;*     MAY  25  1903      * 


Division      'j^54^ 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOE. 
PROVERBS. 


INVALUABLE  IN  THE  STUDY. 

The  Biblical  Illustrator; 

OR 

Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  and  Illustrations,  Expository,  Scientific, 
Geographical,  Historical  and  Homiletic. 

Gathered  from  a  wide  range  ot  Home  and  Foreign  LHeratttfe^ 
on  the  verses  of  the  Bible,  by  the 

Rev.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 


1 


Royal  Octaro,  Cloth,  each  about  650  pages,  per  Volume,  $2.00. 


"No  matter  how  full  his  library  may  be,  nor  how  empty  his 
pocket-book,  the  minister  who  sees  this  work  will  want  it." — Observer. 

"It  promises  to  be  the  most  useful  cyclopedia  for  ministers  is- 
sued as  yet." — Christian. 

"Every  volume  is  profusely  treated  and  explained  verse  by  verse, 
with  apposite,  varied  and  suggestive  extracts  from  a  vast  number 
of  ancient  and  modern  authors.  The  meaning  of  v/ords,  the  lessons 
deducible  from  the  text,  the  doctrine  it  teaches,  the  duty  it  enjoins, 
pithy  remarks  of  commentators  and  other  writers  upon  it,  and  an- 
ecdotes with  which  to  enforce  its  teachings  follow  each  verse.  .  . 
The  author  has  put  the  condensed  substance  of  many  commentaries 
In  one,  giving  the  results  reached  by  many  learned  experts." — Meth- 
odist Review. 

"There  is  little  or  no  exposition,  properly  so  called,  but  an  abun- 
dant citation  of  the  opinions  of  men  called  forth  by  the  inspired 
writers.    In  this  respect  the  book  is  unique." — Christian  Intelligencer. 

OLD  TESTAMENT  VOLUMES: 

Genesis,  Vol..  1.  Joshua,  Judges  and  Ruth. 

Genesis,  Vol.  2.     -  I.  and  II.  Chronicles,  Ezra,  Ne- 
ExoDus.  hemiah  and  Esther. 

LEviTicps  and  Numbers.  Proverbs. 

Deuteronomy.  The  Psalms.    Vol.  1:  1-xxvL 

NEW  TESTAMENT  VOLUMES: 

St.  Matthew.  Philippians  and  Colossians. 

St.  Mark.  Thessalonians. 

St.  Luke,  Vol.  1.  First  Timothy. 

St.  Luke,  Vol.  2.  Second  Timothy,  Titus,   and 

St.  Luke,    Vol.  3.  Philemon. 

St.  John,    Vol.  1.  Hebrews,  Vol.  1. 

St.  John,    Vol.  2.  Hebrews,  Vol.  2. 

St.  John,    Vol.  3.  James. 

Acts,  Vol.  1.  First  Corinthians,  Vol.  1. 

Acts,  Vol.  2.  First  Corinthians,  Vol.  2. 

Acts,  Vol.  3.  Second  Corinthians. 

Romans,  Vol.  1.  First  and  Second  Peter. 

Romans,  Vol.  2.  First,  Second  and  Third  John, 

Galatians.  and  Jude. 

Ephesians.  Revelation. 

Indes  Volume  to  Entire  New  Testament,  $5.00. 

Send  for  our  circular  gimng  special  offers. 

Fleming  H.  RevcII  Company, 

New  York:  Chicago:  Toronto: 

158  Fifth  Avenue.       63  Washington  Street.      37  Richmond  St.  W. 


THE 


Biblical  Illustrator 


OR 


Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  Illustrations; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geograpliical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
Literature,    on    the  Verses  of    The  Bible 


Rev.  JOSEPH    S.    EXELL,    M.A. 


PROVERBS 


1*  »► 


I 


.<t{^^ 


New  York 


Chicago 


Toronto 


Fleming  H.  Revell  Company 

Publishers  of  Evangelical  Literature 


INTBODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  PBOVEBBS. 

Thb  TrrLB  of  the  Book. — "  The  Proverbs  of  Solomon."  There  is  no  necessity, 
from  this  title,  for  considering  the  collection,  in  the  precise  state  in  which  we  now 
have  it,  as  the  work  of  Solomon.  The  proverbs  which  the  book  contains  were  all 
his ;  but  the  selection  and  arrangement  of  them  appear,  from  the  very  statements 
of  the  book  itself,  to  have  been  made  by  different  hands.  In  chapter  xxv.  1  we 
read,  "  These  are  also  proverbs  of  Solomon,  which  the  men  of  Hezekiah  king  of 
Judah  copied  out."  "The  men  of  Hezekiah"  were,  without  question,  "holy 
men  of  God,"  prophets,  appointed  by  that  eminently  pious  prince  to  the  execution 
of  the  good  work.  {Ralph  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  The  Book  of  Proverbs  is  not  to  be 
regarded  simply  as  a  collection  of  wise  sayings,  genial  sentiments,  prudent 
guesses,  or  affectionate  exhortations.  The  book  may  be  viewed,  on  the  contrary, 
as  representing  the  very  science  of  practical  philosophy.  Proverbs  are  condensed 
philosophies.  Sometimes  proverbs  are  condensed  histories.  Wise  men  who 
speak  even  about  "  earthly  things  "  are  often  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  "  dark 
sayings."  Some  truths  can  only  be  hinted  at ;  some  reforms  can  only  be  outlined, 
and  then  can  only  be  shown  as  if  in  twilight ;  there  are  dark  things  in  life  for 
which  names  can  be  found  only  by  a  kind  of  spiritual  genius;  there  are  also 
possible  reforms  or  re-arrangements  of  life  which  even  the  proposers  hardly  realise 
in  all  their  scope  and  uses — hence  even  reformers  and  spiritual  teachers  of  every 
kind  have  often  expressed  themselves  darkly,  suggestively,  tentatively,  so  much  so 
that  their  hesitation  has  been  misunderstood  and  mocked  by  fluent  ignorance  and 
superficial  ability.  (Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  A  proverb,  strictly  speaking,  is  a 
short  moral  sentence,  which  means  something  further  than  what  the  words 
literally  imply.  Most  of  Solomon's  proverbs  are  rather  to  be  called  maxims  or 
sentences.  The  characteristic  feature  of  this  kind  of  writing  is  brevity,  much 
thought  in  a  small  compass ;  as  in  a  seed  is  contained  the  whole  power  of  vegeta- 
tion which  is  to  produce  the  tree.  And  the  obscurity  attendant  on  "  these  words 
of  the  wise,  and  their  dark  sayings,"  is  not  altogether  without  its  uses.  It  whets 
the  understanding,  excites  an  appetite  for  knowledge,  and  keeps  alive  the  attention 
by  the  labour  of  the  investigation,  giving  an  increased  pleasure  to  the  discovery  of 
truth,  by  having  called  forth  our  efforts  to  attain  it.  (B.  E.  Nicholls,  M.A.) 
These  proverbs  of  Solomon  are  a  collection  of  wise  and  moral  sayings,  usually 
plain  and  concise  ;  they  are  also  of  the  poetical  kind,  and  fall  into  metre,  and 
therefore  were  the  more  easily  learned  and  remembered  by  those  in  whose  language 
they  were  written.  They  have  not  that  air  of  smartness,  and  vivacity,  and  wit 
which  modem  writers  have  usually  affected  in  their  maxims  and  sentences ;  but 
they  have  what  is  better — truth  and  solid  good  sense.  {J.  Jortin,  D.D.)  The 
word  which  forms  the  present  title  of  the  book  calls  for  special  notice.  The  Greek 
irapoifiia,  the  Latin  proverhium,  express  only  the  fact  that  the  saying  so  described 
is  current  among  men,  a  "  by-word,"  differing  in  its  origin,  it  may  be,  from  other 
words,  at  first  out  of  the  way,  afterwards  common  and  familiar.    The  Hebrew  word 

T 


vl  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

for  proverb  (mashal)  has  a  much  more  definite  significance.  Its  root-meaning  is 
that  of  comparison,  the  putting  this  and  that  together,  noting  likeness  in  things 
unlike.  It  answers,  i.e.,  to  the  Greek  irapa/BoXr)  rather  than  TTapoijxia.  The  primary 
idea  of  a  Hebrew  proverb,  traceable  throughout  the  book,  in  spite  of  the  wider 
range  of  meaning  which  the  word  subsequently  acquired,  is  that  of  comparison  and 
simihtude.  The  words  of  chapter  xxvi.  7,  "  The  legs  of  the  lame  are  not  equal :  so  is 
a  parable  in  the  mouth  of  fools,"  which  speak  of  the  mashdl  in  this  sense,  are  also 
the  best  illustration  of  its  meaning.  That  it  was  applied  also  to  moral  apothegms 
of  varying  length,  pointed  and  pithy  in  their  form  though  there  might  be  no 
similitude,  is  evident  enough  throughout  the  book.  Elsewhere  it  is  used  with  a 
partial  extension  of  its  meaning  in  another  direction.  Discourses  in  which  there 
is  more  or  less  of  a  poetic  character,  even  though  there  be  no  formal  comparison, 
and  no  didactic  result,  are  described  as  "  parables."  {Dean  Plumptre.)  I  shall 
not  very  much  observe  any  reference  which  these  proverbs  have  the  one  to  the 
other,  because  I  conceive  them  to  be  as  a  heap  of  corn,  wherein  every  grain  is 
weighty,  but  they  have  little  connection  the  one  with  the  other.  But  this  let  me 
note  of  them,  that  these  proverbs,  far  surpassing  others,  do  not  only  contain  an 
inward  pith  of  excellency  in  the  proverbial  sense  of  them,  but  even  in  the  husk 
and  outward  letter  do  deliver  precious  things  and  of  great  use  unto  us.  {Michael 
Jermin.) 

The  Authobshtp  op  the  Book. — The  Jewish  tradition  ascribed  the  Proverbs,  or 
Sayings  of  the  Wise,  to  Solomon,  just  as  it  ascribed  the  Psalms,  or  inspired  lyrics 
of  the  poets,  to  King  David,  and  we  may  add,  just  as  it  ascribed  aU  the  gradual 
accretions  and  developments  of  the  law  to  Moses.  But  even  a  very  uncritical 
reader  will  observe  that  the  Book  of  Proverbs  as  we  have  it  is  not  the  work  of  a 
single  hand ;  and  a  critical  inquiry  into  the  language  and  style  of  the  several  parts, 
and  also  into  the  social  and  political  conditions  which  are  implied  by  them,  has 
led  scholars  to  the  conclusion  that,  at  the  most,  a  certain  number  of  Solomon's 
wise  sayings  are  included  in  the  collection,  but  that  he  did  not  in  any  sense 
compose  the  book.  (B.  F.  Horton,  D.D.)  It  is  not  necessary  to  suppose  that 
Solomon  is  the  author  of  all  the  proverbs  in  this  book.  He  may  have  been  the 
collector  or  editor,  as  well  as  the  originator.  Let  us  regard  the  proverbs  as  a 
moral  note-book,  or  practical  guide  to  life ;  it  wiU  then  be  doubly  interesting  to 
look  into  a  guide  drawn  up  by  no  less  an  authority  than  "  Solomon  the  son  of 
David,  king  of  Israel."  It  should  be  keenly  interesting  to  us  to  know  what  such  a 
man  has  brought  back  from  the  fields  of  experience,  and  what  he  has  set  down 
with  the  sanction  of  his  own  name.  Solomon  had  swept  the  whole  circle  of  social 
experience.    (Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 

The  Structitbe  of  the  Wobk. — The  book  may  be  divided  into  five  parts.  Part  1 
is  a  sort  of  preface,  extending  from  chapter  i.  to  chapter  ix.  The  teacher  gives  his 
pupil  a  connected  series  of  admonitions,  cautions,  and  encouragements  to  the  study 
of  wisdom.  Part  2,  from  chapter  x.  to  chapter  xxii.  16,  comprises  what  may  be 
strictly  called  proverbs,  i.e.,  unconnected  sentences  expressed  with  much  neatness 
and  simplicity.  Part  3  reaches  from  chapter  xxii.  17  to  chapter  xxiv. ;  in  it  the 
teacher  renews  his  connected  admonitions  to  the  study  of  wisdom.  Part  4  extends 
from  chapter  xxiv.  to  chapter  xxix.  It  contains  proverbs  supposed  to  have  been 
selected  from  some  larger  collection  of  Solomon  by  the  men  of  Hezekiah.  This 
part,  like  the  second,  consists  of  unconnected  sentences.  Part  5  comprises  the  two 
last  chapters.  The  first  of  these  contains  the  wise  observations  and  instructions 
delivered  by  Agur  to  his  pupils  Ithiel  and  Ucal ;  the  other,  the  excellent  lessons 
addressed  to  King  Lemuel  by  his  mother.  The  description  of  the  virtuous  woman 
(chapter  xixi.  10-31)  is  by  some  considered  to  be  a  separate  poem.  {B.  E. 
Nicholls,  M.A.^  Though  the  composition  be  of  the  disjointed  kind,  yet  there  is 
a  general  design  running  through  the  whole  which  the  author  keeps  always  in 
view,  and  that  is,  to  instruct  the  people,  and  particularly  young  people,  at  their 
entrance  into  public  and  active  life,  to  give  them  an  early  love  and  an  earnest 
desire  of  real  wisdom,  and  to  lay  down  such  clear  rules  for  their  behaviour  as  shall 
carry  them  through  the  world  with  peace  and  credit.  {J.  Jortin,  D.D.)  The 
main  body  of  proverbs  is  the  collection  which  begins  at  chapter  x.  and  ends  at 
chapter  xxii.  16.  This  collection  has  certain  distinct  features  which  mark  it  off 
from  all  that  precedes  and  from  all  that  follows.  All  these  proverbs  are  identical 
in  form — each  is  expressed  in  a  distich.      (There  is  an   apparent  exception   in 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS.  vu 

chapter  xix.  7.)  The  general  drift  of  their  teaching  is  quite  uniform,  the  morality 
indicated  is  of  no  very  lofty  type ;  the  motives  for  right  conduct  are  mainly  pru- 
dential ;  there  is  no  sense  of  mystery  or  wonder,  no  tendency  to  speculation  or 
doubt.  A  few  scattered  precepts  occur  which  seem  to  touch  a  higher  level,  and  to 
breathe  a  more  spiritual  air.  But  these  may  have  been  added  by  the  author  of 
chapters  i.  to  ix.  To  this  collection  is  added  an  appendix  (xxii.  17  to  xxiv.  22), 
which  opens  with  an  exhortation  addressed  by  the  teacher  to  his  pupil.  The 
literary  form  of  this  appendix  falls  far  behind  the  style  of  the  main  collection.  We 
are  evidently  brought  down  to  a  later  period  in  Israel's  melancholy  history. 
Another  brief  appendix  follows  (xiiv.  23-34),  in  which  the  distich  form  almost 
entirely  disappears.  Chapters  xxv.  to  xxix.  contain  an  entirely  new  collection,  which 
was  made  in  the  literary  court  of  Hezekiah,  about  250  years  after  the  time  of 
Solomon.  In  this  collection  there  is  no  uniformity  of  structure  such  as  distin- 
guished the  proverbs  of  the  first  collection.  The  book  closes  with  three  quite 
distinct  passages,  which  can  only  be  regarded  as  appendices.  The  two  collections, 
with  their  several  appendices,  were  at  some  favourable  point  in  religious  history, 
possibly  in  those  happy  days  of  Josiah  when  the  Deuteronomic  Law  was  newly 
promulgated  to  the  joyful  nation,  brought  together,  and,  as  we  should  say  now, 
edited,  with  an  original  introduction  by  an  author  who,  unknown  to  us  by  name,  is 
among  the  greatest  and  noblest  of  Biblical  writers.  The  first  nine  chapters  of  the 
book,  which  form  the  introduction  to  the  whole,  strike  a  far  higher  note,  appeal  to 
nobler  conceptions,  and  are  couched  in  a  much  loftier  style  than  the  book  itseli. 
The  writer  bases  his  moral  teaching  on  Divine  authority  rather  than  on  the  utili- 
tarian basis  which  prevails  in  most  of  the  proverbs.  Writing  in  a  time  when  the 
temptations  to  a  lawless  and  sensual  life  were  strong,  appealing  to  the  wealthier 
and  more  cultured  youth  of  the  nation,  he  proceeds  in  sweet  and  earnest  discourse 
to  woo  his  readers  from  the  paths  of  vice  into  the  Temple  of  Wisdom  and  Virtue. 
His  method  of  contrasting  the  "  two  ways,"  and  exhorting  men  to  shun  the  one  and 
choose  the  other,  constantly  reminds  us  of  the  similar  appeals  in  the  Book  of 
Deuteronomy ;  but  the  touch  is  more  graphic  and  more  vivid  ;  the  gifts  of  the  poet 
are  employed  in  depicting  the  seven-pillared  House  of  Wisdom  and  the  deadly 
ways  of  Folly  ;  and  in  the  wonderful  passage  which  introduces  Wisdom  appealing 
to  the  sons  of  men,  on  the  ground  of  the  part  which  she  plays  in  the  creation  and 
by  the  throne  of  God,  we  recognise  the  voice  of  a  prophet — a  prophet,  too,  who 
holds  one  of  the  highest  places  in  the  line  of  those  who  foretold  the  coming  of  our 
Lord.  (JR.  F.  Horton,  D.D.)  With  regard  to  the  arrangement  and  structure  of 
the  Book  of  Proverbs,  it  may  be  observed  that  ancient  interpreters  divided  it  into 
five  parts,  like  the  books  of  Moses  and  the  Psalms.  The  first  part,  or  book,  which 
is  introductory  to  the  rest,  consists  of  chapters  i.  to  ix.  inclusive.  The  second  part 
extends  from  chapter  i.  to  xxiv.  inclusive.  The  third  part  of  it  is  composed  of 
proverbs  of  Solomon  copied  out  and  added  by  the  men  of  Hezekiah,  and  comprises 
chapters  xxv,  to  xxix.  The  fourth  part  contains  the  words  of  Agur — probably  a 
symbolical  name  of  Solomon — and  is  formed  of  chapter  xxx.  The  last  part  is 
chapter  xxxi.,  the  words  of  King  Lemuel,  probably  another  symbolical  title  of 
Solomon  himself.  These  five  parts  of  the  proverbs  are  not  thrown  together  pro- 
miscuously, loosely,  and  incoherently,  but  they  have  their  Epeoial  characteriBtics 
and  peculiar  organisation.    {Bp.  Chris.  Wordsworth.) 

The  Ethical  Teaching  of  the  Book. — It  wiU,  perhaps,  be  slighted  on  account  of 
its  contents,  as  a  mere  system  of  dry  morality,  by  those  who  had  rather  deal  in 
discourses  of  the  mystic  or  enthusiastic  kind,  and  admire  that  sort  of  rapturoug 
and  ecstatic  devotion.  But  whether  they  will  allow  it  or  no,  this  book  contains  the 
main  pfcrts  of  pure  and  undefiled  religion,  and  lays  down  the  best  of  rules  for  the 
prudent  conduct  of  life,  and  for  obtaining  the  favour  of  God  and  the  testimony  of 
an  approving  conscience.  (J.  Jortin,  D.D.)  The  careful  reader  of  this  book  wiU 
receive  the  instructions  of  tnat  wisdom  which  directs  men  to  practise  justice  regu- 
lated by  discretion  and  tempered  by  moderation  and  mercy.  It  teaches  us  our 
duty  to  God  and  man,  and  leads  us  in  every  good  path.  Solomon  could  have 
given  us  lectures  on  astronomy  and  poetry,  on  the  nature  of  birds  and  beasts,  and 
everything  that  attracts  the  curiosity  of  many  ;  but  as  the  wisdom  of  the  prudent 
is  to  understand  his  way,  he  is  directed  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to  give  us  in  this  book 
the  instructions  of  Divine  and  moral  wisdom,  to  remain  for  the  use  of  men  till  the 
latest  posterity.  {George  Lawson,  D.D.)  Wisdom  is  the  general  topic  of  the 
whole  book :  that  sound,  practical  judgment  in  affairs  of  life  which  yields  good 


▼m  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS. 

citizenship,  hononrable  success  in  commercial  and  public  affairs,  virtaons  and 
contented  household  life.  The  first  nine  chapters  form  a  connected  discourse,  in 
which  wisdom  is  personified.  Not  grey-eyed  Pallas  Athene  was  so  majestic 
or  so  winsome.  This  stately  figure  is  both  queen  and  counsellor ;  her  haunt  is 
no  retired  tower,  or  nun's  cell,  but  the  market-place,  the  bazaar,  the  court-room , 
the  public  square.  Not  great  learning  or  charm  of  wit  is  her  requirement, 
but  sound  behavioar  in  the  sight  of  God  and  man,  {Charles  M.  Southgate.) 
Broadly  speaking,  the  wisdom  of  the  Hebrews  covers  the  whole  domain  of  what 
we  should  call  science  and  philosophy.  It  is  the  consistent  effort  of  the  human 
mind  to  know,  to  understand,  and  to  explain  all  that  exists.  It  is,  to  use  the 
modern  phrase,  the  search  for  truth.  But  by  wisdom  is  meant  not  merely  the 
search,  but  also  the  discovery ;  not  merely  a  desire  to  know,  but  also  a  certain  body 
of  conceptions  ascertained  and  suflQciently  formulated.  While  Wisdom  embraces 
in  her  wide  survey  all  things  in  heaven  and  in  earth,  there  is  one  part  of  the  vast 
field  which  makes  a  special  demand  upon  human  interest.  The  proper  study  of 
mankind  is  man.  Very  naturally  the  earliest  subject  to  occupy  human  thought 
was  human  life,  human  conduct,  human  society.  (B.  F.  Horton,  D.D.)  The 
general  idea  of  wisdom  is,  that  it  consists  in  the  choice  of  the  best  ends,  and  of  the 
best  means  for  their  attainment.  This  definition  admits  of  application  both  in  a 
lower  and  in  a  higher  department.  In  the  first  place  it  may  be  applied  to  the  whole 
conduct  of  human  life,  in  all  its  daily  intercourse  and  ordinary  transactions,  and 
amidst  all  its  varied  circumstances.  We  stand  in  different  relations  ;  we  occupy 
different  conditions  ;  we  are  subjected  to  different  trials ;  we  are  exposed  to  different 
temptations ;  our  lot  is  characterised  by  different  changes,  difficulties,  and  perplexing 
incidents  ;  one  day,  one  hour,  may  shift  our  position,  and  require  an  entire  altera- 
tion of  our  course.  To  accommodate  our  conduct  to  these  variations — to  suit  to 
all  of  them  the  application  of  the  great  general  principles  and  precepts  of  the  Divine 
law,  and  to  "  guide  our  affairs  with  discretion  "  in  them  all — requires  "  wisdom." 
And  for  enabling  us  to  act  our  part  rightly,  creditably,  and  usefully,  from  day  to 
day,  there  is,  in  this  book,  an  immense  fund  of  admirable  counsel  and  salutary 
direction.  And  then,  secondly,  the  knowledge  of  wisdom  may  be  taken  in  its 
higher  application  to  interests  of  a  superior  order,  to  spiritual  duties,  to  the  well- 
being  of  the  better  part,  to  all  that  regards  true  religion  and  the  salvation  of  the 
soul.  Wisdom,  in  this  book,  is  generally  understood  in  this  its  highest  application,  as 
might  indeed  be  expected  in  a  book  of  instructions  from  God.  We  would  hardly 
imagine  a  communication  from  Him  confined  to  the  mere  prudential  and  successful 
regulation  of  our  temporal  affairs.  How  important  soever  this  may  be  in  a  life 
of  which  the  personal  and  the  social  enjoyment,  so  long  as  it  lasts,  is  to  so  great  an 
extent  made  up  of  little  things,  and  dependent  on  their  due  adjustment,  yet  in  a 
Divine  communication  to  man,  as  an  immortal  creature,  and  occupying  a  position, 
in  regard  to  God  and  his  everlasting  destinies,  so  peculiar,  and  so  pregnant  with 
interesting  results,  we  cannot  conceive  these  to  be  the  only,  or  even  the  principal, 
subjects.  Nor  are  they.  They  are  in  every  way  subordinate.   (Ralph  Wardlaw,  D.D.) 

Stjmmabt  of  Contents  for  HoMtLETic  Purposes. — The  Words  of  the  Wise,  or 
Proverbs  of  Experience.  Treasures  in  the  House,  or  Proverbs  of  Home-Life. 
Closer  than  a  Brother,  or  Proverbs  of  Friendship.  The  Reward  of  the  Diligent,  or 
Proverbs  of  Industry.  The  Suicide  of  the  Soul,  or  Proverbs  of  Purity.  The 
Principal  Thing,  or  Proverbs  of  Wisdom.  The  Struggle  with  the  Strong,  or  Pro- 
verbs of  Counsel.  The  False  Balance,  or  Proverbs  of  Trade.  Wine  a  Mocker,  or 
Proverbs  of  Temperance.  The  Issues  of  Life,  or  Proverbs  of  Eestraint.  The 
Better  Choice,  or  Proverbs  of  Integrity.  The  Shining  Path,  or  Proverbs  of  Holi- 
ness. The  Exaltation  and  Eeproach  of  a  Nation,  or  Proverbs  of  Politics. 
(Bp.  W.  S.  Perry.) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOE. 

PROVERBS. 

CHAPTER  I. 

Vebs.  1-7.  Tlie  proverbs  of  Solomon. — The  Book  of  Proverbs  : — 1.  The  book  does 
not  consist  of  proverbs  entirely.  Much  of  it  is  the  language  of  pious  exhortation  and 
spiritual  precept.  2.  The  book  contains  many  worldly  precepts.  Some  have  a 
selfish,  secular  sound.  But — (1)  It  is  well  to  inquke  whether  the  supposed  purely 
prudential  maxim  is  really  so  entirely  a  citizen  of  this  world  as  it  seems  to  be. 
(2)  It  is  well  to  remember  that  many  even  of  our  Saviour's  discourses  might  seem 
open  to  the  charge  of  being  moral  and  social,  rather  than  spiritual  and  heavenly. 

C(3)  Such  precepts  by  implication  convey  the  assurance  that  a  religious  life  is 
intimately  connected  with  worldly  conduct ;  depends  upon  it ;  grows  out  of  it ; 
is  bound  up  with  it ;  fails  or  flourishes  because  of  it.  Illustrate  by  suretyship, 
3.  The  pre-eminent  place  in  the  book  is  assigned  to  Wisdom,  which  is  one  of  the 
names  of  Jesus  Christ.  4.  The  proverbs  contained  in  the  book  are  peculiar  in 
form.  They  are  highly  antithetical.  They  often  contain  a  double  or  threefold 
antithesis.  5.  The  point  of  a  proverb  may  often  be  missed  by  inattention ;  some- 
times it  needs  acuteness  to  see  the  point.  6.  The  matter  of  the  Proverbs  calls  for 
attention.  Note  how  they  concern  the  gift  of  speech,  riches,  and  poverty,  such  sins 
as  sloth.  They  proclaim  great  practical  truths,  and  are  often  of  great  strength 
and  sweetness.  {Dean  Burgon.)  The  proverbs  of  Solomon  : — 1.  The  proverbs 
of  Solomon  are  pleasing  to  refined  taste.  He  was  a  preacher  accustomed  to  employ 
acceptable  words  full  of  pungent  and  profitable  instruction.  2.  In  the  second  place, 
proverbs  are  practical  in  their  use.  True  religion  is  not  of  the  head  only,  nor  of 
the  heart  only ;  it  is  the  cultivator  of  all  our  faculties,  and  acts  upon  our  whole 
person,  in  its  legitimate  development,  as  the  God  of  nature  forms  a  tree  or  flower, 
unfolding  all  parts  at  the  same  time,  breathing  life  and  beauty  on  every  leaf.  The 
portion  of  sacred  record  now  under  consideration  is  of  especial  importance  to  young 
persons.  The  inculcation  of  duty  is  no  less  essential  than  the  defence  of  doctrine. 
It  is  the  symptom  of  a  diseased  condition,  when  a  patient  desires  intoxicating 
draughts  rather  than  wholesome  aliment.  When  a  religionist  is  more  voracious  of 
excitement  than  instruction,  and  is  much  more  prompt  to  fight  for  a  dogma  than 
to  illustrate  his  infallibility  by  a  noble  demeanour,  he  would  do  well  to  search  into 
the  divinity  of  a  faith  which  is  so  barren  of  heavenly  deeds.  3.  Thirdly,  sacred 
proverbs  are  ennobling  in  their  tendency.  (1)  They  present  the  most  concise  forms 
of  wisdom.  (2)  In  proverbs  we  have  the  most  profitable  type  of  wisdom.  Their 
statements  of  doctrine  may  not  be  so  explicit  as  in  some  later  portions  of  Scripture, 
but  what  they  do  assert  is  of  the  very  highest  importance.  In  particular  we  are 
here  taught  to  combine  reflection  with  action — nourishing  a  mind  that  ponders  over 
a  heart  that  prays.  (3)  The  proverbs  of  Solomon  are  invaluable,  because  they 
most  clearly  teach  the  importance  of  correct  and  immovable  principles  in  the 
heart ;  conduct  full  of  nobleness  and  integrity  in  every  walk  of  life ;  the  necessity 
and  usefulness  of  self-discipline  ;  and  the  importance  of  bringing  every  purpose  as 
well  as  every  act  to  the  test  of  God's  holy  Word.  4.  Fourthly,  the  scriptural 
maxims,  the  merits  of  which  we  are  discussing,  are  not  only  pleasing  to  the  taste, 
practical  in  their  use,  and  ennobling  in  their  tendency,  but  they  are  saving  in  their 

2 


2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha?.  t. 

design.  {E.  L.  Magoon.)  Authoritative  maxims  : — This  is  the  meaning  of  the 
term  "Proverbs"  in  the  original.  A  proverb  is  a  weighty  sentiment,  moral  or 
prudential,  expressed  in  sententious  language.  It  is  the  recorded  verdict  of  men, 
sealed  by  experience,  and  reserved  for  future  guidance.  The  proverbs  of  a  people 
have  no  small  influence  upon  their  character,  and  sometimes  they  have  a  very  evil 
influence.  Let  one  which  is  erroneous  in  its  morality,  or  perverted  in  its  appli- 
cation, become  current,  and  it  seems  to  give  the  sanction  of  reason,  experience,  and 
almost  of  inspiration  to  that  which  is  wrong,  e.g.,  "Charity  begins  at  home." 
This  has  nourished  selfishness  and  checked  benevolence.  There  is  this  advantage 
in  a  proverb,  that  it  directs  the  conduct  without  perplexing  the  mind  or  burdening 
the  memory.  Proverbs  are  to  the  morals  of  a  people  what  gold  coin  is  to  its 
currency — portable,  rich,  and  always  passable.  The  form  in  which  the  Bible 
proverbs  are  expressed  is  usually  that  of  parallelism,  or  in  two  parts,  the  second 
line  repeating  the  sentiment  of  the  first,  or  sometimes  its  opposite.  (W.  H.  Lewis, 
D.D.)  The  preacher  : — Solomon  went  through  a  peculiar  experience  of  his  own, 
and  God,  who  in  nature  gives  sweet  fruit  to  men  through  the  root-sap  of  a  sour 
crab,  when  a  new  nature  has  been  engrafted  on  the  upper  stem,  did  not  disdain  to 
bring  forth  fruits  of  righteousness  through  those  parts  of  the  king's  experience 
that  cleaved  most  closely  to  the  dust.  The  heights  of  human  prosperity  he  had 
reached ;  the  paths  of  human  learning  he  had  trodden  farther  than  any  in  his 
day ;  the  pleasures  of  wealth,  and  power,  and  pomp  he  had  tasted  in  all  their 
variety.  The  man  who  has  drained  the  cup  of  pleasure  can  best  tell  the  taste  of 
its  dregs.  The  fatal  facility  with  which  men  glide  into  the  worship  of  men  is  a 
reason  why  some  of  the  channels  chosen  for  conveying  the  mind  of  God  were 
marred  by  glaring  deficiencies.  For  engraving  the  life-lessons  of  His  Word,  our 
Father  uses  only  diamonds ;  but  in  every  diamond  there  is  a  flaw,  in  some  a 
greater,  and  in  some  a  less ;  and  who  shall  dare  to  dictate  to  the  Omniscient  the 
measure  of  defect  that  binds  Him  to  fling  the  instrument  as  a  useless  thing  away  ? 
Two  principles  cover  the  whole  case.  "  All  things  are  of  God."  "  All  things  are 
for  your  sakes."  1.  The  universality  of  God's  government.  2.  The  special  use 
for  His  own  people  to  which  He  turns  every  person  and  every  thing.  Here  is  a 
marvel.  Not  a  line  of  Solomon's  writings  tends  to  palliate  Solomon's  sins. 
(miliam  Arnot,  D.D.)  The  proverbs  of  Solomon : — No  one  subject  is  long  pursued 
in  this  treatise,  nor  is  there  any  coherence  and  connection  between  its  parts.  Yet 
there  is  a  general  design  running  through  it,  to  instruct  young  people  at  their 
entrance  into  public  and  active  life.  This  Book  of  Proverbs  is  short  and  soon  read. 
It  will  perhaps  be  slighted  on  account  of  its  contents,  as  a  mere  system  of  dry 
morality,  by  those  who  had  rather  deal  in  discourses  of  the  mystic  and  enthusiastic 
kind,  and  admire  that  sort  of  rapturous  and  ecstatic  devotion.  But  whether  they 
will  allow  it  or  no,  this  book  contains  the  main  parts  of  pure  and  undefiled  religion, 
and  lays  down  the  best  of  rules  for  the  prudent  conduct  of  life,  and  for  obtaining 
the  favour  of  God  and  the  testimony  of  an  approving  conscience.  By  wisdom 
Solomon  means  true  religion  and  virtue,  as  by  folly  he  means  disobedience  and 
vice.  Following  is  an  abstract  of  the  acts  of  religion  and  morality  recommended 
by  him.  I.  Positive  duties.  The  foundation  of  religion  is  laid  upon  the  principle 
of  fearing  God.  He  exhorts  us  to  love  wisdom  and  to  prize  it  above  all  things,  as 
the  only  way  and  the  infallible  way  to  obtain  it.  He  exhorts  us  to  love  wisdom 
betimes,  and  to  make  it  the  first  choice,  the  first  object  of  our  affections.  He 
exhorts  young  persons  to  honour  and  obey  their  parents,  and  to  regard  their 
instructions.  He  advises  discretion  in  choosing  friends.  He  exhorts  to  chastity, 
purity,  contentment,  control  of  temper,  meekness,  mercifulness,  industry,  &c. 
II.  Negative  duties.  He  dissuades  from  fornication  and  adultery,  from  sloth  and 
idleness,  from  pernicious  company  ;  he  advises  to  shun  strife,  contention,  rebellion ; 
to  keep  the  heart  free  from  irregular  passions,  and  not  to  be  vicious  in  any  way,  or 
oppressors.  He  exhorts  to  avoid  suretyship  as  a  most  dangerous  indiscretion.  He 
teaches  not  to  trust  in  riches,  in  friends,  in  superior  abilities,  nor  to  value  ourselves 
for  our  oblations  and  sacrifices,  for  any  of  the  externals  or  ceremonials  ot  religion. 
He  earnestly  exhorts  us  not  to  be  scoffers  and  scorners  of  religion.     III.  Thk 

motives     BI     WUICH     these     moral     duties     ABE     ENFOKCED,    AND     THE     RECOMPENSES 

WHICH  ARE  PROMISED  TO  THOSE  WHO  PRACTISE  THEM.  And  they  are  no  less  than 
every  advantage  that  a  man  can  reasonably  desire  in  this  life  ;  they  are  the  favour 
of  God  and  His  protection,  and  along  with  it  the  testimony  of  a  good  conscience, 
courage  and  confidence,  safety  from  evil,  long  life,  health,  plenty,  riches,  honours, 
leputatioD  both  present  and  posthumous,  and  an  inheritance  that  shall  descend  to 


CHAP.  1.]  PROVERBS. 


children's  children.  (John  Jortin,  D.D.)  Truths  made  compact  and  portable  : — 
The  late  Dr.  James  Hamilton  said  justly  that  we  ought  to  be  thankful  to  any  one 
who  makes  a  great  truth  portable.  Our  memories  are  weak.  Like  travellers  in 
the  desert  or  amidst  Polar  ice,  we  want  to  be  lightly  laden  ;  and  yet  we  must  carry 
on  our  own  shoulders  the  equipments  required  for  all  the  journey.  And  some 
teachers  have  not  the  art  of  packing.  They  give  out  their  thoughts  in  a  style  so 
verbose  that  to  hsten  is  a  feat  and  to  remember  would  be  a  miracle.  Occasionally, 
however,  there  arises  a  master  spirit,  who  in  the  wordy  wilderness  espies  the 
important  principle,  and  who  has  the  faculty  of  separating  it  from  surrounding 
truisms,  and  reproducing  it  in  convenient  and  compact  dimensions.  From  the 
mountain  of  sponge  he  extracts  the  ounce  of  iodine  ;  from  the  bushel  of  dry  petals 
he  distils  the  flask  of  otto  ;  or,  what  comes  nearer  our  purpose,  from  bulky  decoc- 
tions he  extracts  the  nutritious  or  the  fragrant  particles,  and  in  a  few  tiny  packets 
gives  you  the  essence  of  a  hundred  meals.  Of  such  truth-condensers  the  most 
distinguished  in  our  country  is  Bacon.  "  Knowledge  is  power."  "  They  are  two 
things — unity  and  uniformity."  "  Reading  maketh  a  full  man ;  conference  a  ready 
man ;  and  writing  an  exact  man."  Truths  like  these  flash  like  revelations,  or  shine 
as  the  most  brilliant  novelties  on  the  page  of  our  mighty  thinker ;  but  many  of 
them  are  truths  which  he  had  heard  discoursed  by  drowsy  pedants,  or  vaguely 
muttered  by  the  multitude,  and  it  is  the  work  of  his  genius  to  reduce  vagueness  to 
precision,  and  concentrate  an  ocean  of  commonplace  into  a  single  aphorism.  By 
making  the  truth  portable  he  made  it  useful.  Proverbial  sayings  of  wise  men  : — 
The  seven  wise  men  of  Greece  acquired  their  fame  from  the  proverbial  sayings  they 
originated  or  adopted.  Solon  of  Athens  took  for  his  motto,  "  Know  thyself  "  ; 
Chilon  of  Sparta,  "  Consider  the  end  "  ;  Thales  of  MUetos,  "Who  hateth  suretyship 
is  sure  " ;  Bias  of  Priene,  "  Most  men  are  bad  " ;  Cleobulus  of  Lindos,  "  The 
golden  mean,"  or  "Avoid  extremes";  Pittacos  of  Mitylene,  "Seize  time  by  the 
forelock  "  ;  Periander  of  Corinth,  "  Nothing  is  impossible  to  industry."  (Christian 
Million.)  Profitable  use  of  the  Book  of  Proverbs  : — An  old  man,  well  known  for 
his  goodness,  is  full  of  sparkling  epigrams,  which  he  attributes  to  his  habit  of 
reading  the  Book  of  Proverbs  through  each  month.  (F.B.  Meyer, B.A.)  Proverbs : — 
A  proverb  is  the  child  of  experience. 

Ver.  2.  To  know  wisdom  and  instruction ;  to  perceive  the  words  of  understand- 
ing.— Wisdom  and  instruction : — Wisdom  is  here  taken  for  the  theoretical  part,  to 
know  the  truth  of  things,  as  appears  by  the  opposition  of  manners  in  the  next 
verse.  It  may  be  meant  of  wisdom  in  general,  knowledge  of  the  truth  ;  for  many 
philosophical  truths  are  contained  in  this  book.  But  it  hath  a  special  eye  to  the 
knowledge  of  God  and  Divine  truths.  And  it  signifies  an  exact  knowledge  of  things 
by  their  causes,  or  other  properties,  whereby  we  may  be  able  to  distinguish  between 
real  and  apparent  truths.  The  word  "  instruction  "  properly  signifies  the  manner 
of  teaching  by  which  wisdom  is  attained.  It  is  set  after  wisdom,  because  that  is 
the  end  and  perfection  of  instruction,  and  therefore  more  worthy  than  the  means. 
"  The  end  is  first  in  intention,  last  in  execution."  Men  think  of  dwelling  before 
they  think  of  building.  It  signifies  such  instruction  as  is  communicated  to  boys, 
joined  with  correction,  for  the  word  imports  both.  "  Understanding  "  means  words 
of  weight  worthy  to  he  understood,  and  well  understood  by  those  that  delivered 
them ;  coming  from  men  of  great  understanding,  and  making  them  such  that  learn 
them.  Acute  sentences,  full  of  good  matter,  fit  to  pass  for  authentical  like  current 
money.  Doctrines  taught  by  this  verse  are — 1.  Wisdom  is  to  be  gotten  out  of 
Scripture.  2.  Divine  truths  are  far  more  excellent  than  other  truths.  3.  There  is 
need  of  wisdom  to  guide  both  the  understanding  and  the  will.  4.  Divine  truths 
must  be  inquired  into  as  well  as  Divine  precepts.  5.  Pains  must  be  taken  to  dis- 
tinguish real  truths  from  apparent.  Because  they  are  hard  to  distinguish,  they  are 
worth  distinguishing.  6.  Instruction  is  the  means  to  get  wisdom  out  of  Scripture. 
7.  Hearing  Divine  truth  without  understanding  doth  men  no  good.  8.  Knowledge 
of  trivial  things  is  of  little  worth.  9.  Knowledge  of  Divine  truth  will  do  us  much 
good.  It  will  bring  us  acquainted  with  God  more  fuUy  than  the  creatures  can. 
(Francis  Taylor.)  Religion  and  virtue  considered  under  the  notion  of  wisdom  : — 
The  principal  scope  of  the  Proverbs  is  to  teach  men  wisdom.  Wisdom  is  introduced 
in  the  dramatic  way,  as  a  divine  person  appearing  in  a  very  lovely  form,  displaying 
her  native  worth  and  beauty,  and,  by  the  most  powerful  persuasions,  and  the  most 
affectionate  manner  of  address,  soliciting  the  degenerate  sons  of  men  to  hearken  to 
ber  counsels  for  their  good.    In  general,  what  the  author  meaneth  by  wisdom  is 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  I. 

true  religion  and  virtue.     "  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom." 
The  fear  of  the  Lord  signifieth  universal  religion  because  it  is  an  eminent  part  of  it ; 
and  because  it  is  a  principle  which,  when  the  mind  is  duly  possessed  with,  and 
brought  thoroughly  under  its  power,  cannot  fail  of  producing  obedience  to  all  the 
commandments  of  God.     True  religion  is  nothing  else  but  the  practice  of  virtue 
from  a  regard  to  the  Deity.     The  wisdom  recommended  is  called  "  the  knowledge 
of  the  holy  "  (chap.  ix.  10).     Acquaintance  with  Divine  objects,  and  with  the  duty 
we  owe  to  God,  is  the  truest  understanding.     It  is  not  mere  speculative  knowledge 
even  of  religion  he  meaneth  ;  the  instructions  of  wisdom  do  all  tend  to  practice  ; 
and  the  conformity  of  our  lives  to  its  rules  is  that  only  which  will  dominate  us 
"wise  men."     The  character  of  wisdom  is  applied  to  particular  virtues.     "To 
receive  the  instructions  of  wisdom,  justice,  and  judgment,  and  equity."     1.  Justice 
is  a  very  important  branch  of  our  duty.   2.  Another  virtue  is  chastity.     AU  kinds  of 
voluptuousness   and   excess  are  directly  contrary  to   wisdom.     Slothfulness  and 
neglect  in  government  of  the  tongue  are  also  signs  of  unwisdom.     Observations : 
1.  That  virtue  and  integrity,  to  be  preserved  from  the  ways  of  sin  and  wickedness, 
rnust  be  the  result  of  deliberation  and  choice.     Wisdom  is  the  quality  of  a  free-self - 
determining   agent.     Discretion  consisteth  in  weighing  maturely  the  motives  of 
action,  in  comparing  them  together,  and  being  determined  freely  by  that  which, 
upon  the  whole,  appeareth  to  be  the  justest  and  the  best.     From  this  it  is  a  plain 
consequence,  that  the  more  calm  and  sedate,  the  more  deliberate  and  free  our  minds 
are  in  acting,  our  conduct  is  the  wiser  and  the  better.     2.  That  a  good  man  useth 
foresight,  and  looketh  to  the  last  issue  of  things,  that  so  he  may  direct  his  behaviour. 
Religion  could  not  justly  be  called  wisdom  if  it  had  not  a  view  to  the  future  conse- 
quences of  our  present  conduct.     If  men  believe  there  is  a  God,  wise,  just,  and  good, 
they  must  conclude  that  righteousness  is  pleasing  to  Him ;  and  if  the  soul  is 
immortal,  and  shall  subsist  in  another  state,  they  who  have  done  good  in  this  life 
have  the  best  hope  of  being  distinguished  by  the  favour  of  the  Deity  in  the  next. 
(J.  Abernethy,  M.A.)        A  great  teacher  and  a  true  learner  : — I.  A  gbeat  teacher. 
1.  His  history.     He  was — (1)  The  son  of  a  great  man.     "Solomon  the  son  of 
David,"  saint,  hero,  poet,  king.     (2)  The  king  of  a  great  people.     King  of  Israel : 
the  chosen  of  God,  whose  are  the  fathers.     2.  His  lessons.     (1)  Their  form.     He 
spoke  in  "  proverbs."   3.  His  design.    The  true  culture  of  the  "  simple."    (1)  Mental 
culture.      Making  them  "to  know  wisdom,"  &c.      (2)  Moral  culture.     Teaching 
them  "  justice,  and  judgment,  and  equity."     II.  A  true  learner.     1.  He  is  a  wise 
man.     He  is  wise  who  does  the  best  thing.     2.  He  pays  attention.     "  A  wise  man 
will  hear."     3.  He  improves.     He  increases  in  "  learning."     He  attains  "  unto  wise 
counsels."     He  receives  docilely  into  him  the  words  of  his  master,  and  he  rises  in 
intelligence,  and  worth,  and  power.     (David  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  To  receive  the  instruction  of  wisdom,  justice,  and  judgment  and  equity. — 
Judgment  and  equity  :— "  Judgment"  is  used  for  discerning  right  from  wrong  ;  for 
the  law,  manner,  or  rule  of  it ;  for  punishment  or  execution  of  judgment.  "  Equity  " 
in  Hebrew  means,  straight  ways,  that  go  on  foreright,  and  even,  like  plains :  when 
men  go  not  uphill  and  downhill  in  their  actions,  but  proceed  in  an  even  course. 
It  signifies  also  a  thing  right  in  God's  or  man's  eyes,  which  they  approve  as  just 
and  equal.  Some  understand  by  equity  moderation,  that  we  use  not  the  extremity 
of  the  law,  nor  do  all  that  we  may.  Others,  integrity  of  mind  in  working  and  dis- 
cerning. The  doctrines  suggested  are — 1.  Matters  of  practice  must  not  be  perceived 
only,  but  received.  There  is  a  piercing  of  truth  into  the  understanding,  and  a 
receiving  of  it  into  the  judgment.  2.  Knowledge  is  ordinarily  received  from  others. 
3.  A  spiritual  wisdom  is  required  to  guide  all  our  actions.  4.  Every  one's  right 
must  be  preserved.  5.  Men  must  study  to  know  how  to  judge  of  interests. 
6.  Extremity  of  justice  is  not  always  to  be  used ;  moderation  sometimes  is  to  be 
exercised.     (Francis  Taylor.) 

Ver.  4.  To  give  subtilty  to  the  simple,  to  the  young  man  knowledge  and  dis- 
cretion.— Subtiltyfor  the  simple  .-—The  word  is  sometimes  taken  in  an  ill  sense,  for 
a  crafty  wit  to  deceive  others.  Sometimes  in  a  good  sense,  for  understanding  to 
prevent  dangers  that  crafty  men  might  bring  upon  us.  So  it  is  taken  here.  Com- 
pare "  simple"  with  the  Latin  "  fatuus,"  a  fool.  Simple  comes  from  a  verb  which 
signifies  to  allure  or  seduce  one  that  wants  understanding  of  God's  truths  and  will, 
and  80  is  easily  allured  to  any  error  or  wickedness  by  good  words,  as  giving  credit 
to  everything,  because  not  able  to  examine  things  for  want  of  judgment.     He  falls 


CHAP.  1.]  PROVERBS. 


into  danger  for  lack  of  knowledge.  The  word  also  signifies  one  who  wsuits  fore- 
sight to  prevent  danger.  1.  The  Scripture  contains  a  store  of  heavenly  knowledge 
sufficient  to  inform  simple  persons.  Note  the  store  of  heavenly  mysteries  in  the 
Scripture ;  the  clearness  of  them ;  the  variousness  of  them.  2.  Subtilty  for  pre- 
venting of  dangers  is  best  learned  oat  of  the  Scriptures.  3.  We  are  naturally 
simple,  and  easily  led  into  error.  4.  The  way  to  keep  us  from  errors  is  the  right 
understanding  of  Scripture.  5.  Most  danger  of  going  astray  is  in  the  time  of  youth. 
6.  Bare  knowledge  is  not  enough,  but  discretion  must  be  laboured  for  also.  Know- 
ledge is  imperfect,  and  wiU  need  further  augmentation  by  deliberation.  And 
knowing  men  do  things  rashly  oftentimes,  being  disturbed  with  passion.  {Ibid.) 
Good  subtilty  : — This  term  suggests  the  very  point  of  Solomon's  advice.  The 
young  man  who  comes  from  a  quiet  home,  where  he  has  been  under  wise  guidance, 
is  really  simple,  unsophisticated,  unused  to  the  ways  of  the  world,  unfit  to  meet  its 
temptations,  and  needing  much  good  counsel  and  warning  from  those  who  are 
experienced  in  the  world's  ways.  "Simple"  here  is  not  "silly,"  but  guileless, 
unsuspecting,  easily  drawn  aside,  over-trustful.  It  is  familiarly  said  that  "  experi- 
ence is  a  dear  school,  but  fools  will  learn  in  no  other. "  Solomon  urges  on  the 
young  man  that  if  he  would  be  willing  to  learn,  he  might  be  saved  from  many  bitter 
and  even  degrading  experiences.  There  is  an  evil  sense  attaching  to  the  word 
"  subtilty,"  from  its  association  with  the  serpent  that  tempted  Eve  ;  but  the  better 
meaning  of  the  word  comes  to  view  through  Solomon's  connecting  it  with  other  good 
and  suggestive  terms.  He  thinks  that  the  young  man,  at  the  very  outset  of  life, 
needs  "  wisdom,"  which  we  may  take  in  the  general  sense  of  "  culture  "  ;  an  "  in- 
struction," that  is,  "  discipline,"  "  training,"  and  "  understanding,"  or  the  power  of 
weighing,  distinguishing,  discriminating:  and  "wisdom,"  in  the  further  sense  of 
"  thoughtfulness,"  the  habit  of  looking  things  well  round  before  we  decide  on  our 
action.  Impulsiveness  is  a  constant  weakness  in  young  people.  They  act  before 
they  think.  And  "  Justice,"  or  the  first  principles  of  righteousness,  by  which  all 
proposed  conduct  should  be  appraised,  and  "  judgment,"  or  the  self-estimating 
which  is  virtually  the  same  as  a  cultured  and  active  "  conscience,"  and  "  equity," 
or  the  various  adjustment  of  "  principles  "  to  the  different  relationships  of  men,  and 
the  various  circumstances  in  which  they  may  be  placed  ;  and  "  discretion,"  or  that 
kind  of  reticence  which  keeps  the  young  man  from  being  duped  by  false  advisers. 

1.  Expect  subtilty  in  those  who  would  tempt  you  astray.  Here  the  word  takes  its 
bad  form,  as  crafty,  designing,  making  good  appearance  in  order  to  deceive  ;  keep- 
ing back  part  of  the  truth,  and  so  leaving  a  designedly  false  impression.  See 
temptation   of   Eve.     There  is  a  good  "suspiciousness,"   which  is  a  safeguard. 

2.  Show  subtilty  in  not  readily  yielding  to  the  tempters.  Here  the  word  is  used  in 
a  good  sense.  Be  on  your  guard.  Do  not  give  your  love  to  the  first  person  who 
seeks  it.  Beware  of  the  plausible  man,  and  the  flatterers.  Be  forewarned  and  so 
you  will  be  forearmed.  Keep  your  own  counsel.  See  underneath,  and  do  not  be 
caught  by  mere  outside  glitter.  {Robert  Tuck,  B.A.)  The  simple  man  : — Plato 
wrote  on  the  door  of  his  academy, "  Let  no  man  unskilled  in  geometry  come  hither." 
Solomon  writes  the  very  reverse  on  the  door  of  his  school,  "  Let  the  simple  man 
come  hither."  (G.  Lawson,  D.D.)  Discretion  : — There  are  many  more  shining 
qualities  in  the  mind  of  man,  but  there  is  none  more  useful  than  discretion  ;  it  is 
this,  indeed,  which  gives  a  value  to  all  the  rest,  which  sets  them  at  work  in  their 
proper  times  and  places,  and  turns  them  to  the  advantage  of  the  person  who  is 
possessed  of  them.  Without  it,  learning  is  pedantry,  and  wit  impertinence  ;  virtue 
itself  looks  Uke  weakness  ;  the  best  parts  only  qualify  a  man  to  be  more  sprightly  in 
his  errors,  and  active  to  his  own  prejudice.  {W.  Addison.)  Discretion : — A 
father  that  had  three  sons  was  desirous  to  try  their  discretion,  which  he  did  by 
giving  to  each  of  them  an  apple  that  had  some  part  of  it  rotten.  The  first  eats  up 
his  apple,  rotten  and  all ;  the  second  throws  all  his  away,  because  some  part  of  it  was 
rotten ;  but  the  third  picks  out  the  rotten,  and  eats  that  which  was  good,  so  that  he 
appeared  the  wisest :  thus,  some  in  these  days,  for  want  of  discretion,  swallow  down 
all  that  is  presented,  rotten  and  sound  altogether ;  others  throw  away  all  truth, 
because  everything  delivered  unto  them  is  not  truth,  but  surely  they  are  the  wisest 
and  most  discreet,  that  know  how  to  try  the  spirits  whether  they  be  of  God  or  not — 
how  to  choose  the  good  and  refuse  the  evil.     (/.  (Spencer.) 

Yer.  5.  A  wise  man  will  hear,  and  will  increase  learning;  and  a  man  of 
understanding  shall  attain  unto  wise  counsels. — The  increase  of  knowledge: — 
I.  No  MAN  IS  80  wiBX  BUI  KE  MAT  LEAAN  MOBE.    And  that  both  in  theoretical  and 


6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  I. 

practical  knowledge,  how  to  think  better,  and  how  to  do  better.  Be  not  content 
with  that  measure  of  knowledge  ye  have,  but  labour  still  for  more.  II.  Much 
KNOWLEDGE  COMES  IN  AT  THE  EAE.  Hearing  and  seeing  are  by  Aristotle  called  the 
learned  senses,  because  by  these  doors  learning  enters  into  the  soul.  Yea,  and  lips 
also.  The  ears  are  the  conduit  pipes  of  wisdom  to  convey  it  to  us.  III.  Thb 
ScBiPTUKE  BRINGS  IN  iNCKEASE  OF  KNOWLEDGE.  Becausc— 1.  It  is  the  highest  book 
in  the  world.  2.  All  heavenly  wisdom  in  other  books  comes  from  thence,  as  waters 
in  rivers  from  the  fountain.  IV.  Scripture  learning  is  the  best  learning.  It 
is  the  most  profound  knowledge.  It  is  the  most  profitable.  V.  Natural  parts 
WELL  USED  HELP  MUCH  IN  RELIGION.  Paul's  learning  was  a  great  help  to  him, 
and  Solomon's  high  reach.  It  is  a  wonder  what  may  be  attained  by  industry 
and  God's  blessing  upon  it.     {Francis  Taylor.) 

Ver.  6.  The  words  of  the  wise  and  their  dark  sa3ring«. — The  words  of  the 
wise : — Nothing  can  give  a  deeper  insight  into  the  character  and  genius  of  a 
people  than  their  household  words — those  current  maxims  and  sayings  which 
influence  their  everyday  life,  the  popular  proverbs  which  pass  from  mouth  to 
mouth.  These  are  the  expression  of  a  people's  inward  life.  It  does  not  belong  to 
a  high  state  of  civilisation  to  originate  proverbs.  One  of  our  most  homely  maxims 
or  proverbial  sayings,  will  stir  the  soul  to  its  very  centre  and  depth,  and  do  more  to 
regulate  the  life  and  manners,  than  all  the  enactments  in  all  the  statute  books  of 
the  world.  In  the  Book  of  Proverbs  we  have  nothing  but  the  lessons  of  practical 
wisdom.  They  rest  on  great  principles  as  their  basis — those  principles  which  enter 
into  the  eternal  reason  of  things,  and  which  are  as  unchangeable  as  God  Himself. 
It  follows  that  the  maxims  of  this  book  are  adapted  to  all  time,  all  countries,  and 
all  people.  Humanity  is  one.  The  writers,  whoever  they  were,  had  a  profound 
knowledge  of  men  and  things;  and  we  have  here  the  results  of  no  narrow 
experience.  Principles  are  stated  with  great  clearness  ;  the  rule  of  conduct  is  laid 
down  with  consummate  skill  and  precision,  and  the  lofty  aim  of  the  whole  is  to 
allure  men,  and  especially  the  young  and  inexperienced,  into  the  way  of  happiness 
and  peace.  1.  Some  maxims  concern  the  relations  which  subsist  between  the 
young  and  the  old.  The  young  are  to  take  part  in  the  progress  and  development  o£ 
the  race.  They  are  not  only  to  be  the  fathers  and  mothers  of  a  future  generation, 
but  also  their  teachers,  and  their  models.  To  prepare  and  qualify  them  for  this, 
they  must  have  in  them  the  elements  of  knowledge  and  of  goodness.  Youth  is  the 
period  of  acquisition.  The  present  is  always  more  or  less  dependent  on  the  past.  We 
cannot  sever  ourselves  from  those  who  have  gone  before  us,  nor  break  the  bond 
which  connects  us  with  those  who  are  coming  after  us.  The  young  are  to  give  the 
impression  of  their  own  intellectual  and  moral  life  to  the  generations  following. 
2.  These  maxims,  though  not  set  forth  as  coming  immediately  from  the  mind  or 
spirit  of  God,  are  in  harmony  with  Infinite  Wisdom.  They  have  in  them  nothing 
of  a  merely  individual  character.  They  contemplate  man  as  man,  independently 
of  all  outward  arrangements  and  institutions,  and  deal  with  that  which  is  common 
to  the  race.  The  Book  of  Proverbs  stands  unequalled  among  all  the  writings  which 
the  world  has  ever  produced.  They  are  human  sayings,  but  possessed  of  Divine 
authority ;  and  they  have  in  them  all  those  principles  which  can  ennoble  and 
dignify  the  character  of  man,  clothing  him  with  true  greatness  in  this  world,  and  in 
the  world  to  come  crowning  him  with  glory  everlasting.  The  following  findings 
seem  to  come  as  near  as  may  be  to  the  end  or  object  of  the  writer : — 1.  That  a 
certain  degree  of  instruction  and  knowledge  is  essential  to  intercourse  with  the 
more  intelligent  and  better-informed  classes.  2.  That  discretion,  uprightness,  and 
unyielding  attachment  to  justice,  are  qualities  of  which  youth  stands  most  in  need, 
and  which  enter  into  all  integrity  of  character.  3.  That  youth  being  the  period  of 
greater  simplicity  and  inexperience,  it  needs  increased  reflection  and  sagacity  to 
lead  to  the  apprehension  and  discovery  of  approaching  temptation  and  danger,  and 
of  the  best  means  of  escape.  4.  That  even  the  wisest  and  best  informed  of  men 
have  ever  something  new  to  learn,  and  may  by  listening  to  the  great  oracle  of  truth, 
increase  their  knowledge  and  power  of  perception  without  limit.  5.  That  true 
wisdom  has  its  basis  in  true  piety,  and  that  there  can  be  no  greater  folly  than 
to  reject  this  highest  form  of  knowledge.  (R.  Ferguson,  LL.D.)  The  dark 
sayings  of  the  wise  : — Dark  sayings  mean  properly  enigmas  or  riddles.  These  were 
used  of  old  as  one  of  the  methods  of  conveying  instruction.  It  was  conceived  that 
by  giving  exercise  to  the  understanding  in  finding  out  the  solution  of  the  enigma,  it 
was  calculated  to  deepen  on  the  mind  the  impression  of  the  lesson  which  was  wrapt 


CBJlP.  I.]  PROVERBS. 


ap  in  it.  This  was  not  done  for  mere  amusement,  but  for  imparting  serious 
instruction ;  although,  to  the  young,  there  might  in  some  instances  be  the  blending 
of  an  intellectual  attainment  with  the  conveyance  of  useful  information,  or 
salutary  counsel.     (iJ.  Wardlaw,  D.D.) 

Vet.  7.  The  feax  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  knowledge. — The  first  rudiments 
of  knowledge : — The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  an  abiding  and  reverent  sense  of  the 
presence  of  God  and  of  accountableness  to  Him.  For  this  to  exist  God  must  be  that 
real,  personal  Being  which  we  have  every  reason  to  believe  God  has  revealed  Him- 
self to  be :  such  in  character,  as  to  love,  holiness,  and  justice,  as  He  has  declared 
Himself  in  His  "Word.  Why  is  this  fear  the  beginning  of  knowledge?  1.  Because 
knowledge  being  the  apprehension  of  facts,  and  application  of  them  to  life,  it  cannot 
properly  begin,  or  be  based  on  a  right  foundation,  without  first  apprehending  and 
applying  a  fact  which  includes  and  which  modifies  all  other  facts  whatever. 
2.  Because  knowledge  is  the  food  of  the  soul.  And  what  is  the  soul  ?  What  ought 
its  stores  and  its  accumulated  powers  to  be,  and  to  be  useful  for  ?  The  knowledge 
which  is  to  feed  and  train  the  soul  must  begin,  continue,  and  end,  in  the  appre- 
hension of  Him.  3.  Because  knowledge,  as  the  mere  accumulation  of  facts,  is  in- 
operative upon  life.  If  you  would  be  worth  anything  to  society,  worth  anything  to 
your  own  families,  worth  anything  to  yourselves,  the  fear  of  God  must  come  first  in 
your  thoughts  and  lives.  The  fear  of  God  is  the  first  thing  ;  the  consciousness  of 
Him  about  you,  the  laying  down  His  revealed  facts  respecting  Himself  and  you  as 
your  greatest  facts ;  the  setting  up  of  His  will  as  the  inner  law  of  your  being. 
{Dean  Alford.)  How  is  the  "fear  of  the  Lord"  the  beginning  of  knowledge  ? — 1.  It 
quickens  the  intellect,  and  sustains  its  activity.  2.  It  restrains  from  those  follies 
and  corruptions  which  weaken  the  powers,  and  divert  from  high  themes.  3.  This 
fear  starts  thought  from  the  right  centre  and  in  right  directions.  4.  This  fear  is 
the  root  of  that  right  living  and  wise  conduct,  that  forethought,  purity,  temperance, 
uprightness,  and  obedience  to  God,  which  we  may  call  vital  knowledge  ;  knowledge 
in  the  heart  and  life,  as  well  as  in  the  head.  (Monday  Club  Sermons.)  The  root 
of  knowledge  : — The  "  fear  of  the  Lord  "  implies  a  right  state  of  heart  towards  God, 
as  opposed  to  the  alienation  of  an  unconverted  man.  Though  the  word  is  "  fear,"  it 
does  not  exclude  a  filial  confidence  and  a  conscious  peace.  What  God  is  inspires 
awe  ;  what  God  has  done  for  His  people  commands  affection.  See  here  the  centri- 
fugal and  centripetal  forces  of  the  moral  world.  "  Knowledge  "  and  "  wisdom  "  are 
in  effect  synonymous — the  best  knowledge  wisely  used  for  the  highest  ends.  The 
"  fear  of  the  Lord  "  is  the  foundation,  "knowledge  "  is  the  imposed  superstructure. 
He  who  does  not  reverentially  trust  in  God  knows  nothing  yet  as  he  ought  to  know. 
His  knowledge  is  partial  and  distorted.  The  knowledge  of  God — His  character  and 
plans,  His  hatred  of  sin.  His  law  of  holiness.  His  way  of  mercy — is  more  excellent 
than  all  that  an  unbelieving  philosopher  has  attained.  It  is  a  knowledge  more^ 
deeply  laid,  more  difficult  of  attainment,  more  fruitful,  and  more  comprehensive, 
than  all  that  philosophers  know.  Men  speak  of  the  stupendous  effects  which  know- 
ledge, in  the  department  of  mechanical  philosophy,  has  produced  on  the  face  of  the 
world,  and  in  the  economy  of  human  life ;  but  the  permanence  of  these  acquisitions 
depends  on  the  authority  of  moral  laws  in  the  consciences  of  men.  The  moral 
encircles  and  controls  the  economic  in  the  affairs  of  men.  The  knowledge  of  God  is , 
the  root  of  knowledge.  (William  Arnot,  D.D.)  A  plea  for  reverence ;— Keverence 
is  the  alphabet  of  religion.  As  you  cannot  acquire  knowledge  without  the  knowledge 
of  the  alphabet,  so  you  cannot  acquire  anything  of  the  religious  life  without  the 
spirit  of  reverence.  Self-conceit  is  precisely  the  negative  of  reverence.  It  is  the 
absence  of  the  spirit  that  looks  up  to  anything  above  us.  It  is  the  spirit  that  leads 
one  to  say,  "  I  am  the  greatest  and  the  best."  There  are  many  conditions  in  our 
life  which  tend  to  produce  the  spirit  of  self-conceit  and  tend  to  counteract  the  spirit 
of  reverence.  The  absence  of  any  traditions  in  America  tend  against  the  spirit  of 
reverence.  Across  the  ocean,  in  the  Old  World,  we  stand  in  cathedrals  a  thousand 
years  or  more  old,  in  the  presence  of  customs  hoary-headed  with  antiquity  ;  we 
walk  by  the  city  walls  which  have  seen  many  a  battle  between  liberty  and  despotism  ; 
and  these  old  cathedrals,  these  old  cities,  these  old  customs,  awaken  in  us  some 
spirit  of  reverence.  But  we  have  no  such  cathedrals.  The  absence  of  any  class 
distinctions  in  America  tends  against  the  spirit  of  reverence.  We  are  all  on  the 
same  level.  There  is  no  class  to  which  we  can  look  up  with  reverence.  The 
reaction  against  Puritanism  has  tended  against  reverence.  It  is  no  longer  customary 
in  our  homes  to  teach  reverence  of  children  to  their  parents,  or  in  schools  to  teach 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  u 

reverence  of  pupils  to  teachers.     In  the  olden  time  every  boy  bowed  reverently  to 
the  minister ;  now  the  minister  gets  along  very  well  if  the  boy  does  not  cry  out,  ' '  Go 
up,  thou  baldhead !  "     The  spirit  of  criticism,  the  scientific  spirit,  has  tended 
against  reverence.     Many  things  which  of  olden  time  men  superstitiously  feared 
they  fear  no  longer.     We  have  analysed  until  all  great  things  have  been  picked  to 
pieces  in  our  laboratory.  CWe  will  not  allow  any  mysteries^    You  cannot  revere 
what  you  are  criticising.    The  two  processes  never  can  go  on  simultaneously  in  the 
same  mind.     The  sectarian  spirit  has  been  against  the  spirit  of  reverence.     The 
Congregationalist  has  sneered  at  the  ritual  of  the  Episcopalian,  and  the  Episcopalian 
has  shrugged  his  shoulders  over  the  non-ritual  of  the  Congregationalist.    The  spirit 
of  antagonism  between  the  different  denominations  has  despoiled  those  symbols 
which  were  before  the  common  objects  of  a  mutual  reverence.     Finally,  our  demo- 
cratic theology  has  tended  against  the  old  spirit  of  reverence.     Just  because  we  no 
longer  reverence  a  king  in  the  nation  we  do  not  reverence  the  King  in  the  heavens. 
Now,  if  it  be  true  that  reverence  is  a  fountain  of  life,  and  reverence  is  a  beginning 
of  wisdom,  how  in  this  age,  under  these  circumstances,  are  we  to  develop  reverence 
in  ourselves,  in  our  churches,  and  in  our  children  ?    In  the  first  place,  then,  the  old 
notion  of  holy  places  is  gone.     We  cannot  recover  it.     In  truth  there  is  very  little 
foundation  for  it.     For  it  we  are  to  substitute  this  larger,  grander,  more  awe-inspir- 
ing conception — that  every  place  is  holy  place,  every  ground  is  holy  ground,  and 
God  is  in  aU  Nature.     God  is  as  truly  here  as  He  ever  was  in  Palestine,  as  truly  in 
the  White  Mountains  or  the  Bocky  Mountains  as  He  ever  was  in  the  Sinaitic 
Mountains ;  He  is  everywhere,  always  speaking,  in  all  phenomena.     This  must 
come  into  our  hearts  to  take  the  place  of  the  older  and  narrower  conception  of  holy 
places.     We  cannot  re-establish  a  united  ritual,  nor  all  agree  to  climb  to  God's 
throne  by  the  steps  "  worn  by  the  knees  of  many  centuries."    But  we  must  learn 
the  broader,  the  larger,  more  catholic,  aye,  and  profounder  reverence  which  sees 
God  in  every  form  of  worship ;  for  wherever  the  human  heart  is  seeking  God,  there 
God  is.    We  are  to  recognise  Christ  in  all  truth.     The  old  reverence  for  the  Bible 
as  a  book  without  any  error  whatever,  and  as  a  conclusive  and  final  guide  on  ques- 
tions of  science,  literature,  history,  philosophy,  and  reUgion,  is  passing  away.     Our 
reverence  is  not  for  the  tables  of  stone  that  are  broken  and  lost,  nor  for  the  words 
that  were  inscribed  upon  them — we  do  not  know  exactly  what  form  of  words  were 
inscribed  upon  them — but  for  the  great  fundamental  principles  of  the  moral  life 
which  those  Ten  Commandments  embody.     There  is  many  a  man  who  has  rever- 
ence for  the  book  and  none  for  the  truth  that  is  in  the  book.     Woe  to  us  if,  throw- 
ing away  the  old  mechanical  reverence  for  the  outer  thing,  we  fail  to  get  the  deeper 
reverence  for  the  inward  truth !    What  reverence  has  God  shown  for  truth  1     Think 
of  it  one  moment.     He  has  launched  into  human  history  this  volume  of  literature. 
The  ablest  scholars  are  not  agreed  on  such  questions  as  who  wrote  these  various 
books,  at  what  dates,  for  what  purpose,  and  with  what  immediate  intent.   The  great 
majority  of  the  books  are  anonymous ;  the  great  majority  of  them  are  without 
definite  and  positive  date.     What  does   this  mean  ?     It  means  this :  God   has 
launched  truth  without  a  sponsor  into  the  world,  and  left  the  truth  to  bear  witness 
to  itself.     Truth  answers  to  the  human  mind  as  cog  to  cog ;  and  the  reverence  for 
the  shell  is  to  be  lost  only  that  reverence  for  the  kernel  may  take  the  place.     We 
find  it  difficult,  many  of  us,  to  have  any  reverence  for  the  events  that  are  taking 
place  in  America,  and  the  leaders  who  are  participating  in  them.     We  cannot  cure 
that  irreverence  towards  leaders  and  politicians  by  pretending  respect  for  a  man 
whom  we  do  not  respect,  who  has  won  his  way  to  office  by  dishonourable  and  dis- 
reputable methods.     We  must  go  further,  we  must  look  deeper,  we  must  see  that, 
as  God  is  in  all  worship  and  in  aU  truth,  so  God  is  in  aU  history.     We  are  to  see 
God  in  every  man,  and  in  all  of  life.     There  are  times  when  there  seems  nothing 
more  awe-inspiring  than  a  simple,  single  human  soul.     Said  Phillips  Brooks  once 
to  me,  "  There  is  no  man  so  poor,  so  ignorant,  so  outcast,  that  I  do  not  stand  in  awe 
before  him."    As  the  old  reverence  for  the  priest  and  the  robe  and  the  pulpit  fade 
away,  reverence  for  man  as  the  battle-ground  between  good  and  evil  must  come  in 
to  take  its  place,  or  reverence  will  disappear.     "  The  fear  of  God  is  the  fountain  of 
life."     I  think  it  is  Goethe  who  has  drawn  the  distinction  between  fear  and  rever- 
ence.    Fear,  he  says,  repels ;  reverence  attracts.     It  is  not  the  fear  of  God  that 
repels,  it  is  the  reverence  for  God  which  attracts,  which  is  the  fountain  of  life. 
And  when  this  reverence  has  found  its  place  in  our  hearts,  it  is  to  be  the  fountain 
of  all  our  life  ;  of  our  reason,  and  we  are  not  to  be  afraid  of  being  too  rational ;  of 
our  commercial  industries,  and  we  are  not  to  be  afraid  of  being  too  industrious ;  of 


CHAP.  J.]  PROVERBS. 


our  humour,  and  we  are  not  to  be  afraid  of  a  good  hearty  laugh ;  reverence  in  all 
our  life.  You  cannot  have  reverence  on  Sunday  and  irreverence  in  the  week ; 
reverence  in  the  church  and  irreverence  in  the  daily  life.  And,  leaving  in  the  past 
that  reverence  which  was  fragmentary,  broken,  and  largely  idolatrous,  we  are  to 
press  forward  to  a  grander,  broader,  nobler,  diviner  reverence  in  the  future.  {L. 
Abbott,  D.D.)  The  fear  of  the  Lord : — 1.  The  fear  of  God  will  urge  us  to  a  pro- 
fitable study  of  the  Holy  Scriptures.  2.  The  fear  of  God  will  especially  influence 
us  in  our  devotions.  3.  The  fear  of  God  wiU  bring  us  to  the  business  of  the  day  in 
the  right  frame  of  mind  to  carry  it  on.  4.  The  fear  of  God  will  enable  us  to  bear 
the  trials  and  disappointments  of  life.  5.  In  the  last  trial  of  all,  in  the  hour  of 
death,  we  shall  assuredly  reap  the  fruit  of  having  lived  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  for 
then  we  shall  have  nothing  else  to  fear.  (J.  Edmunds.)  Piety  : — I.  Piety  is 
REVERENCE  roB  God.  Filial  reverence  is  meant  by  "fear."  Keverence  implies  two 
things,  a  recognition  of  Divine  greatness,  and  a  recognition  of  Divine  goodness.  An 
impression  of  goodness  lies  at  the  foundation  of  reverence,  and  hence,  too,  gratitude, 
love,  adoration  enter  into  this  reverence.  II.  Piety  is  initiatory  to  knowledge. 
It  is  the  beginning  of  it.  But  what  knowledge  ?  Not  mere  intellectual  knowledge. 
Many  an  impious  man  knows  the  circle  of  the  sciences.  The  devil  is  intelligent. 
It  is  spiritual  knowledge — spiritual  knowledge  of  self,  the  universe,  Christ,  and  God. 
True  reverence  for  God  is  essential  to  this  knowledge.  EeUgious  reverence  is  the 
root  of  the  tree  of  all  spiritual  science.  He  knows  nothing  rightly  who  does  not 
know  God  experimentally.  (Homilist.)  Filial  love  : — Filial  love  stands  near  and 
leans  on  godliness.  It  is  next  to  reverence  for  God.  That  first  and  highest  com- 
mandment is  like  the  earth's  allegiance  to  the  sun  by  general  law ;  and  fihal 
obedience  is  like  day  and  night,  summer  and  winter,  budding  spring  and  ripening 
harvest,  on  the  earth's  surface.  There  could  be  none  of  these  sweet  changes  and 
beneficent  operations  of  nature  on  our  globe  if  it  were  broken  away  from  the  sun. 
So  when  a  people  burst  the  first  and  greatest  bond — when  a  people  cast  off  the  fear 
of  God,  the  family  relations,  with  all  their  beauty  and  benefit,  disappear.  {W. 
Arnot,  D.D.)      Practical  piety  : — I.  Speculative  piety,  or  a  due  knowledge  of  God 

AND  OF  OUR   DUTY  TOWARDS  HiM,  IS  THE    FIRST    FOUNDATION    OF   TRUE  WISDOM.       1.    The 

proper  exercise  of  true  wisdom  consists  in  directing  and  conducting  us  to  the  chiefest 
happiness  which  human  nature  is  capable  of.  2.  That  religion  is  the  only  method 
by  which  we  are  directed  and  conducted  towards  the  attainment  of  this  chief  happi- 
ness. 3.  That  a  due  knowledge  of  God,  and  of  our  duty  towards  Him,  is  the  basis 
and  groundwork  of  true  religion.     11.  Practical  piety,  or  the  regulating  of  our 

ACTIONS  according  TO  KNOWLEDGE,  IS  THE  HEIGHT  AND  PERFECTION  OF  UNDERSTANDING. 

1.  To  be  habitually  conversant  in  the  exercises  of  piety  is  an  instance  of  the  truest 
and  most  considerate  wisdom,  because  it  is  the  most  effectual  means  to  promote  our 
happiness  and  well-being  in  this  life.  There  are  four  things  for  the  attainment  of 
which  we  are  chiefly  solicitous.  A  clear  reputation.  A  comfortable  fortune.  A 
healthful  body.  A  quiet  mind.  2.  The  constant  exercise  of  religious  duties  is  an 
instance  of  the  truest  and  most  considerate  wisdom,  because  it  is  the  most  effectual 
means  to  promote  our  eternal  happiness  in  the  world  to  come.  {N.  Brady.)  A 
reverent  fear  of  God  : — I.  Eeligiousness,  or  a  reverent  fear  of  God,  is  the  best 
WISDOM.  Because  it  brings  a  man  to  acquaintance  with  God.  It  teaches  us  how  to 
converse  with  God  rightly  by  true  worship  and  obedience,  and  how  to  come  to  live 
with  God  for  ever.  II.  Things  of  greatest  worth  should  be  of  greatest  account 
WITH  us.  The  affections  should  ever  follow  the  judgment  well  informed.  III.  Irre- 
ligious persons  are  m  God's  account  the  fools  of  the  world.  They  want  God's 
fear,  as  natural  fools  want  wisdom.  IV.  None  despise  heavenly  wisdom  but  such 
as  know  not  the  value  of  it.  The  excellency  of  it  is  so  great,  that  it  would  allure 
men  to  look  after  it,  had  they  spiritual  eyes  to  see  it.  Knowledge  hath  no  enemy 
but  an  ignorant  man.  V.  They  that  slight  the  means  of  knowledge  slight 
knowledge  itself.  We  account  so  in  outward  things.  We  ask  sick  men  refusing 
physic  if  they  make  no  account  of  their  lives.  Neglect  of  the  means  of  grace  is  a 
real  sHghting  of  wisdom.     (Francis  Taylor. ) 

Ver.  8.  Hear  the  instruction  of  thy  father. — The  family  : — The  first  and  great 
commandment  is  the  fear  of  God,  and  the  second,  which  is  next  to  it  and  Hke  to 
it,  is  obedience  to  parents.  Wherever  the  root  is  planted  this  is  the  first  fruit 
which  it  bears.  God  honours  His  own  ordinance,  the  family.  He  gives  parents 
rank  next  after  Himself.  Filial  love  stands  near,  and  leans  on  godliness.  God  is 
the  author  of  the  family  constitution.    Its  laws  are  the  marriage  of  one  man  with 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

one  woman,  the  support  of  children  by  parents,  and  the  support  of  deoajed  parenta 
by  the  children  grown.  The  polygamy  of  Eastern  peoples  has  made  the  richest 
portions  of  the  earth  like  a  howling  wilderness.  In  the  constitution  of  nature  there 
is  a  self-acting  apparatus  for  punishing  the  transgression  of  the  family  laws.  The 
Divine  institute  is  hedged  all  round.  The  prickles  tear  the  flesh  of  those  who  are 
so  foolish  as  to  kick  against  them.  In  practice,  and  for  safety,  it  is  well  to  keep 
families  together  as  long  as  it  is  possible.  To  violate  the  providential  laws  is  both 
a  crime  and  a  blunder.  Love  to  parents  ranks  next  under  reverence  to  God. 
When  France  threw  off  the  first  commandment  the  second  went  after  it. 
{William  Arnot,  D.D.)  Forsake  not  the  law  of  thy  mother. — For  mother's  sake : — 
What  a  mysterious  thing — what  a  mysterious,  magical.  Divine  thing  is  a  mother's 
love !  How  it  nestles  about  the  heart,  and  goes  with  the  man,  and  speaks  to  him 
pure  words,  and  is  like  a  guardian  angel !  This  young  man  (of  whom  he  was  then 
preaching)  could  never  take  any  money  that  came  to  him  from  his  mother  and 
spend  that  upon  a  Sunday  excursion  or  a  treat  to  a  theatre.  It  was  a  sacred  thing 
with  him  ;  it  had  the  impression  and  the  inscription  of  his  mother's  image,  and 
his  mother's  purity,  and  his  mother's  piety,  and  his  mother's  love.  It  was  a  sacred 
thing  to  him,  and  these  things  that  he  felt  to  be  questionable,  or  felt  to  be  sinful, 
were  always  to  be  provided  for  by  other  resources  and  by  money  that  came  to  him 
from  other  hands.  Oh !  there  is  the  poetry  of  the  heart,  the  poetry  of  our  home 
and  domestic  affections,  the  poetry  of  the  religion  of  the  heart  and  the  altar,  about 
that  little  incident,  and  it  strikes  me  as  being  perfectly  beautiful.  (Thomas  Binney.) 
A  mother's  influence :  The  late  Dr.  Harvey  Goodwin,  Bishop  of  Carlisle,  gave  the 
following  account  of  his  mother  :  "  I  am  one  of  those  who  lost  their  mother  at  a 
very  early  age.  I  was  very  little  over  six  years  old  when  my  dear  mother  was 
suddenly  taken  from  me.  I  mention  my  age  that  I  may  put  before  you  the  effect 
which  my  mother's  teaching  had  upon  me,  and  the  tender  age  at  which  it  ceased, 
and  I  think  we  may  draw  from  it  some  useful  lessons.  Now,  then,  when  I  look 
back  to  the  teaching  of  my  mother,  what  do  I  think  of  it  ?  I  say  deliberately,  and 
without  any  amount  of  exaggeration,  that  though  I  have  since  that  time  been  at 
school,  been  under  tutors,  been  at  college,  and  had  all  the  experience  of  life,  I  do 
not  believe  that  all  the  lessons  that  I  have  received  since  that  time  put  together 
amount  in  value  and  in  importance  to  the  lessons  which  I  learned  from  my  mother 
before  I  was  seven  years  old.  I  will  tell  you  one  of  the  first  lessons  she  taught  me. 
She  taught  me  always  to  speak  the  truth  ;  and  the  lesson  she  gave  me  concerning 
truth  has  never  bten  lost  upon  me.  She  always  brought  me  up  in  the  feeling  that 
what  was  to  be  spoken  was  to  be  the  whole  truth  and  nothing  but  the  truth  ;  that 
there  was  to  be  no  evasion,  that  everything  was  to  be  stated  simply  and  honestly, 
exactly  as  it  occurred ;  and  I  will  tell  you  how  she  enforced  that  lesson — she  always 
spoke  truth  to  me.  I  never  caught  her  in  any  kind  of  deceit ;  I  always  knew  that 
what  she  said  to  me  she  meant.  I  was  always  sure  that  if  she  told  me  she  was 
going  to  do  a  thing  she  would  do  it,  and  no  amount  of  coaxing  or  persuasion  would 
lead  her  to  change  her  mind.  Absolute  truth,  absolute  in  the  smallest  matters, 
that  was  her  practice,  and  that  was  the  lesson  that  she  impressed  upon 
me." 

Ver.  9.  For  they  shall  be  an  ornament  of  grace  unto  thy  head. — Filial  love 
an  ornament  of  beauty : — It  seems  an  instinct  of  humanity  to  put  ornaments  upon 
the  person.  It  does  not  rank  high  among  the  exercises  of  the  human  faculties,  yet 
it  is  quite  above  the  reach  of  all  inferior  creatures.  Ornaments  on  the  fallen,  like 
many  other  innocent  things,  become  the  occasions  of  sin,  but  they  are  not  in  their 
own  nature  evil.  To  deck  with  external  beauty  that  which  is  morally  corrupt 
within  is  a  cheat  which  men  practise  on  themselves  and  others,  but  adornment  of 
the  person,  modest  in  measure  and  adopted  instinctively  by  an  innate  sense  of 
propriety,  is  conducive  to  virtue  and  consistent  with  Scripture.  Moral  qualities  are 
the  true  adornments  of  a  human  being.  All  the  graces  of  the  Spirit  are  lovely : 
but  here  the  foremost  of  relative  duties,  a  child's  reverential  regard  for  a  parent,  is 
recommended  as  an  ornament  of  surpassing  beauty.  Love,  obey,  cherish,  reverence 
your  parents.  This  is  in  God's  sight  of  great  price.  These  ornaments  will  not  be 
out  of  date  when  time  has  run  its  course.  The  moral  laws  of  God  have  avenging 
sanctions  even  in  the  powers  of  nature.  Godliness  is  profitable  unto  all  things. 
The  first  commandment  is  fruitful  even  in  this  life,  and  the  second  is  like  it — like 
it  in  its  holy  character,  like  it  in  its  glad  results.  "  Honour  thy  father  and  thy 
mother,"  this  is  an  ornament  of  soUd  gold.     Unlike  the  watering  of  superficial 


CHAP.  1.]  PROVERBS.  H 

accomplishments,  the  more  rudely  it  is  rubbed  the  more  brightly  it  glows.   {William 
Arnot,  D.D.) 

Vers.  10-19.  My  son,  if  ainners  entice  thee. — Reatons  for  resisting  the  entice- 
ments of  sinners : — By  sinners  is  meant  all  persons  who  are  not  trne  Christians. 
Thiee  reasons  why  we  should  not  consent  when  sinners  entice  us:  1.  Because 
when  we  begin  to  sin  it  is  hard  to  stop.  2.  Because  it  is  dangerous.  3.  Because  it 
is  disgraceful.  (1)  It  is  so  in  the  looks  it  gives  us.  (2)  It  is  so  in  the  company  into 
which  it  brings  us.  Two  things  we  ought  to  do :  1.  Get  rid  of  the  sins  we  have 
committed.  2.  Try  to  keep  from  sinning  any  more.  Said  a  boy  to  his  sister  one 
day,  "  I  want  the  spirit  to  look  sin  right  in  the  face  when  it  comes  to  me,  and  say, 
'  Begone.'  "  "  Yes,"  replied  the  sister,  "  and  one  thing  more  you  want ;  you  want 
God's  spectacles  to  see  sin  and  know  it  when  it  comes,  for  it  does  not  always  show 
its  colours."  (R.  Newton,  D.D.)  Sinful  enticements  : — How  industrious  wicked 
people  are  to  seduce  others  into  the  paths  of  the  destroyer.  Sinners  love  company 
in  sin ;  the  angels  that  fell  were  tempters  almost  as  soon  as  they  were  sinners. 
They  do  not  threaten  or  argue,  but  entice  with  flattery  and  fair  speech ;  with  a  bait 
they  draw  the  unwary  young  man  to  the  hook.  But  they  mistake  if  they  think 
that  by  bringing  others  to  partake  with  them  in  their  guilt,  and  to  be  bound, 
as  it  were,  in  the  bond  with  them,  they  shall  have  the  less  to  pay  them- 
selves, for  they  will  have  so  much  the  more  to  answer  for.  (Matthew  Henry.) 
The  various  ivays  by  which  sifiners  entice  us  to  vice  : — I.  I  shall  mention  some  of 
THE  VARIOUS  WAYS  BY  WHICH  SINNERS  ENTICE  US  TO  VICE.  1.  They  represent  it  as  a 
light  and  trivial  matter,  and  at  the  worst  as  venial  and  pardonable.  "  What  is  it," 
they  will  probably  say,  "  but  a  human  weakness  and  infirmity,  to  which  all  men  are 
subject  ?  Can  it  be  criminal  to  follow  the  dictates  of  one's  natural  passions  ?  You 
can  be  no  worse  than  thousands  who  indulge  in  the  same  excesses."  TheywiU  give 
soft  names  to  the  greatest  abominations  in  order  to  prevent  alarm.  In  this  way 
the  understanding  is  imposed  upon  and  the  conscience  is  silenced.  When  vice  is 
painted  in  all  its  black  colours  we  are  apt  to  be  alarmed  at  the  commission  of  it, 
but  when  it  is  stripped  of  its  deformity  we  become  more  reconciled  to  it,  and  more 
readily  yield.  But  can  that  be  a  light  matter  which  is  treason  against  the  Almighty 
and  which  has  subjected  us  to  death  ?  Perhaps  we  are  more  in  danger  from 
smaller  than  greater  transgressions,  because  they  steal  upon  us  more  imperceptibly, 
and  draw  us  insensibly  into  the' commission  of  them.  Is  not  this  a  good  argument 
to  be  jealous  of  the  very  appearance  of  evil  and  to  loathe  the  garments  spotted  with 
iniquity  ?  2.  By  representing  the  gain  and  the  pleasure  which  accompany  it. 
Gain  and  pleasure  are  the  two  great  charmers  which  have  seduced  mankind  and 
led  them  captive  at  their  wiU.  What  foul  and  black  crimes  hath  the  love  of 
money  been  the  means  of  perpetrating  !  To  this  corrupt  source  may  be  traced  all 
the  fraud  and  injustice,  all  the  theft  and  robbery  which  have  been  committed. 
And  what  is  the  acquisition  of  wealth,  upon  which  men  are  so  much  set  ?  Is  it  any 
substantial,  permanent  good?  Will  it  preserve  health,  prolong  life,  or  ward  off 
death  ?  The  love  of  pleasure  has  ruined  many.  It  enchants  the  simple.  Health 
has  been  impaired.  3.  By  traducing  the  principles  of  good  men  and  turning  their 
manners  into  ridicule.  The  gospel  hath  unfolded  a  glorious  plan  of  salvation  by 
which  God,  consistently  with  the  purity  of  His  nature  and  the  perfection  of  His 
government,  can  be  reconciled  to  the  chief  of  sinners.  It  is  nobly  adapted  to  restore 
peace  to  the  troubled  mind  and  to  inspire  the  hope  of  immortality.  Shall  we  be 
laughed  out  of  it  by  any  set  of  men  or  for  any  gratification  whatever  ?  4.  By  leading 
the  road  and  calling  us  to  follow  them.  It  must  be  allowed  that  example  has  a 
powerful  influence  upon  mankind  and  will  often  prevail  when  all  other  means 
prove  ineffectual.  Good-nature  may  not  allow  him  to  separate  from  his  com- 
panions. To  do  as  others  do  hath  long  been  a  powerful  principle  of  action,  and 
hath  carried  men  greater  lengths  than  they  ever  thought  of.  Before  I  proceed 
to  the  second  branch  of  the  subject  I  shall  give  an  advice  or  two  to  the  young. 
1.  Cultivate  an  early  acquaintance  with  God.  2.  Carefully  avoid  the  company  of 
the  ungodly.  Who  knows  but  your  principles  may  be  shaken  and  your  morals 
corrupted  before  you  are  aware  ?  3.  Be  earnest  in  prayer  to  God  that  He  may 
never  suffer  you  to  be  tempted  beyond  what  you  are  able  to  bear.  Heaven  is  your 
best  resource,  and  from  whence  your  most  effectual  aids  do  come.     II.  A  few 

ARGUMENTS    WHICH,    BY    THE     BLESSING     OF     GoD,    WILL    ENABLE     US     TO     RESIST     THEM. 

1.  It  is  mean  and  dishonourable  to  be  connected  with  bad  men.     2.  It  is  the  most 
prejudicial  to  your  best  and  eternal  interests.     The  health  will  be  impaired,  the 


19  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  t. 

Boal  lost.  3.  The  infinite  obligations  you  are  under  to  your  Ood  and  Redeemer. 
4.  If  you  consent  you  will  lay  a  foundation  for  much  anguish  and  remorse. 
Loose  and  dissipated  men  may  put  on  what  appearance  of  gaiety  and  mirth  they 
please,  but  I  am  apt  to  think  it  is  more  affected  than  real,  more  feigned  than 
true.  5.  The  distress  and  grief  in  which  you  must  involve  your  parents  and 
friends.  (D.  Johnstone,  D.D.)  The  allurements  of  sin : — I.  A  danger  implied. 
It  is  the  nature  of  sin  to  be  aggressive.  Wherever  it  obtains  an  entrance  it  will, 
if  not  destroyed,  ultimately  become  the  master.  It  cannot  exist  without  seeking 
to  push  itself  forward  to  some  new  conquest.  There  was  never  one  transgressor 
yet  who  did  not  try  to  make  another  like  himself.  There  is  on  earth  what  may 
be  called  a  huge  propaganda  of  evil.  Self-security  only  makes  more  easy  victims. 
II.  A  METHOD  EXPOSED.  The  word  "  entice  "  implies  that  they  do  not  ask  you 
plainly  and  directly  to  commit  sin  as  sin,  but  rather  set  before  you  some  real  or 
imaginary  pleasure  which  you  can  get  only  by  a  commission  of  that  which  is  sin. 
They  dexterously  conceal  the  fact  that  it  is  sin.  They  bait  their  hook. 
The  sin  is  to  be  committed  as  a  means  to  an  end,  and  the  mind  is 
BO  occupied  by  the  end  that  the  guilt  of  the  means  is  overlooked.  Then  it 
is  well  to  know  the  enticements  which  are  commonly  employed  to  delude  and  allure 
the  unwary.  1.  One  common  enticement  is  the  increase  of  knowledge.  The  asser- 
tion is  made  that  they  will  "  see  life."  2.  Another  is  pleasure.  That  may  be  good, 
but  it  is  well  to  ask,  "  What  will  it  cost  ?  "  It  is  dear  if  it  can  only  be  bought  by 
the  forfeiture  of  peace  of  conscience  and  the  favour  of  God.  3.  Another  is  the  love 
of  liberty.  You  are  asked  to  do  the  doubtful  or  the  wrong  "  just  to  assert  your 
liberty."  4.  The  tempter  promises  that  you  will  never  be  discovered.  It  is  urged, 
"  Nobody  will  ever  know."  Yes,  God  will  know.  III.  Eesistance  enforced. 
"  Consent  thou  not."  Give  a  plain,  downright,  emphatic  refusal.  The  right  use 
of  the  word  "No"  at  the  critical  turning-points  of  life  will  save  a  man  from 
destruction.     There  are  two  excellent  maxims   as  regards  our  moral   actions — 

1.  Always  force  yourselves  to  come  to  a  positive  decision  in  all  matters  of  conduct. 

2.  Never  allow  yourselves  to  deliberate  on  a  matter  in  reference  to  which  conscience 
is  clear.  IV.  A  motive  suggested.  In  this  resistance  which  has  been  urged. 
The  text  is  a  parental  appeal,  and  brings  to  bear  upon  us  all  the  memories 
and  associations  of  our  earliest  home.  Cherish  them,  and  they  will  build 
for  you  a  breakwater  within  reach,  by  means  of  which  you  may  safely  over- 
ride the  fiercest  storms  and  whirlwinds  of  temptation.  (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.) 
Bad  company : — The  desire  to  make  proselytes  to  our  speculative  opinions,  and 
bring  over  others  to  think  as  we  do,  is  not  a  more  constant  attendant  on  our  pride  and 
conceit  than  the  desire  in  men  of  vicious  lives  to  make  the  practice  of  others  as  bad 
as  their  own.  Whether  it  be  that  many  kinds  of  wickedness  require  numbers  to 
associate,  in  order  to  their  being  carried  on  with  success,  so  that  they  who  are 
engaged  in  them  are  constantly  beating  up  for  allies  ;  whether  the  sense  of  shame 
is  not  lessened,  and  the  censure  of  the  decent  portion  of  mankind  made  more 
tolerable  when  multitudes  share  in  it ;  whether  the  conscience  is  not,  also,  soothed 
and  flattered  from  the  same  cause  ;  or  whether,  lastly,  the  perversion  of  their  ways 
has  produced  in  such  men  a  gratuitous  desire  of  doing  hurt,  and  a  love  of  mischief 
for  its  own  sake ;  so  it  is — the  loss  of  his  own  virtue  produces  in  a  man  the  desire  to 
overcome  the  virtue  of  others.  The  particular  sin  which  the  preacher  had  in  his 
thoughts  at  the  time  was  that  of  dishonesty,  and  the  enticement  he  speaks  of  was 
to  the  taking  of  property  belonging  to  others,  and  living  upon  it,  instead  of 
labouring  for  an  honourable  and  independent  livelihood.  He  selects  that  species  of 
crime,  out  of  many  that  would  have  answered  as  well,  as  a  specimen  whereby  to 
illustrate  his  argument,  and  show  the  ruin  and  misery  to  which  the  path  of  sin 
conducts  a  man.  There  is  one  property,  common  to  the  language  of  all  enticers  of 
others  to  sin,  of  whatever  kind  the  sin  be  ;  and  Solomon  has  not  failed  to  notice  it 
in  the  case  he  has  supposed.  It  is  the  pretence  of  the  most  disinterested  friendship, 
high  professions  of  good-will  and  regard  for  the  person  they  undertake  to  entice. 
"  Come  with  us ;  cast  thy  lot  among  us  ;  let  us  all  have  one  purse."  They  who 
entice  them  to  the  sin  disguise  their  secret  ends,  their  abominable  selfishness,  so 
BuccessfuUy,  under  appearance  of  generosity,  that  they  are  blinded  for  a  time,  and 
think  the  morality  which  they  have  learned  at  home  too  strict  and  impracticable, 
and  the  kindness  they  received  from  their  parents  and  relations  hardly  worthy  to 
be  compared  to  the  friendship  of  these  men.  How,  then,  is  a  man  to  judge  in  this 
matter?  Is  he  to  pass  through  life  with  a  sour  suspicion  of  mankind,  reject  all 
their  kindness  as  a  cloak  for  bad  designs,  and  hold  the  opinion  that  no  man  is  ever 


OHAT.  X.]  PROVERBS.  18 

loved  save  by  his  father  and  mother  ?  Far  from  it.  In  the  passage  before  us  he 
propounds  a  test  and  criterion  whereby  a  young  person  may  distinguish  between 
true  and  false  friendship  ;  and  it  is  this  :  that  the  true  will  always  be  accompanied 
with  a  concern  for  his  virtue.  "  If  sinners  entice  thee,  consent  thou  not."  I  know 
not  how  I  can  better  illustrate  this  maxim  of  Solomon  than  by  stating,  in  the  royal 
author's  own  words,  the  consequences  of  listening  to  the  counsels  of  the  ungodly — 
the  solicitations  to  sin,  with  which  the  young  are  sure  to  be  assailed  by  cunning 
and  practised  offenders.  For  example,  with  respect  to  sins  of  licentiousness,  and 
the  temptations  thereto,  he  says  of  him  that  yieldeth  to  them  that  he  that  goeth 
after  the  strange  woman,  "  goeth  as  an  ox  to  the  slaughter,  and  as  a  fool  to  the 
correction  of  the  stocks  ;  tiU  a  dart  strike  through  his  liver  ;  as  a  bird  hasteth  to  the 
snare,  and  knoweth  not  that  it  is  for  his  life."  "  For,"  he  says  again,  "  she  hath 
cast  down  many  wounded,  yea,  many  strong  men  have  been  slain  by  her."  Again, 
when  he  would  dissuade  from  idleness,  and  inculcate  the  wisdom  of  a  provident 
regard  to  the  future,  he  says,  "  Go  to  the  ant,  thou  sluggard,  consider  her  ways  and 
be  wise."  Again,  of  dishonesty.  "  The  thoughts  of  the  diligent  tend  only  to 
plenteousness  ;  but  every  one  that  is  hasty,  only  to  want.  The  getting  of  treasures 
by  a  lying  tongue  is  a  vanity,  tossed  to  and  fro,  of  them  that  seek  death."  "  The 
robbery  of  the  wicked  shall  destroy  them."  {A.  Gibson,  M.A.)  The  personal  element 
in  temptation  :  -Sin  is  not  so  dangerous  as  is  the  sinner.  Sin  is  repellent ;  but  the 
sinner  may  be  winsome  and  attractive.  The  personal  element  in  temptation  is  often 
the  attractive  element.  I.  Sin  sometimes  clothes  itseuf  with  personal  authobity. 
As  of  a  master  over  a  servant,  or  a  father  over  a  son.  Temptation  becomes  strong 
when  it  enlists  authority  on  its  behalf.  II.  Sin  sometimes  clothes  itself  with 
PEBSONAii  affection.  Many  of  the  forms  of  vice  depend  entirely  upon  friendship 
for  their  propagation.  They  would  die  a  natural  death  if  it  were  not  for  a  man's 
friends.  III.  Sin  sometimes  clothes  itself  with  personal  attractions.  Consider 
mental  attractions.  The  learned,  the  witty,  the  intellectual  bad  man,  is  a 
power  for  evil.  There  is  a  passing  over  of  power  from  the  man  to  his  sin.  The 
more  attractions  a  man  has  personally  the  more  ropes  has  sin  to  pull  upon  others 
with,  and  the  more  deceptive  attire  has  sin  to  clothe  itself  with.  IV.  Sin  sometimes 
CLOTHES  ITSELF  WITH  PERSONAL  INFLUENCE.  Wealth  givcs  a  man  influence  in  a 
community.  So  does  social  or  ofiScial  position.  Young  men  should  be  taught  to 
recognise  sin  promptly,  no  matter  what  it  is  clothed  in.  Christian  manliness  and 
independence  are  the  safeguards  against  the  personal  e  ^nients  in  temptation. 
Dare  to  be  right,  even  if  sin  should  enlist  all  the  powers  oi  the  world  on  its  side. 
Dare  to  say,  "No."  This  is  Christian  heroism.  {The  Southern  Pulpit.)  Youth 
counselled  : — The  text  refers  to  another  state  of  society  than  that  in  which  we  live. 
I.  Life  is  a  scene  of  real  and  daily  temptation.  Whether  a  man  wishes  it  or  not, 
he  will  be  enticed.  The  mistake  of  many  is  that  they  expect  to  pass  through  life 
without  being  tried.  They  are  not  forearmed.  There  is  not  any  perfect  escape  to 
be  expected.  It  is  the  necessary  discipline  through  which  man  must  pass.  The 
knowledge  and  experience  of  evil  is  just  as  inevitable  as  the  knowledge  and  experience 
of  any  of  the  ordinary  affairs  of  human  life.  II.  There  is  one  period  of  life 
BCOBE  specially  EXPOSED  TO  TEMPTATION  THAN  OTHERS.  At  first  sight  the  temptatious 
of  youth  seem  to  be  at  variance  with  the  general  principle,  that  as  a  man's  day  is 
BO  shaU  his  strength  be.  Youth's  strength  and  youth's  day  often  seem  to  be  very 
disproportionate.  It  seems  hard  that  youth  should  be  so  severely  tried.  1.  The 
generosity  of  youth  is  tried  by  the  callousness  and  coldness  of  the  world.  2.  The 
guilelessness  of  youth  is  tried  by  severe  lessons  ;  friends  faU  off,  and  depart  like 
swallows  in  the  winter,  when  we  seem  to  need  them  most.  3.  The  purity  of  youth 
is  tried  by  having  to  go  forth  into  the  world  of  real  and  actual  impurity,  to  make 
venture  in  its  own  strength  against  it  aU.     III.  In  society  we  find  many  persons 

WHOSE  CHIEF  DELIGHT  IT  SEEMS    TO   BE    TO   THROW  TEMPTATIONS   IN    THE  WAY  OP  YOUTH. 

No  sooner  does  a  man  go  astray  than  he  strives  to  drag  others  with  him.  It  is 
done — 1.  By  ridicule.  2.  By  sly  suggestions.  3.  By  lending  bad  books  and 
indulging  in  bad  conversation.  To  overcome  these  temptations  great  decision  of 
character  is  required.  To  get  on  in  life  requires  the  steady,  unbroken  bent  of  a 
strong  wiU.  There  is  no  guarantee  for  real  decision  of  character  except  in  the  fear 
of  God.  {W.  G.  Barrett.)  The  dangers  to  which  the  young  are  exposed : — Youth 
is  the  most  interesting  and  important  period  of  our  moral  probation  for  eternity. 
In  it  the  young  begin  to  be  freed  from  that  parental  authority  and  discipline 
which  restrain  them  from  the  practice  of  vice.  They  were  then  called,  in  some 
measure,  to  think,  to  judge,  and  to  act  for  themselves.     Then  the  principles  early 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.i. 

instilled  into  their  minds  are  to  be  brought  to  the  test  of  trial.     I.  Young  men  MAt 

BE  EXPOSED  TO  THE  BANEFUL  INFLUENCE  OF  BAD  EXAMPLE,  TO  THE  FORCE  OF  RIDICULE, 
AND  TO  THE  POWER  OF  PERSUASION.  II.  ThE  TtOUNO  ARE  ENTICED  BY  SETTING  BEFORE 
THEM  SPLENDID  AND  SEDUCTIVE  REPRESENTATIONS  OF  THE  RICHES  AND  ENJOYMENT  WITH 
WHICH  VICE    IS    ACCOMPANIED.       III.     ThE    YOUNG    ARE    ENTICED    TO  THE    COMMISSION  OF 

VICE  BY  CONCEALING  ITS  NATIVE  DEFORMITY.  Sedulously  endeavourlng  to  diminish 
impressions  of  the  danger  with  which  it  is  attended.     IV.  The  young  are  enticed 

BY  MISREPRESENTATIONS  OF  THE  DiVlNE  BeING  AND  RELATIONS.       God's  mercifulneSS  is 

overpressed,  and  His  justice  and  holiness  are  put  out  of  sight.  God  will  never  let 
sin  go  unpunished.     (John  Hunter.)         The  foe  and  the  fight : — I.  The  danger. 

I.  The  sinners  that  entice  from  within  are  the  man's  own  thoughts  and  desires. 
There  is  quite  an  army  of  these  sinners  in  a  young  man's  breast.  Thoughts 
open  up  the  way,  and  prepare  a  trodden  path  on  which  the  man  may  follow.  A 
gossamer  thread  is  attached  to  an  arrow  and  shot  through  the  air  unseen,  over  an 
impassable  chasm.  Fixed  on  the  other  side,  it  is  sufficient  to  draw  over  a  cord ; 
the  cord  draws  over  a  rope,  the  rope  draws  over  a  bridge,  by  which  a  highway  is 
opened  for  all  comers.  Thus  is  the  gulf  passed  that  lies  between  the  goodly 
character  of  a  youth  fresh  from  his  father's  family  and  the  daring  heights  of 
iniquity  on  which  veteran  libertines  stand.  From  the  brink  on  this  side  the  youth 
darts  over  a  thought  which  makes  itself  fast  to  something  on  these  forbidden 
regions.  Deeds  will  quickly  follow  when  the  way  is  prepared.  2.  The  sinners  that 
entice  from  without  are  fellow-men,  who,  having  gone  astray  themselves,  are  busy 
leading  others  after  them.  The  deed  most  characteristic  that  the  father  of  lies  ever 
did  was  to  lead  others  after  him  into  sin.  An  evil-doer  has  a  craving  for  company 
in  his  wickedness.  By  a  natural  necessity,  the  licentious  recruit  among  the  ranks 
of  the  virtuous,  the  drunken  among  the  ranks  of  the  sober.  It  is  a  power  of  nature 
that  is  taken  and  employed  to  enslave  men.  Men  are  gregarious.  The  principle 
of  association  is  implanted  in  their  nature,  and  is  mighty,  according  to  the  direction 
it  gets,  for  good  or  evil.     This  great  power  generally  becomes  a  ready  agency  of  ill. 

II.  The  enticements.  These  are  manifold.  As  addressed  to  well-educated,  well- 
conducted  youths,  they  are  always  more  or  less  disguised.  The  tempter  always 
flings  over  at  least  his  ugliest  side  some  shred  of  an  angel's  garment.  Few  young 
men  who  have  enjoyed  a  religious  education  come  to  a  sudden  stand,  and  at  once 
turn  their  back  upon  God  and  godliness.  Most  of  those  who  do  fall  diverge  at  first 
by  imperceptible  degrees  from  the  path  of  righteousness.  The  importance  of  the 
ancient  rule,  "  Obsta  principiis  "  ("  resist  the  beginnings  "),  can  never  be  overrated. 
Watch  the  beginnings  of  evil.  High  in  the  list  of  dangerous  enticements  stands  the 
theatre.  The  custom  of  society  encouraging  the  use  of  intoxicating  drinks  con- 
stitutes one  of  the  most  formidable  dangers  to  youth  in  the  present  day.  But  we 
never  yet  met  with  a  drunkard  who  either  became  one  all  at  once  or  who  designed 
to  become  one.  In  every  case  the  dreadful  demon  vice  has  crept  over  the  faculties 
by  slow  degrees,  and  at  last  surprised  the  victim.  III.  The  defence.  "  Consent 
thou  not."  It  is  a  blunt,  peremptory  command.  Your  method  of  defence  must 
differ  from  the  adversary's  mode  of  attack.  His  strength  lies  in  making  gradual 
approaches;  yours  is  a  resistance,  sudden,  resolute,  total.  It  is  not  by  partial 
compliances  and  polite  excuses  that  enticements  are  to  be  repelled.  With  such 
adversaries  you  are  not  obliged  to  keep  terms.  Much  depends  on  the  unfaltering, 
undiluted,  dignified  "  No  "  of  one  who  fears  God  more  than  the  sneer  of  fools. 
The  shortest  answer  is  the  best.  The  means  of  resisting  may  be  found  in— 
1.  Refinement  of  manners.  2.  Profitable  study.  3.  Benevolent  effort. 
4.  Improving  company.  But  though  the  society  of  the  good  is  an  instru- 
ment of  protection  not  to  be  despised,  it  is  still  subordinate.  There  is  another 
companion.  "  There  is  a  Friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother."  You 
cannot  fight  the  enticements  of  sinful  pleasure  in  your  own  strength, 
"Under  the  Captain  of  salvation  you  may  fight  and  win.  (Williavi  Amot,  D.D.) 
Men  each  other's  tempters :— There  are  two  worlds  from  which  temptation  reaches 
us— the  world  in  which  we  live,  and  the  world  below  us.  There  are  two  classes  of 
beings  who  act  as  tempters,  devils  and  men.  There  is,  however,  but  one  class  of 
characters ;  sinners  alone  can  be  tempters.  We  do  not  know  how  the  first  sin 
originated.  I.  Look  at  the  case  supposed.  1.  It  is  a  common  case.  Sinners  do 
entice.  It  is  in  the  nature  of  sin  to  make  men  tempters  one  of  another.  The  social 
character  of  mankind  seems  to  involve  this.  2.  It  is  a  serious  case.  Generally 
speaking,  the  tempters  are  stronger  than  the  tempted.  The  tendencies  of  oui 
human  nature  are  in  the  direction  of  transgression.     The  principles  of  every  sin 


OBJir.  I.]  PROVERBS.  15 

are  latent  in  us  all.  Those  principles  may  be  undeveloped  because  they  have  not 
been  appealed  to  ;  but  let  an  appeal  be  made,  and  they  will  be  manifest.  Tempta- 
tion is  presented  to  a  nature  more  or  less  susceptible.  3.  It  is  by  no  means  a 
hopeless  case.  There  is  One  who  can  be  a  refuge,  a  strength,  and  a  present  helper. 
II.  Look  at  the  advice  given.  "  Consent  thou  not."  Without  consent  the  tempta- 
tion cannot  take  effect,  and  without  consent  the  temptation  can  do  no  real  harm. 
If  you  do  consent,  be  sure  "your  sin  will  find  you  out."  To  consent  now  is  to 
expose  yourself  to  greater  danger  hereafter.  If  you  consent  to  enticement  to-day, 
it  will  be  almost  an  impossible  thing  to  refuse  to-morrow.  (S.  Martin.)  Entice- 
ments and  enticers : — Some  point  is  gained  by  regarding  this  as  Solomon's  advice  to 
his  son  Eehoboam,  who  probably  was  an  only  son,  and  certainly  was  brought  up 
amidst  the  dangerous  luxuries  and  flatteries  of  Eastern  court  life.  One  of  his  chief 
perils  lay  in  evil  companionships.  The  surface  of  society  never  tells  the  truth  con- 
cerning it.  It  is  strange  to  find  Eehoboam  warned  of  "  wild  banditti  "  (vers.  11-14). 
Illustrate  from  the  "Prince  Hal"  of  English  history  and  common  sentiment 
concerning  such  men  as  "  Bobin  Hood."  Drinking,  gambling,  and  impurity  are 
the  wild  evils  of  our  time,  and  the  caution  of  the  text  applies  to  them.  I.  Tempta- 
tions MUST  COME.  This  is  a  necessary  law  for  those  who  are  placed  on  probation. 
Forms  of  enticement  differ  in  different  ages.  In  each  age,  in  each  setting  of  social 
circumstances,  there  is  a  lawless,  self-indulgent  side.  There  is  in  all  young  people 
a  love  of  romance,  and  a  high-spiritedness,  which  makes  them  delight  in  adventure ; 
but  selfishness  and  covetousness  are  the  dispositions  which  most  readily  respond  to 
enticements  of  social  evil.  None  can  hope  to  escape  temptation,  none  should  wish 
to  escape  it.     There  is  no  possible  culture  of  moral  character  without  such  testing. 

II.  Sin  lies  in  consenting  to  enticements.  Personal  consent  is  essential  to  sin. 
What  advice  can  then  be  given  to  the  young?  1.  Do  not  put  yourself  in  the  way  of 
temptation.  2.  Meet  enticement  with  simple  refusal.  III.  The  character  of  an 
enticement  is  shown  in  the  character  of  those  who  present  it.  We  are  often 
placed  in  difficulty  by  the  disguises  of  temptation.  Especially  before  we  have 
gained  life-experience.  By  the  hands  and  the  neck  it  does  seem  like  Esau.  By 
the  talk  it  does  seem  a  wise  serpent.  A  fair  judgment  of  it  is  often  beyond  our 
power.  But  judging  those  who  offer  the  temptation  is  always  possible.  If  a  man 
is  not  a  good  man,  you  had  better  suspect  what  he  wants  you  to  do.  If  you  know 
a  man  is  good,  you  may  begin  with  confidence  in  his  advice.  If  sinners  entice,  it  is 
always  safe  not  to  consent.  If  the  good  invite,  it  is  always  best  to  consent  at  once. 
God  is  the  infinitely  good  One,  and  to  His  call  and  invitation  instant  and  unques- 
tioning response  should  be  given.  (Weekly  Pulpit.)  Virtuous  obstinacy. — I.  The 
tempters  are  called  sinners,  a  sinner  here  is  one  who  has  himself  gone  out  of 
the  straight  path  of  duty,  and  is  now  a  wilful  wanderer,  aiming  to  draw  others  into 
his  own  dangerous  course.  II.  The  way  of  tempting  called  enticing.  Sometimes 
the  enticement  of  flattery  is  employed  ;  sometimes  misrepresentation  ;  sometimes 
allurement ;  sometimes  the  barest  artifice.  The  most  dangerous  artifices  are  those 
that  tend  to  shake  the  only  sure  foundations  of  moral  obligation  and  responsibility. 

III.  How  ARE  THESE  TEMPTERS  TO  BE  DEALT  WITH  ?  Parental  authority  and  affection 
enforce  the  solemn  charge.  Call  in  reason  to  your  aid.  Call  in  reflection.  Call  in 
self-knowledge.  Call  in  the  solemn  warnings  of  God's  holy  oracles.  Call  in  watch- 
fulness and  prayer.  Covet  the  approbation  of  conscience.  Stop  to  count  the  final 
cost.  Let  the  sensual  allure,  let  the  unbelieving  misrepresent,  let  the  reckless  scoff ; 
but  by  the  help  of  God,  in  the  name  of  all  that  is  virtuous  and  praiseworthy,  for  the 
happiness  of  your  whole  present  life,  in  the  aspiration  after  a  life  of  perfect  virtue 
and  of  perfect  bliss,  let  your  one  decisive  answer  ever  be,  "  No."  (/.  Bullar.) 
The  enticements  of  sinners: — Youth,  neglected  or  corrupted,  makes  manhood 
despicable  or  vicious.  The  crimes  of  riper  years  multiply  and  embitter  the 
infirmities  and  the  sorrows  of  age.  "Beware  of  poisoning  the  youthful  mind 
with  false  principles.  Leave  the  rational  powers  gradually  to  unfold  themselves. 
You  may  aid  reason  in  its  operations,  but  never  let  authority  supply  the  place  of 
conviction,  nor  check  a  passion,  but  by  an  argument  level  to  the  comprehension." 
This  is  the  pernicious  doctrine  of  the  new  philosophy,  which  is  but  another  name 
for  infidelity.  Better  advice  is,  watch  the  first  dawnings  of  intellect.  It  begins  to 
open  sooner  than  most  suspect.  Its  natural  tendency  is  towards  error.  It  belongs 
to  you  to  inform  and  to  direct  it.  Watch,  with  equal  care,  the  first  emotions  of 
feeling  and  passion  ;  their  tendency  is  equally  towards  vice.  Tell  your  children 
that  virtue  derives  its  chief  and  its  only  religious  value  from  its  conformity  to  the 
nature  and  wiU  of  God,  and  that  vice  is  odious  and  detestable  from  its  opposition  to 


H  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [Ohap.  I. 

both.      I.  Is  IT   NOT  STEANGK   THB   'WICKED   SHOULD   SEEK   TO  ENTICE  OTHEBS  ?      That 

human  nature  is  corrupted  appears  in  the  practice  and  the  contagion  of  vice.  Vice, 
the  natural  product  of  a  tainted  heart,  first  makes  its  appearance  in  the  moral 
constitution  ;  grows  by  indulgence,  and  is  propagated  by  example.  1.  Sinners  are 
prompted  to  the  seduction  of  others  by  natural  impulse.  It  results  both  from  their 
principles  and  their  habits.  2.  The  wicked  are  led  to  seduction  by  a  second  motive. 
They  feel  a  shame  which  they  refuse  to  acknowledge  ;  they  are  anxious  to  wear  off 
this  painful  impression  in  their  own  minds,  and  divide  the  disgrace  of  their  conduct 
in  the  opinion  of  mankind  by  the  society  of  others.  3.  Vice  is  also  attended  with 
fear.  The  man  wants  society  in  order  to  dissipate  thought.  4.  Vice,  indeed, 
requires  society  either  for  its  full  enjoyment  or  the  effectual  accomplishment  of  its 
purposes.  5.  Indefatigable  is  the  kingdom  of  darkness  in  propagating  itself, 
6.  Infernal  influences  may  be  necessary  to  account  for  the  activity  of  the  wicked 
in  seduction.  II.  The  methods  employed  in  the  wobk  of  seduction.  The  efforts 
of  the  seducer  are  not  systematic  and  uniform.  They  are  accommodated  to  cir- 
cumstances and  tempers.  You  are  not  guiltless  if  you  suffer  yourselves  to  be 
seduced.  No  temptation  amounts  to  a  physical  necessity  of  transgressing ;  neither 
sin  nor  sinners  can  prevail  against  you  without  your  own  inclination.  Your  most 
effectual  weapon  of  defence  is  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  the  Word  of  God,  in 
connection  with  the  other  parts  of  the  Christian  armour.  {David  Birchan,  D.L.) 
Bad  company: — I.  The  company  portrayed.  1.  Lawlessness.  "Sinners" 
(ver.  10 ;  1  John  iii.  4).  To  sin  is  to  sink.  2.  Persuasiveness.  "  Entice  thee." 
The  gilded  trappings  of  many  modern  amusements,  the  gay  apparel  of  fallen  virtue, 
the  promise  of  good  to  be  enjoyed  that  never  comes,  are  baits  by  which  thousands 
are  lured  into  sin.  3.  Combination.  "  Come  with  us  "  (ver.  11).  "  Combine," 
said  a  great  politician,  when  speaking  to  a  class  of  men  who  had  a  grievance  which 
they  wished  to  redress.  So  says  the  enemy  of  souls.  In  the  ranks  of  the  wicked 
hand  joins  in  hand   (chap.  xi.  21).     4.  Cruelty.     "  Let  us  lay  wait  for  blood." 

5.  Cowardice.      "  Let  us  lay  wait."      Cruelty   and   cowardice    are   often   allied. 

6.  Selfishness  (ver.  13).  The  emptying  of  other  people's  houses  is  of  no  consequence 
so  that  they  fill  their  own.  It  is  said  of  Napoleon,  that  for  every  step  he  rose  in 
greatness  the  head  of  another  fell.  7.  Sociability  (ver.  14).  This  sounds  pleasant 
enough ;  but  what  of  the  money  to  be  put  into  the  purse  ?  Blood-money. 
8.  Activity  (ver.  16).  There  is  in  the  wicked  an  impulse  which  impels  them  to  hurry 
into  sin.  II.  The  counsel  given.  1.  Heed  good  advice  (ver.  8).  The  voice  of  the 
tempter  is  powerless  to  him  who  listens  reverently  to  the  voice  of  God  (Mark  i.  11, 
26).  2.  Learn  to  say,  "No"  (ver.  10).  3.  Shun  evil  company  (ver.  15).  "Evil 
companions,"  says  one,  "first  make  us  sad,  and  then  they  make  us  bad." 
4.  Keep  away  from  the  haunts  of  evil.  "  Refrain  thy  foot."  Some  who  would  not 
associate  with  the  ungodly  frequent  the  places  where  the  wicked  congregate.  They 
go  to  see,  and  in  some  cases  as  the  result  of  seeing,  "  fall  to  rise  no  more."  The 
Swiss  mules  have  a  habit  of  going  close  to  the  edge  of  dangerous  precipices.  If 
men  were  as  sure-footed  in  the  path  of  life  as  are  mules  upon  the  mountains,  they 
might  do  so  too  ;  but  with  natures  prone  to  evil,  it  is  safer  to  keep  as  far  as  possible 
from  the  place  where  danger  is.  5.  Cultivate  true  godliness.  A  godly  character 
is  a  wall  of  defence  which  the  worldly  are  often  afraid  to  attack.  (H.  Thome.) 
Warning  against  the  enticements  of  the  wicked  : — I.  The  evil  enticement  mentioned 
in  the  text.  1.  The  wicked  deed,  it  is  promised,  shall  be  done  in  secrecy  and  with 
concealment.  2.  It  is  a  bold  and  spirited  act  to  which  the  young  man  is  incited. 
The  appeal  is  made  to  his  "  pluck  "  and  love  of  adventure  (ver.  12).  3.  The  allure- 
ment is  held  out  of  great  spoil.  4.  The  offer  of  frank  and  jovial  companionship. 
II.  The  dissuasive  warning  of  the  text  (ver.  10).  1.  Consider  the  awful  extremes 
to  which  your  evil  course  may  lead.  2.  Consider  how  faithfully  and  plainly  you 
have  been  warned.  3.  The  ruinous  consequences  of  a  wicked  course.  {T.  G.  Horton.) 
Admonition  to  the  young  : — I.  Who  they  are  against  whose  enticements  the  young 
ARE  TO  BE  ON  THEIR  GUARD.  1.  Such  as  havo  abandoned  themselves  to  vice  and 
crime.  The  gratification  of  devils  is  to  have  men  as  sinful  and  miserable  as  they 
are.  2.  Those  who,  however  moral  in  the  eye  of  men,  are  yet  destitute  of  godliness. 
It  has  always  been  the  policy  of  the  enemy  of  souls  to  lead  men  into  the  depths  of 
iniquity  by  little  and  little.  The  drunkard,  for  example,  is  as  sober,  enhghtened, 
industrious,  respected  in  society,  beloved  in  his  own  family  as  any  other  when  Satan 
first  approaches  him.  Now,  were  the  destroyer  of  man  at  once  to  show  to  this  indi- 
vidual the  full  picture  of  that  beastliness  and  misery  to  which  he  intended  soon  to 
reduce  him,  there  would  still  be  a  sufficiency  of  moral  courage,  of  self-preservation. 


OlAr.  1.]  PROVERBS.  17 

of  homan  feeling  in  him  to  cause  him  to  flee  even  with  horror  and  with  tears  from 
the  snare.  But  Satan  is  too  cunning  and  too  intent  upon  success.  He  has  patience 
in  mischief,  and  can  exercise  it  long  in  order  to  gain  a  mighty  end.  3.  Those 
especially  who  are  acquaintances  or  companions.  The  companionship  of  the  young 
is  usually  formed  by  accidental  circumstances,  without  thought  or  discrimination. 
Some  become  companions  at  school,  some  by  neighbourhood,  some  by  relationship, 
some  by  serring  under  the  same  master,  or  working  in  the  same  establishment. 

4.  Those  also  who  are  strangers.  Alas !  such  is  the  moral  condition  of  man  that 
we  must  live  in  this  world  in  a  state  of  constant  suspicion.  It  was  by  listening  to 
a  stranger  that  our  first  mother  was  deceived ;  and  in  the  same  way  was  the  man 
of  God,  who  had  been  sent  from  Judah  to  denounce  the  wrath  of  Jehovah  against 
Jeroboam  and  his  idolatrous  altar  at  Bethel,  betrayed  into  an  act  of  fatal  disobedi- 
ence, n.  The  nature  of  the  enticements  against  which  the  tounq  are  here 
WARNED.  1.  Sinners  will  entice  them  by  their  example.  2.  Sinners  will  entice  them 
by  holding  out  false  hopes  and  representations  of  enjoyment  in  the  courses  to  which 
they  allure  them.  3.  By  misrepresenting  or  denying  the  truth  of  God.  4.  By 
ridiculing  their  moral  fears.  5.  By  appealing  to  the  multitudes.  We  naturally 
hate  singularity,  and  in  nothing  so  much  as  in  religion.  6.  By  flattering  kindness 
and  attention.  7.  By  pretensions  to  religion.  III.  IiiLTJstbate  and  enforce  the 
admonition,  "consent  THO0  NOT."  1.  It  is  only  with  their  own  consent  that  the 
young  can  be  led  astray.  The  guilt  as  well  as  the  bitter  consequences  of  their 
yielding  to  sin  will  rest  with  themselves.  2.  To  be  ready  to  refuse  their  consent  to 
the  enticements  of  sinners,  their  hearts  must  be  well  established  in  regard  to  both 
the  ways  of  sin  and  the  ways  of  righteousness.  3.  The  young  are  to  cherish  in  their 
minds  a  suspicion  and  terror  of  all  who  would  entice  them  to  sin.  4.  Let  them 
carry  about  with  them  habitually  a  fear  of   God  and  a  sense  of  His  presence. 

5.  Let  them  consider  the  extreme  difficulty  of  entering  into  life.  Instead  of 
tampering  with  sin,  and  exposing  ourselves  to  its  snares,  we  would  have  enough  ado 
to  gain  heaven  though  no  such  allurements  lay  in  our  path.  6.  Let  them  ponder 
much  and  deeply  the  misery  of  those  who  are  pursuing  the  pleasures  of  sin. 
7.  Let  them  keep  steadily  before  their  minds  the  terrors  of  the  wrath  that  is  to 
come.  8.  Let  them  now  give  their  consent  to  the  invitations  of  Christ.  {Joseph 
Hay,  M.A.)  Counsel  for  the  tempted  : — I.  Temptation  is  inevitable.  1.  The 
name  of  temptation  is  legion,  for  they  are  many,  and  yet  one.  The  strongest 
agencies  appear  in  human  form — sinners,  who  are  agents  of  the  devil.  They  may 
be  our  companions.  They  may  even  call  themselves  our  friends.  2.  It  is  not  a 
sin  to  be  tempted.  II.  The  power  or  temptation.  Its  power  lies  in  the  word 
"  entice."  Enticements  are  the  bait  on  the  devil's  hook.  "  Pleasure  "  is  one  of 
them.  "  Seeing  life  "  is  another.  The  love  of  liberty  or  of  asserting  independence 
is  a  powerful  lure.  The  dread  of  being  laughed  at  is  a  strong  compulsion.  "  Nobody 
will  know  "  is  often  the  last  inducement  which  subdues  the  will  and  silences  the 
conscience.  III.  The  limits  of  temptation.  Temptation  is  mighty,  but  it  is  not 
almighty.  No  one  has  power  over  our  will  so  that  we  must  yield.  IV.  The  way  of 
ESCAPE.  "  Consent  thou  not."  Augustine  traced  the  ways  of  the  battle.  They  are 
"  Cogitatio,  Imaginatio,  Delectatio,  Conseiisio."  Consent  is  the  final  stage  of  a  lost 
battle.  It  is  the  lowering  of  the  flag  before  the  enemy ;  the  opening  of  the  gates  of 
the  citadel  of  life.  V.  Say  "  No"  to  the  tempter,  but  say  "  Yes  "  to  Christ.  He 
says,  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway " ;  "I  have  prayed  for  you  that  your  faith 
fail  not "  ;  "  Take  therefore  the  whole  armour  of  God,"  &c.  (John  Reid,  M.A.) 
A  courageous  decision : — In  America  there  were  some  eight  young  men  who 
went  out  one  Sabbath  morning  along  the  banks  of  the  Potomac,  and  they  were 
breaking  the  Sabbath  and  acting  in  a  most  outrageous  way,  when  the  bell  of 
the  village  church  rang  out,  and  one  of  the  young  men  stopped  short  and  said, 
"  I  must  go  to  church."  The  others  said,  "  What  d'ye  mean  ?  You're  surely  not 
going  to  church?  "  "  Yes,  I  am  going."  "  Oh,  George  is  getting  pious,  and  so  he 
ought  to  be  baptized,  and  here  we  are  by  the  Potomac  River,  and  we  will  baptize 
him  by  immersion."  And  so  they  were  about  to  plunge  him  in  the  river,  when  ho 
said,  "  Stop  one  minute,  boys,  and  then  I'm  in  your  hands;  but  before  you  plunge 
me  into  the  river,  I  want  to  tell  you  one  thing.  My  mother  was  an  invalid,  and  I 
never  saw  her  out  of  bed,  and  when  I  was  about  to  leave  home  and  choose  an  occu- 
pation, she  said  to  me,  '  Now,  George,  after  you  are  all  ready  to  go,  I  want  to  sea 
you  in  my  room,  and  to  give  you  my  dying  blessing,  for  I  am  certain  I  shall  never 
see  you  again.  Your  father  has  not  money  enough  to  bring  you  home  at  the 
hohdays,  and  I  am  very  certain  before  you  return  I  shall  have  left  you  for  ever,  so 

3 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  1. 

be  sure  and  come.'  I  went  into  my  mother's  room  after  I  was  ready,  and  she 
asked  me  if  I  would  kneel  down  by  the  bedside,  and  I  knelt  down.  I  remember 
just  how  her  hand  looked.  I  remember  the  blue  vein  on  the  thin  wasted  hand  as 
she  put  it  out  over  me.  Then  she  dropped  it  upon  my  head  and  said,  'This  is  my 
benediction.  I  will  never  see  you  again,  and  I  want  you  to  remember  this :  you 
will  be  out  in  the  world,  and  there  will  be  a  great  many  temptations  over  you  ;  but 
remember  when  sinners  entice  thee  consent  thou  not.'  Now,"  said  he,  "  I  am  going 
to  church."  "  Well,"  they  said,  "you  mustn't  go  to  church."  He  started;  they 
followed,  half  in  derision,  half  in  earnestness.  They  came  to  the  church  door. 
They  went  in.  That  day  the  gospel  was  mighty  in  the  heart  of  that  young  man. 
Then  and  there  he  yielded  himself  to  God.  Before  many  i^ionths  had  passed  along, 
some  from  one  kind  of  influence,  some  from  another,  but  all  those  young  men,  had 
entered  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  Six  of  them  are  in  heaven,  two  of  them  are  occu- 
pying high  positions  in  the  Church,  and  all  because  that  young  man  dared  to  do 
his  duty.  (2'.  Be  Witt  Talmage.)  Let  us  lay  wait  for  blood. — The  robber  oj 
SolomoiVs  time  : — The  temptation  against  which  the  teacher  seeks  to  guard  his 
disciple  is  that  of  joining  a  band  of  highway  robbers.  At  no  period  in  its  history 
has  Palestine  ever  risen  to  the  security  of  a  well-ordered  police  system,  and  the 
wild  license  of  the  marauder's  life  attracted,  we  may  well  believe,  many  who  were 
brought  up  in  towns.  The  "  vain  men  "  who  gathered  round  Jephthah  (Judges  xi.  3), 
the  lawless  or  discontented  who  came  to  David  in  Adullam  (1  Sam.  xxii.  2),  the 
bands  of  robbers  who  infested  every  part  of  the  country  in  the  period  of  the  New 
Testament,  and  against  whom  every  Eoman  governor  had  to  wage  incessant  war, 
show  how  deeply  rooted  the  evil  was  there.  The  story  of  St.  John  and  the  young 
convert  who  became  a  robber,  the  most  interesting  of  all  apostolic  traditions,  may 
serve  as  another  illustration.  The  history  of  many  centuries  (our  own,  e.g.,  in  the 
popular  traditions  of  Robin  Hood  and  of  Henry  V.),  presents  like  phenomena.  The 
robber-life  has  attractions  for  the  open-hearted  and  adventurous.  No  generation, 
perhaps  no  class,  can  afford  to  despise  the  warning  against  it.  (Dean  Plumptre.) 
The  robber^s  speech  : — I.  Young  men  are  in  great  danger  of  being  drawn  away  to 
8INFDL  COURSES.  Bccause  they  have  not  that  grounded  experience  that  others  have, 
nor  are  so  able  to  look  through  shows  into  substances.  Because  they  are  wilful  and 
headstrong,  and  will  follow  their  own  lusts,  notwithstanding  good  men's  persuasions. 
II.  Secrecy  is  a  great  bait  to  wickedness.  Because  shame  is  a  great  bridle  to 
keep  men  from  open  wickedness.  Many  are  kept  in  by  it  whom  no  counsel  will 
keep  from  evil  ways.  Because  fear  of  punishment  is  a  bit  that  keeps  others  from 
sin.     Take  heed  of  secret  solicitations  to  secret  evils.     III.  Wicked  men  have  mant 

BECRET    DEVICES  TO  BRING  THEIR  WICKED    DESIGNS  TO  PASS.       As  EsaU  (GcU.  XXvii.   41), 

Jezebel  (1  Kings  xxi.  9).  It  is  their  study  day  and  night  (Psa.  xxxvi.  4;  Prov.  iv.  16). 
IV.  Wicked  men  promise  themselves  success  of  their  mischievous  plots.  They  think 
their  mine  too  deep  for  men  to  countermine,  and  look  not  to  God,  who  can  go  beyond 
them.  This  shows  us  how  deeply  sin  is  rooted  in  sinful  souls,  so  that  they  dare  pro- 
mise themselves  good  success,  not  only  in  lawful,  but  also  in  sinful  affairs.  (Francis 
Taylor.)  My  son,  walk  not  thou  in  the  way  with  them.— Bad  company ;—  Hardly 
any  young  man  goes  to  a  place  of  dissipation  alone.  Each  one  is  accompanied.  No 
man  goes  to  ruin  alone.  He  always  takes  some  one  else  with  him.  We  may,  in  our 
places  of  business,  be  compelled  to  talk  to  and  mingle  with  bad  men ;  but  he  who  de- 
liberately chooses  to  associate  with  vicious  people  is  engaged  in  carrying  on  a  courtship 
with  a  Delilah,  whose  shears  will  clip  off  all  the  locks  of  his  strength,  and  he  will  be 
tripped  into  perdition.  1.  I  warn  you  to  shun  the  sceptic — the  young  man  who 
puts  his  fingers  in  his  vest  and  laughs  at  your  old-fashioned  religion,  and  turns 
over  to  some  mystery  of  the  Bible  and  says,  "  Explain  that,  my  pious  friend — 
explain  that "  ;  and  who  says,  "  Nobody  shall  scare  me ;  I  am  not  afraid  of 
the  future."  Alas !  a  time  will  come  when  the  blustering  young  infidel  will 
have  to  die,  and  then  his  diamond  ring  will  flash  no  splendour  in  the  eyes  of 
Death  as  the  grim  foe  stands  over  the  couch  waiting  for  his  soul.  2.  Again,  I  urge 
you  to  shun  the  companionship  of  idlers.  There  are  men  hanging  around  every 
store,  and  office,  and  shop  who  have  nothing  to  do,  or  act  as  if  they  had  not. 
Idleness  is  next  door  to  villainy.  Thieves,  gamblers,  burglars,  shop-lifters,  and 
assassins  are  made  from  the  class  who  have  nothing  to  do.  3.  I  urge  you  to  avoid 
the  perpetual  pleasure-seeker.  Look  out  for  the  man  who  always  plays  and  never 
works.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  Ditsuasion  from  joining  the  robbers  : — The  sum 
of  all  this  advice  is  as  if  he  had  said,  "  Oh,  my  son,  sinners  will  entice  thee  with 
these  or  such  like  words  and  promises,  and  lay  such  snares  for  thy  inexperienced 


OBAP.  I.]  PROVERBS.  19 

youth  ;  but  remember  that  thou  art  my  son,  and  not  theirs,  and  therefore  hast  more 
reason  to  hearken  to  me,  who  speak  to  thee  out  of  a  fatherly  affection.  Hearken 
not,  therefore,  to  their  counsels,  flatteries,  or  promises.  Show  thyself  so  strange  to 
them  that  thou  wilt  not  so  much  as  enter  into  their  way,  much  less  walk  into  it." 
I.  Childben  should  bather  hearken  to  their  parents'  good  counsel  than  to 
others'  bad.  Because  they  are  more  engaged  to  parents  than  to  any  other  for  life, 
education,  pains,  and  means.  Parents'  counsels  are  given  in  love,  and  are  for  their 
good.  II.  Young  men  have  need  to  labour  for  knowledge  to  discern  between 
GOOD  counsel  and  BAD.  BecausB  they  are  often  put  to  it.  Young  men  stand,  as 
Hercules  in  his  dream,  between  virtue  and  vice,  solicited  by  both.  Because  there  are 
fair  pretences  for  all  sins.  Gluttony  is  called  the  free  use  of  the  creature ; 
drunkenness,  good-fellowship  ;  prodigality  is  called  liberality  ;  covetousness,  thrift ; 
lust  is  entitled  love  ;  pride  goes  for  handsomeness.  It  needs  a  good  touchstone  to 
distinguish  between  gold  and  copper  well  gilt  over.  No  less  skiU  is  needed  to  dis- 
tinguish between  real  and  apparent  good.  Weigh  things  by  the  light  of  reason  and 
the  light  of  Scripture.  III.  Allurements  to  sin  abb  no  excuse  for  sin.  Because 
allurers  have  no  power  to  compel.  They  may,  and  ought  to  be  refused.  IV.  Com- 
pany EXCUSES  NO  MAN  IN  HIS  SINS.  Company  cannot  alter  the  nature  of  things.  It 
cannot  make  good  evil  or  evil  good.  There  is  choice  of  company ;  all  company  is 
not  evil.  Company  may  draw  our  corrupt  nature  to  sin,  but  cannot  excuse  us  for 
sin.  V.  Continuance,  or  walking  in  sin,  is  dangerous.  It  is  the  sign  of  a  hard  heart 
to  continue  in  sin.  The  mouth  of  the  conscience  is  stopped.  It  makes  the  heart 
more  hard  still.     Custom  will  make  a  man  not  start  at  the  greatest  sins.     VI.  The 

VERT  ENTRANCE  INTO  SINFUL  WAYS  IS  FULL  OF  DANGER,  LIKE  A  DOWNFALL HO  Stay  till  yOU 

come  to  the  bottom.  Keep  out  of  evil  ways,  or  get  out  quickly.  {Francis  Taylor.) 
The  pernicious  effects  of  evil  company : — The  condition  and  circumstances  in  which 
we  are  placed  here  are  such  that  society  is  necessary  to  the  happiness,  if  not  to  the 
very  being,  of  mankind.  Besides  this  necessity,  which  compels  us  to  seek  assist- 
ance from  society,  there  is  a  natural  inclination  which  strongly  prompts  us  to  it. 
Solomon,  having  observed  this  absolute  necessity  of  friendship  and  society,  and  of 
what  high  importance  it  is  to  choose  friends  and  companions  rightly,  hath,  in  this 
Book  of  Proverbs,  given  many  rules  concerning  that  choice,  of  which  the  text  is 
one.  "  Walk  not  in  the  way  of  sinners  "  ;  enter  not  into  any  friendship  with  wicked 
men.  I  shall  show  the  dangers  of  evil,  and  the  advantages  of  good,  company. 
1.  As  the  foundation  of  all,  let  me  mention,  first,  the  authority  of  the  Holy 
Scriptures,  choosing  a  few  out  of  the  many  passages  to  this  purpose  with  which  the 
sacred  writings  abound.  "  Make  no  friendship,"  saith  Solomon,  "  with  an  angry 
man,  lest  thou  learn  his  ways,  and  get  a  snare  to  thy  soul.  He  that  walketh  with 
wise  men  shall  be  wise ;  but  a  companion  of  fools  shall  be  destroyed."  To  this 
purpose  the  prophet  expostulates  very  sharply  with  Jehoshaphat  concerning  the 
alliance  into  which  he  had  entered  with  Ahab,  a  wicked  and  idolatrous  king : 
"  Shouldst  thou  love  them  that  hate  the  Lord?  "  There  is  something  very  strong 
and  solemn  in  the  adjuration  used  by  St.  Paul  to  the  Thessalonians  :  "  Now  we 
command  you,  brethren,  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  ye  withdraw 
yourselves  from  every  brother  that  walketh  disorderly."  2.  To  this  authority  of 
Holy  Scripture  I  add  the  confirmation  of  reason,  to  show  that  we  ought  to  be 
careful  in  the  choice  of  companions  from  this  consideration,  that  the  nature  of  a 
man's  friends  or  company  must  be  of  great  consequence  to  his  well-being.  And 
this  appears  from  hence,  because  they  always  have  an  extraordinary  influence,  not 
only  upon  his  own  temper  and  behaviour,  but  upon  all  his  chief  concernments. 
Now,  comfort  in  distress  is  one  of  the  chief  advantages  that  may  be  gained  by 
friendship,  and  one  of  the  principal  ends  proposed  by  it.  But  how  can  this  be 
hoped  for  from  any  wicked  person  ?  However  agreeable  his  temper  may  be  to  a  mind 
at  ease,  however  soothing  his  discourse  to  the  ear  of  the  prosperous,  yet  can  it  bring 
little  comfort  to  a  troubled  spirit.  Besides,  the  only  support  in  adversity  is  religion, 
the  firm  belief  of  a  wise  and  good  Providence,  directing  all  things  to  the  best  ends. 
And  how  is  it  possible  for  a  man  to  administer  comfort  from  this  consideration  who 
lives  in  rebellion  against  that  great  Being?  or  how  can  one  who  hath  any  love  to 
religion  delight  in  the  company  of  him  who  disclaims  or  disregards  it  ?  Even  our 
interest  is  injured  by  intimacy  with  wicked  men;  for  being  guided  by  their 
passions  and  sacrificing  their  most  sacred  obligations  to  their  vices,  they  are  incon- 
stant and  insincere,  and  Ukely  to  betray  our  interests  who  neglect  and  forfeit  their 
own.  Whereas,  in  conversing  with  the  good  man,  there  are  many  advantages. 
His  known  sincerity  secures  as  from  the  anxiety  of  suspicion ;  the  principles  upon 


JO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  & 

vhicli  lie  acts  remove  all  fears  of  change  in  him.    Bepatation,  it  is  eyident,  cannot 
be  obtained  by  living  in  familiarity  with  wicked  men.    Friendship  either  finda  or 
makes  men  aUke  ;  and  the  world  justly  supposes  that  we  resemble  those  with  whom 
we  live  in  strict  intimacy.     For  this  reason  nothing  can  be  of  greater  use  to  our 
character  than  a  close  union  with  wise  and  good  men.    From  what  hath  been  said 
may  be  drawn  some  observations  worthy  of  our  attention  and  care.     1.  We  should 
fix  in  our  minds  a  right  sense  of  the  great  use  which  may  arise  to  us  all  from 
society  and  mutual  converse.     2.  AU  among  us  who  may  be  considered  in  the 
different  relations  of  parents  or  masters  ought  to  be  careful,  not  only  for  ourselves, 
but  for  those  who  are  committed  to  our  charge  or  dependent  upon  us,  in  the  choice 
of  companions.     3.  We  should  labour  to  acquire  those  good  qualities  which  are 
most  proper  to  fit  us  for  receiving  and  giving  improvement  by  company.     Such  as 
candour  and  ingenuousness  of  mind,  by  which  we  are  brought  readily  to  acknow- 
ledge our  own  mistakes  and  to  do  justice  to  the  perfections  or  pre-emi»ence  of 
another.     Such,  likewise,  is  humility,  a  virtue  which  makes  us  inclined  to  listen 
and  learn.     We   should  also  study  to  bring  advantage  to  company,  as  well  as 
receive  from  it ;  to  which  end  we  should  establish  a  persuasion  of   our  truth, 
honesty,  and  good-nature.   {J.  Lawson.)        Surely  in  vain  the  net  is  spread  in  the 
sight  of  any  bird. — A  warning  against  evil  associations : — In  things  temporal  the 
knowledge  of  peril  leads  naturally  to  the  avoidance  of  it.     The  parallel  of  the  text 
implies  the  existence  of  danger,  under  the  simile  of  the  spreading  of  the  net,  and 
develops  the  character  of  the  safeguard,  viz.,  consciousness  of  the  purpose  for 
which  the  net  is  spread.     Three  sources  from  which  the  dangers  of  young  people 
specially  arise  :  evil  associations,  false  principles,  and  a  perverse  and  wicked  heart. 
The  majority  of  young  men  in  the   world  consist  of  the  sceptical,  who  despise 
religion ;   the  sensual,  who  hate  it ;  and  the  indifferent,   who  neglect  it.     The 
sceptical  or  philosophical  young  man  is  one  who  has  read  much,  but  reasoned 
little.   His  philosophy  consists  in  perplexing  and  unsettling  what  others  believe  rather 
than  in  propounding  anything  rational  of  his  own.   He  affects  a  thorough  contempt 
of  the  old  tracks  and  beaten  paths,  and  disclaims  all  views  of  religion  that  do  not 
afford  scope  for  human  reason.     There  is  a  second  class  of  tempters  who  leave  the 
intellect  untouched,  but  who  do  the  work  of  the  enemy,  and  spread  nets  for  the 
soul  by  means  of  appetites  and  lusts.     Its  aim  is  to  make  the  most  of  time  as  it 
passes,  to  drain  the  cup  of  pleasure  while  yet  it  remains  within  our  grasp,  to  resolve 
the  existence  of  man  into  the  gratification  of  sense,  and  leave  futurity,  which  must 
be,  and  eternity,  which  may  be,  to  shift  for  themselves.     There  is  yet  a  third  class 
of  evil  associates  or  tempters,  by  whom  snares  are  spread  for  the  soul,  who  do  not 
pride  themselves  on  their  sensuality,  like  the  second,  or  on  their  infidelity,  like  the 
first,  who  literally  "  care  for  none  of  these  things."     These  are  persons  who  con- 
sider religion  as  a  thing  decent  and  proper  enough  for  those  who  have  time  to 
spare,  such  as  children  and  servants,  but  account  it  only  the  occasional  concern 
of  men  devoted  to  study  or  engaged  in  business.     1.  The  antidote  for  the  subtle 
poison  insinuated  by  the  infidel  is  to  be  found  in  the  just  consideration  of  Christ's 
atonement.     2.  The  antidote  to  the  allurements  of  the  sensual  is  the  just  considera- 
tion of  Christ's  example.      3.  The  most  effectual   antidote  to  the  stealthy  and 
subtle  poison  of  the  companionship  and  example  of  the  indifferent  is  the  just  appre- 
ciation of  the  promises  of  Christ.      Until  the  infidel  can  observe  the  brightness  of 
Christ's  glory  ;  until  the  sensualist  can  suUy  the  purity  of  Christ's  holiness  ;  until 
the  worldling  can  demonstrate  the  fallacy  of  Christ's  promises,  safety  may  always  be 
found  by  looking  unto  Jesus,  by  looking  unto  Him  in  our  hours  of  need.     {Thomas 
Dale,  M.A.)         Persuasions  and  dissuasions  : — "  In  vain."     So  our  translation  and 
some  others  read  it.     Some  take  it  to  be  in  vain  in  regard  of  the  bird,  which  will  take 
no  warning,  but  will  fly  to  the  meat,  though  it  fall  into  the  net.    So  will  thieves  go  on 
till  they  come  to  the  gallows,  notwithstanding  examples  of  others  hanged  before,  or 
counsels  of  friends.     Others  apply  it  to  the  young  man  himself,  as  if  Solomon  had 
said,  "  If  birds  have  wit  to  see  and  avoid  snares,  thou,  my  son,  being  a  reasonable 
creature,   shouldst  much  more   see   the  danger   of   these   evil  men's  counsels." 

I.  Varietv  or  REASONS  ARE  NEEDFUL  TO  DISSUADE  FROM  EVIL.  Bccausc  of  our  private 
unbelief ;  because  of  our  positive  unbelief  ;  because  of  men's  different  dispositions. 

II.  Keasons  brought  to  coNFraM  TRUTH  MUST  BE  SOLID  ONES.  Bccausc  nothing  but 
truth  should  come  from  an  informer  (teacher).  Keasons  ought  not  only  to  be  true, 
but  to  bear  up  all  truths.  How  can  a  man  think  to  persuade  others  by  that 
which  does  not  persuade  himself?  III.  There  is  a  world  of  injustice  in  thh 
WORLD.      Men  have  different  humours  and  affections.     We  must  be  just  in  the 


CHAP.  I.]  PROVERBS.  21 

midst  of  an  unjust  generation.  IV.  Wicked  men  have  cunning  devices  to 
DO  MiscHiEr.  To  expedite  the  business  the  sooner,  that  they  may  quickly  effect 
their  desire,  and  to  remove  all  impediments.  Take  heed  of  ungodly  men'i 
plots.  Use  the  dove's  innocency,  but  with  the  serpent's  subtilty.  (Francis  Taylor.) 
Warrud  by  seeing  : — Early  in  the  morning  I  went  out  with  a  fowler  to  oatoh  wild 
pigeons.  We  hastened  through  the  gorge  of  the  mountain.  We  spread  out  our  net, 
covering  up  the  edges  of  the  net,  as  well  as  we  might,  with  the  branches  of  trees, 
80  that  the  fowls  of  the  air  might  not  discover  it.  We  arranged  the  call-bird ;  its 
feet  fast,  its  wings  flapping,  so  as  to  invite  all  the  fowls  of  the  air  to  come  and  lie 
there.  Then  we  retired  into  a  booth  of  branches,  and  waited  for  the  birds  to  come. 
In  the  far  heights  we  saw  a  flock  of  birds  approach.  They  came  nearer  and  nearer, 
and  lower  and  lower,  until  they  were  just  able  to  drop  into  the  net,  when  they 
suddenly  darted  away.  We  were  disappointed.  We  waited,  and  after  a  while  saw 
another  flock  of  birds  come  nearer  and  nearer,  and  lower  and  lower,  untU  just  the 
moment  when  they  were  about  to  drop  into  the  net,  suddenly  they  darted  away.  I 
Baid  to  the  old  fowler,  "  What  is  the  reason  of  this?  Let  us  examine  the  thing." 
So  we  went  out,  and  we  found  that,  by  the  flutter  of  a  tree-branch,  part  of  the  net 
had  been  exposed,  so  that  the  birds,  coming  near,  had  seen  their  danger  and  had 
escaped.  And  when  I  saw  that,  I  said  to  the  old  fowler,  "  That  reminds  me  of  a 
passage  of  Scripture :  '  Surely  in  vain  is  the  net  spread  in  the  sight  of  any  bird.' " 
(T.  De  ^V^tt  Talmage.)  Traps  for  men : — There  are  two  classes  of  temptations 
— the  superficial  and  the  subterraneous — those  aboveground,  those  underground. 
If  a  man  could  see  sin  as  it  is,  he  would  no  more  embrace  it  than  he  would 
embrace  a  leper.  I  want  to  point  out  the  insidious  temptations  that  are  assailing 
more  especially  our  young  men.  The  only  kind  of  nature  comparatively  free  from 
temptation,  so  far  as  I  can  judge,  is  the  cold,  hard,  stingy,  mean  temperament. 
What  would  Satan  do  with  such  a  man  if  he  got  him  ?  Satan  is  not  anxious  to  get 
a  man  who,  after  a  while,  may  dispute  with  him  the  realm  of  everlasting  mean- 
ness. It  is  the  generous  young  man,  the  ardent  young  man,  the  warm- 
hearted young  man,  the  social  young  man  that  is  in  especial  peril.  1.  The 
first  class  of  temptations  that  assault  a  young  man  is  led  on  by  the 
sceptic.  He  will  not  admit  he  is  an  infidel  or  atheist.  Oh,  no  I  he  is  a  "  free- 
thinker "  ;  he  is  one  of  your  "liberal"  men;  he  is  free  and  easy  in  religion. 
2.  The  second  class  of  insidious  temptations  that  come  upon  our  young 
men  is  led  on  by  the  dishonest  employer.  3.  Temptations  to  drink.  (Ibid.) 
Moral  traps : — I.  Sm  lats  traps  fob  souls.  Sin  has  woven  a  net  and  laid 
it  along  the  path  of  life.  This  net  is  wrought  of  diverse  materials,  such  as 
sensuality,  avarice,  ambition.  Traps  are  adjusted  for  men  of  every  mental  type, 
of  every  period  in  life,  in  every  social  grade.  II.  These  traps  must  be  exposed. 
The  fowler  conceals  his  net.  Sin  works  insidiously.  It  takes  advantage  of  men's 
circumstances,  ignorance,  and  inexperience.  The  work  of  the  true  philanthropist 
is  to  expose  the  traps.  III.  These  traps  bring  ruin  to  their  authors.  They  lay 
wait  for  their  own  blood.  Ketribution  overtakes  them.  If  they  escape  violence 
themselves,  the  Nemesis  pursues  them.  Their  schemes  may  seem  to  prosper  here, 
but  justice  tracks  their  steps,  and  their  ruin  is  inevitable.  (David  Thomas,  D.D.) 
So  are  the  wayB  of  every  one  that  is  greeCij  of  gain. — Oreed  of  gold  : — Midas,  the 
Phrygian  king,  asked  a  favour  of  the  gods,  and  they  agreed  to  grant  him  whatever 
he  should  desire.  The  monarch,  overjoyed,  resolved  to  make  the  favour  inexhaus- 
tible. He  prayed  that  whatever  he  touched  might  be  turned  into  gold.  The  prayer 
was  granted,  and  bitter  were  the  consequences.  Whatever  the  poor  king  touched 
did  turn  to  gold.  He  laid  his  hand  upon  a  rock,  and  it  became  a  huge  mass  of 
gold  of  priceless  value ;  he  clutched  his  oaken  staff,  and  it  became  in  his  hand  a 
bar  of  virgin  gold.  At  first  the  monarch's  joy  was  unbounded,  and  he  returned  to 
his  palace  the  most  favoured  of  mortals.  Alas  for  the  short-sightedness  of  man  1 
He  sat  at  table,  and  all  he  touched  turned  in  mockery  of  his  wish  to  gold — pure, 
solid  gold.  Then  the  conviction  came  rushing  upon  his  humbled  mind,  that  he 
must  perish  from  his  grasping  wish — die  in  the  midst  of  plenty ;  and  remembering 
the  ominous  saying  he  had  heard,  "  The  gods  themselves  cannot  take  back  their 
gifts,"  he  howled  to  the  sternly  smiling  Dionysius  to  restore  him  to  the  coarsest, 
vilest  food,  and  deliver  him  from  the  curse  of  gold. 

Vers.  20-23.  Wisdom  crleth  without— T7i«  voice  of  true  Wisdom  .-—The  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  is  the  true  Wisdom  which  speaks  to  the  sons  of  men.  The  ancients 
were  accustomed  to  speak  of  their  religion  as  wisdom  or  philosophy,  and  therefore 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

the  Greeks  represented  Minerva  as  the  goddess  of  wisdom,  sajing  that  she  had  pro- 
ceeded from  the  brain  of  Jupiter.  I.  The  attitude  which  Wisdom  takes  when  shh 
ADDBESSES  THE  SONS  OF  MEN.  1.  Her  appeal  is  an  open  and  public  one.  2.  Her 
proposals  are  of  a  varied  description.  She  comes  into  the  streets,  where  are  all 
manner  of  enticing  frivolities.  La  the  chief  places  of  concourse,  where  the  multi- 
tudes assemble.  In  the  opening  of  the  gates,  where  commerce  is  carried  on, 
3.  Her  appeals  are  pathetic.  She  "  crieth."  H.  The  charactebs  which  Wisdom 
ADDBESSES  HEESELP  TO.  Simple  oncs ;  scorners  ;  fools.  III.  The  pbomises  which 
she  makes.  "  I  will  infuse  My  Spirit  into  you."  {W.  Barker.)  The  fatal  policy  of 
drift : — I.  The  message.  1.  Eastern  method  of  publication.  "  She,"  beautiful 
personification  of  Wisdom,  stands  "  at  the  head  of  the  noisy  streets  "  (R.V.  margin). 
Our  methods— the  Toice —the  press,  its  powerful  agency.  2.  But  the  substance  of 
wisdom  is  always  the  same,  because  human  nature,  life,  and  needs  are  the  same. 
We  still  require  higher  guidance  in  our  hurried  life  of  to-day.  Wisdom  sees  into 
the  heart  of  things ;  seeks  their  essence  ;  is  not  drawn  aside  by  accidentals ;  and 
puts  them  in  true  proportions.  3.  The  Spirit  of  Wisdom.  "  I  will  pour  out  My 
Spirit,"  (fee.  More  a  spirit  than  a  science :  not  to  be  learnt  by  rules,  but  reveals 
itself  to  love.  Euskin  says  that  no  great  painting  can  be  produced  unless  the  artist 
loves  his  subject.  There  must  be  a  leaning  that  way.  A  boy  who  leans  to  science 
will  make  a  better  naturalist  than  one  to  whom  slugs  and  insects  are  repulsive.  So 
the  spirit  of  wisdom  is  poured  out  as  love  upon  the  lover.  It  purifies  thought, 
steadies  life,  and  enriches  the  nature.  II.  How  teeated.  "  I  have  called,"  dko. 
She  stands  and  cries :  but  the  stream  passes  by  engrossed  and  heedless,  or  turns  to 
break  a  jest  upon  her.  "  Simple  ones,"  those  who  are  as  weather-vanes,  light 
of  head,  and  turned  by  every  wind  ;  shallow  of  heart,  they  live  the  easy  life  of  hand 
to  mouth.  "  Scorners,"  the  superior  people,  who  "  know,  don't  you  know,"  to 
whom  earnestness  is  fanaticism,  and  devotion  cant.  "  Fools,"  to  whom  knowledge 
is  a  reproach,  who  stupidly  go  on  their  way,  and  resent  interference,  even  for  their 
good.  But  the  excuses  !  "  Let  my  schemes  come  to  completion,  and  then !  "  "When 
I  have  a  bit  more  time !  "  If  a  youth  neglects  learning  a  trade  or  profession,  his  Ufa 
will  be  "  bound  in  shallows  and  miseries."  To  drift  is  fatal.  But  too  often  this 
counsel  is  set  at  nought.  III.  The  punishment  or  neglect.  All  through  the  day 
she  has  cried,  and  has  been  neglected  or  despised.  The  light  begins  to  fade,  the 
night  comes,  not  of  "  sleep,  bakny  sleep,"  but  of  wrath.  Wisdom  sadly  leaves. 
The  whirlwind  begins  to  gather :  the  air  trembles :  the  earth  shudders.  Most 
fearful  of  all  is  God's  laughter  through  the  darkened  heavens.  (/.  Feather.) 
The  cry  of  Wisdom : — Evil-doers  are  not  left  without  a  warning.  The  warning 
is  loud,  public,  authoritative.  The  wisdom  of  God  is  a  manifold  wisdom.  While 
it  centres  bodily  in  Christ,  and  thence  issues  as  from  its  source,  it  is  reflected  and 
re-echoed  from  every  object  and  every  event.  Every  law  of  nature,  and  every  event 
in  history,  has  a  tongue  by  which  Wisdom  proclaims  God's  holiness  and  rebukes 
man's  sin.  Wisdom  speaks  through  man's  conscience.  It  is  not  conscience  pro- 
claiming God's  anger  against  the  man's  evil  that  has  power  to  make  the  man 
good.  It  is  the  conscience  sprinkled  with  the  blood  of  Christ  that  at  once  speaka 
peace  and  works  purity.  I.  Eeproof  of  the  simple  who  love  simplicity.  By  the 
"  simple "  is  meant  that  class  of  sinners  whose  leading  characteristic  is  the 
absence  of  good  rather  than  positive  activity  in  evil.  The  root  of  bitterness  has 
not  shot  forth  in  any  form  of  outrageous  vice,  but  it  remains  destitute  of  righteous- 
ness. The  simple  for  time  are  always  a  numerous  class  ;  but  the  simple  for 
eternity  are  a  more  numerous  class  stiU.  H.  Eeproof  for  the  scobners  who  love 
scorning.  This  class  meet  the  threatening  realities  of  eternity,  not  by  an  easy 
indifference,  but  by  a  hardy  resistance.  Scorners  may  be  found  on  both  the  edges 
of  society.  Poverty  and  riches  become  by  turns  a  temptation  to  the  same  sin. 
Scorners  love  scorning.  The  habit  grows  by  indulgence.  It  becomes  a  second 
nature.  It  becomes  the  element  in  which  they  live.  Their  scoffs  are  generally 
parrying  strokes  to  keep  convictions  away.  These  smart  sayings  are  the  fence  to 
turn  aside  certain  arrows  which  might  otherwise  fix  their  tormenting  barbs  in  the 
conscience.  Tbe  scorner  is  not  so  bold  a  man  as  he  appears  to  be.  III.  Reproof 
for  the  FOOLS  who  hate  knowledge.  Fools  are  those  who  have  reached  the  very 
highest  degrees  of  evil.  They  hate  knowledge,  and  knowledge  has  its  beginning  in 
the  fear  of  God.  The  emphatic  "  no  God  "  of  the  fourteenth  Psalm  indicates,  not 
the  despair  of  a  seeker  who  is  unable  to  find  truth,  but  the  anger  of  an  enemy  who 
does  not  like  to  retain  it.  It  is  not  a  judgment  formed  in  the  fool's  understanding, 
but  a  passion  rankling  in  his  heart.     (William  Arnot,  D.D.)        Wi$dom'»  voice  :^^ 


CHAP.  I.]  PROVERBS.  S3 

I,  A  DrvrNE  call.  1.  The  subject  of  the  call.  2.  The  places  in  which  it  is  given. 
3.  The  manner  in  which  it  is  addressed.  4.  The  persons  to  whom  it  is  applied. 
(1)  The  simple  are  those  who  are  easily  seduced,  the  thoughtless  masses,  who 
become  the  ready  victims  of  evil-designing  men.  (2)  The  scorners  are  those  who 
ridicule  sacred  things.  (3)  The  fools  who  hate  knowledge  include  both  of  the 
above    classes.     II.  An    impobtant    exhortation — "  Turn   you    at    My   reproof." 

I.  The  subject  to  which  this  exhortation  refers.  The  great  design  of  the  gospel  is 
to  turn  men  from  the  error  of  their  way.  (1)  We  are  to  turn  in  the  exercise  of 
true  repentance.  (2)  We  are  to  turn  with  full  purpose  of  heart.  (3)  We  are  to 
turn  without  delay.  2.  The  inducement  given  in  order  to  lead  us  to  comply  with 
this  exhortation.  The  sinner's  inability  to  turn  to  God  is  not  of  the  same  nature 
as  our  inability  to  fly,  which  is  a  physical  inability.  To  meet  the  moral  inability, 
and  to  encvurage  those  who  are  oppressed  with  a  sense  of  it,  the  promise  is  given, 
"I  will  pour  out  My  Spirit  unto  you."  He  is  bestowed  in  order  to  change  our 
hearts,  to  aid  our  infirmities,  and  to  strengthen  us  with  strength  in  our  souls.  It 
is  also  said,  "  I  will  make  known  My  words  unto  you."  (1)  They  will  be  made 
known  to  enlighten.  (2)  To  direct.  (3)  To  quicken.  (4)  To  console.  III.  A 
SOLEMN  DENUNCIATION.  Of  the  doom  here  denounced  we  have — 1.  Its  procuring 
cause.  The  disregard  shown  for,  and  the  contempt  cast  upon,  the  Divine 
message.  The  act  "  stretching  out  the  hand "  is  done — (1)  To  command 
attention.  (2)  To  afford  assistance.  (3)  To  confer  a  blessing.  (4)  To  make  up 
a  quarrel.  2.  Its  terrible  nature.  He  who  is  shown  as  graciously  promising  and 
helping  is  now  described  as  "  laughing  at  calamity  and  mocking  at  fears."  And 
the  woe  will  be  aggravated  by  the  consideration  that  mercy  will  be  sought  when 
seeking  it  will  be  unavailing.  (Author  of  "  Footsteps  of  Jesus.")  Wisdom^s 
warning : — The  Book  of  Proverbs  is  a  jewel-case  well  filled  with  gems.  This 
passage  is  a  delightfully  Oriental  presentation  of  the  truth  of  the  call  of  God  to 
the  soul  of  man.  I.  The  call  or  Wisdom.  1.  By  wisdom  is  meant  the  beneficent 
Divine  energy.  2.  This  Divine  energy  comes  into  connection  with  man,  and  pro- 
duces a  reflection  of  itself  in  him.  3.  The  complete  presentation  of  this  Divine 
wisdom  going  forth  for  the  enlightenment  of  men  is  found  in  Jesus  Christ. 
(1)  This  call  is  open.  (2)  The  offer  made  in  the  call  is  free.  (3)  All  classes  of  men 
are  touched  by  this  call.  (4)  The  call  is  urgent.  II.  The  results  of  the  call  of 
Wisdom.    1.  Eefusal  of  God's  offer  is  possible,  and  consequences  necessarily  follow. 

iV\  The  acceptance  of  sin  puts  man  in  the  attitude  of  the  rejection  of  God. 
2)  When  sinful  man  wants  God's  wisdom  as  a  refuge  it  is  no  longer  available. 
(3)  Calamity  comes  upon  those  who  reject  the  voice  of  the  wisdom  of  God.  (4)  The 
retribution  that  comes  is  largely  internal.  2.  It  is  possible  for  men  to  hear  and 
obey  Wisdom's  voice.  The  result  to  the  obedient  is  given  thus.  (1)  Part  of  it  is 
safety.  (2)  Out  of  this  comes  quietude.  This  lesson  has  its  fuU  application  in 
relation  to  Wisdom  incarnate,  even  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  There  are  diverse  con- 
sequences for  those  who  answer  this  voice  diversely.  (D.  J.  Burrell,  D.D.) 
Heavenly  laisdom : — The  Hebrew  has  "wisdoms"  plural,  as  including  all  kinds  of 
true  wisdom.  I.  Heavenly  wisdom  is  worth  the  looking  after.  As  things  publicly 
cried  and  proclaimed  are  worth  taking  notice  of.  II.  This  heavenly  wisdom  is  to 
BE  FOUND  only  IN  Jksus  Christ.  As  the  Son  of  God  He  knew  the  Father's  will 
from  all  eternity.  God  spake  to  Him  before  His  incarnation.  God  gave  Him  the 
Spirit  beyond  measure.  All  wisdom  that  others  have  in  heavenly  things  comes 
from  Him.  HI.  God  is  very  desirous  that  men  should  get  heavenly  wisdom. 
Therefore  He  cries  loudly,  earnestly,  affectionately.  As  He  gives  natural  light  in 
creatures  and  arts,  so  He  gives  supernatural  in  revelations.  IV.  This  heavenly 
knowledge  is  offered  to  the  meanest.  It  is  preached  in  villages.  To  show  that 
God  is  no  respecter  of  persons.  To  bind  men  the  more  to  God.  V.  The  way  to 
this  heavenly  knowledge  is  plain  and  easy.  It  is  cried  about  the  streets ;  it  is 
taught  in  all  languages ;  it  is  taught  by  earthly  simiUtudes  as  in  parables 
abundantly.  {Francis  Taylor.)  She  uttereth  her  voice  in  the  streets. — The 
voices  of  the  street : — We  are  all  ready  to  hsten  to  the  voices  of  nature — of  the 
mountain,  the  sea,  the  storm,  the  star.  How  few  learn  anything  from  the  voices 
of  the  noisy  and  dusty  street.  Learn — I.  That  this  life  is  a  scene  of  toil  and 
struggle.  Can  it  be  that  passing  up  and  down  these  streets  on  your  way  to  work 
you   do   not  learn    anything  of    the   world's   toil,    and    anxiety,   and    struggle? 

II.  That  all  classes  and  conditions  of  society  must  commingle.  We  some- 
times culture  a  wicked  exclusiveness.  All  classes  of  people  are  compelled  to  meet 
on   the    street.     The    democratic   principle   of    the  gospel    recognises  the    fact 


U  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [crip.  I. 

that  we  stand  before  God  on  one  and  the  same  platform.     HI.  That  it  n  ▲ 

TKBT  HABD  THING  TOR  A  MAN  TO  KEEP  HIS  HEART  RIGHT  AND  TO  GET  TO  HEAVEN. 

Infinite  temptations  spring  upon  us  from  these  places  of  public  concoaree. 
IV.  That  life  is  ruiiL  or  pretension  and  sham.  What  subterfuge,  what  double- 
dealing,  what  two-facedness  1  V.  That  the  street  is  a  great  field  for 
Christian  charity.  There  are  hunger,  and  suffering,  and  want,  and  wretched- 
ness in  the  country;  but  these  evils  chiefly  congregate  in  our  great  cities. 
On  every  street  crime  prowls,  and  drunkenness  staggers,  and  shame  winks, 
and  pauperism  thrusts  out  its  hand,  asking  for  alms.  (IT.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 
How  long,  ye  simple  ones,  will  ye  love  simplicity  ? — The  simplicity  of  unregenerate 
men ; — I.  I  am  to  show  in  what  respects  evert  unregenerate  sinner  mat  be  said 
TO  BE  A  "simple  ONE."  They  may  be  very  far  from  this  character,  in  point  of 
natural  sagacity,  acquired  learning,  and  speculative  knowledge  of  religious  things. 
But,  after  all,  they  are  really  simple.  1.  The  unregenerate  are  simple,  in  that  they 
are  satisfied  with  slight,  superficial  apprehensions  of  God.  2.  The  unregenerate  are 
simple,  in  their  being  satisfied  with  slight  thoughts  of  sin.  3.  They  are  simple,  in 
that  they  are  easily  induced  to  mistake  good  and  evil,  to  put  the  one  for  the  other. 
4.  They  are  simple,  as  to  believing  the  strength  of  sin  in  their  own  hearts.  They  do 
not  think  their  hearts  so  corrupt  and  prone  to  iniquity  as  described  in  Jer.  xvii.  9. 
6.  In  consequence  of  these  things,  they  are  easily  seduced  into  sin,  and  led  to  entire 
apostasy  from  their  former  seeming  faith  and  holiness.  6.  They  are  simple,  as  to 
the  ground  on  which  they  imagine  their  spiritual  state  to  be  good.  They  are 
surprised  at  the  niceness  and  scrupulousness  of  the  saints  in  this  matter.  7.  And 
as  to  the  approaches  of  death  and  eternity  :  these  steal  upon  them  at  unawares. 
The  saints  see  death  in  its  causes — the  holiness  of  God,  and  the  sinfulness  of  man. 
II.  This  simplicitt  is  loved  bt  sinners.  It  is  not  a  harmless  weakness,  but  attended 
with  deadly  obstinacy.  1.  They  have  a  kind  of  happiness,  notwithstanding  of  it, 
which  suits  their  carnal  taste.  2.  This  happiness  depends  on  the  continuance  of 
their  simplicity.  For  a  little  Divine  wisdom  would  annihilate  that  dream,  and  make 
their  present  joys  tasteless.  3.  They  have  an  aversion  to  that  happiness  which 
is  truly  Divine  and  holy.  4.  Therefore,  to  part  with  this  simplicity  seems  to  them 
to  be  just  the  same  thing  as  running  into  despair.  5.  Therefore,  either  in  the 
way  of  deceit  or  of  violence,  they  resist  the  means  of  illumination.  III.  What  ib 
IMPLIED  IN  God's  observing  the  time  that  a  sinner  continues  in  this  character  ? 
1.  It  is  founded  in  His  omniscience.  2.  And  in  His  character  as  the  Judge  of  all. 
3.  Because  every  act  of  sin  in  the  heart  hath  its  own  malignity.  4.  Every  period 
of  impenitence  is  an  aggravation  of  all  past  sins.  5.  God  is  unwearied  in  this 
observation  (Isa.  xl.  28).  6.  This  observation  is  recorded  that  the  sinner  himself 
may  be  brought  to  such  an  accurate  remembrance  of  his  sins  as  is  necessary  for  his 
taking  in  a  sense  of  Divine  wrath  (Psa.  1. 21).  {J.  Love,  D.D.)  Scomers  delight  in 
their  scorning. — Delight  in  scorning : — I  shall  arrange  the  matter  of  this  scorning  in 
different  classes,  so  as  to  begin  with  the  ultimate  and  fundamental  objects  of  scorning, 
and  gradually  to  come  down  to  the  more  immediate,  and  those  which  are  obvious  to 
common  observation.  I.  Such  things  as  relate  to  the  Divine  nature  and 
character  in  general.  1.  The  infinite  holiness  of  God.  9.  The  infinite  justice  of 
God.  3.  All  the  natural  excellences  of  the  Divine  nature.  When  these  natural 
excellences  of  strength,  wisdom,  eternity,  &c.,  are  considered  as  clothed  with  the 
moral  lustre  of  infinite  holiness,  justice,  &c.,  their  beauty  is  converted  into  gloom 
and  horror  to  the  sinner.  He  hates,  and  therefore  derides  them.  4.  The  mercy  of 
God.      II.   Such  things  as  relate  to  the  manifestation  of  the   nature  and 

CHARACTER   OF  GoD,  IN    HiS    WAT   OF   SAVING    SINNERS  :    BECAUSE  THE  GLORY  OF  GoD,  AS 

ABOVE  DESCRIBED,  SHINES  FORTH  IN  THIS  WAT.  1.  The  Sovereign  counsels,  purposes, 
and  compacts  of  the  Three  Persons  in  the  Godhead  concerning  the  salvation  of 
sinners.  2.  The  solemn,  holy,  and  glorious  operations  of  the  Godhead,  in  the  actual 
procurement  of  salvation,  in  the  incarnation  and  humiliation  of  the  Second  Person 
in  the  glorious  Trinity.  While  the  Bedeemer  was  on  earth,  there  was  a  multitude 
of  sinners  who  poured  out  their  hostile  scorn  upon  Him,  especially  when  He  was 
upon  the  Cross  (Psa.  xiii.  7,  &c.).  3.  The  holy  operations  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  in 
the  Person  of  Christ,  and  in  His  people.  HI.  The  manifestations  of  God,  in 
THE  CHARACTER  AND  LIVES  OF  His  CHILDREN.  Here,  the  excelleuces  of  God  are 
brought  near  to  the  eyes  of  natural  men ;  and  there  are  two  reasons  why  the  natural 
enmity  is  more  exercised  against  the  saints  than  directly  against  God.  1.  They 
have  more  lively  views  of  the  holiness  of  the  saints  than  they  have  of  the  holiness  of 
God  Himself.    2.  Because  there  is  greater  appearance  of  impunity.     This  enmity  at 


CHIP,  x.]  PROVERBS.  25 

the  saints  shows  itself  in  derision.  1.  At  their  sins.  The  wicked  will  give  no  quarter 
to  the  least  sin  in  a  child  of  God.  2.  At  their  sinless  infirmities.  3.  At  the  success  of 
their  efforts  to  draw  them  into  sin  (Isa.  xxix.  21).  4.  Nicknaming  their  graces,  and 
then  taking  liberty  to  ridicule  them.  5.  The  sorrows  and  joys  of  the  saints.  6.  The 
hopes  and  fears  of  the  saints ;  for  the  same  reasons  as  above.  7.  The  counsels  and 
reproofs  of  the  saints.  IV.  Such  things  as  relate  to  the  puke  and  spiritual  worship 
OF  God.  1.  This  is  a  combination  of  all  the  things  already  mentioned.  2.  The  spiritual 
substance  of  Divine  worship  is  itself  hateful  to  the  sinner ;  and  that  considered  both 
as  an  exercise  of  sanctified  self-love  and  as  springing  from  disinterested,  voluntary 
love  to  God — particularly  in  this  last  view.  3.  But  the  sinner  frequently  dares  not 
to  avow  this ;  not  from  any  want  of  enmity,  but  from  a  sneaking,  cowardly  dread 
of  God.  And  therefore  he  fixes  his  ridicule  upon  the  outside  of  the  service  of 
God.  Here  he  nibbles,  and  plays  off  his  sordid  artillery.  V.  The  providence  op 
God.  1.  The  external  operations  of  the  power  and  wisdom  of  God  in  the  visible 
world,  when  considered  by  themselves,  detachedly  from  His  moral  administration, 
are  indeed  the  lowest  of  His  works.  There  is  least  of  what  is  peculiarly  Divine 
apparent  in  them.  2.  But  if  the  external  manifestations  of  God,  in  the  creation, 
are  considered  as  intimately  connected  with  His  moral  character,  then  even  the 
goodness  of  God  therein  appears  under  a  gloom,  if  it  be  considered  as  leading  on  the 
sinner  to  repentance,  under  certification  of  double  vengeance  if  he  repent  not,  and 
as  giving  a  low  picture  of  his  superior  and  sublime  goodness  as  to  moral  things 
(Eom.  ii.  4,  5).  3.  And,  much  more,  external  judgments.  There  seems  nothing  so 
material  in  sin  as  to  justify  external  calamities.  (Ibid.)  Nothing  to  replace  the 
Christian  religion  : — Lord  Chesterfield  being  at  supper  with  Voltaire  and  Madame 

C ,  the  conversation  turned  on  the  affairs  of  England.     "  I  think,  my  lord," 

said  the  lady,  "  that  the  Parliament  of  England  consists  of  five  or  six  hundred  of 
the  best  informed  and  most  sensible  men  in  the  kingdom."  "  True,  madam,  they 
are  generally  supposed  to  be  so."  "What,  then,  can  be  the  reason  they  should 
tolerate  so  great  an  absurdity  as  the  Christian  reUgion  7"  "I  suppose,  madam,  it 
is  because  they  have  not  been  able  to  substitute  anything  better  in  its  stead  ;  when 
they  can,  I  doubt  not  but  in  their  wisdom  they  will  readily  accept  it."  Turn  you 
at  My  reproof. — Turning  from  evil: — 1,  What  voices  does  Wisdom  find  in  each 
generation  ?  Parent-voice  ;  teacher-voice  ;  experience-voice  ;  revelation-voice  ; 
Christ's  voice.  2.  Where  does  Wisdom  raise  her  voice  ?  For  them  that  have 
ears  to  hear,  anywhere,  everywhere.  3.  What  is  the  message  which  the  voice 
delivers  ?  I.  An  assertion.  You  need  to  be  turned.  This  is  not  the  message  we 
expect  Wisdom  to  bring.  She  should  say,  "  Study.  Seek  good  teachers.  Think, 
Bead."  She  does  say,  "  Turn  " ;  and  so  she  reveals  the  one  deep  and  universal  need. 
Simple  ones,  turn  from  folly.  Scorners,  turn  from  the  deceit  of  scorning.  Fools, 
turn  from  your  wilful,  wicked  ways.  The  first  thing  Wisdom  would  have  us  do  is 
change.  Thefirstcallof  Christ,  the  true  Wisdom,  is,  "Bepent."  II.  A  truth.  You 
must  turn  yourselves.  The  call  is  based  on  our  possession  of  will,  and  on  the  fact 
that  we  have  hitherto  made  such  misguided,  such  ruinous,  choices  with  our  wills. 
Wisdom  calls  for  a  new  and  different  exercise  of  our  will.  There  is  a  sense  in 
which  we  cannot  save  ourselves ;  there  is  a  sense  in  which  nobody  can  save  us 
but  ourselves.  We  can  shift  it  on  nobody's  shoulders.  Therefore  the  Divine 
persuasions  are,  "Choose;  turn."  III.  A  duty.  You  ought  to  turn  at  once.  Under 
the  constraint  of  such  gracious  promises  and  persuasions.  For  Wisdom  wins  as 
well  as  calls.  She  promises  to  give  her  spirit,  the  love  of  knowledge,  the  joy  of 
knowing,  to  all  who  will  turn  from  selfish  pleasure's  giddy  ways.  And  Christ 
persuades  and  promises  that  He  may  win.  He  promises  "  the  life  that  now  is,  and 
the  life  that  is  to  come."  1.  Pardon.  2.  Cleansing.  3.  Healing.  4.  Conscious 
sonship.  5.  Love.  6.  Joy  unspeakable.  7.  Heaven.  From  dead-works — turn. 
From  worldly  pleasures — turn.  From  self-seekings — turn.  From  sin — turn.  Let 
the  call  of  Wisdom  and  of  Christ  ring  in  our  ears  wherever  we  go,  in  busy  street,  in 
quiet  home,  in  bustling  business,  in  lonely  room.  {Weekly  Pulpit.)  Sinners 
admonished : — Various  are  the  means  which  the  Lord  employs  to  convince  the 
wicked  of  the  error  of  their  ways,  and  bring  them  to  a  knowledge  of  Divine  truth. 
I.  The  beproofb  He  administers.  1.  By  the  Scriptures,  which  contain  the  most 
pointed  and  salutary  admonitions,  sending  us  for  instruction  and  reproof  to — (1)  The 
works  of  creation ;  (2)  examples  of  impiety ;  (3)  the  awful  solemnities  of  death 
and  the  grave.  2.  By  ministers.  They  persuade  men  by  the  terrors  of  the  Lord, 
and  encourage  them  by  the  promises  of  the  gospel.  3.  By  conscience.  The 
internal  and  universal  monitor ;   the  witness  to  aU  our  proceedings.     It  speaka 


26  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  L 

with  sovereign  authority.  4.  By  providence.  By — (1)  Pious  parents;  (2)  family 
connections;  (3)  godly  neighbours;  (4)  by  afflictions,  and  difficulties;  (5)  by  the 
death  of  our  fellow-mortals.  II.  The  submission  He  requires.  He  invites  return — 
1.  With  penitent  hearts.  Genuine  repentance  includes — (1)  Conviction  of  sin ; 
(2)  humiliation  of  soul;  (3)  compunction  of  spirit;  (4)  holy  indignation  and  shame; 
(5)  humble  confession  to  God.  2.  With  believing  minds.  By  faith  we — (1)  Credit 
the  gospel;  (2)  embrace  the  Saviour;  and  (3)  realise  salvation.  3.  With  fervent 
devotion.  We  should  call  upon  Him — (1)  Sincerely;  (2)  humbly;  (3)  confidently; 
(4)  fervently ;  (5)  diligently.  4.  With  prompt  obedience.  Keligion  requires  an 
universal  renunciation  of  the  principles  and  habits  of  vice,  and  an  entire  devotedness 
to  God,  both  of  heart  and  life.  III.  The  encouragement  He  imparts.  "  Pour  out 
My  Spirit."  The  participation  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  an  inestimable  privilege,  which 
includes  every  holy  principle  that  He  implants,  and  every  gracious  disposition  which 
He  requires.  The  Spirit  of  God  is — 1.  A  convincing  Spirit.  He  opens  the  eyes  of 
our  understanding;  and  He  imparts  a  spiritual  discernment  (Johnivi.  8-11).  2.  A 
quickening  Spirit.  He  removes  the  death  of  sin,  and  infuses  the  life  of  grace.  3.  A 
comforting  Spirit.  4.  A  sanctifying  Spirit.  He  is  called  "the  Spirit  of  holiness." 
He  sanctifies  His  people  wholly,  and  preserves  them  blameless  unto  the  coming  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (1  Thess.  v.  23).  (Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermont.) 
Hindrances  to  spiritual  progress : — I.  God  requires  nothing  more  than  man  can  do. 
The  text  requires  men  to  do  something ;  and  it  promises  assistance  only  on  the 
condition  that  they  make  use  of  some  strength  which  it  supposes  them  to  possess. 
But  it  does  not  require  of  them  that  they  should  change  their  hearts  or  renew  their 
natures.  They  are  to  "  turn  at  God's  reproof,"  and  it  is  assumed  that  they  might 
turn  if  they  would.  We  enjoin  on  men  that  they  set  vigorously  about  the  reforming 
what  they  know  to  be  wrong,  and  the  cultivating  what  they  know  to  be  right.  The 
command  of  the  text  does  not  overrate  the  powers  of  those  to  whom  it  is 
addressed.  II.  God  makes  a  gracious  promise.  We  assume  that  the  help  of  God's 
Spirit  is  indispensable  to  our  taking  the  first  step,  as  well  as  the  last,  in  the  path  of 
salvation.  But  our  turning  is  the  condition  of  our  obtaining  the  Spirit.  No  men 
are  altogether  without  the  inward  strivings  of  the  Spirit.  Because  the  Spirit  is  not 
acting  apparently  in  a  man's  renewal,  we  may  not  assume  that  He  is  not  acting. 
He  may  be  engaged  in  preparatory  work.  Turn  at  God's  reproof,  and  you  will 
receive  the  Spirit  in  its  renovating  power,  and  have  the  wisdom  which  is  strength, 
and  peace,  and  life,  and  immortality.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  I  will  pour  out  My 
Spirit  unto  you. — The  gift  of  the  Spirit : — Some  take  it  for  illumination  only,  and 
gifts  of  knowledge.  So  it  agrees  well  with  the  words  that  follow,  "  I  wiU  make 
known  My  words  unto  you."  If  ye  hearken  to  My  reproof  I  will  tell  you  more  of 
My  mind.  Ye  shall  know  more  of  heavenly  truths.  Others  take  it  for  sanctifying 
gifts  of  the  Spirit.  I.  They  that  will  turn  to  God  shall  not  want  the  plentiful 
HELP  of  God's  Spirit  to  direct  them.  They  will  pray  for  God's  Spirit.  Encourage 
men  to  turn  to  God,  for  then  they  shall  have  His  Spirit  for  their  instructor, 
sanctifier,  and  comforter.  II.  The  Spirit  and  the  Word  must  go  together  to 
guide.  Both  are  joined  in  this  verse.  A  lying  spirit  it  must  needs  be  that 
contradicts  God's  plain  Word.     (Francis  Taylor.) 

Vers.  24-28.  Because  I  have  called,  and  ye  refused. — The  rejected  call  of 
Wisdom  : — I.  The  manner  in  which  it  has  called  upon  you — in  which  the  appeals 
of  Wisdom  and  of  religion  have  been  made.  In  the  manner,  the  variety,  the  intensity, 
the  tenderness,  the  unwearied  nature,  and  the  sleepless  watchfulness  of  appeal, 
nothing  has  occurred  that  can  be  compared  with  the  calls  which  have  been  made 
to  you  to  abandon  a  sinful  course  and  to  give  your  heart  to  God.  H.  The  manner 
OF  the  reception  of  this  call.  You  have  neglected  these  calls  and  warnings ; 
you  paid  no  attention  to  them,  as  if  they  did  not  pertain  to  you,  or  as  if  they  had 
no  claim  to  your  regard.  You  have  argued  against  the  truth ;  you  have  cavilled 
against  the  truth ;  you  have  urged  excuses  that  you  might  not  obey  the  truth  ;  you 
have  sought  plausible  reasons  for  neglecting  to  do  what  you  knew  to  be  your  duty ; 
you  have  taken  refuge  under  the  imperfections  of  Christians  for  not  being  your- 
self a  Christian.  You  have  done  this  long.  In  some  cases  it  has  been  the  work  of 
a  life ;  in  all  cases  it  has  been  a  leading  object  of  life  thus  far.  III.  The  effect 
OF  neglecting  and  disreo.vrding  these  calls.  "When  your  fear  cometh,"  &c. 
Your  wealth  cannot  save  you  ;  your  accomplishments  cannot  save  you.  Death 
cares  for  none  of  these  things.  1.  You  will  die,  and  the  fear  of  death  will  come 
upon  you.     2.  The  fear  of  the  judgment  day  will  come  upon  you,  for  that  cannot 


CHAP,  I.]  PROVERBS.  87 

always  be  avoided.  IV.  When  these  things  come  it  will  be  too  late  to  cry  roB 
MERCY.  There  must  be  a  limit  to  the  calls  of  religion  and  mercy,  for  life  is  very 
brief,  and  they  all  lie  this  side  the  grave.  Can  you  suppose  that  He  will  always 
appeal  to  the  sceptic  and  the  caviller,  and  bear  with  his  scepticism  and  cavils 
through  a  vast  eternity  ?  This  cannot  be  ;  and  somewhere  there  must  be  a  limit 
to  the  offers  of  mercy  to  men.  That  may  occur  before  you  shall  reach  the  death- 
bed, short  as  is  the  journey  thither.  May  not  the  mind  become  so  worldly,  and  the 
heart  so  vain,  and  the  conscience  so  "seared,"  and  the  life  so  wicked,  and  the  will 
so  obdurate,  and  the  whole  soul  so  utterly  shattered  and  ruined  by  sin,  that  con- 
version shall  be  hopeless  and  ruin  certain  ?  It  may  occur  on  the  death-bed :  then 
the  cry  for  mercy  may  be  vain.  And  there  is  a  world  where  the  cry  of  mercy  is 
never  heard.  Embrace  the  call,  whether  to  you  it  be  the  last  or  not,  and  your 
eternal  welfare  will  be  secure.  (A.  Barnes,  D.D.)  The  folly  and  danger  of 
refusing  the  calls  of  mercy : — I.  That  God  calls  on  sinners.  1.  This  is  clear  from 
many  parts  of  Scripture  (Isa.  Iv.  1,  3,  6,  &c.,  Ixv.  1,  2  ;  Ezek,  xviii.  30,  31). 
2,  The  end  to  which  He  calls  us  in  these  different  ways  is  to  repent  and  turn  from 
our  sins,  and  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (Acts  xx.  21 ;  Mark  i.  15).  As  to 
the  nature  and  manner  of  those  calls,  they  are — (1)  Kind  and  gracious ;  they  are 
full  of  love,  tenderness,  and  pity  (Deut.  xxxii.  29  ;  Hos.  xi.  8 ;  Matt,  xxiii.  37  ; 
Luke  xix.  41,  42).  What  moving  expostulations  are  these  !  (2)  They  carry  the 
highest  reason  and  persuasion  along  with  them.  It  is  to  avoid  our  own  ruin  and 
secure  our  own  happiness.  (3)  They  last  but  for  a  season.  His  patience  will  at 
last  be  worn  out  by  our  many  obstinate  refusals.  The  shining  day  of  grace  at  last 
ends  in  the  eternal  shades  of  night  (Matt,  xxiii.  38  ;  Isa.  Ixvi.  4 ;  Jer.  vii.  13-15), 
II.  That  sinners  too  often  refuse  to  hearken  to  the  calls  of  God.  Many  hear 
the  gospel  calls,  but  few  are  obedient  to  them.  The  old  world  would  not  be  reformed 
by  the  preaching  of  Noah.  The  Israelites  stoned  the  prophets  that  were  sent  to 
them  (Jer.  vii.  24-26  ;  2  Chron.  xxiv.  21).  Now,  whence  can  this  proceed,  that  so 
many  are  disobedient  to  the  heavenly  call  ?     1.  It  is  partly  owing  to  unbelief. 

2.  Others  slight  the  Word  because  they  are  prejudiced  against  the  messenger  that 
brings  it,  regarding  his  imperfections  and  inadvertencies  more  than  the  weight  of 
those  things  which  he  delivers.  3.  Others  do  it  through  ignorance  :  darkness  and 
blindness  of  mind  make  them  hardened  and  obstinate.  They  know  not  God,  their 
sinful  state,  their  need  of  Christ,  nor  the  beauty  and  excellency  of  spiritual  things. 
4.  Others  through  pride  reject  the  calls  of  God  (Eev.  iii.  17).  5.  Others  through 
love  of  the  world.  The  business  of  the  world  engrosses  their  time,  and  the  pleasures 
of  it  entirely  captivate  their  affec.ions.     6.  Others  through  a  false  peace.    Ill,  The 

EVIL  and  danger  OF  REFUSING  TO  HEARKEN  TO  God'S  CALLS,  HiS  COUNSEL  AND  REPROOF. 

1.  It  is  the  most  heinous  ingratitude  to  God.     2.  It  is  a  contempt  of  God's  power. 

3.  We  rob  ourselves  of  the  greatest  advantages.  4.  By  rejecting  the  calls  of  God 
we  run  ourselves  into  the  greatest  misery  and  ruin.  What  threatenings  and  woe 
are  denounced  against  the  obstinate  sinner  !  I  now  come  to  apply  the  subject. 
1.  Let  us  admire  the  mercy  of  God  in  thus  calling  sinners.  2.  Let  such  as  have 
obeyed  the  calls  of  God  rejoice  therein  ;  they  have  cause  of  eternal  joy  and  eternal 
thankfulness.  3.  Let  such  as  have  shut  their  ears  against  the  calls  of  God  be 
persuaded  now  to  hearken  to  them.  {T.  Hannam.)  Irreversible  chastisements : — 
These  words  are  awful,  but  not  hopeless ;  they  pronounce  God's  judgment  on  the 
finally  impenitent ;  the  penitent  they  but  awaken,  that  they  may  "  hear  the  voice 
of  the  Son  of  God  and  live."  The  sentence  pronounced  is  final.  If,  hearing,  men 
wiU  not  hearken,  a  time  will  come  when  all  these  calls  will  but  increase  their 
anguish  and  misery.  Because  these  words  relate  to  the  day  of  judgment,  is  there 
no  sense  in  which  they  are  fulfilled  in  this  life  ?  It  should  appal  any  one  to  find 
that  they  do  not  appal  him.  Conscience  bears  witness  that  he  has  been  one  of 
those  against  whom  the  words  denounce  woe.  All  suffering,  mental  or  bodily,  has 
a  twofold  character ;  it  is  at  once  punishment  and  chastisement ;  it  at  once  expresses 
God's  hatred  for  sin  and  mercy  to  the  sinner  ;  it  is  at  once  the  wrath  and  love  of 
Almighty  God.  Of  God's  judgments,  many  are  for  this  life  without  remedy.  God 
warns  that  He  may  not  strike  ;  but,  when  He  does  strike,  a  man's  whole  life  is 
changed.  To  certain  courses  of  sin  God  annexes  certain  punishments,  and  although, 
for  a  time  and  up  to  a  certain  degree  of  sin,  they  may  not,  to  any  extent,  follow, 
yet,  beyond  that  bound,  they  do  follow  irresistibly,  irreversibly.  Manifold  diseases 
"  of  mind,  body,  or  estate,"  whereby  God  chastens  sin,  have  this  in  common,  that 
there  is  no  certain  time  when  the  blow  comes.  We  cannot  tell  the  rule  by  which 
God  dispenseth  suffering  and  loss.     To  us  they  seem  to  fall  more  suddenly  on 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [orap.i. 

some,  while  others  go  on  longer  without  visible  punishment.    "We  only  know  that 

happy  they  who  are  chastened  soonest.     The  judgments  God  is  constantly  sending 

should  awe  us  all,  especially  such  as  are  even  half-conscious  that  there  is  some 

besetting  sin,   slight  as  it  may  seem,   to  which   they  are  continually  yielding. 

Unheedful,  such  permit  sin  to  accumulate  after  sin.     And  sin  after  sin  is  filling  up 

the  measure  of  their  provocations  and  the  fearful  treasure  of  the  wrath  of  Almighty 

God.    All  sin  must  be  eating  out  the  love  of  God  and  His  life  in  the  soul.    If  God's 

fire  do  fall,  then  man's  only  wisdom  is,  with  what  strength  he  has,  darkened  though 

his  path  be  by  the  bewildering  of  past  sin,  to  grope  his  way  onward  in  the  new  path 

wherein  God  has  set  him.     The  past  is,  in  one  sense,  closed.     He  has  been  tried, 

has  failed,  and  is  in  this  way,  perhaps,  tried  no  more.     His  trial  is  changed.     If 

we  failed,  we  have  missed  what,  by  God's  grace,  we  might  have  become.     Man  may 

gather  hope  from  the  very  severity  of  God's  punishments.     While  we  mourn  our 

neglect  of  past  calls,  our  sorrow,  which  is  still  His  gift  and  call  within  us,  will 

draw  down  His  gladdening  look,  which  will  anew  call  us  unto  Him.    As  we  would 

hear  the  last  blissful  call,  hearken  we  each  one  of  us  to  the  next,  whereby  He 

calleth  us  to  break  off  any,  the  very  slightest,  evil,  or  to  gird  ourselves  to  any  good, 

and  follow  Him  without  delay.     (E.  B.  Ptisey,  D.D.)         God  and  the  impenitent 

sinner: — I.  God  and   the   impenitent   sinner  in   probation.      1.  God's  conduct 

towards  the  sinner  in  probation.  (1)  He  calls  them,  by  His  Word,  His  ministry. 

His  Spirit.     (2)  He  stretches  out  His  hand  to  them.     "His  arms  are  outstretched 

to  receive  them."     (3)  He  counsels  them.     Presents  lessons  of  wisdom  to  them. 

(4)  He  reproves  them.     Kebukes  them  for  their  sins.     2.  The  sinner's  conduct 

towards  God  in  probation.    (1)  They  refuse  His  call.     "  Ye  refused."     (2)  They 

disregard  His  outstretched  hands.     "No  man  regarded."     (3)  They  set  at  nought 

His  counsel.     They  rejected  His  "reproof."    II.  God  and  the  impenitent  sinner 

IN  betkibution.     1.  God's  conduct  towards  the  impenitent  sinner  in  retribution. 

(1)  He  laughs  at  their  distress.     "  I  will  laugh  at  your  calamity."     Their  distress  is 

great.     Their  destruction  has  come  as  a  "  whirlwind,"  and  what  is  more,  it  has 

grown  out  of  their  conduct.     "  They  eat  of  the  fruit  of  their  own  way."     (2)  He 

disregards  their  prayers.    "  I  will  not  answer."    2.  The  impenitent  sinner's  conduct 

towards  God.    They  cried  to  Him  for  help.     They  may  bitterly  call  upon  Me,  "  but 

I  will  not  answer."     There  is  earnest  prayer  in  hell,  but  it  is  fruitless.     {Homilist.) 

Wisdom  personified,  and  love  incarnate : — Wisdom  is  one  of  the  Divine  attributes ; 

and  Christ  "is  of  God  made  unto  us  wisdom,"  as  well  as  " righteousness,  and 

sanctification,  and  redemption."     We  may  surely  expect,  then,  that  up  to  a  certain 

point  the  utterances  of  Wisdom  and  of  Christ  would  coinjide ;  so  that  in  these 

passages  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs  we  should  be  able  to  find,  as  we  find  throughout 

the  whole  of  the  Old  Testament,  some  portion  of  "  the  testimony  of  Jesus."     But 

does  it  follow  that  because  some,  or  even  many,  of  Wisdom's  utterances  may  be 

correctly  spoken  of  as  the  words  of  Christ  Himself,  therefore  all  of  them  may  be  so 

regarded  ?     To  see  how  utterly  foolish  is  this  way  of  reasoning,  we  have  only  to 

remember  how  many  of  David's  words  not  only  coincide  with  those  of  Christ,  but 

are  actually  quoted  in  the  New  Testament  as  if  Christ  Himself  had  uttered  them  ; 

and  yet  no  one  is  so  foolish  as  to  insist  that  all  the  words  of  David  can  be  safely 

put  into  the  mouth  of  Christ.     As  we  said  at  the  beginning,  wisdom  is  one  of  the 

attributes  of  God  ;  and  therefore  the  words  of  Wisdom  must  be,  up  to  a  certain 

point,  the  expression  of  the  Divine  mind.     We  may  say  that  Wisdom  expresses  the 

mind  of  God  in  creation,  in  providence,  in  the  whole  realm  of  law.     And  in  this 

realm,  as  well  as  in  the  realm  of  grace,  the  Son  of  God  has  His  place  as  the 

Eevealer.     We  may  regard  Christ  and  Wisdom  as  identical  throughout  the  realm 

of  natural  law ;  so  that  no  error  would  result  from  the  substitution  of  the  one  for 

the  other  within  that  range  of  truth ;  but  when  we  leave  the  realm  of  law  and 

enter  that  of  grace,  it  is  entirely  different ;  then  it  may  not  only  be  injurious  but  fatal 

to    take   the   utterances   of   mere    wisdom    and   put   them    into  the  mouth    of 

Christ.     If  Christ  had  been  only  wisdom,  He  could  not  have  heard  the  sinner's 

prayer.     But  He  is  also  "  righteousness,  and  sanctification,  and  redemption  "  ;  and 

that  makes  all  the  difference,  for  now  that  He  has  made  an  atonement  for  our  sins 

and  opened  up  the  way  of  life.  He  can  speak,  not  only  in  the  name  of  wisdom,  but 

of  pardoning  mercy  and  redeeming  grace ;  and,  accordingly,  far  from  laughing  at 

calamity  and  scorning  the  penitent's  prayer,  which  wisdom  if  it  were  alone  might 

do,  He  can,  and  will,  and  does  "  save  them  to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  God 

by  Him."     Having  thus  considered  the  extent  to  which  we  may  expect  to  find  "  the 

testimony  of  Jesus  "  in  the  words  of  Wisdom,  let  us  now  test  the  principle  we  have 


CHAP.  1,]  PROVERBS.  2Sr 

laid  down  by  an  examination  of  the  passage.     The  paragraph  begins  with  this  bold 
and  striking  personification :  "  Wisdom  crieth  without ;  she  uttereth  her  voice  in 
the  streets :  she  crieth  in  the  chief  place  of  concourse,  in  the  openings  of  the  gates : 
in  the  city  she  uttereth  her  words,  saying  " — and  then  follows  the  passage  with 
which   we    have  mainly  to   do.       ^et   us,    then,    listen  to  Wisdom's  cry,    and 
observe  how  truthfully  and  powerfully  it  is  translated  into  the  language  of  men. 
We  shall  see  its  truth  to  nature  better  if  we  first  look  back  a  little.     She  begins,  not 
with  a  cry,  but  with  tender  words  of  counsel  and  of  promise  (vers.  8,  9),  "  My 
son,  hear  the  instruction  of  thy  father,"  &c.     These  are  the  tender  and  kindly 
words  of  counsel  in   which   she  addresses  the  young  man   setting  out  in  life. 
Following  this  are  tender  and  yet  solemn  words  of  warning  against  the  tempter 
whom  every  one  must  meet  (ver.  19)  :  "  My,  son,  if  sinners  entice  thee,  consent 
thou  not,"  &c.    But  now  time  passes  on,  and  Wisdom's  proUg6  begins  to  go  astray, 
to  forget  the  instruction  of  the  father  and  the  loving  law  of  the  mother ;  and  so 
now  she  lifts  up  her  voice  and  cries,  entreating  the  wanderer  to  turn  before  it  is  too 
late  (vers.  22,  23).     Time  passes  on,  and  the  warning  cry  has  been  as  little  heeded 
as  had  been  the  tender  voice  of  Wisdom  at  the  first.    The  son,  instead  of  being 
prudent,  has  been   rash ;   he  has   been,   not  economical,  but  extravagant ;    not 
temperate,  but  dissipated  ;  and  so  he  has  gone  on  till  his  last  opportunity  has  been 
thrown  away,  his  patrimony  squandered,  his  health  gone,  his  last  friend  lost. 
Then  once  more  his  early  monitor  appears.     The  prodigal  remembers  the  tender 
words  of  counsel  and  of  promise.     He  remembers  how,  when  he  was  just  beginning 
to  go  astray,  before  he  had  become  hopelessly  entangled  in  evil,  Wisdom  lifted  up 
her  voice  and  cried.     For  a  long  time  his  old  counsellor  has  not  been  present  to  his 
mind  at  all.     He  has  been  hurrying  on  in  courses  of  evil,  but  now  his  very  wretched- 
ness forces  him  to  stop  and  think.     And,  again,  there  stands  Wisdom  before  him. 
How  does  she  address  him  now  ?     Does  she  speak  to  him  in  soothing  tones?    Does 
she  promise  to  restore  him  his  money,  or  his  health,  or  his  friends  ?    Alas,  no :  she 
cannot.     All  she  can  say  is,  "  I  told  you  it  would  be  so.     I  warned  you  what  would 
be  the  end ;  and  now  the  end  has  come.     You  must  eat  the  fruit  of  your  own  ways, 
and  be  filled  with  your  own  devices."     That  is  positively  all  that  Wisdom  can  say  ; 
and  there  is  no  tenderness  in  her  tone.     She  seems  to  mock  him  rather,  she  seems 
to  laugh  at  his  calamity.     Such  is  the  voice  of  Wisdom  in  the  end  to  those  who 
have  despised  her  counsel  in  the  beginning.     And  is  not  the  whole  representation 
true  to  nature  ?    Yes,  it  is  perfectly  true  that  "  Wisdom  crieth  without,  she  uttereth 
her  voice  in  the  streets,"  and  says  these  things  so  loudly  that  no  listening  ear  can 
fail  to  hear  them.     It  is  no  matter  of  deep  philosophy.     It  is  no  ecclesiastical  or 
theological  dogma.     It  belongs  to  the  Proverbs,  the  proverbs  of  the  streets.     The 
merit  of  Solomon,  in  this  chapter,  is  not  in  telling  us  something  we  should  not 
otherwise  have  known  ;  but  in  putting  what  everybody  knows  in  a  very  striking  form. 
I  question  whether  in  all  literature  there  can  be  found  any  more  vivid  and  alarming 
description  of  the  terror  and  despair  of  a  remorseful  conscience,  as  it  looks  back  and 
recalls,  when  too  late,  the  neglected  counsels  alike  of  earthly  and  of  heavenly 
wisdom.     So  far  Wisdom  ;  and  if  it  were  only  with  her  that  sinners  had  to  do,  it 
would  go  hard,  not  only  with  the  profligate  and  openly  vicious,  but  with  the  most 
respectable.     But  He  with  whom  we  have  to  do  is  not  known  as  wisdom.     He  is 
wise  indeed ;  and  all  wisdom  is  from  Him.     But  there  is  that  in  Him  which  is 
higher  than  wisdom.     "  God  is  love."     Wisdom  is  the  expression  of  His  will  in  the 
realm  of  law ;  but  love  is  the  expression  of  Himself.     The  love  of  God  is  not  a 
lawless  love.     It  is  not  at  variance  with  wisdom.     The  law  which  ordains  that  the 
sinner  must  eat  of  the  fruit  of  his  own  way  and  be  filled  with  his  own  devices 
cannot  be  set  aside  by  the  mere  emotion  of  compassion.     Hence  it  was  necessary, 
in  order  to  redeem  man  from  the  condemnation  of  sin,  that  the  Holy  One  of  God 
should  suffer.     Hence,  too,  it  is  that,  though  by  the  suffering  and  death  of  Christ 
believers  in  Him  are  set  free  from  the  condemnation  of  sin,  yet  the  natural  con- 
sequences of  the  transgressions  of  wisdom's  laws  are  not  abolished.     If  health  has 
been  wasted,  it  will  not  be  miraculously  restored.     If  money  has  been  squandered, 
there  must  be  suffering  from  the  want  of  it.     If  character  has  been  forfeited  by 
dishonesty  and  impurity,  it  may  never  be  redeemed  on  this  side  the  grave.     The 
laws  of  wisdom  are  not  repealed  or  set  at  naught ;  they  remain  in  force.    But  such 
has  been  the  ingenuity,  so  to  speak,  of  the  Divine  love,  that  without  infringing  on 
the  proper  domain  of  wisdom  expressing  itself  in  law,  the  way  has  been  opened 
up  for  the  full  pardon  and  ultimate  restoration  even  of  those  who  have  wandered 
farthest  and  sinned  most.     And  accordingly,  a  passage  like  this  awful  one  iu  the 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 


first  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Proverbs,  instead  of  obscuring  the  Divine  love  in  the 
smallest  degree,  or  interposing  so  much  as  a  thread  between  the  sinner  and  his 
Saviour,  rather  serves  as  a  background  on  which  to  set  forth  the  radiant  form  of 
the  Saviour  of  mankind, 

«•  Whose  love  appears  more  orient  and  more  bright, 
Having  a  foil  whereon  to  show  its  light." 

(/.    M.    Gibson,    D.I).)  A   neglected   warning : — Some   years   ago   a   terrible 

inundation  occurred  in  North  Holland,  due  entirely  to  neglected  warnings. 
The  dykes,  as  the  custom  is,  are  inspected  by  a  dyke  engineer  on  certain 
days  every  year.  A  farmer  reported  the  dangerous  condition  of  one  repeatedly, 
but  whether  from  carelessness  or  because  he  considered  it  interference,  the 
engineer  laughed  at  all  his  fears,  saying  the  dyke  would  stand  many  years  yet. 
Not  long  after,  during  a  violent  storm,  part  of  the  dyke  was  carried  away 
by  the  waters.  In  a  short  time  several  villages,  and  miles  of  cultivated  land, 
were  under  water,  many  lives  being  lost.  {S.  S.  Chronicle.)  Critical  periods 
in  a  sinner's  life : — Every  sinner,  while  unreconciled  to  God,  is  in  constant 
and  imminent  danger  of  the  loss  of  all  things.  Yet  there  are  seasons  of  special 
danger,  periods  in  his  life  when,  unless  he  repent  and  turn  to  God,  he  ripens 
very  fast  for  judgment.  I.  The  se.\son  of  youth  is  one.  The  mind  is  then  recep- 
tive, the  heart  is  tender,  the  character  is  unformed,  evil  habits  are  not  yet  matured, 
and  all  things  invite.  It  is  "flood-tide,"  and  is  sure  to  lead  on  to  victory  if  he 
takes  advantage  of  it.  But  neglected,  thrown  away,  the  future  is  almost  sure  to 
miscarry.  II.  The  period  of  conviction  of  sin  is  one  of  extreme  peril.  Then 
the  sinner  is  on  the  threshold  of  life.  But  hesitating,  grieving  the  Spirit,  turning 
back,  losing  his  conviction,  he  may  be  ruined  for  ever.  III.  The  pekiod  of  Divine 
chastisements  is  a  critical  period.  God's  end  in  these  usually  is  to  reclaim  men. 
To  sin  on  in  spite  of  them ;  to  refuse  to  be  corrected  ;  to  wax  worse  and  worse  in 
the  day  of  trial,  and  under  God's  afflictive  dispensations,  is  to  run  a  fearful  risk  of 
final  and  eternal  abandonment.  (Anon.)  I  also  will  laugh  at  your  calamity. — 
Retribution : — We  have  here  a  personification  of  that  attribute  of  God  which  is 
specially  employed  in  words  of  counsel  and  admonition,  and  is  here  made  to 
represent  God.  The  voice  of  Wisdom  is  the  voice  of  God.  I.  The  merciful 
APPEAL  OF  God  to  sinners,  and  its  rejection.  1.  God  is  said  to  call.  2.  God  is 
said  to  stretch  out  His  hand.  In  the  gesture  of  earnest  appeal,  making  use  of 
arguments  of  deed  as  well  as  of  word.  Providence  warns.  The  hand  of  God  in 
history  demonstrates  what  providence  in  its  dealings  with  individuals  teaches,  that 
virtue  and  happiness,  vice  and  misery,  go  hand  in  hand  ;  that  morality  and  self- 
interest  in  the  long  run  merge  ;  that  the  path  of  duty  and  the  path  of  safety 
coincide.  3.  God  is  said  to  counsel.  The  message  of  Scripture,  with  its  manifold 
invitations  and  warnings,  is  faithfully  delivered.  4.  God  is  said  to  reprove.  By 
severe  strokes  of  discipline  God  speaks  to  those  who  in  their  infatuation  have 
refused  to  pay  attention  to  His  former  appeals.  But  the  rod  of  correction  may  be 
disregarded.  The  possibility  of  such  reckless  opposition  to  the  merciful  appeal  of 
God  demonstrates  the  power  of  the  evil  principle  in  fallen  human  nature.  We 
have  here  a  complete  reversal  of  the  ordinary  principles  of  self-interest  which 
actuate  men  in  all  circumstances,  except  in  the  sphere  of  morality.  II.  The 
despairing  appeal  of  sinners  to  God,  and  its  futility.  Their  position,  as  here 
depicted — 1.  It  is  unspeakably  awful.  The  text  speaks  of  calamity,  of  fear,  of 
desolation,  of  destruction  like  a  whirlwind,  of  distress  and  anguish.  The  text 
speaks  of  a  terrible  aggravation  of  their  distress,  occasioned  by  the  stinging  sarcasm 
which  accompanies  their  suffering.  2.  It  is  strictly  retributive.  All  their  suffering 
has  been  earned  by  themselves.  As  they  formerly  eluded  Him  in  His  efforts  to 
seek  and  to  save  them,  so  now  He  will  not  be  found  of  them.  3.  It  is  utterly 
hopeless.  The  futility  of  their  appeal  is  absolute.  Their  cry  is  the  cry  of  blank 
despair.  They  have  sinned  away  their  day  of  grace,  and  their  offended  God  will 
be  entreated  of  them  no  more.  It  may  be  said  that  the  moral  sense  is  shocked  by 
such  a  representation  of  God's  conduct  towards  impenitent  sinners  as  that  which 
we  have  drawn  from  the  text.  Our  reply  is,  that  it  is  presumptuous  for  any  mortal 
to  say  what  is,  and  what  is  not,  in  harmony  with  the  Divine  perfection,  or  con- 
sistent with  the  Divine  character.  In  nature  we  know  God  can  assume  an  attitude 
of  sternness.  In  the  moral  sphere  there  may  be  occasions  when  He  shall  stand 
forth  as  an  infleiuble  Euler,  as  an  immovable,  righteous  Judge.    (A.  0.  Smith,  B.A.) 


CHIP,  t.]  PROVERBS.  31 

The  after-time  for  the  sinner : — Wisdom  is  represented  as  calling,  waiting,  pleading ; 
but,  as  concerning  some  who  heard  the  call,  altogether  in  vain.  At  last  Wisdom 
grows  indignant,  as  well  she  may.  In  carrying  out  His  gracious  purpose  of  reveal- 
ing Himself  to  us,  God  may  use  every  act  and  every  feeling  that  is  genuine  to  man. 
It  is  quite  proper  that  men  should  deride  the  proud  and  the  malicious  when  they 
are  baffled  and  put  to  shame,  and  this  natural  feeling  is  here  used  to  represent  the 
feeling  of  God  towards  those  who  contemptuously  despise  the  riches  of  His  grace. 
The  merely  human  gave  the  tone  to  the  revelations  of  God  that  were  made  in  Old 
Testament  times.  It  is  the  divinely  human — it  is  humanity  at  its  best — which 
gives  tone  to  all  the  representations  of  God  made  in  the  New  Testament.  So  we 
have  now  severities  and  indignations,  even  the  "wrath  of  the  Lamb,"  but  not 
derisions,  not  scorn,  not  any  "laughing  at  calamity."  The  text  does  but  express ■ 
the  feeling  we  have  when  the  wicked  meet  their  deserts.  I.  Evrr,  has  its  ceetain 
FIXED  CONSEQUENCES.  Law  equally  reigns  in  the  moral  and  in  the  material  world. 
Every  moral  action  has  its  certain  and  well-defined  consequences.  II.  Nothing 
CHECKS  consequences  BUT  THE  REMOVAL  OF  CAUSES.  Illustrate  from  cases  of 
infectious  disease.  Man's  great  evil  is  wilfulness,  and  to  remove  this  ever-fruitful 
source  of  moral  mischief  requires  no  less  than  a  regeneration.  III.  By  the 
KEsisTANCE  OF  GOOD  COUNSEL  THE  EVIL  GEOWs  STKONGER.  He  who  goes  after  sin  has 
to  resist  much  counsel  and  persuasive  influence.  And  this  is  the  ever-working 
law,  good  resisted  leaves  evil  stronger.   IV.  If  evil  grows  stronger,  its  consequences 

MUST   become    more    SERIOUS,  AND  WILL   BE    BROUGHT    ON    MORE    RAPIDLT.       The  simple 

ones  turn  deaf  ears,  and  hurry  after  the  tempters  ;  and  then  their  "fear  comes  as 
desolation."  V.  Evil  mat  grow  beyond  all  influence  of  reproof,  and  then  its 
ISSUES  MUST  prove  OVERWHELMING  INDEED.  Men  may  get  beyond  the  reach  of  aU 
available  moral  influences.  Conceive  what  that  condition  must  be.  Compare  the 
state  of  the  "devil-possessed."  A  most  awful  and  alarming  picture  is  that  of  a 
moral  being  abusing  himself  until  he  actually  becomes  insusceptible  of  moral 
impressions.  In  those  who  resist  moral  counsel  and  invitation  a  wilfulness  grows 
up  which  becomes  every  day  more  difiicult  to  overcome ;  a  process  of  heart-hardening 
is  actually  going  on.  Be  warned,  then,  of  the  "  wrath  of  the  Lamb."  [Weekly 
Pidjnt.)  And  your  destruction  cometh  as  a  whirlwind. — The  figure  of  the  whirl- 
wind : — In  eastern  countries,  so  rapid  and  impetuous  sometimes  is  the  whirlwind 
that  it  is  in  vain  to  think  of  flying ;  the  swiftest  horse  or  the  fastest  sailing  ship 
could  be  of  no  use  to  carry  the  traveller  out  of  danger.  Torrents  of  burning  sand 
roll  before  it,  the  firmament  is  enveloped  in  a  thick  veil,  and  the  sun  appears  of  the 
colour  of  blood.  The  Arab  who  conducted  Mr.  Bruce  through  the  frightful  deserts 
of  Senaar  pointed  out  to  him  a  spot  among  some  sandy  hillocks,  where  the  ground 
seemed  to  be  more  elevated  than  the  rest,  where  one  of  the  largest  caravans  which 
ever  came  out  to  Egypt,  to  the  number  of  several  thousand  camels,  was  covered 
with  sand.  The  destruction  of  Sennacherib's  army  (2  Kings  xix.  25)  was  probably 
(comp.  Isa.  xxxvii.  7)  by  the  blast  of  the  hot  pestilential  south  wind  blowing  from 
the  deserts  of  Lybia,  called  the  simoom.     (B.  E.  Nicholls,  M.A.) 

Ver.  28.  Then  shall  they  call  upon  Me,  but  I  will  not  answer. — Sowing  di»- 
ohedience,  reaping  judgment : — One  of  the  marvellous  reasonings  of  the  Judge  with 
the  criminal  is  recorded  here.  I.  God  in  mercy  visits  a  rebellious  generation. 
1.  The  call.  It  is  in  the  earthquake  and  in  the  storm.  Day  unto  day  proclaims 
it,  and  night  unto  night.  There  is  no  speech  or  language  where  it  is  not  heard. 
The  call  has  come  with  distinct  articulation  from  the  lips  of  prophets  and  apostles. 
It  sounds  with  authority  in  a  human  conscience.  2.  The  hands  stretched  out. 
There  is  a  way,  and  the  way  is  open  unto  the  Father.  There  is  no  obstruction, 
there  is  no  forbidding,  there  is  no  upbraiding.  Sinners  are  welcomed  with  open 
arms.  3.  The  counsel.  Specially  addressed  to  those  who  procrastinate. 
4.  Beproof .  If  they  will  not  be  enticed  by  the  promise  of  heaven.  He  will  threaten 
them  with  the  fear  of  hell.  Everlasting  love  needs  a  strong,  hard  instrument 
wherewith  to  work  out  her  blessed  purposes  on  an  unpliant  race.  Judgment 
looming  in  reserve,  serving  meantime  by  its  blackness  to  make  the  invitation  more 
winning.  II.  A  rebellious  generation  neglects  or  resists  the  gracious  visita- 
tion OF  God.  Men  have  ears  and  stop  them.  III.  They  shall  eat  the  fruit  of 
THEIR  OWN  WAYS,  AND  BE  FILLED  WITH  THEIR  OWN  DEVici;^.  Judgment  wiU  be  an 
exact  answer  to  disobedience,  as  fruit  answers  to  seed,  or  an  echo  to  the  sound. 
(William  Arnot,  D.D.)  The  danger  of  deferring  repentance  : — There  is  a  good 
English  proverb  that  "  He  who  neglects  the  occasion,  the  occasion  will  neglect  him." 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.i. 

la  previous  verses  we  have  a  general  proclamation  (ver.  20) ;  a  merciful  reprehension 
(ver.  22) ;  a  gracious  exhortation  (ver.  23) ;  a  yearning  promise  (end  ver.  23) ;  a 
gracious  threatening.  The  words  of  the  text  are  underclapt  against  all  those  that 
procrastinate  their  repentance  and  returning  home  to  God.  Note  the  parties  them- 
selves  that  do  prolong  this  day  of  grace;  their  earnest  and  diligent  seeking  after 
God ;  the  unseasonableness  of  the  time  of  their  seeking ;  and  the  frustration  of 
their  hopes.  Those  that  wiU  not  hear  when  He  calleth  them,  God  will  not  hear 
when  they  call  unto  Him.  Thus  the  Lord  dealt  with  His  people  in  Ezekiel's  days. 
There  is  a  double  day,  a  white  day,  and  a  black  day ;  a  day  of  salvation  and  a  day 
of  damnation.  There  are  three  reasons  for  this  point.  1.  The  law  of  retaliation. 
2,  The  time  of  God's  attributes.  Both  mercy  and  justice  have  their  season  in  this 
life  ;  and  when  mercy  hath  acted  her  part,  then  cometh  justice  upon  the  stage,  and 
acteth  her  part.  8.  It  is  God's  use  to  do  so  in  other  things,  even  upon  the  contempt 
of  temporal  blessings,  and  therefore  much  more  in  matters  of  grace  and  salvation. 
Illustrated  in  the  cases  of  the  Israelites,  Ishmael,  King  Saul,  Esau.  If  God  so 
severely  punish  contempt  of  temporal  blessings,  how  will  He  punish  contempt  of 
proffers  of  grace  and  salvation  ?  He  will  come  with  martial  law  against  all  those 
that  contemn  the  gospel  (John  iii.  18).  God  doth  commonly  give  men  a  day,  but 
no  man  or  angel  doth  know  how  long  this  day  lasteth.  God  gave  the  angels  a  day, 
Cain  a  day,  Nineveh  a  day,  the  antediluvian  world  a  day.  All  we  know  is  that 
this  day  is  for  us  now.  Now  is  the  day  of  Christ  upon  you.  What  is  the  meaning 
of  all  those  Scriptures  which  show  how  God  doth  deliver  up  men  unto  the  spirit  of 
giddiness,  and  unto  the  spirit  of  slumber  ?  And  what  means  the  "  hardening  of 
men's  hearts,"  and  "  searing  of  men's  consciences,"  but  only  to  show  that  the  day 
of  grace  may  end  unto  a  particular  man,  ten,  twenty,  nay,  forty  years  before  his 
death.  If  thou  refuse  this  day,  thou  refusest  all ;  for  what  knowest  thou  but  this 
very  day  may  be  thy  day?  The  reason  is — 1.  Because  God's  patience  is  in  His  own 
breast,  and  who  can  tell  how  long  it  will  last  ?  2.  Because  God's  patience  gives  no 
mark  or  inkling  of  it  before  it  ends.  3.  Because  God  reckons  up  every  hour. 
4.  It  is  a  wonder  that  the  day  of  grace  is  not  ended  already,  and  that  thou  art  not 
now  in  hell.  When  Christ  first  comes  to  the  soul,  He  witnesseth  grace  and  mercy 
to  thee  if  thou  wilt  repent  and  amend ;  yea.  He  witnesseth  forgiveness  of  sins, 
redemption,  and  salvation,  if  thou  wilt  believe  ;  but  if  not,  He  will  be  a  swift  witness 
against  thee.  (William  Fenner,  B.D.)  Nature^s  warning  :— This  is  a  sublime 
dramatic  utterance.  It  is  Wisdom  that  is  represented  as  speaking.  By  wisdom 
among  the  Orientals  moral  philosophy  was  understood,  or  science  speaking  on  the 
side  of  morality.  Taken  in  its  largest  way  it  is  as  if  nature  (in  the  text)  had  risen 
up,  and  had  declared  from  her  own  seat,  and  by  her  own  authority,  what  was  the 
history  of  transgression  against  her  fundamental  laws.  It  is  the  voice  of  physiology ; 
it  is  the  voice  of  health,  it  is  the  voice  of  natural  law.  It  is  the  voice  of  the  poor- 
house,  the  gaol,  the  gallows,  speaking  out  and  telling  men  what  are  the  ends  of 
those  ways  which  are  essentially  the  violation  of  God's  laws  in  nature.  We  see 
men  violating  the  fundamental  laws  of  health,  strength,  character,  prosperity,  and 
society,  little  by  little,  and  because  sentence  is  not  speedily  executed  against  evil- 
doers, they  are  presumptuous,  and  say,  "  How  doth  God  know?"  At  a  later  stage, 
when  the  fatal  work  is  done,  and  disease,  decay,  poverty,  the  coldness  of  men,  the 
indifference  of  society,  disgrace,  neglect,  infamy,  suffering,  and  death  come  upon 
them,  then  they  begin  to  call  out  in  these  several  states,  and  condemn  everybody 
but  themselves.  Then  they  seek  to  patch  up  their  broken  constitutions.  Then 
they  attempt  to  put  on  the  inspects  of  honesty.  Then  they  try  to  regraft  themselves 
upon  the  tree  from  which  they  have  been  broken  off,  but  largely  in  vain.  They 
call,  but  nature  will  not  hear.     They  plead  unto  deaf  ears.     I.  Look  at  the  mildest 

rOBMS    OF  TRANSGRESSION THOSE  OF  INDOLENCE   AND    SELF-INDULGENCE.       HoW  quietly 

men  spend  their  lives  doing  nothing !  But  when  they  pass  the  meridian  of  life, 
and  begin  to  go  down  the  farther  slope,  they  find  that  nobody  cares  for  them. 
They  are  in  everybody's  way.  The  probabilities  are  that  one  who  has  spent  the 
first  part  of  his  life  in  indolence  and  self-indulgence  will  spend  the  last  part  of  hia 
life  in  the  same  way.  II.  Look  at  the  same  thing  as  it  takes  place  in  regard  to 
JL  man's  reputation.  Every  man  is  a  character-builder.  Every  man  is  building 
himself  up  by  his  purposes,  his  deeds ;  and  these  form  his  character,  and  it  is  his 
character  that  stands  by  him.  His  reputation  is  simply  the  shadow  that  it  casts. 
What  a  man  is,  is  his  character  ;  and  what  men  think  him  to  be  is  his  reputation. 
Men  sometimes  think  they  are  building  character  when  they  are  only  getting 
reputation.     Few  are  aware  of  this  distinction,  and  so  it  comes  to  pass  that  many 


OHAP.i.]  PROVERBS.  83 

men  go  steadily  downward.  They  beg!n  to  violate  the  truth.  They  equivocate. 
They  walk  on  the  perilous  edge  of  insincerity.  And,  notwithstanding  this,  they  do 
not  perceive  any  change  in  themselves.  But  any  man  who  lacks  simplicity  very 
soon  gets  to  be  suspected  by  other  people.  Men  are  dishonest  in  the  same  way. 
They  are  tricky.  Such  a  man  goes  on  from  day  to  day,  and  at  last  it  is  whispered 
of  him,  "  That  man  is  not  honest,"  and  presently  all  the  world  knows  it  except 
himself.  III.  Look  at  the  same  thing  in  bespect  to  the  sins  which  a  man 
COMMITS  against  HIS  OWN  SELF.  Of  all  wastefulucss  there  is  none  like  that 
which  men  commit  upon  their  own  persons.  There  are  many  ways  in  which 
men  drain  off  the  vitality  of  their  whole  brain  and  nervous  system. 
Excessive  virtuous  industry  will  do  it.  Passionate  self-indulgence  will  do  it. 
Excessive  addiction  to  stimulating  drinks  will  do  it.  While  there  may  be 
exceptional  cases,  the  law  for  all  such  is  destruction.  The  law«  of  nature  have 
only  a  limit  of  mercy,  but  they  have  a  limit  of  mercy.  A  man  may  be  overtaken 
and  yet  may  recover  himself.  There  is  a  limited  amount  of  atonement  in  nature. 
But  there  must  be  no  presuming  on  it.  The  laws  of  nature  are  made  for  the 
obedient.  Society  is  established  for  the  obedient.  It  has  very  limited  resources  for 
reforming  men.  You  are  safe  if  you  do  not  go  down  into  vice.  Let  alone  mischief 
before  it  be  meddled  with.  Keep  clear  of  all  evil.  Obedience  is  safe.  Obedience 
to  God  in  nature ;  in  your  own  body ;  in  the  laws  of  society ;  obedience  to  God 
everywhere — that  is  absolutely  safe,  and  nothing  else  is  safe.  Sin,  however  sweet 
and  smooth  and  safe  it  may  seem,  is  not  safe.  It  is  safe  to  be  right ;  it  is  dangerous 
to  be  wrong.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  They  shall  not  find  Me. — Who  seek  and  do  not 
find  .«— Scripture  speaks  of  men  calling  upon  God,  and  of  His  refusing  to  hear  them. 
And  yet  our  Lord  said,  "  Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive;  seek,  and  ye  shall  find."  How 
explain  this  seeming  contradiction  ?  These  things  are  not  said  of  the  same  persona, 
or  rather  of  the  same  characters,  at  the  same  time.  What  if  I  were  to  say  that 
now,  at  this  very  moment,  the  words  of  the  text  are  both  applicable  to  us,  and  not 
applicable  ?  The  words  were  at  no  time  in  any  man's  earthly  life  so  true  as  they 
will  be  at  the  day  of  judgment.  Then  they  may  be  true  in  a  greater  or  less  degree ; 
they  may  be  substantially  true  in  the  life  that  now  is.  Is  Christ's  promise,  "  Seek, 
and  ye  shall  find,"  equally  true  to  all  of  us?  Take  most  of  us  :  suppose  one  of  us 
to  have  reached  boyhood  with  a  bad  disposition,  ready  for  the  first  temptation,  with 
habits  of  good  uncultivated.  Does  God  hear  his  prayers  ?  Or  in  trying  to  turn 
from  evil  to  good  have  you  ever  found  your  resolutions  give  way,  till  you  fell  back 
again  to  what  you  were  at  the  beginning  ?  In  that  case  you  sought  God  and  failed 
to  find  Him.  Or  has  it  ever  happened  to  you  to  have  done  a  mischief  to  yourselves 
which  you  could  not  undo  ?  Then  you  may  realise  that  you  may  seek  some  good 
and  be  unable  to  attain.  We  know  what  it  is  that  hinders  God  from  hearing  us 
always ;  because  we  are  not  thoroughly  one  in  His  Son  Christ  Jesus.  The  very 
feeling  of  coldness  and  unwillingness  to  pray,  because  we  have  often  prayed  in 
vain,  is  surely  working  in  us  that  perfect  death  which  is  the  full  truth  of  the  words 
of  the  text.  {Thomas  Arnold,  D.D.)  The  misery  of  late  repentance  after  axcicked 
life : — I.  Theke  is  a  time  when  wicked  men  will  be  ovektaken  with  those 
misehies   that  no  warning  would  serve  them  to  prevent  by  repentance  and 

REFORMATION.       II.    ThEY  WILL    BE    ONE    DAY    SENSIBLE    OF    THEIR    OWN  FOLLY,  AND    CRT 

UNTO  God  for  mercy  and  deliverance.  III.  But  God  will  not  then  regard  their 
REPENTANCE,  NOR  BE  MOVED  BY  THEIR  PRAYERS.  For  Understanding — 1.  Lay  down 
three  things.  (1)  All  sorts  of  calamities  are  meant  by  the  wise  man,  which  are 
either  the  natural  effects  of  sin  or  other  punishments  of  sin  inflicted  by  the  Divine 
justice,  and  that  either  in  this  world  or  in  the  world  to  come.  (2)  This  proposition 
is  not  to  be  understood  as  if  all  wicked  men  were  at  last  reduced  to  extreme  misery 
in  this  life.  All  that  need  be  said  is  this,  either  that  they  do  often  suffer  those 
punishments  in  this  life  which  their  wicked  doings  naturally  produce,  or  that  the 
justice  of  God  doth  other  ways  overtake  them  in  punishments  that  show  the  finger 
of  God  and  a  more  immediate  hand  of  providence.  (3)  If  any  go  on  in  these 
practices  upon  which  nature  itself  and  God's  curse  besides  have  seemed  to  sentence 
miseries  in  this  life,  if  some  of  them  should  happen  to  escape  here,  and  live  out 
their  days  without  any  great  misfortune  befalling  them  at  last,  yet  there  is  a  day 
coming  when  they  shall  not  escape.  One  day  they  will  smart  for  it.  Under 
proposition  II.,  understand  that  it  is  not  to  be  understood  universally  as  if  every  man 
reduced  to  extreme  misery  would  infallibly  apply  himself  to  God  for  mercy,  for  we 
know  there  have  been  examples  to  the  contrary,  e.g.,  Ahab.  This  seeking  God'g 
favour  does  frequently  happen,  but  even  they  who  do  so  are  unhappy  in  their  lata 

4 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I, 

repentance,  especially  those  that  have  had  the  most  warnings  and  convictions,  but 
would  not  be  reclaimed.  Under  proposition  III.,  show  that  this  is  the  most  awakening 
consideration  of  all,  and  hath  the  greatest  force  to  make  an  effectual  impression  of 
the  two  former  upon  our  minds.  But  this  point  requires  careful  interpretation,  and 
a  precise  distinction  between  the  miseries  that  an  obstinate  course  of  sin  produces 
in  this  life  and  those  punishments  it  will  bring  in  another  life.  1.  How  useless 
the  prayers  and  repentance  of  wicked  men  will  be  as  to  the  recovery  of  their 
happiness  in  this  life  !  They  are  usually  unprofitable  as  to  those  advantages  which 
they  have  lost  by  their  obstinate  and,  till  now,  incurable  folly ;  such  as  health, 
plenty,  and  good  name.  And  they  will  not  procure  them  that  comfort  from  the 
principles  of  religion  which  relieves  good  men  under  their  adversities.  2.  How 
unprofitable  their  importunity  in  seeking  the  mercy  of  God  will  be  as  to  their  escape 
in  the  day  of  judgment !  For  them  who  repent  not  till  their  turn  comes  in  the 
other  world,  it  will  turn  to  no  account  for  them ;  they  must  hear  the  irreversible 
sentence,  and  suffer  the  unavoidable  effect  of  it  for  ever.  And  all  this  implies  no 
want  of  goodness  in  God.  {W.  Clagett,  D.D.)  Counsel  rejected  :— Better  stop 
now.  Some  years  ago,  near  Princeton,  New  Jersey,  some  young  men  were  skating 
on  a  pond  around  an  "air-hole,"  and  the  ice  began  to  break  in.  Some  of  them 
stopped  ;  but  a  young  man  said,  "  I  am  not  afraid  !  Give  us  one  round  more !  " 
He  swung  nearly  round,  when  the  ice  broke,  and  not  until  next  day  was  his  lifeless 
body  found.  So  men  go  on  in  sin.  They  are  warned.  They  expect  soon  to  stop. 
But  they  cry,  "Give  us  one  round  more!"  They  start,  but  with  a  wild  crash 
break  through  into  bottomless  perdition.  Do  not  risk  it  any  longer.  Stop  now. 
God  save  us  from  the  foolhardiness  of  the  one  round  more !  I  thank  God  that  I 
have  been  permitted  to  tell  you  which  is  the  right  road  and  which  the  wrong  road. 
You  must  take  one  or  the  other.  I  leave  you  at  the  forks  ;  choose  for  yourselves ! 
{T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 

Ver.  31.  Therefore  shall  they  eat  of  the  fruit  of  their  own  way. — God^s 
method  of  punishment : — It  is  to  let  us  punish  ourselves.  In  this  way  man  is  led 
by  bitter  experience  to  see  his  own  folly  and  God's  wisdom.  When  we  will  not  be 
guided  by  God  He  grants  all  our  wishes  and  desires  to  show  us  how  foolish  and 
miserable  they  are.  When  a  man  is  "  cursed  with  every  granted  prayer  "  he 
learns  by  bitter  experience  that  it  is  possible  to  be  his  own  worst  enemy.  His 
long-indulged  desires  become  tyrannical  tormentors.  The  promises  of  God  are 
conditional.  He  will  give  us  good  things  if  we  will  do  our  part ;  but  not  if  we 
neglect  it,  or  do  the  contrary  to  it.  God  has  given  us  the  dignity  of  freedom, 
which  involves  the  terrible  possibility  of  disobeying  His  commands.  It  is  the  best 
thing  for  the  thoughtless  and  careless  to  be  let  alone  of  God.  Those  who  look  back 
over  their  lives  can  trace  most  of  their  errors  to  the  fact  that  they  have  tried  to  take 
themselves,  so  to  speak,  away  from  the  guidance  of  God.  Within  the  man  who 
delights  in  sin,  and  loves  darkness  rather  than  light,  there  is  a  hell  of  his  own 
making,  from  which  he  cannot  depart  any  more  than  from  himself.  Only  those 
who  are  beyond  reformation,  and  who  have  altogether  decided  for  the  devil,  God  in 
this  way  leaves  alone  to  be  creatures  of  their  own  appetites  and  the  prey  of  their 
sins.  On  others  God  inflicts  sharp  discipline  in  order  to  make  them  like  Himself. 
{E.  J.  Hardy.)  Vain  regrets  : — A  man  in  South  Africa  bought  a  piece  of  land 
for  the  purpose  of  farming  it,  but,  after  a  short  trial,  finding  it  unsuitable  for  that 
purpose,  and  hearing  that  gold  was  found  in  the  neighbourhood,  set  to  work  to  see 
if  he  could  find  any,  but  failed.  Disgusted  with  his  purchase,  he  sold  it  for  what 
it  would  fetch,  getting  what  we  would  call  "  a  mere  song"  for  it.  The  man  who 
bought  it,  having  also  heard  that  there  was  a  likelihood  of  gold  being  found,  lost 
no  time  in  making  a  vigorous  search,  and  was  rewarded  in  finding  both  gold  and 
diamonds,  which  made  him  rich  beyond  his  wildest  dreams.  Some  years  after- 
wards the  former  owner,  who  had  left  the  country,  heard  from  an  old  friend  that 
gold  by  the  ton  and  diamonds  by  hundreds  were  being  taken  from  his  bit  of  land, 
and  it  is  said  that  he  gnashed  his  teeth  with  rage  and  chagrin,  as,  with  his  hands 
clenched  until  the  nails  entered  the  palms,  he  exclaimed,  "  Oh,  what  have  I  lost! 
what  have  I  lost !  "  You  who  have  not  accepted  Christ,  take  care  that  some  day 
when  salvation  is  no  longer  yours  to  take  or  refuse,  you  in  the  bitterness  of 
anguish  can  only  say,  "  Oh,  what  have  I  lost  1  what  have  I  lost !  " 

Ver.  32.  The  prosperity  of  fools  shall  destroy  them. — Prosperity  dangerout  to 
virtue: — By  "fools"  are  here  represented  all  wicked  and  vicious  persons.     The 


CHAP.  I.]  PROVERBS.  35 

misery  of  such  persons  is,  that  when  God  gives  them  what  they  most  love,  they 
perish  in  the  embraces  of  it.     The  reasons  for  this  are  three.     I.  Because  evert 

FOOLISH  OR  VICIOUS  PERSON  IS  EITHER  IGNORANT  OR  REGARDLESS  OF  THE  PROPER  ENDS 
AND  USES  FOR  WHICH  GoD  DESIGNS  THE  PROSPERITY   OF    THOSE    TO    WHOil    He    SENDS    IT. 

Which  ends  are — 1.  To  try  and  discover  what  is  in  a  man.  2.  To  encourage  men 
in  a  constant,  humble  expression  of  their  gratitude  to  the  bounty  of  their  Maker, 
who  deals  forth  such  rich  and  plentiful  provisions  to  His  undeserving  creatures. 
3.  To  make  them  helpful  in  society.  No  man  holds  the  abundance  of  wealth  as  a 
proprietor.     II.  Because  prosperity  (as  the  nature  of  man  now  stands)  has  a 

PECULIAR    FORCE    AND    FITNESS     TO    ABATE    MEN's    VIRTUES    AND    TO     HEIGHTEN    THEIR 

corruptions.  1.  For  its  abating  their  virtues.  Virtue  is  such  a  plant  as  grows 
upon  no  groujad  save  that  which  is  tilled  and  cultivated  with  the  severest  labour. 
But  what  a  stranger  is  toil  and  labour  to  a  great  fortune  !  2.  For  heightening  and 
inflaming  men's  corruptions.  Nothing  more  effectually  betrays  the  heart  into  a 
love  of  sin  and  a  loathing  of  holiness  than  an  ill-managed  prosperity.  The  vices 
which  particularly  receive  improvement  by  prosperity  are — 1.  Pride.  2.  Luxury 
and  uncleanness.  3.  Profaneness  and  neglect  of  God  in  the  duties  of  religion. 
Those  who  lie  soft  and  warm  in  a  rich  estate  seldom  come  to  heat  themselves  at 
the  altar.  III.  Because  prosperity  directly  indisposes  men  to  the  proper 
MEANS  OF  their  AMENDMENT  AND  RECOVERY.  1.  It  renders  them  utterly  averse  to 
receiving  counsel  and  admonition.  2.  It  unfits  for  the  sharp  trials  of  adversity 
which  God  uses  to  correct  and  reduce  the  soul.  (1)  He  either  faints  and  desponds 
and  parts  with  his  hope  together  with  his  possessions,  or  (2)  he  will  murmur 
and  blaspheme  the  God  that  afflicts  him.  The  only  way  for  a  man  not  to 
find  prosperity  destructive  is  for  him  not  to  be  a  fool.  This  he  may  avoid  by  a 
pious  observance  of  these  following  rules :  1.  Let  him  consider  on  what  weak 
hinges  his  prosperity  and  felicity  hang.  2.  Let  him  consider  how  little  he  is 
bettered  by  prosperity  as  to  those  perfections  which  are  chiefly  valuable.  3.  Let  a 
man  correct  the  gaieties  and  wanderings  of  his  spirit  by  the  severe  duties  of  morti- 
fication. Since  the  fool  in  his  best — that  is,  in  his  most  prosperous  condition — 
stands  tottering  upon  the  very  brink  of  destruction,  we  should  solicit  God,  not  for 
temporal  enjoyment,  but  for  a  heart  that  may  fit  us  for  it,  if  it  be  God's  will  that 
prosperity  be  our  lot.  {R.  South,  D.D.)  The  danger  of  prosperity  : — The  title 
of  "  fool "  is  the  usual  character  of  the  sinner  in  the  language  of  Wisdom,  in 
opposition  to  prudence.  Prosperity  comprehends  all  things  desired  by  worldly 
men — riches,  honours,  pleasures,  health,  strength,  peace,  plenty,  all  that  is  grateful 
to  the  carnal  mind  and  appetites.  Prosperity  abused  is  fatal  and  destructive  to 
foolish  sinners.  I.  Prosperity  is  destructive  to  the  wicked.  There  is  no 
pestilence  and  contagion  in  the  nature  of  things  that  are  pleasing  to  our  faculties. 
They  are  dangerous,  not  as  made  by  God,  but  as  managed  by  Satan.  The 
primary  design  of  God,  in  His  most  free  and  rich  benefits,  is  to  endear  Himself  to 
us  and  bind  us  to  His  service.  When  the  wicked  abuse  God's  blessings,  defeat  Hia 
kindness,  and  frustrate  the  excellent  ends  of  it.  He  most  righteously  and  severely 
continues  their  prosperity,  that  foments  their  lusts  and  renders  them  more  wilful 
and  incorrigible  and  the  more  guilty  of  their  own  damnation.  Prosperity  is  a  fatal 
ambush  for  their  surprisal  and  ruin.  Prosperity  abused  is  destructive  to  sinners, 
both  meritoriously,  as  it  induces  a  deadly  guilt  and  makes  them  obnoxious  to  the 
revenging  wrath  of  God,  and  effectively,  as  it  is  opposite  to  the  felicity  and  per- 
fection of  man.  1.  Prosperity  is  the  continual  incentive  of  the  vicious  affections. 
2.  Prosperity  occasionally  incenses  an  irascible  appetite.  3.  Prosperity  inclines 
sinners  to  an  impious  neglect  of  God.  4.  Prosperity  exposes  dangerously  to  the 
tempting  power  of  Satan.  5.  Prosperity  is  destructive  to  many,  in  that  it  affords 
them  advantages  to  corrupt  others,  and  reciprocally  exposes  them  to  be  corrupted 
by  others.  6.  Prosperity  usually  renders  the  means  of  grace  ineffectual.  7.  Pros- 
perity renders  men  averse  to  suffering  for  the  sake  of  Christ.  8.  Prosperity 
makes  men  careless  of  evils  that  might  happen.  9.  Prosperity  is  the  great  tempta- 
tion to  delay  repentance  until  the  sinner's  case  is  desperate.  II.  The  folly  of 
prosperous  sinners.  Folly  is  the  cause  of  their  abusing  prosperity  and  the  effect 
of  their  prosperity  abused.  1.  The  perfection  of  man  consists  in  the  excellences 
of  his  spiritual  and  immortal  part.  2.  All  the  prosperity  in  the  world  cannot  bring 
true  satisfaction  to  him  that  enjoys  it,  for  it  is  disproportionate  to  the  spiritual  and 
immortal  nature  of  the  soul.  The  folly  of  the  sinner  is  a  voluntarily  chosen 
folly,  a  culpable  and  guilty  folly ;  the  most  ignominious  folly,  the  most  woful  folly. 
III.  The    justice,    certainty,    and    heaviness    of    the     judgment     coming    on 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  i. 

BiNNERS  WHO  ABUSE  THEIR  PROSPERTTT.  Justicc,  for  their  destruction  is  the  frnit  of 
their  own  choice.  Certainty,  for  it  is  unchangeably  established  by  the  Divine 
ordination  that  the  pleasures  of  sin  shall  end  in  the  misery  of  obstinate  sinners. 
The  heaviness  will  be  according  to  the  aggravation  of  their  sin.  Temporal 
prosperity  is,  therefore,  no  special  sign  of  God's  favour.  {William  Batet,  D.D.) 
The  /ooVs  prosperity : — I.  These  words  describe  the  ungodly.  1.  By  their 
present  way  of  sin.  2.  By  their  future  state  of  misery.  II.  They  describe  the 
SIN  OF  THE  UNGODLY.  1.  By  the  occasioH.  2.  By  the  act.  3.  By  the  habit.  Pros- 
perity and  ease  is  the  occasion  ;  turning  away  from  God  and  rejecting  His  counsel 
is  the  act ;  and  folly  or  simplicity  is  part  of  the  habit.  III.  They  describe  the 
GODLY.  1.  By  their  obedience.  They  hearken.  2.  By  their  privilege  or  reward. 
They  be  quiet  from  fear  of  evil.  (1)  It  is  so  that  "  the  prosperity  of  fools  destroyeth 
them."  (2)  How  folly  and  prosperity  concur  to  their  destruction.  By  the  pleasing 
of  their  sensitive  appetite  and  fancy,  and  so  overcoming  the  power  of  reason.  The  mora 
amiable  the  world  appears,  the  more  strongly  it  doth  allure  the  soul  to  love  it. 
Hereby  it  taketh  the  soul  off  from  God.  The  very  noise  and  bustle  of  earthly 
things  divert  their  minds  and  hinder  them  from  being  serious.  The  sense  of 
present  ease  and  sweetness  doth  make  them  forget  the  change  that  is  near.  Pride 
lifts  them  up,  so  that  God  abhors  them,  and  prosperity  engages  them  in  opposition 
to  the  word  and  ways  and  servants  of  the  Lord.  (3)  The  uses  to  make  of  the  text. 
Do  not  grudge  at  the  prosperity  of  ungodly  men.  Do  not  desire  riches  or  prosperity. 
Honour  those  that  are  great  and  godly,  rich  and  religious.  Let  great  men  have  a 
double  interest  in  your  prayers.  (R.  Baxter.)  Self-slayers  : — Suppose  an  iceberg 
possessed  an  intelligence  and  conscience  ;  suppose  it  should. say  while  dwelling  in 
the  polar  region,  "  It  is  because  of  the  sun  that  I  am  an  iceberg,"  what  would  you 
answer?  You  would  say,  "It  is  not  because  of  the  sun,  but  because  of  your 
attitude  towards  the  sun."  Go  down  and  place  yourself  beneath  its  melting  rays, 
permit  yourself  to  be  enfolded  in  the  arms  of  the  Gulf  Stream,  and  you  will  soon 
cease  to  be  an  iceberg,  and  become  a  part  of  the  warm  and  gentle  waters  which 
enfold  you.  Or  suppose  we  take  this  same  truth  in  the  realm  of  physical  law. 
Many  a  Hindoo  has  stood  for  years  with  a  napkin  bound  about  his  eyes  that  he 
might  not  see  the  sun,  and  when  the  cloth  has  been  removed  and  he  has  sought  to 
look  upon  that  sun,  he  could  not  see.  Behold,  he  had  become  blinded.  Was  it  not 
he  who  had  bUnded  himself  ?  And  yet,  was  it  not  also  true  that  working  through 
the  natural  law  God  had  blinded  him  ?  There  is  a  man  sweeping  toward  Niagara, 
and  I,  standing  on  the  shore,  cry  out,  "Pull  for  the  shore;  the  rapids  are  just 
below  you,  and  you  wiU  go  over  the  falls  "  ;  but  he  simply  says  to  me,  "  God  is  too 
good  to  permit  me  to  go  over  the  falls  "  ;  and  I  cry  again  and  he  heeds  not.  But 
presently  I  see  him  grasp  the  oars.  Alas,  it  is  too  late.  Sweeping,  whirling, 
plunging,  his  boat,  like  a  cockle-shell,  dashes  over  the  cataract,  and  he  is  gone. 
Now  we  may  say  that  the  God  who  made  water  run  down  hill  slew  that  man,  but  is 
the  responsibility  with  Him  ?  No.  The  man  who  knew  that  law  and  refused  to 
recognise  it  slew  himself.  Well,  men  realise  this  in  relation  to  their  own  physical 
organisation,  because  they  realise  that  they  have  a  physical  constitution  ;  but  they 
do  not  realise  that  they  have  just  as  truly  a  moral  constitution ;  that  the  laws  of 
the  one  are  as  inevitable  as  the  other ;  that  in  reference  to  the  soul  it  is  as  true  as 
of  the  body;  "the  soul  that  sinneth  'against  the  law  of  its  being'  shall  die." 
(G.  T.  Doivling,  D.D.)  Whoso  hearkeneth  unto  Me  shall  dwell  safely. — 
Quiet  from  the  fear  of  evil : — The  secret  of  a  quiet  life  has  been  the  great  quest  of 
man.  The  Confucian,  the  Buddhist,  the  Pythagorean  have  busied  themselves  with 
it,  as  well  as  Solomon.  It  was  the  motive  of  the  mightiest  movement  of  mediaeval 
Christendom.  Simeon  on  his  pillar,  Bernard  in  his  cell,  Francis  in  his  rags,  were 
all  occupied  with  it;  and  in  these  restless,  stormy,  anxious  times  it  is  the  question 
of  questions  still.  I.  The  fear  of  evil  is  the  element  of  it  with  which  man  has 
most  directly  to  do.  Man  is  a  being  "  looking  before  and  after."  Apprehension 
and  memory  furnish  together  pretty  well  the  whole  of  our  bitter  experience  in  life. 
The  fear  of  evil  is  not  an  animal,  it  is  strictly  a  human  experience ;  part  of  the 
endowment  of  our  race.  II.  It  is  precisely  this  fear  of  evil  which,  by  God's 
help,  we  are  to  conquer  ;  the  evil  itself  is  wholly  beyond  our  power. 
Calamity  haunts  the  evil  air  of  an  evil  world,  and  man  catches  the  infection.  He 
lives  fearfully,  and  faces  death  fearfully,  till  he  has  learnt  the  Divine  secret. 
III.  How  18  THE  power  TO  BE  WON?  1.  By  realising  how  purely  independent  of 
things  is  man's  peace  and  happiness.  2.  By  taking  a  true  measure  of  the  range  of 
our  being  and  its  resources.     3.  By  perfect  filial  trust  in  God.     We  want  a  heart. 


mur.  n.]  PROVERBS.  57 

an  arm  to  rest  on.  The  only  perfect  rest  is  in  God.  This  sense  of  the  Divine  love, 
the  clasp  of  the  everlasting  arms,  is  exquisite  and  blessed  rest.  {Baldwin  Brown, 
B.A.)  The  blessedness  of  hearkening  to  the  voice  of  heavenly  wisdom: — To 
hearken  means  not  only  to  hear,  but  to  hear  with  attention,  so  as  to  follow  the 
advice  given  (Jas.  i.  25) ;  or,  as  the  Saviour  says  (John  x.  27).  Such  hear,  not  to 
forget,  but  to  treasure  up  in  their  memories,  that  they  may  reduce  to  practice  what 
they  hear  :  such  hear,  not  to  cavil  and  find  fault,  but  that  they  may  profit  by  the 
instruction  they  receive.  Now,  this  attention  is  assuredly  the  work  of  the  Spirit  on 
the  heart,  as  we  read  of  Lydia  (Acts  xvi.  14).  And  hence  it  behoves  all,  when  hear- 
ing God's  Word,  to  lift  up  their  hearts  to  Him,  that  it  may  be  with  profit  to  their 
souls.  And  what  are  the  promises  made  to  such  hearers?  Safe  dwelling  and 
quietness  from  fear  of  evil.  The  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  operating  on  the 
heart,  brings  solid  and  lasting  peace.  The  first  of  these  promises  is  beautifully 
illustrated  by  our  blessed  Lord  Himself  at  the  close  of  His  sermon  on  the  mount 
(Matt.  vii.  24-27).  The  man  who  hears  Christian  instruction,  and  who  satisfies 
himself  with  Ustening  and  approving,  but  goes  no  further,  never  casts  away  his 
sins,  or  really  lays  hold  on  Christ,  may  flatter  himself  that  all  is  right  with  his 
Boul,  because  he  has  feelings  and  convictions  and  desires  of  a  spiritual  nature  ;  but 
such  a  man's  religion  will  break  down  entirely  under  the  first  flood  of  tribulation, 
and  fail  him  completely  when  his  need  is  the  sorest,  whereas  the  man  who  hears 
Christian  instruction,  and  practises  what  he  hears,  upon  such  a  man  the  floods  of 
sickness,  sorrow,  poverty,  disappointments,  bereavements  may  beat,  but  his  soul  is 
unmoved,  his  faith  does  not  give  way,  his  comforts  do  not  forsake  him.  Not  only, 
however,  is  safety  promised  to  him  who  hearkeneth  to  the  voice  of  heavenly 
wisdom,  but  such  an  assurance  of  it  as  shall  remove  every  distressing  fear.  Not 
only  quietness  from  evil,  but  from  the  fear  of  it.  Men  in  general  suffer  much  more 
from  fear  of  evils  which  they  expect  may  come  upon  them  than  from  those  which 
they  actually  have  to  undergo  ;  but  God  "  keeps  him  in  perfect  peace  whose  mind 
is  stayed  on  Him."  A  wicked  man  is  terrified  with  imagined  danger ;  a  godly  man 
is  not  afraid  even  when  the  danger  is  real ;  for  the  one  has  a  witness  for  him  in  his 
own  breast,  whereas  the  other  carries  within  a  witness  against  himself ;  and  this 
witness  is  a  judge  to  condemn  him,  yea,  an  executioner  to  torment  and  vex  him. 
To  be  freed  from  the  fear  of  evil  is,  in  truth,  the  perfection  of  a  spiritual  state ;  and 
a  great  part  of  the  saint's  portion  both  on  earth  and  in  heaven  lies  in  the  deliver- 
ance and  security  from  it.  But  it  may  be  asked.  To  whom  are  these  gracious 
promises  made  ?  They  are  made  to  all :  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  old  and 
young.  The  term  used  is  as  large  as  any  can  desire  :  "  Whoso  hearkeneth."  Let 
them  only  listen  to  Christ's  invitation  in  the  gospel,  and  render  obedience  to  His 
oommajids,  and  the  promised  blessings  shall  be  vouchsafed  to  them.    (T.  Grantham.) 


CHAPTER  II. 

VsB.  1-5.  Bo  tluit  thou  incline  thine  ear  onto  wladom. — Wisdom :— This  is 
constantly  connected  with  religion.  A  religious  fear  of  God  is  the  first  step  in 
true  wisdom.  He  who  would  know  Gbd  aright  must  love  Wisdom  and  humbly  and 
vigorously  seek  after  her.  Wisdassjl-ipoken  of  as  a  virtue,  as  much^as  Jruthf nl- 
ness  or  charity  or  sobriety.  It  is  identified  with  goodness.  There  is  a  real,  true 
6easg"m  which  wisdom  may  be  put  for  religion:  thje.ilQdiifiarmg.raan- is  the  wise 
man  ;  without  the  fear  of  God  it  is  impossible  to  call  any  man  truly  wise.  Taking 
lEe  lowest  view  of  things,  only  a  selfish  view,  looking  only  at  what  is  to  be  gained, 
the  religious  man  is  a  wise  man.  If  the  good  man  proves  to  have  been  wrong,  he 
loses  nothing  in  the  end,  for  he  has  had  his  own  happiness  here — peace  of  mind, 
a  quiet  conscience,  and  good  prospects  for  the  future.  To  take  a  higher  view  of  the 
subject.  The  religious  man  is  concerned  with  far  grander  and  more  exalted  things 
than  any  other  man.  The  principal  attribute  of  a  wise,  discerning  man  is  to  be 
able  to  see  things  as  they  really  are,  to  pierce  through  outside  appearances  and  get 
at  the  heart  of  things,  and  not  be  cheated  by  sham  outsides.  To  do  this  is  a  sign 
of  wisdom.  The  religion  of  Jesus  Christ  treats  of  such  mighty  concerns  that  it  is 
impossible  to  give  the  name  of  wise  to  him  who  thinks  lightly  of  it.  Wisdom  is 
'something  which  must  be  laboured  for  ;  it  is  not  to  be  sought  merely  for  amuse- 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  n. 

ment,  but  the  search  is  to  be  the  very  business  of  man's  life.  {H.  Goodwin,  M.A.) 
The  endeavour  to  obtain  true  wisdom : — The  wise  man  is  now  come  to  the  top  of 
the  ladder  which  doth  bring  us  to  true  wisdom.  The  lowest  step  was  a  docile  heart 
(ver.  1).  The  next,  human  instruction  (ver.  2).  The  next  above  that,  prayer  to 
God  (ver.  3).  The  last,  study  and  painful  endeavour  through  God's  blessing  to 
obtain  it  (ver.  4).  We  must  not  lie  in  a  ditch  and  cry,  "  God,  help  !  "  We  must 
not  so  trust  to  our  prayers  that  we  give  over  our  endeavours.     I.  Heavenlt  wisdom 

IS  OF  GKEAT  PRICE.       II.  HeAVENLI  WISDOM  18  FAB  EEMOTE  AND  HIDDEN  FEOM  US.       It  iS 

beyond  our  invention  and  beyond  our  apprehension.     III.  We  must  search  for 

THE  means  of  OBTAINING  HEAVENLT  WISDOM.       IV.    We    MUST  USE    THE  MEANS  WHEN  WK 

FIND  THEM.     (Fraucis  Taylor.)         The  true  wisdom : — I.    The  nature  of   true 
laaoL-i  vi      \ WISDOM.     It  is  different  from  what  the  world  calls  wisdom.     Its  nature  is  different ; 
-  [its  object  and  end  are  different.     It  is  such  a  knowledge  as  is  connected  with  the 

'j  u'iiV^  Wear  of  God  and  obedience  to  His  will.  Worldly  wisdom  may  be  of  use  in  directing 
s  in  those  things  which  concern  the  present  life,  but  spiritual  wisdom  will  direct 
s  in  those  things  which  concern  the  life  to  come.     II.  The  means  which  are  to  be 

_  SED  fob  obtaining  wisdom.      III.    If    the   means  are  used,   success  WILL   CERTAINLY 

follow.  Worldly  wisdom  is  too  often  connected  with  pride ;  spiritual  wisdom  is 
always  accompanied  by  humility.  IV.  The  source  to  which  we  must  evee  ascribe 
THAT  success.  God  and  God  alone  is  the  author  of  it.  The  teaching  of  this  passage 
may  be  summed  up  thus — 1.  There  is  a  wisdom  which  man  does  not  naturally 
possess,  yet  without  which  no  man  can  be  happy.  2.  This  wisdom  consists  not  in 
the  depths  of  science  and  learning,  but  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  3.  This  wisdom 
is  the  gift  of  God.  4.  It  may  be  obtained  by  every  one  who  desires  it  and  diligently 
seeks  for  it  in  the  way  which  God  has  appointed.  {J.  S.  Pratt,  B.G.L.)  Rules 
for  the  attainment  of  wisdom  : — I.  There  must  be  an  active,  practical  habit  op 
ATTENTION.  Earthly  wisdom  is  gained  by  study ;  heavenly  wisdom  by  prayer. 
Prayer  puts  the  heart  under  a  heavenly  tutorage.  II.  Prater  must  not  stand  in 
THE  STEAD  OF  DILIGENCE.  Let  it  rather  give  energy  to  it.  The  miner's  indefatigable 
pains,  his  invincible  resolution,  his  untiring  perseverance.  The  rule  of  success  is : 
Dig  up  and  down  the  field,  and  if  the  search  be  discouraging,  dig  again.  The 
patient  industry  of  perusal  and  reperusal  will  open  the  embosomed  treasure.  The 
habit  of  living  in  the  element  of  Scripture  is  invaluable.  Yet  this  profit  can  only 
be  fully  reaped  in  retirement.  To  search  the  Scriptures  we  must  be  alone  with 
God.  This  enriching  study  gives  a  purer  vein  of  sound  judgment.  All  funda- 
mental errors  and  heresies  in  the  Church  may  be  traced  to  partial  and  disjointed 
statements  of  truth.  Truth  separated  from  truth  becomes  error.  But  the  mind 
prayerfully  occupied  in  search  of  Divine  truth—"  crying  and  lifting  up  the  voice  " — • 
will  never  fail  to  discern  the  two  great  principles  of  godliness,  the  "  fear  and  know- 
ledge of  God."  There  is  no  peradventure  nor  disappointment  in  this  search.  Never 
has  apostasy  from  the  faith  been  connected  with  a  prayerful  and  diligent  study  of 

(the  Word  of  God.  (C.  Bridges.)  The  inq^iirjj  after  Divine  truth: — I.  Jt  must 
BE  CANDID — SINCERE.  It  is  Said  of  "  fools  "  that  they  "  despise  wisdom  and  instruc- 
tion." But  the  children  of  Wisdom  "receive"  her  words.  They  give  them 
what  they  are  entitled  to,  a  serious  and  deliberate  attention.  They  listen,  they 
remember,  they  meditate,  they  examine,  they  accept,  they  lay  up  for  use.  If  yoa 
feel  the  value  of  your  privilege  in  having  the  Word  of  God  in  your  possession,  you 
will  attend  to  the  instructions  and  counsels,  the  admonitions,  the  encouragements, 
the  commands  which  in  the  Bible  are  set  before  you.  There  are  some  who  refuse 
to  hear  at  all.  This  is  unreasonable,  uncandid,  unmanly,  and  most  infatuated. 
There  are  some  who  only  seem  to  hear ;  the  spirit  of  assentation  has  in  it  no  sin- 
cerity, no  heart.  When  there  is  sincerity  of  heart  you  will  "hide  with  you"  the 
Divine  counsels  and  commands;  hide  the  contents  of  the  Word  in  the  memory,  in 
the  understanding,  in  the  conscience,  in  the  heart  _  11^  It  must  be  earnest.  An 
inquiry  determined  on  gratification,  and  that  spares  no  pains  oh^  its  attainment. 
Divine  Wisdom  is  in  earnest  in  imparting  her  instructions,  and  the  pupil  should  be 
in  earnest  in  seeking  her  instructions.  He  who  is  sensible  of  his  inability  to  guide 
himself  in  the  perplexing  paths  of  life  will  be  all  solicitude  for  a  conductor,  a 
Divine  guide  who  may  bring  him  into  the  right  way  and  keep  him  in  it.  III.  With 
earnestness  must  be  united  istpORTUNATE  PERSEVERANCE.  This  is  implied  in  the 
variety  of  expressions  used  in  succession  to  each  otBeT.  Men  discover  the  value 
they  set  on  the  treasures  of  this  world  by  their  unrelaxing  diligence  in  seeking 
them.  They  do  not  give  up  the  search  immediately  because  they  do  not  imme- 
diately succeed.     Divine  knowledge  is  fitly  compared  to  treasure.     The  comparison 


CHAT,  n.]  PROVERBS.  39 

is  natural  and  common.  But  how  few  even  of  the  people  of  God  who  profess  to 
have  learned  the  value  of  this  wisdom  and  knowledge  by  a  happy  experience  dis- 
cover the  longing,  the  vehement  and  persevering  research,  for  the  attainment  of  a 
larger  and  larger  amount  of  it  which  might  be  expected  of  them  !  There  is  no  way 
in  which  the  Word  can  "  be  "  in  us  richly  without  an  eager  seeking  after  it,  or 
"  dwell "  in  us  richly  without  a  careful  and  jealous  keeping  of  it.  There  are 
powerful  spiritual  inducements  presented.  "  Then  thou  shalt  understand  the  fear 
of  the  Lord,"  cfec.  By  these  terms  true  religion  is  expressed.  Knowledge  of  God 
is  the  first  lesson  of  heavenly  wisdom.  On  the  right  apprehension  of  this  lesson  all 
the  rest  necessarily  depends — 

"  You  cannot  be  right  in  the  rest 
Unless  you  think  rightly  of  Him." 

Wrong  views  of  God  wiU  vitiate  every  other  department  of  your  knowledge.  The 
"  fear  of  the  Lord,"  founded  in  the  knowledge  of  Him,  is  something  to  the  right 
understanding  of  which  experience  is  indispensable.  IV.  The  soukcb  fbom  which 
TBUB  WISDOM  IS  TO  BE  OBTAINED.  "  The  Lord  givcth  wisdom."  Li  two  ways — by  His 
Word  and  by  His  Spirit.  These  two  are  really  one,  tor  wod  neither  gives  wisdom 
by  His  Word  without  His  Spirit  nor  by  His  Spirit  without  His  Word.  The  word 
rendered  "  sound  wisdom  "  is  one  of  general  import,  signifying  anything  real,  solid, 
substantial.  God  has  stores  of  wisdom  laid  up  for  present  use  ;  He  will  ever  give 
larger  and  clearer  manifestations  of  Himself,  of  His  truths,  of  His  ways,  and  of 
His  will  out  of  His  inexhaustible  stores,  and  there  is  also  a  treasure  of  invaluable 
wisdom  and  knowledge  in  reserve  for  His  people  in  a  future  and  better  world. 
Another  promise  is  safety.  "  A  buckler  to  them  that  walk  uprightly."  Jehovah  is 
security  amidst  all  the  assaults  of  the  enemies  of  the  upright,  and  especially  amidst 
"  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked  one,"  which,  when  the  shield  of  Jehovah's  power  is 
interposed,  cannot  touch  him,  but  fall,  quenched  and  pointless,  to  the  ground, 
{R.  Wardlaiv,  D.D.)  The  promises  of  Wisdom  : — Man  must  listen  to  Wisdom  if 
he  would  be  wise ;  his  attitude  must  be  one  of  attention ;  he  must  turn  his  ear 
towards  the  heavens  and  listen  for  every  whisper  that  may  proceed  from  the  skies, 
and  whilst  his  ear  is  listening  his  heart  must  be  applied  with  unbroken  attention  to 
understanding.  Everything  depends  upon  our  spirit  as  to  the  results  of  our  study 
in  the  school  of  Wisdom.  The  "  crying  after  knowledge  and  lifting  up  the  voice  for 
understanding  "  are  equivalent  to  an  exercise  in  prayer.  There  must  also  be  activity 
or  energy  of  the  intensest  quality.  Seeking  as  for  silver  is  an  allusion  to  mining. 
The  remains  of  copper  mines  have  been  discovered  in  the  peninsula  of  Sinai  and 
the  remains  of  gold  mines  in  one  part  of  the  desert  of  Egypt.  Wisdom  does  not 
lie  on  the  surface.  It  is  to  be  dug  for.  Searching  as  for  hid  treasure  reminds  of 
the  insecurity  of  property  in  the  East  and  its  frequent  burial.  God  has  purposely 
hidden  both  wisdom  and  understanding  in  order  that  the  energy  of  man  might  be 
developed  in  searching  for  them.  Wisdom  is  hidden  in  ancient  books ;  in  the 
experience  of  the  whole  world  ;  in  all  difficult  places  ;  and  is  to  be  sought  for  with 
perseverance  and  zeal ;  the  very  act  of  searching  being  accompanied  by  a  blessing. 
The  Lord  alone  can  give  wisdom.  He  is  the  one  fountain  of  wisdom.  Elsewhere 
are  partial  revelations,  broken  experiences,  hints  of  meaning,  temporary  satis- 
factions, but  until  we  have  discovered  the  Lord,  and  set  Him  always  before  us,  we 
shall  be  working  without  a  centre.  True  religion  comes  before  true  philosophy. 
Righteousness  of  character  is  necessary  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  treasures  of  sound 
wisdom.  By  "  sound  wisdom  "  we  are  to  understand  furtherance  or  advancement. 
God  is  evermore  on  the  side  of  those  who  are  righteous  or  upright  or  holy.  Wisdom 
enters  into  the  heart,  and  thus  keeps  the  whole  life  pure.  Knowledge  is  not  merely 
an  acquisition,  it  becomes  a  real  pleasure  to  the  soul,  and  not  until  it  has  become 
such  a  pleasure  are  we  really  in  possession  of  it.  Discretion  and  understanding  are 
represented  as  the  keepers  of  the  soul — its  protectors  and  guides — saving  the  soul 
from  the  way  of  the  evil  man,  and  protecting  it  from  the  man  who  delights  in 
froward  things,  literally,  in  the  misrepresentation  and  distortion  of  the  truth. 
{J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Spiritual  excellence  : — I.  Spieitual  excellence  described. 
It  is  "the  fear  of  the  Lord"  and  the  "knowledge  of  God."  Godliness  has  to  do 
with  both  the  intellect  and  the  heart.  It  is  knowledge  and  fear.  In  true  spiritual 
excellence  there  is  a  blending  of  reverent  love  and  theologic  light — such  a  blending 
that  both  become  one ;  the  love  is  light  and  the  light  is  love.  This  is  not  the 
means    to    heaven,    it    is    heaven  —  in    all    times,    circumstances,    and    worlds 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n 

11.  Spikitoal  excellence  attained.  1.  By  the  reception  of  Divine  truth.  The 
receptive  faculty  must  be  employed.  2.  By  the  retention  of  Divine  truth.  What 
we  receive  from  the  Divine  mind  we  must  hold  fast.  3.  By  the  search  after 
Divine  truth.  The  ear  must  be  turned  away  from  the  sounds  of  earthly  pleasure, 
the  din  of  worldliness,  and  the  voices  of  human  speculation,  and  must  listen  atten- 
tively to  communications  from  the  spiritual  and  eternal.  4.  The  search  must  be 
earnest  and  persevering.  By  bo  much  as  spiritual  excellence  is  more  valuable  than 
all  worldly  treasures  should  be  our  ardent,  unwearied  diligence  in  quest  of  it. 
(D.  Thomas,  D.B.) 

Ver.  3.  Yea,  if  thou  criest  after  knowledge. — All  knowledge  is  good  .-—No  kind  of 
knowledge  is  to  be  despised.  The  bee  gathers  honey  from  every  flower.  What 
shore  so  bleak,  what  moor  so  barren,  what  rocks  so  naked  from  which  we  may  not 
carry  home  some  interesting  object,  in  the  shape  of  plant  or  mineral?  So  there 
are  no  circumstances  in  which  we  are  placed,  or  persons,  the  humblest,  with  whom 
we  can  associate,  without  learning  something  we  did  not  know  before ;  something  of 
value  which,  while  interesting,  may  not  one  day  prove  useful,  an  example  of  the 
familiar  proverb,  "Keep  a  thing  for  seven  years,  and  you  will  find  the  use  of  it." 

*"  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  Earnest  seeking  for  virtues  : — A  man  has  lost  a  title-deed,  or 
some  paper  that  would  decide  a  suit  in  his  favour  rather  than  against  him.  And  with 
what  alacrity  does  he  search  for  it !  How  does  he  go  through  the  house  in  quest 
of  it !  "  My  dear,  have  you  seen  that  roll  of  paper  with  a  great  red  seal  on  it?  " 
"  What  was  it  ?  A  newspaper  ?  "  "  No,  no  !  not  a  newspaper.  I  shall  lose  a  suit 
if  I  cannot  find  it."  And  she  searches  in  every  drawer  and  every  trunk,  and  every 
closet,  and  even  under  the  carpets.  Both  of  them  search  night  and  day,  going 
over  the  same  place  twenty  times,  saying,  "Maybe  I  did  not  look  thoroughly." 
And  they  cannot  give  it  up.  The  man  almost  cries,  he  wants  it  so  much.  He  will 
have  it,  so  much  depends  upon  it.      And  at  last  he  finds  it,  and  he  says,   "I 

^  would  rather  have  had  my  house  burned  than  not  to  have  found  this  paper." 
Now,  when  men  search  for  victorious  virtues  in  their  souls  as  they  would  search 
for  an  important  legal  document,  do  you  suppose  they  wiU  be  saying,  "  Perhaps 
others  may  be  able  to  live  a  good  Christian  life,  but  I  cannot "  ?  You  can.  And 
when  you  want  true  religion,  when  your  soul  hungers  for  it,  you  will  find  it.  {H. 
W.  Beecher.) 

Ver.  4.  Seekest  her  as  silver. — Search  for  hid  treasures : — Even  in  Job,  the 
oldest  book  in  the  world,  we  read  that  the  bitter  in  soul  dig  for  death  more  earnestly 
than  for  hid  treasures  (Job  iii.  21).  There  is  not  another  comparison  within  the 
whole  compass  of  human  actions  so  vivid  as  this.  I  have  heard  of  diggers  actually 
fainting  when  they  have  come  even  upon  a  single  coin.  They  become  positively 
frantic,  digging  all  night  with  desperate  earnestness,  and  continue  to  work  till 
utterly  exhausted.  There  are,  at  this  hour,  hundreds  of  persons  thus  engaged  all 
over  the  country.  Not  a  few  spend  their  last  farthing  in  these  ruinous  efforts.  I 
heard  a  respectable  man  in  Sidon  declare  that  if  he  had  been  one  of  those  fortunate 
diggers  in  the  garden  he  would  have  killed  all  the  rest  and  fled  with  the  treasure 
out  of  the  country.  These  operations  are  carried  on  with  the  utmost  secrecy, 
accompanied  with  charms  and  incantations  against  the  jan  and  other  spirits  which 
are  said  to  keep  guard  over  hid  treasures.  The  belief  in  the  existence  of  these 
guards,  and  of  their  dangerous  character,  is  just  as  prevalent  now  as  in  the  time  of 
the  Thousand  Nights.  Intelligent  and  respectable  people  have  assured  me  that 
they  have  come  upon  slabs  of  stone,  closing  up  doors  to  secret  chambers,  which  no 
power  on  earth  could  remove,  because  the  proper  password  or  charm  is  lost. 
Others  soberly  assert  that  they  have  been  driven  away  by  terrible  jan,  who 
threatened  them  with  instant  death  if  they  attempted  to  force  the  doors.  The 
secret  deposits  are  always  found  by  accident.  (W.  M.  Thomson,  D.D.)  The  great 
life-quest : — Wisdom,  or  the  intellectual  adoption  of  good  and  pious  principles,  and 
the  practical  application  of  such  principles  to  the  ordering  of  life  and  conduct  and 
relations,  is  personified.  The  writer  has  dealt  with  Wisdom's  call  to  the  young, 
and  with  her  warning  to  the  negligent ;  now  he  presents  her  instructions  to  those 
■who  show  a  disposition  to  give  heed  to  her.  She  addresses  those  who  take  a 
serious  view  of  life.  Life  is,  for  every  man,  full  of  sublime  possibilities.  There 
must  be  some  great  life-quest,  something  that  we  should  live  to  seek,  some- 
thiag  that  we  may  hope  to  win.  I.  What  does  it  seem  to  be  ?  It  is  called 
"knowledge,"   "understanding,"   "wisdom."      The  desire    to  know   was    never 


CHAP,  n.]  PROVERBS.  41 

more  absorbing.  The  pursuit  of  knowledge  never  seemed  more  encouraging. 
Facilities  for  the  search  never  so  abounded.  Eewards  for  those  who  attain 
never  were  so  rich.  And  yet  the  grave  mysteries  of  life  never  so  thickened  and 
darkened  round  the  human  spirit  as  they  do  to-day.  The  pursuit  of  knowledge 
can  never  stop  with  things,  it  must  concern  itself  with  moral  questions.  Since  the 
time  of  Bacon  there  has  grown  up  an  extravagant  demand  for  the  sense-verifica- 
tion of  everything.  Man's  supreme  question  is :  •'  Good,  what  is  it  ?  Where  is  it  ? 
How  can  it  be  attained  ?  "  Appeal :  You  would  know  as  books  can  teach ;  as 
science-leaders  can  teach ;  as  experiertee  can  teach.  But  none  of  them,  nor  all 
together,  will  ever  satisfy  you.  You  must  know  as  God,  and  God  alone,  can  teach 
you.  n.  What  doks  it  pbove  to  be  ?  The  knowledge  and  fear  of  God.  If  a  man's 
quest  be  sincere  and  thoroughly  earnest,  it  leads  to  that ;  it  cannot  rest  short  of 
that.  1.  A  life-quest  may  not  be  carried  far  enough.  It  may  stop  at  what  only 
seems  to  be.  2.  A  life-quest  may  be  turned  aside.  *'  Ye  did  run  well,  who  did 
hinder  you  ? "  Young  souls  may  be  attracted  aside  by  worldly  pleasure ;  driven 
aside  by  worldly  cares  ;  or  cast  aside  by  false  teachings.  "  Then  shall  ye  know,  if 
ye  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord."  When  you  have  found  what  is  the  chief  good  for 
the  sons  of  men,  follow  it  on,  through  riches,  learning,  pleasure,  still  unresting, 
ever  unresting,  until  the  soul  is  led  to  the  feet  of  Jesus,  and  finds  in  Him  the 
true  knowledge  and  the  true  fear  of  God.  {Weekly  Pulpit.)  Seek,  and  ye  thall 
Jind  : — The  matter  of  this  whole  passage  consists  in  a  command  to  seek  and  a 
promise  to  bestow.  A  father  speaks,  and  he  speaks  to  children.  He  demands  a 
reasonable  service,  and  promises  a  rich  reward.  In  the  fourfold  repetition  of  the 
command  there  seems  an  order  of  succession.  I.  "  Keceive  my  wobds."  Practical 
instruction  begins  here.  The  basis  of  all  religion  and  morality  is  the  Word  of  the 
Lord,  taken  into  the  understanding  and  the  heart.  The  Word  of  God  is  a  vital 
seed,  but  it  will  not  germinate  unless  it  be  hidden  in  a  softened,  receptive  heart. 
The  place  and  use  of  providential  visitation  in  the  Divine  administration  of 
Christ's  kingdom  is  to  break  up  the  way  of  the  Word  through  the  incrusta- 
tions of  worldliness  and  vanity  that  encase  a  human  heart,  and  keep  the  Word 
lying  hard  and  dry  upon  the  surface.  H.  "  Incline  thine  eab."  The  entrance 
of  the  Word  has  an  immediate  effect  on  the  attitude  of  the  mind  and  the 
source  of  the  life.  The  incoming  of  the  Word  makes  the  ear  incline  to 
wisdom ;  and  the  inclining  of  the  ear  to  wisdom  lets  in  and  lays  up  greater 
treasures  of  the  Word.  Those  who  hide  the  Word  in  their  hearts  acquire  a 
habitual  bent  of  mind  toward  things  spiritual.  The  great  obstacle  to  the  power 
and  spread  of  the  gospel  lies  in  the  averted  attitude  of  human  hearts.  A  man 
inclines  his  ear  to  those  sounds  which  already  his  heart  desires.  To  turn  the  ear 
to  the  word  of  wisdom  by  an  exercise  of  will,  is  the  very  way  to  innoculate  the 
heart  with  a  love  to  that  word  passing  the  love  of  earthly  things.  The  ear  inclined 
to  Divine  wisdom  will  draw  the  heart;  the  heart  drawn  will  incline  the  ear. 
III.  "  Cry  after  knowledge."  This  represents  the  bent  heavenward  of  the  heart 
at  a  more  advanced  stage.  The  longing  for  God's  salvation,  already  begotten  in  the 
heart,  bursts  forth  now  into  an  irrepressible  cry.  Men  may  be  offended  with  the 
fervour  of  an  earnest  soul,  God  never.  Compression  will  only  increase  the 
strength  of  the  emotion  struggling  within.  IV.  "  Seek  heb  as  silver."  Another 
and  a  higher  step.  The  last  was  the  earnest  cry ;  this  is  the  persevering  endeavour. 
Fervent  prayer  must  be  tested  by  persevering  pains.  "Strive  to  enter  in."  The 
search  of  wisdom  is  compared  to  another  search  with  which  we  are  more  familiar. 
The  zeal  of  mammon's  worshippers  rebukes  the  servants  of  the  living  God.  We 
are  invited  to  take  a  leaf  from  the  book  of  the  fortune-seeker.  Will  not  the  far- 
reaching  plans,  and  heroic  sacrifices,  and  long-enduring  toil  of  Californian  and 
Australian  gold-diggers  rise  up  and  condemn  us  who  have  tasted  and  known  the 
grace  of  God  ?  Two  things  are  required  in  our  search — the  right  direction  and  the 
sufficient  impulse.  Those  who  seek  thus  shall  not  seek  in  vain.  None  fail  who 
seek  according  to  the  prescription  of  the  Word,  and  after  the  example  of  the  world. 
{W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  Meditation  in  searching  : — Solomon,  speaking  of  knowledge  and 
understanding,  bids  us  to  "  search  for  her  as  for  hidden  treasure."  You  know 
jewels  do  not  he  up6nthe"gartBCe  of  the  ground,  but  they  are  hid  in  the  receptacles 
of  the  earth;  you  must  dig  for  them  before  you  can  enjoy  them.  Truth  is  in  pro- 
funda, and  our  understandings  are  dark.  He  that  rides  post  through  a  country  is 
never  able  to  make  a  full  description  of  it ;  and  he  that  takes  but  a  transitory  view 
of  the  truths  of  the  gospel  will  never  come  to  the  full  knowledge  of  them.  'Tis 
meditation  makes  them  appear  to  our  eye  in  their  beauty  and  lustre.   {H.  G.  Salter.) 


43  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

A  penetrating  search : — Some  years  ago  the  scientific  world  was  startled  by  the 
announcement  that  far  down  in  the  abyss  of  waters,  below  the  seeming  limits  of 
life  and  light,  a  new  world  of  animal  organisms  had  existence.  Fish  and  mullusc, 
sponge  and  coral  were  there,  though  man  had  vainly  imagined  no  living  creature 
could  be  found.  He  had  not  dredged  deep  enough.  A  longer  line  brought  new 
wonders  to  light.  And  so  with  the  Scriptures.  They  can  never  be  exhausted.  It  is 
we  who  fail  to  search,  and  searching,  never  find.     {W.  H.  Groser.) 

Ver.  5.  Find  the  knowledge  of  God. — The  benefits  of  religion : — Eeligion,  whether 
natural  or  revealed,  has  always  the  same  beneficial  influence  on  the  mind.  In 
youth,  in  health  and  prosperity,  it  awakens  feelings  of  gratitude  and  sublime  love, 
and  purifies  at  the  same  time  that  which  it  exalts  ;  but  it  is  in  misfortune,  in 
sickness,  in  age,  that  its  effects  are  more  truly  and  beneficially  felt ;  when  sub- 
mission is  cherished  in  faith  and  humble  trust  in  the  Divine  will,  when  duties 
become  pleasures,  undecaying  sources  of  consolation,  then  it  creates  powers  which 
were  believed  to  be  extinct,  and  gives  a  freshness  to  the  mind  which  was  supposed 
to  have  passed  away  for  ever,  but  which  is  now  renovated  as  an  immortal  hope. 
Its  influence  outlives  all  earthly  enjoyments,  and  becomes  stronger  as  the  organs 
decay  and  the  frame  dissolves;  it  appears  as  that  evening  star  of  light  in  the 
horizon  of  life  which  we  are  sure  is  to  become,  in  another  season,  a  morning  star, 
and  to  throw  its  radiance  through  the  gloom  and  shadow  of  death.  {Sir  Humphrey 
Davey.)  Knowledge  of  God  the  result  of  revelation  : — I  do  not  look  to  the  Bible 
to  teach  me  what  I  or  my  successors  may  some  day  find  out  by  the  use  of  observa- 
tions and  the  inductive  faculties  ;  I  go  to  the  Bible  to  learn  what  I  cannot  find  out 
for  myself.  Apart  from  revelation,  what  do  I  know  about  the  world  to  come,  about 
anything  but  what  I  can  touch,  taste,  and  handle  ?  What  hope  have  I  for  the 
future  if  I  look  only  to  nature  ?  Nature  tells  me  that  when  I  die  I  shall  probably 
be  just  like  the  dog,  or  horse,  or  any  other  animal.  "All  immortal,  none  immortal," 
she  seems  to  say.  Therefore  I  must  get  light  from  revelation.  I  must  even  look 
to  revelation  for  the  motives  which  influence  conduct,  for  personally  I  am  not 
satisfied  with  these  systems  of  ethics  that  are  founded  on  utiUtarian  motives.  I 
do  not  see  how  I  can  be  said  to  have  knowledge  of  God  unless  He  in  some  way 
reveal  Himself  to  me.     (Prof.  Bonney.) 

Ver.  6.  For  the  Lord  giveth  wisdom. — The  fountain  of  wisdom : — I.  That  God 
IS  THE  ONLY  FOUNTAIN  OF  ALL  TKUE  WISDOM.  Men  Say  that  the  Deity  is  not  the 
only  source  of  it,  but  that  much  of  it  may  be  attained  by  a  converse  with  beings 
most  opposite  to  Him,  even  with  wicked  and  reprobate  spirits.  Such  were  the 
oracles  and  gods  of  the  Gentiles,  which  the  wisest  men  among  them,  not  excepting 
Socrates  himself,  consulted,  to  learn  of  them  how  to  set  about  and  manage  their 
most  weighty  affairs.  Their  mistake  arises  from  their  confounding  the  notions 
of  wisdom  and  of  craft.  A  wise  man  cannot  maintain  his  character  without  doing 
always  that  which  is  just  and  right.  Nobody  shall  ever  be  able  to  persuade  him 
that  an  ill  thing  can  be  a  real  benefit,  or  the  part  of  a  wise  man  or  a  true  friend. 
A  cunning  and  crafty  man  lays  this  down  to  himself  for  a  general  rule,  that  by 
all  means  whatsoever  he  must  gain  his  point,  and  come  at  the  end  which  he 
aims  at.  In  his  pursuit  of  it  he  will  proceed  in  the  path  of  righteousness  if  that 
leads  him  most  directly  and  easily  to  it.  But  when  truth  is  on  the  opposite  side 
he  first  bespatters  it  with  all  imaginable  defamations,  and  then  strikes  at  it 
furiously  in  the  disguise  in  which  he  has  put  it.  The  difference  between  the  wise 
and  cunning  man  is  this  :  the  wise  man  studies  to  be  thoroughly  and  substantially 
good ;  the  cunning  man  contents  himself  with  the  shadow  and  appearance  of 
goodness.  And  this  confirms  the  conclusion  that  God  alone  is  the  fountain  of  all 
true  wisdom.      II.   The  only   wxy  to  draw  wisdom  out  of  this  fountain   is  by 

STUDYING   AND    PBACTISING     THE    SACRED    ORACLES    OF    GOD.         1.     HoW    doeS   it    appear 

that  the  books  which  are  called  the  Word  of  God  contain  the  precepts  of  sound 
wisdom  ?  How  can  those  books  which  are  styled  the  Divine  Word  contain  such 
wise  directions  as  lead  men  to  happiness  ?  It  is  in  the  power  of  every  man  to  be 
happy  who  governs  himself  by  the  directions  of  the  Word  of  God,  because  that 
teaches  him  to  possess  his  soul  in  patience,  trusting  in  God,  whose  command  he 
obeys,  that  He  will  lead  him  in  the  right  way.  2.  Does  not  this  Word  of  God 
enjoin  men  in  certain  cases  to  suffer  things  very  grievous  to  flesh  and  blood  ?  It 
does,  and  yet  these  proverbs  of  Solomon,  which  seldom  can^  our  views  beyond  this 
life  do  vehemently  inculcate  upon  us  a  strict  adherence  to  the  rules  of  piety  and 


CHAP,  n.]  PROVERBS.  43 

virtue,  as  what  will  most  effectually  conduce  to  our  present  welfare,  let  the  chances 
and  accidents  of  our  condition  be  what  they  will.  The  sacred  maxims  are  most 
beneficial,  both  for  public  government  and  private  life,  without  respect  had  to 
anything  hereafter.  Let  us  take  the  royal  preacher's  word  for  it,  that  this  science 
of  Divine  wisdom  requires  very  intense  and  serious  application  of  mind  thoroughly 
to  apprehend  it.  (IT'.  Reading,  M.A.)  Religion  and  the  cultivation  of  the  fn- 
telh'ct : — It  is  a  serious  evil  if  the  best  trained  minds  of  the  community  are  either 
hostile  or  indifferent  to  the  claims  of  God.  Students  are  placed  in  peculiar  peril 
in  respect  of  religion.  There  is  a  prevalent  notion  amongst  half-educated  people 
that  the  highest  culture  of  the  mind  tends  to  the  destruction  of  the  religious  spirit. 
There  is  now  an  antagonism  between  the  school  which  prides  itself  upon  its 
rationalism  and  the  school  which  is  equally  entrenched  in  its  strong  faith.  The 
habits  of  student  life  are  not  altogether  helpful  to  the  preservation  of  religious 
character.  The  studies,  companions,  work,  and  recreation,  often  operate  injuriously 
upon  the  spiritual  tone  of  men.  Many,  in  the  course  of  their  study,  have  lost  their 
faith.  I.  Eeligion  in  relation  to  the  ends  of  study.  There  are  specific  subjects 
of  study  bearing  direct  relation  to  a  man's  life-work.  But  the  real  object  of  study 
is  to  discipline  the  powers  and  to  strengthen  the  mind.  Study  which  is  intended 
to  increase  knowledge  and  to  gather  facts  begins  when  student  life  ceases.  The 
best  student  is  the  man  who  "  is  "  most,  not  the  man  who  has  learned  moat.  The 
highest  ideal  of  study  must  be  that  which  secures,  or  at  least  aims  at  securing, 
thoroughness  of  discipline  and  wholeness  of  view.  Perfection,  as  the  harmonious 
and  free  working  of  all  parts  and  powers  of  the  mind,  must  be  the  goal  to  which 
the  student  tends.  To  learn  everything  is  not  given  to  man,  but  to  be  his  best  sell 
in  everything  which  he  can  be,  this  is  his  privilege.  It  is  here  that  the  subject  of 
religion  comes  to  be  considered  by  the  student.  The  nature  which  he  possesses  is 
distinctly  religious.  If  a  man  does  not  attend  to  that  faculty  whereby  he  regards 
God,  he  neglects  that  part  of  himself  which  is  most  important  and  influential.  No 
man  can  afford  to  pass  lightly  by  the  claims  upon  him  which  are  put  forth  by 
religion.  The  religious  nature  must  be  disciplined  and  cultured  if  we  are  to  lay 
claim  to  wholeness  of  being.  See  the  influence  which  religion  has  exerted  upon 
our  human  life  and  history.  Eliminate  religion  from  the  story  of  the  world  and 
what  is  left  ?  Critics  charge  religion  with  being  a  hindrance  to  human  progress. 
But  this  is  the  common  logical  fallacy  of  putting  the  universal  in  place  of  the 
particular.  Certain  forms  of  religious  polity  may  have  done  so,  but  not  religion. 
Eeligion  has,  more  than  aught  else,  aided  man  in  his  long  and  weary  pilgrimage  of 
progress.  Eeligion  cannot  be  easily  set  aside  by  those  who  are  engaged  in  the 
cultivation  of  the  mind.  All  men  are  dealing  with  religious  topics.  The  most 
striking  instance  is  to  be  found  in  the  modern  teachers  of  science.  Scarcely  a 
single  man  of  science  of  any  repute  but  deals  with  these  all-absorbing  points  of 
human  thought,  and  indeed  cannot  help  himself.   Eeligion  is  human,    II.  Eeligion 

AS    AN    INFLUENCE    OF   DEEP    AND   FAR-REACHINO    POWER.       The    Student    CanUOt    do    his 

work  as  a  common  man.  Intellectual  cultivation  is,  as  a  rule,  associated  with 
moral  refinement.  The  destruction  of  entire  nature  may  be  seen  among  students. 
This  is  generally  preceded  by  neglect  of  the  religious  side  of  their  nature — faith 
undermined  either  by  the  operations  of  intellectual  doubt,  or  else  still  more  seriously 
assailed  by  the  numbing  influences  of  sinful  habits,  but  all  proceeding  in  the  first 
instance  from  the  neglect  of  practical  religion,  the  duties  of  prayer,  and  communion 
with  the  Unseen.  1.  Eeligion  renders  the  student  reverent.  Nothing  is  so  unsuit- 
able to  the  man  who  desires  a  cultivated  mind  as  arrogance  and  self-esteem.  All 
wisdom  is  humble.  Eeverence  has  been  the  mark  of  the  profound  and  patient 
investigators  of  nature  in  all  ages.  Eehgion  and  its  duties  produce  reverence. 
2.  Eeligion  secures  inward  harmony  of  the  powers.  Man  cannot  gain  intellectual 
vigour  when  his  whole  being  is  torn  asunder  by  conflicting  forces.  Outward 
physical  quietness  is  the  necessary  condition  of  study.  Inward  spiritual  peace  is 
as  necessary.  Eeligion  will  give  this.  Coming  into  proper  relation  to  God,  we 
find  everything  else  in  its  place.  To  return  to  God  is  to  return  to  the  balance  of 
our  life.  The  religious  life  is  only  sustained  by  the  knowledge  of  Him  who  is  the 
express  image  of  the  Father,  and  the  shining  ray  of  the  central  light  of  God. 
Christ's  religion  is  the  religion  of  intelligence.  (Llewelyn  D.  Bevan,  DJD.)  The 
Lord  giveth  wisdom  : — I.  As  to  the  excellency  of  Scripture  wisdom  ;  that  surely 
may  be  accounted  such  which  enlightens  the  understanding  with  the  noblest  and 
most  blessed  truth,  and  directs  the  will  to  the  choice  of  the  greatest  good.  And 
these  being  truths  concerning  the  first,  and  best,  and  most  excellent  of  Beings,  ara 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  n. 

best  suited  to  enlighten  and  improve,  to  raise  and  enlarge,  the  understanding  of  a 
reasonable  creature  ;  and  being  truths  which  have  the  fullest  and  clearest  evidence 
as  declared  by  God  Himself,  the  God  of  truth,  are  best  suited  to  satisfy  a  mind 
desirous  of  true  knowledge.  II.  How,  and  to  what  mannek  op  persons,  this 
WISDOM  or  God  is  given.  1.  Now,  the  manner  in  which  God  gives  us  this  wisdom 
is  by  His  Holy  Spirit,  the  Enlightener  and  Sanctifier  of  the  Church,  by  an  outward 
and  inward  teaching.  (1)  Outwardly  He  teaches  us  by  giving  a  rule  of  faith  and 
practice  in  things  pertaining  to  God  for  the  salvation  of  our  souls.  God  also 
instructs  us  outwardly  by  the  ministry  of  His  Church,  and  the  example  of  holy 
men  and  women.  (2)  But  these  outward  instructions  and  motives  not  being  able 
of  themselves  to  inspire  us  with  religious  wisdom,  God  is  graciously  pleased  to 
teach  us  inwardly,  also,  by  His  Holy  Spirit.  2.  It  remains  to  be  inquired  to  whom 
Gt)d  giveth  this  heavenly  wisdom.  (1)  To  the  humble  attendant  upon  His  Word. 
(2)  To  the  true  believer  of  His  Word.  (3)  To  the  sincere  practiser  of  His  Word. 
A  good  life  is  the  best  key  to  Scripture.     (T.  Tamson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  7.  He  layeth  up  sound  wisdom  for  the  righteous. — Oood  men  and  their 

God  : — I.  The  character  of  good  men.  1.  They  are  spoken  of  as  the  "  righteous." 
The  moral  code  of  the  universe  may  be  reduced  to  two  words  :  "  Be  just."  Be  just  to 
yourselves,  to  others,  and  to  God.  Virtue,  morality,  and  religion  constitute  a 
righteous  man.  2.  They  are  spoken  of  as  "  walking  uprightly."  Goodness  in  all 
moral  creatures  is  not  stationary,  but  progressive.  3.  They  are  spoken  of  as 
"saints."  They  are  consecrated  to  God's  service,  set  apart  to  His  use;  they  are  the 
living  and  imperishable  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     II.  The  God  of  good  men. 

1.  His  relation  to  creation  generally.  He  is  the  great  original,  central,  exhaustless 
fountain  of  intelligence.  The  "Father  of  lights" — the  light  of  instinct,  reason, 
genius,  conscience.  Wherever  there  is  a  ray  of  truth,  a  beam  of  intelligence,  a 
gleam  of  virtue,  there  is  God,  and  in  them  He  should  be  recognised  and  worshipped. 

2.  His  relation  to  the  good  in  particular.  He  makes  special  provision  for  them. 
He  provides  for  their  instruction.  He  is  their  buckler,  their  shield,  and  their 
enemies  must  strike  through  Him  to  injure  them.  He  superintends  their  career. 
He  vouchsafes  their  ultimate  perfection.  (David  Thomas,  D.D.)  Importance  of 
vrisdom : — Not  more  necessary  are  constant  supplies  of  water  to  the  growth  of 
vegetation  in  the  sultry  regions  of  the  East  than  the  influence  of  Divine  truth  to 
the  existence  of  human  happiness.  If  a  tree,  planted  by  the  margin  of  a  refreshing 
river,  is  proof  against  the  heat  of  the  sun  or  the  unfavourableness  of  the  seasons, 
he  also  who,  into  a  well-prepared  heart,  receives  continual  infusions  of  religious 
wisdom,  is  flourishing  and  happy  amidst  all  the  inconveniences  of  life.  (Bp. 
Jebb. )  A  buckler  to  them  that  walk  uprightly. — God  the  safeguard  of  wisdom : — 
We  are  ill  keepers  of  our  own  goodness  and  wisdom.  God  therefore  is  pleased  to 
lay  it  up  for  us,  and  that  it  may  be  safe,  Himself  is  the  buckler  and  safeguard  of  it. 
But  it  must  be  sound  and  real  wisdom  and  goodness,  or  else  He  careth  not  for  it. 
The  word  translated  "sound  wisdom"  signifieth  essence  or  being  ;  but  it  is  used 
also  to  signify  virtue,  wisdom,  and  the  law  of  God,  because  other  things  pass  away, 
but  they  have  a  durable  being — they  make  the  well-being  of  man,  they  support  the 
being  of  all  things  that  are.  As  a  buckler  taketh  the  blows  on  itself  which  are 
directed  to  another,  so  God  taketh  the  wrongs  done  to  the  righteous  as  done  to  Him- 
self, and  so  doth  receive  them,  as  that  He  taketh  away  the  hurt  from  His  servants. 
The  buckler  also  shows  that  they  who  will  live  uprightly  must  strive  and  fight. 
Let  every  one  resist  the  enemy  valiantly,  for  he  that  resisteth  shall  have  an 
unwearied  helper,  and  triumphing  shall  not  want  a  bountiful  rewarder.  God  will 
defend  and  preserve  those  that  walk  uprightly  from  falling  into  errors  in  seek- 
ing for  wisdom.  It  is  from  God,  by  fearing  Him,  that  wisdom  is  obtained,  and 
that  wisdom  so  obtained  is  alone  sound  wisdom.  The  paths  of  judgment  Gk>d  will 
keep  for  Himself,  the  ways  of  holiness  He  will  preserve  for  His  saints ;  and  He 
preserving  the  ways  of  holiness,  the  ways  will  preserve  them  that  walk  in  them. 
The  words  may,  however,  mean.  He  will  so  keep  judgment  that  He  will  preserve 
mercy ;  He  will  so  preserve  mercy  that  He  will  keep  judgment.  The  ways  cross 
not  so  much  in  themselves  but  that  they  can  meet  in  Him.  Note  that  they  are  but 
paths,  narrow  paths  of  judgment,  which  the  Lord  keepeth,  but  it  is  a  broad  way  of 
mercy  which  He  preserveth.  The  force  of  ver.  8  is  that  God,  who  is  Himself  exact 
righteousness,  guideth  His  servants  in  the  ways  of  righteousness.  The  word 
"  understanding  "  may  seem  to  be  derived  from  standing,  according  as  the  Greek 
word  also  hath  its  derivation.      Clemens  Alexandrinus  giveth  the  reason  of  the 


CBiP.SL]  PROVERBS. 


deriration,  because  nnderstanding  doth  staj  and  settle  the  mind,  which,  befors 
being  unresolved,  was  carried  hither  and  thither.  But  though  this  be  true  of  a 
natural  understanding,  jet  a  spiritual  understanding  doth  rather  consist  in  walking 
the  paths  that  lead  from  earthlj  things  to  heavenlj.  To  understand  righteousness 
IB  from  a  civil  righteousness  to  walk  to  a  religious  righteousness.    {M,  Jermin.) 

Ver.  11.  Discretion  shall  preserre  thee. — Humility  : — This  is  the  first  sought 
and  last  won  of  the  Christian  graces.  Such  are  the  difSoulties  in  the  acquisition  of 
humility  that  it  is  but  seldom  really  found.  It  is  a  common  want  of  the  present 
day.  See  the  ordinary  courtesy  of  modem  society.  See  the  special  snare  in 
intellectual  careers.  In  both  of  these  provinces  of  life  especial  discouragement  has 
been    given   during  the   recent  period   to  the  growth   in   us   of    true  humility. 

1.  Abj£Ctn£ss  is  kot  humiliiy.  Depression,  abasement,  humiliation,  by  no 
means  exhaust  all  the  commutation  of  this  well-known  Christian  term.  Abjectness 
and  humility  may  have  some  features  in  common.  But  humility  presupposes  a 
soaring  spirit.  The  calm  dignity  of  Christian  holiness  must  rest  behind.  This 
lovely  grace  assists  and  furthers  genuine  aspirations.  Our  Lord  made  three 
contributions  to  the  science  of  ethics,  and  each  of  them  bore  the  impress  of  the 
Cross — humility,  faith,  love.  These,  at  least.  He  lifted  into  places  of  high  impor- 
tance. Our  Lord  places  humility  in  the  very  front  of  His  teaching.  See  sermona 
on  the  mount  and  on  the  plain.  There  ia  nothing  vain  or  false  in  humility. 
"  Humility  is  the  hall-mark  of  wisdom."  11.  The  beginnings  of  humtutt  must  bb 
BUDS  IN  CABEFUL  SBLT-RKPRESsioN.  We  are  SO  much  bound  up  with  ourselves  that 
we  cannot  come  to  a  just  and  fair  estimate  of  our  own  affairs  without  rejecting  a 
vast  amount  of  the  suggestions  and  insinuations  that  we  make  to  ourselves.  Self- 
abnegation  may,  in  becoming  habitual,  cast  off  all  consciousness.  Repentance 
must  begin  with  humiliation.  There  can  be  no  contrition  without  humility.  The 
difficulty  is  to  get  this  feeling  the  permanent  posture  of  the  soul.  Here  we  must 
depend  upon  the  action  of  conscience.  The  following  are  some  of  the  provinces  in 
which  we  have  to  exercise  self -repression.  1.  Good-fortune,  successes,  advance- 
ment, commendation,  praise,  bring  a  too  satisfied  sense  of   our  own  exaltation. 

2.  Success  is  said  to  try  humility,  misfortune  to  produce  it.  "  We  can  hardly 
learn  humility  and  tenderness  enough  except  by  suffering."  3.  Think  of  the  wrath, 
quarrels,  and  resentments  which  arise  from  nervous  anxiety  about  ourselves  and 
our  position.  Bishop  Wilson  says,  "  He  that  is  truly  humble  never  thinks  himself 
wronged."  4.  Humility  often  seems  persistently  to  fly  away  from  the  intellectual 
life.  ni.  Humility  bequirbs  us  to  fix  oub  attentions  upon  people  and  things 
OUTSIDE  OF  ourselves.  This  includes  a  steady  posture  of  reverence.  The  reverent 
life  confers  grace  and  refinement  upon  our  characters.  It  constitutes  the  inextin- 
guishable charm  of  religion.  In  the  practice  of  the  reverent  life  we  have  the 
conscious  cultivation  of  humility.  We  move  out  of  self-contemplation  and  self- 
pleasing  into  the  higher  region  of  sacrifice,  and  into  the  dignity  of  giving,  in  offering 
homage  to  the  Almighty  God,  and  in  according  attention  to  other  people. 
IV.  Humility  is  regulated  by,  our  deportment  towards  truth.  True  humility 
is  marked  by  a  simplicity  of  mind  from  which  self  is  banished.  Disorderly 
introspection  is  morbid  and  unwholesome.  But  humility  is  difficult  to  attain.  It 
is  scarcely  possible  until  the  character  is  thoroughly  settled  to  avoid  an  amount  of 
self -consciousness  which  is  inconsistent  with  real  humility.  There  is  indeed  much 
intellectual  as  well  as  moral  weakness  that  stands  in  the  way  of  acquiring  humility. 
Besides  the  want  of  the  power  of  concentration,  there  is  generally  a  lack  of 
imagination.  See  illustration  in  our  Lord's  life  of  humility  with  aspiration  in  it. 
1.  The  lofty  aspirations  and  the  soaring  aims  of  our  Lord  were  never  laid  aside  by 
Him,  but  they  were  kept  in  the  background.  2.  With  what  consistency  did  He 
repress  Himself,  and  how  thoroughly  His  teaching  coincided  with  His  example  ! 

3.  He  showed  reverence  towards  all.      His  respect  for  men  is  most  touching. 

4.  What  self-sacrifice  and  neglect  of  self  are  visible  throughout  His  career  I  No 
labour  is  ever  too  much  for  Him.  He  was  always  ready  at  the  caU  of  duty.  Does 
the  way  of  humility  still  seem  hard  ?  There,  on  that  hill  outside  Jerusalem,  at  the 
foot  of  that  Cross  which  is  set  up  towards  heaven,  drawing  all  men  unto  it,  we  may 
come  to  learn  what  we  can  learn  nowhere  else — how  to  lower  our  pride,  and  to 
foster  humility  in  our  souls.  {Edward  Miller,  M.A.)  The  negative  beneficial 
influence  of  religion  : — There  is  an  important  distinction  between  the  understanding 
of  the  meaning  of  Divine  discoveries  and  the  perception  of  their  excellence  and 
truth.     Knowledge  in  Scripture,  with  which  salvation  is  connected,  includes  the 


46  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

latter.  The  knowledge  of  anything  means  the  knowledge  of  its  real  and  distinctive 
properties.  The  apostle  speaks  of  "spiritual  discernment."  "Discretion"  and 
"  understanding"  in  this  connection  mean  self -jealousy  arising  from  self-knowledge. 
The  knowledge  of  ourselves  includes  the  knowledge,  theoretical  and  experimental, 
of  the  unlimited  deceitfulness  of  our  own  hearts.  And  this,  connected  with  a  right 
knowledge  of  the  sources  of  temptation  as  they  exist  in  such  abundance  and 
variety  around  us,  will  inspire  and  maintain  discretion.  He  will  "  watch  unto 
prayer,"  and  not  merely  trust  to  his  own  discretion.  Diffidence  of  self  and 
confidence  in  God  constitute  the  discretion  of  the  spiritual  man.  The  two  sources 
of  temptation  for  youth  are  wicked  men  and  wicked  women.  The  "evil  man" 
Bpeaketh  froward  things,  i.e.,  words  of  perverse  rebellion,  of  a  spirit  stubborn, 
refractory,  scornful,  self-wiDed.  These  work  seductively  on  youthful  minds  of  a 
particular  temperament ;  especially  on  those  who  have  a  craze  for  independence. 
The  "evil  man's"  ways  are  crooked  ways,  changing  from  purpose  at  wayward 
inclination.  The  "  strange  woman  "  represents  all  seducers  to  immorality  and 
sensual  indulgences,  and  such  have  a  special  influence  on  youth.  (R.  Wanllaw, 
D.D.)         The  youth  asuisted  in  forming  his   religious    sentiments  : — I.  Let   toub 

MIND  BE  IMPRESSED  WITH  THIS  SENTIMENT,  THAT  THERE  IS  SUCH  A  THING  AS  RELIGION  ; 
AND    THAT    IT    IS    OF    SERIOUS    IMPOBTANCB.       II.  ALWAYS    REMEMBER    THAT    RELIGION  IS 

AGREEABLE  TO  THE  NATURE  OF  GoD.  As  it  is  a  scrvicc  which  you  owe  to  Him, 
your  ideas   of   it   must    correspond  with    His  moral  character.     III.  To  judge 

WHAT    RELIGION    IS,     TOU     MUST     ALWAYS    CONSIDER     THAT    IT     IS     A     RATIONAL    THING. 

IV.  Religion  MUST  be  a  work  suited  to  the  nature  and  condition  of  man.     V.  You 

MUST  ALWAYS  REMEMBER  THAT  RELIGION  IS  A  BENEVOLENT  AND  USEFUL  THING  ;  AND 
THAT,  WHEREVER  IT  TAKES  PLACE,  IT  MAKES  MEN  BETTER  THAN  THEY  WERE  BEFORE. 

VI.  Judge  of  things  doubtful  by  things  which  are  plain.     VII.  If  a  matter 

PROPOSED  TO  YOU,  IN  A  WAY  OF  INSTRUCTION  OR  ADVICE,  APPEARS  DOUBTFUL,  SUSPEND 
TOUR   RESOLUTION,    UNTIL    YOU    HAVE     MADE    FURTHER    INQUIRY.        (J.    LathrOp,    D.D.) 

Ver.  12.  To  deliver  thee  from  the  way  of  the  evil  ma.n.— Wickedness  and  wisdcm, 
the  bane  and  the  antidote  : — I.  A  terrible  description  of  wicked  persons.  1.  Their 
character.  Their  speech  is  corrupt.  Their  habit  is  corrupt.  Their  heart  is 
corrupt.  Their  influence  is  corrupt.  2.  Their  peril.  The  spell  of  lust  palsies  the 
grasp  of  her  victims.  Everything  dies  under  the  influence  of  wickedness — self- 
respect,  spiritual  sensibility,  mental  freedom,  the  freshness,  the  vigour,  and  the 
beauty  of  life.  3.  Their  doom.  They  are  rooted  out  from  the  esteem  of  the  good, 
from  the  sphere  of  improvement,  from  the  realm  of  mercy,  and  from  the  domain 
of  hope.  n.  The  antidote.  Wickedness  is  terribly  powerful,  but  wisdom  is 
mightier.  Its  mightiness  in  man,  however,  depends  upon  its  right  reception. 
1.  Wisdom  guards  the  innocent.  The  way  to  keep  out  evil  is  to  fill  the  soul  with 
goodness.  2.  It  delivers  the  fallen.  Heavenly  wisdom  in  the  soul  is  the  only 
soul-redemptive  force.  3.  It  guides  the  redeemed.  Like  the  star  to  the  mariner, 
if  this  wisdom  shine  within  us  it  wiU  guide  us  safely  over  the  voyage  of  life. 
{David  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  inflxience  of  associates  : — The  tree  frog  acquires  the 
colour  of  whatever  it  adheres  to  for  a  short  time.  If  it  be  found  on  the  oak,  it  is  a 
brown  colour ;  on  the  sycamore  or  cedar,  he  is  of  a  whitish  brown  colour ;  but 
when  found  on  the  growing  corn,  he  is  sure  to  be  green.  Just  so  it  is  with  young 
men.  Their  companions  tell  us  what  their  characters  are ;  if  they  associate  with 
the  vulgar,  the  licentious,  and  the  profane,  then  their  hearts  are  already  stained 
with  their  guilt  and  shame,  and  they  will  themselves  become  alike  vicious.  Our 
moral  and  physical  laws  show  how  important  it  is  to  have  proper  associations  of 
every  kind,  especially  in  youth.  How  dangerous  it  is  to  gaze  on  a  picture  or  scene 
that  pollutes  the  imagination  or  blunts  the  moral  perceptions,  or  has  a  tendency  to 
deaden  a  sense  of  our  duty  to  God  and  man  1  (Christian  Treasury.)  From  the 
man  that  speaketh  froward  things. — Froward  : — This  is  a  word  which  occurs  more 
than  once  in  these  verses,  and  which  occurs  frequently  throughout  this  book,  and 
whereof  I  have  not  met  with  an  exactly  defined  signification.  Some  understand 
by  it  peevishness  or  perverseness.  Were  I  to  consult  its  etymology  I  should  rather 
conceive  that  it  was  "  fromward  "  ;  and  so,  impetuous,  headstrong,  acting  on  the 
impulse  of  whatever  feeling  is  uppermost  in  the  mind,  unrestrained  by  calculation  or 
conscience,  and  the  opposite,  therefore,  of  discretion.  In  ver.  12  I  should  render  the 
word  by  "  unfaithful  "  ;  in  ver.  14,  by  "  perverse  "  ;  in  chap.  iii.  32,  by  "  unlawful," 
or  "transgressor  of  the  law."  But  it  is  not  easy  to  gather  the  precise  meaning 
of  the  word  "  froward,"  as  the  original  words  for  it  are  various.    (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.) 


CBi».  n.]  PROVERBS.  47 

Vers.  13.  To  walk  in  the  ways  of  darkness. — Perils  in  the  deep  : — Here  an  arm 
of  the  sea  of  life  is  spread  out  before  us,  and  we  are  led  to  an  eminence  whence  we 
may  behold  its  raging.     We  must,  one  by  one,  go  down  into  these  great  waters. 
We  see  many  of  our  comrades  sinking  beneath  the  surge.    It  is  good  to  count  the 
number,  and  measure  the  height  of  these  ranks  of  raging  waves,  that  we  may  be 
induced  to  hold  faster  by  the  anchor  of  the  soul,  which  is  sure  and  steadfast.     The 
dangers  are  delineated  in  exact  order.     I.  "  The  way  of  evil."    Whether  they  be 
persons  or  principles  the  word  does  not  expressly  say.     The  way  of  the  evil  is  the 
way  which  Satan  trod,  and  by  which  all  his  servants  follow.     II.  "  The  man  that 
SEEAKETH  FROWARD  THINGS."     He  is  One  of  the  forcmost  dangers  to  young  men.     In 
a  workshop,  or  warehouse,  or  circle  of  private  friendship,  one  with  a  foul  tongue  is 
a  serious  mischief-maker.     It  may  be  that  the  froward  things  are  swearings  ;  or 
impurities,  or  infidel  insinuations ;  or  mere  silliness  that  fills  with  vanity,  and  tends 
to  weaken  the  moral  fibre.     Even  when  a  person  does  not  sympathise  with  the  evil, 
and  imitate  it,  his  conscience  gets  a  wound.     It  is  not  good  for  us,  in  an  experi- 
mental way,  thus  to  know  evil.     III.  "  Who  leave  the  paths  of  kighteodsness." 
When  the  imagination  is  polluted,  and  the  tongue  let  loose,  the  feet  cannot  keep  on 
the  path  of  righteousness.     Thinking,  and  hearing,  and  speaking  evil,  will  soon  be 
followed  by  doing  it.    In  all  of  us  are  the  seeds  of  crime,  and  in  many  the  seedlings 
are  growing  apace.     He  who  would  be  kept  from  the  path  of  the  destroyer  must 
crucify  the  flesh,  with  its  affections  and  lusts.     In  the  matter  of  watching  for  one's 
soul  the  true  wisdom  is  to  take  care  of  the  beginnings.     IV.  "  To  walk  in  the  ways 
OF  DARKNESS."    The  doing  of  evil  produces  darkness,  and  darkness  produces  the 
evil-doing.     Indulged  lusts  put  out  the  eyesight  of  the  conscience ;  and  under  the 
darkened  conscience  the  lusts  revel  unchecked.    V.  "  Who  rejoice  to  do  evil."    A 
more  advanced  step  in  guilt.  At  first  the  backslider  is  ashamed  of  his  fall.  He  palliates, 
alleges  the  strength  of  the  temptation,  and  promises  amendment.   As  the  hardening 
progress  goes  on,  he  begins  to  feel  more  easy,  and    comes  to   rejoice    in    evil. 
VI.  Who   "delight  in  the   frowabdness    of    the    wicked."     These    are    more 
abandoned  than  the  wicked  themselves.     To  take  pleasure  in  sin  is  a  characteristic 
of  fallen  humanity ;  to  delight  in  seeing  others  sinning  is  altogether  devilish.     To 
complete  the  picture  of  the  dangers  to  which  the  young  are  exposed,  one  other  peril 
of  the  world's  deep  is  marked  on  the  chart  which  is  mercifully  placed  in  the 
voyager's  hands — it  is  "  the  strange  woman."     The  deceiver  is  so-called.     Marriage 
is  honourable  in  all.     Unlawful  relations  of  the  sexes  mean  wild,  selfish  passions, 
which  will  surely  be  followed  by  visible  marks  of  God's  vengeance.     God's  anger 
wiU  track  lust  through  all  its  secret  doublings.    He  makes  sin  generate  its  own 
punishment.    And  the  woe  of  a  hardened  sensualist  is  a  "  hell "  indeed.    {W. 
Amot,  D.D.) 

Ver.  16.  To  deliver  thee  ftrom  the  atrangre  woman. — Sensual  temptation: — Gaze 
not  on  beauty  too  much,  lest  it  blast  thee  ;  nor  too  long,  lest  it  blind  thee ;  nor  too 
near  lest  it  burn  thee.  If  thou  like  it,  it  deceives  thee ;  if  thou  love  it,  it  disturbs 
thee  ;  if  thou  hunt  after  it,  it  destroys  thee.  If  virtue  accompany  it,  it  is  the  heart's 
paradise  ;  if  vice  associate  it,  it  is  the  fool's  purgatory.  It  is  the  wise  man's  bon- 
fire, and  the  fool's  furnace.  (Quarlef.)  The  enticement  of  women  : — The  deliver- 
ance from  evil  men  was  described  before ;  now  follows  the  deliverance  from  evil 
women,  who  are  as  dangerous  to  the  young  man,  if  not  more,  in  regard  to  their 
crafty  allurements.  Men  present  as  enticement  unlawful  gain  ;  women  offer  un- 
lawful pleasure.  I.  There  is  a  medicine  in  Scripture  fob  evert  disease  of  the 
BOUL.  Here  an  antidote  against  the  poison  of  evil  women.  1.  There  is  a  fence 
against  several  degrees  of  sin.  Against  evil  thoughts;  evil  words,  evil  deeds. 
2.  There  are  many  remedies  for  the  same  sin.  Prohibitions,  examples,  judgments. 
II.  The  danger  from  evil  women  is  great.  Illustrate  Samson  and  Solomon.  As 
good  women  are  modest,  so  bad  women  are  loud  and  bold.  As  good  women  are 
tenderly  affected,  so  wicked  ones  are  most  cruel.  Take  heed  of  being  overcome  by 
smooth  language.  They  will  tell  thee  that  they  love  none  else,  and  will  die  for 
thee,  but  they  love  thy  wealth  and  beauty,  and  will  leave  thee  when  these  fail. 
{Francis  Taylor.)  The  strange  woman  : — Surely  one  cannot  declare  the  whole 
counsel  of  God  and  leave  out  a  subject  which  is  interwoven  with  almost  every 
chapter  in  the  Bible.  I  am  entirely  aware  of  the  delicacy  of  introducing  this 
subject  into  the  pulpit.  1.  One  difficulty  arises  from  the  sensitiveness  of  unaffected 
purity.  2.  Another  difficulty  springs  from  the  nature  of  the  English  language, 
which  has  hardly  been  framed  in  a  school  where  it  may  wind  and  fit  itself  to  aU 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHU.  a. 

tha  phases  of  imparity.  3.  Another  difficulty  lies  in  the  confused  echoes  which 
vile  men  create  in  every  community,  when  the  pulpit  disturbs  them.  4.  Another 
difficulty  exists  in  the  criminal  fastidiousness  of  the  community  upon  this  subject. 
The  proverbs  of  Solomon  are  designed  to  furnish  us  a  series  of  maxims  for  every 
relation  of  life.  There  will  naturally  be  the  most  said  where  there  is  the  most 
needed.  If  the  frequency  of  warning  against  any  sin  measures  the  liability  of  man 
to  that  sin,  then  none  is  worse  than  impurity.  I.  Can  lanottaok  bk  found  which 
CAN  DBAW  A  CORRUPT  BiAUTT  80  VIVIDLY  AS  THIS :  "  Which  f orsaketh  the  guide  of  her 
youth,  and  forgetteth  the  covenant  of  her  God  "  ?  Look  out  upon  that  fallen 
creature  whose  gay  sally  through  the  street  calls  out  the  significant  laugh  of  bad 
men,  the  pity  of  good  men,  and  the  horror  of  the  pure  !  Was  not  her  cradle  as 
pure  as  ever  a  loved  infant  pressed  ?  Love  soothed  its  cries,  sisters  watched  its 
peaceful  sleep,  and  a  mother  pressed  it  fondly  to  her  bosom  !  Had  you  afterwards, 
when  spring-flowers  covered  the  earth,  and  every  gale  was  odour,  and  every  sound 
was  music,  seen  her,  fairer  than  the  lily  or  the  violet,  searching  them,  would  yoa 
not  have  said,  *'  Sooner  shall  the  rose  grow  poisonous  than  she ;  both  may  wither, 
but  neither  corrupt  "  ?  And  how  often,  at  evening,  did  she  clasp  her  tiny  hands  in 
prayer  1  Alas,  she  forsook  the  guide  of  her  youth  I  Faint  thoughts  of  evil,  like  a 
far-off  cloud  which  the  sunset  gilds,  came  first ;  nor  does  the  rosy  sunset  blush 
deeper  along  the  heaven  than  her  cheek  at  the  first  thought  of  evil.  Now,  O 
mother,  and  thou,  guiding  elder  sister,  could  you  have  seen  the  lurking  spirit 
embosomed  in  that  cloud,  a  holy  prayer  might  have  broken  the  spell,  a  tear  have 
washed  its  stain !  Alas  !  they  saw  it  not ;  she  spoke  it  not ;  she  was  forsaking  the 
guide  of  her  youth.  She  thinketh  no  more  of  heaven.  She  breatheth  no  more 
prayers.  Thou  hast  forsaken  the  covenant  of  thy  God.  Go  down  I  fall  never  to 
rise  1  Hell  opens  to  be  thy  home  !  II.  The  next  injunction  or  God  to  thb  toun(1 
IS  UPON  THE  ENSNARING  DANGER  OP  BEAUTY.  "  Dcsirc  not  her  beauty  in  thy  heart, 
neither  let  her  take  thee  with  her  eyelids."  God  did  not  make  so  much  of  nature 
with  exquisite  beauty,  or  put  within  us  a  taste  for  it,  without  object.  He  meant 
that  it  should  delight  us.  He  made  every  flower  to  charm  us.  He  never  made  a 
colour,  nor  graceful  flying-bird,  nor  silvery  insect,  without  meaning  to  please  our 
taste.  When  He  clothes  a  man  or  woman  with  beauty.  He  confers  a  favour,  did 
we  know  how  to  receive  it.  Beauty,  with  amiable  dispositions  and  ripe  intelligence, 
is  more  to  any  woman  than  a  queen's  crown.  As  moths  and  tiny  insects  flutter 
around  the  bright  blaze  which  was  kindled  for  no  harm,  so  the  foolish  young  fall 
down  burned  and  destroyed  by  the  blaze  of  beauty.  If  God  hath  given  thee  beauty, 
tremble  ;  for  it  is  as  gold  in  thy  house :  thieves  and  robbers  will  prowl  around,  and 
seek  to  possess  it.  If  God  hath  put  beauty  before  thine  eyes,  remember  how  many 
strong  men  have  been  cast  down  wounded  by  it.  Art  thou  stronger  than  David  ? 
Let  other  men's  destruction  be  thy  wisdom  ;  for  it  is  hard  to  reap  prudence  upon 
the  field  of  experience.  III.  In  the  minute  description  of  this  dangerous  creature, 
mark  next  how  seriously  we  are  cautioned  of  her  wiles.  1.  Her  wiles  of  dress. 
Coverings  of  tapestry  and  the  fine  linen  of  Egypt  are  hers ;  the  perfumes  of  myrrh, 
and  aloes,  and  cinnamon.  Silks  and  ribbons,  lace  and  rings,  gold  and  equipage ; 
ah,  how  mean  a  price  for  damnation  1  The  wretch  who  would  be  hung  simply  for 
the  sake  of  riding  to  the  gallows  on  a  golden  chariot,  clothed  in  king's  raiment, 
what  a  fool  was  he  !  2.  Her  wiles  of  speech.  Beasts  may  not  speak  ;  this  honour 
is  too  high  for  them.  To  God's  imaged  son  this  prerogative  belongs,  to  utter 
thought  and  feeling  in  articulate  sounds.  We  may  breathe  our  thoughts  to  a 
thousand  ears,  and  infect  a  multitude  with  the  worst  portions  of  our  soul.  How, 
then,  has  this  soul's  breath,  this  echo  of  our  thoughts,  this  only  image  of  our  feel- 
ings, been  perverted,  that  from  the  lips  of  sin  it  hath  more  persuasion  than  from 
the  lips  of  wisdom  ?  Purity  sounds  morose  and  cross  ;  but  from  the  lips  of  the 
harlot  words  drop  as  honey,  and  flow  smoother  than  oil:  her  speech  is  fair,  her 
laugh  is  merry  as  music.  The  eternal  glory  of  purity  has  no  lustre  ;  but  the  deep 
damnation  of  lust  is  made  as  bright  as  the  gate  of  heaven  !  3.  Her  wiles  of  love. 
Love  is  the  mind's  light  and  heat ;  it  is  that  tenuous  air  in  which  aU  other  faculties 
exist  as  we  exist  in  the  atmosphere.  A  mind  of  the  greatest  stature  without  love  is 
like  the  huge  pyramid  of  Egypt — chill  and  cheerless  in  all  its  dark  halls  and 
passages.  A  mind  with  love  is  as  a  king's  palace  lighted  for  a  royal  festival.  Shame 
that  the  sweetest  of  all  the  mind's  attributes  should  be  suborned  to  sin  I  Devil- 
tempter  I  will  thy  poison  never  cease  ?  Shall  beauty  be  poisoned  ?  shall  language 
be  charmed  ?  shall  love  be  made  to  defile  like  pitch,  and  burn  as  the  living  coals? 
Trust  the  sea  with  thy  tiny  boat,  trust  the  fickle  wind,  trust  the  changing  skies  oc 


CSAJ.  n.]  PROVEBBS.  49 

April,  tmst  the  miser's  generosity,  the  tyrant's  mercy ;  bat,  ah !  simple  man,  trust 
not  thyself  near  the  artful  woman,  armed  in  her  beauty,  her  cunning  raiment,  her 
dimpled  smiles.  4.  Next  beware  the  wile  of  her  reasonings.  "  To  him  that  wanteth 
understanding,  she  saith.  Stolen  waters  are  sweet,  and  bread  eaten  in  secret  is 
pleasant.  I  came  forth  to  meet  thee,  and  I  have  found  thee."  What  says  she 
in  the  credulous  ear  of  inexperience  ?  Why,  she  tells  him  that  sin  is  safe  ;  she 
swears  to  him  that  sin  is  pure.  Out  of  history  she  will  entice  him,  and  say,  "  Who 
hath  ever  refused  my  meat-offerings  and  drink-offerings  ?  What  king  have  I  not 
sought  ?  What  conqueror  have  I  not  conquered  ?  Philosophers  have  not,  in  all 
their  wisdom,  learned  to  hate  me.  I  have  been  the  guests  of  the  world's  greatest 
men.  Art  thou  afraid  to  tread  where  Plato  trod,  and  the  pious  Socrates?  Aii  thou 
wiser  than  all  that  ever  lived  ?  "  Nay,  she  readeth  the  Bible  to  him ;  she  goeth 
back  along  the  line  of  history,  and  readeth  of  Abraham,  and  of  his  glorious  com- 
peers ;  she  skippeth  past  Joseph  with  averted  looks,  and  readeth  of  David  and  of 
Solomon.  Or,  if  the  Bible  will  not  cheat  thee,  how  will  she  plead  thine  own  nature ; 
how  will  she  whisper,  "  God  hath  made  thee  so."  How,  like  her  father,  will  she  lure 
to  pluck  the  apple,  saying,  *'  Thou  shalt  not  surely  die."  I  will  point  only  to  another 
wile.  When  inexperience  has  been  beguiled  by  her  infernal  machinations,  how, 
like  a  flock  of  startled  birds,  will  spring  up  late  regrets,  and  shame,  and  fear ;  and, 
worst  of  all,  how  will  conscience  ply  her  scorpion-whip  and  lash  thee,  uttering  with 
stem  visage,  "  Thou  art  dishonoured,  thou  art  a  wretch,  thou  art  lost !  "  So,  God 
saith,  the  strange  woman  shall  secure  her  ensnared  victims  if  they  struggle.  "  Lest 
thou  shouldst  ponder  the  path  of  life,  her  ways  are  moveable  that  thou  canst  not 
know  them."  She  is  afraid  to  see  thee  soberly  thinking  of  leaving  her,  and  enter- 
ing the  path  of  life  ;  therefore  her  ways  are  moveable.  She  multiplies  devices,  she 
studies  a  thousand  new  wiles,  she  has  some  sweet  word  for  every  sense— obsequience 
for  thy  pride,  praise  for  thy  vanity,  generosity  for  thy  selfishness,  religion  for 
thy  conscience.     IV.  Having  disclosed  her  wiles,  let  me  show  you  what  God  say3 

OF  THE  CHANCES  OF  ESCAPE  TO  THOSE  WHO  ONCE  FOLLOW  HER.       "  NonC  that  gO  UUtO  her 

return  again,  neither  take  they  hold  of  the  paths  of  life."  The  strength  of  this 
language  was  not  meant  absolutely  to  exclude  hope.  Some  may  escape — as  hera 
and  *here  a  mangled  sailor  crawls  out  of  the  water  upon  the  beach — the  only  one 
or  two  of  the  whole  crew.  There  are  many  evils  which  hold  their  victims  by  the 
force  of  habit ;  there  are  others  which  fasten  them  by  breaking  their  return  to 
society.  Many  a  person  never  reforms,  because  reform  would  bring  no  relief. 
There  are  other  evils  which  hold  men  to  them,  because  they  are  like  the  beginning 
of  a  fire  ;  they  tend  to  burn  with  fiercer  and  wider  flames,  until  all  fuel  is  consumed, 
and  go  out  only  when  there  is  nothing  to  burn.  Of  this  last  kind  is  the  sin  of 
licentiousness  ;  and  when  the  conflagration  once  breaks  out,  experience  has  shown 
what  the  Bible  long  ago  declared,  that  the  chances  of  reformation  are  few  indeed. 
V.  We  are  repeatedly  warned  against  the  strange  woman's  house.  Her  house  has 
been  cunningly  planned  by  an  evil  architect  to  attract  and  please  the  attention.  It 
stands  in  a  vast  garden  full  of  enchanting  objects  ;  it  shines  in  glowing  colours, 
and  seems  full  of  peace  and  full  of  pleasure.  AH  the  signs  are  of  unbounded  enjoy- 
ment— safe,  if  not  innocent.  Though  every  beam  is  rotten,  and  the  house  is  the 
house  of  death,  and  in  it  are  all  the  vicissitudes  of  infernal  misery,  yet  to  the  young 
it  appears  a  palace  of  delight.  They  will  not  believe  that  death  can  lurk  behind  so 
brilliant  a  fabric.  That  part  of  the  garden  which  borders  on  the  highway  of 
innocence  is  carefully  planted.  There  is  not  a  poison-weed,  nor  thorn,  nor  thistle 
there.  Ten  thousand  flowers  bloom,  and  waft  a  thousand  odours.  A  victim 
cautiously  inspects  it ;  but  it  has  been  too  carefully  patterned  upon  innocency  to  be 
easily  detected.  "  Whoso  is  simple,  let  him  turn  in  hither."  Will  the  youth 
enter  ?  Will  he  seek  her  house  ?  To  himself  he  says,  "  I  will  enter  only  to  see  the 
garden — its  fruits,  its  flowers,  its  birds,  its  arbours,  its  warbling  fountains !  "  He 
is  resolved  in  virtue.  He  seeks  wisdom,  not  pleasure !  Dupe !  you  are  deceived 
already  ;  and  this  is  your  first  lesson  of  wisdom.  He  passes,  and  the  porter  leera 
behind  him  !  He  is  within  an  enchanter's  garden  !  He  ranges  the  outer  garden 
near  to  the  highway,  thinking  as  he  walks,  "  How  foolishly  have  I  been  alarmed 
at  pious  lies  about  this  beautiful  place  !  I  heard  it  was  hell :  I  find  it  is  paradise  I  " 
Emboldened  by  the  innocency  of  his  first  steps,  he  explores  the  garden  further  from 
the  road.  The  flowers  grow  richer  ;  their  odours  exhilarate.  Ridiculous  priest,  to 
tell  me  that  death  was  here,  where  all  is  beauty,  fragrance,  and  melody !  Surely, 
death  never  lurked  in  so  gorgeous  apparel  as  this !  When  our  passions  enchant  us, 
how  beautiful  is  the  way  to  death  !     Where  are  his  reoolutions  now  ?     This  is  tha 


50  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

virtuous  youth  who  came  to  observe  !  He  has  already  seen  too  much  !  but  he  will 
see  more  ;  he  will  taste,  feel,  regret,  weep,  wail,  die  1  It  is  too  late  !  He  has  gone 
in — who  shall  never  return.  "  He  goeth  after  her  straightway  as  an  ox  goeth  to 
the  slaughter ;  or  as  a  fool  to  the  correction  of  the  stocks  .  .  .  and  knoweth  not 
that  it  is  for  his  life."  Enter  with  me,  in  imagination,  the  strange  woman's  house, 
where,  God  grant,  you  may  never  enter  in  any  other  way.  There  are  five  wards — 
Pleasure,  Satiety,  Discovery,  Disease,  Death.  1.  Ward  of  Pleasure.  The  eye  is 
dazzled  with  the  magnificence  of  its  apparel — elastic  velvet,  glossy  silks,  burnished 
satin,  crimson  drapery,  plushy  carpets.  Exquisite  pictures  glow  upon  the  wall ; 
carved  marble  adorns  every  niche.  2.  Ward  of  Satiety.  Overflushed  with  dance, 
sated  with  wine  and  fruit,  a  fitful  drowsiness  vexes  them.  They  wake,  to  crave ; 
they  taste,  to  loathe ;  they  sleep,  to  dream  ;  they  wake  again  from  unquiet  visions. 
They  long  for  the  sharp  taste  of  pleasure,  so  grateful  yesterday.  The  glowing 
garden  and  the  banquet  now  seem  all  stripped  and  gloomy.  3.  The  Ward  of 
Discovery.  In  the  third  ward  no  deception  remains.  The  floors  are  bare ;  the 
naked  walls  drip  filth ;  the  air  is  poisonous  with  sickly  fumes,  and  echoes  with 
mirth,  concealing  hideous  misery.  None  supposes  that  he  has  been  happy.  The 
past  seems  like  the  dream  of  the  miser  who  gathers  gold  spilt  like  rain  upon  the 
road,  and  wakes,  clutching  his  bed,  and  crying,  "  Where  is  it  ?  "  4.  Ward  of  Disease. 
5.  Ward  of  Death.  No  longer  does  the  incarnate  wretch  pretend  to  conceal  her 
cruelty.  She  thrusts,  aye,  as  if  they  were  dirt — she  shovels  out  the  wretches. 
Some  fall  headlong  through  the  rotten  floor — a  long  fall  to  a  fiery  bottom.  The 
floor  trembles  to  deep  thunders  which  roll  below.  Here  and  there  jets  of  flame 
sprout  up,  and  give  a  lurid  light  to  the  murky  hall.  Oh,  that  the  young  might  see 
the  end  of  vice  before  they  see  the  beginning  !  1.  I  solemnly  warn  you  against 
indulging  a  morbid  imagination.  In  that  busy  and  mischievous  faculty  begins  the 
evil.  2.  Next  to  evil  imaginations,  I  warn  the  young  of  evil  companions.  Decaying 
fruit  corrupts  the  neighbouring  fruit.  3.  But  I  warn  you,  with  yet  more  solemn 
emphasis,  against  evil  books  and  evil  pictures.  4.  Once  more,  let  me  persuade  you 
that  no  examples  in  high  places  can  justify  imitation  in  low  places.  5.  Let  me 
beseech  you,  lastly,  to  guard  your  heart-purity.  Never  lose  it.  If  it  be  gone,  you 
have  lost  from  the  casket  the  most  precious  gift  of  God.     (if.  W.  Beecher.) 

Ver.  17.  Whicli  forsaketh  the  guide  of  her  youth. — The  peril  of  taking  life  into 
our  own  control : — We  all  shrink  with  horror  from  that  lowest  depth  of  human 
depravity  here  described  ;  but  we  may  not  therefore  lose  the  lessons  of  this  solemn 
and  masterly  description.  Forsaking  and  forgetting  God  is  the  one  danger  of  life; 
forsaking  that  guidance  which  is  from  Him  and  leads  to  Him,  and  forgetting  that 
covenant  which  binds  us  unto  Him.  The  course  of  degradation  and  mischief  of 
the  unhappy  person  here  portrayed  is  derived  from  the  two  facts  of  the  text.  Who 
remembers  not,  who  regrets  not,  the  fresh  and  balmy  morning  of  youth  ?  Then  we 
were  guided  in  the  ways  of  righteousness.  There  is  a  season  when  youth  becomes 
independent  and  intolerant,  and  chafes  under  the  most  gentle  guidance.  These  are 
the  days  of  second  thoughts,  days  when  the  sweetness  of  forbidden  waters  is  tasted, 
when  the  border  of  the  debatable  land  is  crossed.  These  are  critical  days  in  every 
man's  Ufe.  Some  have  slipped  and  recovered  the  steps  which  had  almost  gone. 
With  some  the  reason  of  self-guidance  and  independence  has  never  passed  away. 
They  have  forsaken  the  guide  of  their  youth.  The  reason  of  this  woful  departure 
and  falling  away  is  thus  given.  "She  forgetteth  the  covenant  of  her  God."  And 
are  not  our  young  people  bound  in  covenant  ?  Baptism  and  confirmation  are  its 
seals.  Alas  !  that  so  many  tokens  of  the  forgetfulness  of  the  covenant  of  our  God 
are  evident  on  the  very  surface  of  society  to-day,  and  met  with  in  common  associa- 
tions.    (Dean  Alford.) 

Ver.  20.  Walk  in  the  way  of  good  men. — The  true  way  of  walking  : — Here  is  the 
general  application  of  the  counsels  of  the  chapter  for  the  good  that  will  come  to 
those  that  avoid  the  society  of  evil  men  and  women.  I.  Men  cannot  walk  in  qood 
WAYS  uNLKss  THEY  LEAVE  THE  BAD  ONES.  Bccause  good  and  evil  being  contraries,  the 
one  will  keep  out  the  other  :  as  cold  keeps  out  heat,  and  heat  cold.  Evil  thoughts 
keep  out  all  thoughts  of  good.  II.  It  is  not  enough  to  avoid  evil,  we  must 
ACTUALLY  DO  GOOD.  Becausc  foisakiug  evil  is  but  a  foundation  for  a  greater  build- 
ing, and  no  man  can  dwell  on  a  foundation.  III.  One  chief  and  principal  end  of 
WISDOM  18  well-doing.  No  blessiug  attends  on  mere  knowing.  A  curse  follows 
upon  knowledge  without  practice.     IV.  It  is  safer  to  imitate  good  men  than  bai>. 


CHAP,  m.]  PROVERBS.  fl 


Because  the  way  of  good  men  is  better,  and  their  end  is  better.  V.  Good  example 
BOMETiMEs  PREVAILS  TO  DRAW  OTHERS  TO  PIETY.  Because  shame  is  taken  away  by 
good  examples  going  before.  And  fear  also  is  taken  away.  We  should  follow  the 
choicest  examples  of  goodness.  Why  shouldest  thou  not  rather  follow  the  example 
of  Abraham,  Job,  Joseph,  David,  than  of  Ishmael,  Esau,  and  other  profane  persons  ? 
Sheep  will  not  follow  wolves,  but  they  will  follow  one  another.  So  do  thou  follow 
good  men  to  heaven,  rather  than  bad  men  to  hell.     (Francis  Taylor.) 

Ver.  22.  Transgressors  shall  be  rooted  out  of  it. — The  present  punishments  of  evil 
men: — The  metaphor  "rooted  out"  is  taken  from  a  tree.  If  a  wild  tree  and 
offensive  grow  in  a  garden,  and  the  gardener  cut  off  the  top  of  it,  if  it  send  forth 
new  sprouts,  as  bad  as  the  former,  he  digs  up  the  root  itself.  So  doth  God  deal 
with  wicked  men.  He  takes  them  away,  and  if  their  posterity  follow  their  courses, 
He  proceeds  to  root  out  the  whole  name  and  family.  I.  God  will  sometimes  in 
THIS  world  put  a  ditfebence  BETWEEN  GOOD  MEN  AND  BAD.  That  men  may  see 
who  God  is,  and  learn  what  He  is.  H.  Wicked  men  are  restless  in  evil. 
Because  they  have  a  body  of  sin  in  them,  and  abundance  of  opportunities  around 
them ;  and  are  left  by  God  to  run  on  to  perdition.  So  they  are  never  weary  of 
sinning.  III.  Wicked  men's  lives  are  often  cut  short  by  their  wicked  courses. 
Drunkenness  breeds  dropsies ;  gluttony  breeds  fevers  ;  wantonness  breeds  foul 
diseases.  Trouble  of  conscience  sometimes  makes  men  end  their  days.  God's  just 
judgments  fall  on  them.  IV.  Transgressors  deal  treacherously  with  God. 
Because  they  fail  in  the  trust  committed  to  them  ;  act  against  their  trust ;  betray 
God's  honour  ;  and  labour  to  undo  God's  Church.  V.  Sin  roots  out  the  posteritt 
OF  WICKED  MEN.     Bccause  sin  goes  by  propagation,  and  also  by  imitation.     VI,  If 

MEN  WILL    NOT  FOR    THEIR    OWN    SAKE8    FORSAKE    SIN,    THEY    SHOULD    DO    IT    FOR  THEIB 

children's  sakes.  Much  evil  may  come  on  our  posterity  from  our  sins :  as 
hereditary  diseases,  poverty,  losses,  crosses.    {Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  III. 

Vebs.  1-35.  My  son,  forget  not  my  law ;  but  let  thine  heart  keep  my  command- 
ments.— Useful  precepts  and  inspiring  motives: — I.  To  remember  and  keep  in 
OUR  HEARTS  THB  THINGS  WRITTEN  IN  THIS  BOOK  (vcTS.  1,  2).  Interest  dictatcs  to  us 
the  propriety  of  keeping  God's  commandments.  II.  To  live  in  the  exercise  of 
mercy  and  TRUTH  (vcr.  3),  in  every  part  of  our  intercourse  with  our  fellow- 
creatures,  however  defective  they  may  be  in  the  practice  of  these  virtues  to  us. 
As  workers  under  the  Spirit  we  are  required  to  write  the  law  of  kindness  and  of 
truth  upon  the  tables  of  our  heart,  by  maintaining  deep  impressions  of  it,  by 
meditating  upon  the  peaceful  motives  that  should  excite  us  to  that  virtue,  and  by 
endeavouring,  through  the  grace  of  Christ,  to  have  our  hearts  habitually  disposed 
to  all  those  duties  which  are  the  natural  fruits  of  love  and  integrity.  God  is  well 
pleased,  not  only  with  the  reverence  and  love  which  His  people  show  to  Himself, 
but  with  that  generosity  and  mercy,  that  sincerity  and  faithfulness,  which  they 
evince  to  their  fellow-men.  To  find  in  His  children  His  true  though  imperfect 
image  greatly  delights  the  Deity.  That  understanding  which  is  good  in  the  sight 
of  God  and  man  is  another  fruit  of  the  constant  practice  of  mercy  and  truth. 

III.    To   DEPEND   ON    GoD,  AND    NOT    ON    OUR    OWN    UNDERSTANDING    (ver.  5).       To    trUSt 

in  God  is  to  depend  on  Him  for  bestowing  on  us  every  needful  blessing,  and  pre- 
serving us  from  all  evil.  This  dependence  on  God  is  to  be  exercised  with  all  our 
hearts,  our  judgments  being  persuaded  that  God  is  the  only  and  the  all-suflScient 
object  of  confidence,  and  our  souls  resting  with  full  satisfaction  in  His  power 
and  faithfulness.  We  must  renounce  every  sublunary  dependence ;  we  must  not 
make  our  own  understanding  a  staff  to  our  hearts.  IV.  To  be  liberal  in  the 
SERVICE  OF  God  (vers.  9,  10).  Earthly  substance  is  necessary  for  the  use  of  our 
bodies,  but  we  are  called  to  make  a  nobler  use  of  it  than  in  the  mere  service  of  the 
outward  man.  We  are  to  honour  the  Lord  with  it,  making  no  use  of  any  part  of 
our  increase  till  we  have  set  apart  a  reasonable  proportion  of  it  for  the  service  of 

God.       V.    To    BEHAVE    ARIGHT    UNDER     AFFLICTIVB     PROVIDENCES     (vCr.     IIK       We    are 

warned  against  despising  Divine  rebukes,  or  fainting  under  them.     The  rebukes  of 


S2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [aur.  m. 

provideaoe  are  despised  when  persons  regard  not  the  supreme  hand  which  afflicts, 

when  they  consider  not  the  design  of  God  in  afflicting,  or  when,  through  stupidity 
©f  mind  or  hardness  of  heart,  they  neglect  to  comply  with  it.    Afflictions  may  be 
despised  when  men  do  not  valne  them  as  necessary  and  usefal.     Weariness  under 
the  Divine  correction  is  another  common  fanlt,  which  we  must  avoid  with  care. 
Our  hearts  must  not  fret  against  the  Lord,  nor  suffer  reflecting  thoughts  to  spring 
up,  for  God  never  exceeds  the  due  measure  in  distressing  us.    No  ingredient  is 
poured  into  the  cup  of  affliction,  but  by  infinite  wisdom  and  grace.     Ever  keep  in 
mind  who  it  is  that  afflicts  us.    Let  all  flesh  keep  silent  before  Him.     He  is  a 
Father,  and  chastens  us  in  love.     VI,  To  istkkm  wisdom,  aud  earnestlt  pursue 
IT  (vers.  13-26).     All  the  treasures  of  wisdom  are  hid  in  Christ,  and  He  commu- 
nicates the  precious  gift  by  His  Word  and  Spirit.   The  excellency  of  wisdom  appears 
in  the  gifts  she  bestows.     She  is  a  munificent  princess,  holding  in  both  hands  the 
richest  presents,  to  be  given  to  her  servants.    A  happy  life  extended  to  old  age  is 
given  to  the  lovers  of  wisdom,  and  riches  and  honour  are  given  in  the  same  sense 
as  length  of  days.    And  religion  is  not  less  conducive  to  pleasure  than  it  is  to 
honour  and  wealth.     It  will  readily  be  admitted  that  some  of  wisdom's  ways  are 
pleasant ;  but  are  they  all  so  ?    There  is  peace  and  pleasure  in  repentance,  which 
is  sweetened  by  the  apprehension  of  God's  mercy  in  Christ.     There  is  pleasure  in 
self-denial,  for  he  that  practises  it  knows  that  he  is  the  true  self-seeker.     There  is 
pleasure  and  peace  in  tribulations,  because  when  they  abound,  consolations  abound 
much  more  by  Christ.     There  is  peace  in  fighting  the  Lord's  battles.     All  the 
exercises,  all  the  privileges,  all  the  hopes  of  religion,  are  full  of  pleasure.    Add  the 
glory  which  belongs  to  wisdom,  as  it  appears  in  creation  and  providence  (vers. 
19,  20).     No  wisdom  is  sound  but  that  which  is  taught  by  the  Word  of  God,  and 
approved  by  Him  who  is  the  author  of  wisdom.     This  sound  wisdom  makes  us 
discreet  and  prudent,  and  guards  us  against  that  selfish  cunning  which  has  so  often 
assumed  its  name.     Safety  is  another  of  the  great  advantages  which  always  attend 
wisdom.     Walking  in  the  ways   of   the   Lord,  we  may  banish  those  fears  that 
would  distress  the  soul.     The  Lord  is  a  sure  ground  of  confidence  in  the  worst  of 
times.     Our  proper  exercise  in  such  seasons  is  to  trust  in  the  Lord,  and  to  pour 
out  our  hearts  before  Him,  knowing  that  He  will  be  a  refuge  for  us.     (G.  Lawaon.) 
Religious  impressions  to  be  retained : — Travellers  tell  us  that  the  constant  rubbing 
of  the  sand  on  Egyptian  hieroglyphs  removes  every  trace  of  colour,  and  even  effaces 
the  deep-cut  characters  from  basalt  rocks.   So  the  unceasing  action  of  multitudinous 
trifles  will  take  all  the  bloom  off  your  religion,  and  cause  the  name  of  the  King 
^t  on  the  tablets  of  your  heart  to  be  forgotten  if  you  do  not  counteract  them  by 
Constant,  earnest  effort.         Godliness : — I.  Godliness  is  associated  with  reoabd 
/  roR  LAW  (ver.  1).     1.  Appropriation.     "My  law."    Before  we  commend  the  Word 
I  of  God  to  others  we  must  receive  it  ourselves.     2.  Instruction.     "  Forget  not." 
V  This  implies  that  something  has  been  taught.     3.  Exhortation.     "  Forget  not." 
There  are  lew  things  men  so  soon  forget  as  Divine  commands.     The  godly  man  is 
one  who  respects  righteous  law.     He  delights  in  the  law  of  the  Lord  (Psa.  i.  2 ; 
Eom.  vii.    22).     The  moral  law  is  eternal,  and   must   be  regarded  by  all  true 
followers  of  Christ.     Obedience  to  it  is  not  the  ground  of  justification,  but  this  is 
attained  in  the  work  of  sanctification.     II.  Godliness  is  associated  with  present 
ADVANTAGES  (vei.  2).     1.  Intensity  of  life.     "  Length  of  days."    In  the  long  run 
the  longest  day  is  the  day  that  has  the  longest  record   of   service  for  God. 
2.  Length   of  life.     "  Long  life."     "  A  blessing,"  say  some,  "  of  the  Jewish  dis- 
pensation."   A  blessing,  rather  let  us  say,  of  all  dispensations.     "  Kighteousness 
tendeth  to  life  "  as  much  now  as  ever,  and,  other  things  being  equal,  he  will  live 
the  longest  who  lives  the  best.     3.  Serenity  of  life.     "Peace."    Tranquillity  con- 
tinuing through  all  the  years.     The  peace  of  the  man  who  hearkens  to  God  is  like 
a  river  (Isa.  xlviii.  18),  getting  broader  and  deeper  as  it  gets  nearer  to  the  sea. 
III.    Godliness    is    associated    with    regard    fob    the    well-being    op    men. 
"  Mercy  "  (R.V,  margin,  "  kindness  ")  "  and  truth  "  (ver.  3).     See  here  the  bearing 
of  a  godly  life  upon  the  good  of  men.     The  mind  of  God  is  one  of  "  good-will 
toward  men  "  (Luke  ii.  14),  and  those  who  would  be  God-like  must  be  of  the  same 
mind  (Matt.  v.    45).     IV.  Godliness  is   associated  with  faith  in  God  (ver.  6). 
Trust  in  the  Lord  is  the  secret  of  safety  (chap.   xxix.  25),  of  happiness  (chap, 
xvi.   20),   and   of  spiritual  prosperity  (chap,   xxviii.  25).     V.  Godlin-ess  is  asso- 
ciated WITH  THE  ACKNOWLEDGMENT  OF   GoD   (vcr.    6).      This   acknowledgment   of 
God  is  to  be— 1.  Personal.     "Thy  ways."     2.  "In  all  thy  ways."     Man's   wavg 
are  many.     Some  walk  in  high  places,  some  in  lowly  valleys.     The  way  of  some  is 


axT.  nz.]  PROVERBS.  5S 

in  the  eea,  of  others  in  the  office,  of  others  in  the  aeademj,  of  others  in  the  senate. 
Some  men  walk  in  many  ways.    Abraham  Lincoln  was  a  rail-splitter,  a  store- 
keeper, a  bargeman,  a  lawyer,  a  member  of  a  State  legislature,  a  Congressman,  and 
President  of  the  United  States,  but  in  all  positions  he  acknowledged  God.     At  the 
threshold  of  life  "  he  had,"  says  one  of  his  biographers,  "  a  profound  trust  in 
Providence";  and  when  he  left  Springfield  for  Washington  to  take  his  place  as 
President  he  said  to  his  friends,  "  Pray  that  I  may  receive  that  Divine  assistance 
without  which  I  cannot  proceed."     3.  In  our  own  sphere.     We  need  not  go  out  of 
our  way.     The  ordinary  path  of  life  will  "  furnish  all  we  ought  to  ask."     The 
promise  in  the  sixth  verse  suggests  that  we  may  acknowledge  God  by  looking  to 
Him  for  guidance,  and  it  gives  the  assurance  of  Divine  direction.     VI.  Godliness 
IS    ASSOCIATED    WITH    HUMILITY   (ver.   7).      "  Be    not  wise   in  thine   own   eyes." 
"  Many,"  says  Seneca,  "  might  have  attained  wisdom  had  they  not  thought  they 
had  attained  it."     The  way  to  godliness  is  in  the  footsteps  of  Christ,  and  to  follow 
in  that  path  we  must  be  meek  and  lowly  in  heart.     VII.  Godliness  is  associated 
WITH  PRACTICAL  HOLINESS  (vcrs.  7-9).    1.  The  godly  man  will  shun  eviL     "  Depart 
from  evil."     To  "  depart "  may  be  rendered  to  "  turn  aside."    As  men  sometimes 
"  cut "  those  they  do  not  wish  to  see,  so  is  evil  to  be  *•  cut."    To  go  into  the  way 
of  evil  is  to  run  a  risk  of  falling  into  it.     2.  Cultivate  benevolence  (ver.  9). 
Christian  benevolence    is    substantial  ("  substance,"    not   merely   good    wishes) ; 
generous    ("first-fruits");   God-honouring   ("honour    the    Lord").      Those  who 
with  a  right  motive  give  of  what  God  has  given  them  acknowledge  their  indebted- 
ness to  Him  and  His  ownership  in  what  they  possess.    VHI.  Godliness  is  gain 
(ver.  10).     Gain  is  not  always  godliness,  but  godliness  is  always  gain  in  the  highest 
sense.     The  giving  of  the  first-fruits  fills  the  barns.     {H.  Tharne. )        The  earthly 
rewards  of  wisdom  : — We  are  taught  to  look  for  the  fruit  of  righteousness  in  long 
life  and  prosperity,  for  the  penalty  of  sin  in  premature  destruction.     We  are  accus- 
tomed to  dwell  on  the  promised  joys  of  the  future  world  as  if  godliness  had  no 
promise  of  the  life  which  now  is,  and  in  so  doing  we  take  all  life  and  colour  from 
those  expected  blessings.     The  true  view  seems  to  be,  the  way  of  wisdom,  the 
path  of   the  upright,  is  so  full   of  joy,  so  crowned  with  peace;  the  life  of  the 
children  of  the  kingdom  is  so  wisely  and  bountifully  provided  for  ;  the  inevitable 
pains  and  troubles  which  fall  to  their  share  are  so  transformed,  that  from  this 
present  good  we  can  infer  a  future  better,  gathering  hints  and  promises  of  what  we 
shall  be  from  the  realised  felicity  of  what  we  are.     What  are  the  immediate  and 
apprehensible   benefits   of   the    life  which  is  lived  according  to  the  dictates  of 
heavenly  wisdom  ?    I.  The  bioht  life  is  a  wholesome  lite,  physically  healthy. 
The  body  is  a  sacred  trust,  a  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  to  use  it  ill  is  to  violate 
the  trust  and  to  defile  the  temple.     The  temperance  of  habit  and  orderliness  of  life 
which  Wisdom  requires  of  her  children  are  the  first  conditions  of  vitality.    Peace  of 
mind,  cheerfulness  of  temper,  the  transfer  of  aU  anxiety  from  the  human  spirit  to 
the  strong  Spirit  of  God,  are  very  favourable  to  longevity.    Let  no  one  think  of 
measuring  life  only  by  days  and  years.    Each  day  should  be  a  full,  rich  day, 
unmarred  by  recollections,  unshadowed  by  apprehensions.     Each  day  is  distinctly 
worth  living.     The  life  in  God  is  undoubtedly  a  healthy  life,  nor  is  it  the  less 
healthy  because  the  outward  man  has  to  decay,  and  mortality  has  to  be  swallowed 
up  of  life.     n.  The  bight  life  requires  fair  dealing  between  man  and  jus. 
The  main  economic  principle  of  wisdom  is  this,  that  all  legitimate  trade  is  the 
mutual  advantage  of  buyer  and  seller.     III.  Wisdom  commands  not  only  justice, 
BUT  generosity.     She  requires  her  children  to  yield  the  first-fruits  of  all  their 
possessions  to  the  Lord,  and  to  look  tenderly  upon  His  poor.    And  the  teaching  of 
experience  is  that  those  who  act  upon  this  precept  purchase  to  themselves  a  good 
possession.    IV.  Loos   at  the  deepeb,  more  spiritual  bbsults  of  bight  livinq. 
God  is  so  much  to  men,  that  clear  vision  and  strong  action  are  utterly  impossible 
apart  from  a  humble  dependence  upon  Him.    The  beginning  of  all  wisdom  is  in 
the  recognition  of  God,  in  personal  submission  to  Him,  in  diligent  obedience  to 
all  His  directions.     We  do  not  at  first  see  what  is  meant  by  trusting  in  the  Lord 
with  all  our  heart ;  we  confuse  it  with  that  tepid,  conventional  relation  to  God 
which  too  frequently  passes  current  for  faith.    They  who  do  entirely  renounce 
their  own  judgment,  who,  with  their  whole  heart  trusting  Him,  acknowledge  Him 
in  all  their  ways,  find  their  Uves  running  over  with  blessing,  and  become  the  meant 
of  incalculable  good  to  the  world  and  to  themselves.    It  would  not  be  easy  to  mak* 
plain  or  even  credible  to  those  who  have  never  trusted  in  God  how  this  guidance 
and  direction  are  given.     When  a  few  years  have  been  passed  in  humble  depen- 


H  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

dence  on  God,  it  is  then  possible  to  look  back  and  see  with  astonishing  clearness 
how  real  and  decisive  the  leadings  of  the  Spirit  have  been.  Our  life,  we  find,  ia 
all  a  plan  of  God,  and  He  conceals  it  from  us,  as  if  on  purpose  to  evoke  our  trust, 
and  to  secure  that  close  and  personal  communion  which  the  uncertainty  renders 
necessary.  Some  are  suspicious  of  the  "  Inward  Light,"  as  it  is  called.  That  may 
be  because  they  do  not  trust  the  Lord  "  with  the  whole  heart."  Wisdom  calls  for 
a  certain  absoluteness  in  all  our  relations  to  God,  a  fearless,  unreserved,  and 
constantly  renewed  submission  of  heart  to  Him.  And  while  the  external  results 
of  wisdom  are  great  and  marked,  this  inward  result,  which  is  the  spring  of  them 
all,  is  more  blessed  than  any.  The  supreme  bliss  of  the  heavenly  wisdom  is  that 
it  leads  us  into  a  detailed  obedience  to  the  law  which  is  our  life ;  it  sets  us  under 
the  immediate  and  unbroken  control  of  God.  To  know  the  secret  of  the  Lord,  to 
walk  in  this  world  not  guideless,  but  led  by  the  Lord  of  life,  to  approach  death 
itself  not  fearful,  but  in  the  hands  of  that  Infinite  Love  for  whom  death  does  not 
exist,  surely  this  is  worth  more  than  the  gold  and  precious  stones  which  belong 
only  to  the  earth  and  are  earthy.     (iJ.  F.  Uorton,  D.If.) 

Yer.  2.  Long  life  and  peace  shall  they  add  to  thee. — The  philosophy  of  health 
and  peace : — I.  Obedience  to  moral  law  is  a  condition  of  physical  health. 
Heart-obedience  is  required.  The  connection  is  clear  from  three  facts.  1.  That 
physical  health  requires  obedience  to  the  Divine  laws  of  our  being.  2.  That 
obedience  to  the  Divine  laws  of  our  being  involves  the  study  of  them.  3.  That  a 
hearty  agreement  with  the  Divine  will  is  essential  to  secure  the  study  of  His  laws, 
n.  Obedience  to  moral  law  is  a  condition  of  spiritual  peace.  Peace  of  soul 
requires  two  things.  1.  The  inward  harmony  of  its  powers.  2.  The  sense  of  the 
Divine  favour.  The  feeling,  or  even  the  fear,  that  the  Lord  is  against  it,  gives  it 
the  throb  of  perpetual  restlessness  or  torture.  Obedience  to  moral  law  secures  the 
two  conditions  of  this  peace.     (D.  Thomat,  D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  Let  not  mercy  and  truth  forsake  thee. — Mercy  and  truth : — As  the  wings 
of  the  cherubim  touched  one  another  in  the  midst  of  the  house,  so  Mercy  and  Truth 
are  such  a  pair  as  will  either  lodge  together  or  leave  together.  There  was  such  a 
similitude  of  nature  between  the  Twins  of  Love,  eros  and  anteros,  that  at  once  they 
wept,  and  at  once  they  smUed,  they  fell  sick  together,  and  they  recovered  jointly. 
Such  are  the  Twins  of  Grace,  Truth,  and  Mercy  ;  she  that  would  have  them  cut  in 
twain  and  parted  is  an  harlot,  she  that  cries  spare  and  preserve  them  whole,  she  is 
the  mother  and  must  enjoy  them.  Look  upon  them  in  a  state  of  policy ;  mercy 
without  truth  is  a  sweet  shower  dropping  on  the  barren  sands,  quite  spilt,  and  no 
blessing  foUows  it.  Truth  without  mercy  is  extreme  right  and  extreme  injury. 
Mercy  without  truth  is  a  dangerous  pity.  Truth  without  mercy  is  not  verity  but 
severity.  Consider  them  towards  God  and  heaven,  and  then  most  unfit  it  is  that 
either  should  be  alone.  A  faith  of  mere  protestation  without  good  works,  such  is 
truth  without  mercy ;  it  might  have  been  in  the  Gergesene  swine,  for  such  a  faith  is 
in  the  devil,  says  St.  James.  All  the  integrity  of  the  heathen,  all  the  goodness  that 
Socrates  could  teach,  because  it  is  not  in  Christ,  such  is  mercy  without  truth.  St. 
Austin  compares  them  thus  :  "  A  pagan  living  without  blame  before  man  is  a  man 
with  his  eyes  open  in  the  dark  midnight,  and  he  that  professeth  Christ  and  not 
mercy,  but  is  sold  to  commit  iniquity,  is  one  with  his  eyes  shut  in  a  clear  day, 
and  he  sees  as  little."  {Bp.  Hacket.)  Bind  them  about  thy  neck. — True 
phylacteries  (see  Deut.  vi.  8) : — I.  The  substance  of  a  true  phylactery  :  "  Mercy 
and  truth."  These  are  the  two  grand  elements  of  revelation.  They  meet  man's 
nature  as  a  being  possessing  intellect  and  heart,  each  of  which  has  its  respective 
cravings  and  claims.  H.  The  uses  of  a  true  phylactery.  The  old  phylacteries 
seem  to  be  used — 1.  As  mementoes.  They  were  to  remind  the  wearer  of  the  law. 
2.  As  safeguards.  This  was,  indeed,  a  later  and  superstitious  use.  Still  "  mercy 
and  truth  "  rightly  worn  are  safeguards.  They  protect  us  from  what  is  wrong  and 
ruinous.  (D.  Thomas^  D.D.)  The  combination  of  mercy  and  truth  in  a  good  life : — 
A  double  metaphor,  wherein  keeping  mercy  and  truth,  or  exercising  them  outwardly, 
is  compared  to  tying  a  gold  chain  about  the  neck  for  ornament ;  and  retaining  them 
in  the  heart  is  compared  to  things  written  in  a  table-book,  that  they  may  not  be 
forgotten.  1.  Duties  to  men  are  to  be  made  conscience  of,  as  well  as  duties  to  God. 
2.  Mercy  and  truth  should  always  go  together  ;  because  both  are  ornaments  to  us. 
Men  wear  lace  on  good  clothes,  so  doth  mercy  adorn  truth.  Both  are  profitable 
unto  others.     3.  The  want  of  one  buries  the  commendation  of  the  other.     4.  Both 


CHAP,  ra.]  PROVERBS.  i5 

are  together  in  God,  else  could  we  look  for  no  favour  from  Him.  Truth  is  required 
in  all  our  dealings  with  men  ;  but  truth  must  always  be  tempered  and  toned  with 
mercy.  (Francis  Taylor.)  Write  them  upon  the  table  of  thine  heart. — Soul 
literature : — Writing  is  a  very  ancient  art.  Moses  knew  it.  There  is  a  yet  older 
writing,  the  penmanship  of  the  soul.  In  this  art  every  man  is  a  busy  writer.  The 
soul  registers  every  impression  made  on  it.  In  comparing  soul-writing  with  that 
of    the    pen,     two    things    are    observable — correspondence    and     dissimilarity. 

1.  CoRBESPONDENCE.  Both  imply  readers.  Accuracy  in  both  requires  training. 
Both  are  either  useful  or  injurious.  II.  Dissimilabitt.  Soul-writing  is  more 
universal ;  more  voluminous ;  more  permanent ;  more  useful  to  Christianity.  Truth 
written  by  the  soul  in  the  life  is  more  legible  than  truth  written  by  the  pen.  It  is 
more  convincing ;  and  it  is  more  persuasive.  Conclusion  :  1.  Life  is  a  book  which 
we  are  writing  day  by  day.  2.  The  book  of  life  should  be  a  Christian  book.  3.  This 
book  of  life  will  have  to  be  examined.  {Homilist.)  Sacred  inscriptioru  on  the 
heart : — At  places  of  public  resort,  such  as  the  summit  of  a  lofty  mountain  or  the 
site  of  a  famous  monument,  you  may  see  tables  of  wood  or  stone  or  level  turf.  All 
over  them  inscriptions  have  been  chiselled  so  thickly  that  you  could  not  now  find  an 
unoccupied  spot  to  plant  a  letter  on.  The  characters  are  various — some  old,  some 
new,  some  well-formed,  some  irregular  scrawls,  some  mere  scratches  on  the  surface 
which  a  winter's  storms  will  wash  out,  some  so  deep  that  they  will  be  legible  for 
ages.  The  table  lies  there,  the  helpless  recipient  of  ideas,  good  or  bad,  that  stray 
comers  may  impress  upon  it.  The  heart  of  man  is  like  one  of  these  common  public 
receptacles.  {W.  Amot,D.D.)  Receptive  tablets  : — 1.  The  duty  of  parents  is  clear, 
and  their  encouragements  are  great.  Watch  the  young.  Stand  beside  that  soft, 
receptive  tablet.  Keep  trespassers  away.  Insert  many  truths.  Busily  fill  the  space 
with  good,  and  that  too  in  attractive  forms.     This  is  the  work  laid  to  your  hand. 

2.  Afflictive  providences  generally  have  a  bearing  on  this  printing  process.  God  sends 
what  will  break  the  heart  or  melt  it.  The  heart,  in  contact  with  a  busy  world,  was 
rubbed  smooth  and  slippery.  The  type,  when  it  touched,  glided  off  the  surface,  and 
left  no  mark  behind.  This  bruising  and  breaking  opened  the  crust,  and  let  the 
lesson  in.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  4.  So  shalt  thou  find  favour  and  good  understanding  In  the  sight  of  God 
and  man. — The  commencement  of  the  religioxis  life : — There  was  a  moment  in  our 
existence  when  we  committed  our  first  sin ;  and  there  was  a  moment  when  we  first 
lifted  up  our  hearts  in  prayer  and  thanksgiving  to  our  Father  in  heaven.  None  of 
us  probably  recollect  either  of  these  moments.  I.  What  do  we  mean  by  a  eelioious 
LITE  ?  How  are  we  to  live  to  maintain  our  own  self-respect,  to  be  morally  pure,  to 
be  acceptable  to  God,  to  love  Him  and  serve  Him,  and  do  good  to  and  love  our 
neighbour  ?  The  ceremonial  of  religion  in  itself  is  not  religion  ;  it  is  too  often  put 
in  the  place  of  real  goodness  and  piety.  The  belief  of  any  or  of  every  creed  is  not 
religion.  Intellectual  states  and  ecclesiastical  connections  are  not  religion.  Gloom, 
sadness,  melancholy,  superstition,  fanaticism,  are  not  religion.  Before  we  can 
become  truly  religious  we  must  have  correct  views  of  God,  of  ourselves,  of  our 
relationship  to  God,  of  sin,  and  of  hating  and  forsaking  it.  Reverence  for,  and  the 
sincere  love  of,  God  is  one  mark  of  a  religious  life.  Self-control  upon  religious 
principles  is  another  and  distinctive  mark  of  the  religious  life.  Our  reverence  and 
love  of  God  are  practically  embodied  and  developed  in  our  self-government.  Aa 
Christians,  we  should  lead  a  life  in  harmony  with  the  Divine  example  which  Jesus 
has  placed  before  us.  He  has  in  His  life  and  ministry  revealed  to  us  the  character 
of  the  Father,  and  the  religious  life  that  we  should  lead  as  His  followers.  We 
receive  Christ  to  be  our  Teacher,  Guide,  Friend,  Counsellor,  Example,  and 
Redeemer.  II.  The  commencement  of  a  eeligious  life.  This  is  a  matter  of  deep 
interest  to  us  all.  Some  have  no  recollection  of  any  other  state  than  that  in  which 
they  are  now  living ;  others  have  a  broad  line  which  marks  the  past  and  the  present. 
Matthew,  Zacchaeus,  Nicodemus,  Paul,  and  others,  were  familiar  with,  and  could 
narrate  all  the  circumstances  of  their  religious  history.  The  means  and  agencies 
of  the  change  from  darkness  to  Ught,  from  error  to  truth,  from  wickedness  to 
righteousness,  from  vice  to  virtue,  from  irreligion  to  an  enlightened  humble  piety, 
are  very  varied.  It  is  not  the  usual  order  of  things  that  aged  persons  become 
religious,  and  as  for  death-bed  conversions,  we  have  as  little  faith  in  them  as  in 
death-bed  incantations,  extreme  unction,  and  priestly  absolutions.  It  is  the  life  of 
a  man  that  proclaims  who  he  is  and  what  he  is.  Christianity  is  for  life.  The  life 
of  a  sincere  Christian  always  fits  for  death.    To  be  leading  and  enjoying  such  a  life 


£6  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [cHi».  ni. 

in  youth  is  one'  of  God's  greatest  blessings.  If  you  covet  goodness  of  heart  and 
purity  of  mind,  lead  a  Christian  life.  If  you  desire  true  greatness,  naanlinsss,  and 
honour,  lead  a  Christian  life.  If  you  seek  for  a  good  hope  of  immortality,  lead 
a  Christian  life.  (R.  Ainslie.)  The  tecret  of  success  : — The  poet  here  gives  us 
not  only  melodious  measures,  but  valuable  truths,  even  the  secret  of  life  which  has 
often  eluded  the  search  of  moralists  and  speculative  philosophers.  He  unfolds  that 
which  to  us  is  of  vital  moment — the  secret  of  success.  We  all  desire  prosperity. 
One  avenue  to  success  is  making  money ;  another  is  culture ;  another  is  self- 
indulgence.  The  text  says  happiness  is  not  intellectual  but  a  moral  quality.  True 
•wisdom  is  the  reverence  and  love  of  God.  We  are  set  in  right  relations  with  God ; 
and  this  is  a  source  of  peace.  Beligion  is  not  a  disagreeable  condition  on  which  a 
blessing  rests,  a  dark  tunnel  through  which  we  reach  a  shining  land  beyond.  It  is 
a  gift  of  God,  radiant  and  happy,  an  appeal  not  to  our  lower  tastes,  but  to  all  that 
is  exalted  within  us.  In  the  way  of  religion  we  learn  the  true  secret  of  success. 
(R.  S.  Storrs,  D.D.)  The  way  to  favour : — The  men  of  the  world  may  hate  the 
principles  of  the  man  of  God,  but  the  latter  will  have  a  testimony  in  his  conscience, 
and  if  he  maintains  a  steadfast  consistency,  will  command  respect  and  good-will. 
This  is  the  only  legitimate  way  of  finding  favour  with  men.  Their  favour  must  be 
foregone  if  it  cannot  be  gotten  but  by  conduct  inconsistent  with  right  principle.  It 
is  but  a  false  and  selfish  and  temporary  favour  at  the  best  that  can  thus  be  obtained ; 
and  it  is  obtained  at  the  expense  of  what  is  infinitely  more  precious,  the  favour  of 
God.     (E,  Wardlaw,  D.D.) 

Ver.  5.  Trust  in  the  Lord  .  .  .  lean  not  to  thine  own  understanding:. — Reason 
and  faith : — The  question  is,  not  whether  we  shall  use  reason,  but  what  are  its 
limits  ?  Shall  we  accept  only  what  we  can  understand  and  explain,  and  refuse  all 
which  does  not  quadrate  with  our  reason  ?  Is  Faith,  with  her  delicate  ear,  her  quick 
sensibility,  and  wondrous  prescience,  to  have  no  place  ?  In  the  power  of  modem 
reason  can  we  know  every  inch  of  our  way  ?  1.  How  is  it  in  the  business  world  ? 
The  activities  of  men  are  put  forth  in  faith  and  trust.  Commerce  would  fold  her 
wings  but  for  this  principle  of  faith.  2.  How  is  it  in  still  more  practical  life  ? 
3.  History  and  mental  science  teach  us  the  folly  of  leaning  to  our  own  understand- 
ing. 4.  In  Biblical  and  scientific  theology  may  be  found  further  illustration  of  the 
text.  When  the  believer  is  in  Christ,  faith  points  the  way  to  higher  circles  of  truth. 
Much  that  is  beyond  reason  does  not  contradict  reason.  (Ste2yhen  R.  Dennen,  D.D.) 
The  supreme  wisdom  of  perfect  trust  in  God  : — I.  The  iNSCFriciENCT  of  the  human 
UNDERSTANDING.  1.  Its  inherent  weakness.  2.  The  brevity  of  its  experience, 
making  it  impossible  to  form  right  conclusions  upon  those  concerns  which  extend 
into  eternity  backward  and  forward.  3.  Its  limit  in  space.  The  universe  extends 
beyond  reach  of  finite  imagination.  4.  It  has  no  certain  communion  with  the  spirit 
world ;  hence  eternal  things  are  not  to  be  trusted  to  our  understanding.  II.  The 
suFFiciENCT  OF  GoD.  1.  He  knows  all  things  thoroughly  as  Creator  and  Preserver. 
2.  He  has  power  over  all  things.  3.  His  love  for  us  is  unlimited.  Conclusion : 
1.  Oppose  scepticism  as  one  of  the  follies  of  a  weak  understanding.  2.  Surrender 
wholly  to  God's  guidance.  (Hotniletie  Monthly.)  Trust  in  God  :  I.  What  is  it 
TO  trust  in  the  Lord?  1.  To  be  persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  counsel  thee  what 
to  do.  2.  That  He  is  willing  and  able  to  give  wholesome  advice  to  those  who  need 
it.  3.  To  look  unto  God  for  counsel.  4.  Confidently  to  expect  seasonable 
directions  from  Him.  II.  Why  is  it  a  duty  to  trust  in  the  Lord  ?  1.  Every- 
one is  bound  to  order  his  affairs  the  best  he  can.  2.  It  is  a  right  acknowledgment 
of  God.  3.  It  is  following  the  inclination  of  a  generous  heart.  Lessons  :  1.  They 
act  sinfully  and  foolishly  who  do  not  wholly  trust  in  the  Lord  for  direction  in  their 
afifairs.  2.  Do  what  God's  holy  ones  of  old  used  to  do — make  Him  thy  oracle, 
counsel,  guide.  {George  Barker.)  Trusting  in  God  with  all  the  heart : — God  in 
everything  requires  the  heart,  the  undivided  heart.  In  the  text  is  one  great  secret 
of  the  Divine  life,  the  principle  on  which  it  rests,  the  food  by  which  it  is  fed.  It  is 
to  be  taken  from  all  worldly  dependencies  and  securities,  and  resting  in  the 
eonsciousness  of  being  one  with  God,  in  holy  fellowship,  in  perpetual  nourishment 
and  support.  Men  commonly  fail  in  the  practical  outworking  of  their  trust,  in  their 
daily  employment,  and  experience  and  walk.  Earthly  instruments  are  too  much 
sought  and  relied  upon  independently  of  God.  I.  The  affections  may  be,  and  oftkh 
ark,  violently  excited  and  worked  upon,  and  yet  not  brought  to  a  holy  sub- 
jection unto  God.  There  may  be,  with  much  religious  warmth  and  sentiment, 
DO  small  remnant  of  the  evil  temper  and  ungoverned  will ;   even  in  humility  itself 


CHAP,  m.]  PROVERBS.  67 

an  arrogant  and  self-righteous  display,  as  if  the  sinner  were  more  humble  than  his 
neighbour,  as  if  he  had  a  merit  in  God's  sight  on  account  of  his  numerous  and 
extravagant  lamentations.  Great  numbers  are  held  in  a  chain  of  error  under 
the  notion  of  a  spiritual  superiority ;  they  are  really  full  of  a  miserable  conceit. 
II.  Mant  believe  all  the  doctkikes   of  grace,    and    claim  for  themselves  a 

PECULIAR   soundness  AND  PURITY  OF  FAITH,  IN  WHOM  THAT  FAITH  IS  BUT  A  SPECULATIVE 

MATTER,  AND  NOT  AN  OPERATIVE  PRINCIPLE.  Men  dcceive  thsmselyes  with  notions 
of  faith,  and  take  up  with  that  which  is  not  real,  which  has  no  life  in  it.  That 
which  is  trusted  to  as  principle  is  so  received  as  to  be  no  principle  at  all ;  is  a  mere 
assent  of  the  understanding,  and  not  a  conviction  working  in  the  heart.  Nothing 
can  be  right  and  true,  no  tenet,  no  belief,  which  does  not  incorporate  us  with  God, 
and  bring  us  into  subjection  to  Him.  III.  The  ordinances  and  means  of  grace 
MAY  BE  UTTERLY  INEFFECTUAL.  Prayer  is  Unavailing  if  unaccompanied  with  any 
trust,  any  abiding  trust,  in  God.  AU  our  means  and  talents  are  given  for  active, 
diligent  employment.  Faith  is  to  be  continually  remaining  as  a  vital  energy  in  the 
breast,  as  the  monitor  and  guide,  as  the  comfort  and  support,  of  all  true  believers, 
whatever  they  do,  wherever  they  go.  It  produces  not  only  a  leaning  upon  Divine 
grace  on  particular  occasions  of  meditation  or  devotion,  but  an  unfailing  regard 
to  God's  providential  wisdom  and  goodness  and  government  in  daily  life.  God  is  in 
everything,  above  all,  through  all,  in  all.  To  those  who  wholly  trust  in  God,  not 
leaning  to  their  own  understanding,  but  ready  in  all  things  to  obey  His  will  and 
Word,  the  Lord  will  be  a  perpetual  guide.  There  is  a  mystic  intercourse,  an 
invisible  superintendence,  a  secret  agency,  a  leading  hand,  always  near  and  always 
employed  for  the  safety  and  well-being  of  those  who  commit  themselves  implicitly 
and  faithfully  to  the  Lord's  holy  keeping.  (J.  Slade,  M.A.)  Reliance  upon  God : — 
Hope  is  ever  accompanied  with  trust,  reliance,  and  confidence  on  something,  and 
it  is  either  well  or  ill  grounded.  What  is  there  besides  God  on  which  we  are  apt  to 
repose  our  trust  ?  Fortune  or  chance ;  the  favour  of  the  world  ;  friends  ;  riches  and 
power ;  men's  own  abilities,  caution,  forecast,  prudence,  and  diligence.  There  is 
nothing  in  which  we  can  reasonably  trust,  except  the  Divine  Providence.  1.  That 
our  reliance  may  be  rational,  we  should  know  what  it  is  that  God  hath  promised, 
and  what  we  may  expect  from  Him.  No  absolute  and  unconditioned  promises  of 
material  blessings  are  made  to  us.  We  are  promised  contentment  and  peace  of 
mind.  He  who  is  contented  cannot  be  unhappy.  2.  Beliance  must  be  accom- 
panied with  obedience,  with  a  serious  and  settled  purpose,  and  with  honest 
endeavours  to  do  the  things  which  are  pleasing  to  God.  3.  Keliance  on  God  is 
founded  on — (1)  His  goodness;  (2)  the  relation  between  Him  and  us;  (3)  His 
promises.  4.  Keliance  is  a  duty  which  is  not  to  be  exercised,  and  cannot  be 
exercised,  by  the  wicked.  They  who  will  not  serve  God  commonly  put  no  confidence 
in  Him.  They  fear  Him  perhaps,  but  they  love  Him  not.  Obedience  to  God  is 
naturally  accompanied  with  reliance  on  God.  5.  Beliance  on  God  should 
be  accompanied  with  supplications  to  Him  to  bless  us.  6.  Keliance  should 
be  united  with  diligence  and  prudence  in  our  worldly  affairs.  7.  Reliance  excludes 
immoderate  cares,  and  vain  desires,  and  fretful  discontent,  and  dissatisfaction  ;  for 
he  who  firmly  believes  that  all  is  ordered  for  the  best,  and  shall  conduce  to  his 
happiness,  cannot  live  in  slavish  subjection  to  these  turbulent  passions.  Reliance 
will  not  make  a  man  insensible  to  trouble,  but  it  will  have  a  considerable  effect 
towards  regulating  his  affections  and  composing  his  heart,  and  producing  an 
acquiescence  to  the  will  of  God.  8.  Reliance  is  a  noble  virtue,  and  a  disposition  of 
mind  most  agreeable  to  God.  God  hath  made  singular  promises  in  favour  of  it. 
Reliance  is  thus  acceptable  because  it  implies  love  for  God,  and  desire  to  please 
Him  ;  and  because  it  is  the  greatest  honour  we  can  pay  to  Him.  {J.  Jortin,  D.D.) 
Good  and  evil : — I.  The  good  to  be  secured.  1.  Supreme  trust.  This  means, 
undoubtingly  ;  undividedly ;  lovingly.  2.  Supreme  trust  in  the  supremely  good.  "In 
the  Lord."  The  All-wise  ;  the  All-loving  ;  the  All-holy ;  the  All-mighty.  11.  The 
EVIL  TO  be  avoided.  "Lean  not  to  thine  own  understanding."  1.  This  is  a 
prevalent  evil.  Men  do  it  in  all  departments — business,  politics,  literature,  and 
religion.  2.  This  is  a  patent  evil.  It  is  clear  to  all.  Reason  shows  it.  History 
shows  it.  Individual  experience  shows  it.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Legitimate  u»e 
of  the  understanding  : — Trusting  in  the  Lord  does  not  mean  that  we  may  not  use  our 
own  understanding,  forming  our  plans  with  discretion,  and  with  all  possible  fore- 
sight and  precaution,  and  in  pursuing  our  ends  employing  all  suitable  and 
legitimate  means.  There  is  a  legitimate  using  of  the  understanding  that  is  not 
chargeable  with  "  leaning  to  it."    While  we  use  it  we  are  to  depend  on  God  for 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  m. 

snccess,  trnst  in  the  promises  of  His  Word,  and  in  the  care  and  overruling  direction 
of  His  providence.  As  dependence  upon  God  for  strength  to  resist  temptation  does 
not  preclude  our  applying  all  the  energy  of  our  minds,  so  dependence  upon  Him  for 
direction  in  our  ways  does  not  set  aside  the  employment  of  our  own  prudence  and 
sagacity.  God  is  the  Supreme  Director  of  all  events,  whose  concurrent  will  is 
essential  to  the  success  of  every  measure  ;  without  it  all  the  thoughts  of  men  are 
vain,  turning  out  subversive  of  their  own  designs  and  subservient  to  God's. 
(jR.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  The  nndentanding  not  strong  enough  to  lean  iipon: — A 
thing  may  be  useful  which  we  must  not  lean  upon,  lest  it  should  break  and  let  us 
fall ;  a  reed  from  an  osier-bed  is  very  useful  to  make  baskets,  but  you  should  not 
lean  upon  it.  So  our  understandings  are  very  useful,  but  the  best  of  them  are  not 
sufficiently  strong  to  lean  upon.  (Chicago  Sunday  School  Teacher.)  The  danger  of 
following  our  own  wishes  : — As  we  emerge  from  childhood,  we  learn  to  suspect  the 
wisdom  of  our  wishes.  From  some  eminence  in  our  pilgrimage  we  look  back  on  the 
path,  and  see  plainly  how  much  of  our  trouble  was  caused  by  resolutely  following 
our  own  will.  We  see  how  we  sometimes  turned  aside  from  the  true  way  because 
it  seemed  rough  and  circuitous  ;  and  how,  in  other  places,  attracted  by  the  flowers 
or  the  scenery,  we  neglected  the  map  and  the  sign-posts,  and  wandered  among  bogs 
and  thickets,  where  we  floundered  in  mire,  or  were  torn  with  thorns  ;  and  to 
precipices,  where  we  stumbled  and  were  bruised,  and  might  have  perished.  Thus, 
by  bitter  experience,  we  have  learned  that  our  will  is  not  always  the  wisest.  What 
we  have  prescribed  to  ourselves  as  medicine  has  proved  to  be  poison  ;  the  cup  we 
have  clutched  as  sweeter  than  honey  has  become  more  bitter  than  gall.  We 
resolved  to  take  the  helm  into  our  own  hands,  and  have  struck  on  hidden  rocks.  We 
have  gone  where  the  moss  was  brightest,  and  the  quagmire  has  nearly  choked  ua. 
We  have  glided  where  the  ice  seemed  smoothest,  and  it  has  given  way  in  the 
moment  of  our  greatest  exhilaration.     (Newman  Hall.) 

Vet.  6.  In  all  thj  ways  acknowledge  Him,  and  He  shall  direct  thy  paths. — 

Trust  and   guidance  : — We  have  here  the  sound  counsel  of  a  wide  experience. 

1.  As   CONTAINING  THE   MOST   IMPOBTANT    PRECEPTS    FOB    LIFE.       God    claimS    frOm  yOU 

here — 1.  The  supreme  affection  of  your  heart.  2.  The  complete  homage  of  your 
intellect.  3.  The  unswerving  loyalty  of  your  lives.  Beligion  is  not  to  be  put  on 
and  off,  it  must  pervade  the  life.  II.  As  suggesting  the  greatest  dangers  in 
LITE.  1.  The  fallibility  of  human  counsellors.  2.  The  deceitfulness  of  our  own 
hearts.  III.  As  promising  the  greatest  blessings  through  life.  1.  Domesti- 
cally. 2.  Commercially.  3.  Spiritually.  (T.  Campey.)  The  nature  of  the 
Christian's  trust  in  God  : — I.  The  nature  of  the  trust.     1.  It  must  be  intelligent. 

2.  It  must  be  unlimited.  3.  It  must  be  constant.  No  trust  is  of  any  great  value 
that  is  not  uniform  and  abiding.  II.  The  manner  in  which  this  trust  is  mani- 
fested. 1.  There  is  surrender  to  the  Divine  authority.  2.  There  is  obedience  to 
the  Divine  law.  3.  There  is  submission  to  the  Divine  providence.  4.  There  is 
faith  in  the  Divine  promises.  Contrast  the  man  who  leans  on  his  own  under- 
fltanding  with  the  man  who  trusts  in  God.  The  one  leans  on  a  broken  reed,  the 
other  on  the  arm   of   Omnipotence.      (Anon.)         The   Christian's    mainstay : — 

I.  Something  to  lean  upon  :  "  Trust  in  the  Lord."  1.  He  is  worthy  of  trust — kind, 
good,  loving.  2.  He  is  suitable  to  trust  in — powerful,  eternal,  just.  3.  He  is  able 
to  be  trusted  in,  for  He  is  accessible,  He  invites  all.  He  saves  all  who  trust  in  Him, 

II.  Something  to  distrust  :  "  Lean  not  to  thine  own  heart."  1.  Nothing  i^ 
more  fickle.  2.  Nothing  is  more  frail.  3.  Nothing  is  more  deceptive.  4.  Nothing 
is  more  wicked.  III.  Something  to  establish:  "In  all  thy  ways  acknowledge 
Him."  "  In  all  thy  ways."  There  will  be  ways  of  sorrow.  Acknowledge  His 
hand.  There  will  be  ways  of  disappointment.  Thank  Hira  for  the  discipline. 
There  will  be  ways  of  joy.  Praise  Him  for  His  love.  IV.  Something  to  cheer: 
"  He  shall  direct  thy  path."  He  will  direct  it  in  perfect  wisdom  ;  He  will  direct  it 
in  perfect  goodness ;  He  will  direct  it  for  our  good  and  His  own  glory.  How 
peaceful  the  prospect,  and  how  safe  and  sure  the  journey  of  that  man  whom  the 
Lord  directs !  (Homilist.)  Consult  God  first : — Take  one  step  at  a  time, 
every  step  under  Divine  warrant  and  direction.  Ever  plan  for  yourself  in  simple 
dependence  on  God.  It  is  nothing  less  than  self-idolatry  to  conceive  that  we  can 
carry  on  even  the  ordinary  matters  of  the  day  without  His  counsel.  He  loves  to 
be  consulted.  Therefore  take  all  thy  difficulties  to  be  resolved  by  Him.  Be  in  the 
habit  of  going  to  Him  in  the  first  place — before  self-will,  self-pleasing,  self-wisdom, 
human  friends,  convenience,  expediency.     Before  any  of  these  have  been  consulted, 


CHA».  m.]  PROVERBS,  ,  59 

go  to  God  at  once.     (C.  Bridges,  M.A.)        The  necessity  for  Divine  guidance  .— 

1.  The  filial  acknowledgment  demanded,  1.  In  what  it  consists.  We  must 
acknowledge  God's  supreme  authority,  and  also  His  Divine  wisdom  and  goodness. 

2.  In  what  manner  this  acknowledgment  should  be  made.  By  going  to  the  Divine 
Word  for  instruction ;  by  prayer ;  and  by  obedience  to  His  authority.  II.  Thb 
Divine  guidance  which  is  pbomised.  1.  By  enabling  us  to  understand  truth  and 
the  rule  of  duty.  2.  By  preparing  and  disposing  the  heart  to  obedience.  3.  By  a 
kind  and  wise  providence.  Application :  1.  Do  you  complain  that  you  have  not 
such  guidance  ?  In  all  your  ways  you  do  not  acknowledge  God.  2.  We  must  be 
sinful  if  we  are  in  error.  3.  The  subject  appeals  to  wanderers  and  backsliders. 
4.  The  counsel  is  specially  addressed  to  the  young.  {Evangelical  Preacher.)  God 
to  he  acknowledged  in  all  the  affairs  of  life : — There  is  no  hardship  in  this.  This 
injunction  is  aimed,  not  at  the  speculative  atheism  which  denies  that  there  is  a 
God,  but  at  the  much  more  common  practical  ungodliness  which  keeps  Him  at  a 
distance  from  human  affairs.  If  the  commandment  had  been,  "  Acknowledge  God 
in  the  uncertain  and  difficult  ways  of  life,"  it  would  have  met  with  a  more  ready 
compliance.  The  large,  and  the  formal,  and  the  public  men  will  submit  to  His 
decision  ;  but  the  little,  and  close,  and  kindly  they  will  keep  to  themselves.  Let 
Him  compass  you  about  as  the  atmosphere  embraces  the  earth,  going  into  every 
interstice,  and  taking  the  measure  of  every  movement.  "  Trust  in  the  Lord  at  all 
times ;  pour  out  your  hearts  before  Him."  [W.  Arnot,  D.D.)      Acknowledging  God  : — 

1.  A  direction  :  "In  all  thy  ways  acknowledge  Him."  1.  It  means  to  recognise 
God  as  our  master,  to  accept  Him  as  the  sole  arbiter  of  our  lot,  and  publicly  to 
acknowledge  the  position  which  we  assume  towards  Him.  2.  It  means  to  take 
God  into  all  our  counsels,  and  listen  to  His  authority  in  everything  we  undertake. 
This  act  will  render  it  impossible  for  us  to  sin,  for  how  can  a  man  take  a  holy  God 
unto  his  counsels  for  evil?  3.  It  means  to  acknowledge  God  in  all  our  actions  by 
seeking  His  blessing  in  their  progress.  It  is  not  sufficient  to  begin  well.  It  is  only 
when  God  is  sought  at  every  stexD  that  we  can  walk  in  accordance  with  His  will  or 
progress  safely  or  securely.  4.  It  means  to  cultivate  a  feeling  of  resignation,  and 
to  be  willing  to  give  up  our  own  ways  and  desires  to  His  demand.  This  is,  indeed, 
the  great  test  which  determines  whether  we  acknowledge  God.  It  costs  some- 
thing, and  hereby  we  prove  our  sincerity.  It  is  hard  to  have  to  renounce  the 
cherished  desires  of  a  lifetime.  II.  The  peomise  :  "  And  He  shall  direct  thy 
paths."  1.  That  it  is  the  only  safe  course  we  can  pursue  to  allow  God  to  direct  us. 
Owing  to  our  own  ignorance  and  shortsightedness  we  cannot  direct  them  oiirselves.. 

2.  That  it  is  an  utter  impossibility  for  God  to  direct  our  paths  unless  we  commit 
our  whole  ways  into  His  hands.  Faith  and  trust  are  the  requisites  for  this  happy 
consummation.  3.  That  the  ultimate  end  of  His  direction  will  turn  out  a  gloriousl 
triumph.      (Homilist.)  Human    dependence  and   Divine  guidance: — I.    The 

ACKNOWLEDGSrENT  OF  GoD  IN  ALL  OUR  WATS  SUPPOSES,  AS  A  PRELIMINARY,  THAT 
WHAT    WE    ARE    ABOUT    TO    DO    IS     CONSISTENT    WITH     CHRISTIAN    PRINCIPLE.        Christian 

principle  is  on  the  side  of  everything  that  is  high,  and  honourable,  and  pure  in  the 
character  of  man.  A  mean  Christian,  a  dishonourable  Christian,  an  impure- 
minded  Christian,  are  associations  of  light  and  darkness  unknown  to  Christian 
verity.  II.  This  acknowledgment  of  God  is  the  constant  accompaniment  of  a 
FILIAL  spirit.  The  true  child  may  not  always  understand,  but  will  always  obey 
the  will  of  his  parent.  The  filial  spirit  regulates  the  discordances  between  the 
understanding  and  the  life.  The  religious  man  is  a  child.  It  is  not  enough  for 
him  to  do  child's  work,  he  must  do  it  in  a  child's  temper.  It  is  not  enough  for 
him  to  bear  a  child's  discipline,  he  must  bear  it  in  a  child's  spirit.  III.  This 
acknowledgment  of  God  is  always  accompanied  by  practical  obedience.  Whether 
it  is  the  cause  or  the  effect  of  this  obedience,  it  is  not  necessary  to  distinguish. 
There  is  a  real  practical  obedience  along  with  the  utterance  that  expresses  the 
acknowledgment.  When  may  we  hope  that  Divine  direction  is  given  in  answer  to 
prayer?  Consider^l.  The  reflex  benefits  of  prayer.  2.  The  arrangements  of 
God's  providence  that  secure  an  answer  to  prayer.  To  withhold  prayer  is  to 
oppose  the  spiritual  constitution  of  the  universe.  It  is  the  refusal  of  obedience,  of 
worship,  of  the  acknowledgment  of  dependence,  of  confession,  of  supplication,  and 
of  thanksgiving ;  and  we  cannot  imagine  that  to  place  ourselves  at  that  distance 
from  God  is  the  way  to  secure  eternal  bliss.  (TF.  G.  Barrett.)  Duty  and  assur- 
ance : — I.  The  duty  enjoined.  1.  The  nature  of  this  duty.  By  our  "ways"  and 
"  paths  "  we  understand  the  designs,  aims,  and  intentions  of  our  minds,  together 
■with  our  actions  consequent  upon  them ;  our  whole  capacity  of  judging,  designing, 


€0  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

resolving,  and  acting.  To  actnowledge  God  is  to  confess  and  own  Him,  according 
to  all  those  several  accounts  and  manifestations  of  Himself  that  He  has  given  ns. 
2.  The  extent,  scope,  and  latitude  of  the  duty.  It  is  not  indeed  capable  of  limita- 
tion, for  unless  our  resignation  shall  be  universal,  it  cannot  be  sincere.     III.  The 

ENCOURAQKMENT    OB   THE    MOTIVE    THAT    IS    OFFERED    TO  THE  PRACTICE    OF    IT.       1.    The 

truth  of  the  proposition,  "  He  will  direct  thy  paths."  What  is  to  be  understood 
by  this  Divine  direction  ?  What  confidence  have  we  that  God  will  make 
good  His  promise?  2.  The  force  of  the  motive.  Because  He  will  vouchsafe 
to  direct  our  paths,  therefore  in  all  our  ways  we  should  acknowledge  Him. 
(Dean    Lambe.)  What   to    acknowledge    concerning    God: — I.    His    presence. 

"The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  in  every  place."  All  except  an  atheist — a  no  God 
man — will  admit  this  with  their  lips ;  few  admit  it  in  their  lives.  II.  His 
power.  He  can  do  whatsoever  He  pleases.  Nothing  is  impossible,  nothing  if 
too  hard  for  the  Lord.  III.  His  promises.  The  Bible  is  full  of  promises, 
suitable  for  all  persons,  and  fitting  into  all  circumstances.  {R.  Newton.  D.D.) 
Providence  : — Submission  to  Divine  providence  does  not  consist  in  a  blind  surrender 
of  the  will  to  the  influence  of  circumstances.  Many  a  time  we  persuade  ourselves 
that  our  course  is  one  of  patient  acquiescence  in  the  will  of  God,  when  we  do  but 
drift  in  foolish  idleness  on  the  stream  of  life.  This  text  introduces  the  subject  of 
Divine  providence  as  an  essential  truth  in  the  practical  creed  of  our  daily  life.  In 
solving  the  problem  of  human  life  it  is  necessary  to  recognise  the  individuality  of 
character  and  the  liberty  of  will.  A  false  humility  has  led  to  the  virtual  denial  of 
this.  Men  have  deemed  it  bestowing  honour  upon  God  to  represent  themselves  as  , 
mere  clay  in  the  hands  of  the  potter.  This  idea  has  been  underlying  much  of  the 
popular  theology  of  the  past,  and,  in  some  way  or  other,  it  seems  to  be  underlying 
much  of  the  popular  theology  of  to-day.  To  be  wilfully  blind  to  our  own  capacity 
and  character  is  to  deny  ungratefully  the  best  gifts  of  God.  It  is  to  lose  sight  of 
the  real  purposes  of  our  being.  True  self-examination  is  one  of  the  chief  wants  of 
our  time.  Self-examination  is  real  and  true  in  proportion  as  it  dispenses  with  the 
fallacious  and  often  misleading  appearances  in  the  lives  of  others.  Truth  is  relative. 
No  two  truths  can  possibly  be  antagonistic  to,  or  inconsistent  with,  each  other.  We 
recognise  the  individuality  of  character  and  the  liberty  of  the  will,  and  in  perfect 
consistency  with  this,  we  aflSrm  the  truth  taught  in  the  text.  But  what  is  it  to 
acknowledge  God  ?  The  relation  of  cause  and  effect  holds  good  in  the  realm  of 
spiritual  life  not  less  than  in  the  material  world.  Rewards  and  punishments  are 
not  arbitrarily  bestowed  by  Him  who  is  "  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth."  To 
"  acknowledge  "  God  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  to  acknowledge  the  principles  of 
truth  and  righteousness  in  all  our  ways.  It  is  not  to  talk  about  religion,  but  to  act 
it  in  the  life.  Not  he  who  talks  much  about  the  gospel,  but  he  whose  every-day 
duties  in  business,  in  the  family,  and  in  the  world  are  evidently  influenced  by  the 
spirit  and  essence  of  the  gospel,  is  the  best  evangelist.  Thus  to  acknowledge  God 
is  to  secure  the  guidance  of  His  providence.  Thus  God  has  placed  man's  happiness, 
60  to  speak,  in  his  own  keeping ;  and  by  true  submission  to  the  Divine  will  man  is 
able  to  "  lay  hold  on  eternal  life."  Surrendering  ourselves  to  the  guidance  of  holy 
and  eternal  principles,  we  are  unconcerned  about  the  future.  Our  delight  being  in 
the  Lord — that  is,  in  the  integrity  and  holiness  of  His  will — we  know  that  He  will 
give  us  the  desires  of  our  heart.  (F.  Wagstaff.)  How  does  God  guide  us  ? — In 
acknowledging  God  we  are  not  to  trust  enthusiastically  to  impressions,  to  dreams, 
to  fancied  voices,  and  inward  suggestions.  Far  less  are  we  to  make  a  lottery  of  the 
Bible,  opening  it  at  random,  and  taking  the  text  that  first  meets  our  eye  as  given  us 
by  God,  and  putting  our  own  meaning  upon  it.  We  are  to  apply  our  understand- 
ings to  the  blessed  volume  of  inspiration,  that  we  may  find  its  principles  and 
precepts  that  bear  upon  our  case,  and  give  our  hearts  to  prayer,  for  that  influence 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  is  necessary  to  deliver  us  from  all  undue  prepossessions 
and  prejudices  in  examining  it.  (R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  The  acknowledgment  of 
God  : — Such  acknowledgment  will  not  be  a  fruitless  thing,  it  will  have  a  practical 
effect.  I.  How  God  is  to  bk  acknowledged.  By  a  solemn  and  deliberate  appeal 
to  the  great  Disposer  of  all  things  for  that  aid  and  guidance  which  He  alone  can 
afford.  This  must  involve — 1.  A  real  conviction  that  God  rules  the  world.  If  God 
has  no  care  for  the  concerns  of  this  lower  world,  to  acknowledge  Him  is  useless ; 
if  He  acts  in  all  things  quite  independently  of  oar  conduct,  acknowledgingf  Him  is 
an  impertinence.  2.  That  we  honestly  admit  to  Him  in  each  particular  case  that 
the  matter  is  in  His  hands,  and  that  it  is  ordered  as  He  may  see  fit.  This  implies 
»  coarse  of  thought  just  the  very  opposite  of  that  which  men  commonly  parsoe  in 


CHAP,  m.]  PROVERBS.  61 

the  basiness  of  life.  To  them  all  concerns  and  events  are  godless  just  because 
they  are  godless  themselves.  3.  A  sincere  dependence  on  Him  for  direction  and 
help.  This  is  the  practical  bearing  of  our  conscious  reference  to  God.  A  real  and 
earnest  acknowledgment  of  God  is  a  belief  in  His  supreme  and  almighty  govern- 
ment of  the  world  ;  a  devout  reference  to  His  presence  in  all  the  concerns  in  which 
we  are  called  to  act,  a  humble  reliance  on  His  Spirit  and  aid ;  and  this  is  a  state  of 
mind  to  be  maintained,  continually  carried  into  every  scene  of  duty  and  conflict, 
and  made  a  settled  habit  of  thought  and  feeling  in  all  our  ways.  JI.  How  wilii 
God  direct  oub  ways  ?  If  proof  that  He  does  were  wanted  the  whole  experience  of 
His  people  in  all  ages  would  rise  up  in  witness.  The  promise  is  of  direction.  It  is 
not  necessarily  a  complete  deliverance,  and  much  less  a  painless  course  of  ease  and, 
prosperity.  How  will  the  direction  be  effected?  Through  the  working  of  our  own; 
minds  and  the  counsels  of  others ;  by  opening  new  paths  and  placing  fresh  aids 
within  our  reach  ;  by  influencing  our  souls  through  the  teaching  of  His  Spirit,  and 
preserving    them  from  false  signs   by  which   they  were  wont  to  be  led  astray. 

1.  Often  God  leads  us  and  we  know  not  how,  we  cannot  say  by  what  means  it  is. 

2.  Often  God  leads  us  even  by  means  of  obstacles.  3.  Often  God  leads  us  by  means 
of  delay.  4.  Sometimes  God  even  seems  to  guide  our  way  by  means  of  our 
enemies.  (J.M.  Charlton,  M. A.)  God'i  direction: — Do  nothing  without  Gcfd's 
direction  in  His  Word.  A  man  that  had  a  house  to  build  would  in  all  things  follow 
the  direction  of  a  skilful  workman,  lest  he  lose  his  cost.  So  let  us  follow  God's 
guidance,  or  all  our  labour  is  lost.  None  desires  to  go  astray  out  of  his  way,  except 
he  be  first  gone  out  of  his  wits.  Every  man  will  rather  take  a  guide  to  direct  him, 
and  give  money  to  that  end.  If  we  be  careful  to  acknowledge  God  in  our  ways  we 
shall  not  wander  out  of  them,  for  we  shall  have  a  trusty  guide.  The  Athenians 
conceived  that  their  goddess  Minerva  turned  all  their  evil  counsels  into  good  to 
them  ;  the  Eomans  thought  their  goddess  Yidelia  set  them  again  in  the  right  way 
when  at  any  time  they  were  out.  All  this,  and  undoubtedly  more,  is  done  by  the 
true  God  for  all  who  commit  their  ways  unto  Him.  (Francis  Taylor,  B.D.) 
Acknowledging  God  in  all  our  ways : — I.  The  natdre  of  the  injunction.  A 
practical  acknowledgment  is  required  ;  but  this  is  founded  on  a  firm  belief  of  the 
existence  and  perfections  of  God.  We  acknowledge  God  in  all  our  ways — 1.  When . 
we  live  in  obedience  to  His  Word  and  commandments.  2.  When  we  look  to  and 
trust  Him  for  what  we  want,   and    implore  His  blessing  on  all  we   undertake. 

3.  When  we  acquiesce  in  and  submit  to  His  dispensations.  4.  Acknowledging  implies 
praising  and  gratefully  adoring  Him  under  a  sense  of  His  bounty  and  loving-kind- 
ness. 5.  And  seeking  Him  in  and  through  His  Son.  II.  The  encoubagement 
GIVEN  TJS  TO  ACKNOWLEDGE  GoD.  1.  We  shall  be  preserved  by  grace  from  fatal 
mistakes  and  errors.  2.  We  shall  be  conducted  by  God  through  aU  the  difficulties 
and  perplexities  that  may  meet  us.  3.  We  shall  be  well  instructed  in  the  way  of  duty 
and  peace.  (S.  Knight,  M. A.)  Piety  in  ev ery -day  life  : — 1.  Bring  religion  into 
our  ordinary  conversation.  2.  Into  our  ordinary  employments.  3.  Into  all  our 
trials.  4.  Into  our  ordinary  blessings.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  Acknowledging 
God : — 1.  Acknowledge  God  as  thy  King,  by  conforming  to  His  laws.  2,  As  thy 
Benefactor,  by  gratefully  receiving  His  benefits.  3,  As  thy  Father,  by  submitting  to 
His  paternal  chastisements.  4.  As  thy  Model,  by  striving  to  copy  His  perfec- 
tions. (Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermons.)  Divine  guidance : — I.  The  Duty. 
1.  Acknowledge  His  wisdom.  2.  His  goodness.  3.  His  superintendence.  4.  His 
faithfulness.  II.  The  promise  connected  with  the  duty.  He  will  make  our 
path  straight  and  plain  before  us,  and  show  in  what  way  we  ought  to  walk,  and 
how  we  ought  to  act.  (W.  C.  Wilson,  M. A.)  Dependence: — The  thought  of  an  -^ 
over-ruling  Providence  is  the  sweetest  of  all  thougmrto  the  Christian.  It  is  to  him 
his  stay,  his  comfort,  and  his  assurance  in  this  dark  vale  of  tears.  The  best 
Christian  is  he  that  trusts  most  implicitly  to  the  God  of  providence,  the  God  of  all 
His  mercy.  The  Christian  who  truly  loves  Christ  feels  himself  utterly  dependent 
upon  the  strength  of  Christ.  There  are  some  men  who  go  forth  to  their  daily  work 
from  morning  till  evening  as  though  there  were  no  providence  to  guide  them. 
Worldly-minded  men  have  no  recognition  of  a  God,  make  no  acknowledgment  of  a 
providence.  » I.  Man's  duty.  The  whole  course  of  man's  existence  is  a  course  of 
utter  dependence,  and  for  some  mercy  or  favour  he  is  every  day  required  to  give  an 
acknowledgment.  This  feeling  of  dependence  we  must  be  conscious  of  every  day 
we  live.  In  every  position  of  society  we  are  mutually  dependent  the  one  upon 
the  other.  One  class  of  society  looks  to  another  class,  and  even  the  queen 
upon    her   throne   must   ask    her   people   for   her  annual  supplies  and  revenues.. 


62  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

But  there  is  a  point  at  which  dependence  ceases.  There  is  One  above  all  othera 
who  owes  nothing  to  any  man,  but  contributes  of  His  goodness  to  all  men  freely — 
One  on  whom  all  are  dependent,  and  yet  He  Himself  is  independent  of  any. 
That  is  the  God  of  heaven  ;  the  God  of  providence — the  source  of  all  our 
comfort  ;  the  author  of  every  blessing  ;  the  giver  of  every  grace,  the  spring  of 
all  our  joys,  the  life  of  every  delight.  To  acknowledge  God  we  must — 
1.  Believe  in  the  existence  of  God.  2.  Use  the  power  and  privilege  of  prayer  when 
we  are  in  need,  distress,  affliction.  11.  God's  pkomise.  He  has  pledged  Himself 
in  His  own  never-failing  covenant,  •'  I  will  direct  thy  paths."  Are  you  not 
conscious  that  oftentimes  Providence  has  turned  your  feet  by  a  way  you 
know  not,  and  opened  up  to  you  new  spheres  of  duty?  The  mercies  past 
demand  acknowledgment,  and  they  encourage  you  to  trust  for  mercies  yet  to 
come.  If  you  feel  any  doubt,  hesitation,  perplexity,  trouble,  then  come,  like 
Hezekiah  of  old,  and  spread  your  want  before  the  Lord  ;  the  ears  of  the  God 
of  Sabaoth  love  to  hear  the  voice  of  him  that  prayeth.  {R.  Maguire,  M.A.) 
He  shall  direct  thy  paths .- — His  direction  will  secure — 1.  Safety.  2.  Happiness. 
3.  Endless  progress.  {D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  great  duty  of  acknowledging 
God : — I.  The  duty  enjoined.  We  are  to  carry  out,  in  the  actings  of  every-day 
life,  the  great  principle  that  there  is  a  Being  above  us,  and  that  Being  is  the 
proper  object  of  the  love  and  confidence  of  His  creatures.  From  the  time  we  set 
out  in  life  to  the  period  of  old  age — in  all  the  variety  of  circumstances  in  which 
we  may  be  placed,  whatever  be  our  state,  whether  one  of  prosperity  or  one  of 
affliction — in  all  our  concerns,  personal  and  relative,  temporal  and  spiritual,  in  all 
that  belongs  to  this  world  or  that  relates  to  the  next— we  should  think  of  God,  and 
thank  God,  and  trust  God,  and  pray  to  God  for  His  counsel  and  grace.  We  are 
to  see  God  in  everything,  and  we  are  to  do  nothing  without  Him.  This  duty  is  set 
in  opposition  to  the  natural  tendency  of  the  human  mind  to  draw  wisdom  from  its 
own  resources,  and  to  rest  satisfied  with  its  own  powers.  This  setting  God  before 
us,  with  that  feeling  of  reverence  which  His  great  name  inspires,  is  a  barrier  to  the 
commission  of  sin.  II.  The  encoubagement  orvEN  to  practise  this  duty.  All  our 
goings  shall  be  under  His  guidance,  if  we  own  and  seek  His  providence.  With  a 
special  regard  to  the  interests  of  the  humble,  trusting  soul.  He  will  open  a  path 
before  it ;  He  will  lead  it  into  that  path  by  indications  of  His  will,  plain  and 
evident.  We  are  short-sighted.  We  miscalculate.  We  often  fail.  We  are  exposed 
to  temptations.  We  want  a  counsellor.  If  we  look  for  God  we  shall  see  God,  and 
see  Him  as  our  Helper,  Protector,  and  Guide,  in  the  most  remarkable  manner.  If 
we  depend  upon  providences,  in  the  use  of  means,  we  shall  have  providential  actings 
in  our  behalf,  times  without  number.  God  may  not  always  lead  us  in  the  path 
that  we  ourselves  would  choose.  Infinite  Wisdom  chooses  the  path,  and  Infinite 
Love  bears  us  through  it.  The  rugged  way  may  be  the  right  way,  though  we  may 
not  now  be  able  to  see  it.  The  direction  of  a  higher  Power  brought  to  your  affairs 
will  not  only  conduce  to  your  spiritual  interests,  it  will  likewise  prove  the  greatest 
ternporal  blessing.  {William  Curling,  M.A.)  Trust  in  the  Lord  : — Speaking  , 
broadly;  there  are  two  ways  in  which  people  pass  through  life.  They  pass  through  ; 
it  remembering  God,  or  they  pass  through  it  forgetting  Him.  God  is  out  of  sight ' 
to  us  all :  the  difference  is  that  to  some  He  is  out  of  mind  ;  by  others  He  is  really 
and  truly  constantly  thought  of.  We  are  all  mixed  up  together  for  the  present : 
those  who  are  passing  through  the  world  looking  to  God,  and  leaning  on  His  arm, 
and  those  who  have  no  help  but  what  their  own  strength  gives  them,  and  no  hope 
beyond  this  world.  We  are  all  mixed  up  together — nay,  the  two  ways  are  mixed 
up  very  often  in  ourselves ;  we  seem  to  pass  from  one  to  the  other,  from  forgetting 
God  to  remembering  Him,  from  trusting  Him  to  trusting  only  this  world  ;  we  have 
Him  in  mind  one  hour,  we  lean  unto  our  own  understanding  the  next.  Yet,  in 
spite  of  all  this,  there  are  but  the  two  ways  ;  there  is  no  mixing  up  of  them  in  the 
eyes  of  God,  who  sees  all  clearly.  Now,  to  which  is  our  ordinary  course  of  life 
most  like  ?  We  must  look  close  into  our  hearts  and  secret  ways  if  we  would  not  be 
deceived ;  if  we  really  wish  to  know  whether  we  are  trusting  to  Almighty  God's 
wisdom  and  strength  to  help  and  guide  us  through  our  day's  walk,  or  whether  we 
are  leaning  to  our  own  poor,  weak  understanding.  One  sure  proof  is  in  our 
private  prayers.  It  is  impossible  that  any  one  can  really  be  acknowledging  God — 
can  be  thinking  of  anything  but  worldly  things — who  does  not  pray  by  himself  in 
secret,  and  pray  every  day  regularly.  Then,  again,  how  do  we  pray?  Do  we  make 
a  reality  of  our  prayers  by  giving  our  mind  to  them,  and  keeping  our  thoughts  from 
wandering — by  earnestly  begging  God  to  be  merciful  to  us,  and  to  take  care  of  us, 


CHIP,  m.]  PROVERBS.  63 

in  soul  and  body,  both  here  and  in  eternity  ?  Or  do  we  pray  only  becatise  we 
should  feel  uncomfortable  if  we  had  not  said  our  prayers,  but  yet  without  really 
feeling  that  we  need  what  we  pray  for  ?  Another  proof  is  our  way  of  bearing 
disappointments — the  crosses  and  vexations  which  come  upon  all  of  us  in  our 
turn  as  we  go  through  life.  Nothing  shows  more  plainly  than  this  whether  we  are 
indeed  acknowledging  the  Lord  in  all  our  ways,  for  this  discovers  to  us  for  certain 
whether  indeed  we  behevB  that  all  things  come  from  God's  ordering ;  and  also 
that  there  is  nothing  that  He  sends  on  us  but  He  sends  it  out  of  love  for  our  souls, 
out  of  the  desire  to  do  us  good  in  the  end.  Another  proof  is  the  care  we  take  to 
keep  in  order  our  words  and  our  secret  thoughts  as  we  pass  through  the  day. 
"  Acknowledge  Him  in  all  thy  ways,"  says  the  Scripture ;  and  how  should  we 
acknowledge  Him  better  than  by  showing  how  constantly  what  He  loves  and  desires 
comes  into  our  thoughts,  and  keeps  us  from  saying  and  thinking  what,  if  we  sought 
only  our  own  will,  we  should  think  and  say.  When,  for  love  and  fear  of  Him,  we 
keep  back  a  bitter  or  ill-natured  word  that  no  one  knew  we  were  going  to  say,  then 
we  do  nothing  for  the  praise  of  men,  but  we  "  acknowledge  "  Him  in  secret.  When 
for  fear  and  love  of  Him,  we  not  only  set  a  watch  on  our  lips,  but  keep  a  guard  also 
on  our  thoughts — drive  away  all  things  that  we  ought  not  to  think  about — check 
and  keep  down  our  passion  when  it  is  rising — then  this  is  something  which  is 
meant  only  for  His  eye  ;  for  the  eye  of  man  cannot  see  what  was  in  our  heart,  and 
would  not  have  known  anything  about  it  if  we  had  indulged  our  thoughts.  But  if 
we  let  our  thoughts  run  riot,  and  say  that  no  eye  shall  see  them,  and  no  one  think 
the  worse  of  us  for  them  ;  if  we  prefer  to  say  the  first  harsh  or  unkind  thing  that 
comes  up  to  our  lips  when  we  are  vexed  or  angry,  instead  of  keeping  it  under, 
though  it  cost  us  a  struggle ;  if  we  give  our  hearts  liberty  to  long  for,  and  run  after, 
the  good  things  of  this  world,  and  say  that  there  is  no  harm  in  it ;  if  we  let  our 
Bouls  be  burdened  or  surfeited  with  the  cares  or  pleasures  of  this  world  ;  if  we  have 
no  time  for  thoughts  about  God  and  our  eternal  state,  and  put  them  out  of  the  way 
that  we  may  give  ourselves  more  completely  to  our  worldly  interests — if  we  do  all 
this,  how  can  any  one  deceive  himself  with  thinking  that  he  is  acknowledging  God 
in  all  his  ways  ?  {Dean  Church.)  A  recipe  for  the  true  enjoyment  of  life  : — 
Obedience  to  the  known  will  of  God  is  the  condition  which  secures  Divine  direction 
in  the  paths  of  our  life.  I.  The  important  condition.  The  presence  of  the' 
Lord  fills  the  universe,  and  you  should — 1.  Acknowledge  Him  in  your  secret  ways.  | 
Such  presence  should  not  be  a  dread  to  us.  His  is  a  kindly  presence.  2.  Acknow- 
ledge Him  in  your  ways  of  thought.  If  the  fountain  be  pure,  the  stream  which 
flows  therefrom  shall  be  unstained.  3.  Acknowledge  God  in  your  ways  of  business. 
The  best  partner  we  can  have  is  our  heavenly  Father.  4.  Acknowledge  Him  in 
your  ways  of  pleasure.  In  all  festivities.  Wherever  you  go,  whatever  you  do. 
5.  Acknowledge  Him  in  your  ways  of  dress.  Instead  of  dressing  to  appear  fashion- 
able, dress  to  be  Godlike,  Christlike.  6.  Acknowledge  Him  in  the  ways  of  social 
life.  7.  Acknowledge  Him  in  the  ways  of  prayer,  faith,  praise,  penitence,  doing 
good,  reading  the  Scriptures.  II.  Thi  souL-iNSPnirNO  promise  :  "He  shall  direct 
thy  paths."  1.  In  the  pilgrimage  of  life.  2.  To  the  unrevealed  future.  3.  To 
the  Cross  of  Calvary.  4.  To  the  ever-flowing  fountain  of  forgiveness.  5.  To 
your  place  in  heaven.  (William  Birch.)  Guidance : — I,  Guidance  is  to  bk 
HAD  FOR  THE  JOURNEY.  There  are  countless  false  paths,  but  no  traveller  needs 
to  take  any  of  them.  God  makes  the  minds  of  those  whom  He  guides  clear, 
BO  that  they  act  wisely,  and  He  makes  their  consciences  sensitive  and  correct, 
BO  that  they  act  rightly.  II.  How  are  we  to  get  this  guidance  ?  It  will 
not  be  forced  upon  any  one.  No  one  can  count  upon  getting  God's  guidance 
who  does  not  seek  it.  This  is  the  meaning  of  "  acknowledge  Him."  It  means 
*'  take  notice  of  Him,"  consult  Him,  and  obey  His  directions.  Treat  Him  as 
you  treat  a  guide.  III.  What  are  "  the  ways  "  in  which  we  must  acknowledge 
Him  ?  1.  The  course  of  life  as  a  whole.  It  is  well  often  to  think  of  life  thus  as  a 
unity,  and  ask  where  it  is  leading  to.  Is  it  not  strange  that  men  should  undertake 
the  longest  journey  of  all  without  Him?  2.  In  each  particular  enterprise  and 
action  we  engage  in  He  is  to  be  acknowledged.  3.  In  what  goes  before  our  actions 
— the  imaginations  and  desires,  the  plans  and  purposes,  we  must  acknowledge  Him.  ^ 
4.  In  what  comes  after  our  actions — habits.  All  of  us  have  some  bad  habits,  and  i 
many  who  consult  God  as  to  particular  actions  still  let  their  formed  habits  guide 
them  each  along  its  own  line.  But  here,  too,  He  must  be  acknowledged,  and  by 
His  grace  the  strongest  habit  can  be  broken.  5.  Stress  must  be  laid  on  the  word 
"  all."     God  will  have  our  whole  heart  or  He  will  have  none  of  it.     (John  Kelman, 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  m. 

M.A.)        Spiritual  direction  : — There  have  been  many  definitions  of  religion.    It  ia 
one  of  the  great  and  fascinating  features  of  life  which  tempt  description,  just  as 
the  glory  and  charm  of  nature  provoke  representation  in  art.     I  am  not  going  to 
add  another  definition.     I  am  only  going  to  say  that  for  practical  purposes  our 
religion  may  be  described  as  our  response  to  the  will  of  God.     It  is  an  obedience. 
When  I  have  said  that,  I  have  said  in  the  same  breath  that  religion  is  not  an  easy 
thing,  but  a  hard.   If  religion  were  not  so  commonly  represented  as  an  accommoda- 
tion to  the  weak,  it  would  be  a  mightier  power  in  the  world  than  it  is  to-day. 
Christian  religion  is  not,  in  the  first  place,  a  concession  to  our  weakness.     It  is  an 
appeal  to  our  strength.     It  is  deep  calling  to  deep.     It  is  a  summons  to  unite  all 
that  is  within  us.    God  does  not  address  Himself  to  our  weakness,  but  to  our  power, 
to  our  faith.     His  Church  is  the  fellowship  of  the  strong,  or  those  who  are  growing 
strong,  not  of  the  weak,  who  hug  their  weakness  and  demand  that  the  rest  shall 
wait  for  them.    Eeligion,  I  say,  is  a  hard  thing.    Any  appeal  to  our  will  is  hard. 
To  submit  the  will  is  the  hardest  thing  man  has  to  do.     If  religion  were  merely 
sympathy,  it  would  not  be  so  hard.   Sympathising  is  easy.   What  is  hard  is  to  obey. 
Have  you  not  discovered  that  ?     How  easy  it  is  to  sympathise  with  Christ,  to  love 
one  so  lovely  as  Christ !     How  hard  it  is  to  obey  Christ !     Have  you  not  found  that 
obeying  Christ  is  more  hard  than  loving  Him  ?    Have  you  not  observed  that  Christ 
asked  for  obedience  much  more  than  He  asked  for  love  ?    It  was  to  our  power  of 
doing  hard  things  that  He  appealed.     It  was  to  our  strength  He  came,  to  side  with 
that  against  our  weakness.     You  must  begin  by  taking  Christ  Himself.     The  one 
comprehensive  expression  of  God's  will  is  Christ.     To  respond  to  Christ  is  the  first 
step  in  religion.     It  is  the  first  comprehensive  act  of  obedience  to  God's  will.     It  is 
the  first  comprehensive  surrender  of  your  will  to  His.      But  that  is  a  serious 
matter  and  a  severe.     It  is  not  a  mere  thrill  of  sympathy  with  some  of  the  loveUer 
features  in  Christ.    You  have  not  accepted  Christ  when  you  have  felt  you  would 
like  to  love  Him  and  serve  Him.     That  is  no  act  of  will.     What  Christ  did  for  you 
was  more  than  that.     He  did  not  feel  as  if  He  would  like  to  love  and  help  and  save 
you.     That  would  have  been  a  very  sentimental  salvation,  no  salvation  at  all,  a 
mere  piece  of  amiable  religious  failure.     How  does  it  look  to  say  that  Christ  had  a 
weakness,  or  tenderness,  for  mankind  ?    Yet  it  is  all  that  some  forms  of  religion 
seem  to  recognise  in  Him.     And  to  admit  that  you  have  a  weakness  for  Christ,  is 
that  religion,  faith  ?    Yet  it  is  all  that  you  have  in  some  forms  of  religion  which 
have  much  to  say  about  sympathy  with  Christ  and  little  about  obedience,  about 
self -committal.   To  love  much  that  is  in  Christ  is  one  thing,  but  to  wed  Christ,  give 
yourself  to  Him  for  good  and  all,  take  Him  for  better  or  for  worse  by  a  decisive  act 
of  loving  will  and  total  life — that  is  another  thing  and  a  greater.     How  are  we  to 
let  God  direct  our  path  ?    When  will  He  direct  it  ?     If  this  verse  be  true,  it  is  when 
in  all  our  ways  we  acknowledge  Him.   What  does  that  mean  ?   Push  your  inquiries. 
Do  not  swallow  texts  whole.     There  are  forms  of  acknowledging  God  in  all  our 
ways  which  do  not  seem  to  win  the  blessing  promised  here.     A  man  may  be  very 
pious  in  his  habits,  and  feel  no  shame  or  backwardness  in  acknowledging  God  in 
connection  with  his  daily  pursuits.     He  may  be  particular  about  family  worship, 
about  saying   grace,   about  church-going,  about  obliging  his  servants   to   go  to 
church,  about  thanksgiving  for  prosperity,  about  giving  God  a  portion  of  his  income, 
about  making  a  ready  and  sometimes  even  effusive  recognition  of  religion  in  his 
manner  of  speech,  his  churchly  feeling,  his  philanthropic  energies.     In  plenty  of 
cases  all  this  is  quite  sincere,  in  some  it  is  not.     It  is  sometimes  combined  with 
ways  of  business  which  excite  comment,  or  a  habit  of  mind  which  does  not  adorn 
the  faith.     But,  whether  sincere  or  not,  it  has  this  feature.     The  man  stands  in 
his  own  ways  and  acknowledges  God.     The  acknowledgment  of  God  is  an  extra 
something  joined   on  to  the  pursuit  of  his  ways,  joined   on  to  the  rest  of  his 
activities  as  the  Sunday  and  its  engagements  are  attached  to  the  rest  of  the  week. 
Now,  if  this  is  sincere  it  is  something  to  be  thankful  for.    But  it  is  hardly,  perhaps, 
the  kind  of  thing  which  makes  a  man  sure  of  the  direction  of  God  in  all  he  may 
go  on  to  do  or  design.   Again,  there  are  some  people  who  are  most  unselfish  in  all 
their  thoughts  and  acts,  people  whom  it  is  a  happiness  to  know,  and  who  are  a 
rebuke   sometimes  to   our  own  selfish  ways.     In  spite  of  their  absence  of  self- 
seeking  they  are  not  so  directed  in  their  paths  that  they  become  directors  of  con- 
science to  others.     Some,  I  mean,  with  less  unselfishness  have  a  moral  judgment 
that  we  should  trust  more.    To  say  the  truth,  unselfishness  is  sometimes  a  negative 
kind  of  virtue.     There  are  people  who  are  more  unselfish  than  obedient.     They  do 
not  think  of  themselves,  but — they  have  not  the  secret  of  the  Lord.     They  are  not 


CUAr.TO.}  PROVERBS.  «S 

Mif -willed,  but  they  have  not  the  insight  into  the  will  of  Qod.  We  speak  of  the 
sinlessness  of  Christ,  and  I  fear  it  often  means  something  colourless  and  negative. 
It  keeps  us  from  thinking  as  we  should  about  the  positive  and  complete  obedience  of 
Christ.  And  so  with  the  unselfishness  of  some  sweet  souls.  It  is  more  the 
absence  of  self  than  the  presence  of  God  or  the  secret  of  His  Spirit.  Again,  when 
we  think  of  God  directing  our  path,  what  do  we  mean  ?  When  you  look  for  God's 
guidance  on  a  difficult  matter  what  is  it  you  expect  ?  Do  you  expect  to  hear,  as  it 
were,  a  voice  in  your  soul's  ear  saying  clearly,  as  if  some  one  called  in  at  your 
window,  "  Yes,  do  this,"  "No,  don't  do  that"?  Do  you  expect  to  see  in  a  vision 
of  the  night  a  beckoning  figure  ?  With  cases  like  St.  Paul  before  us,  or  even  Joan 
of  Arc,  how  can  we  deny  that  God  has  taken  in  special  instances  that  way  of  reveal- 
ing His  wUl  ?  But  where  would  missions  have  been  if  the  missionaries  had  waited 
till  they  saw  the  beckoning  of  some  man  of  Macedonia  in  the  dead  of  night  ?  No. 
The  commentary  on  the  text  is,  "  Whoso  shall  do  the  will  of  God  shall  know  the 
doctrine,"  or  "  My  judgment  is  just,  because  I  seek  not  Mine  own  will,  but  the  will 
of  Him  that  sent  Me."  We  must  not  only  acknowledge  God  in  our  ways,  but  by 
our  ways.  We  must  not  only  pursue  our  own  ways  and  interests,  and  add  to  that 
an  occasional  further  acknowledgment  of  God ;  but  our  ways  and  business  them- 
selves must  be  the  acknowledgment  of  God — the  doing  of  His  will.  Life  must  be 
obedience,  service.  And  in  a  life  so  lived  there  grows  up  a  habit  of  mind  which 
increases  in  the  power  of  discerning  God's  will  and  receiving  His  direction.  As  we 
pursue  this  obedience  there  grows  up  in  us  a  mind  conformed  to  Christ's,  a  fellow- 
ship of  the  Spirit,  a  faculty  of  judgment  which  has  the  life  secret  of  the  Almighty. 
Our  natural  powers  work.  Our  rational  judgment  is  alive.  We  bring  our  reason- 
able faculties  to  bear  on  things.  And  yet  within  all  there  is  a  moral  sympathy,  a 
moral  affinity  with  the  Spirit  of  God,  which  guides  our  judgment  almost  insensibly. 
Our  affection  and  devotion,  guide,  shape,  colour  our  views.  Christ  had  no  visions. 
It  was  His  judgment  that  acted  always  in  His  perception  of  God's  will.  But  it  was 
a  judgment  leavened  by  all  His  love  of  the  Father,  by  all  the  obedience  of  His 
past.  He  steered  by  the  compass  of  the  Spirit.  He  never  followed  wandering  fires. 
He  did  not  act  from  suggestions  in  a  trance.  His  human  judgment  was  quickened 
by  the  Divine  Spirit.  It  was  not  in  abeyance.  He  divined  God's  will  not  by  His 
human  weakness,  but  by  His  human  strength.  God  directed  His  path  through 
the  exercise  of  His  native  powers,  raised  to  superhuman  insight  by  the  intense 
purity  and  perfectness  of  His  obedience  at  every  stage.  Everything  He  did  gave 
Him  power  for  seeing  and  doing  His  next  thing.  Every  way  He  took  so  acknow- 
ledged God's  will  that  the  direction  of  God  never  failed  His  path.  Do  not  fall  into 
the  habit  of  expecting  calls  and  impulses  of  a  distinctly  preternatural,  miraculous, 
magical  sort  at  your  decisive  steps  in  life.  So  live  that  the  faculties  that  God  gave 
you  to  read  His  will  may  be  pure  and  fit  for  their  work.  If  your  eye  be  single,  your 
body  will  be  full  of  light.  Obedience  is  the  secret  of  just  judgment  in  the  will  of 
God.  Learn  the  habit  of  worshipping  Christ  in  spirit  and  in  truth.  That  is  the 
school  and  practice  for  that  judgment  which  sees  God's  will,  kindles  to  it,  follows 
it,  perceives  it  for  others,  and  makes  you  a  guide,  antagonist,  and  helper  to  their 
weakness.  There  are  many  great  cases  in  history  where  sanctity  has  given  a 
penetration  of  judgment  which  baffled  policy  and  puzzled  shrewdness.  And  in  the 
great  affairs  of  the  world  the  right  judgment  in  the  long  run  will  reside  with  the 
men  or  the  Church  that  best  succeeds  in  holiness,  in  fine  and  deep  obedience. 
Dwell  much  with  God,  and  you  acquire  God's  habit  of  mind.  Then  take  your  honest 
share  in  the  world,  and  you  learn  to  read  the  world  with  God's  eye.  Go  into 
action,  and  you  perfect  yourself  by  practice  in  the  art  of  interpreting  God's  guidance 
for  life.    (T.  P.  Forsyth,  D.D.)         The  hand  on  the  helm:  — 

My  bark  is  wafted  to  the  strand 

By  breath  Divine ; 
And  on  the  helm  there  rests  a  hand 

Other  than  mine.     (Dean  Alford.) 

A  tafe  pilgrimage : — ^Religion  is  not  a  mere  sentiment ;  it  is  a  life.  A  man 
is  known  by  his  "ways."  I.  The  condition  mentioned.  1.  "Acknowledge 
Him."  (1)  By  shaping  thy  course  according  to  His  Word.  His  Word  is  His 
law.  (2)  By  real  and  constant  prayer.  (3)  By  faith  in  the  Divine  promises. 
2.  "  In  all  thy  ways."  (1)  In  thy  enterprising  ways.  Seek  first  the  blessing 
of   the   great   Disposer  of  events — like   Jacob   at  Bethel,  Moses   in  his  mission, 

6 


66  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  m. 

and  Solomon  in  the  temple.  (2)  In  thy  prosperous  -ways.  (3)  In  thy  ways  of 
adversity.  There  will  be  cross-ways :  acquiesce,  and  glorify  God.  II.  Ths 
ASSURANCE  GIVEN  :  "  He  shall  direct  thy  paths."  1.  By  removing  obstructions. 
How  often  to  the  faithful  He  reveals  surprising  grace,  as  in  the  case  of  Nehemiah, 
Daniel,  &c.  2.  By  preventing  mistakes.  Better  if  Jonah  had  acknowledged  God  ; 
and  Peter  would  once  have  saved  himself  bitter  tears.  Keep  close  to  the  Cloud  and 
the  Pillar.  3.  By  preserving  from  ruin.  How  came  a  portion  of  Israel  to  perish? 
and  Ananias  ?  Eemember  Lot's  wife,  and  beware.  Be  ever  faithful,  and  God  will 
keep  thy  feet  in  heaven's  pathway.  Conclusion :  1.  Now  sinner,  go  thy  way 
and  acknowledge  God  for  the  first  time  on  thy  knees.  2.  Christian  brother, 
resolve  to  set  the  Lord  continually  before  thee.  {The  Congregational  Pulpit.) 
I  will  direct  his  ways  : — It  is  like  a  child  sitting  in  a  boat ;  he  does  not  know 
the  coast,  nor  how  to  row ;  and  his  right  hand,  being  a  little  stronger  than  the 
other,  the  boat  would  be  constantly  turning  round  and  round.  He  would  be  carried 
away  and  lost  if  there  were  no  guiding  power  in  the  boat.  But  there  in  the  stern 
sits  his  father,  whose  steady  hand  overcomes  the  uneven  strokes,  and  the  boat 
keeps  the  right  course.  So  that  the  force  exerted  by  the  child,  though  misdirected, 
all  works  for  good  when  the  father  guides.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  folly  of  a  self- 
directed  life  : — Have  you  acknowledged  God  yet  in  your  life  ?  Are  you  a  converted 
man  ?  Is  your  own  self-will  gone  ?  Have  you  passed  the  reins  of  the  nervous 
steed  of  your  life  into  the  hands  of  Him  who  can  drive  without  a  spill ;  or  are  you 
clumsily  taking  the  reins  into  your  own  hand,  and  trying  to  drive  these  horses  that 
have  a  career  before  them  beside  which  that  fabled  career  in  Grecian  mythology 
sinks  into  insignificance  ?  The  myth  says  that  Sol's  son  stole  the  chariot  of  his 
father,  and  in  one  blazing  career  he  attempted  to  drive  the  horses  of  the  Sun.  It 
was  his  death.  I  rather  think  the  old  Greeks  had  a  hold  on  life  when  they  thus 
spake.  I  rather  think  they  were  feeling  after  the  gospel  when  they  said  to  the  young 
heart,  "  Never  try  to  handle  the  ribbons  of  the  chariot  of  the  Sun,  that  great  circle  of 
the  heavens.  Never  try  to  ascend  the  blazing  steps  of  the  throne  of  light,  or  it  will  be 
your  death."  Oh,  young  man  !  I  beseech  you,  do  not  attempt  to  drive  the  horses 
of  your  life.  You  cannot  do  it.  Many  a  man  as  strong  in  the  muscle  and  nerve 
as  you  are  has  failed.  In  the  paragraphs  of  human  life  you  read  this,  if  you  read 
anything — that  life,  if  it  is  to  be  a  success,  must  be  handed  over  in  humility  of 
spirit  to  a  mighty  God,  the  giver  of  life  to  the  soul.  Have  you  yet  made  the  grand 
decision  ?  (J.  Robertson.)  Life  a  labyrinth  : — One  of  the  great  wonders  of  the 
world  was  the  Egyptian  Lab5Tinth.  Herodotus  tells  us  of  a  visit  he  made  to  this 
place.  There  were  three  thousand  chambers  in  it ;  and  when  you  had  entered,  the 
difiiculty  was  to  get  out.  The  rooms  were  like  one  another,  the  passages  were 
devious,  and  tortuous,  and  winding ;  and  you  might  wander  in  the  Egyptian 
Labyrinth  till  you  died,  and  never  be  able  to  get  out.  They  said,  "  This  maze  is 
the  wonder  of  the  world  !  "  The  Egyptian  Labyrinth  is  nothing  to  this  life  in  the 
way  of  a  maze.  I  have  been  at  the  ball  under  the  cross  of  St.  Paul's,  in  London, 
when  the  day  was  clear.  I  shall  never  forget  how  the  city  looked  as  it  lay  at  my 
feet.  Those  streets  on  streets,  those  lanes  and  crosses,  and  avenues  and  roads — 
they  lay  in  a  perfect  maze,  in  a  labyrinth,  before  me.  One  felt  how  easy  it  would 
be  to  lose  oneself  in  the  London  streets,  they  are  so  many,  the  place  is  so  perplexing. 
No  man  can  tell  you  about  all  these  streets.  He  knows  his  one  little  bit.  It  is 
only  as  you  stand  and  look  down  on  the  great  living  maze  of  the  colossal  city  that 
you  apprehend  its  vastness.  Ah !  this  life  of  ours  is  worse.  As  you  ascend  the 
hill-top,  and  look  down  on  the  streets,  and  ways,  and  lanes,  and  roads  of  life,  you 
say,  "  God  help  me  !  How  can  any  man  thread  his  way  through  this  confusion  ?  " 
{Ibid.)  Acknowledging  God  : — When  the  old  Spanish  mariners,  in  their  explora- 
tions, touched  any  new  land,  the  first  thing  they  did  was  to  run  the  flag  of  Ferdinand 
and  Isabella  to  the  masthead  on  the  highest  point  that  they  could  reach  on  the  new 
land.  Every  new  shore  was  claimed  for  Spain.  The  sovereigns  that  encouraged 
the  explorations  of  these  Spanish  mariners  were  acknowledged  when  the  first  foot 
touched  the  new  shore.  Ah,  man !  when  you  get  your  new  situation,  when  yoa 
Bet  up  your  new  home,  when  new  circumstances  arrive  in  your  life,  it  is  grand  to 
run  up  the  flag  of  God's  Son,  and  say,  "This  new  situation — this  new  era  in  my 
life — will  be  the  acknowledgment  of  God  in  the  person  of  His  Son."  {Ibid.)  The 
value  of  prayer  for  Divine  guidance  : — Two  men  had  been  friends  since  their  early 
boyhood.  One  is  now  a  successful  merchant,  who  is  known  for  his  honour,  probity, 
and  high  Christian  character.  The  other  is  a  lawyer,  a  man  of  integrity  and  good 
standing  in  the  community  also,  but  a  disbeliever  in  God  and  His  providence.    Th« 


•HAP.  m.]  PROVERBS.  61 

two  men  had  been  talking  about  the  eflScacy  of  prayer  ;  and  the  merchant,  urged  to 
Bpeak  from  his  own  experience,  had  confessed  that  he  took  this  text  literally  :  "  In 
all  thy  ways  acknowledge  Him,  and  He  shall  direct  thy  paths."  "  I  never  make  a 
large  purchase  of  goods,  or  plan  any  important  change  in  my  business,"  he  pro- 
ceeded to  explain,  "  without  first  asking  special  Divine  guidance."  The  lawyer 
smiled.  "Oh,  yes,  I  understand,"  he  replied.  "But  your  phenomenal  success 
can  all  be  explained  in  a  natural  way.  For  instance,  most  men  act  impulsively 
sometimes — yield  to  their  whims,  or  to  ideas  suddenly  conceived.  You  escape  this 
danger  through  your  system  of  praying  before  you  act.  The  prayer  gains  you  a 
little  time.  Besides,  your  feeling  of  reverence  for  the  Being  you  worship  has  in 
itself  a  tendency  to  clear  your  mind  of  prejudices,  to  restore  your  balance,  and  to 
make  you  a  reasonable,  logical  person — otherwise,  a  good  business  man."  A  light 
broke  over  the  merchant's  face,  and  he  was  glad  to  have  his  friend's  testimony  to 
the  value  of  prayer,  notwithstanding  his  unspiritual  and  inadequate  way  of  seeking 
to  explain  it.     {Sunday  Companion.) 

Ver.  7.  Be  not  wise  In  thine  own  eyes. — Self-conceit  (see  Isa.  v.  21) : — I.  It 

INVOLVES  SELF-IGNORANCE.  No  One  who  kuows  himself  could  be  conceited.  Let 
the  wisest  man  think  of  two  things — 1.  His  knowledge  in  comparison  with  what 
is  to  be  known.  2  His  knowledge  in  comparison  with  what  he  ought  to  have 
known.     II.  It  obstbucts  mental  improvement.     This  is  clear  from  two  things — 

1.  That    mental    improvement    requires    an    earnest    seeking    for    knowledge. 

2.  Earnest  seeking  for  knowledge  requires  a  deep  sense  of  the  necessity  of 
knowledge.  A  self-conceited  man  feels  no  such  necessity ;  he  thinks  he  knows 
everything.  II.  It  destroys  social  influence.  A  self-conceited  man  disgusts 
rather  than  pleases,  repels  rather  than  draws.  He  is  despised  rather  than 
respected.  Intelligence,  generosity,  truthfulness,  humility,  these  are  the  elements 
of  social  power.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)         The  folly  and  danger  of  self-conceit: — 

1.  What  are  the  usual  signs,  in  toung  people,  of  their  setting  too  high  a 
VALUE  upon  their  OWN  UNDERSTANDING  ?  1.  In  a  general  inattention  to  the  means 
of  instruction  and  improvement.  2.  A  spirit  of  contradiction  strongly  marks  this 
failing.  It  is  a  strong  symptom  of  self-conceit  when  young  people  are  hasty  in 
their  judgments,  and  confident  in  their  own  opinions.  3.  When,  even  in  matters 
of  importance,  they  are  above  asking  or  taking  advice  of  others.  4.  By  rashly 
condemning  the  opinions  and  maxims  which  have  received  the  stamp  of  time  and 
experience.  Youth  should  guard  against  the  fascinations  of  novelty.  5.  The  worst 
sign  is  neglecting  to  ask  counsel  of  God  (Jas.  i.  5).  II.  Whence  is  it  that 
TOUNG  people  ARE  PECULIARLY  EXPOSED  TO  THIS  EVIL?  1.  They  commouly  kuow 
but  little  of  themselves.     2.  They  can  have  but  little  acquaintance  with  the  world. 

3.  They   are  much    exposed    to  the  imprudent   and    sinful    flattery   of    others, 

III.    SosrE    CONSIDERATIONS     TO     PUT    YOUTH     SERIOUSLY     UPON     THEIR     GUARD    AGAINST 

BEING  WISE  IN  THEIR  OWN  EYES.  1.  Cousider  what  little  foundation  there  is  for 
this  vain  conceit.  2.  Nothing  obstructs  progress  in  true  wisdom  more  effectually 
than  the  opinion  that  you  are  wise  already.  3.  If  you  are  wise  in  your  own  eyes, 
you  wiU  not  be  so  in  the  sight  of  God  and  man.  4.  Nothing  more  surely  betrays 
young  people  into  certain  ruin.  Guard,  then,  against  self-conceit.  Watch  and  pray 
constantly  against  the  spirit  that  works  in  character  and  life  such  fatal  mischief. 
{John  Humphrys,  LLJ).) 

Ver.  9.  Honour  the  Lord  with  thy  substance. — The  highest  giving,  the  condition 
of  the  highest  getting : — I.  The   highest   givinq.     1.  Giving  to  the  Best  Being. 

2.  Giving  the  best  things  to  the  Best  Being.  The  surrender  of  self  is  essential  to 
give  virtue  and  acceptance  to  all  other  contributions  (Rom.  xii.  1).  II.  The 
highest  getting.  By  giving  this  you  get  back — what  ?  The  choicest  and  fullest 
Divine  blessings.  1.  He  who  yields  his  all  to  God  attends  to  the  conditions  of  all 
true  prosperity — industry,  temperance,  economy,  forethought,  &c.  2.  He  who 
yields  his  all  to  God  will  insure  the  special  favour  of  Heaven  (see  Heb.  yi.  10.) 
{David  Thomas,  D.D.)  Giving,  a  privilege : — This  rule  of  sacrifice  is  a  costly 
precept  to  the  worldling  and  the  formalist;  but  to  the  servant  of  God  it  is  a 
privilege  to  lay  aside  a  portion  of  substance  with  a  sacred  stamp  on  it,  bearing  the 
inscription,  "  This  is  for  God."    Well  may  we  think  our  substance  due,  where  we 

owe  ourselves.   {C.  Bridges,  M.A.)      The  duty  of  honouring  God  with  our  subttance : 

I.  A  DUTY  ENJOINED.  Honouriug  the  Lord  with  our  substance.  1.  We  are  to 
honour  God  in  the  expenditure  of  our  substance  upon  causes  of  piety  and  benevo- 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  m. 

lencc.  Our  money — even  our  time,  our  health,  our  talents — ia  not  our  own.  The 
humblest  and  the  greatest  are  but  stewards.  Whatever  they  have  is  a  trust. 
2.  Ood  is  to  be  first  considered  in  the  distribution  and  expenditure  of  our  means. 
Our  general  plan  is  to  see  whether  we  have  anything  left  for  God.  To  honour  the 
Lord  is  our  positive,  our  first,  duty.  3.  Charitable  and  religious  expenditure  should 
be  systematic.  11.  A  promise  annexed  to  the  discharge  oy  the  dutt  :  "  Thy 
bams  be  filled  with  plenty."  Expenditure  here  is  gain.  Have  faith  in  God. 
"  There  is  that  scattereth  and  yet  increaseth."  Christian  hberality  is  gain, 
because  it  is  giving  unto  the  Lord.  You  cannot  lose  by  faith,  you  cannot  lose  by 
obedience.  Do  not  narrow  too  hastily,  too  selfishly,  too  covetously,  the  limits  of 
what  you  think  you  can  spare.  Shrink  not  from  self-denial.  The  test  for  us  is 
our  comparative  expenditure  for  self  and  for  God.  {John  C.  Miller,  M.A.) 
Honouring  t)ie  Lord  with  our  substance : — Under  the  old  dispensation  the  Divine 
directions  respecting  religious  observances  and  the  use  of  property  were  more 
precise  and  definite  than  they  are  under  the  new.  With  the  Jew  it  was  in  no  sense 
optional  whether  or  not  he  should  contribute  to  the  maintenance  of  the  institutions 
of  religion,  nor  whether  he  should  contribute  little  or  much.  Under  the  Christian 
dispensation  giving  is  voluntary.  This  may  weaken  the  sense  of  obligation  in  many 
minds.  I.  The  duty  here  enjoined.  We  do  not  honour  the  Lord  with  our 
substance  when  we  use  it  for  purposes  of  display  or  of  self-gratification.  God  is 
honoured — 1.  When  we  relieve  the  physical  wants  of  our  fellow-creatures.  2.  By 
devoting  it  to  the  maintenance  of  gospel  institutions.  3.  By  employing  it  for  the 
diffusion  of  the  gospel  in  the  benighted  portions  of  the  earth.     II.  The  promise 

BY   which    we   are    ENCOURAGED    TO    PERFORM    THE    DUTY.       {W.   M.  BivchaTd.) 

Ver.  11.  Despise  not  the  chastening  of  the  Lord. — Chastisements  disciplinary  : — 
The  text  is  a  kind  of  condensation  of  practical  wisdom  for  the  direction  of  life.  It 
has  reference  to  those  dealings  of  God  with  men  which  have  a  stern  and  severe 
aspect,  which  are  in  themselves  painful  and  unwelcome,  and  under  which  the 
human  soul  cannot  well  be  satisfied  or  sustained  aside  from  the  two  considerations, 
first,  that  they  are  the  appointments  of  God,  and  second,  that  they  are  designed  to 
be  instrumental  of  our  good.  One  of  the  most  striking  and  unusual  marks  of 
human  destiny  is  to  be  found  in  the  afflictive  dispensations  which  trouble  us.  The 
general  counsel  of  the  text  is  aimed  at  one  of  the  common  errors  of  men,  viz.,  not 
being  affected  by  our  trials  in  a  wise  and  beneficial  manner.  I.  Consider  our 
AErLiCTioNS  AS  CHA8TENINGS,  CORRECTIONS.  1.  They  are  of  God,  and  God  takes  no 
pleasure  in  the  miseries  of  His  creatures.  They  must  be  disciplinary — a  part  of  the 
discipline  of  His  love.  It  is  a  wonder  that  God  should  love  us  at  all ;  no  less  a  wonder 
than  that,  loving.  He  should  afflict  us.  2.  The  rule  or  order  of  human  afflictions  indi- 
cates their  corrective  intent.  All  of  them  do  not  come  under  this  principle,  indeed, 
but  many  of  them  do.  God  makes  the  miseries  of  life  follow  close  and  visible  the  sins 
and  crimes  of  life  to  a  very  wide  extent.  They  follow  the  sins  of  individuals  and 
of  nations.  But  we  cannot  rank  all  miseries  under  this  rule.  If  we  could  know  as 
God  knows  all  the  secondary  causes  which  He  employs,  it  is  extremely  probable  that 
we  should  attribute  many  human  miseries  to  human  sin  which  we  now  attribute  to 
the  just  and  naked  sovereignty  of  God.  Whenever  we  can  see  the  connection,  and 
trace  our  unhappiness  to  a  fault,  that  unhappiness  is  clearly  the  blow  of  a  rod  of 
discipline.  3.  A  state  of  entire  innocence  would  have  kept  the  world  from  all 
suffering.  4.  The  nature  of  our  afflictions  has  in  it  something  very  remarkable. 
They  are  not  so  heavy  as  to  crush  us.  They  have  many  accompanying  alleviations. 
For  the  most  part  we  are  able  to  bear  up  under  them.  They  are  not  destructive, 
they  must  be  disciplinary.  5.  Consider  the  manner  in  which  our  afflictions 
ordinarily  come  upon  us.  They  commence  gently,  and  if  the  chastised  do  not 
amend,  they  are  increased.  6.  The  alleviations  which  accompany  earthly  afflic- 
tions furnish  almost  a  demonstration  that  the  afflictions  are  designed  for  amend- 
ment. II.  The  IMPROVEMENT  OF  THIS  SUBJECT.  It  becomcs  us,  who  have  so  many 
distresses  to  bear,  to  consider  well  the  design  of  them.  The  world  we  live  in,  with 
its  mingled  chastisements  and  mercies,  perfectly  accords  with  the  declarations  of 
the  gospel,  that  God  is  displeased,  but  waits  to  be  gracious.  And  we  shall  soon 
have  done  with  this  system  of  disciplinary  affliction  for  ever.  (J.  S.  Spencer,  D.D.) 
Life  a  disriplin^ : — People  sunk  in  heathenism  do  not  trouble  themselves  about  the 
true  meaning  of  life.  They  are  at  the  unreflective  age  of  experience.  They  are  in 
a  position  of  ignorance  or  indifference  with  respect  to  the  moral  and  religious 
aspect  of  man's  life.     But  with  the  rise  and  growth  of  reflection  the  significance  of 


COAf .  m.]  PROVERBS.  69 

existence  comes  to  the  front,  and  presses  in  upon  the  mind,  sometimes  with  painful 
urgency.  This  inquiry  seems  to  us,  who  have  eighteen  centuries  of  Christian 
teaching,  a  comparatively  easy  one.  But  the  answer  varies  to  some  extent  with  the 
individual.  The  attitude  assumed  towards  God  and  the  truths  of  revealed  religion 
enters  into  the  matter.  This  is  seen  by  comparing  the  views  of  a  sceptical  and  a 
believing  person.  The  question  as  to  the  true  interpretation  of  life  was  weighed 
and  discussed  by  the  wise  and  good  men  who  wrote  the  Scriptures.  Their  conclu- 
sion was  that  hie  is,  in  part  at  least,  disciplinary  in  its  nature.  Its  hindrances, 
trials,  sufferings  are  connected  with  the  fatherly  goodness  of  God,  and  offer  oppor- 
tunities for  spiritual  growth  and  improvement  which  would  otherwise  be  impossible. 
This  idea  is,  however,  associated  in  most  minds  with  the  severer  dispensations  of 
Providence,  and  with  these  alone.  But  it  really  runs  through  life.  The  world  is 
so  constituted  as  to  be  a  school  of  training  for  the  human  spirit.  The  moral 
government  of  the  world  gives  clear  evidences  that  God  wills  other  ends  than 
happiness,  ends  that  even  involve  the  present  loss  of  happiness.     I.  This  broader 

JLKD   DEEPER   ASPECT    OF   THE   MATTER   IS    DISCLOSED    IN    THE    RELATIONSHIP    SUBSISTING 

BETWEEN  MAN  AND  NATURE.  In  the  natural  world  the  fuUest  scope  has  been  left 
for  effort,  inquiry,  perseverance,  diligence.  Had  the  world,  as  created  by  God, 
given  a  premium  to  indolence  and  incapacity  it  would  have  given  us  no  hint  of  a 
Divine  purpose  underlying  our  life,  but  constituted  as  it  is,  it  forces  us  to  the 
conclusion  that  life  was  meant  to  be  disciplinary  in  its  character.     11.  This  truth 

18    REVEALED     IN     OUR    RELATIONSHIP     WITH     MEN — WITH     SOCIETY.        The     moral    laW, 

which  is  our  guide  to  duty,  is  stamped  upon  the  consciences  of  men,  so  that  there 
is  no  excuse  for  ignorance  regarding  it.  But  though  the  abiding  principles  of  God's 
kingdom  are  plain  and  undeniable,  they  do  not  save  us  from  the  trouble  of  thinking. 
The  very  difficulty  of  doing  the  right  thing,  we  know,  is  a  sign  of  the  moral  purpose 
underlying  our  life.  Life  is  a  discipline,  but  life  may  not  be  in  any  true  sense  a 
discipline  to  this  individual  and  to  that,  because  so  much  depends  upon  the  attitude 
of  the  soul  to  God,  and  to  His  will.  It  remains  with  each  man  to  enter  into  God's 
redeeming  purpose,  and  to  become  a  feUow- worker  with  Him.  (Morison  Bryce.) 
Despising  God's  chastenings  : — I.  What  is  it  to  despise  the  chastenings?  1.  To 
receive  them  without  any  emotion.  Trials  should  be  felt ;  the  heart  should  smart 
under  the  rod.  2.  To  fail  to  look  into  the  cause  of  them.  When  afflictions  come 
men  seldom  seriously  set  themselves  to  see  why  God  contendeth  with  them.  3.  To 
fail  to  be  altered  and  unproved  by  them.  If  a  child  is  not  better  for  his  parent's 
discipline,  we  say  that  correction  has  been  thrown  away  upon  him.  H.  What  is 
IT  TO  be  "  WEARY  OF  His  CORRECTION"  ?  1.  It  is  the  fault  of  those  who  make  too 
much  of  their  afflictions.  Some  are  "  swallowed  up  of  overmuch  sorrow."  It  over- 
whelms, stupefies,  consumes  them.  They  brood  over  every  circumstance  of  the 
stroke  which  has  befallen  them,  and  see  it  in  the  most  aggravated  light.  Their 
imaginations  even  add  to  the  reaUty.  The  believer,  when  he  meets  with  sorrow, 
should  consider  the  bright  as  well  as  the  dark  side  of  the  Lord's  dealings  with  him. 
It  is  the  sore  temptation  by  which  sufferers  are  sometimes  exercised  to  be  led  to 
doubt,  because  of  their  suffering,  that  they  are  objects  of  the  Lord's  interest.  2.  It 
is  the  fault  of  those  who  rebel  against  the  correction,  who  fret  and  murmur  at  the 
stroke.  We  weary  of  correction — 3.  When  we  cannot  wait  the  Lord's  time  for  the 
removal  of  our  trials.  We  almost  long  to  take  the  times  out  of  His  hands,  and 
arrange  things  for  ourselves.  As  trial  never  comes  a  day  too  early,  so  it  never 
stays  a  day  too  long.  We  have  afflictions  to  sustain,  trials  to  endure ;  but  we  have 
a  God  of  aU  comfort  to  make  those  trials  easy.  {A.  Roberts,  M.A.)  Right 
conduct  under  affliction  : — I.  What  must  be  oub  care  when  we  are  in  affliction  ? 
1.  We  must  not  despise  an  affliction,  be  it  ever  so  light  or  short,  as  if  it  were  not 
worth  taking  notice  of;  or  as  if  it  were  not  sent  on  an  errand,  and  therefore 
required  no  answer.  We  must  not  be  stocks  or  stones,  insensible  of  them.  2.  We 
must  not  be  weary  of  an  affliction,  be  it  ever  so  heavy  or  long,  nor  faint  under  it ; 
nor  be  dispirited,  nor  driven  to  use  indirect  means  for  our  relief  and  redress  of  our 
grievances.  We  must  not  think  that  the  affliction  either  presses  harder,  or 
continues  longer  than  is  meet,  nor  conclude  that  deliverance  will  never  come 
because  it  does  not  come  so  soon  as  we  expect  it.  H.  What  will  be  our  comfort 
when  in  affliction  ?  1.  That  it  is  a  Divine  correction.  2.  That  it  is  a  fatherly 
correction.  Afflictions  not  only  consist  with,  but  flow  from,  covenant  love.  They 
are  so  far  from  doing  any  real  hurt,  that  they  become  the  happy  means  of  sanctifi- 
cation.  (Matthew  Henry.)  C/uutemru/ .-—The  course  of  human  life  is  a  course  of 
chastening.    It  is    not    a  word    confined    to    the  vocabulary  of    religion.    But 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAi.nx. 

ebastening  seems  to  be  unequally  distributed.  There  is  a  possibility  of  treating 
godly  chastisement  in  an  ungodly  spirit.  It  may  be  despised,  or  it  may  be  endured 
with  impatience.  God's  purpose  requires  time  for  its  exposition  and  realisation  ;  and 
we  require  patience  to  abide  its  complete  unfoldment.  Patience  often  accomplishes 
what  the  most  overwhelming  strength  could  never  effect.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Moral  beauty  the  result  of  chastening  : — Scarcely  any  gem  reveals  its  true  beauties 
in  a  natural  state.  The  diamond  in  the  rough  is  most  unattractive,  and  would  be 
thrown  away  by  a  casual  observer  as  a  worthless  pebble  ;  its  perfections  are  hidden 
under  a  hard  crust,  which  can  only  be  removed  by  its  own  powder.  The  deep 
velvet  hues  of  the  sapphire,  the  glowing  brilliant  red  of  the  ruby,  the  soft  clear 
green  of  the  emerald,  and  the  delicate  strata  of  the  onyx,  alike  only  display  them- 
selves in  their  true  character  after  the  lapidary  has  used  his  skill  in  cutting  them 
into  facets  and  polishing  them  ;  and  on  the  perfection  of  this  operation  depends  in 
a  great  measure  the  beauty  of  the  gem.  As  it  is  with  these,  so  it  is  also  with 
human  gems.  (Scientific  Illustrations.)  Neither  be  weary  of  His  correction. — 
Suffering  in  its  bearing  on  conversion : — The  text  assures  that  there  is  nothing  in 
our  present  affliction  that  need  make  us  despair.  Suffering  is  altered  in  character 
as  soon  as  we  enter  into  possession  of  the  Divine  favour.  It  is  no  longer  absolute 
and  irremediable ;  it  forms  part  of  the  plan  of  Divine  love.  It  has  not,  however, 
ceased  to  bear  its  character  of  chastisement.  How  does  affliction  help  us  to  realise 
the  Divine  love  ?  1.  It  acts  as  a  dyke  against  the  overflow  of  evil,  it  incessantly 
restrains  and  thrusts  it  back.  Pain  is  a  restraining  and  preserving  power  in  this 
sinful  world.  2.  It  acts  as  a  preparative.  Suffering,  under  the  influence  of  grace, 
fills  up  the  infinite  distance  between  man  and  the  Cross.  It  was  the  suffering  of  a 
God  who  humbled  Himself  that  saved  us ;  and  it  is  suffering  dispensed  by  this  same 
God  which  prepares  the  sinner  to  believe  in  the  crucified  One.  Suffering  also 
makes  us  seize  the  salvation  thus  wrought  for  us,  but  which  must  be  consummated  in 
ns.  It  must,  therefore,  pursue  its  work  on  this  redeemed  earth,  where  sin  still 
dwells.     (E.  De  Pretsensi,  D.D.) 

Yer.  12.  For  whom  the  Lord  loveth  He  correcteth,  even  as  a  father  the  son  in 
whom  he  delighteth. — The  characteristics  of  fatherly  chastisement : — The  paternal 
relation  is  frequently  ascribed  to  the  Almighty,  as  that  in  which  He  stands  to  His 
people  and  servants.  This  reminds  them  that  they  are  placed  by  Him  under 
discipline,  and  that,  if  they  offend,  they  must  expect  to  receive  chastisement.  I.  A 
FATHER  ^^TLL  CHASTISE  HIS  SON  WITH  BELUCTANCE.  He  will  try  aU  Other  mcaus 
first.  When  he  does  chastise  it  will  be  as  one  that  yields  to  a  painful  necessity. 
So  God  "  does  not  afflict  willingly."  We  cannot  explain  the  reasons  of  the  distinc- 
tions which  are  made  by  Divine  Providence,  apparently  without  respect  to 
differences  of  character  in  the  subjects  of  them.  There  are  circumstances  lying 
too  deep  for  human  view,  which  justify  God's  ways.  II.  A  fatheb  will  chasten 
HIS  SON  WITH  tenderness.  He  may  be  severe,  he  will  not  be  cruel.  When  God 
chastens,  it  is  in  tenderness ;  when  He  sends  affliction,  He  mitigates  its  severity, 
and  does  not  permit  it  utterly  to  lay  waste  our  comforts.  His  afflictions  leave  no 
permanently  injurious  effects.  III.  A  father  will  chasten  his  son  with  a  view 
TO  HIS  PROFIT.  The  good  of  his  child  is  his  great  and  ultimate  object.  God  has 
many  gracious  ends  to  serve  by  affliction.  It  may  be  designed — 1.  To  restrain  us 
when  we  are  ready  to  enter  on  sinful  courses.  2.  They  may  operate  as  seasonable 
mementoes  in  regard  to  the  insecurity  of  our  state  here,  and  the  necessity  of 
preparing  to  meet  our  God.  3.  They  may  be  designed  to  try  and  call  into  exercise 
Christian  graces,  to  wean  our  affections  from  the  world,  to  awaken  holy  desireB 
after  God  and  heaven,     [James  Henderson,  D.D.) 

Vers.  13-26.  Happy  is  the  man  that  flndeth  wisdom. — Wisdom: — I.  Thepleasttrm 
OF  wisdom.  1.  Present  happiness.  2.  Lasting  happiness.  II.  The  preciousness 
OF  WISD0.M  (vers.  14-18).  Many  figures  are  employed  to  set  forth  the  preciousness 
of  wisdom.  III.  The  possession  of  wisdom.  1.  Its  reception  (ver.  18).  This 
laying  hold  implies  earnestness  and  determination.  Heavenly  wisdom  will  never 
be  the  portion  of  the  man  who  has  "  no  heart  to  it "  (chap.  xvii.  16).  2.  Its 
retention  (ver.  21).  The  crown  jewels  in  the  Tower  are  guarded  and  closely 
watched.  Iron  bars  exclude  the  stranger  from  a  too  near  approach  to  them,  and 
jealous  eyos  watch  his  movements  as  he  is  permitted  to  look  at  them.  So  let  na 
guard  the  "  Pearl  of  great  price."  The  only  hand  that  can  hold  fast  the  pearl  of 
wisdom   are  those  of  "faith  and  love  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus"  (2  Tim.  i.  13). 


CHAP,  in.]  PROVERBS.  71 

Compare  "The  Lord  ...  shall  keep"  (ver.  26).  IV.  The  pattern  or 
WISDOM  (ver.  19).  V.  The  Ptntsuir  op  wisdom.  {H.  Thome.)  The  happinets  of 
the  pious  : — It  is  a  great  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  pious  man  is  only  to  be  blest ; 
he  is  blest  already.  I.  Peace  of  conscience.  The  possession  of  the  entire  world, 
with  all  its  honours  and  pleasures,  would  be  but  a  mockery  to  him  who  feels  the 
lash  of  an  accusing  conscience.  While  on  the  other  hand,  to  him  who  is  at  peace 
with  himself  there  is  a  sweet  and  ample  solace  under  whatever  external  evils  may 
befall  him.  This  peace,  however,  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  another  state  of 
mind  nearly  resembling  it.  There  is  a  sense  of  security  in  regard  to  spiritual  and 
eternal  things  which  springs  not  from  religion,  but  from  the  want  of  it.  It  results 
either  from  infidel  or  deistical  principles;  or  from  the  power  of  sinful  appetites 
and  passions  which  shut  out  all  serious  thoughts  ;  or  from  false  ideas  of  the  mercy 
of  God ;  or,  again,  from  men's  most  erroneous  conceptions  of  their  own  character. 
How  different  the  peace  of  the  children  of  God!  It  is  intelligent,  and  well- 
grounded,  and  Scriptural.  It  admits  the  existence  of  sin  and  punishment,  of  death 
and  of  hell.  Truly  pious  men  generally  have  profounder  impressions  of  these 
realities  than  any  others.  But  at  the  same  time  they  look  with  faith  to  an  all- 
sufiQcient  Eedeemer ;  and  in  the  merits  of  His  obedience  and  death  they  see  ample 
reason  for  confidence  and  hope.  II.  The  union  or  inclination  and  duty.  The 
pious  have  this  characteristic,  that  they  not  only  pursue  the  path  of  rectitude,  but 
delight  in  it  as  being  not  merely  their  duty,  but  their  choice.  They  have  a  new 
spiritual  relish,  which  makes  religious  duties  as  attractive  to  them  as  books  are  to 
a  scholar,  as  parade-day  is  to  a  soldier,  or  as  gay  amusements  are  to  the  children 
of  fashion.  III.  Communion  with  God.  The  pious  man  withdraws  from  outward 
and  worldly  things,  and  seeks  intercourse  with  his  God.  And  who  shall  tell  the  joy 
and  peace  of  the  communion  thus  gotten?  It  is  pure,  heavenly,  Divine. 
rV.  Confidence  in  Providence.  One  of  the  chief  evils  of  this  world  is  its  uncertainty. 
Its  fashion  is  continually  passing  away.  Now,  amid  all  these  proverbial  vicissitudes 
of  this  world,  there  is  only  one  man  who  can  walk  with  a  charmed  life,  i.e.,  the  wise 
or  pious  man.  He  knows  not,  nor  does  he  want  to  know,  what  may  befall  him  ;  but 
he  is  sure  nothing  shall  happen  to  him  which  is  not  sent  by  a  Divine  hand,  which 
is  not  wisely  and  kindly  intended,  and  which  shall  not,  in  the  end,  minister  to  his 
eternal  blessedness.  How  happy  is  the  man  who  has  found  this  wisdom ;  who  can 
and  does  thus  habitually  regard  God  !  How  free  from  care  and  anxiety  his  bosom ! 
V,  The  hope  of  heaven.  Hope  is  often  spoken  of  as  the  one  great  blessing  of  man 
which  survived  the  ruins  of  the  fall.  There  is,  however,  an  objection  sometimes 
offered  to  this  statement.  "  If  this  be  so,"  it  is  said,  "  then  Christians  ought  to  be 
distinguished  by  a  uniform  sense  of  contentment  and  peace ;  they  should  be  the 
happiest  of  mortals :  whereas  frequently  the  reverse  of  this  is  the  case."  The 
objection  is  fair,  and  we  purpose  to  answer  it  fairly.  First,  then,  all  professed 
Christians  are  not  such  in  reality ;  and,  of  course,  it  is  no  wonder  that  nominal 
behevers  should  have  only  nominal  joy.  But,  secondly,  many  real  children  of  God 
are  constitutionally  of  a  gloomy  or  desponding  temperament.  But,  thirdly,  a  great 
many,  of  whom  we  may  hope  that  the  root  of  the  matter  is  in  them,  feel  and  show 
but  little  of  the  happiness  we  have  spoken  of  because  of  their  weak  faith  and 
careless  living.  The  most  beautiful  landscape  conveys  no  pleasure  to  the  man  who 
does  not  see  it.  The  largest  promises  mean  nothing  to  him  who  does  not  know  or 
believe  that  he  has  soma  title  to  them.  And  hence  the  disquietude  of  many  of 
whom  it  would  be  harsh  to  say  they  had  no  interest  in  Christ.  (T.  W.  Chambers.) 
The  value  of  wisdom  : — I.  One  way  of  learning  wisdom  (vers.  11,  12).  By  means 
of  "the  chaster>ng  of  the  Lord";  that  is,  of  instruction  through  chastisement. 
There  are  some  who  will  heed  no  other  voice  but  this.  Many  a  life  that  has  been 
frivolous  or  selfish  or  indifferent  to  spiritual  things  has  been  led  into  the  path  of 
wisdom  by  affliction.  God  would  not  let  chastening  come  unless  we  had  some- 
thing yet  to  learn.  When  it  does  come,  therefore,  it  behoves  us  to  listen  patiently 
and  reverently.  H.  The  blessedness  of  wisdom.  This  is  expressed  in  the  way 
which  would  mean  most  to  an  Oriental.  To  him  things  to  be  desired  would  be 
ornamental,  like  silver,  fine  gold,  rubies  (or  pearls).  And  then  he  is  allowed  to  let 
his  imagination  run  riot.  Let  him  think  of  anything  in  the  world  which  he 
would  like  to  possess  very  much,  wisdom  is  still  infinitely  more  to  be  desired. 
Why  is  it  blessed  to  choose  Wisdom  ?  In  her  right  hand  is  length  of  days.  What 
man  wants  is  life  itself.  The  pursuit  of  wisdom  tends  naturally  to  give  a  man 
longer  life.  The  wise  man,  who  serves  God  in  quietude  and  simplicity,  has  ait 
even,  regular  habit  of  life  which  tends  to  longevity.    In  her  left  hand  are  riches 


7f  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

and  honour.  We  may  not  say  that  riches  and  honour  always  go  to  the  good  and 
never  to  the  bad ;  but  taking  the  world  over,  It  pays  to  do  right  even  from  a 
worldly  point  of  view.  In  the  long  run  prosperity  and  honour  go  to  those  who 
deserve  them.  "Where  would  you  go  to  find  those  who  truly  enjoy  life  ?  To  the 
epicure,  the  man  of  mental  or  bodily  dissipation,  the  ungodly  rich,  the  frivolous  ? 
Surely  not.  These  lives  do  not  contain  the  formula  of  peace.  III.  The  skat  of 
WISDOM.  It  is  in  God.  The  man  seeking  wisdom  looks  up  to  Him  whose  super- 
human wisdom  is  declared  in  every  rain-drop  and  every  grass-blade.  Whoever 
earnestly  wants  to  know  how  to  live  will  somehow  find  his  way  to  God.  IV.  The 
CONSEQUENCES  OF  EECEiviNG  WISDOM.  They  are  such  as  life,  grace,  safety,  peace. 
The  life  of  wisdom  of  the  Old  Testament  finds  its  fulfilment  in  the  life  of  the  soul 
in  Jesus  Christ.  The  value  of  the  Christian  life  is  made  clear  by  taking  up  such 
things  as  are  sometimes  supposed  to  be  disadvantageous  in  it  and  seeing  how  they 
are  transformed  into  blessings.  Such  things  as  these  are  supposed  to  be  unpleasant 
in  it :  its  definite  committal,  outspoken  avowal,  sacrifice  of  pleasure,  loss  of  indepen- 
dence, irksome  duties.  But  the  life  which  turns  its  own  seeming  disadvantages  into 
positive  enjoyments  must  be  the  pleasantest  life.  Such  is  the  life  of  the  soul  in 
Christ,  who  is  made  unto  us  the  wisdom  of  God.  (D.  J.  Burrell,  D.D.)  The  value 
of  wisdom : — Here  notice  the  writer's  insight  into  the  fundamental  conception  of 
human  life.  I.  Life  as  a  school.  The  word  "chastening"  might  be  rendered 
"  instruction."  It  means  the  dealing  of  God  with  the  human  soul  as  a  teacher 
deals  with  his  pupil.  This  idea  relieves  God  of  the  charge  that  He  is  angry  with 
His  children  when  sorrows  fall  upon  them.  We  are  not  to  "  despise  "  this  instruc- 
tion, not  to  "weary"  at  this  correction.  U.  The  best  lesson  to  be  leakned  in 
THIS  school  is  wisdom.  Not  all  in  the  school  succeed  in  learning  this.  Wisdom  is 
skill ;  it  is  enlightenment  of  the  soul  with  respect  to  its  relation  to  God  and  His 
world.  It  includes  insight,  judgment,  and  the  highest  qualities  of  the  soul.  With 
the  richness  of  this  inner  life  there  comes  true  peace.  III.  This  wisdom  is  ckeative. 
"  The  Lord  by  wisdom  hath  founded  the  earth."  Wisdom  is  creative  in  man.  He 
is  a  generator  of  moral  influence  wherever  he  may  be.  Some  persons  are  reserve 
forces  of  righteousness.  Such  influence  is  creative.  IV.  This  wisdom  begets 
FAITH.  It  produces  confidence  in  the  unknown  and  untried.  Knowledge  of  God, 
instead  of  creating  doubt,  inspires  firmer  hope  and  humble  reliance.  The  further 
one  sees  into  God's  character  the  more  serene  and  settled  he  is,  because  the  progress 
in  knowing  God  is  progress  in  knowing  goodness.  (E.  S.  Tead.)  The  religious 
and  moral  ends  of  knowledge : — Here  are  described  the  effects  of  wisdom  upon  the 
honour  and  happiness  of  human  life.    I.  In  every  period  of  life  the  acquisition 

OF  KNOWLEDGE  IS  ONE    OF   THE    MOST    PLEASING  EMPLOYMENTS  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.       In 

youth  there  are  circumstances  which  make  it  productive  of  higher  enjoyment. 
II.  The  pursuits  of  knowledge  lead  not  only  to  happiness,  but  also  to  honour. 
To  excel  in  the  higher  attainments  of  knowledge,  to  be  distinguished  in  those 
greater  pursuits  which  have  commanded  the  attention  and  exhausted  the  abilities 
of  the  wise  in  every  former  age  is  perhaps  of  all  the  distinctions  of  human  under- 
standing the  most  honourable  and  grateful.  HI.  Knowledge  is  at  best  only  a 
MEANS  TO  AN  END.  Knowledge  of  every  kind  supposes  some  use  to  which  it  is 
to  be  applied.     1.  To  illustrate  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  the  Father  of  nature. 

2.  To  secure  the  welfare  of  humanity.  The  benevolence  of  knowledge  is  of  a  kind 
as  extensive  as  the  race  of  man,  and  as  permanent  as  the  existence  of  society. 

3.  To  improve  our  own  minds.     {Archibald  Alison,  D.D.) 

Ver.  14.  For  the  merchandise  of  it  is  better  than  the  merchandise  of  silver,  and 
the  gain  thereof  than  fine  golA.— The  honour,  profit,  and  pleasure  of  religion: — 
It  is  an  unquestionable  truth,  that  to  walk  in  the  paths  which  God  has  enjoined, 
is  to  secure  to  ourselves  the  most  perfect  felicity  which  our  present  state  will  admit ; 
and  that  our  misery  and  unhappiness  arise  in  proportion  to  our  deviation  from  that 
"peaceful  and  pleasant  path."  If  you  are  wise  enough  to  lay  hold  of  and  retain 
this  excellent  wisdom — 1.  Honour  shall  be  yours.  2.  Profit  shall  be  yours.  Who 
can  doubt  of  the  advantages  which  will  accompany  our  sincere  profession  of 
religion  ?  Advantages  in  time  and  in  eternity.  3.  Pleasure  shall  be  yours. 
Religion  affords  the  mind  the  most  complete  and  substantial  satisfaction.  {W. 
Dodd,  LL.D.)  A  gainful  merchandise  : — Wisdom  is  compared  and  contrasted 
with  other  possessions.  It  is  merchandise.  There  is  a  most  pleasant  excitement 
in  the  prosecution  of  mercantile  enterprise.  It  gives  full  play  to  all  the  facultiea. 
Those  who  prosecute  have  their  wits  more  sharpened  than  other  sections  of  the 


CHIP,  in.]  PROVERBS.  73 

community.  The  plans  are  contrived,  and  the  calculations  made.  .  .  .  What  of  the 
merchandise  for  a  more  distant  country  than  that  to  which  his  goods  are  going — 
■what  of  the  traffic  for  eternity  ?  Are  there  no  careful  calculations,  no  instructive 
longings,  no  vivid  imaginings,  as  to  its  condition  and  progress  ?  This  merchandise 
is  better  and  more  gainful  than  any  other.  The  world  contains  not  any  such 
promising  field  for  speculation.  It  opens  up  a  richer  and  surer  market  than  any 
port  of  Time.  It  is  a  treasure  that  cannot  be  taken  away.  (W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  The 
treasures  of  wisdom : — Man  is  the  only  trading  animal ;  commerce  is  his  prerogative. 
The  blazon  of  his  trade,  or  exchange,  is  his  patent  of  nobility.  There  is  no  distinc- 
tion more  honourable.  There  is  no  earthly  title  nobler  than  "  a  merchant "  ;  and  as 
Buch  they  are  the  controlling  class  in  society — the  chieftains  and  nobles  of  the  later 
civilisation.  Without  them,  there  could  be  no  division  of  labour,  and  consequently 
no  accumulation  of  capital,  and  therefore  no  education,  no  literature,  no  science, 
no  fine  art,  no  true  civilisation.  The  term  "  merchant"  is  altogether  honourable 
and  honoured,  and  therefore,  and  as  such,  is  aptly  metaphorical  of  a  true  Christian. 
Consider  some  points  of  resemblance.  I.  The  teue  merchant  is  a  man  of 
STRONG  FAITH.  Indeed,  in  regard  of  temporal  things,  he  above  all  other  men  may 
be  said  "  to  walk  by  faith."  His  barks  are  on  the  sea,  and  the  sea  is  treacherous. 
His  goods  are  consigned  to  men  who  may  be  plotting  to  defraud  him.  His  ability 
to  meet  obligations  depends  on  media  of  exchange,  which  some  financial  panic 
may  paralyse  in  a  moment.  Yea,  his  "  walk  by  faith "  goes  far  beyond  this. 
His  business  extends  practically  to  the  very  ends  of  the  earth,  to  lands  he  has 
never  seen,  and  with  races  of  men  with  whom  he  has  never  mingled.  And 
thus  in  this   walk  by  faith   he  is  a  fit  emblem  of   a   Christian.     II.  The  true 

MERCHANT     IS     A     MAN    OF    GREAT    EARNESTNESS   AND    ACTIVITY.       His    faith    is   not    an 

indolent  trust,  but  an  energising  principle.  III.  The  true  merchant  is  a  man 
PRACTICALLY  AND  PRE-EMINENTLY  USEFUL.  His  warcs  are  of  real  value — his  labours 
sincere  benefactions.  Traced  carefully  back  to  their  origin,  to  mercantile  enter- 
prise under  God,  must  be  ascribed  all  real  human  progress,  from  the  hut  and 
hunting  spear  of  the  earlier  barbarism  to  the  palaces  and  emporiums  of  the  last 
civilisation.  It  is  the  merchant  who  has  bridged  the  oceans  and  united  con- 
tinents ;  covered  the  seas  with  sails  and  the  land  with  machinery.     IV.  Especially 

IN    THESE    PARTICULARS    MUST    EVERY  CHRISTIAN    BE   LIKE  UNTO  A  MERCHANTMAN,  FOR — 

1.  He  must  be  a  man  of  strong  faith.  This  is  essentially  and  every  way  the 
foundation  of  his  character.  He  must  rely  confidently  for  his  salvation  on 
another,  and  live  ever  in  reference  to  the  far-away  and  invisible.  2.  A  Christian 
must  be  an  active  and  earnest  man.  That  indolent  reliance  on  Christ,  which 
some  men  call  faith,  is  a  fearful  delusion  of  the  great  adversary.  While  we  can 
do  nothing  to  merit  salvation,  yet  we  must  do  very  much  "  to  work  out  our  salva- 
tion." The  high  calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  is  not  a  lullaby  over  a  cradle,  but 
a  great  voice  out  of  heaven  saying,  "  Come  up  hither."  3.  A  Christian  must  be 
a  useful  man.  The  law  of  his  life  is  that  of  his  Master,  "  not  to  be  ministered 
unto,  but  to  minister."  4.  But  we  are  not  to  forget  that  while  thus  beneficent  to 
other  men,  a  Christian,  like  a  merchant,  is  above  all,  and  ineffably,  benefiting  him- 
self. This,  indeed,  is  the  main  truth  set  forth  in  the  emblem.  Mark  the  language, 
♦•  The  merchandise  of  it  is  better  than  the  merchandise  of  silver."  It  is  implied 
here  that  this  trading  of  the  merchant  in  earthly  products  is  good  because 
profitable.  But  the  Christian's  exchanging  of  temporal  for  eternal  things  is 
affirmed  to  be  obviously  better,  because  ineffably  more  profitable.  (1)  Because  of 
the  security  of  the  transaction.  All  material  commerce  is  manifestly  with  a 
hazard.  But  not  so  the  spiritual.  The  Christian's  trust  is  in  nothing  finite,  but 
in  the  living  God.  His  bark  cannot  founder,  for  Christ  sails  with  him.  Thieves 
cannot  steal  his  treasure,  for  it  is  laid  up  in  heaven.  (2)  Because  the  treasure  it 
secures  is  infinitely  more  valuable.  This,  indeed,  is  the  great  truth  of  the  whole 
passage.  We  have  here  a  most  beautiful  climax  of  all  earth's  rarest  and  richest 
things.  Silver,  gold,  rubies,  all  in  their  rarest  purity  and  richest  abundance,  are 
declared  to  be  of  inferior  value.  Yea,  the  inspired  penman  affirms  that  "  all 
things  the  human  heart  can  desire  are  not  to  be  compared  with  his."  And  if  you 
■will  remember  that  this  is  the  testimony,  not  of  some  poor,  unsuccessful  man,  but 
of  Solomon — of  Solomon,  too,  at  a  period  of  his  experience  when  he  had  tested,  as 
no  other  man  ever  did,  the  worth  of  all  earthly  things — not  the  utterance  of  one 
who,  disappointed  in  his  struggle  for  riches,  pleasure,  honour,  turns  in  melancholy 
misanthropy  away,  to  rail  at  the  world  and  call  it  hard  names,  and  scold  from  iv 
hermit's  cell,  or  a  priest's  pulpit ;  but  of  a  crowned  king  in  a  palace,  on  a  throne, 


.74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (ohap.  m. 

around  whom  the  world  delighted  to  gather  all  the  prizes  of  life's  mightiest 
triumphs,  then  you  will  take  his  testimony  as  demonstrated,  that  the  treasure 
secured  by  Christian  life  is  better  than  all  the  results  of  an  earthly  commerce. 
(C.  Wadsworth,  D.D.)  Wisdom  for  the  children  : — This  Book  of  Proverbs  is  a 
manual  of  conduct.  It  is  not  intended  to  make  its  readers  learned  men,  but  to 
make  them  wise  men.  We  begin  to  be  wise  when  we  fear  God,  and  to  fear  Him 
is  always  the  chief  part  of  wisdom.  Some  parts  of  the  book  are  specially  intended 
for  the  young.  Its  authors  saw  clearly  that  character  is  largely  formed  in  child- 
hood and  youth.  Hence  strong  emphasis  is  placed  on  the  importance  of  the  firm 
and  wise  discipline  of  children  and  young  people;  and  there  are  grave  and 
repeated  warnings  against  the  sins  to  which  the  young  are  specially  tempted.  If 
we  are  to  achieve  any  great  and  enduring  reformation  in  the  condition  of  this 
country,  and  of  the  world,  there  must  be  an  intelligent,  a  serious,  a  persistent 
endeavour  to  give  to  children  and  young  people  true  conceptions  of  the  possible 
dignity  of  human  life,  the  gracious  sternness  of  duty,  the  freedom  and  blessedness 
which  are  to  be  found  in  the  service  of  God.  Children  are  the  salvation  of  the 
race.  There  is  a  new  world  created  every  thirty  or  forty  years.  There  lies  our 
hope.  What  ought  we  to  teach  the  children  ?  I.  Wisdom.  What  they  need  to 
know  for  the  conduct  of  life :  how  to  live.  Our  first  duty  is  to  make  God  known 
to  them.  And  the  Christian  method  of  doing  that  is  to  bring  home  to  them  con- 
stantly the  great  truth  that  having  seen  Christ  we  have  seen  the  Father.  All  that 
Christ  was,  all  that  He  said,  must  be  accepted  as  containing  disclosures  of  the  life 
of  the  Father.  The  Christian  conception  of  life  is  founded  on  the  Christian  gospel. 
Wisdom  consists  in  a  clear  and  just  estimate  of  what  are  the  true  ends  of  life,  and 
in  the  power  to  determine  how  life  should  be  ordered  so  as  to  secure  those  ends, 
but  for  this  we  must  know  what  God's  relations  to  us  are.  The  great  Christian 
truths  have  a  direct  relation  to  life ;  they  determine  the  laws  of  life  ;  they  are  the 
forces  which  enable  us  to  fulfil  those  laws.  11.  Undebstandino.  This  denotes 
the  power  of  accurate  discrimination  between  things  which  may  seem  to  be  alike ; 
in  this  sense,  understanding  is  one  of  the  aids  and  instruments  by  which  wisdom 
is  able  to  direct  conduct.  In  most  men  the  perception  of  duty  is  often  dim  and 
uncertain.  Men  who  mean  to  do  right  do  wrong  because  they  cannot  clearly  see 
the  line  by  which  right  and  wrong  are  separated.  Therefore  the  plain  duties  of 
human  life  and  relationship  should  be  taught  to  children.  The  duties  of  industry, 
truthfulness,  equal  justice,  temperance,  patience,  fortitude,  good  temper,  courtesy, 
and  modesty.  Much  more  in  the  way  of  direct  moral  instruction,  for  securing  a 
proper  "  understanding  "  of  life  and  relations,  could  be  done  both  in  the  school  and 
in  the  family.  {R.  W.  Dale,  LL.D.)  The  value  of  mental  cultivation : — Even  in 
the  sense  of  mere  mental  cultivation  this  is  true.  A  well-informed,  well-stored 
mind  is  an  acquirement  greatly  superior  in  real  excellence  to  aught  that  is  merely 
external — to  wealth,  or  to  all  the  outward  distinction  that  wealth  can  procure.  It 
is  a  source  of  more  rational  and  richer  enjoyment  to  the  person's  self,  and  a  far 
worthier  ground  of  respectability  and  honour.  There  are  few  objects  really  more 
pitiable  than  an  ignorant,  senseless  rich  man — a  man  whose  mind,  in  its  unfur- 
nished poverty  and  emptiness,  presents  a  perpetual  contrast  with  his  outward  pomp 
and  plenitude.  (R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  The  best  merchaiviise  : — Why  is  the  mer- 
chandise of  wisdom  better  than  the  merchandise  of  silver?  1.  Because  it  is  a 
business  you  can  begin  sooner  than  you  can  any  other.  2.  Because  it  is  easier 
to  trade  in.  It  requires  less  money  and  less  labour  to  carry  it  on.  3.  Because 
you  can  have  better  partners  here  than  in  any  other  pursuits.  4.  Because  it  yields 
more  profit  than  any  other.  5.  Because  there  is  more  room  for  engaging  in  it  than 
in  any  other.    We  are  all  fitted  for  it,  and  invited  to  engage  in  it.    {R.  Newton,  D.D.) 

Yet.  15.  She  la  more  precious  than  rubies. — The  quality  of  virtue: — The 
words  wisdom,  understanding,  and  knowledge  partly  translate  the  word  "  virtue." 
I.  The  wonderful  ErrECTS  virtue  produces  on  the  mind.  1.  The  effects  bear 
no  proportion  to  our  immediate  sentiments  concerning  it.  2.  Observe  the  com- 
plete change  which  it  produces  upon  the  human  character  itself.  It  gives  the 
human  being  all  the  value  which  he  can  possess.  3.  Notice  the  power  it  possesses 
of  communicating  immediate  happiness  to  the  mind.  4.  Virtue  reaches  beyond 
the  agent  himself,  and  affects  all  who  stand  in  connection  with  him.  5.  Observe 
the  unexpected  and  amazing  changes  which  it  produces  upon  the  great  societies  of 
the  earth.  It  is,  in  fact,  the  great  principle  of  national  happiness  and  civilisation. 
n.  Tag  argument  suogbsted.     Look  beyond  the  appearances  of  the  moment,  and 


CHAP,  m.]  PROVERBS.  75 

study  and  know  your  real  interest,  and  your  own  natural  and  best  connections. 
Placed  among  men,  virtue  operates  incessantly  for  their  benefit.  She  is  incessantly 
employed  in  improving  and  comforting  us.  {John  Mackenzie,  D.D.)  The  best 
of  all  blessings  : — 1.  We  cannot  get  all  that  we  desire,  but  we  can  get  the  grace  of 
God.  2.  If  we  could  get  all  the  things  that  we  desire,  they  would  not  make  us 
happy,  but  the  grace  of  God  wUl.  3.  If  we  could  get  them,  and  they  could  make 
us  happy,  we  cannot  keep  them  ;  but  we  can  keep  the  grace  of  God.  The  grace  of 
God,  or  the  religion  of  Jesus,  is  the  most  valuable  thing  in  the  world.  Then  how 
earnestly  we  should  seek  it.  (R.  Netcton,  D.D.)  The  circumstances  which 
enhance  the  value  of  virtue  : — Virtue  is  beautiful  and  lovely  in  itself.  Her  dictates 
are  founded  on  the  nature  of  things.  1.  The  more  accurate  and  perspicuous  our 
knowledge  of  the  principle  which  gives  birth  to  a  virtuous  act,  or  on  which  it  is 
performed,  the  greater  is  the  value  of  it.  2.  The  more  generous  and  pure  the 
motives  to  our  good  actions,  the  greater  is  the  value  of  them.  3.  The  more  the 
virtues  that  we  practise  are  contrary  to  our  natural  dispositions,  to  our  constitu- 
tion, or  to  our  darling  propensities,  the  more  resplendent  and  excellent  are  they. 
4.  The  value  of  our  virtue  is  greatly  enhanced  by  the  outward  obstacles  we  have 
to  contend  with  in  the  exercise  of  it,  or  in  proportion  to  the  little  encouragement 
we  meet  with  in  it.  5.  The  more  considerable  the  privation  we  undergo  for  the 
sake  of  virtue,  the  more  various  and  inevitable  the  hazards  that  attend  it,  the 
greater  is  its  value.  6.  The  satisfaction,  or  the  willingness  with  which  a  virtue  is 
practised,  contributes  in  like  manner  very  much  to  heighten  its  beauty  or  its 
worth.  7.  Constancy  in  virtue  is  also  a  circumstance  which  enhances  the  value  of 
it.  8.  The  more  benign  the  influence  of  our  virtue  is  upon  the  public  interest,  the 
greater  is  its  value.    (G.  J.  Zollikofer.) 

Ver.  16.  Length  of  days  1b  in  her  right  hand. — Godliness  a  help  to  longevity : — 
So  far  from  being  true  that  good  men,  women,  and  children  die  sooner  than  others, 
the  reverse  is  actually  the  case.  As  wickedness  acts  as  a  shortener  of  life,  so  does 
a  regard  for  God's  wholesome  laws  help  to  lengthen  it.  It  is  an  unnatural  thing 
for  one  to  desire  to  die  before  he  has  finished  his  work  on  earth.  It  cannot  be 
wrong  in  us  to  love  life,  when  God  promises  it  to  His  children  as  a  special  blessing. 
It  is  easy  to  discover  why  religion  is  conducive  to  length  of  days.  Obedient 
children  will  be  most  likely  to  avoid  the  vices  and  crimes  which  shorten  life.  The 
love  of  life  is  not  peculiar  to  man  as  a  fallen  being.  Why  do  we  desire  that 
"length  of  days"  should  be  our  portion?    I.  Because  life  is  pleasant,  and  the 

WORLD,  IN    SPITE    OF    SEASONS    OF    CLOUDS  AND  STOEMS,  IS  A  BEAUTIFUL   ONE.       Blustrate 

by  the  summer  landscape.  We  love  life  for  its  many  comforts  and  enjoyments. 
Who  can  estimate  the  pleasures  of  the  family  circle,  the  genial  intercourse  of 
friends,  the  cultivation  of  refinement  and  taste,  the  peculiar  satisfaction  which 
attends  literary  labours,  the  accumulation  of  property  as  a  provision  against  the 
season  of  old  age,  and  that  we  bear  our  part  in  works  of  beneficence  and  charity  ? 
n.  Because  it  is  a  season   of  usefulness.     III.  Because   thkouqh  length    op 

DATS    ON    earth,    WE    MAT   BE    THE   BETTER    PREPARED   TO    MEET    GOD.      Eternity    aloue 

is  the  real  life-time  of  the  soul.  A  life  without  a  purpose  is  utterly  unworthy  of 
him  on  whom  God  has  bestowed  mental  gifts  and  the  gift  of  immortality.  (John 
N.  Norton.)  The  fruits  of  wisdom ; — There  is  a  great  difference  between  the 
Old  Testament  and  the  New,  with  respect  to  the  motives  by  which  religious  virtue 
is  severally  enforced  in  them.  In  the  old  covenant  there  was  an  established 
connection  between  obedience  and  outward  prosperity.  The  New  Testament 
differeth  from  this  very  widely,  both  in  its  general  declarations  and  the  instances 
of  fact  which  its  history  containeth.  Our  Lord  assured  His  disciples  that  they 
must  expect  tribulation.  Length  of  days,  riches,  and  honours,  instead  of  being 
promised  as  the  rewards  of  Christianity,  in  some  cases,  must  be  renounced  by  all 
the  servants  and  disciples  of  Jesus  Christ.  It  may  be  that  we  are  reminded  of 
two  expressions  which  seem  to  promise  material  prosperity  (Matt.  vi.  33 ;  1  Tim. 
iv.  8).  But  in  the  first  our  Lord's  design  is  to  show  the  folly  of  an  inordinate 
carefulness,  not  about  abundance  of  worldly  things,  outward  splendour,  and  great 
wealth,  but  the  necessaries  of  life,  what  we  shall  eat  and  drink,  and  wherewithal 
we  shall  be  clothed.  The  promise  therefore  must  be  understood  to  extend  no 
farther  than  to  answer  the  intention  of  superseding  our  thoughtfulness  about 
these  needful  things.  As  to  the  other  text,  it  seemeth  to  mean  that  in  the  practice 
of  true  religion  we  may  hope  that,  ordinarily,  God's  gracious  care  will  be  employed 
for  our  support  and  preservation.     If  we  observe  the  ordinary  methods  of  Divine 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

providence,  and  the  general  course  and  state  of  things,  with  their  connection  and 
dependence  in  this  world,  we  shall  find  that,  for  the  most  part,  the  practice  of  the 
Christian  virtues  hath  a  tendency  even  to  our  outward  advantage,  and  to  promote 
our  present  interest,  rather  than  the  contrary.     The  observation   holdeth  more 
universally  with  respect  to  communities,  some  of  which  have  risen  from  very  small 
beginnings  to  great  and  powerful  nations,  by  industry,  frugality,  the  exact  dis- 
tribution of  justice,  fidelity,  and  other  virtues ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  history  of 
all   ages   showeth  that  the  most  opulent   and   flourishing  kingdoms  have  been 
precipitated  into  ruin  by  avarice,  oppression,  luxury,  and  injustice.     I.  Wisdom's 
GIFT  IS  LENGTH  OF  DATS.     Life  importeth  the  capacity  for  enjoyments,  and  is  the 
foundation  of  them  all.     Length  of  days  has  the  preference  of  riches  and  honour, 
but  not  of  an  approving  conscience.     That  a  religious  or  virtuous  course  of  life 
tendeth  to  prolong  our  days  we  may  be  convinced  by  experience.     Temperance, 
meekness,    and  patience  contribute   to  long  life.    Benevolence   and    the   social 
virtues  tend  to  secure  life  against  that  foreign  violence  to  which  the  unjust,  the 
cruel,  and  the  inhumane  are  obnoxious.     II.  Wisdom's  gift  is  kiches.     There  are 
abuses  of  wealth.    But  it  may  lawfully  be  sought  after  as  the  means  of  living 
easy,  and  enjoying  the  comforts  of  this  world  with  moderation.     Nature  teacheth, 
and  religion  doth  not  forbid  it,  that  we  should  endeavour  to  render  our  condition 
in  this   world  tolerable.    And   wealth  should  also  be  valued  as  the  means  and 
ability  of   doing  good  in  a   religious  and  moral  sense.     Men  ordinarily  acquire 
riches  by  their  parsimony,  their  industry  and  their  credit,  and  to  all  these  the 
moral  virtues  comprehended  in  wisdom  are  eminently  serviceable.     The  natural 
effect  of  temperance,  chastity,  humility  is  to  retrench  a  great  many  eiorbitancies. 
And  diligence  is  specially  commended  in  religion.     Mutual  confidence  is  of  great 
advantage  for  the  getting  of  riches,  and  religious  character  is  the  sure  ground  of 
confidence.     III.    Wisdom's    gift    is    honouk — that    esteem,   with    the    outward 
tokens  and  expressions  of  it,  which  men  have  in  the  world.     This  is  a  certain 
effect  of  wisdom  or  religious  virtue,  because  virtue  itself  maketh  the  very  character 
which  is  honourable,  or  the  subject  of  esteem.     Men  cannot  help  having  in  their 
heart  a  veneration  for  the  man  who,  by  the  whole  course  of  his  behaviour,  appears 
to  be  pious,  sober,  just,  and  charitable,  let  his  condition  be  what  it  will.     (J. 
Abernethy,  M.A.)         The  discreet  behaviour  of  the  Christian  respecting  his  outward 
welfare  : — Well-being  in  externals,  though  not  the  most  important  part  of    our 
happiness,  is  yet  always  a  part  of  it,  and  consequently  a  care  for  its  conservation 
and  advancement  cannot   be   absolutely  wrong.     1.  See  that  all  your  efforts  to 
promote  your  outward  welfare  are  innocent.    Employ  none  other  than  fair  and 
honest  means  to  that  end.     2.  Never  let  your  efforts  so  engross  and  occupy  your 
mind  as  to  allow  you  neither  inclination  nor  leisure,  time  nor  ability,  to  care  and 
labour  for  that  which  more  proximately  and  directly  promotes  the  perfection  of 
your  spirit.    3.  Do  not  assume  that  your  efforts  for  your  outward  welfare  must 
necessarily  succeed,   or  that  they  are  absolutely  lost  if   they  fail    of   success. 
4.  Dignify  your  efforts  by  forming  just  conceptions  of  the   ultimate  end  of  all 
earthly  goods  and  outward  distinctions.    5.  Enjoy  the  fruits  of  your  labour,  in 
proportion  as  you  reap  them,  and  postpone  not  the  legitimate,  discreet  use  and 
enjoyment  of  them,  till  you  shall  have  acquired  and  accumulated  such  or  such  a 
store  of  them.     Enjoy  all  the  pleasures,  the  comforts,  the  conveniencies  of  life, 
with  a  cheerful  temper  and  without  anxious  care  for  the  future.     Enjoy  them  as 
men,  not  as  children;  enjoy  them  as  Christians.     {G.  J.  Zollikofer.)        The  gain 
of  true  religion : — Sir  Henry  Mitchell,  a  distinguished  Methodist  layman,  made  an 
interesting  speech  at  Bradford,  in  which  he  referred  to  the  late  Sir  Isaac  Holden, 
who  was  a  life-long  Methodist.     He  died  respected  by  every  one  who  knew  him, 
and  more  than  a  millionaire.     Sir  Henry  went  to  see  Sir  Isaac  a  little  while  before 
his  death,  and  said  to  him,  "  You  owe  most  to  your  religion  and  to  Methodism." 
To  which  Sir  Isaac  replied,   "  Everything."     Sir  Isaac  added   that  his  study  of 
Methodist  doctrine  and  experience  had  exercised  a  most  wholesome  discipline  upon 
his  mind,  and  had  contributed  very  largely — perhaps  more  than  any  other  influence 
that  had  been  brought  to  bear  upon  his  character — to  his  success  in  life.         The 
advantages  of  religion  : — "  Honour  "  can  only  be  attained  by  religion  and  virtue. 
I.  The    tede    natdbe    of    honoub.      1.  Used  to  denote  worthy  and   creditable 
parentage.     2.  Or  it  signifies  titles  of  place  and  dignity.     Veneration  is  due  to 
some  callings  and  relations  of  men,  though  the  persons  themselves  should  not  be 
virtuous.     3.  The  term  is  sometimes  used  for  the  esteem  and  reputation  which  a 
man  hath  in  the  world,  especially  amongst  virtuous  persons.     Such   honour  is 


CHi».  m.]  PROVERBS.  rt 

"power,"  enabling  a  man  to  do  things  great  and  worthy;  and  it  is  •'  safety,"  as  it 
gives  a  man  an  interest  in  the  esteem  and  affection  of  others.     II.  Belioion  akd 

VIBTDI!   ABE   THE    ONLY   MEANS   OF   ATTAINING    HONOUR.       This    Can    bc    prOTCd 1.    By 

testimony ;  from  Scripture,  from  the  concurrent  opinion  of  wise  men  in  all  ages. 
2.  By  reason.  There  may  be  a  twofold  cause  of  things — moral  and  natural.  A 
moral  cause  is  that  which  doth  dispose  a  man  to  such  a  condition,  upon  the 
account  of  fitness  or  desert,  and  in  this  sense  honour  is  the  reward  of  virtue.  The 
natural  cause  of  a  thing,  by  its  own  immediate  eflBcacy,  produces  the  effect ;  and  in 
this  sense  likewise  virtue  is  the  cause  of  honour.  3.  By  experience ;  that  practical 
knowing  which  every  man  may  attain  by  his  own  observation.  Two  objections 
may  be  urged  against  what  is  thus  proved — (1)  Good  men  have  met  with  dis- 
honour, as  Christ  and  His  disciples  did.  (2)  Vicious  men  have  sometimes  been 
had  in  honour.  External  honour  may  be  due  to  them  ;  internal  honour  is  only 
given  by  those  who  do  not  know  them.    {Bp.  John  Wilhins.) 

Ver.  17.  Her  ways  are  ways  of  pleasantness. — The  walk  of  faith  a  way  of 
pleasantness  and  peace  : — I.  Why  is  it  that  all  the  ways  of  Wisdom  ake  ways  op 
PLEASANTNESS,  AND  ALL  HER  PATHS  ARE  PEACE  ?  Becausc  they  are  the  appointment 
of  an  infinitely  tender  Father  for  His  covenant  children  to  walk  in.  The  way 
towards  Mount  Zion  might  have  been  full  of  bitterness,  but  even  then  it  would  have 
been  best  to  walk  in  the  way  of  safety.  Heaven  has  its  openings  here.  The 
peaceful  mind,  the  heart  that  rests  in  the  love  of  God,  the  conscience  sprinkled 
with  the  precious  blood  of  atonement,  the  will  that  lies  passive  in  the  hands  of  the 
Father,  or  would  desire  to  do  so :  these  form  some  little  openings  of  what  shall  be — 
foretastes  of  what  shall  be ;  these  are  the  little  beams  of  the  future  day  of  glory, 
where  night  shall  never  come.  Moreover  it  is  pleasant  to  walk  in  the  ways  which 
others  have  found  pleasant.  See  the  testimony  of  God's  saints.  And  those  paths 
must  be  pleasant  and  peaceful  in  which  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  gone  before  us. 

II.    The  PATH  OR  WALK  OF  FAITH  IS  IN    ITSELF  A  MOST    HAPPY  WALK.       Faith    lookcth   tO 

Jesus,  and  as  it  looks  upon  Jesus,  it  walks  in  a  pleasant  path,  rests  upon  Him  for 
wisdom ;  He  is  our  wisdom.  It  is  not  only  wisdom  which  we  look  to,  but  it  is  the 
wisdom  of  tender  sympathy ;  and  this  path  is,  therefore,  a  most  happy,  peaceful, 
blessed  path.  Faith  looks  to  Christ  for  a  complete,  perfect,  and  glorious  righteous- 
ness. Faith  looks  to  Christ  for  sanctification.  Faith  looks  upon  Christ  in  the  way 
of  glorification.  It  requires  wisdom  to  discern  the  paths  of  wisdom.  (J.  H.  Evans, 
M.A.)  The  ways  of  true  religious  wisdom  are  ways  of  pleasantness  : — I.  Enumerate 
SOME  LEADING  INSTANCES  OF  THIS  GENERAL  TRUTH.  1.  It  is  pleasant  to  exchange  a 
constant  stream  of  worldly  and  vain  thoughts,  for  the  contemplation  of  God  and 
heavenly  things.  2.  It  is  pleasant  to  exchange  an  obstinate  stupidity  or  self- 
confidence  for  a  penitential  sense  of  sin,  accompanied  with  a  hope  of  forgiveness, 
founded  on  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  3.  It  is  pleasant  to  exchange  self-indulgence 
for  self-denial.  4.  It  is  pleasant  to  exchange  a  course  of  negligence,  hypocrisy, 
and  sensuality  for  a  life  of  activity  in  the  ways  of  God.  5.  It  is  pleasant  to 
exchange  selfishness,  injustice,  cruelty,  pride,  and  malevolence  for  an  active 
benevolence  towards  mankind.  6.  It  is  pleasant  to  live  as  a  citizen  of  heaven,  as 
one  interested  in  the  affairs  of  God's  eternal  kingdom.  II.  Obviate  some  contrary 
OBJECTIONS.  1.  There  will  be  a  secret  demur  about  this  pleasantness,  on  the  ground 
of  feeling  no  strong  propensity  towards  it.  2.  Of  opposing  the  requirements  of 
religion,  conviction,  humiliation,  repentance,  &c.  3.  Of  the  influence  of  carnal 
relations  and  acquaintances.  4.  Of  the  conduct  of  some  professors.  Let  us  try 
ourselves,  whether  the  ways  of  wisdom  are  indeed  pleasant  to  us.  Have  we  felt 
the  bitterness  of  sin,  and  of  a  sinful  state  ?  Have  we  felt  our  distance  from  this 
pleasure,  and  impossibility  of  getting  near  it?  Have  we  seen  the  glory  of  God, 
universally  ?  Have  we  seen  the  transcendent  glory,  and  tasted  the  sweetness  of  the 
person  and  love  of  Jesus  Christ?  Have  we  an  insatiable  thirst  after  this  sweetness ? 
{J.  Love,  D.D.)  The  advantages  of  virtue  and  piety  : — Two  opinions  the  incon- 
siderate are  apt  to  take  upon  trust.  1.  A  vicious  life  is  a  life  of  liberty,  pleasure, 
and  happy  advantages.  2.  A  religious  life  is  a  servile  and  most  uncomfortable 
state.  The  truth  is,  that  besides  the  principal  work  which  religion  does  for  us  in 
securing  our  future  well-being  in  the  other  world,  it  is  likewise  the  most  effectual 
means  to  promote  our  present,  and  that  not  only  morally, but  by  a  natural  tendency 
in  themselves,  which  the  duties  of  religion  have  to  procure  us  riches,  health, 
reputation,  credit,  and  all  those  things  wherein  our  temporal  happiness  is  thought 
to  consist.     1.  Justice  and  honesty  contribute  very  much  towards  all  the  facultiei 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

of  the  mind.  2.  In  the  continuance  and  course  of  a  virtuous  man's  affairs  there  is 
little  probability  of  his  falling  into  considerable  disappointments  or  calamities — 
not  only  because  guarded  by  the  providence  of  God,  but  because  honesty  is  in  its 
own  nature  the  freest  from  danger.  3.  The  religious  and  moral  man  is  disposed  to 
procure  help,  which  never  enters  into  the  thoughts  of  a  wicked  one.  Being 
conscious  of  upright  intentions,  he  can  look  towards  heaven,  and  with  some 
assurance  recommend  his  affairs  to  God's  blessing  and  direction.  4.  In  all  good 
governments  the  upright  and  honest  man  stands  much  fairer  for  preferment,  and 
is  much  more  likely  to  be  employed  in  all  things  where  fidelity  is  wanted.  5.  The 
more  and  longer  a  virtuous  man  is  known,  so  much  the  better  is  he  loved  and 
trusted.  6.  Virtue  brings  peace  and  content  of  mind.  Virtue  befriends  us  in  the 
life  to  come.  (Laurence  Sterne.)  The  jpeace  and 'pleasantness  of  true  religion  : — 
I.  Pleasure  is  the  idol  of  man.  All  men  desire  happiness,  and  all  strive,  some 
way  or  other,  to  secure  it.  But  fallen  man  is  liable  to  many  and  fatal  mistakes 
in  the  pursuit  of  it.  Is  the  man  of  the  world  really  happy  ?  Such  men  have  their 
pleasures ;  but  they  have  no  true  happiness,  because  their  pleasures  are  neither 
certain,  solid,  nor  lasting.  II.  The  ways  of  true  religion  are  ways  of  pleasantness. 
It  is  God's  will  that  man  should  be  happy.  The  knowledge  of  God  in  Christ  is  the 
first  step  towards  happiness.  It  is  not  only  "  life  eternal,"  it  is  present  peace  and 
pleasure  to  "  know  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  He  hath  sent." 
(Charles  Davy.)  Ways  of  pleasantness  : — The  man  of  pleasure  utterly  mistakes 
both  his  object  and  his  pursuit.  The  only  happiness  worth  seeking  is  found  here ; 
that  which  will  live  in  all  circumstances,  and  abides  the  ceaseless  changes  of  this 
mortal  life.  "  The  ways  "  may  be  dark  and  lonely,  yet  how  does  the  sunshine  of 
reconciliation  beam  upon  their  entrance !  Every  step  is  lighted  from  above,  and 
strewed  with  promises  ;  a  step  in  happiness,  a  step  to  heaven.  Wisdom's  work  is 
its  own  reward — strictness  without  bondage.  God  rules  children,  not  slaves. 
They  work  neither  from  compulsion,  nor  from  hire,  but  from  an  ingenious  principle 
of  gratitude  to  their  Benefactor,  filial  delight  in  their  Father.  Pleasant,  therefore, 
must  be  the  labour,  yea,  the  sacrifices  of  love ;  short  the  path,  cheerful  the  way, 
when  the  heart  goes  freely  with  it.  (C.  Bridges,  M.A.)  The  pleasures  of  a 
religious  life  : — I.  Premise  a  few  things  for  explaininq  the  text.  1.  What  is 
Baid  of  the  pleasures  of  religion  supposes  that  persons  are  inured  to  the  practice  of 
it,  and  have  a  virtuous  disposition  and  turn  of  mind.  Every  pleasure  must  have 
its  faculty  of  perceiving,  suited  and  adapted  to  it.  2.  In  interpreting  the  text  we 
must  except  extraordinary  cases,  such  as  that  of  violent  persecution.  3.  The  text 
does  not  speak  of  what  is  always  the  fact,  but  of  the  direct  and  natural  tendency  of 
the  thing.  The  pleasures  of  religion  may  be  destroyed  by  dark  and  gloomy  notions 
of  it,  or  by  the  influence  of  a  melancholy  habit.  II.  The  peculiar  excellency  of 
THE  pleasures  OF  RELIGION  AND  VIRTUE.  They  aic  the  highest  mankind  are  capable 
of ;  have  everything  in  them  that  can  recommend  any  pleasures  to  the  pursuit  of 
rational  beings,  and  infinitely  the  advantage,  in  many  respects,  over  all  other 
enjoyments  whatsoever.  Let  us  show  the  difference  between  the  several  pleasures 
to  which  mankind  are  addicted,  and  prove  that  their  particular  sentiments, 
prejudices,  affections,  and  habits  do  not  destroy,  or  in  reality  at  all  lessen,  this 
necessary  difference ;  and  that  the  superiority  on  all  accounts,  whether  it  be  in 
respect  of  purity,  solidity,  duration,  and  every  other  circumstance  that  can  help  to 
furnish  out  the  most  complete  satisfaction,  is  on  the  side  of  the  pleasures  of  the 
virtuous  man.  1.  The  pleasures  of  virtue  suppose  all  those  unruly  passions  to  be 
subdued,  or  at  least  controlled  and  moderated,  which  are  the  cause  of  the  greatest 
disorders  and  miseries  in  human  life.  2.  The  pleasures  of  virtue  will  bear  the 
Btrictest  review,  and  improve  upon  reflection.  3.  The  pleasures  of  religion  depend 
entirely  on  ourselves,  and  not  on  those  numberless  accidents  which  may  either 
prevent,  or  blast,  or  entirely  destroy  all  outward  pleasures.  4.  The  pleasures  of 
religion  can  never  be  pursued  to  an  excess  :  never  beyond  the  most  deliberate 
dictates  of  reason  ;  to  bring  a  just  reproach  on  ourselves,  or  to  the  injury  of 
others.  5.  Keligious  pleasures  are  our  best,  our  only  support,  under  the  disappoint- 
ments and  calamities  of  life.  6.  The  pleasures  of  religion  are  of  all  others  the 
most  durable.  {James  Foster.)  Pleasantness  and  peace: — True  piety  has  in 
it  the  greatest  true  pleasure.  The  ways  in  which  she  has  directed  us  to  walk 
are  such  as  we  shall  find  abundance  of  delight  and  satisfaction  in.  All  the 
enjoyments  and  entertainments  of  sense  are  not  comparable  to  the  pleasure  which 
gracious  souls  have  in  communion  with  God  and  doing  good.  That  which  is  the 
only  right  way  to  bring  us  to  our  journey's  end  we  must  walk  in,  fair  or  foul, 


CHAP,  m.]  PROVERBS.  79 

pleasant  or  unpleasant ;  but  the  way  of  religion,  as  it  is  the  right  way,  so  it  is  a 
pleasant  way :  it  is  smooth  and  clean,  and  strewed  with  roses.  There  is  not 
only  peace  in  the  end,  but  peace  in  the  way ;  not  only  in  the  way  of  religion  in 
general,  but  in  the  particular  paths  of  that  way,  in  all  her  paths,  all  the 
Beveral  acts,  instances,  and  duties  of  it.  One  does  not  embitter  what  the 
other  sweetens,  as  it  is  with  the  allays  of  this  world.  [Mattheio  Henry.)  A 
pleasant  road  to  travel : — I.  This  is  jot  endubing.  II.  It  introduces  to  good 
BociETY.  III.  Its  cheerful  prospect.  IV,  Its  joyful  termination.  (J.  W.  Bray.) 
The  temporal  advantages  of  a  religious  life  : — I.  A  just  conception  of  the  naturb 
AND  situation  OF  MAN.  With  a  body  compounded  from  the  earth,  man  became  a' 
living  soul.  Between  those  very  different  substances,  matter  and  spirit,  the  union 
is  most  perfect.  The  situation  of  man  agrees  with  his  nature.  By  his  intellectual 
powers  he  asserts  his  relation  to  the  world  of  mind  and  spirit ;  but  his  material 
part  connects  him  with  a  world  which,  abounding  with  evils,  manifestly  appears 
to  be  the  place  of  preparation  for  riper  and  ascending  existence.  With  this 
nature,  and  in  this  situation,  from  whence  can  man  derive  the  strongest  promise 
of  successful  toil?  A  man  may  foUow  happiness  by  the  path  of  power;  by 
the  pursuit  of  wealth ;  by  becoming  a  votary  of  pleasure.  But  the  ways  of 
unrighteousness  never  can  be  the  ways  of  pleasantness,  nor  its  paths  peace.  II.  Of 
religion,  as  she  stands  opposed  to  her  rivals,  the  most  obvious  and  discriminating 
ADVANTAGES  ARE  THESE.  1.  Her  impartiality  and  easiness  of  access.  2.  The 
comfort  and  certainty  which  attend  her  in  possession.  3.  The  beneficial 
consequences  of  the  pursuit  which  she  directs.  4.  The  supreme  beauty  and 
importance  of  the  objects  to  which  she  looks.  (C.  Symmons,  B.D.)  Religion  and 
its  value: — What  is  the  generally  accepted  sense  in  which  the  word  "  religion"  is 
used  in  our  own  times  ?  The  same  persons  are  found  to  use  the  term  in  somewhat 
different  senses.  It  may  denote  the  creed  or  technical  beliefs  of  different  people- 
or  the  rites  and  ceremonies  of  each  religious  section  of  humanity.  But  religious 
doctrines  and  rites  both  derive  their  origin  from  the  sentiment  of  religion  which  is 
common  to  all  the  religions  of  the  world.  Both  belief  and  practice  are  dependent 
on  what  we  may  call  a  sentiment  of  God,  a  consciousness  that  there  is  a  God,  a 
desire  to  believe  correctly  about  Him,  and  to  please  Him  by  certain  actions.  The 
sentiment  is  the  same  under  whatever  forms  the  religious  doctrine  and  practice  may 
show  themselves.  Eeligion  is  independent  of  the  forms  it  may  assume.  Eeligion  is 
radically  a  consciousness  of  God,  involving  various  thoughts  and  feelings  concerning 
Him,  but  always  more  or  less  coupled  with  a  sense  of  personal  obligation  to  Him. 
Religions  are  the  various  modes  in  which  that  consciousness  is  expressed,  both  as  to 
the  intellectual  notions  concerning  God  held  as  doctrines,  and  the  rites,  ceremonies, 
and  practices  regarded  as  obligatory,  or  as  deemed  pleasing  to  God.     I.  Religion 

DOES  NOT  CONSIST   IN  MERE  BELIEFS  ABOUT    GOD,  OR  IN    THE  OBSERVANCE   OF   RELIGIOUS 

EiTES.  Not  that  these  are  of  no  importance,  only  that  they  must  not  be  put  as 
substitutes  for  true  religion.  Since  Comte's  day  there  has  been  a  tendency  to 
confound  religion  with  morality.  The  two  things  are  distinct,  though  inseparable. 
II.  Religion  is  not  always  associated  with  true  beliefs.  The  intellectual  beliefs 
of  a  man's  religion  can  only  be  approximations  to  the  truth  more  or  less  remote ; 
rites  and  ceremonies  are  obligatory  so  far  as  we  find  them  serviceable  to  our  own 
spiritual  culture,  and  beneficial  to  the  community  as  acts  of  social  worship.  The 
value  of  religion  consists  in  its  affording  satisfaction  to  the  most  imperative  demands 
of  our  nature ;  in  its  power  to  soothe  and  console  the  mind  under  bitterest  griefs  ; 
and  in  the  bright  hopes  which  it  inspires  for  the  life  to  come.  The  refinement  and 
elevation  of  character  among  the  vast  majority  of  our  race  have  been  mainly  owing 
to  the  sanctions  created  or  intensified  by  religious  emotion.  Not  one  of  human 
Borrows  can  be  so  adequately,  so  bounteously  compensated  for  as  by  religion. 
Stoicism,  the  privilege  only  of  the  few,  can  only  be  enjoyed  by  turning  the  heart  to 
stone.  Epicurism,  the  resource  of  spiritual  dipsomaniacs,  is  a  remedy  more 
degrading  than  suicide.  Philanthropic  enthusiasm,  noble  in  itself,  and  demanded 
from  us  by  religion,  will  only  act  as  an  anodyne,  leaving  the  heart,  in  the  intervals 
of  its  influence,  face  to  face  with  its  inconsolable  misery.  But  religion  reconciles 
us  to  all  forms  and  degrees  of  sorrow.  It  turns  every  event  that  seems  hostile  into 
the  act  of  a  Faithful  Friend.  Religion  reigns  over  the  entire  man — not  content  with 
the  outward  polish  of  the  manners,  but  purifying  at  their  source  the  principles  and 
motives  of  all  right  conduct.  (C.  Voysey,  M.A.)  The  happiness  of  true  religion : — 
As  man  is  endowed  with  reason  and  a  sense  of  moral  obligation,  he  is  capable  of 
being  affected  by  rational  motives,  and  therefore  religion  is  congenial  to  his  nature. 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  m. 


That  true  religion  produces  perfect  happiness  may  be  proved— 1.  From  the  eternal 

distinction  which  subsists  between  virtue  and  vice.     In  man  there  is  a  moral  sense 

which  approves  or  disapproves  antecedently  to  the  operation  of  reason.     2.  From 

the  internal  and  exquisite  satisfaction  which  obedience  to  religious  precepts  affords, 

and  the  excruciating  misery  which  a  violation  of  them   always  produces  in  th« 

human  breast.     3.  The  observation  in  the  text  is  displayed  with  the  greatest  force 

at  the  hour  of  death.      Religion,  immortal,  is  the  never-failing  friend  of  man. 

4.  The  paths  of  wisdom  lead  to  happiness,  while  a  vicious  course  of  life  terminates 

in  infamy  and  ruin.    (A.  Stirling,  LL.D.)       The  gifts  of  Wisdom  .-—Both  the  hands 

of  Wisdom  are  filled  with  blessings  for  those  who  come  to  serve  her.     Like  the  God 

of  Wisdom  she  can  never  give  enough  to  her  devotees  and  worshippers.     She  has 

nothing  but  reward  for  those  who  love  her  counsels  and  obey  her  behests.     As  for 

her  ways,  they  are  like  the  streets  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  paved  with  gold ;  and  as 

for  her  paths,  they  are  full  of  peace  without  disturbance,  sacredly  calm  as  the  very 

security  of  heaven.    Not  only  does  Wisdom  give  with  the  hand— she  grows,  she 

abounds  in  fruitfulness,  she  surprises  all  her  children  with  new  products.     {Joseph 

Parker,  D.D.)         On  the  happiness  of  a  virtuous  career  : — Virtue  is  the  image  of 

God  in  the  soul,  and  the  noblest  thing  in  the  creation ;  and  therefore  it  must  be  the 

principal  ground  of  true  happiness.     1.  By  practising  virtue  we  gratify  the  highest 

powers  of  our  natures.     2.  Virtue,  in  the  very  idea  of  it  implies  health  and  order  of 

mind.     3.  By  practising  virtue  we  gain  more  of  the  united  pleasures,  arising  from 

the  gratification  of  aU  our  powers,  than  we  can  in  any  other  way.    The  course  most 

conducive  to  happiness  must  be  that  which  is  most  agreeable  to  our  whole  nature. 

4.  Much  of  the  pleasure  of  vice  itself  depends  on  some  species  or  other  of  virtue 

combined  with  it.     5.  Virtue  leaves  us  in  possession  of  all  the  common  enjoyments 

of  life,  and  it  even  improves  and  refines  them.    This  effect  it  produces  by  restraining 

us  to  regularity  and  moderation  in  the  gratification  of  our  desires.     6.  Virtue  has 

peculiar  joys  such  as  nothing  else  can  give — such  as  the  love  of  the  Deity,  peace 

of  conscience,  a  sense  of  God's  favour,  the  hope  of  future  reward.    Now  consider 

some   peculiar    qualities    of    this    happiness.       (1)  It   is  more   permanent  than 

any   other  happiness;  (2)  more  independent;  (3)  more  pure   and  refined;  (4)  it 

continues  with  a  man   even  in  affliction.      Inferences:   1.   How  wrong  is  it  to 

conceive  of  religious  virtue  as  an  enemy  to  pleasure.     2.  What  strong  evidence  we 

have  for  the  moral  government  of  the  Deity.     3.  What  reasons  we  have  for  seeking 

virtue   above  all  things.      (R.   Price,  D.D.)         Pleasure  and  peace   the  certain 

consequences  of  virtue  : — I.  The  pleasures  of  religion  are  more  noble,  delightful, 

AND  LASTING  THAN  THE  PLEASURES  OF  SIN.     Morc  noblc,  as  the  soul,  that  is  chiefly 

conversant  with  them,  far  excels  the  body;  and  as  the  objects  from  whence  they  are 

derived  are  superior  to  those  that  gratify  our  senses.     The  pleasures  of  virtue  are 

more  delightful  than  the  pleasures  of  sin,  as  they  are  pure  and  without  alloy.     And 

the  remembrance  of  having  done  our  duty  is  a  continual  feast.     II.  The  practice 

OF  BELiGioN  KEEPS  US  IN  PERPETUAL  PEACE  AND  SAFETY.    Religion  prcscrvcs  a  Settled 

tranquillity  in  the  mind,  and  prevents  disquieting  fears  and  the  tumults  of  unruly 

passions.      It  engages  the  kindness  of   Providence,  and   gains  the  good-will  of 

men.    It  heightens   every    enjoyment,   and   effectually   comforts   in    every  trial. 

(T.  Newlin,  M.A.)         The  happiness  of  religion  : — True  religion  yields  its  joys  only 

to  the  heart  that  is  unreservedly  surrendered  to  its  sway.    While  the  heart  continues 

to  be  parted  between  God  and  the  world,  it  cannot  be  to  the  disparagement   of 

religion  that  the  happiness  promised  by  it  to  its  votaries  is  not  enjoyed.     In  true 

religion  itself,  in  the  ways  and  paths,  the  more  open  and  the  more  private  walks  of 

heavenly  wisdom,  there  is  true   blessedness.      What  is  there  in  true  religion  to 

engender  gloom  ?     It  is  light ;  and  it  is  the  property  and  office  of  light,  not  to 

gather  mists,  but  to  dispel  them.     It  turns  the  shades  of  night  into  the  morning. 

(R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)         The  pleasantness  of  religion : — Most  proverbial  expressions 

will  admit  of  some  particular  exceptions,  and  the  plain  meaning  of  this  one  is,  that 

it  is  the  natural  tendency  of  religion  to  make  men  peaceful  and  happy.     I.  The 

KNOWLEDGE    AND    EXPERIENCE    OF    RELIGION    HATH    A    MIGHTY    EFFECT    TO    REMOVE    THE 

PRINCIPAL  CAUSES  OF  DISQUIETUDE.  If  the  mind  be  easy  and  cheerful,  it  is  not  of 
essential  consequence  what  our  outward  circumstances  may  be.  1.  Religion  removes 
doubt  and  uncertainty.  The  knowledge  and  experience  of  religion  sets  a  man  in  a 
good  measure  free  from  anxieties,  allays  the  ferment  in  his  breast,  and  restores  an 
agreeable  composure  to  the  mind.  How  pleasant  is  the  assent  which  the  mind  gives 
to  the  truth,  when  it  has  the  ready  concurrence  of  the  will,  and  the  firm  support  of 
personal  experience  I     2.  Religion  removes  the  sense  of  guilt.     Men  attempt  by 


tmkf.  ra.]  PROVERBS.  81 

rarions  ways  to  relieve  themselves  of  uneasy  thoughts,  but  religion  alone  frees  from 
guilt  and  its  fears.  8.  Religion  removes  the  restlessness  and  turbulency  of 
unsanctified  passions.  It  strikes  at  the  root  of  our  corruptions,  and  forbids  them 
to  rule  and  tyrannise  in  the  heart.  II.  Thb  knowledgi  and  expebienci  or  belioiok 
ABE  ATTENDED  WITH  posiTrvE  JOTS  AND  PLEA30KE8.  1.  The  discoverics  of  religion 
afford  the  highest  entertainment  to  the  understanding.  2.  Its  hopes  and  comforts 
possess  the  heart.  What  a  blessing  is  peace  of  conscience !  And  the  sense  of  God'a 
favour  ;  and  a  firm  faith  in  Divine  Providence ;  and  communion  with  God ;  and  the 
hope  of  eternal  life !  There  is  a  solid  satisfaction  in  the  temper  and  conduct 
religion  recommends;  in  the  duties  of  devotion  and  worship.  (S.  Stennett,  D.D.) 
Pleasure  a  relative  thing  : — That  pleasure  is  man's  chiefest  good  (because  it  is  the 
perception  of  good  that  is  properly  pleasure)  is  an  assertion  most  certainly  true, 
though  under  the  common  acceptance  of  it,  not  only  false,  but  odious ;  for,  according 
to  this,  pleasure  and  sensuality  pass  for  terms  equivalent.  Pleasure  in  general  is 
the  apprehension  of  a  suitable  object,  suitably  applied  to  a  rightly  disposed  faculty, 
and  so  must  be  conversant  both  with  the  faculties  of  the  body  and  of  the  soul 
respectively,  as  being  the  result  of  the  fruitions  belonging  to  both.  It  is  too  often 
assumed  that  religion  is  an  enemy  to  all  pleasures — it  bereaves  them  of  all  the 
sweets  of  converse,  dooms  them  to  an  absurd  and  perpetual  melancholy,  designing 
to  make  the  world  nothing  else  but  a  great  monastery ;  with  which  notion  of 
religion,  nature  and  reason  seem  to  have  great  cause  to  be  dissatisfied.  He  who 
would  persuade  men  to  religion,  both  with  art  and  efficacy,  must  found  the 
persuasion  of  it  upon  this,  that  it  interferes  not  with  any  rational  pleasure,  that  it 
bids  nobody  quit  the  enjoyment  of  any  one  thing  that  his  reason  can  prove  to  him 
ought  to  be  enjoyed.  An  argument  from  experience  may  be  taken  to  urge  that  it 
must  be  the  greatest  trouble  in  the  world  for  a  man  to  shake  off  himself  and  to  defy 
his  nature,  by  a  perpetual  thwarting  of  his  innate  appetites  and  desires.  But  this 
religion  requires.  I.  Pleasure  is,  in  the  nature  of  it,  a  relative  thing,  bo  it 
imports  a  peculiar  relation  and  correspondence  to  the  state  and  condition  of  the 
person  to  whom  it  is  a  pleasure.  II.  The  estate  of  all  men  by  nature  becomes 
changed.  It  is  more  or  less  different  from  that  estate  into  which  the  same  persons 
do,  or  may,  pass  by  the  exercise  of  that  which  the  philosophers  call  virtue,  and  into 
which  men  are  much  more  effectually  and  sublimely  translated  by  that  which  we 
call  grace  ;  that  is,  by  the  supernatural  overpowering  operation  of  God's  Spirit.  A 
man,  while  he  resigns  himself  up  to  the  brutish  guidance  of  sense  and  appetite,  has 
no  relish  at  all  for  the  spiritual,  refined  delights  of  a  soul  clarified  by  grace  and 
virtue.  The  Athenians  laughed  the  physiognomist  to  scorn  who,  pretending  to 
read  men's  minds  in  their  foreheads,  described  Socrates  as  a  crabbed,  lustful,  proud, 
ill-natured  person ;  they  knowing  how  directly  contrary  he  was  to  that  dirty 
character.  But  Socrates  bade  them  forbear  laughing  at  the  man ;  for  that  he 
had  given  them  a  most  exact  account  of  his  nature ;  but  what  they  saw  in  him 
so  contrary  at  the  present  was  from  the  conquest  that  he  had  got  over  his 
natural  disposition  by  philosophy.  True  pleasure  is  that  of  the  mind,  which  is 
an  image,  not  only  of  God's  spirituality,  but  also  of  His  infinity.  Religion  belongs 
to  it  in  reference — 1.  To  speculation,  as  it  sustains  the  name  of  understanding. 
2.  To  practice,  as  it  sustains  the  name  of  conscience.  Religious  pleasure 
never  satiates  or  wearies ;  it  is  in  nobody's  power,  but  only  in  his  that  hath 
it.  So  that  he  who  hath  the  propriety  may  be  also  sure  of  the  perpetuity. 
The  man  never  outlives  it,  because  he  cannot  outlive  himself.  Then  it 
follows  that  to  exhort  men  to  be  religious  is  only  in  other  words  to  exhort  them 
to  take  their  pleasure — a  pleasure  made  for  the  soul,  and  the  soul  for  it — 
suitable  to  its  spirituality,  and  equal  to  all  its  capacities.  (R.  South,  D.D.) 
Godliness  is  pleasant  and  delightful : — The  excellency  of  godliness  and  religion 
seen— I.  From  its  pleasure  and  delight.  1.  In  the  work  of  grace  and  regeneration 
wrought  in  the  heart.  2.  Even  grace,  the  more  it  is  improved,  carries  a  delight  and 
pleasurableness  in  it.  3.  There  is  a  great  pleasingness  in  all  the  duties  and  exercises 
of  religion.  In  prayer,  reading  the  Scriptures,  communion  of  the  saints,  sacraments, 
Sabbaths,  &c.  Religion  does  indeed  cause  some  kinds  of  grief  and  sorrow,  such  as 
godly  sorrow  for  sin.  And  when  we  say  that  the  ways  of  spiritual  wisdom  and 
grace  are  ways  of  pleasantness  we  do  not  mean  it  of  the  mad  mirth  of  the  world, 
which  consists  in  nothing  but  vanity  and  folly,  and  luxuriancy  of  spirit.  II.  From 
ITS  tranquillity  and  quiet.  Religion  is  the  business  of  peace,  and  carries  peace 
along  with  it.  1.  With  God,  ths  peace  of  reconciliation.  2.  With  ourselves,  the 
peace  of  assurance.     3.  With  one  another,  the  peace  of  communion.     The  mora 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

godliness,  then,  the  more  pleasure  in  godliness.  (T.  Horton,  D.D.)  Present 
advantages  of  piety : — These  words  are  designed  to  counteract  a  prejudice  which 
prevails,  that  religion  is  connected  with  melancholy,  and  calls  upon  us  to  bid  adieu 
to  all  the  innocent  and  natural  enjoyments  of  life.  The  case  of  those  who  suffer 
persecution  for  the  sake  of  religion  should  be  excluded  from  the  present  view, 
which  relates  to  the  ordinary  state  and  circumstances  of  piety  in  this  world.  And 
in  order  to  contemplate  the  tendency  of  any  principle  we  must  view  it  as  operating 
in  its  mature,  and  vigorous,  and  perfect  state.     I.  The  influemce  of  religion  on 

THOSE  objects  WHICH  ARE  SUPPOSED  TO  BE  MOST  CONTBIBTJTORY  TO  THE  PRESENT  HAPPINESS 

OF  MANKIND.  1.  The  prolongation  of  life.  Piety  inspires  that  moderation  in  all 
things  which  is  equally  favourable  to  the  faculties  of  the  body  and  the  mind.  It 
exerts  a  tranquillising  influence  on  all  our  emotions.  Involved  in  the  prolongation 
of  life  is  the  preservation  of  health.  The  good  man  regards  health  as  a  talent 
entrusted  to  him.  2.  The  possession  of  reputation.  Piety  promotes  esteem :  a 
good  man  commonly  lives  down  at  last  the  enmity  which  his  virtues  had  at  first 
excited.  3.  The  acquisition  of  property.  To  the  attainment  of  moderate  wealth 
piety  is  favourable.  II.  The  present  effects  of  religion  which  belong  to  the  state 
OF  THE  mind.  1.  Belief  in  the  good  Governor  of  all  things.  2.  Harmony  with 
this  Best  of  Beings.  3.  Free  access  to  this  Almighty  Friend.  4.  The  most 
essential  elements  of  piety  are  all  favourable  to  happiness.  These  may  be  stated 
as   adoration   and   benevolence.      {R.  Hall.)         The  pleasantness   of  religion : — 

I.  Religion  promotes  happiness  by  removing  those  things  which  are  the 
principal  causes  of  man's  unhappiness.  Many  people  account  for  the  unhappiness 
of  their  mind  by  the  peculiar  circumstances  in  which  they  are  placed.  Differences 
in  circumstances  may,  to  a  certain  extent,  influence  our  minds  as  well  as  our 
bodies  ;  but  stiU  not  so  much  depends  on  such  circumstances  as  is  generally 
imagined.  1.  One  cause  of  unhappiness  is  guilt.  2.  Another  is  fear.  3.  The 
influence   of    unholy  tempers.      4.  Insatiable   thirst    after   creature   enjoyments. 

II.  Religion  produces  happiness  by  opening  up  new  sources  of  comfort  and 
enjoyment  in  the  mind  of  man.  The  world,  and  the  good  things  of  the  world, 
are  enjoyed  in  a  new  way.  There  is  the  testimony  of  a  good  conscience ;  an 
assurance  of  Divine  favour ;  the  Spirit  of  adoption  ;  the  enjoyment  of  communion 
with  God  in  His  ordinances ;  a  persuasion  of  the  truth  of  God's  promises ;  and  a 
solid,  well-grounded  hope.  It  is  true  that  some  professors  of  religion  are  not 
happy  under  the  influence  of  their  opinions  and  views.  Some  profess  religion 
who  do  not  enjoy  the  life  and  power  of  it.  Some  are  double-minded,  and  try  to 
serve  two  masters.  Some  live,  as  it  were,  under  the  law.  Some  are  constitutionally 
inclined  to  discouragement  and  despondency,  labouring  under  the  disadvantages  of 
a  debilitated  and  nervous  state  of  body.  In  conclusion,  religion  comes  well 
recommended  to  you.  There  are  two  heavens  offered  you,  one  here  and  one  in 
glory.  {J.  E7itwisle.)  The  pleasures  of  religion : — It  is  a  maxim  admitted  by 
all  the  world,  that  "Every  one  is  drawn  by  pleasure."  It  is  the  misery  of  our 
fallen  nature  that  we  are  not  drawn  so  much  by  the  best  pleasures  as  by  the  worst ; 
the  pleasures  we  generally  prefer  end  in  pain  ;  the  pleasures  we  commonly  neglect 
are  such  as  would  make  us  happy  for  ever.  These  are  the  pleasures  of  religion, 
the  "  ways  of  wisdom."  What  are  the  pleasures  of  religion  ?  I.  The  possession 
OF  Christian  graces.  The  great  thing  which  distinguishes  a  Christian  is  "having 
the  Spirit"  (Rom.  viii.  9).  The  Spirit  is  the  author  of  a  new  and  Divine  life  in 
the  soul  of  the  believer.  Every  grace  is  implanted  in  his  soul,  the  exercise  of 
which  is  as  natural  and  pleasant  to  the  new  nature  as  the  due  exercise  of  our 
senses  is  to  the  natural  man.  These  graces  are  knowledge,  faith,  repentance,  hope, 
love.  II.  The  enjoyment  of  Christian  privileges.  Such  are — 1.  Peace  with  God 
through  faith  in  the  blood  of  Christ.  2.  Sacred  joy  in  the  redemption  wrought  for 
him.  3.  Adoption  into  the  family  of  God.  III.  The  performance  of  Christian 
duties.  Such  as  prayer,  praise,  reading  and  hearing  the  Word,  the  Lord's  day. 
As  all  these  are  good  and  pleasant  in  themselves,  so  they  appear  to  greater 
advantage  if  compared  with  the  pleasures  of  the  world.  They  are  certainly  far 
more  solid  and  satisfying,  far  more  rational  and  noble,  and,  above  all,  far  more 
durable.  There  is  far  more  pleasure  in  religion  now  than  there  is  in  sin,  and  we 
are  sure  that  it  will  end  better.  (G.  Burder.)  The  happiness  attendant  on  the 
paths  of  religion : — This  passage  breathes  the  voice  of  the  most  cheering  encourage- 
ment. I.  Evince  the  truth  of  this  declaration.  The  religious  man  is  delivered 
by  religion  from  those  causes  of  solicitude,  terror,  and  afHiction  which  are  the 
principal  sources  of  the  miseries  of  mankind  ;  the  experiences,  helps,  and  consola- 


CHAP,  m.]  PROVERBS.  83 

tions  to  which,  in  proportion  as  men  are  not  religious,  they  are  strangers.  1.  The 
most  grievous  of  all  distresses  is  the  sense  of  unpardoned  guilt.  From  this  the 
religious  man  is  set  free.  He  looks  up  to  God,  through  Christ,  as  to  a  reconciled 
Father.  The  burden  is  removed  from  his  soul,  and  he  goeth  on  his  way  rejoicing. 
Every  token  of  grateful  obedience  which  he  is  enabled  to  render  overspreads  his 
heart  with  gladness.  As  he  advances  in  religion  he  advances  in  happiness. 
2.  Another  distress  arises  from  the  immoderate  fear  of  falling  away  from  God 
under  future  temptations.  The  religious  man  fears  for  himself.  But  his  fear  is 
not  an  overwhelming  terror.  It  is  a  fear  which  excludes  all  dependence  on  his 
own  strength.  It  is  a  fear  which  produces  humility,  caution,  vigilance,  meditation, 
and  prayer.  But  it  is  not  a  fear  which  brings  anguish ;  it  is  not  a  fear  which 
urges  to  despondence.  3.  The  religious  man  is  delivered  from  corroding  anxieties 
as  to  the  events  which  may  befall  him  during  the  residue  of  his  life.  4.  He  is  also 
delivered  from  the  fear  of  the  last  enemy.  Death.  5.  There  yet  remain  various 
circumstances  which  attend  the  religious  man  in  the  ordinary  course  of  his  life, 
and  contribute  no  small  accessions  to  the  daily  amount  of  his  happiness.  By  the 
integrity  and  kindness  of  his  conduct  he  is  often  placed  beyond  the  reach  of  those 
who  may  be  desirous  of  injuring  him.  His  domestic  life  is  a  source  of  happiness. 
His  friends  will  be  found  tender  and  faithful.  The  general  temper  of  his  mind  is 
cheerful  serenity.  From  the  common  bounties  of  providence  he  derives  higher 
satisfaction  than  other  men.  II.  Apply  the  instruction  which  mat  be  dbawn  from 
THE  TEXT.  1.  Address  those  who  are  decidedly  wicked.  2.  Those  who  are  wavering 
between  the  paths  of  religion  and  the  paths  of  guilt.  3.  Those  who  are  religious. 
{Thomas  Gisborne,  M.A.)  Religion  a  comfortable  ivay  of  life  : — Here  is  another 
motive  to  get  wisdom.  Wouldst  thou  go  in  pleasant  ways,  and  live  in  peace  and 
quietness  ?  All  wisdom's  ways  are  such.  The  man  who  gets  wisdom  gets  true 
happiness  and  delight.  When  merchants  go  by  sea,  or  passengers  by  land,  they  are 
glad  when  they  find  fair  way  and  a  quiet  passage.  The  words  of  this  text  are  fitly  knit 
to  the  former,  for  long  life,  riches,  and  honour  are  not  sufficient  to  make  a  man  happy. 
He  may  meet  with  many  occasions  of  sorrow,  and  of  war,  and  trouble,  which  may 
make  his  life  very  uncomfortable.  Here,  therefore,  Solomon  adds  to  the  former 
blessings  pleasure  and  peace,  to  show  that  nothing  is  wanting  to  the  wise  man. 
He  had  commended  wisdom  before  ex  parte  termini,  from  happiness  to  the  end  :  now 
he  commends  it  ex  parte  medii,  from  the  comfort  of  the  way.  (Francis  Taylor,  B.D.) 
The  pleasures  of  real  religion: — I.  The  way  of  beligion  is  the  way  of  wisdom. 
They  that  are  truly  religious  are  wise,  and  the  following  of  religion  is  the  wisest 
course  in  the  world.  1.  The  way  of  religion  is  the  way  of  truth.  2.  The  way  of 
God's  commandments.     3.  The  way  of  faith,  not  of  sense.     4.  The  way  of  holiness. 

5.  The  way  of  irreconcilable  opposition  to  the   devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh. 

6.  The  way  of  spiritual  worship.  7.  The  straight  and  narrow  way.  8.  The  way 
of  universal  obedience.  9.  The  good  old  way.  This  way  is  the  way  of  wisdom, 
because — 1.  God  has  directed  the  children  of  men  into  this  way.  2.  The  Lord 
Jesus  leads  His  people  in  this  way.  3.  The  Spirit  determines  men  to  enter  and 
walk  in  this  way.  4.  Jesus  Himself  took  this  way.  5.  It  is  the  way  most 
agreeable  to  right  reason.  6.  It  is  the  only  way  to  happiness,  here  or  hereafter. 
II.  The  ways  of  religion  are  the  most  pleasant  and  peaceful  ways.  To  whom 
are  the  ways  of  religion  pleasant  ?  1.  To  those  who  have  the  art  of  walking  in 
them.  2.  To  those  who  habituate  themselves  to  close  walking  with  God.  Consider — 
3.  The  testimony  of  the  saints  who,  in  all  ages,  have  given  this  for  their  verdict  of 
the  ways  of  God.  4.  That  pleasure,  innocency  and  holiness  arrive  always  together 
at  their  height.  5.  That  religion,  so  far  as  it  does  prevail,  frees  us  from  the  cause 
of  our  woe.  6.  That  God  directs  and  assists  His  servants  by  His  Spirit.  7.  That 
the  Lord  binds  upon  His  saints  the  walking  in  His  ways  with  the  softest  and 
sweetest  ties  imaginable,  the  answering  of  which  must  needs  create  a  pleasure  in 
the  doing  thereof.  8.  There  is  a  sweetness  interwoven  with  the  Christian  walk. 
9.  There  is  a  transcendent  pleasure  at  the  end  of  the  way.  Religion,  then,  brings  a 
calm  into  the  soul  which  no  other  thing  can  do.  It  gives  a  rest  and  satisfaction 
that  can  nowhere  else  be  found.  It  breaks  the  reigning  power  of  lusts  and 
corruptions,  which  cause  the  soul  much  uneasiness.  It  brings  the  soul  to  the 
accomplishment  of  its  desires.  It  brings  into  a  state  of  resignation  to  the  will  of 
God.  The  pleasures  of  religion  are  of  such  an  elevated  nature  that  all  others  seem 
but  low  and  grovelling  in  comparison  of  them  ;  such  as  the  victory  over  lusts  and 
corruptions ;  the  approbation  of  one's  own  conscience  ;  the  assurance  of  God's 
acceptance ;  the  joy  of  doing  good  to  others  ;  communion  with  God  ;  assurance  of 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  m. 

the  Lord's  love  and  eternal  salvation.  Such  pleasures  are  refined  and  pure;  they 
satisfy  without  loathing  or  disgust ;  they  are  ready,  and  near  at  hand ;  and  lasting. 
Beligion  helps  a  man  to  draw  the  greatest  possible  pleasure  from  created  things. 

III.  Peace  also  is  to  be  enjoyed  in  the  way  of  belioion.     A  sevenfold  peace. 

I.  With  God.  2.  Of  conscience.  3.  Of  heart  by  the  soul's  rest  in  God.  4.  Of 
mind.  5.  With  the  creatures  of  God.  6.  As  prosperity.  7.  Peace  eternal.  What 
peace  can  any  one  have  in  the  way  of  sin  ?  What  peace  is  there  to  a  man  who  is 
a  stranger  to  the  Mediator  of  peace  ?  What  peace  so  long  as  stinging  guilt  remains 
in  the  conscience,  unsatisfied  desires  in  the  heart,  and  lusts  reigning  within? 
(T.  Boston,  D.D.)  The  beauty  of  holiness  : — He  who  would  effectually  plead  the 
cause  of  piety  and  religion  must  not  only  recommend  the  principles  of  it  to  the 
understanding,  as  most  true  and  certain,  but  the  practice  of  it  to  the  will  and 
afifections,  as  desirable  and  delightful.  Nothing  would  tend  more  to  the  advance- 
ment of  true  godliness  than  if  we  could  clearly  demonstrate  that  it  hath  not  only 
the  advantage  above  sin  and  vice  in  respect  of  future  and  eternal  joys,  but  in 
respect  of  present  pleasure  and  satisfaction.  What  is  this  wisdom  which  is  thus 
profitable,  thus  pleasant  ?  Is  it  a  subtle  management  of  our  own  concerns  ?  Nay, 
it  is  nothing  else  but  true  religion,  solid  piety  and  holiness.     I.  All  pleasdbe 

AEISETH    FBOM    AN    ATTEMPEBED  SUITABLENESS    AND    HABMONY    THEBE    18   BETWEEN    THE 

TACULTY  AND  THE  OBJECT.  Where  there  is  any  disagreement,  either  in  contrariety 
or  in  excess,  the  result  is  not  pleasure  but  torment.  1.  The  pleasures  which 
religion  brings  are  not  such  as  do  immediately  affect  the  body,  the  drossy  and 
earthy  part  of  man.  2.  Eeligion,  as  it  doth  allow,  so  it  adds  a  sweetness  and  relish 
to  the  lawful  comforts  of  this  present  life.  Experience  proves  that  sobriety  and 
temperance  bring  more  true  pleasure  than  excess  and  riot.  A  constant  fear  of  God, 
and  a  conscientious  obedience  to  Him,  give  a  seasoning  to  all  our  earthly  enjoyments. 
A  good  conscience  is  a  continual  feast.  3.  The  chief  joys  which  religion  gives  are 
internal  and  mental.     And  these  are  incomparably  beyond  the  delights  of  sense. 

II.  This  pube  and  spibitual  pleasube  abiseth  in  the  mind  fbom  thbee  things. 
1.  A  congruity  and  suitableness  in  holy  and  religious  actions  to  the  rules  and 
principles  of  right  reason.  There  are  three  general  principles  of  natural 
religion.  (1)  That  God  is  loved  and  feared  above  all,  and  the  revelations  of  His 
will  to  be  credited  and  obeyed.  (2)  That  we  ought  to  govern  ourselves  with  all 
temperance  and  sobriety,  in  the  use  of  the  comforts  of  this  life.  (3)  That  we  ought 
to  demean  ourselves  towards  others  with  the  exactest  justice  and  equity.  Where 
our  actions  do  correspond  with  these  principles  of  reason,  there  must  arise  an 
intellectual  joy  and  complacency.  2.  The  comfortable  reflections  of  our  own 
consciences  upon  holy  and  religious  actions.  Self -reflection  is  sweet  and  comfort- 
able to  a  true  Christian.  3.  The  hope  and  expectation  of  the  eternal  reward  of 
our  obedience.  4.  That  must  be  most  pleasant  which  calms  all  our  perturbations 
and  disturbances,  and  fits  us  to  enjoy  both  God  and  ourselves  in  a  sedate 
composure.       III.   Cojimon    obsebvation    and    expebience    will    be    cited    to 

DISPBOVE     ALL     THESE    SPECULATIONS     CONCEBNINO   THE   PLEASURE    OF     BELIOION.      It    is 

pleaded  that,  in  actual  fact,  many  of  the  votaries  of  religion  are  miserable  and 
melancholy.  In  answer  we  say — 1.  The  joys  of  religion  are  not  loud  and 
tumultuous,  but  grave,  solid,  and  serious.  "  True  joy  is  a  severe  thing."  It 
lies  deep  and  recondite,  in  the  centre  of  the  soul,  and  fills  it  with  calm  thoughts, 
sedate  affections,  and  uniform  peace  and  tranquillity.  2.  If,  at  any  time,  the 
religious  man  be  really  sad  and  dejected,  this  is  not  to  be  imputed  to  religion,  but 
to  the  want  of  it,  either  in  himself  or  others.  3.  Even  the  tears  and  sorrows  of  a 
true,  pious  Christian  have  a  more  solid  joy  in  them  than  all  the  noise  and 
extravagant  jollity  of  wicked  men.  There  is  a  sweetness  even  in  mourning,  when 
it  is  filial  and  ingenuous.     Tears  are  a  solace,  and  grief  itself  an  entertainment. 

IV.  What  then  is  to  be  s\u)  of  the  mobtifications  and  self-denials  which 
RELIGION  REQUIBE8  ? — ABE  NOT  THESE  UNPLEASANT?  Is  there  nothing  in  thesc  things 
that  is  difficult  to  be  done,  and  grievous  to  be  borne  ?  1.  It  is  true  that  there  are 
many  things  in  religion  which  are  difficult  and  laborious,  but  this  does  not  argue 
them  to  be  unpleasant  and  grievous.  The  whole  Christian  life  is  warfare ;  in  it 
there  must  be  strain  and  discipline.  2.  We  must  keep  in  mind  that  there  is 
a  twofold  nature  in  every  Christian — his  corrupt  and  his  Divine  nature.  Two 
contrary  parties  are  struggling  within  him.  The  rigorous  duties  of  religion  are 
only  so  to  the  corrupt  and  sinful  inclinations  ;  they  are  a  joy  and  pleasure  to  the 
renewed  and  sanctified  nature.  3.  The  severities  of  religion  are  far  more  difficult 
and  distasteful  at  our  first  entrance  upon  a  holy  life  than  they  will   be  when 


CHi».  ra.]  PROVERBS.  85 

•we  are  confirmed  and  habituated  in  it.  4.  The  severities  of  religion  are  no  mors 
nor  greater  than  what  we  are  content  to  undergo  in  things  of  another  nature.  The 
sinner  meets  with  far  more  trouble  in  the  wajs  of  sin  than  the  most  strict 
and  holy  Christian  can  do  in  the  ways  of  obedience.  The  complaints  against  the 
rigours  of  religion  proceed  only  from  mistakes  and  prejudices.  (Bp.  E.  Hopkin*.) 
The  wayt  of  witdom : — If  we  consider  wisdom  only  as  an  object  of  speculation, 
the  mind  hath  satisfaction  in  meditating  upon  it.  The  greatest  delight  ariseth 
from  serious  devout  meditation  on  God.  Pleasure  springeth  from  different  occa- 
sions. We  ought  to  use  our  reason  in  order  to  choose  those  pleasures  which,  all 
things  considered,  are  the  best  and  fittest  for  us.  In  order  to  choose  we  should 
consider — 1.  The  testimony  of  those  who  have  made  trial  of  wisdom's  ways,  and 
agree  in  assuring  us  that  they  are  ways  of  pleasantness  and  peace.  2.  The 
experience  of  those  who  have  but  the  lowest  measure  of  this  wisdom  ;  these  can 
show  the  painf ulness  of  the  ways  of  sin  and  folly.  3.  The  fact  that  wisdom's  ways 
lead  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  Divine  favour,  and  our  walking  in  them  is  the  only 
foundation  upon  which  we  can  have  confidence  toward  God.  4.  The  pleasures 
which  accompany  sincere  religion ;  that  is,  which  arise  from  the  testimony  of  an 
approving  conscience.  Compare  the  pleasures  of  religion  with  the  pleasures  of 
sense.  (1)  The  gratifications  of  sense  are  common  with  us  to  the  brutal  kinds. 
(2)  The  pleasures  of  this  world  are  but  precarious ;  we  can  have  no  sure  hold  on 
them.  (3)  Those  only  can  be  accounted  the  greatest,  the  noblest,  and  in  all  respects 
the  most  valuable  comforts,  which  support  and  relieve  the  mind  in  its  greatest 
need.  (J.  Abernethy,  M.A.)  The  pleasantness  of  religion: — By  "wisdom"  is 
understood  an  habitual  skill  or  faculty  of  judging  aright  about  matters  of  practice. 
"  Ways  "  and  "  paths  "  in  Scripture  dialect  are  the  courses  and  manners  of  action. 
By  "  pleasantness"  may  be  meant  the  joy  and  delight  accompanying  a  course  of 
such  actions,  and  by  "  peace  "  the  content  and  satisfaction  which  ensue  from  it. 
A  course  of  life  directed  by  wisdom  and  good  judgment  is  delightful  in  the  practice, 
and  brings  content  after  it.  1.  Wisdom  is  of  itself  delectable  and  satisfactory,  as  it 
implies  a  revelation  of  truth  and  a  detection  of  error  to  us  ;  as  it  satisfies  our  best 
desires,  by  enriching  our  minds  with  excellent  and  useful  knowledge,  directed  to  the 
noblest  objects,  and  serviceable  to  the  highest  ends.  2.  Wisdom  disposes  us  to 
acquire  and  to  enjoy  all  the  good  and  happiness  we  are  capable  of.  3.  Wisdom 
frees  us  from  the  company  of  anxious  doubt  in  our  actions,  and  the  consequence  of 
bitter  repentance.  4.  Wisdom  begets  in  us  a  hope  of  success  in  our  actions. 
5.  Wisdom  prevents  discouragement  from  the  possibility  of  ill-success,  and  makes 
disappointment  tolerable.  6.  Wisdom  makes  all  the  troubles,  griefs,  and  pains 
incident  to  life  easy  and  supportable,  by  rightly  valuing  the  importance  and 
moderating  the  influence  of  them.  7.  Wisdom  always  has  a  good  conscience 
attending  it.  8.  Wisdom  confers  on  its  possessor  a  facility,  expert  readiness,  and 
dexterity  in  action  which  is  a  very  pleasant  and  commodious  quality.  9.  Wisdom 
disposes  us  with  judgment  to  distinguish,  and  with  pleasure  to  relish,  wholesome 
things.  10.  Wisdom  acquaints  us  with  ourselves,  our  own  temper  and  constitution, 
our  propensities  and  passions,  our  habitudes  and  capacities.  11.  Wisdom  procures 
and  preserves  a  constant  favour  and  fair  respect  of  men,  purchases  a  good  name, 
and  upholds  reputation.  12.  Wisdom  instructs  us  to  examine,  compare,  and  rightly 
to  value  the  objects  that  court  our  affections  and  challenge  our  care,  merely  regu- 
lating our  passions  and  moderating  our  endeavours.  13.  Wisdom  preserves  order, 
the  parent  of  peace;  and  prevents  confusion,  the  mother  of  iniquity,  strife,  and  dis- 
quiet. 14.  Wisdom  discovers  our  relations,  duties,  and  concernments  with  respect 
to  men,  as  well  as  the  natural  grounds  of  them.  15.  It  acquaints  us  with  the 
nature  and  reason  of  true  religion,  affording  the  most  convincing  arguments  to  per- 
suade us  to  the  practice  of  it,  16.  Wisdom  attracts  the  favour  of  God,  purchases 
for  us  a  glorious  reward,  and  secures  to  us  a  perpetual  felicity.  All  these  things 
are  sources  of  satisfaction  and  delight.  (Isaac  Barrow,  D.D.)  Pleasantness  of 
religion  : — This  is  not  only  the  excellence,  but  the  peculiar  excellence,  of  religion. 
The  ways  of  folly  and  vice,  all  things  considered,  are  not  ways  of  pleasantness. 
Goodness  is  proposed  as  the  duty,  and  pleasure  as  the  reward — a  reward  which  the 
world  and  Satan  are  not  able  to  give.  I.  The  ways  of  religion  are  ways  of 
PLEASANTNESS.  1.  There  is  a  pleasure  in  the  duties  immediately  relating  to  God ; 
such  as  love,  faith,  reliance,  resignation,  hope,  prayer,  and  thanksgiving.  These 
are  all  apparently  cheerful  duties,  and  when  duly  performed,  must  be  attended  wltli 
the  highest  satisfaction.  2.  There  is  a  pleasure  in  those  occupations  in  which  a 
Tirtooas  and  religious  man  will  be  frequently  employed.    3.  There  is  a  pleasure  in 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

that  behaviour  towards  others,  and  that  manner  of  prosecuting  our  worldly  affairs, 
which  ever  accompany  a  religious  disposition.    4.  There  is  a  pleasure  in  performing 
our  duty  to  ourselves,  as  it  relates  to  the  body  and  to  the  passions.     II.  The  wats 
OF  SIN  ABE  NOT  WATS  OF  PLEASANTNESS.     1.  No  man  cau  be  happy  who  acts  against 
his  conscience.     2.  Those  who  feel  no  remorse  of  conscience  may  have  shaken  off 
some  fears,  but  then  they  have  lost  the  greatest  comfort  of  life,  which  is  hope. 
3.  Every  action  contrary  to  reason  and  religion  is,  if  not  always,  yet  certainly  for 
the  most  part,  hurtful  even  in  this  life.    III.  The  objections  which  wicked  men 
MAKE  TO  THESE  PROPOSITIONS.     1.  They  Say  they  do  find  pleasantness  in  their  self- 
gratifications.      2.  Sinners   object  that  good  men,   who  afiirm  from  their    own 
experience  that  there  is  pleasure  in   righteousness,  are  grave  dissemblers,  who 
conceal  the  real  state  of  their  minds  :    that  reaUy  they  sacrifice  their  present  ease 
and  satisfaction.     3.  Sinners  say  that  the  pleasures  of  a  pious  mind,  if  there  be 
such,  arise  from  a  strong  fancy,  from  fanaticism  and  enthusiasm.     4.  Sinners  say 
experience  shows  these  boasted  pleasures  of  religion  not  to  be  very  common  amongst 
Christians.     5.  Sinners  may  object  that  some  duties  of  Christianity  are  harsh  and 
disagreeable,  as  repentance,  self-denial,  and  mortifications,  and  that  therefore  the 
ways  of  religion  cannot  be  ways  of  pleasantness.     (J.  Jortin,  D.D.)        Life  within 
life  : — Are  we  to  understand,  then,  that  those  who  are  wise  and  of  an  understanding 
heart  are  saved  from  all  the  disappointment  and  trouble  of  earthly  pilgrimage? 
The  facts  of  life  instantly  contradict  such  a  view.    But  there  is  life  within  fife. 
The  true  life  throbs  beneath  all  the  appearances  which  are  possible  to  the  observer, 
and  even  below  the  experiences  which  often  trouble  the  believer  himself.    The  most 
illustrious  instance  of  all  completely  disproves  the  suggestion  that  true  wisdom 
exempts  from  earthly  trial,  for  the  Son  of  God  Himself  was  a  man  of  sorrows  and 
acquainted  with  grief ;  and  as  for  His  poverty,  it  is  enough  to  know  that  as  the  Son 
of  Man  He  had  not  where  to  lay  His  head.     (Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)        The  pleasant- 
ness of  wisdom's  ways  : — Here  the  motive  presented  is  that  of  the  present  and  imme- 
diate happiness  in  this  world  which  is  uniformly  to  be  found  in  God's  service. 
I.  Explain  the  statement  of  the  text.     Wisdom  is  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  doing 
the  commandments  of  God,  or  in  other  words,  religion.     It  is  not  merely  said  that 
religious  ways  lead  to  pleasantness ;  they  are  the  ways  of  pleasantness   in  the 
abstract.     Religion  does  not  merely  make  people  happy,  religion  is  happiness. 
There  is  no  way  in  which  true  wisdom  requires  us  to  walk  which  is  not  a  way  of 
peace  ;  not  only  is  there  peace  in  the  end,  there  is  peace  by  the  way.    II.  Confirm 
THE  statement  OF  THE  TEXT.     Remember  the  character  of   God.     He   wills  the 
happiness   of   His    servants  now,    and    not  merely  by  and    by  (1   Tim.   iv.    8). 
Godliness  has  the  "  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is."     III.  Account  for  the  state- 
ment OF  THE  TEXT.     RcligioH  in  every  one  of  its  exercises  is  happiness.     1.  Take 
it  in  its  most  general  character — as  consisting  in  the  love  of  God  and  our  neighbour. 
The  atmosphere  of  love  is  the  atmosphere  of  heaven.     There  is  more  happiness  in 
loving  than  in  being  loved.   2.  Every  one  of  the  "  fruits  of  the  Spirit "  is  an  ingredient 
of   happiness — love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  gentleness,  goodness,  faith,  meek- 
ness, temperance.     3.  Consider  the  happiness  naturally  attendant  on  the  Christian's 
occupation,  the  pursuit  of  everlasting  glory.     4.  The  happiness  of  a  good  conscience, 
and  so  the  consciousness  of  peace  with  God.     (F.  F.  Trench,  M.A.)         The  service 
of  God  pleasant : — Matthew  Henry's  deathbed  was   tranquil   as   a  little  child's. 
Speaking  to  Mr.  Illidge,  he  said,  "  You  have  been  used  to  take  notice  of  the  sayings 
of  dying  men  ;  this  is  mine :  that  a  life  spent  in  the  service  of  God,  and  communion 
with  Him,  is  the  most  pleasant  life  that  any  one  can  live  in  this  world."     [A.  B. 
Grosart.)         Superiority  of  pious  joy  : — I  know  that  sometimes  the  worldling  may 
seem  to  nave  the  best  of  it.     He  laughs  a  louder  laugh,  and  is  more  boisterous  in 
his  mirth.     He  has  need  to  be.     He  must  laugh  aloud  to  convince  himself  that  he 
is  happy.     He  is  obliged  to  be  demonstrative  in  his  merriment,  or  he  could  not  give 
himself  credit  for  it.     What  is  the  value  of  it  all?     Listen  to  one  who  had  laughed 
more  than  most  men,  or,  at  any  rate,  had  tried  to  laugh  more :  "  I  said  of  laughter. 
It  is  mad  ;  and  of  mirth.  What  doeth  it?"    The  worldling's  joy,  such  as  it  is,  ia 
fitful  and  short-lived.     It  is  a  fine-weather  joy,  like  that  of  some  of  the  songsters 
of  the  wood ;  like  that  of  the  nightingale,  which,  though  she  sings  in  the  night, 
cannot  sing  in  the  wild ;  like  the  notes  of  the  blackbird,  which  die  away  as  the 
season  advances  and  when  her  nestlings  are  all  hatched,  as  though  parental  anxieties 
had  been  too  much  for  her ;  like  the  light-heartedness  of  the  cuckoo,  which  is  a 
Bummer  bird,  but  has  no  song  to  enliven  our  winter's  gloom.     The  worldly  heart 
has  its  songs,  but  they  do  not  last.    They  are  only  songs  of  sunshine,  songs  of 


CHAP.  HI.]  PROVERBS.  87 

Bummer.  But  the  robin  sings  all  the  year  round.  In  the  spring,  upon  the  orchard 
spray,  canopied  with  apple  blossoms ;  in  the  summer,  in  the  still  depths  of  the 
forest  shade ;  and  in  the  winter,  too,  on  the  naked  blackthorn,  exposing  his  little 
red  bosom  to  the  wintry  blast,  he  twitters  cheerily  amid  the  snows.  Such  is  the 
Christian's  joy,  stable  and  lasting.  The  other  is  but  a  counterfeit,  and  the  tinsel 
soon  wears  off.  Yonder  clown,  who  by  his  antics  and  grimaces  upon  the  stage  sets 
the  spectators  in  a  roar,  is  not  a  merry  man.  He  has  left  a  sick  child  at  home,  and 
the  last  look  he  had  at  her  pale  face,  as  she  lay  upon  her  poor  pallet  in  their  mean 
lodging,  smote  him  to  the  heart,  for  it  told  him  she  was  like  to  die.  And  from  that 
dying  couch  he  has  come  to  grin  and  caper  at  the  pantomime  to  make  English 
holiday.  And  haunted  by  that  wasted  face  and  those  sunken  eyes,  every  jest  to 
him  is  agony,  and  every  burst  of  laughter  a  cruel  pang  Such  is  the  pleasure  of 
the  sinner,  a  mere  surface  mirth,  a  forced  hilarity,  with  a  poisoned  barb  rankling 
at  the  heart.  But  now  religion,  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  is  joy,  all  joy,  and 
always  joy.  "  Her  ways  are  ways  of  pleasantness,  and  all  her  paths  are  peace." 
"Eejoice  .  .  .  and  again  I  say  rejoice,"  is  not  only  a  permission,  but  a  com- 
mand to  the  Christian.  When  he  is  not  happy,  it  is  not  because  of  his  religion, 
but  because  for  some  reason  in  himself  he  has  missed  its  consolations.  {J.  Halsey.) 
All  her  paths  are  peace. — The  joy  of  peace : — The  "  wisdom  "  in  this  passage  is 
distinctly  and  profoundly  ethical.  The  second  clause  is  not  a  repetition  of  the 
first.  Peace  and  pleasantness  are  not  synonymous  terms.  The  truth  of  the  first 
clause  is  dependent  upon  that  of  the  second.  "  Her  ways  are  ways  of  pleasantness, 
for  all  her  paths  are  peace."  I.  The  life  of  true  wisdom  lays  its  foundations 
IN  PEACE.  1.  Its  beginning  is  the  "  fear  of  the  Lord."  2.  When  in  harmonious 
relations  with  God,  man  finds  the  elements  and  forces  of  his  inner  life  take  their 
due  posts  of  subordination  and  supremacy.  Though  there  is  conflict,  yet  the  higher 
principles  govern,  the  Diviner  forces  sit  upon  the  throne.  3.  The  life  being  thus 
charged  with  Divine  force  cannot  be  governed  by  external  circumstances.  4.  It 
can  know  no  anxieties  touching  the  issues  of  the  future.  5.  Such  a  life  enters  into 
peace  as  far  as  possible  with  all  men.  Through  the  universalising  of  this  wisdom 
the  kingdom  of  peace  shall  come.  II.  On  this  foundation  or  peace,  and  on  this 
ONLY,  CAN  true  HAPPINESS  BE  REARED.  1.  There  cau  be  no  true  happiness  except 
that  which  springs  from  a  harmonious  life.  2.  There  can  be  no  full  happiness 
except  for  such.  That  which  comes  from  some  by-play  of  the  life  must  be  meagre 
and  partial.  (John  Thomas,  M.A.)  The  enjoyments  of  religion : — Wisdom 
denotes  a  life  of  piety.  I.  The  nature  and  design  of  religion.  It  was  revealed 
to  show  us  the  way  of  salvation  ;  to  guide  our  feet  into  the  paths  of  peace  ;  to  exalt 
us  to  happiness  here  and  to  glory  hereafter.  1.  Consider  the  doctrines  she  reveals. 
Their  direct  tendency  is  to  banish  the  fears  of  guilt,  to  console,  and  to  animate  with 
joy  the  fearful  heart.  2.  Consider  the  precepts  which  religion  enjoins.  Are  they 
not  perfective  in  our  nature,  and  directly  conducive  to  felicity  ?  3.  Consider  the 
promised  aid  she  imparts.  A  gracious  Comforter  continually  surrounds  the  godly 
man,  who  Imparts  every  needful  grace.  4.  Consider  the  glorious  rewards  she 
reveals.  To  every  desire  of  the  heart  she  opens  the  most  unbounded  delights — 
delights  commensurate  to  the  widest  wishes  of  the  soul,  and  endless  as  eternity. 
n.  The  nature  of  that  pleasure  enjoyed  by  those  who  walk  in  the  ways  op 
RELIGION.  The  subduing  of  our  desires  and  appetites  is  necessary  to  a  course  of 
piety ;  but  even  self-denial  and  the  Cross  become  sources  of  pleasure.  II.  The 
DUTIES  WHICH  RELIGION  ENJOINS  HER  VOTARIES  TO  OBSERVE.  1.  The  joys  of  prayer 
and  praise.  2.  The  joys  resulting  from  the  sacred  services  of  religion.  3.  From 
meditation  on  the  Scriptures.  4.  From  observance  of  the  Divine  commandments. 
Such  are  the  pleasures,  the  delightful  feelings,  and  peaceful  satisfactions  which 
result  from  walking  in  the  ways  of  religion  ;  and  what  enjoyments  are  comparable 
to  these  ?  (D.  Malcolm,  LL.D.)  The  pleasure  of  Christ's  ivays  : — An  inclination 
to  pleasure  is  usually  the  favourite  passion  of  young  people.  Here  religion  ia 
recommended  under  a  view  of  the  delights  that  attend  it.  Wisdom  here  may  be 
taken  as  a  perfection  in  God,  as  Christ,  or  as  the  grace  in  us  whereby  we  are  made 
wise  unto  salvation  ;  for  the  ways  of  spiritual  wisdom,  or  of  true  religion,  may  be 
said  to  be  the  ways  of  all  these.  They  are  ways  originally  laid  out,  adjusted,  and 
directed  to  by  the  unerring  wisdom  of  the  Eternal  Mind  ;  they  are  the  ways  that 
Christ  has  made  known  to  us,  recommended  and  enjoined  by  His  Word  and  Spirit, 
and  in  part  by  His  own  example  ;  and  they  are  the  ways  that  an  enlightened  and 
renewed  soul  understands,  approves  of,  and  chooses  to  walk  in.  These  are  ways  of 
pleasantness,  including  the  utmost  satisfaction  and  delight.     They  are  "paths  of 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  m. 

peace,"  including  all  prosperity  and  safety.  Prosperity  and  peace  are  found  not  only 
when  the  end  is  reached,  but  also  while  we  are  walking  in  the  way ;  and  not  merely 
in  some  of  the  ways,  but  in  all  of  them.     I.  The   absolute  view  that  mat  be 
TAKEN  or  the  PLEASURES  TO  BE  FOUND  IN  Christ's   WAYS.     1.  The  cicellence  of 
Christ's  ways  themselves.   As  wisdom's  ways,  there  must  be  a  fulness  in  them  of  all 
that  is  desirable.     We  are,  in  them,  conversant  with  God  and  Christ,  heaven  and 
glory,  things  spiritual  and  sublime,  holy  and  good.     We  are  called  to  have  exalted 
thoughts  and  estimations  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  to  delight  in  Him.     It  may  be 
said  this  is  only  showing  the  fairest  face  of  religion.      There  is   something  to 
be  suffered  as  well  as  to  be  enjoyed  in  Christ's  ways.     But  nothing  we  have  to 
sufifer  can  compare  with  what  is  to  be  enjoyed ;  and  the  very  sufferings  bring  to  us 
their  own  joys.     2.  The  suitableness  of  these  ways  to  a  renewed  mind.     However 
good  in  themselves,  if  not  suitable  to  our  taste  and  relish,  they  cannot  afford  us  any 
pleasures.     An  unregenerate,  carnal  temper  has  no  relish  for  Christ's  ways.     When 
regenerate,  spiritual,  and  holy  objects,  acts,  and  exercises  become  agreeable.     A 
renewed  mind  has  a  new  relish.     It  delights  "  in  the  law  of  God  after  the  inward 
man."     3.  A  sense  of  the  Divine  favour  and  acceptance  in  Christ's  ways,  and  of 
our  own  interest  in  the  great  and  blessed  things  we  meet  with  there.     4.  A  lively 
hope  of  the  happy  and  eternal  issues  of  Christ's  ways.     Who  can  rate  the  joy  that 
results  from  strong  and  assuring  expectations  of  a  blessed  and  glorious  immortality. 
n.  The  comparative  view  that  mat  be  taken  or  the  pleasures  to  be  found  in 
Christ's  ways.    They  are  to  be  preferred  to  all  others.     The  pleasures  of  the  mind 
are  more  excellent  than  all  the  pleasures  of  sense  ;  and  the  pleasures  of  religion  are 
superior  to  the  pleasures  of  mind.   When  the  gracious  soul  has  most  to  do  with  God 
through  Christ,  in  a  way  of  holy  communion  with  Him,  of  contemplation  and  adora- 
tion of  Him,  obedience  to  Him,  delight  in  Him,  and  hope  of  His  glory,  it  is  inex- 
pressibly more  pleased  and  better  entertained  than  it  possibly  can  be  with  the  finest 
speculations  and  most  evident  demonstrations  of  reasons  and  philosophy.  1  There  is 
more  worth  and  dignity  in  the  pleasure  of  Christ's  ways  than  in  all  sensitive  enjoy- 
ments.    There  is  a  true  greatness  of  soul  in  the  contempt  of  sensual  pleasures  any 
farther  than  they  are  necessary  to  the  support  of  this  present  frail  life,  and  a  content- 
ment without  them,  even  when  what  is  necessary  for  their  support  is  providentially 
withheld  from  us.     2.  There  is  more  solid  satisfaction  in  this  pleasure  than  in  all 
sensitive  enjoyments.     The  pleasures    of    the    sense    rather  cloy  than   satisfy. 
3.  There  is  more  continuance  in  this  pleasure  than  in  all  sensitive  enjoyments. 
The  pleasures  of  sense  are  all  precarious,  uncertain,  and  perishing  things.     The 
pleasures  of  Christ's  ways  are  of  an  abiding  nature :  "  durable  riches"  (chap.viii.,  18). 
The  good  man  is  satisfied  from  himself.     Believers  carry  their  happiness  about 
them,  they  carry  it  within  themselves ;   no  bitternesses  of  the  present  life  can 
destroy  this  pleasure.     It  is  true  that  real  Christians  are  not  always  rejoicing ;    but 
this  is  not  due  to  any  defect  in  the  objects  of  their  pleasures,  or  in  their  state  and 
principles,  but  to  their  not  living  and  acting  up  to  them.     Improvements  :  (1)  Let 
there  be  self -reflection,  as  to  what  you  have  found  in  Christ's  way.     (2)  Let  all  your 
taste  for  pleasure  put  you  upon  seeking  that  which  is  to  be  found  in  Christ's  ways. 
{John  Guyse.)         The  pleasures  of  religion  : — I.  The  control  which  a  righteous 
MAN  exercises  OVER  HIS  PASSIONS  AND  DESIRES.    A  righteous  man  is  a  happy  man, 
because  he  is  a  free  man,  and  the  servant  to  no  inward  lust ;  he  can  act  up  to  his 
own  decisions,  and  when  he  sees  what  is  right,  he  can  do  it.     If  there  is  wretched- 
ness upon  earth,  it  is  to  live  by  a  rule  which  we  perpetually  violate.     The  most 
miserable  of  human  beings  are  professed  sinners,  men  who  despise  rule,  who  look 
upon  their  passions  as  mere  instruments  of  pleasure.     Putting  aside  all  religious 
considerations,  there  is  not  a  greater  mistake  than  to  suppose  that  a  profligate  man 
can  be  happy.     He  may  seem  to  be  happy  because  his  enjoyments  are  more  visible 
and  ostentatious,  but  is  in  truth  a  very  sorry  and  shallow  impostor,  who  may 
deceive  the  young,  but  is  laughed  at  by  the  wise,  and  by  all  who  know  in  what  true 
happiness  consists.     The  truly  happy  man  is  he,  who  has  early  discovered  that  he 
carries  within  his  own  bosom  his  worst  enemies,  and  that  the  contest  must  be  man- 
fully entered  into.    A  religious  man  is  happy  because  he  is  secure  ;    because  it  is 
not  in  the  power  of  accident  or  circumstance  to  disclose  any  secret  guilt ;    as  he  is, 
he  has  long  been  ;  he  can  refer  to  the  blameless  tenor  of  years,  to  a  mind  long 
exercised  in  avoiding  offence  towards  God  and  towards  man.     II.  The  feelings  of 
charitt   and  brotherly  love   which   religion  alwats  inspires.      As   God  has 
given  to   one  object  beautiful  colours,  and  to   another  grateful  odours,  He  has 
annexed  exquisite  feelings  of  happiness  to  the  performance  of  every  benevolent 


CHAP,  m.]  PROVERBS.  89 

action.  It  is  impossible  to  do  good  to  others  without  feeling  happy  from  it.  The 
conviction  which  religion  inspires,  that  a  man  is  not  born  for  himself  alone,  and 
the  habit  which  it  inculcates,  of  attention  to  the  interests  and  feelings  of  mankind, 
induces  at  last  that  state  of  calm  and  permanent  satisfaction  which  the  words  of 
Solomon  describe.  Nothing  is  more  grateful  than  general  love,  produced  by  a  long 
tenor  of  courtesy,  of  justice,  of  active  kindness,  and  of  modest  respect.     LTI.  The 

COMFORTS    DEKIVED    FROM    THE     FUTURE     RETRIBUTIVE     JUSTICE    OF    RELIGION.      A    man 

of  proper  feeling  always  suffers  from  observing  the  striking  disproportion  that  exists 
in  this  world  between  happiness  and  merit.  It  is  the  severest  trial  of  human 
patience  to  witness  the  respect,  honour,  and  prosperity  of  bad  men.  These  sad  scenes 
are  tolerable  to  the  religious  man  alone,  from  that  final  order  and  regularity  with 
which  he  knows  they  will  hereafter  be  concluded.  Wherever  he  looks,  justice  in  its 
most  perfect  shape  terminates  his  view  ;  all  guilt  is  detected,  all  innocence  is  brought 
to  light ;  at  the  conclusion  of  all  things  a  never-failing  Judge  gives  to  every  thinking 
Boul  the  good  and  the  evil  which  is  its  due.  Pleasure,  then,  is  gained  by  being 
the  lord  and  master  of  our  own  hearts,  by  binding  our  passions  in  links  of  iron ;  by 
adapting  worldly  hopes  and  fears  to  the  nature  of  worldly  things ;  by  obeying  God, 
by  trusting  to  His  providence,  by  expecting  His  judgments.  (Sidney  Smith.) 
Pleasant  ways  and  peaceful  paths  : — The  "  way  "  is  always  longer  and  broader  than 
the  "path."  And  the  meaning  may  be  this.  The  more  general  and  public  things 
in  religion — things  which  all  see  and  know — these  are  "  pleasant."  But  the  things 
which  retire  back,  and  are  most  unfrequented,  and  which  very  few  either  see  or 
guess,  all  these  are  "  peace."  The  same  discrimination  is  traceable  in  the  verse, 
"  In  all  thy  ways  acknowledge  Him,  and  He  shall  direct  thy  paths."  Acknowledge 
God  in  the  great  things  of  life,  and  He  will  be  sure  to  guide  you  in  the  small  ones. 
Let  us  take  this  difference  of  the  "  ways  "  and  the  "  paths  "  to  lead  us  on  in  our 
further  consideration  of  the  text.  1.  Wisdom's  "  way  "  is,  first,  a  high  way.  It  is 
always  reaching  up  out  of  littleness,  it  ranges  at  loftier  levels,  it  is  above  party 
views,  it  is  a  large-minded  thing,  it  is  always  nearer  heaven  than  earth.  And  this 
is  very  "  pleasant,"  to  be  so  free  and  independent  of  man's  estimates  and  human 
judgments,  to  move  in  a  pure,  calm  elevation  of  soul,  beyond  the  common  distractions, 
where  the  strife,  and  the  noise,  and  the  din,  and  the  confusion  does  not  come. 
2.  And  wisdom's  "  way"  always  has  one  fixed  mark.  It  throws  lesser  things  aside 
as  it  goes,  and  it  goes  straight  to  a  goal,  and  that  goal  is  the  glory  of  God.  And 
this  singleness  of  aim  gives  a  strength  to  a  character  ;  it  gives  unity  to  the  whole 
man,  and  that  unity  is  "  pleasantness."  3.  And  wisdom's  "  way "  is  a  way  of 
usefulness.  It  always  puts  usefulness  first — before  pleasure,  before  profit.  It  is  a 
"  way  "  of  work.  They  who  work  there  are  always  serving,  always  ministering. 
Each  one  has  his  mission — either  he  comforts,  or  he  advises,  or  he  teaches.  But 
now  let  us  leave  the  wider  track,  and  go  down  to  one  or  two  of  the  more  secluded 
"  paths."  For  to  all  it  is  not  always  given  to  walk  in  "  ways  of  pleasantness,"  but 
none  who  really  look  for  it  shall  ever  miss  the  "  path  of  peace."  There  is  a  going 
out  in  a  man's  heart  from  its  deepest  places  to  Christ.  He  tells  Jesus  something 
which  has  been  long  a  hidden  burden  in  his  mind.  And  Christ  listens  to  him,  and 
he  feels  it.  And  in  the  little  "  path  "  of  that  secret  confession  there  is  a  "  peace  " 
which  no  words  can  tell.  And  now  there  is  an  avenue  open  between  that  soul  and 
God.  It  was  an  avenue  long  closed  ;  but  now  it  is  open.  And  an  act  of  faith 
travels  along  to  the  Cross,  and  brings  back  a  message  of  pure  love,  ' '  Your  sins  are 
forgiven."  I  am  quite  sure  that  there  is  no  "  peace  "  worth  the  name — no  "  peace  " 
for  a  moment  to  be  put  side  by  side  with  the  "  peace  "  of  the  simple  feeling — "  I  am 
forgiven."    (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 

Ver.  19.  The  Lord  by  wisdom  hath  founded  the  earth. — Earthly  and  heavenly 
wisdom: — There  is  but  one  wisdom  for  God  and  man.  Man's  true  wisdom  is  a 
pattern  of  God's  wisdom.  A  man  to  prosper  in  the  world  must  get  the  very  same 
wisdom  by  which  God  made  and  rules  the  world.  In  the  last  hundred  years  science 
has  improved  in  a  most  wonderful  way,  and  is  improving  every  day.  This  improve- 
ment has  taken  place  simply,  by  mankind  understanding  this  text,  and  obeying 
it.  For  more  than  sixteen  hundred  years  after  our  Lord's  time  mankind  seem  to 
have  become  hardly  any  wiser  about  earthly  things,  nay,  even  to  have  gone  back ; 
but  about  two  hundred  and  fifty  years  ago  it  pleased  God  to  open  the  eyes  of  one  of 
the  wisest  men  who  ever  lived,  Francis  Bacon,  Lord  Verulam,  and  to  show  him  the 
real  and  right  way  of  learning  by  which  men  can  fulfil  God's  command  to  replenish 
the  earth  and  subdue  it.    He  taught  that  the  only  way  for  man  to  be  wise  was  to 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  in. 

get  God's  wisdom,  the  wisdom  with  which  He  had  founded  the  earth,  and  find  out 
God's  laws  by  which  He  had  made  this  world.  "  You  can  only  subdue  nature  by 
obeying  her."  You  can  only  subdue  a  thing  and  make  it  useful  to  you  by  finding 
out  the  rules  by  which  God  made  that  thing,  and  by  obeying  them.  If  you  want 
to  rule,  you  must  obey.  If  you  want  to  rise  to  be  a  master,  you  must  stoop  to  be  a 
servant.  If  you  want  to  be  master  of  anything  in  earth  or  heaven,  you  must  obey 
God's  will  revealed  in  that  thing  ;  and  the  man  who  will  go  his  own  way,  and  follow 
his  own  fancy,  will  understand  nothing,  and  master  nothing,  and  get  comfort  out  of 
nothing  in  earth  or  heaven.  The  same  rule  which  holds  good  in  this  earthly  world 
which  we  do  see  holds  good  in  the  heavenly  world  which  we  do  not  see.  The  same 
rules  which  hold  good  about  men's  bodies  hold  good  about  their  souls.  The 
heavenly  wisdom  which  begins  in  trusting  in  the  Lord  with  all  our  hearts,  the 
heavenly  wisdom  which  is  learnt  by  chastenings  and  afflictions,  and  teaches  us 
that  we  are  the  sons  of  God,  is  the  very  same  wisdom  by  which  God  founded  the 
earth,  and  maJies  the  clouds  drop  down  dew.  God's  wisdom  is  one — unchangeable, 
everlasting,  and  always  like  itself  ;  and  by  the  same  wisdom  by  which  He  made  our 
bodies  has  He  made  our  souls ;  and  therefore  we  can,  and  are  bound  to,  glorify 
Him  alike  in  our  bodies  and  our  spirits,  for  both  are  His.  Illustrate:  The  only 
sure  way  of  getting  power  over  people  is  by  making  friends  of  them,  making  them 
love  and  trust  us.  The  Lord  Jesus  ate  and  drank  with  publicans  and  sinners,  who 
went  out  into  the  highways  and  hedges,  to  bring  home  into  God's  kingdom  poor 
wretches  whom  men  despised  and  cast  off.  Christ  also  "pleased  not  Himself." 
There  was  the  perfect  fulfilment  of  the  great  law — stoop  to  conquer.  Christ 
stooped  lower  than  any  man,  and  therefore  He  rose  again  higher  than  all  men. 
(Charles  Kingsley.)  Divine  'purpose  in  nature  and  revelation : — Faith  in  God 
and  the  obedience  which  arises  from  faith  have  at  all  times,  and  in  almost 
all  circumstances,  been  beset  with  difficulties.  Counter  influences  to  the  work 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  have  been  supplied  by  the  power  of  the  world,  the 
flesh,  and  the  devil.  But,  in  addition  to  this  constant  action  in  the  same 
direction  of  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil,  there  are  also  agencies,  which 
vary  with  time  and  place,  and  the  nature  of  which  it  is  very  desirable  that 
we  should  examine  and  recognise  with  reference  to  the  time  and  place  in 
which  our  own  lot  may  happen  to  be  cast.  Mathematicians  are  familiar  with 
formulas  composed  of  terms,  one  of  which  shall  be  constant  and  the  others  circu- 
lating with  the  time.  I  would  venture  to  compare  the  dangers  of  infideUty  to 
such  a  mathematical  formula.  First  you  have  your  great  constant  term,  the 
power  of  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil;  strong  in  Eden  as  it  is  now,  strong  now 
as  it  was  in  Eden ;  but  then  you  have  a  number  of  terms  which  increase  and 
decrease  in  magnitude,  depending  on  time  and  place  and  circumstances,  some  such 
as  we  can  afford  to  neglect,  some  which  we  shall  neglect  at  our  peril.  Some  of  the 
difficulties  and  trials  of  faith  are  not  more  dangerous  than  extinct  volcanoes,  like 
those  of  which  we  find  the  traces  in  these  islands  ;  some  like  Vesuvius  have  been 
mischievous  in  time  not  so  long  past,  and  may  become  mischievous  again  ;  others 
are  in  active  operation  and  are  dangerous  now.  What  corresponds  to  the  active 
volcano  in  our  time  ?  I.  Let  me  lead  up  to  the  answer  to  this  question  by  first 
indicating  some  few  active  or  conceivable  dangers  to  faith  which  do  not  seem 

TO  ME  TO  BE  THE  SPECIAL  DANGER    OF    OUR   OWN    TIME.       1.    SuppOSC,  for  example,  that 

in  an  unscientific  age  people  have  built  up  a  cosmical  system  which  makes  the 
earth  the  centre  of  things,  and  arranges  all  else  in  accordance  with  this  funda- 
mental hypothesis — translating,  in  fact,  into  the  form  of  a  geocentric  theory  the 
mere  rough,  uncorrected  impressions  of  the  senses:  and  suppose  that  the  theory  so 
constructed  comes  to  be  regarded  as  a  truth  of  Divine  revelation,  so  that  men  see 
their  theory  reflected  from  the  page  of  Holy  Scripture,  and  not  unnaturally  con- 
sider the  truth  of  one  bound  up  with  the  truthfulness  of  the  other.  Then,  it  seems 
manifest,  that  the  first  discovery  of  the  fact  that  the  earth  is  not  the  centre  of  the 
universe,  but  only  a  tiny  ball,  the  extinction  of  which  would  scarcely  affect  the 
solar  system,  and  would  be  absolutely  imperceptible  as  a  loss  to  the  sum  of  existing 
matter,  would  of  necessity  shake  the  minds  of  men  who  had  been  led  to  regard 
their  theory  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth  as  a  portion  of  revealed  truth,  and  that 
some  would  probably  fall  from  their  faith.  The  Church  has  gone  through  such 
an  experience  as  this.  The  volcano  is  extinct  now.  2.  Again,  suppose  that  an 
artificial  theological  system  has  arisen,  and  that  ingenious  men,  puzzled  by  the 
mysteries  of  Christian  faith,  have  devoted  their  energies  to  attempts  to  explain 
ihem ;  or,  if  not  to  explain  them,  at  all  events  to  formulate  them,  and  to  make  it 


CHAP,  m.]  PROVERBS.  91 

possible  to  express  in  precise  language  that  which  probably  language  is  incapable 
of  expressing.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  you  have  a  subtle  distinction  between 
substance  and  accidents,  and  that  you  apply  this  distinction  to  define  by  language 
the  nature  of  the  presence  of  Christ  in  the  holy  Sacrament :  you  build  up,  in  fact, 
the  dogma  of  transubstantiation  ;  and  devout  worshippers  accept  the  dogma,  and 
to  question  its  truth  is  considered  equivalent  to  denying  the  faith  itself.  What  is 
to  happen  when  the  progress  of  human  thought,  or  the  discernment  of  some  God- 
given  teacher,  blows  the  subtle  figment  of  substance  and  accidents  to  the  winds, 
and  leads  men  to  deny  that  the  presence  of  Christ  can  be  expressed  by  any  such 
formula  as  that  which  transubstantiation  professes  to  be  ?  Is  it  not  probable  that 
the  explosion  of  a  dogma  so  closely  bound  up  in  general  opinion  with  Christian 
orthodoxy  will  shake  many  minds  ?  3.  But  there  is  another  danger,  not  connected 
with  intellectual  subtleties,  of  which  the  transition  from  Mediaeval  to  Kefomiation 
times  affords  an  example,  and  of  which,  unfortunately,  there  have  been  examples 
since.  The  thing  which  brought  on  the  Eeformation  more  than  anything  else  was 
the  unholy  lives  of  men — pope,  priest,  and  people.  And  the  want  of  holiness  on 
the  part  of  those  who  should  be  patterns  to  the  flock  has  ever  been,  and  ever  will 
be,  when  it  is  conspicuous,  one  of  the  principal  stumbling-blocks  that  can  be  placed 
in  the  way  of  those  who  would  follow  Christ.  This  volcano  is  not  extinct.  I  fear 
it  never  will  be.  4.  Once  more,  it  is  not  so  long  ago  since  we  were  told,  on  high 
authority,  that  the  peculiar  danger  to  the  faith  belonging  to  our  own  days  was  that 
which  arose  from  the  destructive  results  of  modern  criticism.  But  God  was  with 
His  servants  in  the  burning  fiery  furnace ;  and  I  think  I  am  only  saying  that 
which  expresses  the  conclusions  of  some  of  our  soundest  scholars,  when  I  assert 
that  the  Gospels  have  come  out  of  the  furnace  unhurt,  and  that  the  smell  of  fire 
has  not  passed  upon  them.  II.  Well,  then,  what  is  our  special  difficulty  or  danger 
just  now  ?    It  seems  to  me  that  it  may  be  described  by  such  a  phrase  as  this :  the 

DENIAL    OF    THE    BEING    OF    GOD  ON  THE  GROUND  OF   SUPPOSED    SCIENTIFIC    CONCLUSIONS. 

"  The  fool,"  says  the  psalmist  twice  over,  "hath  said  in  his  heart.  There  is  no  God  "  ; 
and,  if  it  were  only  the  fool  who  said  so,  he  might  very  well  be  left  alone  in  his  folly. 
No,  we  must  accept  the  fact  that  a  certain  number  of  persons  of  high  scientific 
position  tell  us  that  a  careful  examination  of  nature  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  it 
exhibits  no  purpose,  and  that  it  is  all  evolved  out  of  primaeval  matter  without  any 
creative  power  such  as  that  which  believers  in  God  are  wont  to  assume.  Fix 
your  mind  upon  this  one  point.  I  am  going  to  put  out  of  the  question  the 
beneficence  of  the  Creator,  and  the  moral  order  of  the  universe,  because  I  wish  to 
concentrate  attention  upon  the  one  consideration  of  purpose  or  design  ;  if  there 
be  no  design,  there  cannot  well  be  beneficence  or  morality,  and  if  there  be  design, 
beneficence  and  morality  will  (so  to  speak)  take  care  of  themselves.  Moreover, 
design  is  that  which  is  much  more  closely  connected  with  physical  studies  than 
beneficence  and  morality.  Give  me  design  in  the  visible  region  of  nature,  and  I 
shall  have  no  fear  as  to  the  possibility  of  detecting  the  manifestation  of  purpose 
and  will  in  the  region  of  morals  and  of  grace.  But  take  design  out  of  nature,  tell 
me  that  the  heavens  and  the  earth  are  spontaneously  evolved  out  of  matter  (what- 
ever that  may  mean),  that  the  men,  and  beasts,  and  creeping  things  are  one,  that 
the  life  of  man  has  come  from  nothing,  is  nothing,  and  tends  to  nothing — and  then 
I  confess  that  all  the  glory  of  the  universe,  all  the  brightness  of  existence,  all  that 
makes  life  worth  living,  seems  to  me  to  be  gone,  and  that  there  is  nothing  hopeful 
or  joyous  left.  When  I  am  told  by  a  man  of  scientific  eminence  that  it  is  only 
superficial  observers  who  attribute  purpose  to  nature,  and  that  if  I  examine 
sufficiently  I  shall  find  that  all  things  come  of  themselves,  it  seems  to  me  that  this 
is  very  much  like  telling  me  that  ignorant  folks  may  imagine  that  there  is  some 
purpose  in  locomotive  engines,  but  that  if  any  one  will  visit  Crewe,  and  see  them 
made,  he  will  put  aside  all  notion  of  purpose  as  unworthy  of  an  educated  mind. 
The  ordinary  observer  who  sees  a  train  pass  at  full  speed  may  have  an  ignorant 
feeling  of  wonfler  at  the  machine  which  moves  it,  while  the  caieful  observer  in  the 
factory  will  see  that,  after  all,  a  locomotive  engine  is  a  comparatively  simple  affair, 
and  easily  made  when  you  know  how  to  do  it ;  but  there  need  be,  and  there  ought 
to  be,  no  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  wisdom  by  which  the  locomotive  was  made 
and  the  understanding  by  which  it  was  established.  And  so  life  is  as  completely 
a  mystery,  and  as  truly  Divine,  whether  you  read  in  Genesis  that  God  spake  the 
word  and  living  things  were  made,  or  whether  you  read  in  modern  books  of  the 
evolution  of  protoplasm.  I  take  my  stand  upon  design  as  upon  a  foundation  stone; 
if  any  one  denies  it,  I  can  go  no  further;  to  attempt  to  do  so  would  be  like 


93  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

discnssing  optics  with  a  person  who  did  not  believe  in  sunshine,  or  geometry  with 
a  man  who  denied  Euclid's  axioms.  Granting,  however,  the  existence  of  design 
within  the  small  region  of  our  own  experience,  we  feel  a  logical  and  imperative 
necessity  of  postulating  design  beyond  that  region.  This  necessity  extends,  I  think, 
to  the  whole  material  universe.  I,  who  can  examine  my  own  frame  and  the 
mechanism  of  the  world,  and  the  countless  arrangements  by  which  the  order  of 
things  is  maintained,  feel  myself  compelled  to  conclude  that  the  same  principle 
extends  to  those  parts  of  the  universe  which  I  cannot  so  directly  or  so  completely 
examine.  I  know  that  gravitation  and  light  extend  over  space  immeasurable,  I  can 
have  no  doubt  as  to  the  principle  of  design  extending  quite  as  far  ;  in  fact,  I  feel  it 
to  be  an  inevitable,  if  not  an  absolutely  logical,  conclusion,  that  the  whole  material 
universe  is  the  outcome  of  one  mind,  and  is  governed  by  that  same  mind.  But  this 
is  not  the  whole  of  the  argument,  or  even  the  most  important  part  of  it.  The 
transition  from  design  in  the  material  world  to  purpose  in  the  moral  world  seems 
inevitable.  Great  intellects  amongst  ourselves  do  not  employ  themselves  in  merely 
making  ingenious  toys  ;  the  steam-engine  would  never  have  been  constructed  if  the 
comfort  of  man  and  the  needs  of  commerce  had  not  demanded  it.  And  this  world 
deprived  of  its  moral  aspects,  what  would  it  be  but  a  gigantic  toy?  Is  it  conceivable 
that  there  should  be  design  in  every  sinew,  and  nerve,  and  limb  of  which  man's 
body  is  composed,  and  no  purpose  in  those  thoughts,  and  affections,  and  feelings, 
and  aspirations,  and  hopes,  which  are  as  truly  a  part  of  himself  as  his  heart  or  his 
lungs  ?  Let  it  be  granted  that  purpose  in  nature  is  a  delusion,  and  that  evolution 
will  explain  everything,  and  then,  no  doubt,  this  argument  all  vanishes ;  if  there 
be  no  purpose  in  nature,  then  it  is  impossible  to  argue  that  there  is  any  purpose 
extending  beyond  nature  ;  but  let  it  be  once  admitted  that  the  hand  and  brain  of 
man  are  full  of  purpose,  and  then  I  think  it  is  difficult  not  to  extend  the  admission 
from  the  wonderful  region  in  which  man's  hand  and  brain  are  occupied  to  a  more 
wonderful  region  still,  which  transcends  nature  altogether.  In  other  words,  it  is 
difficult  to  believe  that  God,  having  manifested  a  great  purpose  in  the  formation  of 
man,  has  not  a  still  greater  purpose  concerning  him  and  his  destiny.  The  step 
from  nature  to  revelation,  though  in  one  sense  a  long  one,  in  another  sense  seems 
to  be  no  step  at  all ;  the  purpose  of  which  I  have,  as  I  believe,  a  clear  proof  in 
natural  science,  indicates  a  deeper  and  better,  though  more  mysterious  purpose 
still.  Man's  endowments  are  too  great  for  the  mere  prince  or  primus  of  the  animal 
world ;  his  spiritual  nature  is  "  cabin'd,  cribb'd,  confin'd "  in  a  mere  mortal 
tenement  of  flesh  and  blood ;  and,  therefore,  when  I  read  of  God  speaking  to  man, 
making  His  will  known,  giving  him  commands  which  it  is  life  to  obey  and  death 
to  resist,  condescending  to  receive  from  man  worship  and  love,  I  seem  to  find  in  all 
this  the  proper  corollary  to  all  that  nature  teaches  me  concerning  design  in  the 
construction  of  man ;  it  makes  man,  of  course,  a  more  mysterious  being  than  he 
would  otherwise  have  seemed  to  be  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  makes  the  history 
of  man — taken  as  a  whole — more  simple  and  more  intelligible,  because  it  supplies 
an  adequate  solution  of  the  questions.  What  is  man  ?  and  Why  was  man  created  ? 
And  thus  we  seem  to  pass  by  a  safe  and  sure  path  from  the  simplest  indication  of 
design  in  nature  to  the  highest  doctrine  of  Divine  revelation.  Oh,  what  has 
happened  in  these  latter  years  of  the  world's  history  to  snatch  from  us  the  blessed 
inheritance  of  faith  in  God,  which  has  come  down  to  us  from  the  days  of  our 
fathers?  "I  believe  in  God  the  Father  almighty,  maker  of  heaven  and  earth" — 
is  there  anything  in  science  to  deprive  us  of  this  great  truth  ?  Does  not  science 
emphasise  the  word  "  Maker,"  and  at  least  nod  assent  when  the  human  heart  adds 
the  word  "  Father  "  ?  And  though  science  may  have  got  to  the  end  of  its  teaching 
in  this  article  of  the  creed,  is  there  not  something  in  the  conception  of  a  God  and 
Father,  which  leads  up  to  the  belief  in  a  revelation  made  to  His  children  through 
"  Jesus  Christ,  His  only  Son,  our  Lord "  ?  And  certainly  if  Jesus  Christ  be 
accepted  in  the  fulness  of  His  manifested  being,  there  can  be  little  difficulty  in 
accepting  as  the  crown  of  Divine  Revelation  the  blessed  truth  of  the  being  of  "  the 
Holy  Ghost,  the  Lord  and  giver  of  life."  If  I  am  told  that  scientific  discovery  is 
depriving  me  of  all  that  I  most  value,  if  men  who  pretend  to  guide  me  declare  that 
the  faith  of  Christendom  is  folly,  and  desire  again  to  raise  altars  to  "  The  Unknown 
God,"  if  I  am  told  that  there  is  no  purpose  in  nature  and  that  therefore  I  snyself 
am  purposeless  and  meaningless,  a  mere  bubble  upon  the  infinite  stream  of  time, 
am  I  not  justified  in  contending  with  all  my  might  against  such  a  pitiless  system, 
and  in  claiming  God  as  my  Father,  and  the  knowledge  of  Him  as  my  most  precious 
possession  ?     (Bp.  Harvey  Goodwin.) 


CHAP,  ni.]  PROVERBS.  93 

Ver.  20.  The  clouds  drop  down  the  dew. — The  tea  night-mist  of  Palestine : — 
There  is  a  very  remarkable  and  regular  provision  of  Nature,  peculiar  to  Bible  lands, 
which  may  be  observed  in  a  first  sight  of  Palestine  on  any  night  in  the  hot  season 
when  a  west  wind  is  blowing.  I  aUude  to  the  sea  night-mist  of  the  hot  season.  It 
explains  in  a  very  striking  and  hitherto  unsuspected  manner  the  numerous  occur- 
rences of  the  Hebrew  word  tal,  uniformly  rendered  "  dew "  in  the  Authorised 
Version  of  the  Bible.  Some  of  these  have  presented  hitherto  unanswerable  diffi- 
culties, such  as  the  statement  of  the  wise  man  that  "the  clouds  drop  down  the 
*  dew ' "  (chap.  iii.  20),  which,  if  "  dew "  in  the  scientific  sense  of  the  word  is 
understood,  is  just  what  they  do  not,  no  dew  ever  forming  when  clouds  are  about. 
Again,  the  words  in  Isaac's  blessing,  "  God  give  thee  of  the  '  dew '  of  heaven  " 
(Gen.  xxvii.  28) ;  those  of  Moses,  summing  up  the  precious  things  of  heaven  in 
the  "  dew "  (Deut.  xxxiii.  13) ;  the  power  of  an  absolute  eastern  king  being 
likened  to  "a  '  dew '  upon  the  grass  "  (chap.  xix.  12) ;  and  Israel's  future  influ- 
ence amongst  the  nations  to  "  a  '  dew '  from  Jehovah  "  (Micah  v.  7) ;  such  words  as 
these,  and  those  in  many  other  passages,  bespeak  a  peculiar  excellence  and  value 
which  dew  does  not  possess  even  amongst  us,  and  still  less  in  Palestine,  where  it 
only  occurs  in  the  winter,  the  time  of  abundant  heavy  rains,  which  render  it  com- 
paratively useless !  It  was  my  good  fortune,  as  a  result  of  my  residence  in 
Jerusalem,  to  discover  the  deeply  interesting  natural  feature  which  is  called  in  our 
version  "  dew,"  and  fully  to  realise  in  what  its  importance  and  excellence  consists 
(Hos.  xiv.  5).  From  the  end  of  April  till  about  the  end  of  October  no  drop  of  rain 
falls ;  while  each  day,  for  some  ten  or  twelve  hours,  the  sun  shines  with  great 
strength,  unveiled  by  a  single  cloud.  This  fierce  wind  is  in  May  and  October 
intensified  by  a  burning  wind,  the  sirocco,  which  gathers  its  withering,  scorching 
power  as  it  sweeps  over  the  vast  sands  of  the  Arabian  desert,  and  is  the  awful 
"  east  wind  "  of  the  Bible.  During  this  period,  but  more  especially  at  its  close,  in 
September  and  October,  the  west  wind,  which  then  prevails,  comes  up  laden  with 
moisture  from  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  which  is  condensed  in  low-lying  clouds  of 
mist  as  soon  as  it  reaches  the  land.  These  cloud-masses  sweep  along  near  the 
ground,  leaving  behind  them  an  immense  amount  of  what  is  misnamed  in  our 
version  "  dew,"  but  which  is  really  a  very  fine,  gentle  rain  in  the  form  of  a 
light  Scotch  mist.  Its  great  excellence  consists — 1.  In  its  coming  only  in  the 
hottest  and  driest  season,  when  no  other  moisture  can  be  had.  2.  In  its  only  coming 
during  the  night,  "  when  no  man  can  work,"  and  so  interfering  in  no  way  with  the 
business  or  pleasures  of  life.  3.  In  its  coming  in  such  rich  abundance  as  far  to 
exceed  the  moisture  deposited  by  any  formation  of  dew.  4.  In  its  coming  in  such 
fine  particles  and  moderate  quantities  as  not  even  to  hurt  the  gathered  grain  lying 
out  on  the  open-air  threshing-floors.  5.  In  its  effects  ceasing  as  soon  as  the  sun  is 
hot,  and  so  leaving  no  miasmic  or  other  injurious  results  behind,  whence  it  is  well 
called  by  Hosea,  "  the  night-mist  which  early  goes  away."  This  explanation  exactly 
accounts  for  "the  clouds"  being  said  "  to  drop"  it  down,  which  is  just  what  they 
do.  Very  beautiful  are  the  silvery  shining  mist-clouds  which  may  be  seen  as  the 
day  dawns  being  drawn  up  and  dissolved  into  thin  air,  the  fugitive  clouds  to  which 
Hosea  (vi.  4)  compares  Israel's  brief  and  transient  seasons  of  goodness — "Your 
goodness  is  like  the  morning  cloud,  and  like  the  night-mist  (tal)  which  early  goes 
away."  It  also  displays  the  naturalness  of  the  great  amount  of  tai,  or  "night- 
mist,"  which  fell  miraculously  on  Gideon's  fleece  (Judg.  vi.  38).  It  adds  a  new 
intensity  to  our  Saviour's  pathetic  appeal  in  Canticles  v.  2,  "  Open  to  Me  .  .  .  for 
My  head  is  filled  with  the  night-mist  (tal),  and  My  locks  with  the  drops  of  the 
night."  There  is  an  icy  chill  often  attending  exposure  to  the  "  night-mist  "  which 
is  not  experienced  on  a  dewy  night,  the  latter  being  always  fine.  In  a  word,  let 
"  night  mist "  be  written  in  each  of  the  thirty-four  places  in  our  Bible  where  "  dew  " 
occurs,  and  it  will  be  found  to  give  a  new  meaning  and  a  new  beauty  in  every 
instance  !  What  fresh  point  and  power  now  clothe  the  gracious  promise  in  Hosea 
xiv.  5,  "I  will  be  as  the  night-mist  (tal)  to  Israel"!  and  also  that  beautiful  but 
difficult  passage,  Psalm  ex.  3  !     (James  Neil,  M.A.) 

Vers.  21-23.  My  son,  let  not  them  depart  from  thine  eyes :  keep  sound  wisdom 
and  discretion. — Fidelity  to  principle : — The  advantages  connected  with  fidelity  to  the 
ethics  of  godliness  are  here  sketched.  I.  Life.  The  principles  of  heavenly  wisdom 
— 1.  Originate  spiritual  life.  2.  Nurture  spiritual  life.  II.  Oenament.  "Grace 
to  thy  neck."  This  gracefulness  of  soul  is  an  ornament — 1.  Becoming  to  all. 
2.  Within  the  reach  of  every  man.      3.  Admired  by  the  highest  intelligences. 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ra. 

4.  Imperishable  in  its  nature.  III.  Safety.  God  is  the  gnide  and  guardian  of  the 
faithful.  IV.  Courage.  It  is  one  thing  to  be  safe  and  another  thing  to  feel  safe. 
A  feeling  of  safety  may  well  make  us  courageous.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Securing 
wisdom  when  we  have  it : — We  are  not  called  to  be  mere  idolaters  of  wisdom,  but  to 
keep  it  in  the  heart,  with  the  distinct  idea  of  reproducing  it  in  an  obedient  and  pure 
life.  Wisdom  rightly  used  is  increased  in  amount  and  energy.  It  is  not  a  mere 
decoration,  a  medal  to  be  worn  on  the  breast,  or  a  badge  to  proclaim  superiority  of 
class  ;  it  is  a  life-generating  force,  living  ever  in  the  soul  for  its  enlargement  and 
establishment  in  goodness.      (Joseph  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  24.  Yea,  thou  shalt  lie  down,  and  thy  sleep  shall  be  sweet. — The  peaceful 
slumbers  of  the  righteous : — Slumber  is  the  common  privilege  of  thousands  undis- 
tinguished by  any  great  virtue.  But  slumber  may  be  the  ordinary  effect  of  nature. 
While  there  is  no  physical  ailment  or  deep  sorrow  to  hinder  it,  it  is  the  natural 
result  of  weariness  and  daily  toil.  The  slumbers  of  the  text  are  those  which  come 
through  freedom  from  fear.  I.  The  security  of  a  good  man's  rest.  The  body 
demands  rest.  To  withhold  this  rest,  or  to  give  it  reasonable  limits,  is  moral 
suicide.  When  the  good  man  lies  down  he  is  not  to  be  afraid.  Afraid  of  what  ? 
Of  bodily  danger  and  accidents  and  calamities.  It  is  an  instinct  to  have  more 
fear  in  the  darkness  than  in  the  light.  It  is  in  the  night  that  we  dread  the  out- 
break of  the  smouldering  spark;  it  is  the  night  which  favours  the  robber's 
murderous  purpose ;  it  is  the  night  which  adds  terrors  to  the  lightning  flash  and  to 
the  storm.  The  promise  of  the  text  supplies  a  rational  warrant  for  calm  security. 
You  may  sleep  and  take  your  rest,  for  He  that  keepeth  Israel  will  neither  slumber 
nor  sleep.  The  powers  of  evil  shall  not  destroy  further  than  may  be  consistent 
with  the  Divine  designs  of  mercy,  or  with  an  overruling  purpose  for  good.  It  is  a 
promise  that  in  lying  down  we  need  not  be  afraid  of  death.  When  we  close  our 
eyes  in  slumber  we  know  not  in  which  of  two  worlds  we  may  wake  again.  We 
can  only  overcome  the  fear  of  death  by  knowing  that  we  have  a  part  in  Him 
who  is  the  destroyer  of  death.  How  may  we  lay  down  and  not  be  afraid  ?  Only  by 
endeavouring  that,  whether  we  wake  in  one  world  or  another,  we  may  have  Christ 
with  us  at  our  rising.  II.  Thy  sleep  shall  be  sweet.  This  is  a  second  privilege 
of  the  good.  1.  Sleep  is  sweetened  by  the  thought  of  duties  attempted,  if  not  duties 
done.  We  are  all  unprofitable  servants,  but  that  is  no  reason  why  we  should  be 
slothful  servants.  2.  Sleep  is  sweet  through  an  enjoyed  sense  of  the  Divine  for- 
giveness. It  cannot  be  a  healthy  sleep  which  men  enjoy  while  the  pillow  is  pressed 
by  a  weight  of  unpardoned,  unrepented  sin.  3.  Sleep  may  be  sweetened  by  kind 
and  charitable  thoughts  towards  all  mankind.  Cultivate  those  dispositions 
which  minister  to  a  holy  and  gentle  charity.  Conclusion.  You  must  share  in 
the  good  man's  labour  if  either  in  this  life  or  in  that  which  is  to  come  you 
would  share  in  the  good  man's  rest.  Sleep  to  the  labouring  man  is  sweet,  so  also  is 
the  sleep  of  the  labouring  Christian.  His  struggles  with  sin,  his  contest  with  the 
world,  the  labour  of  keeping  the  heart  right,  and  the  hands  pure,  and  the  eye 
single,  and  the  ways  direct — these  are  things  which  make  rest  needful  for  him, 
which  give  refreshment  to  his  slumbers  and  repose  to  his  rest.  And  this  warfare  of 
the  Christian  every  day,  followed  by  a  night  of  rest,  is  but  a  type  of  the  whole  warfare 
of  time  followed  by  the  Sabbath  rest  of  eternity.     {Daniel  Moore,  M.A.) 

Vers.  25, 26.  Be  not  afraid  of  sadden  fear,  neither  of  the  desolation  of  the 
wicked,  when  it  cometh.  For  the  Lord  shall  be  thy  confidence.—  Confident  attitude 
of  God's  people : — When  God  is  abroad  in  judgments.  He  would  not  have  His 
people  alarmed.  He  has  not  come  forth  to  harm,  but  to  defend  the  righteous.  1.  He 
WOULD  HAVE  THEM  MANIFEST  COURAGE.  We  who  cnjoy  the  presence  of  God  ought  to 
display  presence  of  mind.  Since  the  Lord  Himself  may  suddenly  come,  we  ought 
not  to  be  surprised  at  anything  sudden.  Serenity  under  the  rush  and  roar  of  unex- 
pected evils  is  a  precious  gift  of  Divine  love.  II.  The  Lord  would  have  His  chosen 
DISPLAY  discrimination,  SO  that  they  may  see  that  the  desolation  of  the  wicked  is 
not  a  real  calamity  to  the  universe.  Sin  alone  is  evil ;  the  punishment  which 
follows  thereupon  is  as  a  preserving  salt  to  keep  society  from  putrefying.  We 
should  be  far  more  shocked  at  the  sin  which  deserves  hell  than  at  the  hell  which 
comes  out  of  sin.  III.  So,  too,  should  the  Lord's  people  exhibit  great  quietness 
OF  SPIRIT.  Satan  and  his  serpent  seed  are  full  of  all  subtilty  ;  but  those  who  walk 
with  God  shall  not  be  taken  in  their  deceitful  snares.  Go  on,  believe  in  Jesus,  and 
let  the  Lord  be  thy  confidence.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 


enis.  m.]  PROVERBS.  95 

Ver.  27.  Withliold  not  good  from  tbem  to  whom  it  is  due. — A  plea  for  the  ihop- 
men : — When  the  first  man  had  fallen  into  sin  labour  wa^  imposed  upon  him  as  a 
punishment.  And  yet  there  was  mercy  mingled  with  the  judgment.  That  stern 
necessity  which  forced  man  to  eat  bread  in  the  sweat  of  his  brow  became  one  of  his 
purest  and  sweetest  sources  of  enjoyment.  What  would  the  world  be  without 
labour  ?  Do  we  not  owe  to  it  the  occupation  of  time  which  otherwise  would  be  a 
burden  too  heavy  to  bear  ?  Is  it  not  indispensable  to  our  mental  and  physical 
vigour,  to  the  healthy  mind  in  the  healthy  body  ?  And  does  it  not  contribute, 
directly  and  indirectly,  to  our  best  and  most  enduring  pleasures  ?  But  the  labour  is 
as  God  imposed  it  upon  man.  Not  labour  that  is  incessant,  or,  in  itself,  unfriendly 
to  the  interests  of  body  or  mind.  Man  has  too  frequently  made  labour  a  curse.  To 
bring  back  labour  to  the  position  which  it  held  after  the  expulsion  from  paradise, 
to  guard  its  rights,  and  to  render  industrial  occupation  a  help  rather  than  a 
hindrance  to  the  progress  of  humanity  are  objects  of  noble  and  Godlike  enterprise. 
I.  This  pubpose  is  good.  1.  It  is  good  personally.  Putting  wise  limitations  on 
labour  is  good  for  the  body,  for  the  mind,  for  the  soul.  2.  It  is  good  relatively. 
Good  for  employers — good  for  their  interests,  for  their  consciences.  It  is  good  for 
the  commonwealth  and  for  the  Church.  11.  This  movement  for  the  limitation  ov 
lABOCTR  is  just.  Youug  men  have  a  right  to  a  fair  portion  of  time  to  be  used  as 
they  think  best.  We  speak  not  now  of  expediency,  but  of  lawful  claim.  They  have 
a  right  to  be  happy.  It  is  a  sin  to  stop  any  fellow-creature  from  being  happy.  We 
commit  this  sin  if  we  help  to  place  impediments  in  his  way  so  that  he  cannot 
obtain  his  share  of  joy.  They  have  a  right  to  advance  their  own  interests.  Young 
people  may  have  no  golden  opportunities  because  they  have  no  leisure.  They  have  a 
right  to  fulfil  some  moral  design.  What  this  should  be,  each  young  man  should 
find  out  specifically  for  himself.  He  is  then  bound  to  effectuate  it.  And  he  has  a 
right  to  demand  from  society  opportunity  to  obey  the  divinely  implanted  impulse. 
He  must  have  breathing  time,  time  for  moral  achievements.  HI.  The  demand  fob 
SHOETER  hours  OF  LABOUR  IS  ALSO  PRACTICABLE.  It  Can  be  donc.  Late  hours  are  not 
indispensable.  A  little  domestic  arrangement  would  make  it  just  as  easy  to  pur- 
chase in  the  broad  daylight  as  in  the  dark  evening  hour.  {W.  M.  Whittemore,  S.C.L.) 
Withholding  dues: — Many  are  the  forms  of  this  dishonesty,  borrowing  without  pay- 
ment, evading  the  taxes,  keeping  back  the  labourer's  hire.  But  the  rule  probes  deeper 
than  this  surface.  If  we  have  no  legal  debt  to  any,  we  have  a  gospel  debt  to  all. 
Even  the  poor  is  bound  by  this  universal  law  of  his  poorer  neighbour.  Every  one  has 
a  claim  upon  our  love.  Every  opportunity  of  doing  good  is  our  call  to  do  so.  {C. 
Bridges,  M.A.)  Beneficence  : — I.  Human  beneficence  has  its  claimants.  1.  What 
you  have  is  given  in  trust.  2.  It  is  given  you  for  distribution.  II.  Human  bene- 
ficence IS  ONLY  LIMITED  BY  INCAPACITY.  Our  powcr  is  the  measure  of  our  obliga- 
tion. III.  Human  beneficence  should  ever  be  prompt  in  its  services.  1.  Because 
the  postponement  of  any  duty  is  a  sin  in  itself.  2.  Because  the  neglect  of  a  bene- 
volent impulse  is  injurious  to  self.  3.  Because  the  claimant  may  seriously  suffer 
by  a  delay  of  your  help.  IV.  Human  beneficence  excludes  all  unkindness  op 
heart.  True  charity  thinketh  no  evil.  A  selfish  heart  is  an  evil  desire.  (D. 
Thomas,  D.D.)  The  duty  of  charity  : — I.  Charity,  as  of  moral  obligation, 
STANDS  at  the  HEAD  OF  RELIGIOUS  PRACTICE.  It  is  uot  a  duty  purely  of  positive 
command  and  institution,  but  in  its  own  nature,  and  by  a  constant  and  eternal 
obligation.  The  Jews  easily  confounded  things  morally  good  and  evil  with  things 
made  good  and  evil  by  positive  command.  The  distinction  was  vigorously  set 
forth  by  the  prophets.  Charity,  then,  is  the  principal  duty  of  our  religion,  as  being 
universal  and  indispensable  and  a  perfection  in  its  own  nature.     H.  Charity  is 

THE  NEAREST  IMITATION  OF  THE  DiVTNE  NATURE  AND  PERFECTIONS  THAT  WE  ARE  CAPABLE 

OF.  The  Divine  perfections  are  not  imitable  by  as,  as  to  the  degree  and  extent  of 
them.  They  are  all  infinite  in  God.  We  may  do  good  according  to  our  power 
and  in  our  sphere.     God  will  accept  according  to  that  a  man  hath.     IH.  This 

GOOD  disposition  OF   MIND  IS   MADE  ONE  OF  THE  IMMEDIATE  CONDITIONS  OF  OUR  FUTURE 

HAPPINESS.  The  virtue  of  charity  is  an  immediate  gospel-condition  of  our  future 
happiness,  and  it  is  a  natural  cause  of  it,  or  such  a  temper  of  mind  as  may  be  called 
beatific.  In  the  nature  of  things,  it  prepares  men  for  admission  into  the  quiet 
regions  of  peace  and  love.  This  is  also  a  virtue  proper  and  necessary  to  this  life, 
without  which  the  world  cannot  subsist.  This  earth  is  the  only  stage  where  this 
virtue  can  and  must  be  exercised.  It  is  not  easy  to  prescribe  rules,  measures,  and 
proportions  to  men's  charity,  but  neither  is  it  necessary.  {Francit  Astry,  D.D.) 
The  duty  of  charity  stated  and  enforced : — That  charity  in  general  is  a  duty  nobody 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

will  deny.  But  many,  on  account  of  particular  circumstances,  think  themselves 
entirely  discharged  from  the  performance  of  it.  Many,  though  they  own  the 
obligation,  yet  disown  it  in  its  due  degrees.  I.  Who  abe  the  persons  obuqkd 
TO  GIVE  TO  CHABITABLS  USES,  AND  IN  WHAT  PROPORTION?  By  charitable  uses  ia 
meant  the  relief  of  the  helpless,  the  sick,  the  needy,  &c.  The  great,  the  opulent, 
and  the  able  should  undertake  the  principal  share  in  this  duty.  They  are  stewards, 
and  must  give  an  account.  Their  good  deeds  ought  to  bear  proportion  to  their 
abilities.  Everybody  looks  with  abhorrence  upon  a  man  who  is  ever  amassing 
riches  without  laying  anything  out  in  charitable  uses ;  as  greedy  as  the  sea  and  as 
barren  as  the  shore.  Those  whose  circumstances  are  but  just  easy,  who  can  only 
just  meet  the  demands  of  their  families,  claim  to  be  totally  exempted  from  the  per- 
formance of  this  duty.  But  often  such  persons  have  secret  indulgences,  which 
form  their  real  excuse.  Those  in  straitened  circumstances  think  they  have  nothing 
to  do  in  the  works  of  charity.  Eich  and  poor  are  equally  concerned  in  the  duty, 
but  in  proportion  to  their  circumstances.  He  that  has  little  is  as  strictly  bound  to 
give  something  out  of  that  little  as  he  that  has  more  is  obliged  to  give  more. 
Charity  consists  in  doing  the  best  we  can  and  doing  it  with  a  willing  mind.  The 
smallest  present  imaginable  may  be  the  greatest  bounty.  The  only  persons  who 
have  a  fair  right  of  pleading  an  entire  exemption  from  this  duty  are  those  whose 
circumstances  are  deeply  involved ;  for  until  we  can  satisfy  our  creditors  we  ought 
not  to  relieve  the  poor.  It  would  be  unjust  to  give  away  what  is  not  our  own.  There 
is  much  difficulty  in  pitching  upon  any  fixed  and  stated  proportion  short  of  which 
our  charity  ought  not  to  fall.  Where  the  determinate  measure  of  duty  is  not  or 
cannot  be  assigned,  there  men's  interests  or  covetousness  will  be  ever  suggesting 
excuses  for  the  non-performance  of  it.  In  this  we  ought  to  follow  the  rule  laid 
down  in  all  doubtful  cases,  i.e.,  to  choose  the  part  which  is  least  dangerous.  In 
the  exercise  of  charity  we  should  rather  exceed  than  fall  short,  for  fear  of  incurring 
the  guilt  of  uncharitableness.  The  Jews  had  to  appropriate  the  tenth  part  of  their 
revenue  every  three  years  to  charitable  uses.  This  was  a  thirtieth  part  of  their 
yearly  revenue.    We  should  not  at  any  time  fall  short  of  this  measure.    II.  Who 

ARE    THE   persons    QtTALITIED   TO  RECEIVE  OUR  CHARITY?       1.    We  OUght  rather  tO  8UC- 

cour  the  distressed  than  increase  the  happiness  of  the  easy,  because  we  are  to  do 
the  most  good  we  can.  Even  the  bad  are  to  be  relieved  in  cases  of  extreme  neces- 
sity. 2.  The  best  charity  we  can  give  to  the  poor  that  have  ability  and  strength  is 
to  employ  them  in  work,  that  they  may  not  contract  an  habit  of  idleness.  3.  Those 
suffering  reverse  of  fortune  are  proper  objects  of  charity.  4.  Fatherless  children 
demand  our  care.  Charity  is  misplaced  upon  vagrants  and  common  beggars,  who 
may  be  counterfeits.  5.  The  sick  have  claim  upon  our  charity.  III.  The  manner 
IN  which  WE  ARE  TO  DISPENSE  OUR  CHARITY.  Acts  of  mcicy  should  be  both  public 
and  private.  If  charity  were  entirely  secret,  removed  from  the  eye  of  the  world,  it 
would  decay  and  dwindle  into  nothing.  If  charity  were  always  done  in  public,  it 
would  degenerate  into  mere  hypocrisy,  formality,  and  outward  show.  Care  is 
necessary  not  to  be  influenced  by  ostentation  or  any  sinister  motive.  An  action 
good  in  itself  is  greatly  recommended  by  an  agreeable  manner  of  doing  it,  an 
agreeable  manner  being  to  actions  what  a  lively  manner  of  expression  is  to  our 
sense — it  beautifies  and  adorns  it,  and  gives  it  all  the  advantage  whereof  it  is  capable. 
It  is  our  duty  not  only  to  have  virtue,  but  to  make  our  virtue  truly  amiable.  A 
delicacy  of  this  kind  is  most  chiefly  to  be  observed  with  those  who  have  not  been 
used  to  receive  charity.  IV.  The  motives  to  charity.  1.  Compassion.  As 
ingrafted  in  us  this  is  mere  instinct;  as  cultured  and  cherished  it  becomes  a 
virtue.  2.  The  pleasure  of  benevolence.  He  that  centres  all  his  regard  upon 
himself,  exclusively  of  others,  has  placed  his  affections  very  oddly ;  he  has  placed 
them  on  the  most  worthless  object  in  the  world— himself.  V.  The  recompense  of 
THE  REWARD.  At  the  last  day  the  question  will  not  be  whether  you  have  been 
negatively  good,  whether  you  have  done  no  harm,  but  what  good  have  you  done  ? 
Our  Saviour  has  made  the  poor  His  representatives.  The  riches  that  we  have 
given  away  will  remain  with  us  for  ever.  When  we  have  shown  mercy  to  our 
fellow-creatures  we  may  safely  expect  it  from  our  Creator.     (J.  Seed,  M.A.) 

Vers.  28-35.  Say  not  unto  thy  neighbour,  Go,  and  come  again,  and  to-morrow  1 
yf]jl  give. — Neighbourliness : — I.  What  is  dde  to  others  ?  (ver.  27).  There  is  a 
Bense  in  which  debt  should  be  avoided,  and  a  sense  in  which  all  men  must  be 
always  over  head  and  ears  in  it  (Eom.  xiii.  8).  Love  is  a  debt  that  can  never  be 
discharged.     As  followers  of  Christ  we  must  love  always  and  love  all.     Some  men 


ou*.  m.]  PROVERBS.  97 

are  neighbours  because  thej  reside  in  the  same  street,  and  all  men  are  neighboori 
because  they  reside  on  the  same  planet.  "  Shivering,"  says  Dr.  Punshon,  "  in  the 
ice-bound,  or  scorching  in  the  tropical,  regions,  in  the  lap  of  luxury,  or  in  the  wild 
hardihood  of  the  primeval  forest— belting  the  globe  in  a  tired  search  for  rest,  or 
quieting  his  life  amid  the  leafy  shade  of  ancestral  woods,  gathering  all  the  decencies 
around  him  like  a  garment,  or  battling  in  the  fierce  raid  of  crime  in  a  world  which 
has  disowned  him,  there  is  an  inner  human-ness  everywhere  which  binds  that  man 
to  me  by  a  primitive  and  by  an  indissoluble  bond."  II.  The  needs  of  others. 
Eeal  goodness  is — 1.  Practical.  It  finds  expression  in  giving.  All  nature  is 
redolent  of  such  beneficence.  The  earth  gives  fruit;  the  sky  gives  rain;  the 
sun  gives  light.  So  is  it  with  nature's  God.  He  gave,  says  one,  "  the  best  thing 
in  heaven  for  the  worst  thing  on  earth."  2.  Prompt.  It  says,  not  to-morrow,  but 
to-day — not  by  and  by,  but  now.  "Keep,"  says  "William  Arnot,  "as  few  good 
intentions  hovering  about  as  possible."  A  kind  deed  done  quickly  is  twice  done, 
and  if  some  deeds  are  not  done  quickly  they  will  never  be  done  at  all.  III.  The 
coNiTDENCE  OF  OTHERS  (ver.  29).  Evil  growing  out  of  a  betrayal  of  confidence  is 
one  of  the  worst  forms  of  evil.  There  are  confidences  of — 1.  A  national  character. 
Israel  rested  upon  the  staff  of  Egypt,  but  it  turned  out  to  be  "  a  bruised  reed  "  (2 
Kings  xviii.  21).  2.  A  friendly  character.  Such  confidence  was  betrayed  by 
Ahithophel  (Psa.  xli.  9),  and  by  Judas  (John  xiii.  18).  3.  A  business  character. 
The  confidence  of  an  employer  in  his  assistant.  This  may  be  betrayed  by  wasting 
the  master's  goods  (Luke  xvi.  1),  or  by  misappropriating  them  (Exod.  xx.  15 ;  Eph.  iv. 
28).  IV.  The  integkitt  of  others  (ver.  30).  The  strife  of  law  courts  has  brought 
misery  to  thousands  of  innocent  people.  Some  people  are  always  inventing 
grievances.  V.  The  sins  of  others  (ver.  31).  Oppression  is  opposed  to  neighbour- 
liness. Some  modern  employers  of  labour  will  surely  stand  aghast  when  the  time 
for  this  reckoning  comes.  Well  might  the  wise  man  say  of  such,  "  Choose  none  of 
his  ways."  VI.  To  ourselves  (vers.  32-35).  Goodness  has  its  reward.  Two 
companion  pictures  teach  this  by  a  graphic  contrast.  1.  The  hatred  versus  the 
friendship  of  the  Lord.  From  the  unneighbourly  God  turns  away,  but  His  face  is 
towards  the  upright.  To  enjoy  the  friendship  of  God  we  must  be  the  friends  of 
men.  2.  The  curse  versus  the  blessing  of  the  Lord.  To  bless  is  to  be  blessed. 
The  merciful  shall  obtain  mercy.     {H,  Thome.) 

Ver.  30.  Strive  not  with  a  man  without  a  cause. — Strife  : — I.  As  a  principlb 
INHERENT  IN  THE  BOUL.  There  is  a  battling  instinct  in  every  human  mind.  Man 
is  made  to  antagonise.  The  principle  is  intended  to  put  us  into  antagonism — 1. 
Not  against  existence,  but  against  the  evils  of  existence.  2.  Not  against  God,  but 
against  the  enemies  of  God.  II.  As  a  principle  liable  to  perversion.  (D. 
Thomas,  D.D.)  Negative  goodness  : — Here  we  are  called  to  do  good  negatively. 
The  strife-loving  disposition  is  fatal  to  culture,  solidity  of  goodness,  and  every 
instinct  of  beneficence.  Where  strife  is,  God  is  not.  Where  there  is  cause  of 
strife  be  careful  to  ascertain  its  true  quality.  It  must  be  a  cause  so  evident  and  so 
righteous  that  there  can  be  no  dispute  about  it.  Some  minds  are  ingenious  in 
creating  causes  of  strife,  and  they  justify  themselves  by  blinding  themselves. 
Strength  is  itself  a  temptation.  Who  can  be  strong  and  yet  civil  ?  Unjust  conten- 
tions degrade  their  authors.  False  accusations  need  further  lies  for  their  defence 
and  support.  Whom  we  begin  by  iU-treating  we  end  by  hating.  {Joseph  Parker, 
D.D.) 

Ver.  31.  Envy  thou  not  the  oppressor. — The  oppressor: — He  is  a  common 
character.  There  is  the  political  oppressor,  the  social  oppressor,  the  ecclesiastical 
oppressor.  I.  His  character  is  not  to  be  envied.  1.  Because  envy  is  in  itself  an 
evil.  2.  Because  there  is  nothing  in  the  oppressor  to  be  desired.  II.  His  conduct 
IS  not  to  be  followed.  Stand  aloof  (Psa.  xxxvii.  1).  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The 
oppressor  not  to  be  envied  : — Whether  public  or  private,  the  man  who  "  grinds  the 
faces  of  the  poor  "  by  severity  and  extortion,  may  succeed,  may  prosper ;  may,  by 
this  means,  amass  a  fortune,  and  rise  to  still  higher  honour.  He  is  not  to  be 
envied  ;  not  only  because  envy  is  in  itself  wrong,  but  also  because  there  is  really 
nothing  in  his  character  and  career  to  produce  it.  His  prosperity  is  not  to  be 
envied  even  by  the  poorest  and  most  suffering  victim  of  his  oppression.  And 
while  he  is  not  to  be  envied,  far  less  are  his  ways  to  be  imitated  for  the  sake 
of  obtaining  the  envied  results — the  same  wealth,  the  same  greatness,  the  same 
power.     (R,  Wardlaw,  D.D.) 

8 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cttiJ.  HI. 

Ver.  33.  The  curse  of  the  Lord  is  in  the  house  of  the  wicked. — In  what  tense, 
and  in  what  cases,  a  curse  may  still  extend  to  Christians  : — I.  Christiaks  are  most 

CERTAINLY  EXPOSED  TO  THE  DiVINE  CURSE,  IF  GUILTY  OF  THE  SINS  TO  WHICH  IT  APPER- 
TAINS. There  is  no  curse  remaining  for  the  believing  and  the  penitent.  But  still 
there  is  a  curse  retained  on  record,  and  it  must  be  as  surely  kept  for  some  beneath 
the  gospel  as  it  ever  was  aforetime.  There  are  some  who  are  cold  and  selfish,  who 
have  no  root  of  Christian  tenderness,  nor  any  spirit  of  believing  love ;  who  take  no 
pity  on  the  poor,  the  stranger,  or  the  naked.  If  neglect  brings  curse,  how  much 
more  must  positive  wrong.  Our  Saviour  speaks  of  the  condemned  in  general 
terms  as  "  the  workers  of  iniquity."  There  is,  then,  a  possibility  of  curse  yet 
remaining  beneath  the  covenant  of  grace.     II.  Make  detailed  examination  of  one 

OR  TWO  of  the  more  SECRET  OF    THE  SINS  THAT   TOO  MANY  CHRISTIANS    ARE    GUILTY    OF. 

1.  "  Cursed  is  he  that  removeth  his  neighbour's  landmark."  The  Christian  trans- 
lation of  this  is,  "  Let  no  man  go  beyond  and  defraud  his  brother  in  any  matter." 

2.  "  Cursed  is  he  that  maketh  the  blind  to  go  out  of  his  way."  In  a  moral  and 
spiritual  sense  this  reads,  "  Cursed  is  he  who  imposeth  upon  the  simple,  the 
credulous,  the  unwary,  the  ignorant,  or  the  helpless,  and  either  wilfully  deceives, 
misleads,  corrupts,  or  plunders  any  of  these,  for  selfish  or  unworthy  purpose  of  his 
own."  {John  Miller,  M.A.)  The  curse  and  the  blessing  : — I.  The  different 
CHARACTERS  HERE  MENTIONED.  All  men  are  sinful,  but  all  men  are  not  wicked,  in 
the  sense  of  being  immoral.  The  "just  "  are  the  sincere  and  renewed  of  mankind. 
II.  The  different  portion  assigned  to  each.  On  the  house  of  the  wicked  a 
curse,  on  the  habitation  of  the  just  a  blessing.  The  curse  of  the  law,  of  a  troubled 
conscience,  of  a  neglected  gospel,  of  a  judgment  to  come.  The  blessing  comes  by 
God  "  making  all  things  work  together  for  good."  The  blessing  of  God  is  upon  the 
table  of  the  just,  upon  their  sorrows,  upon  their  toils,  upon  their  families — in  a 
word,  upon  their  souls.  They  are  blessed  with  peace  and  light  and  liberty — with 
all  spiritual  blessings  in  Christ  Jesus.  {American  National  Preacher.)  Different 
characters  and  destinies  : — I.  The  difference  of  character.  The  doctrine  of  the 
corruption  of  human  nature  should  always  be  viewed  in  connection  with  the 
redemption  of  the  world  by  the  sacrifice  of  the  death  of  Christ.  As  this  redemp- 
tion extends  to  all  mankind,  all  are  consequently  placed  in  a  state  of  trial.  And 
this  leads  to  the  difference  of  character  mentioned  in  the  text.  Some  receive  and 
improve  the  grace  that  is  offered  to  them  ;  others  refuse  and  oppose  it.  Hence  all 
the  inhabitants  of  the  world  are  divided  into  two  distinct  classes  of  character.  By 
the  "  wicked  "  we  are  to  understand  all  that  vast  multitude  who  take  this  world  for 
their  portion.  The  "  house  of  the  wicked  "  means  every  family  where  the  love  and 
fear  of  God  are  not  the  ruling  principles.  The  "  just "  means  one  who  accepts  and 
improves  the  grace  offered  him  in  the  gospel ;  whose  religion  is  seated  in  the  heart 
and  is  displayed  in  the  life.  A  just  person  is  governed  by  a  principle  of  love  to 
God  and  of  love  to  man.  The  "  habitation  of  the  just "  means  a  family  where 
religion  is  the  principal  thing.  The  members  of  such  a  family  act  uprightly, 
according  to  their  different  stations.  II.  The  different  states  of  those  to  whom 
THESE  CHARACTERS  SEVERALLY  BELONG.  1.  The  cursc  of  the  wicked.  They  are  not, 
however,  always  in  an  afflicted  state.  The  expression  means  that,  whatever  their 
outward  circumstances,  God  does  not  look  favourably  upon  them.  When  God's 
blessing  is  withdrawn  nothing  but  curse  remains.  2.  The  blessing  of  the  just.  It 
lies  in  the  continual  favour,  protection,  and  presence  of  God.  Not  necessarily  in 
outward  circumstances.  "  All  things  work  together  for  their  good."  Observe — 1, 
That  the  characters  and  states  of  mankind  have  been  always  the  same  in  every  age 
of  the  world,  and  they  will  continue  to  be  so  till  time  shall  cease.  2.  That  the 
difference  of  character  necessarily  leads  to  a  difference  of  state.  (J.  S.  Pratt, 
B.C.L.)  God's  curse  and  blessing: — 1.  God's  curse  is  on  wicked  men  in  all 
their  ways.  Their  poverty,  losses,  and  crosses  are  not  properly  trials,  but 
beginnings  of  sorrows.  2.  God's  blessing  is  on  godly  men  in  all  their  doings.  If 
they  have  but  little,  they  have  content  with  it.  God  will  turn  poverty  into  plenty 
if  He  sees  it  best  so  to  do.  {Francis  Taylor,  B.D.)  Moral  contrasts  in 
character  and  destiny : — There  are  in  human  life  great  contrasts  of  character, 
and  these  are  accompanied  by  corresponding  contrasts  in  the  lot  and  destiny 
of  men.  Three  examples  in  verses  33-35.  All  three,  however,  resolve  them- 
selves into  the  general  distinction  and  opposition  between  right  and  wrong  which 
run  through  the  whole  of  life.  I.  Let  us  seek  to  bring  that  radical  con- 
trast BEFORE  OUR  MINDS  IN  A  GENERAL  VIEW.  What  is  light  ?  What  is  wrong  ? 
1,  The  words  themselves  give  us  some  hint  of  what  we  mean  and  what  we  feel,  for 


CHAP,  m.]  PROVERBS.  99 

right  is  the  same  as  direct,  straight,  and  wrong  is  the  same  as  wrung,  twisted, 
turned,  perverted  from  that  which  is  straight  and  direct.     There  are  actions  and 
habits  of  mind  which  we  feel  to  be  in  some  sense  straight,  direct,  right ;  others 
which  we  feel  to  be  wrong — that  is,  which  deviate  from  that  which  is  straight. 
There  are  other  words,  referring  to  moral  distinctions,  which  contain  the  same  idea. 
A  good  man  is  constantly  spoken  of  in  the  Scriptures  as  an  upright  man — a  man 
upright  in  heart,     A  bad  man  is  often  spoken  of  as  a  perverse,  a  froward  man  ;  he 
is  one  who  turns  aside  from  the  right  way;  his  ways  are  crooked  ;  and   so  on. 
But,  so  far,  we  have  nothing  more  than  an  analogy  before  our  minds.     The  word 
informs  us  that  we  have  gathered  our  notion  of  something  belonging  to  the  mind 
and  feelings  from  something  that  has  been  seen  by  the  bodily  senses  in  the  world 
outside  us  ;  that  is  all.     It  tells  us  that  our  ideas  of  right  and  wrong  resemble  our 
ideas  of  a  straight  or  a  curved  line.     But  we  want  to  know  not  merely  what  right 
and  wrong  resemble,  but,  if  possible,  what  they  are  in  themselves.     2.  Do  you  mean 
that  what  you  call  a  right  action  is  a  useful  action,  and  what  you  call  a  wrong 
action  is  a  hurtful  action  ?      The  opinion  before  us  is,  that  the  experience  of  man- 
kind, gradually  forming  and  accumulating  through  the  ages  of  the  past,  has  ascer- 
tained certain  things  to  be  helpful,  and  certain  other  things  to  be  injurious,  to  its 
welfare,  and  that  we  have  learned  to  name  the  one  class  of  things  right,  and  the 
other  wrong.     (1)  If  this  theory,  which  identifies  the  right  with  the  socially  useful, 
and  the  wrong  with  the  socially  injurious,  be  true,  why  should  we  need  two  sets  of 
words  to  express  the  same  idea  ?    When  a  man  has  done  a  generous  action,  or 
spoken  the  truth  in  the  face  of  a  strong  temptation  to  speak  falsehood,  why  should 
we  not  say  he  has  acted  usefully,  instead  of  saying  he  has  acted  rightly  ?     (2)  Again, 
refer  this  question  to  your  own  feelings.     When  these  words — useful,  right — are 
pronounced  in  your  hearing,  and  you  take  in  their  respective  meanings,  do  they 
not  awaken  two  entirely  different  feelings  in  your  mind  ?     You  may,  indeed,  feel 
about  a  particular  act  that  it  is  both  right  and  useful  at  the  same  time  ;  still,  that 
is  not  one,  but  two  feelings  in  regard  to  the  action,  which  happen  for  the  moment 
to  meet  and  be  blended  in  your  mind.     On  the  other  hand,  there  are  many  actions 
in  regard  to  which  you  have  one  of  these  feelings  and  not  the  other  present  to  your 
mind.     You  say,  "  It  was  a  useful  deed,  it  was  very  convenient  ;  but  it  was  not 
right  after  all."     You  have  a  sense  of  utility  which  is  gratified  by  what  has  been 
done ;  you  have  another  and  a  higher  feeling  about  right  and  wrong,  which  is 
dissatisfied  and  displeased  by  what  has  been  done.     (3)  Again,  if  you  take  a  general 
survey  of  men's  actions,  you  will  be  led  to  the  same  conclusion.     What  do  you  say 
of  the  act  in  which  one  man  rushes  forward  in  a  moment  of  sudden  opportunity 
and   takes  the  life  of  his  fellow-man  ?      What  do  you  say  of  assassination,  of 
murder?     Is  it  right — can  anything  in  the  world  ever  make  such  an  act  other  than 
wrong  ?    Yet  such  an  act  has  often  turned  out  in  the  highest  degree  useful  to 
society-     3.  Is  our  feeling  about  right  and  wrong  the  same  essentially  as  our  feeling 
about  beauty  and  ugliness  ?    All  that  is  right  is  beautiful ;  but  there  is  much  that 
is  beautiful  that  is  not  right.     4.  I  take  my  stand,  then — fearless  of  contradiction 
from  any  really  awakened  conscience — upon  this  position  :  your  feeling  for  right 
is  superior  to  every  other  single  feeling  of  your  nature.     It  is  the  noblest  part  of 
your  feeling  for  God,  and  every  other  feeling — that  for  use  and  that  for  beauty,  that 
for  self  and  that  for  society — stands  in  a  lower  and  subordinate  relation  to  it :  like 
servants  in  the  presence  of  their  master.     Your  conscience  is  your  master,  and  woe 
to  you  if  you  seek  to  put  any  other  passion  into  the  lordly  seat  which  conscience 
holds — if  you  would  make  that  part  of  your  nature  the  slave  which  something 
within  you   says  you  were  Divinely  made   to   obey.      II.  Application  of  these 
rRiNcrPLEs  TO  THE  TEXT.     1.  The  "  wicked  "is  spoken  of,  and  the  "  just  "  is  spoken 
of.      These  names,  these   characters,  can   never  be  interchanged.      Who  is  the 
wicked  man  ?    He  is  one  who  is  the  slave  of  his  lower  feelings — his  appetites,  his 
passions,  his  lusts,  his  comforts  and  conveniences,  and  who  is  the  constant  rebel  to 
the  law  of  right,  to  God  within  his  soul.    Who  is  the  just  man  ?     He  is  the  man 
who  obeys  and  follows,  because  he  reveres  the  right,  the  God  revealed  in  the  soul ; 
and  who  makes  every  other  part  and  passion,  every  comfort  and  convenience,  give 
way  to  and  f  oUow  in  the  wake  of  the  highest.  The  curse  of  the  Lord  is  in  the  house  of 
the  former,  and  cannot  but  rest  thereon,  and  there  must  remain  until  the  falsehood 
of  his  heart  and  life  be  removed.    The  blessing  of  the  Lord  is  on  the  habitation  of 
the  latter — is  necessarily  there,  as  God  is  true  and  faithful  in  His  ways.    As  the 
blade  of  grass  catches  on  its  summit  the  pearly  globe  of  heaven's  dew,  so  the 
blessing  of  the  Most  High  is  caught  by  every  upward-looking,  obedient,  praying 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ni, 

heart.  2.  Again,  there  is  the  scorner,  and  there  is  the  lowly  man.  These  names, 
these  characters,  cannot  be  confounded  with  one  another.  Who  is  the  scorner  ? 
The  man  who  has  lifted  his  pride  and  egotism  into  the  seat  where  conscience  ought 
to  be  ;  who  obeys  that  dark  and  irrational  passion  ;  who  is  swollen  with  self-idolatry 
instead  of  bending  in  the  sense  of  his  littleness  before  the  God  who  made  him. 
And  the  lowly — who  is  he  ?  The  man  who  feels  and  owns  himself  to  be  low  and 
God  to  be  high  ;  himself  to  be  little  and  God  to  be  great ;  himself  to  be  sinful  and 
seamed  with  faults,  and  God  to  be  the  Holy  Father  of  his  spirit.  The  former  is 
and  will  be  an  object  of  Heaven's  scorn ;  for  who  is  so  worthy  of  the  deepest  con- 
tempt as  a  human  creature  the  slave  of  pride  ?  and  a  scorned  object  he  must 
remain  until  his  proud  heart  be  broken.  But  to  the  lowly  grace,  or  favour,  is  given ; 
for  God  is  faithful,  and  grants  to  men  their  true  needs.  Heaven  stoops  to  those  who 
know  that  they  cannot  of  themselves  rise  to  heaven.  3.  There  is  the  wise  man 
and  there  is  the  fool ;  and  these  names  and  characters  can  never  really  be  confused. 
For  who  is  the  wise  man?  He  who  lives,  and  ever  seeks  to  live,  accord- 
ing to  the  best  light  given  to  him  ;  who  reveres  the  nature  God  has 
bestowed  upon  him  ;  who  prayerfully  and  humbly  endeavours  to  be  true 
to  it.  And  who  is  the  fool?  Just  the  opposite  of  this.  One  who  "plays  the 
fool  "  with  the  glorious  nature  God  has  given  ;  breaks  down  its  holy  landmarks  by 
letting  loose  the  swine  and  tigers  of  his  evil  passions  into  it ;  defiles  the  temple  of 
his  body  by  vice ;  does  his  best  to  put  out  the  eyes  of  his  conscience,  and  fling  the 
dethroned  ruler  of  his  nature  into  prison  and  darkness.  Glory,  eternal  glory  and 
life,  shall  be  the  portion  of  the  former  ;  but  shame  the  promotion  (or  exaltation)  of 
the  latter  1  What  terrible  irony,  what  scathing  satire,  in  that  word  1  "  Exalted  " 
to  shame  1  "Promoted"  to  disgrace!  Advanced  in  the  ranks  of  ignominy  and 
dishonour!     (E.  Johnson,  M. A.) 

Ver.  34.  Surely  He  scometh  the  scomers. — Why  God  icomt  the  scorner  : — I.  The 
8C0ENER  AS  GoD  SEES  HIM.  God  is  described  as  spurning  the  scorner,  but  at  the 
same  time  His  love  points  out  the  right  way  to  those  who  are  anxious  to  overcome 
evil.  The  scorner  whispers  "cant"  of  all  religious  forms  and  expressions. 
II.  The  iNrLUENCE  or  the  scorner.  A  man  who  makes  religion  the  butt  of  his 
ridicule  is  very  apt  to  win  a  certain  admiration  from  the  young  and  the  weak- 
minded.  Nothing  is  easier  than  for  a  man  to  set  up  as  a  cynic.  Let  him  pick  out 
the  weak  points  in  every  one  but  himself,  let  him  see  in  every  subject  the  sugges- 
tion of  a  bad  extreme,  and  his  equipment  is  complete.  God  scorns  the  scorner 
because  he  degrades  Divine  work.  There  is  nothing  in  the  world  so  pure  but  some 
of  these  scomers  see  a  blemish  in  it.  They  see  only  the  baser  side  of  everything ; 
the  bad  something  in  every  page  of  Holy  Writ.  A  cynical  Christian  is  a  contradic- 
tion in  terms.  The  man  who  would  frustrate  his  own  side  deserves  to  be  branded 
a  failure.  The  Church  never  had  so  much  need  of  men  who  will  press  forward  in 
the  Christian  race  as  to-day.  Find  your  highest  type  of  mankind  in  whoever  tries 
to  make  the  world  better  and  to  stand  openly  for  God.  [Ahp.  A.  Mackay-Smith.) 
The  scorn  of  scorn  : — But  how  can  one  feel  a  scorn  of  scorn  without  himself  coming 
into  the  same  condemnation?  And  when  we  venture  to  say  of  God  that  He 
"  scometh  the  scomers,"  do  we  not  seem  to  charge  upon  the  Judge  the  identical 
fault  for  which  He  Himself  is  passing  sentence  upon  the  offender  ?  The  answer  to 
these  questions  lies  here.  Feelings,  like  actions,  derive  their  moral  character  to  a 
great  extent  from  circumstances.  What  is  sin  under  ordinary  circumstances  is, 
in  the  special  case  of  the  executioner,  innocence.  It  seems  to  be  a  necessary 
feature  of  the  law  of  retribution  that  like  should  be  punished  by  like  ;  so  that  this 
scorning  of  the  scorner  comes  under  the  same  head  as  the  slaying  of  the  slayer. 
And  yet  it  is  not  every  one  who  may  slay  the  slayer,  neither  is  it  every  one  who 
may  scorn  the  scorner,  but  He  blamelessly  may  who  is  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth. 
"  Surely  He  scometh  the  scorners,"  and  in  perfect  holiness  He  does  it.  I.  Out  of 
WHAT  SORT  OF  SOIL  SPRINGS  UP  THIS  WEED  OF  SCORN  ?  And  through  what  negligence 
of  ours  is  it  suffered  to  get  its  growth,  choking  the  good  seed,  and  spoiling  the  whole 
fruitage  of  the  soul  ?  One  of  the  most  frequent,  certainly  the  most  vulgar,  of  all 
the  varieties  of  scorn,  is  that  which  associates  itself  with  the  possession  of  money. 
"  Our  soul,"  exclaims  one  of  the  psalmists  sadly,  as  if  speaking  out  of  the  depths  of 
a  bitter  experience,  "  is  filled  with  the  scornful  reproof  of  the  wealthy."  Those 
words  date  from  a  far  past.  It  is  some  three  thousand  years  since  they  were 
spoken,  but  probably  they  had  as  little  of  the  air  of  novelty  about  them  then  as  they 
have  now.     It  is  an  old  truth.     But  there  is  a  sort  of  power  antecedent  even  to  the 


CHAP,  ni.]  PROVERBS.  101 

money  power,  and  perhaps  for  that  reason  I  ought  to  have  spoken  of  it  first.  I 
mean  bodily  superiority.  Among  savage  races,  where  the  struggle  for  survival  is 
plainly  seen  to  be  everything,  this  tyranny  of  the  stronger  arm  is,  of  course,  more 
noticeable  than  in  the  midst  of  people  called  civilised.  But  the  pride  of  life,  yes,  of 
downright  animal  life,  is  by  no  means  a  stranger  even  to  enlightened  society  ;  as  a 
hundred  indications  from  the  popular  worship  of  the  prize-fighter  upwards,  even  as 
far  as  the  councils  of  nations,  amply  testify.  Along  with  strength  of  limb  we  reckon 
the  advantage  which  those  who  are  engaged  in  competition  gain  from  a  firm  foot- 
hold, good  standing-ground.  Hence  it  happens  that  official  station,  high  place,  the 
holding  of  civil  or  military  authority,  has  been  known  to  engender  scornfulness. 
And  as  with  strength  and  power,  so  with  beauty.  Unsanctified  beauty  is  prover- 
bially scoi-nful.  In  ancient  times,  the  ill-made  dwarf  seems  to  have  been  given  his 
place  in  kings'  palaces  for  the  very  sake  of  heightening,  by  force  of  contrasts,  the 
shapeliness  of  those  among  whom  he  crept  and  jested.  The  fact  that  graciousness 
of  manner  is  always  thought  to  add  so  great  a  charm  to  personal  beauty  testifies  of 
itself  to  our  not  naturally  expecting  to  find  the  two  things  combined.  Imperious- 
ness  is  commonly  submitted  to  as  one  of  the  supposed  prerogatives,  or  inherent 
rights  of  beauty.  Nevertheless,  it  is  written  in  a  certain  place,  that  "  the  Lord 
hateth  a  proud  look."  A  consciousness  of  superior  knowledge,  or  knowledge 
supposed  to  be  superior,  often  carries  with  it  the  assumption  of  scorn.  Thank 
God,  the  succession  of  lowly-minded  scholars  has  never  wholly  failed  since  know- 
ledge began  to  be.  And  yet  the  affectation  of  omniscience  on  the  part  of  speakers 
and  writers  is  far  more  frequent  than  could  be  wished.  Learning  patronises 
sanctity.  Yet  again,  there  is  such  a  thing  as  spiritual  scorn.  Contempt  for  those 
held  to  be  theologically  or  ecclesiastically  below  the  mark,  a  certain  pitiless  disdain 
for  the  class  whom  St.  Paul  so  tenderly  speaks  of,  "  the  weak  in  the  faith,"  has 
too  often  found  utterance  and  illustration  in  the  history  of  the  people  of  God.  So, 
then,  these  are  the  motive  springs,  the  sources  and  the  suggestions  of  scorn.  11.  Some 
OF  THE  BEST  ACCREDITED  REMEDIES  FOR  SCORN.  Do  not  Understand  me  to  intend 
methods  of  warding  off  from  ourselves  the  scorn  of  others.  The  thing  we  really 
need  to  be  told  is  how  to  seal  up  the  fountain  of  scorn  in  our  own  hearts.  1.  One 
of  these  remedies  is  to  consider  often  and  seriously  the  Uttleness,  the  real,  the 
intrinsic  smallness  of  the  possession,  gift,  privilege,  whichever  it  may  be,  upon 
which  we  are  pluming  ourselves,  and  from  which  we  draw  the  justification  of  our 
scornful  thoughts.  Your  wealth  is  tempting  you  to  entertain  a  certain  disdain  for 
those  less  rich  than  yourself,  is  it  ?  Consider  what  your  riches  really  are.  One  of 
the  English  mystics  speaks  of  his  having  found  it  an  effectual  mode  of  disabusing 
himself  of  the  illusions  of  wealth  to  imagine  all  his  property  turned  into  some  one 
form  of  merchandise,  and  then  asking  himself.  How  am  I  the  better  or  the  happier 
for  being  the  legal  owner  of  a  hundred  thousand  pieces  of  such  or  such  a  mineral, 
or  half  a  million  boxes  or  two  million  bales  of  such  or  such  a  fabric  ?  The  device 
is  perhaps  a  clumsy  one,  for  in  real  life  wealth  seldom  or  never  locks  itself  up  in  the 
monotonous  and  unattractive  way  supposed  ;  at  least,  that  is  not  the  form  in  which 
we  see  it.  StiU  the  suggestion  has  something  of  value  in  it,  for  it  does  fasten  the 
attention  upon  the  coarse,  material  side  of  all  accumulated  riches,  and  does  remind 
ns  how  insignificant  the  thing  called  a  fortune  really  is  as  compared  with  the  earth 
and  the  fulness  thereof.  The  mighty  One  who  made  and  owns  the  world  scorneth 
the  scorners,  and  assuredly  on  this  score  of  great  possessions  He  has  a  right  to  do 
so.  So  much  for  the  littleness  of  wealth  at  its  greatest,  but  when  we  go  on  to  take 
into  account  the  transiency  of  it  as  well  as  the  littleness,  we  see  at  once  what  an 
utterly  groundless  justification  riches  furnish  for  the  exercise  of  scorn.  Once 
separated  from  your  property,  and  finding  yourself  all  alone  with  your  scorn,  how 
very,  very  poorly  off  you  will  be  1  how  very,  very  lonely  !  But  if  the  case  be  thus 
with  riches,  is  it  any  the  better  with  bodUy  strength  and  personal  beauty,  the  pride 
of  power  and  the  pride  of  intellect,  and  the  pride  of  Churchly  privilege  ?  No,  they 
are  transient  all.  If  riches  have  wings,  so  have  they.  2.  But  there  is  a  nobler, 
loftier  thought  than  this,  and  one  even  more  efficacious  as  a  protection  against  the 
growth  in  us  of  the  scornful  mood,  and  that  is  the  thought  that  all  of  these  various 
possessions  are  given  us  in  trust.  If  we  can  only  rise  to  that  conception  of  our  life 
which  acknowledges  it  to  be,  with  all  its  powers  and  talents  and  privileges  and 
opportunities,  nothing  less  than  a  weighty  trust  committed  to  us  by  Almighty  God, 
the  Maker  of  our  bodies  and  the  Father  of  our  spirits,  if  we  can  but  do  this,  we 
shall  be  guarded  alike  from  frivolity,  from  despondency,  and  from  scorn.  We 
eannot  be  frivoloas,  for  no  matter  how  swift  the  trust,  we  see  the  solemnity  of  it ;  w« 


lOf  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cBii.m, 

cannot  be  despondent,  for  the  responsibility  laid  on  as  is,  by  its  very  nature, 
prophetic  of  more  than  heart  can  wish  or  tongue  utter  ;  we  cannot  be  scornful,  for 
there  is  nothing  in  a  lent  possession  that  tends  to  foster  the  vanity  of  ownership. 
3.  But  the  best  of  all  the  antidotes  to  scorn  is  the  contemplation,  honest,  earnest, 
and  sustained,  of  the  example  of  our  Saviour  Christ.  If  superiority  of  any  kind 
whatsoever  could  confer  the  right  to  be  contemptuous,  surely  that  right  was  His. 
But  what saith  He  of  Himself,  this  King  of  kings ?  "I  am  meek,"  He  says,  " and 
lowly  in  heart."  Yes,  that  is  it;  there  lies  the  hiding  of  His  power.  There  is  no 
dash  or  touch  or  tinge  of  scorn  to  mar  the  perfect  sweetness  of  His  nature. 
Gracious  He  is,  and  clement,  reassuring  our  timidity  by  the  loving  kindness  of 
His  smile,  and  through  the  pitifulness  of  His  great  mercy  loosing  those  who  are 
tied  and  bound  by  sin.  If  our  religion  means  anything  at  all,  means  it  not  this, 
that  a  Christian's  duty  is  the  imitating  of  Christ  ?  And  are  we  imitators  of  Him, 
if  knowingly  we  go  on  letting  the  scornful  temper  rule  our  hearts  in  place  of  pity  ? 
There  is  a  hard,  unloving  mood  of  mind  into  which  people  sometimes  allow  them* 
selves  to  fall  as  a  sort  of  revenge  upon  their  own  ill  success.  Embittered  by  losses 
or  failure,  disappointed,  hurt,  they  seem  to  find  a  certain  ghastly  consolation  in 
noticing  the  like  drawbacks  in  lives  other  than  their  own.  But  this  is  not  to 
imitate  Christ.  He  lost  everything.  "  Then  they  all  forsook  Him  and  fled."  And 
yet  some  of  the  gentlest,  tenderest,  most  pitiful  of  His  sayings  are  to  be  found 
among  the  words  spoken  from  the  Cross.  In  the  family  prayers  of  the  late  Dean 
Alford,  himself  an  eminent  exemplar  of  kindliness  and  forbearance,  there  is  a 
beautiful  petition,  which,  if  granted,  would  bring  gladness  into  many  a  home  to 
which  now  it  is  a  stranger :  "  From  forgetting  or  not  caring  for  one  another's 
infirmities,"  so  the  supplication  runs,  "  good  Lord,  deliver  us."  The  forgetting 
is  the  evil  that  comes  from  want  of  thought;  the  not  caring,  the  evil  that 
comes  from  want  of  heart ;  and  how  sore  is  our  need  of  deliverance  from  both 
of  them!  (W.  R.  Huntington,  D.D.)  He  ^veth  grace  unto  the  lowly . — 
Of  humility : — Pride  and  humility  are  two  opposite  habits  or  dispositions  of 
the  mind.  There  are  two  extremes,  and  between  these  the  virtue  of  humiUty 
is  placed.  The  two  extremes  are  in  the  excess,  which  is  pride,  and  in  the 
defect,  baseness  of  mind.  Pride  ariseth  from  an  over-valuation  of  a  man's 
self,  or  a  want  of  a  due  sense  of  his  dependency  upon  Almighty  God.  1.  It 
is  a  foolish  thing  for   a  man   to   be   proud   of    the  endowments  of  his   mind. 

2.  Of  bodily  endowments.  3.  Of  things  adventitious  and  foreign.  The  other 
extreme  is  baseness  or  sordidness  of  mind,  which,  though  it  carries  the  shadow  of 
humility,  is  quite  another  thing.  True  humility  is  a  lowly  frame  and  habit  of 
spirit  arising  from  the  due  sense  of  the  glorious  excellency  of  the  Almighty  God 
and  of  our  own  frailties  and  infirmities.  It  is  in  itself  the  effect  of  a  mind  truly 
and  soundly  principled.  It  is  evidenced  by — 1.  A  most  awful  and  sincere  reverence 
of  the  great  and  glorious  God.  2.  A  most  high  and  constant  gratitude  and  thank- 
fulness of  heart  and  soul  to  Him.  3.  The  employment  of  all  that  God  has  given  us 
to  His  glory  and  service.  4.  A  constant  vigilance  and  attention  of  mind  upon  all 
our  thoughts,  words,  and  actions.  5.  A  sober  opinion  concerning  ourselves,  and 
all  we  do  and  say.  6.  A  diligent,  and  impartial,  and  frequent  consideration,  and 
examination,  and  animadversion  of,  and  upon,  our  defects  and  failings.  7.  Charit- 
able opinions  of  the  persons  of  others,  as  far  as  possibly  may  be.     I.  The  FRirrra 

AND  ADVANTAGES  AND  BENEFITS  OF  TRUE  HUMILITY  IN  RELATION  TO  AlMIGHTY  GoD. 

Two  great  advantages — 1.  He  receives  grace,  favour,  or  honour  from  God.  2.  He 
receives  direction,  guidance,  and  counsel  from  God.     H.  The  advantages  of  truh 

HUMILITY  IN  relation  TO  THE  HUMBLE  MAN  HIMSELF.       1.    Humility  kccpS    the  SOUl    io 

great  evenness  and  tranquillity.     2.  Gives  contentment  in  any  condition  or  station. 

3.  Gives  patience  under  all  adversity.  4.  Gives  great  moderation  and  sobriety  and 
vigilancy  in  the  fullest  enjoyment  of  temporal  felicity.  5.  Humility  is  an  excellent 
remedy  against  the  passion  of  fear.  III.  The  advantages  of  humility  in  relatiox 
TO  OTHEr.s.  These  are  of  two  kinds — 1.  The  advantage  the  humble  man  doth  to 
others.  2.  The  advantage  which  the  humble  man  receives  from  others  upon  the 
account  of  his  humility.  Christ  is  the  example  of  humility — (1)  Because  the 
instance  and  example  of  His  humility  was  the  most  signal  and  wonderful  of  all 
His  adiiiirablo  virtues.  (2)  Because  without  humility  to  prepare  and  mellow 
the  hearts  of  men  it  could  not  be  morally  possible  for  them  to  receive  the  faith 
of  Christ.  (3)  Because  without  humility  all  the  rest  of  those  excellent  virtues  that 
were  taught  in  the  doctrine,  and  exhibited  in  the  example  of  Christ,  had  been 
but  unacceptable.     Humility  and  lowliness  of  mind  is  the  substratum  and  ground- 


OHA».  IT.}  PROVERBS.  108 

work,  the  necesearj  ingredientg  into  all  acceptable  daties  toward  God  and  man. 
{Sir  M.  Hale.) 

Ver.  35.  The  wise  sliall  Inherit  gloiy. — Sanctified  intellect : — ^I.  Its  chaba.cteb. 
Intelligence,  mind,  reason  is  that  power  by  which  the  supremacy  of  man  over  the 
beasts  of  the  earth  is  asserted.  Whilst,  other  things  being  eqaal,  the  greatest 
minds  have  been  Christian,  the  powers  may  be  predicated  of  intellect,  irrespective 
of  the  moral  character  of  its  possessor.  But  a  great  intellect  dissociated  from 
moral  control  may  become  a  scourge  and  a  terror.  II.  The  work  of  sanctified 
nrrELLECT.  It  is  the  glory  of  God.  But  this  involves  the  good  of  man.  There  is 
no  subject  to  which  intelligence  can  devote  itself  but  may  be  made  to  minister  to 
both.  How  then  shall  we  work  ?  1.  By  prayer.  A  devotional  spirit  is  the  first 
essential  element  of  piety.  2.  By  the  press.  3.  By  the  pulpit.  III.  The  reward 
OP  SANCTIFIED  INTELLECT.  It  shall  "  Inherit  glory."  (William  Leask.)  But 
shame  shall  be  the  promotion  of  fools. — The  folly  of  the  earthly-minded  : — I,  In 
THE  CHOICE  WHICH  HE  MAKES.  1.  The  slnner  prefers  the  favour  of  man  to  the 
favour  of  God.     2.  He  prefers  the  interests  of  the  body  to  the  interests  of  the  soul. 

3.  He  prefers  temporal  pleasure  to  eternal  happiness ;  and  in  so  doing,  verily,  he 
prefers  the  rags  to  the  robes,  the  pebbles  to  the  jewels,  and  the  shadow  to  the 
substance.  II.  In  the  conduct  which  he  PtmsuES.  1.  He  rebels  against  God 
his  Maker,  refusing  to  submit  to  His  authority.  2.  The  sinner  is  going  to  an 
eternal  world,  and  makes  no  preparation  for  that  eternal  world.  3.  He  is  con- 
demned ;  a  pardon  is  freely  offered  by  the  Lord,  and  he  rejects  the  offered  pardon. 
m.  What  is  to  be  the  end  of  these  things?  "  Shame  shall  be  the  promotion 
of  fools."  This  shame  will  arise  from  several  sources.  1.  From  disappointment. 
Should  a  soldier  be  cashiered  for  cowardice,  when  he  expected  promotion  for  his 
supposed  bravery;  should  an  author  be  cried  down,  when  he  expected  great 
applause  ;  or  should  a  person  find  that  no  mention  is  made  of  him  in  a  will,  when 
he  expected  to  be  one  of  the  principal  heirs ;  in  all  such  cases  disappointment 
would  be  a  matter  of  shame.  How  much  more  when  the  sinner  wakes  up  in 
eternity,  and  finds  all  his  fond  hopes  of  heaven  blasted  for  ever  1  2.  From 
the  full  development  of  character  which  shall  then  be  made.  Some  years 
since  a  certain  man  in  one  of  our  Atlantic  cities  was  charged  with  a  very 
base  act — was  charged  with  opening  a  letter  which  had  been  put  into  the 
post-ofiQce,  and  divulging  some  family  secrets  which  that  letter  contained.  He 
denied  the  charge.  A  committee  was  appointed  to  investigate  the  charge  and 
make  a  report.  I  was  present  when  the  report  was  made.  In  the  presence  of 
some  one  or  two  hundred  citizens,  the  chairman  of  the  committee  came  forward 
and  said,  "  We  have  investigated  the  charge  alleged  against  the  gentleman,  and 
find  it  to  be  true."  I  saw  the  man  the  moment  his  character  was  thus  blasted  for 
ever.  After  one  frantic  effort  with  a  pistol  to  take  the  life  of  the  person  who  had 
thus  exposed  him,  he  dropped  his  head ;  he  could  not  bear  to  look  upon  man  or 
woman  any  more ;  and,  returning  to  his  lodgings,  he  laid  himself  down  upon  his 
bed,  and  died  of  a  broken  heart.  Shame  killed  him.  And  now,  if  the  divulging  of 
one  base  act  in  such  an  assembly  on  earth  occasioned  him  such  overwhelming, 
heartbreaking  shame,  oh !  what  intolerable  shame  must  come  upon  the  sinner  when 
every  base  act,  when  every  impure  thought,  when  every  unlawful  deed  shall  be 
revealed  before  God  and  angels  and  men  !    3.  From  the  manifestation  of  his  folly. 

4.  From  the  company  with  which  he  wiU  be  obliged  to  associate.    (D.  Baker,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Veb.  1.  The  instruction  of  a  father. — A  religious  home  : — I.  Thb  love  or  a. 
religious  home.  Two  kinds  of  love  for  the  offspring.  1.  The  natural  love. 
2.  The  spiritual  love,  which  has  respect  to  the  spiritual  being,  relations,  and 
interests  of  the  children.  II.  The  training  of  a  religious  home.  1.  The  parent's 
teaching  is  worth  retaining.  2.  The  parent's  teaching  is  practical.  3.  The 
parent's  teaching  is  quickening  to  all  the  powers,  intellectual  and  moral.  IH.  The 
iNTiiUBNCE  of  A  RELIGIOUS  HOME.  1.  The  susceptibllity  of  childhood.  2.  The 
force   of  parental  affection.      Religious  homes  are  the  great  want  of  the  race. 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

{David  Thomas,  D.D.)  Paternal  exhortation : — Doctrine  and  law  form  the  staple 
of  this  appeal.  By  •*  law  "  understand  "  direction,"  for  life  is  an  ever-bisectmg 
course,  and  full  of  points  that  must  bewilder  inexperienced  travellers.  Do  not 
venture  upon  great  sea  voyages  without  proper  instruments  and  without  being 
taught  how  to  use  them.  So  in  life.  Be  enriched  with  doctrine  or  wisdom,  and 
cultivate  that  tender  filial  spirit  which  gratefully  yields  itself  to  direction.  It  is  at 
once  wise  and  lovely  for  youth  to  consult  the  aged,  and  to  avail  themselves  of 
accumulated  experience.  Any  other  spirit  is  vain,  self-conceited,  frivolous,  and 
unworthy.  Why  should  the  father  be  anxious  to  instruct  and  direct  the  son? 
Because  he  has  seen  more  of  Ufe,  more  of  its  mystery,  its  peril,  its  tragedy  ;  there- 
fore his  heart  yearns  to  preserve  the  young  from  danger.  The  father's  position  is 
one  of  moral  dignity  and  supreme  benevolence.  Having  suffered  himself,  he  would 
Bave  his  children  from  pain.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Attend  to  know  understanding. — 
Knoioing  understanding : — I.  Young  men  have  need  often  to  be  called  upon  to 
GET   tbue  knowledge.      1.   Becausc  of   their   own  backwardness  to    the  work. 

2.  The  impediments  and  diversions  from  attaining  true  wisdom.  3.  There  are 
many  things  to  be  believed,  beyond  the  power  of  corrupted  reason  to  find  out. 
4.  There  are  many  practical  things  to  be  learned,  else  they  can  never  be  done. 
6.  There  are  many  faculties  of  the  soul  to  be  reformed.  6.  There  are  many  senses 
and  members  of  the  body  to  be  directed  to  many  particular  actions,  and  each  to  its 
own.  Uses :  1.  To  blame  young  men  that  think  their  parents  and  teachers  over- 
diligent.     2.  To  urge  children  to  attend  to  their  parents  instructing  them  in  piety. 

3.  To  persuade  parents  and  teachers  not  only  to  instruct,  but  also  to  incite  to 
attention.  II.  Every  young  man  has  need  to  be  called  on  to  look  after  true 
knowledge.  1.  Because  there  is  no  disposition  to  this  wisdom  in  the  best  by 
nature.  2.  There  is  much  averseness,  because  the  principles  of  faith  are  above 
nature,  and  of  practice  against  nature.   {Franci*  Taylor,  B.D.)        The  invitation : — 

I.  Let  our  own  children  receive  instructions.     This  charity  must  begin  at  home. 

II.  Let  all  young  people  take  pains  to  get  knowledge  and  grace.  They  are  in 
the  learning  stage.  III.  Let  all  who  would  receive  instruction  come  with  the 
disposition  op  children.  Let  prejudices  be  laid  aside.  Let  them  be  dutiful, 
tractable,  and  self-diflSdent.     {Matthew  Henry.) 

Vers.  3, 4.  For  I  was  my  father's  son,  tender  and  only  beloved  in  the  sight  of  my 
mother. — The  religious  education  of  Solomon  : — Solomon  in  these  words  gives  us 
two  pieces  of  his  own  private  history,  in  order  to  account  for  the  zeal  he  shows  in 
this  book  for  the  welfare  of  the  rising  generation.  The  first  is,  that  in  early  life  he 
had  a  large  share  in  the  affections  of  his  parents  ;  and  the  second,  that  he  received 
the  first  rudiments  of  that  wisdom,  for  which  he  became  afterwards  so  eminent, 
from  their  early  instructions.  The  affection  of  his  father  David  did  not,  by 
excessive  indulgence,  stand  in  the  way  of  his  education,  as  does  the  ill-regulated 
affection  of  many  foolish  parents,  who  cannot  cross  the  inchnation  of  their  children, 
nor  employ  the  authority  to  compel  the  attention  of  their  light  and  unstable  minds 
to  what  is  for  their  lasting  benefit.  His  mother,  Bathsheba,  took  her  share  with  her 
husband,  David,  in  the  delightful  task  of  instructing  young  Solomon  in  the  things 
of  God.  Of  this  Solomon  says  nothing  in  the  text.  Though  he  speaks  of  the 
affection  of  both  his  parents,  he  mentions  only  his  father's  care  of  his  education. 
But  in  another  passage  of  this  book  we  find  him  referring  to  his  mother's  in- 
structions, and  styling  them  "  the  prophecy  which  his  mother  taught  him."  Audit 
gives  us  a  most  comfortable  proof  of  the  genuine  piety  of  both  David  and  Bathsheba, 
and  of  the  sincerity  of  their  repentance  for  their  grievous  sin  which  they  had  com- 
mitted. I.  What  kind  of  education  did  Solomon's  parents  give  him  when  he 
WAS  young  ?  We  cannot  entertain  a  doubt  that  David  would  give  his  favourite  son, 
to  whom  he  looked  as  his  successor  on  the  throne,  the  best  education  which  Israel, 
in  his  time,  could  afford.  A  man  of  talent  and  information  himself,  and  possessed 
of  the  amplest  means,  he  would  certainly  grudge  no  labour  or  expense  to  make  him 
acquainted  with  whatever  could  serve  to  fit  him  for  his  future  station  in  life.  The 
schools  of  the  prophets  were  for  the  instruction  of  the  youth  of  Israel.  Whatever 
value  we  may  attach  to  other  branches  of  education,  and  however  important  and 
useful  instruction  in  those  arts  and  sciences  which  serve  the  purposes  of  this  present 
life  may  be  supposed  to  be,  the  knowledge  of  the  principles  of  religion  is  un- 
questionably far  more  valuable,  important,  and  useful.  For  as  the  soul  is  more 
valuable  than  the  body,  and  eternity  than  time,  so  the  knowledge  which  fits  us  for 
spending  life  as  becomes  rational,  immortal,  and  accountable  creatures,  and  which. 


CHAP,  nr.]  PROVERBS.  105 

through  the  blessing  of  God,  may  train  us  up  for  spending  eternity  in  happiness  and 
joy,  must  be  inconceivably  more  valuable  than  what  refers  merely  to  this  present 
vain  and  transitory  world.  We  cannot,  indeed,  insure  that  our  children,  however 
carefully  instructed  in  the  fear  of  God,  will  profit  by  our  care  so  as  to  serve  God  in 
their  generation ;  but  early  instruction  is  the  probable  means  of  their  future  and 
eternal  benefit — a  means  which  God  has  enjoined  parents  to  use,  and  which  He  has 
promised  in  ordinary  cases  to  bless.  Let  the  means  be  conscientiously  employed, 
and  let  the  fear  that  all  may  be  unavailing  rather  excite  to  greater  diligence  than 
repress  exertion,  and  to  earnestness  for  the  Divine  blessing  on  the  means  of  Divine 
appointment.  II.  In  what  manner  did  they  conduct  the  business  of  his  religious 
EDUCATION?  1.  They  did  not  confide  it  entirely  to  others.  There  were  good  men 
about  David's  court,  some  of  whom  probably  had  a  particular  charge  of  Solomon's 
education,  and  in  whom,  as  being  prophets  of  God,  David  might  have  reposed  the 
most  entire  confidence  for  ability  and  fidelity.  But  Solomon's  parents  do  not  seem 
to  have  considered  this  as  exempting  them  from  the  obligation  of  the  law  of  God  to 
watch  over  their  young  charge  themselves.  They  wished  to  see  with  their  own 
eyes,  and  to  hear  with  their  own  ears,  the  progress  that  he  made,  and  to  add  their 
own  diligence  to  that  of  his  teachers,  in  order  to  promote  his  spiritual  benefit.  A 
king  and  queen  taking  so  much  pains  for  the  religious  instruction  of  their  son  is  a 
pleasant  sight,  and  must  certainly  silence  and  shame  multitudes  of  persons  in 
private  life,  who  either  neglect  this  duty  altogether,  or  satisfy  themselves  entirely 
with  the  diligence  of  others,  to  whose  care  they  entrust  it.  You  have  no  time,  you 
say.  But  will  you  not  find  time  to  die  ?  and  why  should  you  so  involve  yourselves 
in  the  affairs  of  the  world  as  not  to  have  time  for  doing  those  things  which  are 
necessary  for  your  dying  well  ?  If  you  have  little  leisure  on  working  days,  aa 
perhaps  many  of  you  have,  what  deprives  you  of  time  on  the  first  day  of  the  week  ? 
2.  They  adapted  their  instructions  to  his  years.  If  we  wish  to  be  useful  to  the 
young  our  language  must  be  plain  and  familiar ;  we  must  address  ourselves  to  the 
imagination  even  more  than  to  the  judgment,  must  confine  ourselves  chiefly  to  first 
principles,  and  frequently  repeat  the  same  instructions,  that  they  may  take  the 
firmer  hold  on  the  memory.  3.  They  instructed  him  in  the  most  affectionate,  serious, 
and  winning  manner.  They  showed  by  their  manner  that  they  felt  the  importance 
of  the  instructions  they  gave  him,  and  that  in  the  pains  they  took  they  were 
prompted  by  the  sincerest  love.  Perhaps  it  is  owing  in  some  degree  to  a  harshness 
and  ungraciousness  of  manner  employed  by  some  pious  parents,  that  so  little 
advantage  is  gained  by  their  children,  from  all  the  anxious  pains  taken  on  them  ; 
and  perhaps,  in  other  instances,  to  a  want  of  due  seriousness  of  manner  when 
instruction  is  given.     III.  The  motives  bt  which  they  were  induced  to  devote 

THEIR    attention   TO    THE   RELIGIOUS   EDUCATION    OF   THEIR   SON.       1.    The    Warmth    of 

their  affection  for  their  son.  Did  the  affection  of  his  pious  and  penitent  parents, 
think  you,  expend  itself  in  the  endearments  of  parental  fondness  ?  in  endeavours 
to  gratify  the  passions  of  their  darling  child,  and  to  anticipate,  were  it  possible, 
every  foolish  and  preposterous  wish  of  his  heart  ?  Was  it  the  only  effect  of  it  that 
they  spoiled  his  temper  by  indulgence,  and  neglected  his  education  by  their  aver- 
sion to  cross  his  humour  or  subject  him  to  necessary  restraint  ?  Such  is  the  effect 
of  the  foolish  fondness  of  many  parents  ;  they  do  their  children  the  greatest  injury 
by  the  injudicious  manner  in  which  they  show  their  regard;  they  "  doat  too 
much,"  as  saith  the  poet,  "  and  spoil  what  they  admire."  Not  so  the  parents  of 
Solomon.  Love  to  their  son  excited  them  to  labour  for  his  welfare.  And  what 
does  a  good  man  or  woman  consider  as  best  for  their  children  ?  Doubtless  what 
they  consider  as  best  for  themselves — the  knowledge  of  God,  the  fear  of  God,  the 
enjoyment  of  God.  When  parents  neglect  the  religious  education  of  their  children, 
I  can  account  for  their  negligence  only  in  one  of  two  ways — either  they  do  not 
really  love  their  children,  or  they  do  not  themselves  believe  the  truth  and  necessity 
of  religion.  The  first  I  am  reluctant  to  admit  ;  for  bad  as  the  world  is,  the 
instances  of  parents  who  do  not  love  their  children  are  few,  and  natural  affection 
shows  itself,  not  unfrequently,  very  strong  in  the  conduct  of  the  most  abandoned 
of  men.  To  be  "  without  natural  affection  "  is  to  be  worse  even  than  the  brutes.  I 
will  not  say,  then,  that  those  parents  who  do  not  educate  their  children  in  the  fear 
of  God  are  destitute  of  natural  affection  :  the  truth  is,  that  they  do  not  really 
believe  the  religion  which  they  profess ;  for  did  they  believe  it,  they  love  their 
children  so  well  that  they  would  use  every  conceivable  means  within  their  power 
to  make  them  acquainted  with  it,  and  so  put  them  in  possession  of  its  inestimable 
advantages.     Did  you  believe  the  gospel  yourselves,  you  could  not  indolently  look 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

on  and  see  your  beloved  children  perish.  You  would  "  travail  in  birth  till  Christ 
were  formed  in  their  hearts."  You  would,  like  the  parents  of  Solomon,  teach  your 
children,  while  they  are  yet  young,  "  the  things  which  belong  to  their  peace." 
2.  The  example  of  their  godly  ancestors  excited  them  to  educate  their  child  in  the 
fear  of  God.  And  why  should  not  we  also  follow  the  commendable  practices  of  our 
godly  forefathers  ?  We  are  sufficiently  prone  to  follow  customs  which  we  have 
"received  by  tradition  from  our  fathers,"  which, perhaps,  can  scarcely  be  justified; 
and  must  it  not  much  more  be  our  wisdom  and  honour  to  imitate  them  in  what  ia 
so  praiseworthy  ?  What  evidence  do  we  give  that  we  belong  to  the  family  of  God, 
if  the  customs  and  manners  of  the  family  are  not  adopted  by  us — if,  instead  of 
"  bringing  up  our  children  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord,"  that  they 
may  be  "  a  seed  which  shall  serve  Him,  that  shall  be  accounted  to  the  Lord  for  a 
generation,"  we  shall  suffer  them  to  continue  ignorant  of  the  first  principles  of 
religion,  and  a  ready  prey  to  every  temptation  ?  3.  The  positive  injunction  of  the 
law  of  God,  though  last  mentioned,  must  have  been  first  in  its  force  on  the  con- 
science of  Solomon's  parents,  exciting  them  to  see  to  his  religious  education.  And 
this  law  is  still  obligatory.  It  is  not  one  of  those  things  peculiar  to  the  old 
dispensation,  which  have  passed  away,  but  part  of  that  law  by  which  we  are 
bound,  under  the  dispensation  of  the  gospel.  Our  obligation  to  attend  to  the 
religious  education  of  our  offspring  is  inseparable  from  our  relation  to  them  as  our 
children.  When  God  gives  a  person  the  blessing  of  children.  He  unites  duty  with 
privilege,  the  duty  of  educating  them  for  God  with  the  privilege  of  enjoying  them 
as  His  gift.  IV.  The  use  which  Solomon  made  or  his  parents'  instructions. 
Here  I  can  only  remark,  in  general,  that  it  appears,  from  the  text,  that  he  had  pro- 
fited by  them.  His  parents,  who  had  instructed  him  with  such  pious  care  in  hia 
youth,  at  least  his  father  David,  were  many  years  dead  before  he  wrote  this  book  ; 
but  we  find  that,  at  the  time  he  wrote  it,  they  still  lived  in  his  affectionate  remem- 
brance of  them  and  their  pious  care  ;  and,  in  token  of  this,  he  quotes  some  of  their 
early  instructions,  and,  in  imitation  of  them,  enforces  on  his  son  attention  to  the 
same  duties.  And  good  reason  had  he  to  cherish  a  grateful  recollection  of  them ; 
for,  in  thus  training  him,  they  had  done  him  the  greatest  kindness — a  kindness 
for  which  he  could  never  repay  them,  and  which  it  would  have  been  the  highest 
ingratitude  if  he  should  ever  have  forgotten.  {James  Peddle,  D.D.)  Let  thine 
lieart  retain  my  words. — Education :  the  child's  thought  of  the  parent : — This 
chapter  begins  with  a  charming  little  piece  of  autobiography.  The  grateful 
memories  of  a  father's  teaching  and  of  a  mother's  tenderness  give  point  and 
iorce  to  the  exhortations.  I.  The  importance  of  early  impressions.  It  is  almost 
impossible  to  exaggerate  the  permanent  effects  of  those  first  tendencies  impressed 
on  the  soul  before  the  intellect  is  developed,  and  while  the  soft,  plastic  nature  of 
the  child  is  not  yet  determined  in  any  particular  direction.  We  learn  to  love,  not 
because  we  are  taught  to  love,  but  by  some  contagious  influence  of  example,  or  by 
some  indescribable  attraction  of  beauty.  Our  first  love  to  religion  is  won  from  us  by 
living  with  those  that  love  her.  The  affections  are  elicited,  and  often  permanently 
fixed,  before  the  understanding  has  come  into  play.  The  first  thing  is  to  give  our 
children  an  atmosphere  to  grow  up  in  ;  to  cultivate  their  affections,  and  set  their 
hearts  on  things  eternal ;  to  make  them  associate  the  ideas  of  wealth  and 
honour,  of  beauty  and  glory,  not  with  material  possessions,  but  with  the  treasures 
and  rewards  of  wisdom.  II.  What  is  to  be  the  definite  teaching  of  the  child  ? 
The  first  object  in  the  home  life  is  to  enable  children  to  realise  what  salvation  is,  as 
an  inward  state,  resulting  from  a  spiritual  change.  We  are  tempted  in  deahng 
with  children  to  train  them  only  in  outward  habits,  and  to  forget  the  inward  sources 
which  are  always  gathering  and  forming  ;  hence  we  often  teach  them  to  avoid  the 
lie  on  the  tongue,  and  yet  we  leave  them  with  the  lies  in  the  soul,  the  deep  inward 
nnveracities  which  are  their  ruin.  We  bring  them  up  as  respectable  and  decorous 
members  of  society,  and  yet  leave  them  a  prey  to  secret  sins  ;  they  are  tormented 
by  covetousness,  which  is  idolatry,  by  impurity,  and  by  all  kinds  of  envious  and 
malignant  passions.  The  second  thing  to  be  explained  and  enforced  is  singleness 
of  heart,  directness  and  consistency  of  aim,  by  which  alone  the  inward  life  can  be 
shaped  to  virtuous  ends.  The  right  life  is  a  steady  progress  undiverted  by  the 
alluring  sights  and  sounds  which  appeal  to  the  senses.  Here,  in  the  passage,  is  a 
great  contrast  between  those  whose  early  training  has  been  vicious  or  neglected, 
and  those  who  have  been  "  taught  in  the  way  of  wisdom,  led  in  paths  of  upright- 
ness." It  is  a  contrast  which  should  constantly  be  present  to  the  eyes  of  parents 
with  a  warning  and  an  encouragement.     {R.  F.  Horton,  D.D.) 


CHAP.  IT.]  PROVERBS.  107 

Ver.  7.  Wisdom  is  the  principal  tiling^. — The  principal  thing : — I.  If  we  consides 
han's  spiritual  state  in  the  sight  of  God.  II.  If  we  consideb  man's  pbesent 
HAPPINESS.  The  true  happiness  of  man  has  its  foundation  in  wisdom.  I  go  on 
the  supposition  of  Christ  that  a  "  man's  life  consisteth  not  in  the  abundance  of  the 
things  he  possesseth."  Happiness  depends  on  the  state  of  the  mind.  It  is  religion 
only  which  enlightens  the  understanding,  which  influences  the  heart,  and  which 
brings  into  the  favour  of  high  heaven.  Man  cannot  be  happy,  because  he  is  subject 
to  passions  and  tempers  which  perplex  and  disturb  him.  1.  Eeligion  brings  U3 
into  a  state  of  mind  which  is  calculated  to  make  us  happy.  2.  It  gives  a  blessing 
to  all  around,  and  inspires  contentment  in  every  state.  III.  If  we  consider  the 
IMPERISHABLE  NATURE  OF  THIS  BLESSING.  Truc  rcHgion  accompauics  us  in  life ;  it 
lives  with  us  in  death ;   it  goes  with  us  into  eternity.     IV.  If  we  consider  its 

SOVEREIGN    AND    PECULIAR    INFLUENCE    IN    IMPROVING    THE   WORLD.       This    trUC    wisdom 

shall  one  day  produce  such  a  change  that  heaven  shall  come  down  to  earth  and 
dwell  among  men.  (J.  Stewart.)  The  *'  summum  bonum  "  ; — A  modern  author 
says  the  "  chief  good  must  unite  the  following  qualities  :  It  must  be  intellectual, 
or  adapted  to  the  higher  and  nobler  part  of  our  nature ;  attainable  by  all,  of  what- 
ever sex,  age,  or  mental  conformation  ;  unimpaired  by  distribution  ;  independent 
of  the  circumstances  of  time  or  place  ;  incapable  of  participation  to  excess  ;  com- 
posed essentially  of  the  same  elements  as  the  good  to  be  enjoyed  in  a  future  state." 
I.  "SuMMUM  bonum"  DESCRIBED.  1.  Cousists  in  the  possession  of  the  highest  know- 
ledge. 2.  In  the  application  of  the  highest  knowledge.  II.  "Summum  bonum" 
SOUGHT.  1.  Attentively.  2.  Constantly.  3.  Lovingly.  4.  Supremely.  III.  "  Sum- 
mum  bonum  "  ENJOYED.     It  will  be  three  things  to  us.     1.  A  guardian.    2.  A  patron. 

3.  A  rewarder.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  principal  thing  : — I.  What  this  wisdom 
IS.  Sometimes  the  word  refers  to  our  blessed  Lord  Himself.  It  also  means  that 
religion  of  which  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  sum  and  substance.  1.  He  is  a 
wise  man  who  knows  himself.  Till  a  man  knows  God  he  knows  not  himself.  God 
is,  in  that  sense,  a  glass,  in  which  a  man  sees  himself,  and  the  nearer  he  comes  to 
that  glass  the  more  he  discerns  himself.  A  man  knows  himself  when,  as  a  law- 
condemned  sinner,  as  a  sin-condemned  sinner,  and  as  a  self -condemned  sinner,  he 
stands  before  the  eye  of  God.  Then  there  is  self -acquaintance — not  till  then.  He 
now  reads  the  hardest  book  in  the  world.  There  is  no  book  so  hard  as  the  book  of 
a  man's  own  heart.  2.  He  is  a  wise  man  who  draws  near  to  God  in  Christ.  He 
is  a  wise  man  who,  under  a  sentence  of  condemnation  as  in  himself  deserved,  can 
in  Christ  know  how  to  meet  the  holy  Lord  God  with  humble  confidence.  3.  He  is 
a  wise  man  who,  in  the  midst  of  the  crookedness  of  this  world,  is  led  to  walk 
straightly  with  God.  4.  He  is  a  wise  man  who  knows  how  to  meet  the  trials  of 
life.  II.  Why  is  this  wisdom  called  the  principal  thing  ?  That  is  the  principal 
thing  which  is  the  only  abiding  thing.  True  wisdom,  like  its  source,  is  perennial, 
unchanging,  everlasting.  And  it  is  the  only  satisfying  thing.  It  comes  from  God ; 
it  leads  to  God.  It  comes  from  above ;  it  leads  to  above.  It  is  a  principle  of 
immortality,  and  it  trains  the  soul  and  educates  it  for  immortality.  III.  The 
EXHORTATION,  "  Get  WISDOM."  Get  it )  then  it  is  to  be  got.  It  is  to  be  got  in  the 
way  of  seeking.     For  a  man  to  feel  his  lack  of  wisdom  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom. 

1.  Do  not  mistake  a  counterfeit  for  wisdom.  2.  Avoid  first  declensions.  3.  Make 
a  conscience  of  secret  prayer.  4.  Avoid  dangerous  associations.  5.  Take  heed  a3 
to  your  books.  6.  Study  to  show  religion  at  home  as  well  as  abroad.  7.  Live 
upon  Christ.  As  your  soul  is  under  the  constraint  of  His  love  it  weakens  the  world, 
it  makes  sin  hateful,  it  raises  above  self,  it  purifies  the  motives,  and  brings  a  man 
to  walk  nearly,  closely  with  God.  {J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.)  Divine  wisdom  .-—Divine 
wisdom  only  deserves  the  name  of  wisdom.  1.  Because  it  converseth  in  the 
highest  things.  2.  Because  it  seeks  to  approve  itself  to  God.  3.  Because  it  is 
both  the  mother  and  guide,  or  chariot-driver,  of  all  virtue,  and  guides  it  aright. 

4.  It  is  the  greatest  gift  God  ever  gave  man,  for  it  directs  him  to  Jesus  Christ,  the 
wisdom  of  the  Father,  without  whom  is  no  salvation,  and  therefore  no  true  nor 
lasting  gain  by  any  other  wisdom.  Use  :  To  reprove  such  as  boast  much  of  human 
sciences,  but  make  no  account  of  heavenly  wisdom.  (Francis  Taylor,  B.D.) 
Grace  is  ivisdom,  and  wisdom  is  the  principal  thing : — I.  The  commendation  op 
WISDOM.  By  wisdom  is  meant  Christ  the  Wisdom  of  God ;  and  grace,  which  is 
the  only  wisdom  in  a  man.  This  can  be  shown  in  two  ways.  1.  The  Lord  counta 
nothing  wisdom  but  godliness,  and   this  He   doth  everywhere   style  "  wisdom." 

2.  In  God's  account  all  things  are  folly  without  grace.  The  heathen  were  the 
greatest  artists  and  philosophers  of  the  world,  those  that  most  inquired  into  the 


108  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.it. 

secrets  of  nature,  as  in  Athens  and  Corinth,  which  were  universities  and  places  far 
more  famous  than  any  other  for  knowledge,  tongues,  and  all  abilities.     Take  the 
greatest  statist  and  politician  in  the  world,  which  hath  also  a  great  show  and  name 
for  wisdom.     Let  him  be  without  a  principle  of  grace,  and  his  own  policies  will 
prove  his  own  snare.     Take  the  greatest  men  in  the  world,  and  they  are  wise  in 
their  own  conceits,  yet  is  their   life   a   vanity.      Wisdom    acts    by   the    highest 
principles.     According  to  a  man's  principles  are  the  rules  of  his  actions.     These 
are  some  of  the  high  and  excellent  principles  that   godliness  lays   in  the  soul, 
(a)  That  the  chief  beauty  of  the  creature  is  holiness,     (b)  The  happiness  of  the 
creature  consists  in  communion  with  God.     (c)  Sin  is  the  greatest  evil  in  the  world. 
(d)  It  is  better  to  sufifer  than  to  sin.     (e)  Things  seen  are  but  temporal.     II.  An 
EXHORTATION  TO  GET  THIS  WISDOM.     1.  The  cxcellency  of  grace  lies  in  a  conformity 
unto  God.     2.  From  this  conformity  there  ariseth  a  communion.     3.  Grace  fits  a 
man  for  the  service  of  God.     4.  Grace  turns  all  that  a  godly  man  enjoyeth  into  a 
blessing.     5.  Grace  fills  the  soul  with   all   spiritual  excellences.     6.  Grace  will 
preserve  a  man  from  all  evil.     (William  Strong.)         The  principal  thing  : — Wealth, 
power,  ease,  pleasure,  intellectual  greatness  are  thought  by  different  persons  to  be 
the  principal  thing.     God  says,  "  Wisdom  is  the  principal  thing."    I.  In  what 
DOES  TRUE  RELIGION  CONSIST  ?     It  embraces  three  things — regeneration,  justification, 
and  sanctification  ;  and  secures  a  fourth — glorification.    Eegeneration  is  a  change 
of  heart ;  justification  a  change  of  state ;  sanctification  a  change  of  character ; 
glorification  is  the  union  and  consummation  of  all  other  changes.     II.  Why  is 
TRUE  RELIGION  THE  PRINCIPAL  THING?     1.  Becausc  it  more  exalts  our  nature  and 
character  than  anything  else  can  possibly  do.     2.  It  puts  man  in  possession  of 
more  solid  and  lasting  enjoyment  than  anything  else  possibly  can.     3.  It  provides 
for  the  whole  scope  of  man's  being,  for  soul  and  body,  for  time  and  eternity,  for 
earth  and  heaven.     III.  The  applications  of  the  subject.     Get  true  religion — by 
forsaking  everything  previously  sought  as  the  principal  thing  ;  by  repenting  of  the 
past,  by  coming  to  Christ  in  faith  and  prayer,  by  seeking  the  aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit ; 
by  imbuing  the  mind  with  gospel  truths,  submitting  to  its  doctrines  and  precepts, 
and  conforming  the  character  to  all  its  requirements.     How  great  the  happiness  of 
those  who  have  true  religion  !     (Essex  Remembrancer.)        Religion  is  wisdom : — 
Mankind  is  constantly  in  search  after  happiness ;  they  seek  it  in  various  ways  of 
their  own  contrivance.     I.  True  religion  is  the  soundest  wisdom.     Keal  religion, 
when  it  takes  possession  of  the  human  bosom,  always  produces  in  its  possessor  a 
true  concern  for  his  everlasting  salvation.   II.  This  wisdom  is  the  "  principal  thing," 
AND  THEREFORE  WORTHY  OF  OUR  EARNEST  PURSUIT.     If  a  man  consult  his  owu  Safety 
and  happiness  he  will  seek  it  in  religion.     Our  safety  and  security  are  only  in  God. 
Religion  opens  to  us  enjoyments  not  to  be  found  elsewhere.     Religion  adds  to 
every  man's    relative   usefulness.      Only    that    usefulness    which    springs    from 
religious  principles  will  be  lasting.     Religion  will  be  found  to  be  "  the  principal 
thing"  at  the  hour  of  death  and  at  the  day  of  judgment.     (George  Clayton.) 
Religion  man's  only  wisdom : — I.  The  object  that  is  set  before  us.     We  are  to 
pursue  "  wisdom  "  and  "  understanding."     These  words  relate  to  that  state  of  the 
human  mind,  when  it  is  brought  to  apprehend  Divine  truths,  and  to  apply  those 
truths  to  the  course  of  human  action.     A  wise  man  is  one  who  has  gained,  and 
who  has  taken  home  to  his  heart,  the  knowledge  essential  to  the  right  guidance  of 
his  steps  towards  heaven.     A  man  of  understanding  is  one  whose  mind  has  been 
enlightened  to  a  clear  perception  of  right  and  wrong,  and  who  has  within  him 
those  just  and  holy  principles  of  the  law  of  God  which  lead  him  to  pursue  the  good 
and  to  avoid  the  evil.     The  object  pointed  out  to  you  is,  the  application  of  the 
science  of  religion  to  man  in  his  present  state,  leading  him  to  the  discharge  of 
duties  which  he  owes  to  God,  himself,  and   his    fellow-creatures.     There  is  no 
motive  like  a  religious  motive  to  insure  the  performance  of  a  right  action.     There 
is  no  law  equal  to  the  law  of  God  as  a  guide  to  what  is  good,  and  a  check  to  what 
is  evil.     When  this  law  reaches  the  heart,  and  becomes  the  governing  principle  of 
a  man's  conduct,  it  produces  effects  which  you  will  look  for  in  vain  from  the 
purest  precepts  of  mere  morality.     Knowledge  enlightens  a  man,  and  so  great  is 
its  influence  in  this  way,  that  many  at  the  present  day  are  actually  making  it  the 
object  of  idolatry.     We  must  not  mistake  the  character  of  knowledge,  or  overrate 
her  influence.     She  does  much  for  a  nation  to  civilise  and  polish  it,  but  she  does 
not  teach  us  our  duty  to  God,  nor  lead  us  to  practise  it.     What  is  human  know- 
ledge compared  with  the  knowledge  of  religion  ?    Our  main  object  through  life 
ehoald  be  to  acquaint  ourselves  with  the  things  of  God,  and  to  gain  for  oar  minda 


OHAF.it.]  proverbs.  100 

that  Divine  illumination  that  shall  enable  ns  to  pass  in  safety  through  the  varied 
temptations  of  the  present  world,  and  to  reach  the  happiness  of  the  next.  II.  Tna 
SUPBEME  IMPORTANCE  OF  THIS  HEAVENLT  WISDOM.  The  hearts  of  the  fallen  race  of 
Adam  are  naturally  fond  of  sensible  objects.  We  are  like  little  children,  pleased 
with  trifles  ;  baubles  amuse  us ;  when,  as  beings  destined  for  eternity,  we  ought  to 
be  contemplating  heaven's  august  realities.  What  have  the  men  who  have  been 
most  given  to  the  things  of  the  world  gained  even  here  by  this  earthliness? 
Surely,  nothing  that  deserves  the  name  of  satisfaction.  The  possession  of  religion 
more  than  makes  amends  for  whatever  losses,  or  trials,  or  anxieties,  we  may 
experience  in  obtaining  it.  Religion  is  so  incalculably  important  that  we  cannot 
estimate  its  value.     It  is  "  profitable  unto  all  things."    III.  The  diligence  with 

WHICH  WE  SHOULD    APPLY    OUESELVES    TO    THE    ATTAINMENT    OP    IT.       [William  Curlifig, 

M.A.)  The  worth  of  wisdom: — I.  Its  sacred  nature.  Even  in  the  ordinary 
concerns  of  life  we  feel  the  difference  between  knowledge  and  wisdom.  Wisdom 
is  not  limited  to  prudence  in  relation  to  the  ordinary  concerns  of  this  life.  Nor 
does  it  consist  in  science,  however  exalted  its  flight ;  nor  in  philosophy,  however 
ennobling  the  vantage-ground  on  which  it  stands.  Wisdom  is  the  fear  of  God,  the 
knowledge  of  God,  the  love  of  God,  a  right  state  of  heart  before  God,  The  wisdom 
proper  for  man  as  a  fallen  being  concerns  the  questions  how  he  may  obtain  the 
favour  of  God,  escape  the  punishment  due  to  sin,  obtain  glory,  honour,  and 
immortality.  Wisdom  is  connected  with  salvation.  II.  Its  supreme  importance. 
1.  Its  superiority  above  all  other  objects  to  which  you  can  possibly  direct  your  atten- 
tion. Pleasure  is  a  great  attraction  to  the  youthful  mind,  but  happiness  is  often 
sought  where  it  is  not  to  be  found.  That  alone  deserves  the  name  of  happiness 
which  will  bear  reflection.  Wisdom,  thought  of  as  religion,  is  superior  to  fame,  or 
wealth,  or  knowledge.  2.  Its  beneficial  effects  should  be  considered.  Observe  the 
character  thus  formed  ;  its  influence  on  conduct  and  practice,  and  its  relation  to 
the  future.  III.  The  Scriptural  method  or  obtaining  true  wisdom.  1.  There 
must  be  a  deep  conviction  of  the  necessity  of  this  wisdom.  2.  A  diligent  study  of 
God's  Word.  3.  Fervent  and  habitual  prayer.  4.  A  believing  application  to  Jesua 
Christ.  5.  Habitual  retirement  for  meditation.  6.  Practical  carrying  out  of  good 
principles  in  all  the  relations  of  life.  (J.  Fletcher,  M.A.)  Therefore  get 
wisdom  : — The  desire  of  knowledge  is  common  to  all  human  kind.  AU  knowledge 
is  worth  the  having,  but  far  more  desirable,  and  infinitely  above  all,  is  the  know- 
ledge of  spiritual  things.  To  this  is  given  the  name  Wisdom.  I.  It  is  possible 
TO  GET  wisdom.  We  are  living  in  an  age  of  weak  convictions,  of  guesses  as  dis- 
tinguished from  beliefs,  of  opinions  rather  than  established  views.  The  most 
popular  phase  of  thought  in  these  times  is  known  as  Agnosticism.  The  original 
agnostic  was  Pyrrho  of  Elis.  He  was  the  universal  sceptic,  whose  philosophy  wa3 
merely  an  interrogation  point.  But  it  is  possible  to  know  respecting  spiritual 
things.  We  have  the  faculty  wherewith  to  apprehend  them.  This  faculty  or 
spiritual  sense  is  the  link  binding  us  to  God.  We  have  it  as  a  Divine  inheritance ; 
it  belongs  to  us  by  reason  of  our  Divine  birth.  We  are  environed  by  spiritual 
facts.     I  do  not  say  that  we  can  exhaust  all  or  any  spiritual  truth.     11.  It  is  our 

MAGNIFICENT  PRIVILEGE  AND  PREROGATIVE  TO  INFORM  OURSELVES  CONCERNING  SPIRITUAL 

things.  We  are  Divine  and  immortal.  In  reaching  out  for  spiritual  truth  we 
give  distinct  evidence  of  our  descent  from  God.  The  lowest  attitude  which  men 
can  assume  towards  truth  is  that  of  credulity.  A  step  higher  and  we  reach  the 
doubters.  Doubt  is  nobler  than  credulity.  A  sceptic  is  a  better  man  than  an 
unthinking  bigot.  But  the  sceptic  is  not  a  learned  man,  for  true  learning  implies 
conviction.  He  is  a  half-educated  man,  and  a  little  learning  is  ever  a  dangerous 
thing.  Doubt  is  always  something  to  move  away  from.  There  are  two  kinds  of 
doubt  as  there  are  two  twilights.  The  higher  thing  is  belief.  Faith  is  substance 
resting  on  evidence ;  the  substance  of  spiritual  things  resting  on  evidence  which 
appeals  to  the  moral  sense.     The  character  of  any  man  is  measured  by  his  creed. 

III.    It  is  OUR  BOUNDEN  DUTY,  THEREFORE,  TO  HAVE  SOUND  CONVICTIONS  AS  TO  SPIRITUAL 

TRUTH.  We  have  no  right  to  allow  the  great  problems  to  go  by  default.  If  there 
is  a  God  it  behoves  us  to  know  it.  How  shall  we  get  wisdom?  (Jas.  i.  5).  God 
is  light ;  open  the  windows,  and  let  God  shine  in.  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the 
beginning  of  wisdom.  Bow  down  at  the  mercy-seat  and  ask  God  to  illuminate  the 
dark  chambers  of  your  soul.  Get  wisdom  from  God.  (D.  J.  Burrell,  D.D.) 
The  attainment  of  true  wisdom  : — I.  Show  the  nature  of  wisdom,  what  it  is,  and 
WHEREIN  IT  CONSISTS.  1.  The  description  of  its  nature  and  causes.  Aristotle  calls 
it  that  intellectual  virtue  whereby  we  are  directed  in  our  manrers  and  carriage,  to 


no  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chu.it; 

make  choice  of  the  right  means  in  the  prosecution  of  our  true  end.  Tully  describes 
it  as  ars  vivendi.  Aquinas  as  the  skill  of  demeaning  a  man's  self  aright  in  prac- 
tical affairs.  In  chap.  xiv.  8,  we  read,  "  The  wisdom  of  the  prudent  is  to  under- 
stand his  way."  The  philosophers  call  four  of  the  virtues  "  cardinal,"  because  all 
the  rest  turn  upon  them  as  upon  their  hinges.  These  are  prudence,  justice, 
fortitude,  and  temperance.  Prudence,  or  wisdom,  consists  of  three  parts  A. 
sagacity  of  judgment  to  make  a  true  estimate  of  things,  persons,  times,  and  events. 
A  presence  of  mind  to  obviate  sudden  accidents,  to  meet  every  emergency. 
Experience  and  observation  of  the  most  usual  and  probable  consequences  of  things. 
2.  The  several  kinds  and  distinctions  of  it.  One  is  a  grace,  or  virtue,  the  other  is 
not.  There  is  a  wisdom  that  cometh  from  above.  There  is  a  wisdom  which  is 
from  beneath,  earthly,  sensual,  devilish.  There  is  a  distinction  in  wisdom 
according  to  the  several  ends  which  men  propose  to  themselves  and  the  means 
whereby  these  several  ends  are  to  be  attained ;  the  gratifying  of  carnal  appetite  ; 
peace  and  contentment  of  mind;  or  spiritual  blessedness.  So  wisdom  may  be 
carnal  policy,  moral  prudence,  or  spiritual  wisdom.  3.  The  proper  effects  of 
wisdom.  It  directs  to  the  right  end,  such  as  may  be  perfective  of  our  natures.  It 
directs  to  consult  about  the  means,  which  must  be  fit  and  accommodate  to  the  end, 
and  must  be  honest  and  lawful  in  themselves.  Two  things  every  man  should 
propose  to  himself  in  the  management  of  his  affairs,  success  and  safety  :  in  order 
to  which  he  must  observe  four  conditions — forecast  and  providence  against  want ; 
wariness  and  caution  against  danger ;  order  and  union  against  opposition ; 
sedulity  and  diligence  against  difficulties.  These  four  seem  to  be  recommended 
in  chap.  xxx.  24,  where  four  living  creatures  are  spoken  of  as  being  "  exceeding 
wise,"  the  ants,  conies  (or  mice),  locusts,  and  the  spider.  4.  The  opposite  to  this 
virtue  of  wisdom,  by  way  of  excess  is  craft,  by  way  of  defect  is  folly.     II.  The 

NECESSITY   OF    WISDOM,    OB   THE   GROUNDS   OF   OCR    OBLIGATION   TO    IT,       Scripture   giveS 

both  precepts  concerning  it  (such  as  Col.  iv.  5 ;  Eph.  v.  15) ;  and  commendations 
of  it  (as  Job  xxviii.  16).  It  is  better  than  riches.  It  is  itself  the  greatest 
honour,  and  will  be  a  means  to  advance  a  man  in  the  esteem  of  others.  It  is  the 
truest  and  best  pleasure.  It  is  as  our  life.  It  is  necessary  to  the  safety  of  our 
persons ;  and  to  the  management  of  our  affairs  with  success.  Objection :  Is  not 
wisdom  a  gift  and  privilege,  rather  than  a  duty  ?  Answer :  1.  Christian  wisdom, 
for  the  nature  and  substance  of  it  is  a  duty,  for  the  degrees  a  gift.  2.  Moral  or 
civil  prudence  is  also  a  duty.  The  neglect  of  such  abilities  as  are  suitable  to  a 
man's  station  is  not  only  a  defect  but  a  fault.  Three  inferences  :  1.  No  wicked 
man  can  be  truly  wise.  2.  Grace  and  holiness  are  the  truest  wisdom.  3.  If 
wisdom  be  the  principal  thing,  then  let  it  be  our  principal  endeavour  to  attain  it. 
(Bp.  John  Wilking.)  The  best  treasure: — The  figure  of  merchandise  is  still 
maintained.  Work,  plan,  seek,  toil,  are  the  watchwords  of  true  zeal  in  this  matter. 
It  is  as  if  the  youth  were  face  to  face  with  many  attractions — say,  beauty,  wealth, 
ease,  pleasure,  and  the  like— and  whilst  he  is  estimating  their  claims  the  father  exhorts 
him,  saying,  "Get  wisdom,  get  understanding;  do  not  be  deceived  ;  insist  upon 
having  the  brightest  treasure,  and  on  no  account  be  victimised  by  men  who  would 
urge  you  to  sacrifice  future  satisfaction  to  immediate  gratification."  {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
The  best  thing  to  get: — Wisdom  is  of  incomparable  value,  as  it  enables  us  to  turn 
every  other  good  to  a  right  use.  I.  The  true  nature  of  wisdom.  1.  Wisdom  is 
not  synonymous  with  knowledge.  2.  Wisdom  is  not  merely  the  equivalent  of 
prudence  in  relation  to  the  ordinary  concerns  of  life.  3.  Wisdom  is  not  identical 
with  philosophy.  4.  Wisdom  consists  in  reverence  of  the  Divine,  in  the  know- 
ledge of  God,  and  a  right  state  of  the  heart  in  relation  to  God.  It  is,  in  a  word, 
religion.  It  is  the  choice  of  the  highest  end,  pursued  by  the  best  means.  It 
consists  in  discharging  aright  those  obUgations  which  we  owe  to  our  glorious 
Creator.  II.  The  supreme  importance  of  wisdom.  1.  Remark  its  superiority  to 
all  other  objects  of  human  regard.  True  wisdom  sought  and  won  and  worn 
appeases  the  hunger  and  thirst  of  the  soul.  2.  The  beneficial  results  of  gaining 
wisdom.  Formation  of  virtuoua  and  Christian  character.  Avoidance  of  evil. 
Eternal  gain.  III.  The  proper  means  of  obtaining  wisdom.  {W.  E.  Daly,  B.A.) 
Application  to  wisdom  and  learning  recommended  and  enforced  : — I.  What 
18  meant  by  wisdom  ?  Cicero  calls  wisdom  the  knowledge  of  things  Divine 
and  human,  and  of  their  efficient  causes.  II.  Wisdom  is  the  guide 
TO  TiBTDE.  Virtue  is  the  right  discharge  of  our  duty  in  every  station 
of  life.  Virtue  contains  the  whole  art  of  right  and  happy  living.  Did 
learning  afford  no  assistance  to  virtue ;  were  pleasure  the  only  benefit  arising  from 


OHAT.  IT.]  PROVERBS.  Ill 

stody ;  it  must  on  every  account  be  allowed  to  be  an  amusement  of  the  noblest 
kind,  and  every  way  best  suited  to  the  nature  of  man.  He  is  most  likely  to  prosper 
in  this  life  whose  mind  is  best  cultivated  and  enlarged  with  the  truest  notions  of 
things,  and  who  joins  to  that  cultivated  understanding  a  corresponding  practice,  not 
less  excelling  in  virtue  than  in  knowledge.  Honour,  too,  is  a  general  attendant 
upon  wisdom.  Moreover,  the  love  of  wisdom  and  the  practice  of  virtue,  will  tend 
above  all  things  to  lengthen  our  present  existence.  1.  God,  the  great  Father  of 
the  world,  has  created  you  a  reasonable  being,  and  endowed  you  with  faculties.  The 
duty  lies  on  you  to  improve  and  enlarge  them.  2.  Your  parents  on  earth  do 
everything  to  help  you  in  getting  wisdom.  3.  Society  has  a  claim  upon  you. 
Then  cultivate  liberal  science  as  the  handmaid  of  sublimer  knowledge.  Moral 
virtue  and  the  improvement  of  the  heart  are  graces  which  give  to  science  its  lustre, 
and  to  life  its  worth.  They  expand  and  enlarge  the  soul.  Cultivate  liberal  science 
under  the  sanction  and  guidance  of  religion.  {W.Dodd,  LL.D.)  The  excellency 
of  wisdom : — I.  An  encomium  of  wisdom.  She  is  commended  to  us  as  the  most  excel- 
lent of  all  things.  She  holds  the  principality  amongst  those  virtues  that  ennoble, 
enrich,  and  adorn  the  mind  of  man.  II.  An  eabnest  persuasion,  backed  with 
arguments,  to  endeavour  the  acquisition  and  improvement  of  this  excellent  virtue. 
Wisdom  is  an  excellent,  energetical  virtue  of  the  mind  of  man,  whereby,  upon  a 
clear  apprehension  and  right  judgment  of  things,  the  whole  soul  is  carried  out,  in  a 
well-governed  order,  in  an  earnest  and  constant  pursuit  of  the  most  excellent 
attainments.  There  is  a  threefold  act  of  wisdom.  1.  To  propose  the  most 
excellent  end.  2.  To  elect  the  best  means.  3.  To  engage  the  most  earnest 
endeavours    in    the    diligent    use    of    these    means.      HI.  Wherein    does    the 

BXCELLENCT   OF   WISDOM    LIE?       IV.  ThIS   EXCELLENCY   IS    ATTAINABLE.       It    CanUOt   be 

commended  in  vain.  Man's  work  in  the  world  cannot  be  done  without  wisdom. 
God  has  given  man  a  rational  soul.  Wisdom  may  be  attained  by — 1.  A  due 
government  of  man's  self.  2.  A  serious  consideration  of  a  man's  state.  3.  A 
diligent  study  of  the  Holy  Scriptures.  (Thomas  Willis,  D.D.)  The  wisdom  and 
importance  of  religion: — 1.  Eeligion  is  the  principal  thing,  as  it  is  the  care  of  our 
principal  part — our  rational  and  immortal  nature.  2.  Wisdom  is  the  principal 
thing,  for  this  secures  our  principal  interest.  3.  Wisdom  is  the  principal  thing,  as 
this  comprises  everything  that  is  amiable,  virtuous  and  excellent.  4.  Keligious 
wisdom  is  the  principal  thing,  because,  while  it  secures  our  main  interest,  it  pro- 
motes all  our  subordinate  interests.  5.  This  heavenly  wisdom  is  the  principal 
thing,  for  without  it  worldly  wisdom  wiU  do  us  no  good.  6.  Keligious  wisdom  is  the 
principal  thing,  as  it  is  of  universal  importance.  (J.  Lathrop,  D.D.)  Religion 
and  virtue  a  sovereign  good  : — 1.  Widely  different  are  the  effects  of  moral  good 
which  is  the  object  of  religion.  The  contemplation  of  an  infinite  Being,  the  study 
of  His  astonishing  works  and  dispensations,  are  objects  which  will  afford  unceasing 
employment  and  satisfaction  for  the  most  exalted  faculties  of  the  sublimest  genius. 
The  constant  progressive  improvement  of  the  soul  in  virtue  and  happiness,  and  the 
continual  approaches  to  the  perfection  of  its  nature,  are  ends  worthy  the  existence 
not  only  of  man,  but  even  of  the  highest  angel.  2.  Another  condition  requisite  to 
constitute  the  sovereign  good  is,  that  it  be  conducive  to  our  well  being.  Happiness 
is  not  made  up  of  transient  raptures.  It  consists  in  the  enjoyment  of  permanent 
serenity  and  calm  satisfaction.  Of  such  felicity  what  can  afford  a  fairer  prospect 
than  a  virtuous  and  religious  disposition  ?  This  tends  to  preserve  the  desires  and 
passions  within  due  subjection,  to  prevent  them  from  inflaming  the  imagination 
and  biasing  the  judgment.  Such  a  disposition  enables  us  to  view  objects  in  their 
true  and  proper  colours,  unadorned  with  fictitious  and  delusive  attractions.  3.  The 
third  quality  requisite  to  constitute  the  sovereign  good  is,  that  it  should  be  suitable 
to  all  times,  places,  and  conditions  of  life.  Even  when  flesh  and  heart  fail,  when 
the  world,  with  all  its  attractions,  can  no  longer  amuse,  then  will  the  consolations 
of  religion  and  virtue  still  support  us,  and  shed  beams  of  comfort  and  hope  to 
dispel  the  dreary  shades  of  the  dark  vale  of  death.  4.  A  fourth  condition  implied 
in  our  idea  of  the  sovereign  good  is,  that  it  should  be  durable  and  inadmissible. 
The  satisfactions  of  religion  and  virtue,  being  derived  from  God,  are  permanent 
and  onchangeable  as  the  source  from  whence  they  spring.  Not  even  death,  which 
tears  us  from  every  sublunary  pleasure,  can  destroy  these  satisfactions.  (B.  C. 
Sowden.)  Wisdom  (a  sermon  to  the  young) : — I.  What  that  wisdom  is  which  is 
HERB  so  eabnestlt  RECOMMENDED.  It  Is  twofold,  viz.,  Speculative  and  practical,  or 
wisdom  of  mind  and  wisdom  of  conduct.  Speculative  wisdom,  or  wisdom  of  mind, 
consists  in  the  knowledge  of  our  true  happiness  and  the  way  to  it.     Practical 


U2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  tf. 

wisdom,  or  wisdom  of  conduct,  consiats  in  the  steady  pursuit  of  it  in  the  right  way. 
II.  How  IT  IS  THE  PRINCIPAL  THING.  It  is  that  whlch  ought  in  the  first  and  principal 
place  to  be  minded,  secured,  and  preferred  before  everything  else ;  the  one  thing 
needful,  in  comparison  of  which  everything  else  has  but  a  very  inconsiderable 
importance.  1.  Though  wisdom,  as  now  explained,  be  the  principal  thing,  it  is  not 
the  only  thing  that  deserves  our  regard.  The  very  term  "  principal  thing  "  implies 
that  there  are  other  things  of  a  subordinate  consideration  that  ought  to  be  minded 
in  a  proper  degree.  The  affairs  of  the  present  life  claim  some  of  our  thoughts  and 
time.  2.  Wisdom  is  the  principal  thing,  so  the  importance  of  every  other  thing  is 
to  be  measured  by  its  connection  with,  or  relation  to  it.  III.  How  wisdom  is  to  bb 
ATTAINED.  1.  Accustom  yoursclvcs  to  a  habit  of  thinking  on  the  best  things. 
Wisdom  begins  with  consideration,  the  want  of  which  is  the  source  of  universal 
folly.  2.  Would  you  be  wise,  let  me  beseech  you  to  consider  the  importance  of 
improving  the  opportunities  and  advantages  of  your  present  education.  3.  Would 
you  be  wise  indeed,  you  must  carefully  inform  yourselves  of  the  will  of  God  and 
every  branch  of  your  duty  from  the  sacred  Scriptures.  4.  Would  you  be  truly  vrise, 
you  must  not  only  take  care  to  furnish  your  minds  with  a  knowledge  of  the 
Christian  principles  in  general,  but  of  those  duties  and  principles  in  particular 
which  will  best  adorn  that  character  and  station  wherein  you  may  hereafter  appear 
in  the  world.  5.  In  order  to  be  truly  wise,  you  must  take  care  to  know  yourselves  ; 
and  particularly  your  constitutional  sins.  6.  Cultivate  a  sense  of  your  constant 
dependence   on   God  for  everything,   and  acknowledge    that    dependence  daily. 

7.  Think  often  of  death.  8.  Earnestly  pray  to  God  to  make  you  wise.  {John 
Mason,  M.A.) 

Yer.  8.  Exalt  her,  and  she  shall  promote  thee. — Man  and  religion  mutvuilly 
exalted  : — True  wisdom  includes  two  things — first,  the  choice  of  the  highest  possible 
good  ;  secondly,  the  adoption  of  the  best  possible  means  for  the  attainment  of  that 
good.  I.  Man  exalting  religion.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  it  may  be  said  that 
man  cannot  exalt  religion.  But — 1.  Man  may  exalt  it  into  his  heart  as  a  supreme 
passion.  Abounding  around  us  are  organisations  which  have  for  their  object  the 
reformation  of  morals,  the  correcting  or  suppressing  certain  evil  habits,  social  and 
national.  But  mere  external  reformation  without  inward  renewal  will  leave  the 
man  lost  and  perishing.  When  man  proposes  to  improve  the  condition  of  humanity 
he  begins  outside,  whereas  God  always  begins  inside.  Man  works  from  circum- 
ference to  centre,  God  works  from  centre  to  circumference.  You  must  place 
religion  on  the  throne  of  your  heart,  give  her  supremacy,  and  the  effect  will  be  seen 
in  the  temper,  conversation,  and  life.  2.  Man  may  exalt  it  into  his  will  as  the  all- 
controlling  force,  the  life-principle.  Tell  me  what  the  ruling  force  in  the  man  is 
and  I  will  tell  you  his  character.  All  intelligent  beings  in  the  universe  are  under 
the  dominion  of  either  selfishness  or  benevolence.  There  is  no  sin  apart  from 
selfishness ;  there  is  no  virtue  apart  from  benevolence.  When  Christ  takes  pos- 
session of  the  heart  the  usurper  is  overthrown.  Sin  is  no  longer  in  the  ascendancy, 
Christ  becomes  king ;  but  although  the  power,  the  supremacy,  of  sin  is  broken, 
evil  in  a  subordinate  state  may  exist  within.  Christ  can  also  expel  His  rivals. 
3.  Man  may  exalt  it  in  his  practice  by  living  its  lofty  precepts.  Christianity  is  not 
a  creed,  it  is  a  life.  The  morals  of  Christianity  are  the  purest  the  world  has  ever 
known,  our  enemies  being  judges.  We  want  "  living  epistles,"  men  and  women 
sanctified  to  God,  embodying  in  their  daily  life  and  conversation  the  lofty  precepts 
of  the  New  Testament.  II.  Christianity  exalting  man.  1.  It  will  promote  your 
honour.  Men  everywhere  yearn  for  a  twofold  immortality — the  immortality  of  the 
life  in  the  world  beyond,  and  the  immortality  of  posthumous  fame  in  this  world. 
Men  have  obtained  honour  in  other  ways  than  by  religion.  But  where  is  the  man 
who  will  match  for  honour  the  men  of  "  faith  "  mentioned  in  Hebrews  xi.  ?  2.  It 
will  promote  your  happiness.  One  of  the  strongest  instincts  of  the  human  soul  is 
the  instinct  for  happiness.  All  men  covet  it.  In  order  to  gain  this  coveted  prize 
man  must  be  brought  into  harmony  with  himself.  Man  is  a  being  of  strange  con- 
trarieties. Within  him  are  forces  of  evil  which  drive  him  into  wrong  courses ;  there 
is  also  a  power  of  conscience  which  meets  him  in  these  evil  ways,  denounces,  con- 
demns, and  punishes  him.  You  cannot  secure  peace  by  forgetting  the  past.  In 
order  to  peace  and  contentment  you  must  be  in  harmony  with  your  surroundings. 

8.  Religion  will  promote  your  prospects.  It  supplies  man  with  blessed  hopes, 
cheerful  prospects,  and  a  glorious  future.  (R.  Roberts.)  Wisdom's  bargain  : — 
I.  Exalt  Wisdom.     1.  By  entertaining  lofty  thoughts  about  her.    2.  By  making 


€HU.  IT.]  PROVERBS.  113 

earnest  efforts  to  obtain  her.  3.  By  giving  her  the  highest  place  in  our  affections. 
4.  By  placing  her  npon  the  seat  of  government  within  the  soul.  5.  By  helping  her 
to  reach  her  throne  of  universal  dominion.  II.  Wisdom  shall  promote  thkk — 
1.  To  the  favour  and  fellowship  of  God  on  earth.  2.  To  a  place  of  safety  and 
comfort  among  the  trials  and  dangers  of  life.  3.  To  a  position  of  usefulness  and 
honour  amongst  men.  4.  To  a  throne  of  glory  in  the  skies.  (T.  Whitelaw,  M.A.) 
She  shall  bring  thee  to  honour. — The  true  honour  of  man  : — The  love  of  honour  is 
one  of  the  strongest  passions  in  the  human  heart.  AU  wish,  by  some  means  or 
other,  to  acquire  respect  from  those  among  whom  they  live.  Among  the  advantages 
which  attend  religion  and  virtue,  the  honour  which  they  confer  on  man  is  fre- 
quently mentioned  in  Scripture.  By  the  true  honour  of  man  is  to  be  understood, 
not  what  merely  commands  external  respect,  but  what  commands  the  respect  of  the 
heart,  what  raises  one  to  acknowledged  eminence  above  others  of  the  same  species. 
From  what  cause  does  this  eminence  arise?  1.  Not  from  riches.  2.  Not  from 
rank  or  office.  3.  Not  from  splendid  actions  and  abilities  which  excite  high 
admiration,  4.  Not  in  reputation  derived  from  civil  accomplishments.  5.  Not 
from  any  adventitious  circumstances  of  fortune.  We  must  look  to  the  mind  and 
the  soul.  The  honour  which  man  acquires  by  religion  and  virtue  is  more  inde- 
pendent and  more  complete  than  what  can  be  acquired  by  any  other  means.  The 
universal  consent  of  mankind  in  honouring  real  virtue  is  sufficient  to  show  what 
the  genuine  sense  of  human  nature  is  on  this  subject.  The  honour  acquired  by 
religion  and  virtue  is  honour  Divine  and  immortal.     {Hugh  Blair,  D.D.) 

Vers.  10,  11.  I  have  taught  thee  in  the  way  of  wisdom;  I  have  led  thee  in  right 
paths. — Precept  and  example  : — Teaching  and  leading  are  closely  allied,  but  are  not 
identical.  It  is  possible  and  common  to  have  the  first  in  large  measure  where  the 
second  is  wanting.  It  is  easier  to  tell  another  the  right  way  than  to  walk  in  it 
yourself.  Only  a  godly  man  can  bring  up  his  child  for  God.  Many  will  do  evil ; 
few  dare  to  teach  it  to  their  own  offspring.  This  is  the  unwilling  homage  which 
the  evil  are  constrained  to  pay  to  goodness.  Great  is  the  effect  when  parents  con- 
sistently and  steadfastly  go  before  their  children,  giving  them  a  daily  example  of 
their  daily  precepts.  An  example  of  some  kind  parents  must  exhibit  in  their 
families.  If  it  be  not  such  as  to  help,  it  will  certainly  hinder  the  education  of  the 
young.  God  in  the  providential  laws  permits  no  neutrality  in  the  family.  There 
you  must  either  be  for  or  against  Him.  {W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  The  true  parental  aim  : — 
What  is  the  prime  object  we  should  seek  for  our  children  ?  It  is  to  have  them 
fixed  and  established  in  ways  of  wisdom  and  right  paths.  What  are  the  means  of 
securing  this  object?  It  is  teaching  them  and  leading  them.  This  father  had 
trained  his  son  in  character  for  wisdom  and  righteousness.  Some  fathers  are  only 
concerned  for  the  physical  wants  of  their  households.  Others  are  most  con- 
cerned for  the  intellectual  culture  of  their  children.  Yet  others  look  chiefly 
after  traits  of  character.  The  true  aim  of  parents  should  be  the  culture  of  a  God- 
fearing, God-obeying,  God-loving  character.  In  the  world  there  is  a  woeful  lack 
of  character.  Then — 1.  Teach  children  right  views  of  life.  2.  Teach  children 
right  habits.  You  lead  them  into  right  paths — (1)  By  your  example.  (2)  By 
prayer.  (3)  By  keeping  them  under  the  influence  of  the  sanctuary,  {W.  F.  V. 
Bartlett,  D.D.) 

Ver.  12.  When  thou  goest,  thy  steps  shall  not  be  straitened ;  and  when,  thou 
runnest,  thou  shalt  not  stumble. — Monotony  and  crises: — The  old  metaphor 
likening  life  to  a  path  has  many  felicities  in  it.  It  suggests  constant  change, 
it  suggests  continuous  progress  in  one  direction,  and  that  all  our  days 
are  linked  together,  and  are  not  isolated  fragments ;  and  it  suggests  an  aim 
and  an  end.  "  When  thou  goest " — that  is,  the  monotonous  tramp,  tramp,  tramp, 
of  slow  walking,  along  the  path  of  an  uneventful  daily  life,  the  humdrum  "one 
foot  up  and  another  foot  down  "  which  makes  the  most  of  our  days.  "  When  thou 
runnest  " — that  points  to  the  crises,  the  sudden  spurts,  the  necessarily  brief  bursts 
of  more  than  usual  energy  and  effort  and  difficulty.  And  about  both  of  them,  the 
humdrum  and  the  exciting,  the  monotonous  and  the  startling,  the  promise  comes 
that  if  we  walk  in  the  path  of  wisdom  we  shall  not  get  disgusted  with  the  one  and 
we  shall  not  be  overwhelmed  by  the  other.  But  before  I  deal  with  these  two  clauses 
specifically,  let  me  recall  to  you  the  condition,  and  the  sole  condition,  upon 
which  either  of  them  can  be  fulfilled  in  our  daily  lives.  "  The  path  of  Wisdom  " 
assumes   a  heightened  meaning,    for   it  is   the    path  of   the  personal   Wisdom, 

9 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chip.  IT. 

the  Incarnate  Wisdom,  Christ  Himself.  And  what  does  it  then  come  to  be,  to 
obej  this  command?  Let  the  Christ  who  is  not  only  wise,  bnt  Wisdom,  choose 
yoar  path,  and  be  sure  that  by  the  submission  of  your  will  aU  your  paths 
are  His,  and  not  only  yours.  Make  His  path  yours  by  following  in  His  steps. 
Keep  company  with  Him  on  the  road.  You  wUl  say,  "  Leave  me  not  alone, 
and  let  me  cling  to  Thee  on  the  road,  as  a  little  child  holds  on  by  her  mother's 
skirt  or  her  father's  hand,"  then,  and  only  then,  will  you  walk  in  the  path 
of  wisdom.  Now,  then,  these  three  things — submission  of  will,  conformity  of 
conduct,  closeness  of  companionship — these  three  things  being  understood,  let  us 
look  for  a  moment  at  the  blessings  that  this  text  promises,  and  first  at  the  promise 
for  long,  uneventful  stretches  of  our  daily  life.  Perhaps  nine-tenths  at  least  of  all 
our  days  and  years  fall  under  the  terms  of  this  first  promise,  "  When  thou  walkest." 
For  many  miles  there  comes  nothing  particular,  nothing  at  all  exciting,  nothing 
new,  nothing  to  break  the  plod,  plod,  plod  along  the  road.  Everything  is  as  it  was 
yesterday,  and  the  day  before  that,  and  as  it  will  be  to-morrow,  and  the  day  after 
that,  in  all  probability.  Now,  then,  if  Jesus  Christ  is  not  to  help  us  in  the 
monotony  of  our  daily  lives,  what,  in  the  name  of  common  sense,  is  His  help  good 
for  ?  Unless  the  trivial  is  His  field,  there  is  very  little  field  for  Him,  in  your  life 
or  mine.  We  all  know  the  sense  of  disgust  that  comes  over  us  at  times,  and  of 
utter  weariness,  just  because  we  have  been  doing  the  same  things  day  after  day  for 
so  long.  I  know  only  one  infallible  way  of  preventing  the  common  from  becoming 
commonplace,  of  preventing  the  small  from  becoming  trivial,  of  preventing  the 
familiar  from  becoming  contemptible,  and  it  is  to  link  it  all  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  to 
Bay,  "  for  Thy  sake,  and  unto  Thee,  I  do  this  " ;  then,  not  only  will  the  rough 
places  become  plain,  and  the  crooked  things  straight,  and  not  only  will  the 
mountains  be  brought  low,  but  the  valleys  of  the  commonplace  will  be  exalted. 
"  Thy  steps  shall  not  be  straitened."  Walk  in  the  path  of  Christ,  with  Christ, 
towards  Christ,  and  "  thy  steps  shall  not  be  straitened."  Now,  there  is  another 
aspect  of  this  same  promise — viz.,  if  we  thus  are  in  the  path  of  Incarnate  Wisdom, 
we  shall  not  feel  the  restrictions  of  the  road  to  be  restraints.  "  Thy  steps  shall  not 
be  straitened,  although  there  is  a  wall  on  either  side,  and  the  road  is  the  narrow 
way  that  leads  to  life,  it  is  broad  enough  for  the  sober  man,  because  he  goes  in  a 
straight  line,  and  does  not  need  half  the  road  to  roll  about  in.  The  limits  which 
love  imposes,  and  the  limit  which  love  accepts,  are  not  narrowing.  "I  will  walk  at 
liberty,  for  I  keep  Thy  precepts  "  ;  and  I  do  not  want  to  go  vagrantising  at  large, 
but  limit  myself  thankfully  to  the  way  which  Thou  dost  mark  out.  Now  what 
about  the  other  one  ?  "  When  thou  runnest,  thou  shalt  not  stumble."  As  I  have 
Baid,  the  former  promise  applies  to  the  hours  and  the  years  of  life.  The  latter 
applies  to  but  a  few  moments  of  each  man's.  Cast  your  thoughts  back  over  your 
own  days,  and,  however  changeful,  perhaps  adventurous,  and,  as  we  people  call  it, 
romantic,  some  parts  of  our  lives  may  have  been,  yet  for  all  that  you  can  put  the 
turning-points,  the  crises  that  have  called  for  great  efforts,  and  the  gathering  of 
yourselves  up,  and  the  calling  forth  of  all  your  powers  to  do  and  to  dare,  you  can 
put  them  all  inside  of  a  week,  in  most  cases.  "  When  thou  runnest,  thou  shalt  not 
Btumble."  The  greater  the  speed  the  greater  the  risk  of  stumbling  over  some 
obstacle  in  the  way.  We  all  know  how  many  men  there  are  that  do  very  well  in 
the  uneventful  commonplaces  of  life,  but  bring  them  face  to  face  with  some  great 
difficulty  or  some  great  trial,  and  there  is  a  dismal  failure.  Jesus  Christ  is  ready  to 
make  us  fit  for  anything  in  the  way  of  difficulty,  in  the  way  of  trial,  that  can  come 
storming  upon  us  from  out  of  the  dark.  And  He  will  make  us  so  fit  if  we  follow 
the  injunctions  to  which  I  have  already  been  referring.  Without  His  help  it  is 
almost  certain  that  when  we  have  to  run,  our  ankles  will  give,  or  there  will  be  a 
stone  in  the  road  that  we  never  thought  of,  and  the  excitement  will  sweep  us  away 
from  principle,  and  we  shall  lose  our  hold  on  Him  ;  and  then  it  is  all  up  with  us. 
But  remember  the  virtue  that  comes  out  victorious  in  the  crisis  must  have  been 
nourished  and  cultivated  in  the  humdrum  moments.  For  it  is  no  time  to  make 
one's  first  acquaintance  with  Jesus  Christ  when  the  eyeballs  of  some  ravenous  wild 
beast  are  staring  into  ours,  and  its  mouth  is  open  to  swallow  us.  (A.  Maclaren, 
D.D.) 

Yer.  13.  Take  fast  hold  of  instruction ;  let  her  not  go :  keep  her ;  for  she  is  thy 
life.— Tfce  hold-fast  religion : — Faith  may  be  well  described  as  taking  hold  upon 
Divine  instruction.  To  take  "fast  hold"  is  an  exhortation  which  concerns  the 
strength,  the  reality,  the  heartiness,  and  the  truthfulness  of  faith,  and  the  more  of 


CHA».  IV.]  PROVERBS.  lis 

these  the  better.  If  to  take  hold  is  good,  to  take  fast  hold  is  better.  The  best 
instruction  is  that  which  comes  from  God  :  the  truest  wisdom  is  the  revelation  of 
God  in  Christ  Jesus ;  the  best  understanding  is  obedience  to  the  will  of  God,  and  a 
diligent  learning  of  those  saving  truths  which  God  has  set  before  us  in  His  Word. 
I.  The  method  of  taking  fast  hold  upon  true  beligion.  At  the  outset  much  must 
depend  upon  the  intense  decision  which  a  man  feels  in  his  soul  with  regard  to 
eternal  things.  This  depends  much  on  a  man's  individuality  and  force  of 
character.  Many  are  truly  religious,  but  are  not  intense  about  anything.  Some 
who  in  other  matters  have  purpose  enough,  and  strength  of  mind  enough, 
when  they  touch  the  things  of  God  are  loose,  flimsy,  superficial,  half-hearted.  If 
the  religion  of  Christ  be  true,  it  deserves  that  we  should  give  our  whole  selves  to  it. 
Our  taking  fast  hold  depends  upon  the  thoroughness  of  our  conversion.  Another 
help  to  a  fast  hold  of  Christ  is  hearty  discipleship.  Another  is  a  studious  considera- 
tion of  the  Word  of  God.  An  established  Christian  is  one  who  not  only  knows  the 
doctrine,  but  who  also  knows  the  authority  for  it.  An  earnest  seriousness  of 
character  will  help  towards  maintaining  a  fast  hold  of  Christ.  If  these  things  are 
in  us  and  abound,  there  will  grow  around  them  an  experimental  verification  of  the 
things  of  God.  And  in  the  mode  of  taking  fast  hold  upon  the  gospel  practical 
Christianity,  practical  usefulness,  has  a  great  influence.  II.  The  difficultiks  or 
TAKING  FAST  HOLD  OF  INSTRUCTION.  1.  This  is  an  agc  of  questioning.  Conceited 
scepticism  is  in  the  air.  2.  This  is  an  age  of  worldliness.  3.  There  is,  and  always 
has  been,  a  great  desire  for  novelty.  4.  The  worst  diflSculty  of  all  is  the  corruption 
of  our  own  hearts.  III.  The  benefits  of  taking  fast  hold.  It  gives  stability  to 
the  Christian  character  to  have  a  firm  grip  of  the  gospel.  It  wiU  also  give  strength 
for  service.  It  will  bring  joy.  Persons  of  this  kind  are  the  very  glory  of  the 
Church.  IV.  The  arguments  of  the  text.  They  are  three.  1.  Take  fast  hold  of 
true  religion,  because  it  is  your  best  friend.  2.  It  is  your  treasure.  3.  It  is  your 
life.  Mr.  Arnot,  in  his  book  upon  the  Proverbs,  tells  a  story  to  illustrate  this  text. 
He  says  that  in  the  southern  seas  an  American  vessel  was  attacked  by  a  wounded 
whale.  The  huge  monster  ran  out  for  the  length  of  a  mile  from  the  ship,  and  then 
turned  round,  and  with  the  whole  force  of  its  acquired  speed  struck  the  ship  and 
made  it  leak  at  every  timber,  so  as  to  begin  to  go  down.  The  sailors  got  out  all 
their  boats,  filled  them  as  quickly  as  they  could  with  the  necessaries  of  life,  and 
began  to  pull  away  from  the  ship.  Just  then  two  strong  men  might  be  seen 
leaping  into  the  water  who  swam  to  the  vessel,  leaped  on  board,  disappeared  for  a 
moment,  and  then  came  up,  bringing  something  in  their  hands.  Just  as  they 
sprang  into  the  sea  down  went  the  vessel,  and  they  were  carried  round  in  the 
vortex,  but  they  were  observed  to  be  both  of  them  swimming,  not  as  if  struggling  to 
get  away,  but  as  if  looking  for  something,  which  at  last  they  both  seized  and 
carried  to  the  boats.  What  was  this  treasure  ?  What  article  could  be  so  valued  as 
to  lead  them  to  risk  their  lives  ?  It  was  the  ship's  compass,  which  had  been  left 
behind,  without  which  they  could  not  have  found  their  way  out  of  those  lonely 
southern  seas  into  the  high-road  of  commerce.  That  compass  was  life  to  them, 
and  the  gospel  of  the  living  God  is  the  same  to  us.  You  and  I  must  venture  all  for 
the  gospel :  this  infallible  Word  of  God  must  be  guarded  to  the  death.  Men  may 
tell  us  what  they  please,  and  say  what  they  will,  but  we  will  risk  everything  sooner 
than  give  up  those  eternal  principles  by  which  we  have  been  saved.  (C  H.  Spurgeon. ) 
Education  the  business  of  life  : — I.  Education  is  the  business  of  life.  Begin  with 
the  infant,  and  observe  how,  from  the  very  first  breath,  every  stage  in  its  growth  is 
but  the  antecedent  of  another,  its  chief  occupation  being  to  get  ready  for  the  next. 
Infancy  spreads  out  into  childhood,  &c.  Thus  obviously  is  life  occupied  with 
preparation  for  the  future.  To  cause  men  to  enter  on  that  future  with  the  best 
advantage  is  the  purpose  of  education,  in  whatever  form  dispensed.  Consisting 
thus  in  preparation  for  the  future,  it  evidently  implies  three  things  —  1.  The 
development  of  the  faculties.  These  lie  folded  up  in  the  child,  unobserved  and 
inactive.  By  assiduous  culture  they  are  to  be  unfolded  in  their  true  proportions, 
and  to  be  made  skiKul  by  judicious  exercise.  2.  The  acquisition  of  know- 
ledge— without  which  one  rushes  upon  the  future  like  a  blind  man  into  a  wilderness. 
Knowledge  is  safety,  light,  and  power ;  ignorance  is  darkness,  peril,  and  imbecility. 
8.  Special  fitness  for  the  special  employment  on  which  one  is  to  enter.  Edu- 
cation is  not  to  be  conducted  at  random,  nor  with  a  merely  general  intent.  It  has 
regard  to  the  peculiar  calling  of  the  individual.  It  would  fit  him  to  act  well  his 
part  in  the  precise  sphere  which  he  is  destined  to  fill.  This,  then,  is  one  sense  in 
which  education  is  the  business  of  life.     It  is  the  business  of  every  season  to  prepars 


11«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  it 

for  the  next.  But  there  is  yet  a  higher  sense.  Life  itself  is  but  one  period  of 
existence,  antecedent  to  another  and  final  period.  Life  itself  is  but  the  childhood 
of  the  immortal  spirit,  getting  ready  for  its  future  youth  and  eternal  manhood. 
Life  itself,  therefore,  is  but  one  long  school-day  ;  its  great  purpose  the  discipline  of 
the  powers,  the  acquisition  of  knowledge,  the  fitting  of  the  character,  in  preparation 
for  that  immortal  action  to  which  the  grave  introduces.  The  perfect  man — he  who 
is  thoroughly  furnished  by  the  completest  culture  of  all  his  powers,  faculties,  and 
affections — is  educated  for  heaven.  To  stop  short  of  this  is  to  leave  the  Divine 
work  incomplete.  Made  to  reach  indefinitely  after  wisdom,  goodness,  and  hap- 
piness, in  this  world  and  the  next,  he  can  rightfully  propose  to  himself  no  other 
end;  and  his  education  is  in  no  just  sense  finished  until  this  end  is  attained. 
Whence  we  observe  there  are  two  essential  deficiencies  in  the  common  judgment : 
first  that  the  cultivation  of  the  intellect  is  limited  to  that  small  exercise  of  the  mind 
which  just  fits  for  some  one  occupation ;  and  second,  that  the  cultivation  of  character 
is  left  almost  altogether  (in  all  formal  education)  to  circumstance  and  accident. 
II.  Bt  what  method  the  desibed  result  is  to  be  effected.  There  are  three 
processes — by  instruction,  by  circumstances,  by  self -discipline.  1.  Instruction;  by 
which  I  intend  all  the  express  external  means  of  human  or  of  Divine  appointment 
which  are  used  in  early  or  later  life.  This  is  sometimes  spoken  of  as  including  the 
whole  of  education.  But  a  little  thoughtful  observation  convinces  us  that  it  is  far 
from  being  so  in  fact ;  that  in  truth  formal  teaching  is  little  more  than  offering 
favourable  opportunities  and  excitements  to  the  individual,  which  he  may  neglect, 
and  so,  with  the  best  instruction,  remain  uneducated.  Essential  as  direct  instruction 
may  be,  if  left  to  itself,  unaided  and  alone,  it  can  accomplish  scarce  anything.  It 
needs  tlie  concurrence  of  circumstances,  and  of  the  will  of  the  instructed.  2.  Cir- 
cumstances have  more  to  do  with  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  and  the  formation 
of  character  than  is  often  supposed.  They  make  the  atmosphere  by  which  one  is 
surrounded,  the  climate  in  which  he  resides.  They  make  up  that  assemblage  of 
invisible,  intangible,  indescribable  influences  which,  in  the  moral  world  as  in  the 
natural,  give  a  complexion,  hue,  constitution,  character,  to  all  who  are  subjected  to 
it ;  influences  to  which  they  of  necessity  yield,  and  which  they  in  vain  seek  to 
counteract.  It  is  of  the  first  importance  in  education  to  give  heed  to  this  con- 
sideration. Inattention  to  this  is  the  cause  of  frequent  ill-success  in  what  appear 
to  be  the  best  arranged  processes  of  instruction.  Great  pains  have  been  taken,  and 
expensive  apparatus  employed,  with  most  unsatisfactory  results.  It  was  the  wrong 
sort  of  pains.  The  controlling  power  of  circumstances  was  overlooked.  The 
influences  of  situation,  companions,  example,  and  social  habits,  were  disregarded. 
3.  To  these  processes  is  to  be  added  that  of  self-discipline.  Without  it  nothing 
efiBcient  can  be  done  by  force  of  teaching,  or  by  the  best  arrangement  of  most 
favourable  circumstances.  The  individual  must  have  a  desire  to  make  progress, 
and  must  exercise  his  own  powers  in  making  it.  It  is  when  he  cheerfully,  with 
Toluntary  labour  and  watching,  applies  himself  to  learn  and  to  become  good,  that 
success  crowns  the  endeavour.  The  general  uses  of  this  subject  are  as  obvious  as 
they  are  important.  (1)  It  rebukes  the  prevalent  misconceptions,  which  bind  down 
the  aim  of  intellectual  effort  to  that  drudgery  of  the  world  by  which  the  body  is 
supported  ;  which  account  the  rational  and  immortal  spirit  sufficiently  taught,  and 
well  enough  employed,  when  it  has  become  skilful  to  answer  the  question,  "  What 
shall  we  eat,  and  what  shall  we  drink,  and  wherewithal  shall  we  be  clothed  ?  " 
(2)  It  rebukes  the  negligence  and  self-indulgence  of  those  who,  possessing,  as  we 
possess,  peculiar  advantages  for  the  highest  intellectual  progress,  content  them- 
selves with  the  lowest,  think  mental  toil  a  drudgery,  repine  at  the  requisites  for 
improvement,  and  set  the  enjoyments  of  indolence  above  the  solid  honours  of 
attainment.  (3)  It  rebukes  the  yet  more  common  error  of  setting  aside  from 
our  notions  of  education  the  progress  of  character,  and  establishment  in  virtue. 
(4)  It  brings  us  to  the  great  duty  of  man,  the  leading  object  of  life ;  the  self- 
discipline  of  the  character  by  which  preparation  is  made  for  eternity.  {H.  Ware, 
D-D)  Take  fast  hold: — It  is  only  "  instruction  "  that  we  must  take  fast  hold 
of.  There  are  some  things  that  we  must  not  even  touch,  much  less  must  we 
try  to  grasp  them.  Take  fast  hold  of  the  wonderful  things  that  are  contained  in 
the  Bible.  1.  We  take  fast  hold  of  instruction  by  praying  over  it.  If  we  pray 
often  over  it  we  shall,  of  course,  think  much  about  it,  and  then  we  may  understand 
it  better.  And  if  we  truly  do  this  we  shall,  without  fail,  strive  to  put  the  truth  that 
we  have  thus  taken  hold  of  into  practice.  2.  It  is  a  great  help  if  we  seek  to  impart 
what  we  have  learned  of  Jesus.     If  we  tell  what  we  know,  it  will  fix  it  upon  our 


CHAP.  IV.]  PROVERBS.  117 

minds.  If  we  do  not  thus  take  fast  hold  of  instruction,  we  may  lose  it.  [J.  J, 
Ellis.)  Hold  fast : — I.  Fast  hold  must  bk  laid  upon  wisdom's  prbcepts. 
1,  Because  many  thieves  lie  in  the  way  to  rob  us  of  what  wisdom  teacheth  us — the 
devil,  wicked  men,  the  world,  the  flesh.  2.  Because  we  may  lose  our  wisdom 
ourselves — by  negligence,  by  sinful  courses.  11.  Wisdom's  precepts  must  not  bk 
PASTED  WTTHAx,  BUT  KEPT  SAFE.  1.  Becausc  parting  with  it  brings  loss  of  other 
things,  as  of  our  safety  and  likewise  of  our  comfort.  2.  Because  it  brings  much 
danger,  and  that  to  all  that  is  dear  to  us.  III.  Holding  fast  wisdom  is  the  way  to 
LIFE.  What  thou  losest  of  heavenly  wisdom,  so  much  thou  losest  of  thy  life. 
{Francis  Taylor,  B.D.)  Religious  instruction: — Instruction  is  not  here  used  for 
acquisition  of  knowledge  or  intellectual  enlargement.  It  is  synonymous  with 
wisdom,  understanding,  heavenly  teaching.  Note — 1.  The  extreme  earnest- 
ness which  the  wise  son  of  David  displays  in  pressing  his  advice.  2.  The  text 
suggests  the  natural  alienation  of  the  heart  from  instruction.  It  does  not  receive  it 
willingly.  It  does  not  retain  it,  if  received,  without  difficulty.  3.  The  last  clause 
of  the  text  resolves  the  whole  question  into  a  simple  and  intelligible  proposition. 
It  brings  the  matter  to  a  point.  Dost  thou  desire  to  live — not  the  life  that  now  is, 
the  transient  and  ephemeral  existence  of  a  corruptible  body — but  in  that  never- 
ending  state  when  a  thousand  years  will  be  as  one  day  ?  Then  take  fast  hold  of 
instruction — in  obtaining  her  thou  hast  secured  thy  object,  for  she  is  thy  life. 
There  is,  in  that  word  life,  a  comprehensiveness  which  conveys  the  fulness  of  joy 
to  the  penitent  soul.  {Lord  Bishop  of  Winchester.)  Vigorous  steadfastness  : — 
The  path  of  wisdom  requires  the  most  vigorous  steadfastness.  Hold  the  lessons  of 
wisdom  with  a  firm  and  unrelaiable  tenacity ;  grasp  them  as  the  drowning  man 
the  rope  that  is  thrown  out  for  his  rescue.  "  Firmness,"  said  Burns,  "  both  in 
sufferance  and  exertion,  is  a  character  which  I  would  wish  to  possess.  I  have 
always  despised  the  whining  yelp  of  complaint,  and  the  cowardly,  feeble  resolve." 
{David  Thomas,  D.D.)  A  wise  caution : — I.  We  must  take  heed  of  falling  in 
WITH  BIN  AND  siNNEES.  Our  tcacher  having,  like  a  faithful  guide,  shown  us  the 
right  paths  (ver.  11),  here  warns  us  of  the  by-paths  into  which  we  are  in  danger  of 
being  drawn  aside.  Those  that  have  been  well  educated,  and  trained  up  in  the 
way  they  should  go,  let  them  not  so  much  as  enter  into  it,  no,  not  to  make  a  trial 
of  it,  lest  it  prove  a  dangerous  experiment,  and  difficult  to  retreat  with  safety. 
"Venture  not  into  the  company  of  those  who  are  infected  with  the  plague,  no,  not 
though  thou  think  thyself  guarded  with  an  antidote."     II.  If  at  ant  time  we  are 

INVEIGLED  INTO  AN  EVIL  WAT,  WE    MUST  HASTEN  OUT   OF  IT.       If,   CIC   thoU   Wast  aWaiC, 

thou  didst  enter  in  at  the  gate,  because  it  was  wide,  go  not  on  in  the  way  of  evil 
men.  As  soon  as  thou  art  made  sensible  of  thy  mistake,  retire  immediately ;  take 
not  a  step  more,  stay  not  a  minute  longer,  in  the  way  that  certainly  leads  to 
destruction.  III.  We  must  dread  and  detest  the  way  of  sin  and  sinners,  and 
DECLINE  them  WITH  THE  UTMOST  CARE  IMAGINABLE.  {Matthew  Henry.)  Popular 
amusements : — This  advice  bears,  in  its  practical  relation,  on  two  important 
features  developed  in  practical  affairs.  It  strikes  at  the  way  of  the  wicked — 1.  As 
it  is  traced  in  those  open  violations  of  integrity  which  are  condemned  alike  by  the 
laws  of  man  and  the  laws  of  God ;  and — 2.  In  that  great  class  of  sins  which  falls 
under  the  term  "  dissipation  "  in  ordinary  life,  which  is  condemned  by  the  laws  of 
Gk)d,  and  too  frequently  tolerated  by  the  laws  of  man,  which  is,  in  itself,  in  fact, 
too  evanescent,  too  much  a  thing  of  the  heart,  sinks  into  too  great  triviality,  is  too 
personal  in  its  character,  involving  too  exclusively  the  sacrifice  of  a  man's  own  soul 
and  life,  and  the  dishonour  of  his  Creator,  to  fall  within  the  province  of  human 
legislation.  Popular  amusements  bear  directly  upon  both  these  classes  of  crime. 
They  form  a  certain  fascinating  territory — a  frontier  lying  between  them  and  the 
practice  of  godliness.  To  allure  the  youth,  the  territories  of  criminality  must  be 
surrounded  with  a  frontier  of  fascinating  pleasures.    I.  Evert  step  tou  takb  in 

THESK   FORBIDDEN    GRATIFICATIONS   IS    TAKEN    AT   TOUR   OWN    COST.      All   the    difficulties 

that  will  occur  to  you  there  are  encountered  at  yonr  own  expense.  In  the  very  first 
principle  of  starting  you  forfeit  all  the  protection,  the  guidance,  and  the  help  which 
man  may  expect  at  any  time,  in  justifiable  engagements,  at  the  hand  of  God.  God 
has  designed  that  the  whole  of  life  should  be  conducted  in  a  subjugation  of  the 
mind  to  His  own  teachings;  and,  in  the  path  of  these  forbidden  pleasures,  amongst 
the  allurements  that  awaken  thoughtlessness  of  Him,  and  draw  the  heart  from  EUxa, 
there  is  no  covenanted  protection  and  guidance,  and  in  that  abandonment  from 
God  he  has  the  elements  of  the  final  curse.     II.  The  popular  amusements  of  oub 

TIMB   ARE   TO  BB   BEPBBHBNDBD   AND   FORSAKEN,  BECAUSE   THBT   ARB   ALWATS  ATTBIISBD 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  rr. 

WITH  INDUCEMENTS  TO  OREiTEB  WBONo.  It  is  not  merely  the  stealing  and  subtle 
influence  that  draws  the  heart  away  from  God  ;  it  is  not  merely  the  dreadful  effect 
which  the  fascination  has  in  soothing  down  the  mind  into  a  state  of  self-gratifica- 
tion ;  it  is  not  merely  the  fact  that  these  delusive  pleasures  draw  the  mind  away 
from  everything  distinctly  religious  ;  but  they  stand  surrounded  with  inducements 
to  drive  the  spirit  home  to  the  point  in  which  it  must  break  through  the  restrictions, 
not  of  Divine  law  only,  but  of  human  law  also.     III.  The  dibect  inehtence  of  the 

HABITS    FOBMED    IN    SCENES    OF  POPtTLAE    AMUSEMENT    IS    ALTOGETHEB   OPPOSED    TO   THE 

eiebcise  of  viTAii  GODLINESS.     In  cascs  I  have  known,  there  was  the  declination  of 
the  habits  of  godliness,  and  the  very  gift  of  prayer  had  almost   ceased ;   every 
element    of    piety    was    crippled.      It    is    said    that   these  popular  amusements 
are  patronised  by  religious  people,   and  that  they  may  at  times  be   rendered 
subservient   to    virtue.     The    answer    is   that    the  peril    in    them    wholly  out- 
weighs  every  advantage    that   can   be   derived    from   them.      {Charlet    Stovel.) 
Curiosity  a  temptation  to  sin: — One  chief  cause  of  wickedness  is  our  curiosity  to 
have  some  fellowship  with  darkness,  some  experience  of  sin,  to  know  what  the 
pleasures  of  sin  arc  like.     Not  to  know  sin  by  experience  brings  upon  a  man  the 
laughter  and  jests  of  his  companions.     Curiosity  brought  about  Eve's  fall ;  and  a 
wanton  roving  after  things  forbidden,  a  curiosity  to  know  what  it  was  to  be  as  the 
heathen,  was  one  chief  source  of  the  idolatries  of  the  Jews.     This  delusion  arises 
from  Satan's  craft.     He  knows  that  if  he  can  get  us  once  to  sin,  he  can  easily 
make  us  sin  twice  or  thrice,  till  at  length  we  are  taken  captive  at  his  will.     He  sees 
that  curiosity  is  man's  great  and  first  snare.     He  therefore  tempts  men  violently 
while  the  world  is  new  to  them,  and  hopes  and  feelings  are  eager  and  restless. 
The  great  thing  in  religion  is  to  set  off  well,  to  resist  the  beginnings  of  evil ;  to  flee 
temptation  ;  and  for  these  reasons — 1.  It  is  hardly  possible  to  delay  our  flight,  with- 
out rendering  flight  impossible.    Directly  we  are  made  aware  of  temptation  we 
shall,  if  we  are  wise,  turn  our  backs  upon  it,  without  waiting  to  think  and  reason 
about   it;   we  shaU  engage  our  mind   in   other  thoughts.     2.  If  we  admit  evil 
thoughts  we  shall  make  ourselves  familiar  with  them.     Our  great  security  against 
sin  lies  in  being  shocked  at  it.     3.  There  is  a  tendency  to  repeat  an  act  of  sin  once 
committed.     4.  The  end  of  sinning  is  to  enslave  us  to  it.     Our  safeguard  lies  in 
obeying  our  Lord's  simple  but  comprehensive  precept,  "Watch  and  pray,  lest  ye  enter 
into  temptation."     {Plain  Sermons  by  Contributors  to  the  "  Tracts  for  the  Times.^') 
Breakers  ahead  : — To  the  young  it  may  be  said,  "  Whatever  be  the  evil  coarse 
that  tempts  you,  your  only  safety  lies  in  determined  refusal  to  take  a  single  step  in 
that  direction,  to  tamper  for  a  moment  with  the  temptation  "  ;  and  that  this  axiom 
may  be  as  a  nail  fastened  in  a  sure  place,  Solomon  gives  it  six  strong  blows  with  the 
hammer,  saying  in  regard  to  every  such  devious  and  sinful  path,  "  Enter  not,  go 
not  in  it,  avoid  it,  pass  not  by  it,  turn  from  it,  and  pass  away."     Some  of  the 
courses  against  which  we  need  to  be  warned.     1.  The  way  of  the  fraudulent.    If  you 
cannot  be  rich  without  guile  be  content  to  be  poor.    To  act  or  imply  what  is  false  is 
as  bad  as  to  utter  a  lie.     2.  The  way  of  the  extravagant.     Spending  money  you  do 
not  possess  ;  against  debt.     Start  in  life  as  you  mean  to  continue,  and  let  this  be 
one  of   your   maxims,  "  Owe  no  man  anything."     3.  The  way  of  the  gambler. 
This  loathsome  cancer  is  eating  into  the  very  vitals  of  English  society.     There  is 
no  evil  course  that  is  more  insidious  in  its  commencement,  or  more  insatiable  in  the 
appetite  it  awakens.     4.  The  way  of  the  drinker.     Have  the  good  sense  to  make  a 
disaster  impossible  by  simply  refusing  to  touch  the  dangerous  thing.     5.  The  way 
of  the  libertine.     Shut  your  ear  against  every  whisper  of  immodesty.     6.  The  path 
of  the  scoffer.     This  danger  almost  always  springs  from  unwise  companionships. 
One  sceptic  in  an  office  may  unsettle  all  his  fellows.     (<7.  Thain  Davidson,  D.D.) 
Contamination  of  evil  society  : — On  the  moors  of  Yorkshire  there  is  a  stream  of 
water  which  goes  by  the  name  of  the  "  Ochre  Spring."    It  rises  high  up  in  the 
hills,  and  runs  on  bright  and  sparkling  for  a  slaort  distance,  when  it  suddenly 
becomes  a  dark  and  muddy  yellow.    What  is  the  reason  of  this  ?    It  has  been  pass- 
ing through  a  bed  of  ochre,  and  so  it  flows  on  for  miles,  thick  and  sluggish,  useless 
and  unpleasant.     The  world  is  full  of  such  beds  of  ochre.  .  .  .  Enter  not  in  the 
path  of  the  wicked,  and  go  not  in  the  way  of  evil  men.     {Church  of  England 
Teachers^  Magazine.)         The  two  paths  ; — I.  The  path  of  the  wicked.     Bad  men 
are  here  described  in  such  terms  as  imply  a  very  wretched  state  of  society.     They 
delight  in  acts  of  violence  and  plunder.     Such  men  form  the  criminal  classes. 
There  are  other  evil-doers  who  are  much  more  dangerous,  because  their  evil-doing 
is  not  80  criminal,  is  not  usually  of  a  sort  that  exposes  them  to  the  penalties  of  tha 


OBir.  IV.]  PROVERBS.  119 

law.  One  feature  of  bad  men  is  pointed  out.  They  cannot  rest  unless  they  do 
mischief  to  some  one.  There  are  men  who  take  an  intense  pleasure  in  corrupting 
their  juniors  and  making  them  as  bad  as  themselves.  One  of  the  chief  pleasures 
of  sin  lies  in  making  others  sinful,  just  as,  on  the  other  hand,  one  of  the  chief 
pleasures  of  goodness  is  making  others  good.  The  tempter  prefers  the  form  of  the 
serpent,  and  does  his  evil  work  subtly,  slyly,  stealthily.  Yet  the  wicked  are 
blind,  blinded  sometimes  by  ignorance,  sometimes  by  passion.  They  do  not  see 
what  their  true  interest  is.  U.  The  path  of  the  just.  "  As  the  shining  light." 
By  the  "  just"  we  are  to  understand  the  good  man  ;  not  a  man  altogether  free  from 
sin,  but  one  who,  though  far  from  faultless,  sincerely  desires  and  earnestly  strives 
to  live  in  all  things  according  to  the  will  of  God.  The  word  "  just "  signifies 
"  commanded."  A  just  man  is  a  commanded  man,  a  man  whom  God  commands, 
a  man  who  acts  according  to  God's  commandments.  The  just  man  is  something 
more  than  a  man  who  is  true,  honest,  fair  in  his  treatment  of  his  fellow-men. 
The  just  man  is  he  who,  to  the  full  extent  of  the  knowledge  of  God's  will,  obeys  it, 
or  does  his  best  to  obey  it,  and  so  is  a  commended  man.  The  path  of  the  just  is 
the  just  man's  course  of  life.  We  have  a  description  of  a  good  man's  life  in  its 
character,  its  progress,  its  perfection.  Light  in  Scripture  bears  several  meanings. 
It  means  knowledge  in  relation  to  the  mind,  holiness  in  relation  to  the  conscience, 
happiness  in  relation  to  the  heart.  The  life  of  a  just  man  is  a  life  of  growing 
knowledge,  holiness,  and  happiness.  "  Unto  the  perfect  day."  What  is  the 
perfect  day  ?  Never  seen  or  experienced  by  Christians  in  this  world.  A  poor  idea 
of  the  perfect  day  that  man  must  have  who  thinks  that  he  has  already  attained  to 
it.  The  difference  between  day  and  night  is  due  to  this,  that  the  portion  of  the 
earth  on  which  we  live  turns  towards  or  from  the  sun.  And  it  is  the  turning  of  our 
souls  towards  Him  who  is  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness  that  makes  our  night  of 
ignorance  and  sorrow  turn  into  the  day  of  knowledge  and  goodness  and  happiness. 
{Hugh  Stowell  Brown.) 

Ver.  15.  Avoid  it — Companionships  to  be  avoided : — The  same  decision  of  character 
which  men  evidence  in  their  worldly  affairs  is  necessary  also  in  the  affairs  of  eternity. 
The  duty  here  enjoined  is  one  by  no  means  pleasing  to  the  natural  mind,  and  cannot 
possibly  be  softened  down  to  suit  the  taste  of  the  worldly  man.  It  depends  not 
upon  our  inclination,  but  upon  the  command  of  God.  Our  salvation  is  at  stake. 
I.  What  soctett  we  aee  to  avoid.  Now  here  there  can  be  no  difficulty  with  regard  to 
persons  of  openly  immoral  lives,  whose  society  none  but  persons  like  themselves 
can  possibly  approve.  Again,  the  case  of  those  who  boldly  deny  religion,  or  are 
attempting  to  make  converts  to  their  own  infidel  opinions,  is  equally  clear.  But, 
doubtless,  the  maxim  goes  much  further  ;  so  that  we  ought  to  shun  the  ways,  not 
of  these  more  notorious  characters  only,  but  in  general  the  ways  of  all  who  do  not 
love  and  fear  God.  These  persons  may  be  differently  divided,  and  may  have 
various  shades  of  virtue  and  vice  amongst  them.  A  cold-hearted  formalist,  an 
inconsistent  professor  of  religion,  a  man  who  knows  what  is  right  and  Scriptural, 
but  has  no  true  feeling  of  piety  in  his  soul,  is  a  dangerous  companion  for  him  who 
would  walk  humbly  with  his  God.  Shall  we,  it  may  be  said,  go  out  of  the  world 
and  forsake  even  our  friends  and  connections  in  life  because  they  may  not  be 
religious  ?  II.  How  far  the  societt  of  those  who  do  not  love  and  fear  God  is 
to  be  avoided.  Now  here  we  cannot  as  Christians  hesitate  to  admit  that  if  it 
could  be  proved  that  the  Word  of  God  required  absolute  and  unceasing  seclusion 
from  all  who  are  not  partakers  of  true  religion,  it  would  be  our  duty  to  obey  the 
command.  But  it  is  not  necessary,  or  indeed  Scriptural,  to  suppose  that  this 
separation  from  all  worldly  things  and  persons  is  thus  entire  and  absolute,  for  then, 
as  the  apostle  argues,  we  must  needs  go  out  of  the  world.  We  may  lawfully  have 
commerce  and  transact  our  daily  affairs  with  various  persons  who  are  not  partakers 
of  true  reUgion.  Neither,  again,  must  we  forsake  the  professing  Church  of  Christ 
merely  because  many  hypocrites  and  false  members  are  to  be  found  connected  with 
it.  In  this  world  the  tares  and  the  wheat  must  thus  grow  together,  and  to  try  com- 
pletely to  separate  them  would  be  a  vain  attempt.  Nor,  still  further,  are  we  so  to 
forsake  the  society  of  men  as  to  prevent  our  labouring  for  their  salvation.  We  may 
converse  with  sinners  for  their  good.  What  we  are  then  to  avoid  is  unnecessary 
familiarity  with  sinners  and  a  disposition  to  comply  with  their  sins.  When  David 
would  describe  "  a  blessed  man,"  he  speaks  of  him  as  not  walking  in  the  counsel  of 
the  ungodly,  nor  standing  in  the  way  of  sinners,  nor  sitting  in  the  seat  of  the 
scornful.    If  our  intercourse  with  men  be  so  conducted  as  to  weaken  our  affections 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.it. 

towards  God,  destroy  the  tenderness  of  our  conscience,  make  us  forget  or  neglect 
onr  souls,  or  unfit  us  for  prayer  and  communion  with  our  Maker,  we  may  be  assured 
we  have  transgressed  the  Scriptural  limit.     III.  But  it  may  be  asked,  Why,  afteb 

Ali,  IS  THE  PATH  OF  SINNERS  TO  BE  THUS  CAREFULLY  AVOIDED  ?      Why  should  SolomOB 

so  multiply  his  cautions — "  Avoid  it,  pass  not  by  it,  turn  from  it,  and  pass  away  "  ? 
What  is  the  real  danger  ?  The  duty  under  consideration  ought  to  be  attended  to, 
both  for  our  own  sake  and  for  that  of  others.  Let  us  suppose,  then,  that  a  person 
is  really  in  earnest  respecting  his  salvation,  and  let  us  examine  what  will  be  the 
effect  of  his  neglecting  the  duty  in  question.  Alas,  how  hard  will  he  find  it  to 
preserve  the  true  spirit  of  religion  in  the  midst  of  worldly  society  !  Evil  example 
will  gradually  prevail.  The  conversation  of  the  wicked  has  far  more  power  to 
corrupt  the  righteous  than  the  conversation  of  the  righteous  to  amend  the  wicked ; 
just  as  it  is  much  easier  for  the  healthy  to  become  diseased  by  communication  with 
the  sick  than  for  the  sick  to  be  restored  by  communication  with  the  healthy.  One 
reason  why  the  society  of  those  who  are  not  truly  religious  will  be  a  great  hindrance 
to  the  Christian  is  that  if  he  will  not  give  up  the  dictates  of  his  conscience  he  must 
expect  to  meet  with  the  scoffs  of  men.  There  would  be  less  danger  to  the  Christian 
in  mixing  with  sinners  if  it  were  not  that  they  are  always  ready  to  entice  him  to 
their  evil  ways.  Good  men,  it  is  to  be  lamented,  are  not  usually  as  anxious  to  bring 
their  companions  to  the  knowledge  and  practice  of  true  religion  as  bad  men  often  are  to 
tempt  the  good  to  wander  from  it.  Many  a  person,  after  feeling  his  heart  impressed 
with  the  things  belonging  to  his  eternal  peace,  has  been  fatally  ruined  by  mixing 
with  those  who  viewed  his  religion  with  suspicion  or  contempt,  and  were  desirous  to 
make  him  forget  the  sacred  impression.  Besides,  if  we  truly  desire  to  serve  God, 
the  company  of  the  wicked  will  be  offensive  to  us.  But  the  strongest  reason  for 
obeying  the  command  in  the  text  is  that  our  salvation  is  endangered  by  the  society 
of  the  wicked.  The  man  of  wisdom  hath  taught  us,  "  He  that  walketh  with  wise 
men  shall  be  wise,  but  a  companion  of  fools  shall  be  destroyed."  (Chrittian 
Observer.)  Keep  at  a  distance : — A  noble  ship,  with  British  colours  flying 
was  making  its  way  across  the  ocean  on  a  summer  afternoon.  Yet  the  face 
of  the  pilot  wore  an  expression  of  deep  anxiety,  and  he  cast  many  uneasy  glances  in 
one  direction,  while  steadily  steering  the  opposite  way.  The  captain  came  up  to 
him  with  a  pale  and  anxious  countenance.  "  Surely  we  must  now  be  safe ?  "  "It 
is  best  to  err  on  the  right  side.  We  can  easily  get  too  near,  but  we  can  hardly  keep 
at  too  great  a  distance."  What  was  this  mysterious  peril?  It  was  a  whirlpool, 
one  of  those  deceitful  eddies  which,  once  approached,  will  draw  the  finest  vessel 
irresistibly  into  certain  destruction.  There  are  worse  whirlpools  on  land  than 
those  of  the  ocean.  There  are  sins  which,  if  you  once  come  within  their  influence, 
are  almost  sure  to  drag  you  into  their  vortex  of  ruin.  Is  not  drunkenness  one  of 
these?  Is  not  gambling  one  of  these?  Is  not  dishonesty  one  of  these?  Sins  of 
every  kind  have  something  of  this  fatal  fascination,  but  some  more  than  others. 
Keep  at  a  distance  from  the  path  of  the  destroyer.  Evil  to  be  avoided  : — There 
is  no  need  of  your  trying  to  face  certain  temptations.  You  are  foolhardy  to  try  it. 
Your  only  safety  is  in  flight.  It  is  as  fifty  against  five  thousand.  If  you  be  given 
to  appetite,  escape  the  presence  of  decanter  and  demijohn.  If  you  are  given  to 
pride,  go  not  amidst  things  that  flatter  it.  If  your  proclivity  be  toward  unclean- 
ness,  lUce  Job  make  a  covenant  with  your  eyes,  that  you  look  not  upon  a  maid. 
(T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 

Ver.  16.  Their  sleep  Is  taken  away,  nnless  they  cause  some  to  fall — The 

proselytism  of  error : — It  is  of  the  wicked  that  Solomon  here  speaks.  What  a  rest- 
lessness does  this  indicate  1  What  a  zeal  in  a  bad  cause  1  The  subject  suggested 
by  the  text  is  the  restless  activity  of  evil  men  in  the  propagation  of  evil.  A  man  is 
accountable  for  his  creed  as  well  as  for  his  practice — accountable  inasmuch  as  it 
must  be  through  his  own  fault  that  he  believes  what  is  false  just  as  much  as  it  is 
through  his  own  fault  that  he  does  what  is  wrong.  This  takes  all  force  from  the 
objection  that  they  who  sleep  not  except  they  bring  over  others  to  what  themselves 
hold  to  be  true  are  performing  a  duty  rather  than  committing  a  sin.  It  would  seem 
as  though  error  were  far  more  energetic  than  truth.  Why  should  falsehood  be 
thus  zealous  in  diffusing  itself  ?  Allowing  that  it  sets  an  example,  allowing  that 
it  addresses  a  rebuke  to  truth,  how  are  we  to  account  for  its  being  so  surprisingly 
energetic  and  devoted  ?  The  holder  of  falsehood  may  make  religion  a  matter  of 
party.  Error  is  that  which  the  warmest  adherent  may  support  from  pride,  or 
jealousy,  or  ambition,  but  truth  is  that  which  can  enlist  these  passions  in  none  but 


CHAP.  IV.]  PROVERBS,  121 

the  hypocrite.  Error  can  work  on  all  the  corruptions  of  our  nature,  whereas  truth 
has  to  hold  these  corruptions  in  check.  That  falsehood  should  have  a  missionary 
spirit  follows  on  the  fact  of  its  being  falsehood,  and  therefore  forced  to  lean  upon 
others  for  support,     (jff.  Melvill,  B.D.) 

Ver.  18.  The  path  of  the  just  is  as  the  shining  light. — The  path  of  thejutt: — 
The  essentials  of  a  just  man's  character  have  been  in  all  ages  the  same.  The  path, 
the  life-course,  of  such  a  man,  is  like  the  shining  light.  I  do  not  think  that  the 
path  of  the  justified  is  compared  to  the  course  of  the  sun,  from  the  period  of  his 
appearance  in  the  morning  to  the  time  of  his  meridian  height.  The  sun  is  an 
emblem,  not  of  the  justified,  but  of  the  Justifier.  The  just  are  those  whom  the  Sun 
of  Righteousness  shines  upon.  The  new  life  of  the  converted  is  like  the  morning 
light.  At  first  it  seems  an  uncertain  struggle  between  the  darkness  and  the  dawn. 
It  quivers  long  in  the  balance.  When  the  contest  begins,  however,  the  result  is  not 
doubtful,  although  it  may  for  a  time  appear  so.  Once  begun,  it  shineth  more  and 
more  unto  the  perfect  day ;  and  it  is  perfect  day  when  the  sun  has  arisen,  as  com- 
pared with  the  sweet  but  feeble  tints  of  earliest  dawning.  The  path  of  the  just  will 
be  like  the  morning,  it  will  increase  until  dawn  break  into  day.  The  analogy  holds 
good  more  exactly  still,  if  we  take  into  view  the  actually  ascertained  motions  of  the 
planetary  system.  When  any  portion  of  the  earth's  surface  begins  to  experience  a 
dawn  diminishing  its  darkness,  it  is  because  that  portion  is  gradually  turning  round 
towards  the  sun ;  while  any  part  of  the  earth  lies  away  from  the  sun,  in  proportion 
to  the  measure  of  its  aversion,  it  is  dark  and  cold ;  in  proportion  as  it  turns  to  him 
again,  its  atmosphere  grows  clearer,  until,  in  its  gradual  progress,  it  comes  in  sight 
of  the  sun,  and  its  day  is  perfect  then.  The  path  of  the  just  is  precisely  like  this. 
Arrested  in  his  darkness  by  a  love  in  Christ,  which  he  does  not  understand  as  yet, 
he  is  secretly  drawn  towards  Him  in  whom  that  love,  in  infinite  measure,  is 
treasured  up.  As  he  is  drawn  nearer,  his  light  increases,  until  at  last  he  finds  him- 
self in  the  presence  of  the  Lord.  There  follows  in  the  text  a  counterpart  intimation 
fitted  to  overawe  the  boldest  heart.  "  The  way  of  the  wicked  is  as  darkness ;  they 
know  not  at  what  they  stumble."  The  darkness  is  in  him.  A  dark  place  in  the 
path  may  be  got  over,  but  darkness  in  his  own  heart  the  traveller  carries  with  him 
wherever  he  goes.  To  the  blind,  every  place  and  every  time  is  alike  dark.  It  is  an 
"  evil  heart  of  unbelief."  The  way  to  get  light  is  to  turn  from  sin.  (W.  Amot,  D.D.) 
The  Christian's  light : — The  righteous  man  possesses  an  understanding  brightened 
by  the  rays  of  Divine  truth,  for  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  hath  shone  into  his  soul. 
His  heart  is  beautified  by  the  light  of  purity,  diffusing  a  pleasant  lustre  around  him 
in  his  conversation ;  and  his  spirit  is  cheered  with  the  light  of  joy  and  consolation 
from  the  countenance  of  God.  This  light  is  not  like  that  of  a  taper  which  bums 
itself  away  into  darkness,  but  like  that  of  the  morning  sun,  which  shines  brighter 
and  brighter,  till  it  blazes  with  meridian  splendour.      (G.  Lawson.)  The  path  of 

the  just: — The  point  of  resemblance  between  the  path  of  the  just  and  the  shining 
light.  I.  As  TO  ORIGIN.  The  shining  light  emerges  from  the  darkness  at  the  dawn 
of  the  day,  and  so  does  the  path  of  the  just,  or  the  believer  on  the  morning  of  con- 
version. There  is  a  great  spiritual  crisis,  call  it  by  whatever  name  you  will.  Our 
Lord  speaks  of  it  as  a  new  birth.  II.  As  to  progeess.  There  should  be  progress — 
1.  In  knowledge  of  Divine  things.  2.  In  holiness  of  heart  and  life.  3.  In  Christian 
nsefulness  and  activity.  4.  In  growing  meetness  for  heaven.  III.  As  to  perfec- 
tion. Progress  ending  in  perfection,  but  not  here.  The  perfect  day  is  not  for 
earth,  but  for  heaven.  As  to  knowledge  of  Divine  things,  here  we  know  in  part, 
there  we  shall  know  even  as  we  are  known.  Here  the  feeble  intellect  is  soon  ex- 
hausted in  its  search  after  knowledge,  there  it  shall  soar  with  untiring  wing.  As  to 
purity,  what  a  change  !  There  are  spots  on  the  disc  of  the  brightest  sun  that  ever 
shone,  but  there  are  none  on  the  spotless  robes  that  have  been  made  white  in  the 
blood  of  the  Lamb.  As  to  useful  activity,  it  will  assume  a  more  exalted  character, 
it  will  embrace  a  wider  range.  {A.  Wallace,  D.D.)  The  path  of  the  just : — I.  The 
CHARACTER  OF  THIS  MAN — the  just  man.  A  just  or  righteous  man  is  he  who  conforms 
himself  to  the  laws  of  God's  government  over  men.  The  perfectly  just  man  is  he 
who  has  never  in  any  matter  trampled  upon  the  rule  of  life  laid  down  by  the  all- 
wise  God,  and  who  continues  to  walk  onwards  by  the  same  perfect  rule.  But  no 
such  character  is  to  be  found  among  men.  The  all-wise  God  has  found  out  a  waj 
whereby  He  may  be  just  and  the  justifier  of  them  that  believe  in  Jesus.  All  the 
righteousness  and  merit  of  God's  own  Son  becomes  theirs.  The  child  of  faith  is  the 
only  joBt  man.    II.  Thb  btarting-point  of  his  life-course — from  dawn.     1.  The 


122  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  rr, 

believer  is  likened  to  the  light,  inasmuch  as  now  he  has  attained  to  wisdom, 
holiness,  and  happiness.  Light,  as  symbolical  of  the  good,  speaks  to  us  of  the 
enlightenment  of  the  understanding,  the  purity  of  holiness,  and  true  happiness. 
Light  is  also  significant  of  natural  good,  of  happiness.  2.  The  believer  is  likened 
to  the  shining  light,  or  the  bright  dawn  of  morning.  This  figure  speaks  to  us  of 
the  transcendent  beauty  of  holiness.  It  is  the  heavenly  ideal  of  all  that  is  bright 
and  fair  and  fresh.  III.  His  actual  coubse — shineth  more  and  more.  Growth  is 
the  one  grand  law  in  the  kingdom  of  light.  The  believer  at  his  new  birth  is  but  a 
babe  in  Christ.  The  children  of  the  kingdom  grow  from  strength  to  strength. 
Where  there  is  no  growth  there  is  no  life.  Perfect  manhood,  "  the  measure 
of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ,"  is  the  goal  short  of  which  no  child  of 
the  Father  dare  stop.  Every  being  grows  according  to  the  measure  of  his  own 
inward  nature,  and  so  does  the  child  of  God.  This  Divine  necessity  of  the 
Christian's  growth  is  symbolised  by  the  figure  of  the  text.  The  Christian's  growth, 
like  all  growth,  is  gradual ;  it  even  proceeds  often  by  means  of  apparent  retrogres- 
sions. Often  the  Christian  seems  to  retrograde.  Yet  even  from  a  sad  eclipse  he 
will  come  forth,  shining  with  a  fuller  splendour  of  blessed  light.  IV.  His  ooAii — 
everlasting  noon — the  "  perfect  day."  From  the  path  of  the  just  all  shadows  of  the 
darkness  shall  pass  away.  Children  of  light  though  we  be,  we  are  often  doing  the 
deeds  of  darkness  and  walking  in  the  dark  and  cloudy  day  of  trial.  But  it  shall 
not  be  so  always.  A  Godlike  purity,  and  God  Himself  as  our  joy,  constitute  the 
two  elements  of  the  light  of  the  perfect  day,  into  which  our  faith  and  patience  grow 
more  and  more.      (Jamet  Hamilton,   M.A.)  The  path  of  the  jutt: — I.  Thi 

BKLIEVEK'S  NATUBAIi  8TATB  OF  DABKNESS  AND  MISEBT.  II.  ThE  BRrLLlANT  COUBSE  HE 
PDBSUES  AFTEB  BEING  TURNED  EBOM  DABKNESS  TO  LIGHT.       His  Way  is  aS  the  "  shiuing 

light."  1.  Beautiful  in  its  appearance.  The  light  of  grace  begins  from  the  first 
to  adorn  the  actions  of  the  righteous.  Their  simplicity  of  mind  and  teachableness 
of  spirit  endear  them  to  all  their  brethren ;  their  lowliness  and  humility  attract 
universal  notice,  while  the  fervour  of  their  love  excites  admiration  and  esteem. 
The  very  shades  in  their  character  serve  as  a  contrast  to  the  excellency  of  the 
change  that  has  passed  upon  them.  As  they  proceed,  their  graces  are  more 
matured,  and  even  thus  early  they  "  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  their  Saviour." 
2.  They  shall  continue  to  be  beneficial  in  their  influence.  They  have  a  work  to 
do,  and  God  will  ensure  them  in  a  course  of  well-doing,  or  the  Divine  purpose 
would  fail.  3.  Believers,  like  the  sun,  are  constant  in  their  progress.  The  sun 
invariably  pursues  his  wonted  course.  The  believer's  progress  is  directed  by  the 
same  power.  III.  The  glorious  consummation  of  the  text.  {The  National 
Preacher.)  The  path  of  the  just : — It  is  not  from  the  observation  of  earthly  cir- 
cumstances that  we  believe  in  the  reign  of  eternal  righteousness.  It  is  because  the 
voice  of  God  has  spoken  the  truth  into  the  hearts  of  men,  because  we  are  ethical 
beings,  because  we  know  by  the  divinest  instinct  within  us  that  righteousness 
reigns.  The  destiny  of  men  is  ethically  determined.  It  is  not  so  altogether  upon 
this  earth,  where  great  distinctions  are  created  through  other  circumstances ;  but 
in  the  long  run,  in  the  eternal  issue,  moral  character  will  determine   destiny. 

I.  The  beauty  of  the  simile.  The  reference  is  evidently  to  the  light  of  day,  the 
sunlight.     It  suggests — 1.  Gladness.     2.  Power.     3.  Beauty.     4.  Order.     5.  Glory. 

II.  The  progressive  aspect.  From  dawn  to  full  day.  The  life  of  the  just  is  not 
completed  at  once.     All  progress.      Not  all  at  the  same  rate.     III.  The  wobds 

"  path    of    the    just  "    INCLUDE    CHABACTEE,  CONDITION,  AND    DESTINY.       The    light    of 

goodness,  of  joy,  and  of  glorious  destiny.  And  these  three  things  are  involved  in 
one  another.  (John  Thomas,  M.A.)  The  path  of  the  just,  like  the  shining  light: — 
Religious  virtue  is  recommended  to  our  affectionate  esteem,  to  our  choice  and 
constant  pursuit,  by  the  character  of  wisdom.  The  goodness  of  the  sincere  is  like 
the  morning  dawn,  which  is  weak  in  its  beginning,  but  gradually  increases  in  bright- 
ness, till  it  arises  to  its  meridian  glory.  The  path  of  the  just  is  nothing  else  but 
the  practice  of  virtue,  of  moral  piety,  of  righteousness,  of  temperance,  of  charity. 
The  whole  of  virtue  is  comprehended,  and  every  essential  branch  of  it  must  be 
reduced  to  practice  in  the  path  of  the  just.  1.  The  way  of  the  just,  morally  con- 
eidcred,  is  a  regular  scheme  formed  according  to  one  model,  and  under  one  uniform 
direction.  The  principle  of  virtue  is  always  an  unvarying  guide,  admirable  for  its 
simplicity,  without  a  mixture  of  interfering  counsels,  without  a  diversity  of 
inconsistent  views.  2.  The  path  of  the  just  is  accompanied  with  inward 
serenity  and  satisfaction.  The  principles  of  religion,  diffusing  their  influence 
through  the  whole  scheme  of  life,  set  everything  about  as  in  a  fair  and  amiable 


CHAP,  rr.]  PROVERBS.  12S 

light.  3.  The  path  of  the  just  sends  light  abroad — that  is,  communicates  profit- 
able instraction  to,  and  hath  a  useful  influence  on,  those  who  have  the 
opportunity  of  observing  it.  The  path  of  the  just  is  like  the  spring  of  the  day 
animated  by  an  inward  undecaying  principle ;  it  rises  in  splendour  from  its  low 
and  more  obscure  beginnings, going  on  gradually  to  perfection.  {J.Abemethy,M.A.) 
The  path  of  the  just,  or  persevering  piety  : — The  just  man  here  is  not  the  man  who 
merely  begins,  it  is  the  man  who  perseveres.  This  man's  path  is  no  meteor,  which 
gleams  and  expires  ;  no  rising  day,  lowering  into  mist  and  darkness ;  it  is  the  path 
of  the  cloudless  light  of  heaven.  Persevering  piety  is  as  the  light  that  shineth 
more  and  more.  I.  Because  of  the  incbeasino  demonstration  which  it  rxra- 
NiSHES  OF  THE  TRUTH  AND  EXCELLENCY  OF  RELIGION.  There  are  many  proofs  of 
that  excellency,  some  argumentative,  others  experimental.  These  last  have  always 
an  increasing  power.  II.  Perseverino  piett  possesses  in  increasing  assdrancs 
OT  THE  Divine  favour.  This  is  the  very  light  of  the  soul,  the  only  source  of  peace 
in  the  conscience.  At  first  it  is  obtained  by  faith  ;  but  in  the  case  we  are  supposing 
faith  grows  into  a  habit,  and  keeps  the  soul  in  perfect  peace.  III.  Persevering 
PIETY  has  increasing  PLEASURES.  There  can  be  no  growing  happiness  without  a 
preserved  sense  of  Divine  acceptance.  Piety  opens  sources  of  mental  pleasures : 
pure,  because  not  applied  to  sinful  objects  ;  rich  and  constant,  because  flowing  from 
sources  of  real  good.  All  these  have  in  them  a  principle  of  increase.  Increasing 
pleasures  are  opened  by  the  Word  and  ordinances  of  God,  by  Christian  communion 
and  religious  exertions.  All  these,  to  a  spirit  prepared  for  them  by  the  salvation 
which  is  of  grace,  through  faith,  present  pleasures  which  never  cloy,  which  afford 
richer  and  still  richer  satisfaction.     IV.  Persevering  piety  has  the  advantaqk 

OF   AN   increasing    EVIDENCE    OF    THE  WISDOM    AND    CARS    OF    GoD  IN  HiS  PROVIDENTIAIj 

ARRANGEMENTS.  The  man  who  perseveres  in  piety  is  more  wise  to  see,  and  more 
careful  to  mark,  the  abounding  instances  of  Divine  interposition.     V.  Persevering 

PIETY   HAS    BRIGHTER   AND   MORE    CHEERING   VIEWS   OF    THE   ETERNAL    STATE.      The  COU- 

viction  of  the  world's  vanity,  experience  of  the  world's  trials,  are  designed  to  quicken 
the  progress  of  the  affections  towards  man's  heavenly  home.  Everything  in  piety 
moves  towards  God ;  but  it  is  God  in  heaven,  as  fully  revealed  there.  1.  See,  then, 
that  your  path  be  indeed  the  path  of  the  just.  Walk  in  it  by  the  strength  of 
regenerate  habits,  fed  by  prayer,  and  by  communion  with  God.  2.  Remember  that 
the  way  of  the  wicked  is  darkness  ;  it  is  all  error  and  perplexity.  3.  Recollect,  for 
your  encouragement,  that,  bright  and  cheering  as  is  the  light  upon  your  path,  it  is 
but  the  light  of  the  morning.  {R.  Watson.)  Two  paths  before  the  young  man : — 
The  Word  of  God  hath  imposed  upon  man  a  choice  of  alternatives.  Two  ways — two 
ends ;  two  characters — two  consequences ;  two  aims  or  objects  in  the  life  that  now  is — 
two  states  or  conditions  in  the  life  that  is  to  come.  When  the  alternative  is  presented 
to  a  rational  and  responsible  being  we  think  he  can  only  make  one  choice ;  he  would 
surely  reject  the  evil  and  embrace  the  good.  Two  things,  however,  are  practically 
opposed  to  this  reasonable  conclusion  ;  the  choice  may  be  evaded  or  postponed,  and 
human  philosophy  and  vain  deceit  have  left  no  artifices  unassayed  to  perplex  what 
God  has  made  straight.  The  period  of  life  when  for  the  most  part  the  path  of  the 
individual  is  to  be  chosen  is  that  of  youth  ;  a  stage  of  life  in  which  the  passions 
are  strong,  and  the  judgment  is  weak,  the  mind  sometimes  scantily  furnished,  and 
the  will  too  often  altogether  unregulated  and  uncontrolled.  Hence,  in  a  moral 
sense,  the  period  of  youth  is  doubly  endangered,  because,  impetuous  and  precipitate 
in  its  very  nature,  and  urged  by  impulse  rather  than  actuated  by  principle,  it  will 
not  readily  pause  to  deliberate  at  all ;  and  if  it  does,  false  views  are  enticingly  pre- 
sented to  it.  The  one  of  these  dangers — which  the  apostle  calls  the  "  vain  deceit  of 
philosophy  " — may  be  escaped  by  taking  truth  for  a  counsellor ;  and  the  other — the 
perilous  folly  of  procrastination — by  hearkening  to  reason  as  our  guide.  I.  The 
PATH  OF  the  JUST.  The  path  of  "light"  is  that  which  discloses  to  those  who 
pursue  it  their  own  motive  of  action  ;  to  others  who  examine  them,  their  principles ; 
and  both  to  themselves  and  to  others  who  assume  the  same  standard  of  judgment, 
the  consequences  of  those  actions.  Ignorance  of  what  is  personally,  relatively, 
socially,  or  even  politically  right,  can  never  co-exist  with  a  genuine  belief  in  the 
gospel  of  Christ  Jesus.  By  the  "just"  we  understand  the  man  who  has  deter- 
mined to  do  right  simply  because  it  is  right ;  resolving  all  first  principles  of  right 
into  the  expressed  and  recorded  wiU  of  God.  By  the  "  path  "  of  such  a  man  we 
understand  the  habitual  tenor  of  his  course  and  conduct  among  mankind.  II.  The 
WAY  OF  THE  WICKED.  By  the  "  wicked  "  we  understand  the  man  who  is  indifferent  to  that 
which  is  good ;  who  acknowledges,  or  at  least  obeys,  no  law  of  action  but  his  own 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.it, 

pleasure,  or  his  own  interest,  or  his  own  inclination,  or  his  own  appetite.  The  way 
of  such  a  man  ia  "  darkness,"  from  the  absence  of  any  fixed  principle  or  of  any  cer- 
tain end.  If  peace  is  essential  to  happiness,  on  Scriptural  principles  happiness 
never  can  be  realised  by  the  ungodly.  All  nature  is  full  of  enemies  to  him  who 
hath  not  God  for  his  friend.  See,  then,  the  importance  of  making  the  right 
choice  in  early  life.  {Thomas  Dale,  M.A.)  Of  increase  of  grace,  and  per- 
severance therein  unto  the  end : — Increase  of  grace  and  perseverance  are 
benefits  flowing  from  or  accompanying  justification.  I.  Increase  ob  growth 
OF  GRACE.  That  real  grace  does  increase  is  evident  from  three  things. 
Scripture  testimony.  God  has  appointed  a  certain  stature  that  His  children 
shall  grow  to.  This  is  the  end  of  Divine  influences  and  the  effect  of  Divine 
ordinances.    II.  How    a  Christian   grows   in   grace.     1.   Inward,    into    Christ. 

2.  Outward,  in  good  works,  in  all  the  parts  of  a  holy  life,  piety  towards 
God,  and  righteousness  towards  men.  3.  Upward,  in  a  heavenly  disposition. 
4.  Downward,  in  humility,  self-denial,  self-loathing,  resignation  to  the  will  of  God. 
in.  The  causes  of  this  growth.  1.  Union  with  Christ.  2.  Communion  with 
Christ  in  His  ordinances  and  in  His  providences.  IV.  The  difference  between 
true  and  false  growths.  1.  True  Christian  growth  is  universal.  2.  The  hypo- 
crite soon  comes  to  a  stand,  the  Christian  goes  on  to  perfection.  V.  True  grace 
GROWS  always.  1.  It  does  not  always  grow,  nor  at  every  particular  season.  2.  It 
never  decays  utterly.  3.  A  Christian  may  be  growing  and  yet  not  be  sensible  of  it. 
This  may  cause  fear  and  trembling.  (T.  Boston.)  Perseverance  in  grace  is  another 
benefit  flowing  from  or  accompanying  justification.  I.  What  this  perseverance 
is.  To  persevere  is  to  continue  and  abide  in  a  state  into  which  one  is  brought. 
II.  How  IS  this  perseverance  to  be  understood.  1.  Not  of  all  who  profess 
Christ.  2.  Of  all  real  saints,  those  who  are  endowed  with  saving  grace. 
Saints  may  lose  the  evidence  of  grace,  so  that  they  cannot  discern  it  in 
themselves.  They  may  lose  the  exercise  of  grace.  They  may  lose  much 
of  the  measure  of  grace  they  have  had.  III.  The  saints  shall  perse- 
vere   TO     THE     END.      IV.   WhAT    ARE     THE     THINGS    WHICH     MAKE    HYPOCRITES     FALL 

AWAY?  1.  Satan's  temptations.  2.  The  world's  snares.  3.  The  corruptions 
and  lusts  of  the  heart.  V.  The  grounds  of  the  perseverance  of  the  saints. 
1.  The  unchangeable  decree  of  God's  election  flowing  from  the  free  and  unchange- 
able love  of  the  Father  to  them.     2.  The  merit  and  intercession  of  Christ  the  Son. 

3.  The  perpetual  abiding  of  the  Spirit.  4.  The  nature  of  the  covenant  of  grace. 
VI.  The  means  of  perseverance.  1.  God's  ordinances  and  providences.  2.  The 
duties  of  religion,  and  exercise  of  the  graces,  faith,  fear,  watchfulness,  &c.  Then 
look  well  to  the  foundation  of  your  religion,  for  sincerity  will  last,  but  hypocrisy  is  a 
disease  in  the  vitals  that  will  end  in  death.  Let  those  whose  care  it  is  to  be 
found  in  Christ  be  comforted  amidst  all  their  temptations,  snares,  and  corruptions, 
in  that  God  has  begun  the  good  work  and  will  perfect  it.  {T.  Boston,  D.D.)  The 
Christian  life  a  progressive  state  : — I.  It  is  in  every  man's  power  to  make  his 
LIFE  A  progressive  STATE.  If  wc  tracc  the  progress  of  the  human  mind  from  the 
first  dawnings  of  sense  and  reason,  we  may  see  from  what  small  beginnings  it 
acquires  a  prodigious  store  of  intellectual  knowledge.  The  moral  powers,  like  the 
natural  perfections  of  the  body,  are  more  equally  distributed  than  the  intellectual ; 
and  in  them  there  is  as  large  a  field  laid  open  for  our  advancement  towards  perfec- 
tion as  there  is  in  the  intellectual.  No  man  knows  what  he  can  do  till  he  is  firmly 
resolved  to  do  whatever  he  can.  There  are  often  abilities  unknown  to  the  possessors 
which  lie  hid  in  the  mind  for  want  of  an  occasion  to  call  them  forth.  One  can 
scarcely  have  too  high  an  opinion  of  the  powers  of  the  human  soul,  especially  in 
the  affair  of  our  salvation,  and  scarce  too  low  an  opinion  of  men's  inclinations  to 
exert  these  powers  in  that  important  case.  But  God  gives  to  every  man  adapted 
and  effectual  grace.  We  have  the  same  natural  power,  the  same  gracious  aid  and 
assistance,  for  persevering  and  improving  in  every  virtue  and  grace,  as  we  had 
originally  for  attaining  them.  What,  then,  should  restrain  or  hinder  our  continual 
progress?  One  reason  why  men  do  not  quicken  their  pace  more  in  the  ways  of 
goodness  is  the  mistaken  judgment  they  form  by  using  a  deceitful  standard.  They 
are  not  at  any  trouble  to  get  exact  notions  of  perfection  and  goodness,  and  to 
examine  their  lives  by  such  truly  imitable  patterns.  So  far,  then,  from  considering 
this  life  as  a  dull  round  of  the  same  insignificant  trifles,  we  ought  to  look  upon  it  as 
an  indefinite  line  wherein  every  step  we  take  is,  or  ought  to  be,  an  important  and 
valuable  advance  in  goodness.  II.  Some  reasons  and  considerations  to  enoagb 
UB  IN  nucH  A  practice.     1.   This  progressive  state  ia  oar  duty.     God's  design  is  to 


OBif.  IT.]  PROVERBS.  135 

make  men  as  virtaons  and  pious  as  possible.  It  is  in  our  power  to  make  a  con- 
stant  and  continued  progress  in  the  kinds  of  these  perfections,  and  thence  arises  our 
obligation  to  advance  in  the  degrees  as  far  as  the  sum  of  our  faculties,  exercised 
and  improved  to  the  utmost,  can  carry  us.  Our  condemnation  wiU  not  lie  in  this, 
that  we  did  not  exactly  transcribe  the  original,  but  that  we  did  not  make  the  copy 
so  complete  as  was  in  our  power.  If  a  man  thinks  himself  already  as  virtuous  and 
good  as  he  needs  to  be,  it  is  a  certain  sign  that  he  has  not  yet  arrived  at  any 
eminence  in  virtue.  2.  The  advantages  we  shall  reap  from  the  progressive  state. 
(1)  It  will  supersede  the  trust  and  confidence  which  too  many  are  apt  to  repose  in 
repentance.  (2)  It  is  the  best  means  for  bringing  us  to  a  uniform  and  unreserved 
obedience.  (3)  It  is  the  only  security  for  our  preservance  in  such  obedience.  (4)  It 
is  the  best  testimony  we  can  have  of  our  being  in  a  salvable  condition.    Eeflections : 

1.  How  groundless  and  unreasonable  are  all  complaints  of  human  life  as  an  insig- 
nificant, capricious,  and  wayward  state.  2.  If  the  progressive  is  the  right  state  of 
life,  what  shall  we  think  of  those  who  are  pursuing  an  opposite  course  ?  (J.  Seed, 
M.J..)  The  progressive  lustre  of  the  Christian's  character  and  example  : — The  use 
of  light  is  twofold — it  enables  us  to  see  and  to  be  seen  ;  and  from  this  twofold  use  of 
light  arises  a  twofold  application  of  the  text.  I.  The  path  of  the  just,  as  he  sees 
IT  himself.  "  As  a  shining  light."  1.  Because  it  is  the  path  of  Christ.  He  is 
the  true  light.  Whatever  light  exists  upon  earth,  whether  physical,  intellectual,  or 
spiritual,  comes  from  Him  as  the  Creator  by  whom  all  things  were  made.  By  Him 
the  lights  of  reason  and  of  conscience  were  lit  up  in  the  soul  of  man  to  guide  him 
to  a  knowledge  of  God  and  duty.  And  after  the  candle  of  the  Lord  had  been  so 
dimmed  and  defiled  by  sin  as  to  become  comparatively  useless,  then  did  He,  as  the 
Sun  of  Righteousness,  arise  with  healing  in  His  beams,  to  restore  in  the  minds  of  Hig 
believing  people  that  light  which  sin  had  so  grievously  obscured  and  beclouded.  To 
this  light  the  eyes  of  God's  people  were  from  the  earliest  ages  of  the  world  directed, 
for  its  dawn  was  coeval  with  the  fall  of  man.  Taking  the  Lord  Jesus  as  his  guide 
and  exemplar  in  the  ways  of  salvation,  the  path  of  the  just  is  as  a  shining  light. 

2,  In  respect  of  the  increasing  certainty  and  confidence  wherewith  he  walks  in  it. 
As  the  rays  of  light  move  in  straight  lines,  so  also  the  path  of  the  just  is  a  straight- 
forward path — free  from  those  perplexing  turnings  and  windings  which  mark  the 
ways  of  worldly  wisdom  and  carnal  policy.  It  is  also  a  path  of  security  in  which 
he  can  walk  without  fear  of  danger.  The  path  is  moreover  pleasant  and  joyful.  So 
far,  then,  as  his  own  understanding  and  feelings  are  concerned,  the  analogy 
between  the  path  of  the  just  and  the  shining  light  is  evident  and  exact.  II.  The 
path  of  the  just  as  it  appeaks  to  his  neiqhboues.  As  the  light  of  Divine  truth 
and  love  is  reflected  to  us  from  the  person  and  character  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
in  like  manner  the  light  of  His  grace  and  holiness  is  reflected  to  the  world  from  the 
lives  and  characters  of  His  faithful  disciples.  As  a  comet  increases  in  brilliancy  in 
proportion  to  the  nearness  of  its  approach  to  the  sun,  so  the  Christian's  light  will 
always  be  more  conspicuous  in  proportion  to  the  closeness  of  his  communion  with 
the  Sun  of  Righteousness.  As  light  is  the  most  plain  and  conspicuous  object  in 
nature,  so  the  Christian,  walking  in  the  integrity  of  his  heart,  is  so  transparent  and 
straightforward  a  character  as  to  be  known  and  approved  of  all.  As  the  same  light 
shining  upon  a  smooth  and  polished  surface  is  reflected  with  greater  lustre  than 
from  a  rough  and  muddy  one,  so  the  same  grace  is  reflected  with  greater  brilliancy 
by  some  Christians  than  by  others.  As  a  professed  follower  and  disciple  of  the  Son 
of  God,  the  Christian  is  imperatively  called  upon  to  let  his  "  light  shine  before  men." 
If  we  are  the  children  of  light,  we  are  called  upon  to  walk  as  such.  Beware,  then, 
of  continuing  in  the  dim  twilight  of  a  lukewarm  and  unstable  profession.  Look  to 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Sun  of  Righteousness.  Take  Him  for  your  guide  and 
exemplar,  and  He  will  assuredly  lead  you  to  everlasting  joy.  (William  Ford  Vance, 
M.A.)  Quiet  progress  : — All  life  means  progress.  Stagnation  is  death.  Our  life  ia 
either  a  halt,  a  return,  or  a  pressing  forward.  I.  In  quiet  times  we  see  more  ok 
the  truth.  II.  It  shows  us  more  in  truth.  Not  only  more  of  it,  but  more  in  it. 
III.  In  quiet  progress  we  make  more  use  of  truth.  Through  quiet  progress  in  our 
lives,  we  are  extending  Christ's  kingdom.  IV.  In  this  quiet  progress  tou  will  bb 
more  reconciled  to  changes  that  must  comb.  V.  We  are  more  restful  in  thb 
INNER  evidences  OF  TRUTH.  (W.  M.  Statham.)  On  the  progressive  nature  of  religion 
in  the  soul : — We  derive  a  great  part  of  our  ideas  from  comparison,  and  the  mind  ia 
pleased  with  similitudes.  No  comparison  can  be  more  appropriate  and  beautiful 
than  that  employed  in  the  text.  I.  The  character  which  is  here  denoted  bt  thb 
TERM  "just."  "  Just "  exprcsscs  a  person  who  has,  without  omission  or  fault,  fulfilled 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

every  branch  of  moral  obligation.  The  same  word  is  employed  to  denote  that 
character  which  extends  not  its  virtuous  exertions  beyond  the  discharge  of  the 
demands  of  strict  justice.  A  distinction  is  made  between  justice  and  goodness. 
"Just"  also  characterises  the  person  who,  having  adopted  right  principles,  directs  his 
conduct  by  them,  as  far  as  is  compatible  with  human  infirmity.  The  term  is  also 
employed  to  signify  those  who,  through  the  merits  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  means 
of  grace  and  salvation  which  He  hath  instituted,  are  restored  to  the  favour  of  God. 
The  two  last  of  these  meanings  come  into  the  text.  The  just  man  here  is  he  who, 
with  an  understanding  as  much  enlightened  as  his  situation  will  permit,  and  with 
a  heart  impressed  with  the  importance  of  reUgion,  endeavours  to  fulfil  the  law  of 
God,  through  the  whole  of  his  conduct,  and  renders  the  cultivation  of  holiness  and 
virtue  his  grand  and  predominant  object.  II.  All  the  faculties  or  man  are  of  a 
PKOGRESSiVE  NATURE.  The  human  faculties  ascend  to  the  most  sublime  attainments ; 
but  for  this  progressive  and  boundless  improvement,  culture  and  discipline  are 
necessary.  The  faith  of  the  just  man,  though  founded  on  rational  convictions,  will, 
at  first,  be  weak  and  wavering.  Whether  he  contemplate  nature  or  revelation,  he  will 
meet  with  obscurity  to  perplex,  with  difiBculties  to  embarrass,  and  with  objections  to 
stagger  him.  But  though  these  obscurities  hang  over  the  path  of  the  good  man, 
and  these  obstacles  start  up,  as  he  advances,  they  neither  involve  him  in  complete 
darkness,  nor  even  retard  his  progress.  As  the  faith  of  the  man  truly  pious 
advances  with  increasing  brightness,  his  works  observe  the  same  tenor.  From  the 
frailties  and  defects  incident  to  humanity,  the  man  of  piety  and  virtue  is  not  exempt. 
But  the  good  man  sins  from  infirmity  alone,  loathes  himself  on  account  of  every 
fault  he  commits,  and  strives  to  acquire  greater  firmness  and  resolution  against 
future  temptations.  Advancing  in  his  vjrtuous  progress,  he  acquires,  at  every  step, 
fresh  vigour  and  alacrity,  and,  at  last,  arrives  at  that  confirmed  habit  of  obedience, 
which  places  him  beyond  the  power  of  such  temptations  as  seem  to  other  men 
irresistible,  and  enables  him,  through  Divine  grace,  to  triumph,  in  some  measure, 
over  nature  herself.  The  good  man  having  the  principles  of  virtue  lodged  in  his 
soul,  and  gradually  brought  forward  by  Divine  energy,  begins  his  course  with 
difficulty,  and  amidst  obscurity  and  temptation.  Gradually  doubts  and  difficulties 
disappear,  and  he  rises  at  last  to  that  settled  temper  of  virtue  and  holiness  which 
makes  him  "  a  light  shining  in  a  dark  place."  (W.  L.  Brown,  D.D.)  Signs  of 
progrett : — In  whatever  path  we  set  out,  there  is  no  standing  still.  The  grace  of 
God,  which  is  given  to  men,  lies  not  dormant.  I.  How  shall  we  know  if  we  have 
MADE  PROGRESS  IN  THE  PATHS  OF  RIGHTEOUSNESS  ?  1.  Are  you  Sensible  of  your  faults 
and  imperfections  ?  The  first  indication  of  wisdom  is  to  confess  our  ignorance,  and 
the  first  step  to  virtue  is  to  be  sensible  of  our  own  imperfections.  Till  we  feel  our 
own  weakness  we  can  never  be  strong  in  the  Lord ;  we  can  never  rise  in  the  Divine 
sight  till  we  sink  in  our  own  estimation,  2.  What  is  the  strength  of  your  attachment 
to  the  cause  of  righteousness  ?  Are  you  enamoured  with  the  beauty  of  holiness  ? 
Men  will  never  imitate  what  they  do  not  love.  If,  then,  you  are  not  lovers  of 
goodness  and  virtue,  you  never  will  be  good  and  virtuous.  3.  Are  your  resolutions 
as  firm  and  your  application  as  vigorous  now  as  when  you  first  set  out  in  the 
spiritual  life  ?  True  religion  does  not  consist  in  fits  and  starts  of  devotion.  He 
alone  is  a  good  man  who  perseveres  in  goodness.  Are  you  as  much  in  earnest  now 
as  when  your  first  love  to  God  began  to  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  righteousness  ?  As 
you  advance  in  years,  all  the  passions  will  gradually  cool.  You  will  not  feel  that 
degree  of  ardour  in  your  devotions  which  you  experienced  in  your  early  years. 
But  your  devotions  may  continue  as  sincere,  though  not  so  inflamed,  as  before, 
and  religion  may  be  as  effectual  as  ever  in  the  regulation  of  your  life.  4.  Another 
mark  of  increasing  grace  is  when  you  obey  the  Divine  commandments  from 
affection  and  love.  He  alone  will  make  progress  in  the  path  of  the  just  who  is 
drawn  by  the  cords  of  love.  II.  Directions  how  to  kake  further  progress  in  the 
PATH  OP  the  just.  1.  Make  a  serious  business  of  a  holy  life.  The  true  Christian 
will  not  be  deficient  in  his  attention  to  the  externals  of  religion  ;  but  he  will  not  rest 
there.  We  must  make  a  study  of  the  holy  life,  in  order  to  advance  from  strength 
to  strength  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord.  2.  Never  rest  satisfied  with  any  degrees  of 
hohness  or  virtue  which  you  attain.  The  law  of  the  spiritual  life  is  to  aim  at 
perfection.  Absolutely  perfect  we  can  never  become  in  this  life ;  but  we  must  be 
always  aspiring  and  endeavouring  after  perfection.  3.  Be  alway  employed  in  the 
improvement  of  your  souls.  Evil  habits  may  be  weakened  ;  inclinations  may  be 
counteracted.  You  may  call  forth  graces  that  have  not  yet  made  their  appearance, 
and  bring  forward  to  perfection  those  that  have,    4,  Abound  in  prayer  to  God  for 


eair.  rr.]  PROVERBS.  127 

the  assistance  of  His  Holy  Spirit.     HI.  Exhortation  to  a  lite  of  PBOGRESsrvE 
vmTTTE.     1.  It  is  your  duty  to  make  progress  in  the  ways  of  righteousness.     You 
must  "  abound  in  the  work  of  the  Lord  "  if  you  expect  your  labours  to  be  attended 
with  success.     2.  Be  assured  that  you  will  be  successful  in  the  attempt.     Here,  all 
who  run  may  obtain.     3.  Think  of  the  beauty  and  the  pleasantness  of  such  a 
progress.     These  are  pleasures  that  time  wUl  not  take  away.     While  the  animal 
spirits  fail,  and  the  joys  which  depend  upon  the  liveliness  of  the  passions  decline 
with  years,  the  solid  comforts  of  a  holy  life,  the  delights  of  virtue  and  a  good 
conscience,  will  be  a  new  source  of  happiness  in  old  age,  and  have  a  charm  for  the 
end  of  life.     4.  Let  me  exhort  you  to  this  progressive  state  of  virtue,  from  the  pleasant 
consideration  that  it  has  no  period.    There  are  limits  and  boundaries  set  to  all  human 
affairs ;  but  in  the  progress  of  the  mind  to  intellectual  and  moral  perfection  there 
is  no  period  set.    On  what  you  do,  on  what  you  now  do,  all  depends.    {John  Logan.) 
Progression  and  perfection : — There  are  two  ideas  in  the  text — progression  and  per- 
fection.    The  life  of  the  believer  here  and  there  is  one.    If  we  have  believed,  we 
have  everlasting  life — we  possess  already  the  immortal  life  which  will  be  perfected 
in  heaven.     I.  Pkogbession  the  chabactekistic  of  the  Chbistian  life  on  eabth. 
Is  it  a  remarkable  thing  that  we  should  look  for  the  growth  of  the  Divine  life  in 
man  ?     Ought  we  to  expect  progress  in  ourselves  as  Christians  ?    It  is  a  reasonable 
thing  for  the  parent  to  look  for  growth  in  his  child ;    and  he  is  greatly  concerned  if 
he  does  not  discover  it.     It  is  a  reasonable  thing  for  the  farmer  to  look  for  growth 
in  the  seed  which  he  has  scattered  upon  the  prepared  soil.    It  is  a  reasonable  thing 
that  men  should  expect  the  sun  to  shine  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day. 
But  let  us  put  it  to  our  own  hearts  whether  we  have  looked  for  this  progress  in 
ourselves.     What  is  God's  thought,  expressed  in  His  Word,  about  this  progression? 
Paul's  prayer  on  behalf  of  the  Ephesians,  that  they  might  be  strengthened  with  might 
by  God's   Spirit  in  the  inner  man ;    that  they  might  be  rooted  and  grounded  in 
love ;    that  they  might  comprehend  more  fully  the  love  of  Christ ;  that  they  might 
be  filled  with  the  fulness  of  God — certainly  implies  the  possibility  and  desirability 
of  progression.     Then  again,  the  words  of  the  same  apostle  concerning  the  same 
people,  that  they  "  be  no  longer  children,  .  .  .  but  growing  up  unto  Him  in  all 
things,  who  is  the  Head,  even  Christ ;  "   coming  "  unto  a  perfect  man,  unto  the 
measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ "  :    these  again  imply  the  possibility 
and  desirability  of  progression.     And  again,  Paul  desires  for  the  Colossians  that 
they  "  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  His  will  unto  all  wisdom  and  spiritual  under- 
standing ;  that  they  might  walk  worthy  of  the  Lord  unto  all  pleasing,  being  fruitful 
in  every  good  work,  and  increasing  in  the  knowledge  of  God ;  strengthened  with  all 
might  according  to  His  glorious  power  unto  all  patience  and  long-suffering  with 
joyfulness."    Shall  we  not  be  concerned  about  our  own  growth  ?    Shall  we  not  be 
grieved  if  we  do  not  grow  in  our  views  and  feelings  in  reference  to  sin  ?     The  older 
we  are  as  the  children  of  God,  the  longer  we  have  had  fellowship  with  the  Pure  and 
Holy  One,  the  more  we  should  hate  everything  which  is  sinful.     Shall  we  not  be 
grieved  if,  as  the  months  go  by,  we  do  not  find  ourselves  more  decided  and  resolute 
and  settled  in  our  religious  convictions  and  habits  ?    Shall  we  not  be  concerned  if 
we  are  not  gaining  greater  power  over  the  sin  which  easily  besets  us  ?    Shall  we  not 
be  concerned  if  we  are  not  more  humble,  more  heavenly -minded,  more  gentle  and 
forgiving,  more  Christlike  than  we  were  ?     U.  Peefection  the  chabactekistic  of 
the  Chbistian  life  in  heaven.    Progression  here ;  perfection  there.    Perfection 
there  according  to  progression  here.    Is  it  so  ?    We  think  so.    If  we  mistake  not, 
the  ordinary  notion  is — no  matter  what  our  life  may  be  here,  if  only  we  have  faith 
in  Christ,  the  moment  this  mortal  shall  put  on  immortality  we  shall  be  perfect  in 
heaven.     We  ordinarily  think  of  our  perfection  there  as  apart  from  our  progression 
here.    But  the  teaching  of  Scripture  is  not  the  stagnant  pool  here  becoming  the 
gushing  fountain  there ;  it  is  the  well  of  water  here,  and  there  springing  up  into 
everlasting  life.     It  is  not  the  babe,  or  rather  the  dwarfed  child  here,  appearing 
there  the  strong,  wise,  well-proportioned  man  ;  it  Is  the  babe  growing  up  here,  tUl 
there  he  attains  the  stature  of  the  perfect  man.    We  know  it  is  very  true,  though 
the  "  well  of  water  "  spring  up  here  ever  so  continuously  and  copiously,  it  shall 
there  in  comparison  gush  forth  like  a  fountain  of  living  waters.    If  we  search  the 
Scriptures  with  this  design  in  view,  to  discover    whether  a  careless,  inactive 
Christian  will  attain  the  same  perfection  in  heaven  as  a  man  like  the  apostle  Paul, 
we  shall  quickly  see  that  progression  here  has  something  to  do  with  perfection 
there.    What  glories  are  these  which  are  set  before  ns  t    To  be  without  sin  ;  to 
know  as  we  are  known  ;  to  love  as  we  are  loved ;   to  have  ourselves  possessed  with 


128  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  IT. 

the  peace  of  God.  Every  one  of  U8  will  reach  the  perfect  day.  There  ■will  be  no 
imperfection  in  heaven.  Yet  those  who  grow  more  here  shall  have  larger 
capabilities  there.  Those  who  are  the  more  faithful  here  shall  have  the  larger 
range  for  faithfulness  there.  Here  is  something  to  fill  us  with  joyful  anticipation. 
{James  Neobard.)  From  dawn  to  noon: — No  nobler  expression  has  ever  been 
given  of  the  great  thought  of  Christian  progress  than  these  words  contain.  But  it 
is  not  always  observed  that  that  thought  is  presented  twice  in  the  text,  once  in  the 
familiar  condensed  metaphor  of  life  as  a  path,  and  once  in  the  lovely  expanded 
figure  which  follows.  A  path  leads  some  whither ;  and  the  travellers  on  it  are 
marching  in  a  definite  direction.  Then,  if  we  turn  to  the  other  emblem  of  our  text, 
the  idea  is  even  more  completely  carried  out  in  the  original  than  our  translation 
would  suggest  to  an  ordinary  reader.  For  the  words  rendered  "  shining  light  "  do 
really  mean  "  light  of  dawn,"  and  those  rendered  "perfect  day"  do  really  mean, 
literally  though  clumsily  translated,  "  the  steadfast  (moment)  of  the  day,"  the 
instant  when  the  sun  seems  to  pause  on  the  meridian,  like  the  tongue  of  the  balance 
right  in  the  centre,  and  inclining  to  neither  side.     I.  So  let  me  ask  you  to  look, 

FIRST,    AT    THE    GREAT   POSSIBILITY    OPENED   HERB    FOR   US    ALL.       NoW,    it    iS    trUC  that 

every  life,  of  whatever  kind,  tends  to  completeness  in  its  own  kind ;  that  the  good 
becomes  better,  and  the  bad  worse.  Single  actions  consolidate  into  habits,  just  as 
the  minute  grains  of  sand,  beneath  the  pressure  of  the  ocean,  are  hardened  into 
rock.  Convictions  acted  on  are  strengthened.  Light  stands  as  the  emblem  of  three 
things — knowledge,  purity,  and  joy.  The  Christian  life  is  capable  of  continual 
increase  in  all  three.  1.  It  is  capable  of  continual  increase  in  knowledge.  Of  course, 
I  do  not  mean  merely  the  intellectual  apprehension  of  certain  propositions  which 
are  received  as  true.  We  know  a  book  or  a  science  or  a  thought  in  one  way ;  we 
know  a  person  in  another  ;  and  Christian  knowledge  is  the  knowledge  of  God  in 
Christ,  and  of  Christ  in  God.  That  knowledge  is  something  a  great  deal  more 
warm-blooded  and  full-pulsed  than  an  intellectual  perception  of  the  truth  of  a  state- 
ment. And  it  is  this  knowledge  which  it  is  intended  should  grow  unceasingly  in 
Christian  experience,  and  in  our  daily  life.  We  have  an  infinite  object  on  whom 
to  fix  our  minds  and  hearts.  A  man  begins  to  be  a  Christian  when  perhaps  through 
many  a  cloud,  and  with  many  hesitations  and  doubts,  and  with  a  very  inadequate 
apprehension  of  the  truth  that  he  is  receiving  and  the  Person  that  he  is  grasping, 
his  faith  puts  out  an  empty  hand,  and  lays  hold  of  Christ  as  his  hope  and  his  all. 
But  as  his  days  go  on,  if  he  be  truly  in  possession  of  that  initial  truth,  he  will  find 
that  it  opens  out  into  splendours,  and  discloses  depths  and  assumes  a  power  con- 
trolling all  life  and  thought,  which  he  never  dreamt  of  when  he  first  apprehended 
it.  We  begin,  like  gold-seekers,  with  surface-washings ;  we  end  with  crushing 
quartz.  We  begin  on  the  edge  of  the  great  continent,  we  travel  onwards  and  in- 
wards, through  all  the  leagues  of  its  mountains  and  plains  and  lakes,  and  we  never 
shall  traverse  it  altogether.  Life  interprets  Christ,  if  we  let  Christ  interpret  life. 
When  the  night  of  sorrow  closes  in  over  our  heads,  there  are  truths  that  shine  out 
bright  and  starry,  like  the  light  points  in  a  keen,  frosty  winter's  night,  which  never 
could  be  seen  in  the  garish  day.  2.  Again,  the  Christian  life  is  capable  of  a 
perpetual  increase  in  purity.  And  if  a  man  be  truly  a  Christian,  there  is  nothing 
more  certain  than  that,  day  by  day,  his  conscience  will  become  more  sensitive  and 
quick  to  discriminate  between  good  and  evil.  The  more  we  rise  in  the  moral  scale, 
the  more  solemn,  sovereign,  and  far  reaching  we  discern  the  commandment  to  be, 
that  we  shall  be  like  our  Lord.  Depend  upon  it,  all  of  us  have  things  in  our  characters, 
and  acts  in  our  daily  ordering  of  our  lives,  which,  if  we  had  advanced  further  along  the 
path,  we  should  avoid  as  a  pestilence.  3.  Again,  the  Christian  life  is  capable  of  a 
continual  increase  in  gladness.  Yes  !  "  As  sorrowful,  yet  always  rejoicing."  All 
other  kinds  of  gladness  fade,  and  all  other  sources  pass  away.  But  Jesus  Christ's 
gladness,  as  He  said  Himself,  is  given  to  us  that  our  "  joy  may  be  full,"  because 
His  joy  remains  in  us.  Time  takes  the  gloss  off  most  things.  It  does  not  take  the 
brightness  out  of  the  Christian  life.  II.  Let  us  mark  the  frequent  failure  to 
BBALisE  THIS  POSSIBILITY.  What  I  havc  been  saying  must  sound  to  many  of  us  liker 
irony  than  a  description  of  fact,  when  we  turn  our  eyes  from  the  possibility  for 
which  provision  is  made  by  the  gift  of  an  infinite  Christ,  and  an  infinite  Spirit,  to 
the  facts  of  Christian  experience  as  we  see  them  lying  round  us.  Progress !  Stag- 
nation is  the  truth  about  hosts  of  us.  A  path  1  Well,  it  is  a  circular  path  if  it  is  a 
path  at  all.  They  mark  time,  as  the  soldiers  say,  one  foot  up  and  the  other  down, 
nut  the  feet  are  always  planted  in  the  same  place.  Sure  I  am  that  in  a  tragically 
large  number  of  cases  a  professing  Christian's  early  days  are  his  best.     Many  of  ua 


CaiF.  IT.]  PROVERBS.  129 

teem  to  have  gone  to  school  to  the  Japanese  gardeners,  that  will  take  you  an  oak, 
ftnd  stick  it  into  a  flower-pot,  and  stunt  it  there,  so  that  it  is  warranted  never  to 
break  the  flower-pot,  and  never  to  grow  an  inch.  There  is  another  kind  of  opposite  to 
that  steady  increase  in  brightness  only  too  common  amongst  us,and  that  is — spasmodic 
growth  by  fits  and  starts ;  brief  summer  followed  by  a  dreary  winter,  and  no  continuous 
and  steadfast  advance.  III.  Lastly,  let  me  ask  tou  to  consideb  the  cure  of  the 
TAiLUBE,  AND  THE  WAT  OP  REALISING  THE  possiBiLiTT.  What  made  a  man  who  is 
a  Christian  in  reality  light  at  first  ?  The  apostle  tells  us,  "  Now  are  ye  light  in  the 
Lord."  The  reason  why  so  many  Christian  people  do  not  grow  ia  because  there  is 
no  depth  and  reality  of  union  between  them  and  Jesus  Christ ;  and  there  is  no 
depth  or  reality  of  union  between  them  and  Jesus  Christ  because  they  have  no 
strength  of  faith.  It  is  not  merely  for  getting  escape  from  some  hell,  or  forgiveness 
for  sins,  that  that  faith  is  essential,  but  it  is  needful  that  there  may  be  flowing  into 
our  hearts  that  which  will  change  our  darkness  into  radiance  of  light.  Take  a  lesson 
from  your  electric  lights.  The  instant  that  you  break  the  contact,  that  instant  the 
flame  disappears.  The  flrst  requisite,  then,  is  to  keep  up  our  union  with  Christ, 
and  that  is  done  by  thinking  about  Him,  by  the  occupation  of  mind  and  heart  with 
Him.  And  the  second  requisite  is,  to  bring  all  our  life  under  the  influence  of 
Christ's  truth,  and  to  bring  all  Christ's  truth  to  bear  upon  our  life.  And  then,  and 
then,  we  shall  be  "  as  the  sun  shineth  in  his  strength."  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Character  and  destiny  of  the  just : — There  are  three  methods  of  using  natural 
facts  as  moral  illustrations.  1.  The  poetic :  which  employs  facts  according 
to  their  impressions  on  the  senses.  2.  The  scientific:  which  employs  facts 
according  to  their  best  ascertained  laws,  with  respect  to  sensible  impressions. 
3.  The  composite :  which  unites  the  poetic  and  scientific ;  applying  facts  in 
accordance  both  with  the  laws  that  govern  them  and  the  manifestations  which 
accompany  them.  The  poetic  method  is  generally  employed  in  the  Bible.  The 
scientific  method  would  have  required  a  scientific  revelation,  and  the  time  for  this 
had  not  yet  come.  The  text  is  an  example  of  poetic  illustration.  I.  The  character 
OP  THE  JUST.  It  is  distinguished  by  these  two  facts — 1.  Its  elements  are  pure  and 
complete.  They  are  matters  of  intellect,  sentiment,  propensity,  conscience,  and 
will.  The  intellect  of  the  just  man  is  always  thoughtful  of  moral  principles.  The 
sentiments  of  the  just  man  admire  moral  principles.  He  sees  that  they  sustain 
self-respect,  and  claim,  rightly,  the  respect  of  the  community.  The  propensities  of 
the  just  man  cling  to  moral  principles.  As  thought  excites  admiration,  so  admiration 
excites  love.  The  conscience  of  the  just  man  is  responsive  to  moral  principles.  Its 
instant  intuitions  of  virtue  and  vice,  and  its  instinctive  excitements,  consequent 
upon  these  intuitions,  aid  the  intellect  in  its  studies,  encourage  the  sentiments  in 
their  admiration,  and  confirm  the  propensities  in  their  attachment.  Not  vain, 
however,  of  its  natural  sagacity,  it  acknowledges  the  necessity  and  superiority  of 
revelation,  and  corrects  its  own  errors  by  the  infallible  decisions  of  the  Word  of 
God.     The  will  is  faithful  to  moral  principles.     This  is  his  grandest  distinction. 

2.  These  elements  are  well  proportioned  in  their  combination,  in  the  character 
of  the  just.  What  is  wanted  is  a  balance  of  powers :  all  the  faculties  and 
principles  in  equal  and  harmonious  action.  The  elements  of  character  in  the 
just  man  are  pure,  complete,  and  well-proportioned.  H.  The  destiny  op  the 
JUST.  What  are  the  distinctions  of  the  sun's  path?  1.  It  is  a  high  path.  Far 
too  high  for  any  earthly  obstruction.  2.  It  is  a  radiant  path.  It  is  glorious 
because  it  is  radiant.     The  glory  of  the  just  is  from  within.    It  is  a  radiation. 

3.  It  is  a  triumphant  path.  4.  It  is  a  benignant  path.  (T.  H.  Stockton.) 
The  path  of  the  just : — I.  The  path  of  the  just  resembles  the  shining  light  in  being 
PRECEDED  BY  A  STATE  OF  DARKNESS  (Eph.  V.  8).  The  darkucss  of  ignoraucc  gives 
way  to  spiritual  knowledge.  The  darkness  of  depravity  gives  way  to  the  light  of 
grace  (1  Pet.  ii.  9).  II.  The  path  of  the  just  resembles  the  shining  light  in 
being  small  at  its  commencement.  There  is  little  light  in  the  understanding, 
little  warmth  in  the  affections,  little  tenderness  in  the  conscience,  little  submission 
or  devotedness  in  the  will.  HI.  The  path  of  the  just  resembles  the  shining  light 
in  its  PROGRESSIVE  CHARACTER.  Sauctification  is  a  work  which,  beginning  in  con- 
version, is  carried  on  gradually.  And  where  there  is  true  grace  in  the  heart,  there 
is  a  desire  and  a  capability  of  greater  perfection,  just  as  in  the  seed  there  is  an 
ability  and  tendency  to  vegetate  and  spring  up  into  a  plant  or  a  tree.  The  pleasure, 
too,  felt  in  the  way  of  righteousness,  naturally  leads  a  man  to  aim  at  greatei 
attainments.  IV.  The  path  of  the  just  resembles  the  shining  light  in  at  length 
REACHING  TO  THE  PERFECT  DAY.     (Jos.  Kivkicood,  M.A.)        The  putk  of  the  just : 

10 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap. IT. 

I.  The  just.  II.  Theib  path.  1.  Of  penitence.  2.  Of  prayer.  3.  Of  self- 
denial.  4.  Of  humility.  5.  Of  struggling,  yet  of  peace.  6.  Of  weakness  and 
strength.  III.  Pekfect  day.  1.  Possessors  (Rev.  viii.  13,  14).  2.  Of  full  revela- 
tion. (1)  Of  God's  glory.  (2)  Of  the  saints'  reflection.  IV.  The  ceown  of  life. 
Certainty  in  truth,  pardon,  joy,  peace.  (Henry  Bennett.)  The  advantages  of  a 
religious  life : — I.  The  cebtainty  and  evidence  afforded  by  a  religious  life. 
Its  subject  is  sure  that  it  is  the  path  of  God's  commandment.  He  sees  that  it  is 
the  path  of  life.  II.  The  beauty  and  excellence  of  a  holy  life.  III.  The 
pleasantness  of  a  holy  life.  1.  Pleasures  of  action.  2.  Pleasures  of  reflec- 
tion. 3.  Pleasures  of  hope.  IV.  Its  instructiveness.  V.  Its  progressive 
NATURE.  The  good  man  improves — 1.  In  knowledge  of  Divine  things.  2.  In 
the  adhesion  of  his  will  to  Divine  things.  3.  In  the  perfection  of  his 
example.  4.  In  the  ease  and  pleasure  of  well-doing.  VI.  It  will  at  last 
ISSUE  in  consummate  perfection — a  perfection  of  holiness  and  happiness.  {H. 
Grove.)  Marks  of  the  Christian's  progress  towards  the  perfection  of  heaven : — 
I.  His  knowledge  is  gradually  increasing.  It  must  be  very  evident,  that  the  more 
a  heaven-taught  man  devotes  himself  to  serious  meditation,  that  he  will  obtain 
clearer  views  of  the  subtle  and  disguised  workings  of  corruption — he  will  be  more 
thoroughly  satisfied  of  the  desperate  alienation  of  the  human  heart  from  God.  He 
wiU,  accordingly,  be  conducted  to  a  more  profound  view  of  the  value  and  import- 
ance of  that  work  which  was  finished  at  Calvary,  to  a  more  unreserved  renuncia- 
tion of  every  claim  to  Divine  favour  on  the  ground  of  his  own  good  works,  and  to 
a  more  heartfelt  conviction  that  he  must  be  justified  by  faith  alone.  II.  His 
HUMILITY  IS  deepening.  The  knowledge  of  his  unworthiness  prostrates  him  who 
is  enlightened.  As  the  genius  who  has  arrived  at  the  highest  proficiency  in  any 
art  or  science  finds  it  hardest  to  please  himself  with  his  own  work,  and  sees  best 
the  inferiority  of  his  attainments  to  the  standard  of  perfection,  so  the  saint  who 
entertains  the  loftiest  views  of  the  holy  character  of  God  will  form  the  most  lowly 
estimate  of  his  own  strength  and  performances.  III.  His  desire  and  alacrity  to 
DO  the  will  of  God  are  becoming  more  ardent.  This  is  the  result  of  all  that 
he  knows  of  the  Sovereign  of  the  Universe,  since  He  delights  in  righteousness. 
This  is  the  natural  result  of  the  unreserved  admission  of  gospel  truth  into  the 
mind,  since  those  who  believe  in  God  must  be  careful  to  maintain  good  works. 
IV.  His  affection  for  the  things  of  time  is  diminishing.  Where  the  treasure 
is,  there  wiU  the  heart  be  also.  As  any  body  rises  above  the  ground,  up  into  the 
regions  of  space,  that  which  philosophers  caU  the  attraction  of  gravitation  affects  it 
less  and  less ;  and  if  it  could  be  elevated  suflSciently,  the  earth  would  at  length  lose 
its  power  over  it  altogether,  and  it  would  be  drawn  away  towards  some  other  planet. 
This  explains,  in  the  way  of  illustration,  the  process  which  takes  place  with  respect 
to  the  human  soul.  V.  By  his  increasing  love  fob  God  and  His  people,  he 
evinces  his  progressive  meetness  for  that  heaven  which  is  love.  (David 
Strong.)  Christian  progress  :  —  In  mountain  climbing  the  traveller  is  not 
conscious  of  getting  nearer  to  heaven,  only  of  getting  farther  from  earth.  The 
sun  and  the  stars  are  no  nearer,  but  the  houses  and  the  fields  are  more  distant. 
So  is  it  in  the  Divine  life.  We  may  not  grow  consciously  meet  for  heaven,  and  are 
apt  to  deplore  our  want  of  progress.  But  the  fact  may  be  that  we  have  been 
advancing  and  ascending,  and  that  now  we  have  a  higher  standard  whereby  we 
judge  ourselves.  If  we  look  back,  one  thing  we  are  certain  of,  that  the  world  has 
less  charm  for  us  and  less  hold  upon  us.  But  farther  from  earth  is  nearer  heaven. 
(J.  Halsey.)  Grace  perfected  : — It  is  the  nature  of  all  the  works  of  God's  creation 
to  seek,  and  to  go  on  to,  their  perfection.  The  first  dawn  of  morn  continues  to 
increase  until  it  shines  in  the  noontide  radiance.  The  feeble  plant  which  is  just 
breaking  the  clod  continues  to  grow  until  in  the  course  of  years  it  stands  a 
flourishing  and  a  stately  tree.  In  the  animal  kingdom  we  see  God's  creatures 
gradually  emerging  from  the  weakness  and  insignificance  of  infancy,  and  rising, 
where  no  obstructions  exist,  into  the  vigour  and  maturity  of  age.  And  shall  the 
light  go  on  to  perfection,  the  plant  and  the  flower  to  blossom,  the  tree  to  bring 
forth  its  fruit ;  and  all  God's  creatures  grow  up  and  flourish  each  in  its  own  perfection, 
and  grace — the  immortal  plant  of  grace — this  little  tree  of  the  Lord's  own  planting 
— shall  this  alone  be  denied  the  benefits  of  God's  universal  law  ?  Mo  I  grace  has 
its  destined  perfection.     (H.  G.  Salter.) 

Ver.  19.  The  way  of  the  wicked  is  as  darkness  :  they  know  not  at  what  they 
stumble. — The  blindness  of  sinners  their  destruction: — All  men  are  either  s&intA  or 


CHAI.  IT.]  PROVEEBS.  131 

sinners;  and  they  are  all  walking  in  paths  as  different  as  the  characters  they 
enstain.  The  text  indicates  that  sinners  are  in  such  darkness  that  they  are 
insensible  of  the  objects  which  are  leading  them  to  ruin.  I.  The  dabkmess  m 
WHICH  SINNERS  ABE  INVOLVED.  It  cannot  be  owing  to  any  deficiency  in  their 
natural  powers,  nor  to  any  want  of  intellectual  information.  The  darkness  is 
moral  darkness ;  it  lies  not  in  their  understandings,  but  in  their  hearts.  Moral 
depravity  always  produces  moral  blindness.  While  sinners  remain  under  the 
entire  dominion  of  a  wicked  heart,  they  are  altogether  blind  to  the  moral  beauty 
of  the  character,  of  the  works,  of  the  providence  of  God.  11.  Sinners  are  insen- 
sible  OF   THE   OBJECTS   OVER    WHICH    THEY    ARE    STUMBLINO    AND   EALLING.      Spiritual 

blindness  is  the  same  in  all  sinners,  at  all  times  ;  and  has  the  same  dangerous  and 
destructive  tendency.  1.  They  are  insensible  that  they  stumble  at  the  great 
deceiver.  2.  They  are  not  sensible  that  they  are  stumbling  at  one  another. 
3.  That  they  stumble  at  Divine  providence.  4.  That  their  common  employments 
are  dangerous  objects,  over  which  they  are  stumbling  and  falling.  5.  They  are  no 
less  blind  to  the  nature  and  tendency  of  their  religious  performances.  6.  The 
moral  blindness  of  sinners  insensibly  leads  them  to  stumble  at  the  preaching  they 
hear.  7.  They  are  blind  to  the  blindness  of  their  own  hearts,  which  are  insensibly 
leading  them  to  blackness  and  darkness  for  ever.  Improvement — 1.  If  sinners  are 
BO  blind  and  insensible  to  the  dangerous  objects  with  which  they  are  surrounded, 
and  over  which  they  are  stumbling,  it  is  not  strange,  that  they  generally 
live  so  securely  and  joyfully.  2.  If  all  sinners  are  involved  in  such  moral 
darkness  as  makes  them  insensible  of  their  dangerous  and  perishing  condition, 
then  it  is  not  strange  that  they  are  so  displeased  at  having  their  danger 
clearly  pointed  out.  3.  If  sinners  are  blind  to  the  objects  which  are 
insensibly  leading  them  to  destruction,  then  they  are  in  extreme  danger  of 
being  finally  lost.  AU  things  conspire  to  destroy  them,  because  they  abase  all 
things  with  which  they  are  connected  and  concerned.  4.  If  sinners  are  constantly 
growing  blinder  and  blinder,  and  more  insensible  of  the  things  which  are  leading 
them  to  ruin,  then  they  are  entirely  in  the  sovereign  hand  of  God,  who  may  save 
or  destroy  them,  according  to  His  holy  and  righteous  pleasure.  5.  It  is  owing  to 
the  distinguishing  and  astonishing  grace  of  God  that  any  are  saved.  6.  Inquire 
whether  sinners  have  ever  been  made  the  subjects  of  God's  special  grace.  {N. 
Emmons,  D.D.)  The  obscurity  and  uncertainty  of  the  way  of  the  wicked : — 1.  We 
will  consider  the  man  who  admits  the  principles  of  religion  in  speculation,  but  con- 
tradicts them  in  practice.  His  way  is  darkness.  Light,  indeed,  has  come  to  him ;  but 
he  loves  darkness  rather  than  light.  He  is  not  guided  by  the  dictates  of  reason,  or 
the  precepts  of  revelation  ;  but  pursues  a  course  in  direct  opposition  to  both.  He 
never  knows  what  course  he  shall  next  pursue  ;  for  he  cannot  tell  what  the  next 
impulse  will  be — what  gust  of  passion  will  take  him,  or  what  wind  of  temptation 
will  drive  him  away.  2.  Let  us  consider  the  hypocrite,  who,  without  integrity  of 
heart,  assumes  the  external  form  of  religion  His  way  is  dark  and  slippery.  He 
believes  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  religion,  and  that  it  is  a  matter  in  which  he 
is  really  concerned.  He  views  a  future  state  as  certain,  and  preparation  for  it  as 
immediately  important.  His  heart  is,  indeed,  full  of  love  to  this  world ;  but, 
since  he  must  leave  it,  he  wishes  to  have  a  good  hope  in  the  view  of  another.  He 
is  sure  he  should  enjoy  himself  and  his  earthly  treasures  much  better  if  he  could 
only  free  his  mind  from  this  painful  bondage  to  the  fear  of  death — this  troublesome 
apprehension  of  the  wrath  to  come.  He  applies  himself  to  obtain  that  tranquil 
state  which  seems  so  desirable.  He  has  no  more  love  to  religion  than  he  used  to 
have.  Terror  only  has  awakened  him  from  his  guilty  slumbers.  It  is  not  the 
temper  of  godliness,  it  is  only  the  pleasure  of  a  good  hope,  which  is  the  immediate 
object  of  his  desire.  He  gains  his  hope  by  self-deception,  and  maintains  it  by  self- 
flattery.  3.  To  consider  the  wicked  man  in  another  point  of  view ;  as  believing  the 
great  truths  of  natural  religion,  but  discarding  revelation.  His  way  is  covered 
with  darkness.  He  has  no  light  to  direct  his  eye  or  guide  his  steps.  With  respect 
to  the  nature,  condition,  and  means  of  future  happiness,  an  awful  uncertainty 
attends  him.  There  is  no  ground  on  which  his  faith  can  stand ;  no  support  on 
which  his  hope  can  lean.  4.  There  is  another  view  which  we  are  to  take  of  the 
wicked.  We  will  consider  them  as  renoimcing  the  great  principles  of  natural 
religion,  the  existence  and  government  of  God,  moral  obligation,  and  a  future 
Tetribation.  There  are  some  such  infidels  as  these  ;  but  their  way  is  covered  with 
darkness,  more  gloomy  and  dismal  than  that  which  involves  the  path  of  other 
transgressors.    What  peace  and  satisfaction  can  a  mortal  feel  without  a  persuasion 


189  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nr. 

that  there  is  a  wise,  just,  and  good  Being,  who  made  and  governs  the  world,  and 
that  this  Being  is  his  friend  ?  With  this  persuasion  he  may  possess  a  cheerful 
serenity  amidst  all  the  vicissitudes  of  life  ;  for  to  the  virtuous  God  is  a  present 
help  in  trouble,  and  all  things  will  He  turn  to  their  advantage.  {J.  Lathrop,  D.D.) 
The  way  of  the  wicked : — There  is  a  castle  on  the  Lake  of  Geneva  which  stands 
upon  a  rock,  and  the  lake  is  underneath.  In  the  old,  cruel  days  great  atrocities 
were  perpetrated  there,  and  one  was  this :  There  is  a  shaft  from  that  prison  to  the 
lake.  Looking  down  it,  you  see  the  water  glittering  far  away  below.  In  those 
days  they  used  to  plant  in  that  shaft  spikes  or  sharp  knives.  Then  they  came  in 
the  darkness,  and,  opening  the  door,  whispered  to  the  prisoners,  "  Three  steps  and 
liberty."  And  the  poor  prisoner  took  his  leap  in  the  dark — as  he  thought,  to 
liberty  ;  but  he  fell  amongst  these  knives,  and  in  a  few  moments  dropped,  a 
bleeding  corpse,  into  the  lake  below.  Yes ;  three  steps  and  liberty — to  be  cut  up, 
and  drop,  a  mangled  body,  into  the  abyss.  I  tell  you  that  is  like  the  liberty  of  sin. 
A  man  who  fancies  he  is  going  to  live  after  his  passions  takes  a  leap  in  the  dark, 
and,  pierced  through  with  many  sorrows,  drops  into  the  gulf  of  darkness.  (W.  L. 
Watkinson.) 

Ver.  20-22.  My  son,  attend  to  my  words.— Divine  principles : — "The  words  of 
wisdom  "  are  the  vehicles  of  those  Divine  principles  the  reception  and  embodiment 
of  which  by  man  are  essential  to  his  well-being.  I.  The  method  of  gaininq 
THEM.  1.  There  must  be  the  attentive  ear.  2.  There  must  be  the  steadfast  look. 
3.  There  must  be  the  enshrining  heart.     11.  The  blessedness  of  having  them. 

1.  They  are  life  to  those  who  find  them;  they  are  the  soul-quickening  elements. 

2.  They  are  health.  Life  without  health  is  scarcely  worth  living.  These  principles 
not  only  give  life  to  the  soul,  but  they  also  supply  the  nutriment  and  stimulate  the 
activities  that  ensure  health— health  of  all  kinds.  (D.  Thomoi,  D.D.)  Call  to 
attention  : — The  motives  that  call  for  our  attention  are  exceedingly  powerful.  It  is 
a  father  that  speaks.  The  things  which  are  spoken  are  of  quickening  and  invigor- 
ating virtue.  They  are  life  to  such  as  find  them,  and  health  not  only  to  the  soul, 
but  to  the  body  ;  not  to  a  particular  part  of  it,  but  to  all  flesh.  A  medicine 
effectual  to  the  cure  of  a  single  member  might  soon  enrich  the  inventor  of  it.  Here 
is  a  medicine  for  all  the  flesh,  and  yet  the  physician  that  prescribes  it  without 
reward  finds  so  few  willing  to  make  use  of  it  that  he  must  proclaim  its  virtues 
again  and  again.  Here  is  a  physician  of  infinite  value ;  attend  to  the  directions 
which  he  gives  for  the  management  of  our  whole  life.     (G.  Lawton.) 

Ver.  23.  Keep  thy  heart  with  all  diligence. — Heart-keeping  : — The  great  defect 
in  our  system  of  education  is  that  it  turns  a  man  away  from  himself.  Many  a 
schoolboy  can  describe  the  continents  and  islands  of  the  earth,  trace  out  the  intrica- 
cies of  the  planetary  system,  naming  suns  and  moons  and  stars,  who  would  stand 
abashed  should  you  ask  him  the  number  of  bones  in  the  human  body,  or  to  trace  out 
the  marvellous  nervous  system  that  God  has  given  him.  Now,  Christianity  turns 
man's  attention  to  himself.     No  other  teacher  ever  equalled  Christ  in  this  respect. 

1.  The  heakt.  If  we  ask  why  the  heart  is  chosen  rather  than  the  understanding,  the 
judgment,  or  memory,  we  find  our  answer  in  the  fact  that  the  understanding  may  be 
always  subject  to  circumstances,  or  may  be  enfeebled  by  disease;  the  judgment  may 
be  in  error,  and  the  memory  may  fail.  There  are  three  reasons  why  the  heart  is 
chosen.  1.  A  pathological ;  it  is  the  fountain  of  life,  through  which  the  blood  passes, 
to  be  distributed  to  every  part  of  the  system.    Stop  the  heart,  and  death  follows. 

2.  The  heart  is  the  region  of  sensibility.  When  the  great  passions  of  hope  and  fear,  of 
love  and  hate,  of  joy  and  sorrow,  take  hold  of  a  man,  he  realises  the  sensation  in  the 
region  of  the  heart.  3.  The  intellect  is  controlled  by  the  heart  more  than  the  heart 
by  the  intellect.  Men  do  not  follow  their  thinkings,  but  their  feelings,  yet  there  are 
teachers  proclaiming  a  religion  of  pure  intellect,  excluding  the  passions  or  feelings 
of  the  Boul.  Christianity  appeals  to  the  emotions.  II.  The  keeping.  We  are  not 
to  destroy  our  appetites  and  passions,  but  to  keep  them  in  subordination  :  keeping 
the  heart  is  not  murdering  it.  Vigilance  is  the  price  of  everything  good  and  great  in 
earth  or  heaven.  Nothing  but  unceasing  watchfulness  can  keep  the  heart  in  harmony 
with  God's  heart.  {Christian  Age.)  Supremely  good  advice  :--!.  Some  of  those 
WEiGHTT  considerations  UPON  WHICH  THE  ADVICE  IS  FOUNDED.  1.  The  heart  is  the 
source  of  all  human  conduct.  The  greatest  and  basest  actions  of  men  did  once 
exist  as  a  simple  and  insignificant  thought.  The  sallyings  forth  of  purpose  might 
pn  ••1'-  hnve  been  checked  at  the  gate  of  the  citadel,  whereas,  when  once  beyond  con- 


CHAP.  IT.]  PROVERBS.  138 

trol,  the  consequences  might  prove  such  as  we  never  ventured  to  anticipate.  2.  Every 
man  is  that  really  which  he  is  in  his  heart.  Conduct  is  not  always  a  trustworthy 
basis  of  estimate.  The  heart  imparts  a  tinge  and  character  to  those  streams  which 
issue  from  it.  3.  Scripture  represents  the  heart  of  man  as  not  in  a  trustworthy 
condition,  and  therefore  the  more  to  be  diligently  kept  and  guarded.  4.  The  fact 
that  out  of  the  heart  come  the  "issues  of  life"  adds  to  the  importance  of  this 
counsel.   What  is  meant  is  the  issues  of  our  future  never-ending  existence.    II.  Point 

OUT  IN  WHAT  WAY  THIS  DUTY  MAY  BE  BEST  PERFOBMED.       1.    Watch  Uarrowly  the  COUrSB 

and  current  of  our  thoughts  and  affections.  2.  Check  them  at  once,  when  we  dis- 
cover them  to  have  taken  a  wrong  course.  3.  Exercise  the  mind  as  much  as  possible 
with  holy  and  heavenly  themes.  4.  Earnestly  call  down  the  aid  and  blessing  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  .{Essex  Congregational  Remembrancer.)  The  government  of  the 
thoughts  .-—Keep  a  strict  guard  over  the  workings  of  your  mind,  your  thoughts,  and 
inclinations ;  for  your  life  and  conversation  will  be  conformable  to  the  main  current 
of  your  thoughts  and  desires.  The  soul  is  ever  busy  and  at  work.  There  is  no  pause, 
no  suspension  of  thought,  at  least  while  we  are  awake.  Think  we  must,  but  what 
to  think  is  the  question.  I.  How  fab  may  we  have  a  command  over  our  thoughts  ? 
1.  It  is  impossible  to  hinder  irregular,  fantastic,  evil  thoughts  from  rising  up  in  our 
minds.  But  we  may  choose  whether  we  will  cultivate  a  familiarity  with  them.  2.  It 
is  not  in  our  power  to  prevent  distractions  even  in  our  religious  addresses  to  God. 
While  the  soul  is  immersed  in  matter,  it  will  sometimes  fly  off  in  airy  wanderings, 
or  flag  into  a  supine  heaviness.  This  is  our  frailty  or  misfortune,  but  will  not  be 
imputed  to  us  as  a  sin,  provided  we  strive  against  it.  3.  Our  thoughts  are  not  abso- 
lutely free,  just  after  we  have  received  some  considerable  loss  or  disaster.  But  we 
must  not  give  up  our  mind  as  a  prey  to  melancholy,  and  wilfully  indulge  our  sorrows. 
4.  Angry  thoughts  have  to  be  taken  into  consideration  ;  the  passion  of  anger ;  the 
first  starts  or  sallies  of  this  passion  ;  the  deliberate  and  settled  consent  of  the  wiU 
to  it.  We  are  invested  with  the  power  to  withhold  the  determinate  consent  of  the 
will  to  these  primary  motions.  We  may  counterbalance  one  passion  by  another, 
and  may  turn  their  artillery  upon  themselves.  We  may  call  in  our  fear  to  subdue 
our  anger.  So  far  as  our  thoughts  are  involuntary,  so  far  they  are  not  sinful.  The 
mind  is  passive  in  receiving  its  notices  of  things,  whether  pure  or  impure ;  but  it  is 
active  in  its  determination,  whether  to  harbour  or  discard  them.  So  far  as  it  is 
active  it  is  accountable.  It  is  active  when  we  dwell  upon  impure  thoughts  with 
complacency.  We  can  suspend  our  judgment.  Our  mature  examination  is  the 
consulting  of  the  guide ;  the  determination  of  the  will  thereupon  is  the  following  of 
that  guide.  We  may  habituate  ourselves  to  the  contemplation  of  the  greatest  good, 
and  then  lesser  delights  will  shine  with  a  diminished  lustre.  H.  Some  rules  for 
the  conduct  of  our  thoughts.  1.  We  must  not  go  too  much  into  light  amuse- 
ments. The  mind  fixed  on  trifles  is  disabled  and  indisposed  for  greater  and  more 
important  business.  2.  We  must  avoid  the  reading  of  bad  books.  3.  Call  in  other 
ideas  to  your  aid  as  soon  as  ever  any  passion  begins  to  ferment.  When  we  observe 
in  ourselves  the  least  approaches  towards  anger,  lust,  envy,  and  discontent,  we 
should  seek  God's  assistance,  and  pray  for  the  succours  of  His  Holy  Spirit. 
4.  AVe  must  often  descend  into  ourselves.  5.  Much  may  be  done  by  the  pursuit 
of  knowledge.  The  more  variety  of  knowledge  the  mind  is  enriched  with,  the 
more  channels  there  will  be  to  divert  our  minds  into.  {J.  Seed,  M.A.)  The 
heart,  and  the  issues  of  life : — In  its  elements  and  outward  scenery  nature  is  the 
same  to  all.  Light  and  night,  sun  and  stars,  air  and  earth  and  landscapes,  offer  a 
common  enclosure  and  background  to  our  existence.  But  the  various  impulses  and 
aptitudes  for  work  with  which  we  are  born — which  press  from  the  very  core  of  our 
being — diversify  the  world  as  widely  as  if  we  were  distributed  upon  different  globes. 
To  one  set  of  men  it  is  a  place  to  think  and  learn  and  grow  wise  in.  Another  finds 
the  world  a  place  to  work  in.  Others  find  it  a  garden  of  beauty  in  which  the  stars 
are  more  valuable  as  blossoms  of  poetic  light  than  for  their  astronomic  truth,  and 
the  air  richer  for  its  hues  than  for  its  uses,  and  the  mountains  grander  for  their 
millinery  of  mist  and  shadow  and  their  draperies  of  verdure  and  snow  than  for  their 
service  to  the  climates  and  housekeeping  of  nations.  Still  others  see  the  world  as  a 
place  to  trade  in  and  grow  rich — a  gorge  between  gold  mountains,  where  they 
must  quarry.  Or  it  is  a  pleasure-ground  for  giddy  or  elegant  enjoyment.  It  is 
plain,  therefore,  that  our  natural  bent  in  the  line  of  work  does  a  great  deal  to 
impress  a  character  upon  the  aniverse.  Even  when  no  moral  quality  is  involved, 
we  see  how  life  gets  coined  at  our  mint,  so  that  the  world,  God's  world,  somehow 
wears  the  stamp  of  the  die  cat  into  oar  heart.    And  temperament,  natural  tempera- 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHA».tT. 

jnent,  has  an  effect  on  life  that  mnst  be  considered  in  this  connection.    If  »  man 

has  a  music-box  in  his  heart,  the  pnlse  of  the  sun  will  seem  to  beat  with  it,  and  the 

trees  to  throb  and  bud  with  its  melody.     If  his  bosom  is  strung  as  an  ^olian  harp, 

nature  will  be  full  of  weird  and  sad  cadences.    You  know  how  experience,  also, 

interprets  the  same  principle,  eren  in  cases  where  moral  considerations  are  not 

prominent.      You  know  how  a  piece  of  good-fortune    brightens   the  air,  how 

prosperous  hours  make  the  globe  buoyant,  how  some  impending  eyil  puts  the 

edge  of  a  spiritual  eclipse  upon  the  sun  as  solemnly  as  the  shadow  of  the  moon 

settles  on  its  burning  disc,  how  suddenly  iU-fortune  in  business  will  seem  to  make 

the  very  springs  of  beauty  bankrupt,  how  the  sickness  of  a  dear  friend  turns  nature 

pallid,  how  the  death  of  wife,  husband,  or  child  will  convert  all  the  trees  to  cypress, 

and  set  the  music  of  nature  in  a  minor  key,  as  a  dirge  or  requiem.    AU  these  facts, 

which  belong  rather  to  the  margin  of  our  subject,  enforce  the  duty  of  "keeping  the 

heart."    For  though  aptitudes,  temperaments,  and  moods  have  much  to  do  with 

the  tone  and  quality  of  our  life,  states  have  more.     A  dark  moral  state  stretches  a 

permanent  veil  of  cloud  over  the  heart,  that  thins  and  chills  all  the  light,  while  a 

mood  or  a  sorrow  may  sail  only  like  the  swift  blackness  of  a  shower  through  our 

air.    And  we  can  do  a  great  deal  to  control  the  moral  states  of  the  heart ;  we  are 

responsible  for  them.    Moral  evils,  such  as  envy,  avarice,  selfishness,  license,  only 

vivify  with  various  colouring  the  one  fundamental  evil,  sin— distance  from  sympathy 

with  God,  alienation  from  the  heavenly  Father,  indifference  or  disloyalty  to  His  will 

and  love.     This  is  our  central  foe.    This  is  what  corrupts  the  issues  of  life.     This 

is  the  serpent  at  the  fountain.   Back  of  all  sins  is  sin.   The  one  comprehensive  purpose 

of  life  is  to  bring  Infinite  grace  to  bear  on  that,  and  drive  it  from  the  inmost  arikery 

of  the  soul.     The  first  thing  to  do,  in  order  that  such  life  may  issue  from  your 

heart,  is  to  get  your  heart  broken.     Not  because  it  is  totally  corrupt,  but  because  it 

is  not  centrally  dedicated — because  God  is  not  invited  and  admitted  to  the  inner 

shrine,  to  rule  thence  with  His  wisdom  and  purity,  so  that  you  shall  consciously 

live  for  Him.     This  world,  with  its  hard  conditions  and  mysteries,  is  built  for  an 

upper  and  nether  millstone  to  grind  pride  out  of  human  hearts,  to  crush  their 

natural  state,  so  that,  in  penitence  and  humility,  God  may  come  into  the  spirit,  and 

the  world  seem  remade  because  the  soul  is  regenerate  in  consecration  and  the 

beginning  of  a  filial  life.    You  are  to  keep  your  heart  with  all  diligence,  by 

desiring  and  praying  for  this  spirit  of  sympathy  with  God  and  allegiance  to  Him. 

And  you  are  also  to   "keep"  it  by  living  in  fellowship  with  great  truths  and 

sentiments.      If  you  have  had   any    seasons  or  season  when    you    have    seen 

the  value    and    blessedness  of  a  religious  conception  of  the  universe  and   of 

religious  principle,   honour  that ;    honour    your    soul's   own   witness  to  sacred 

realities,  by  trying  to  keep  in  the  society  of  those  noble  truths  and  ideas.     (T. 

Starr  King.)        Keeping  the  heart  with  diligence : — I.   SoMe  of  our  hbakts  abb 

NOT  woETH  KEE7INO.    Addressing  some  unconverted  men,  I  say,  "  The  sooner  you 

get  a  new  heart  the  better."    God  is  very  plain  in  telling  us  no  good  can  come 

out  of  these  corrupt,  degenerate  hearts  that  we  all  have  by  nature.     II.  Inasmuch 

as   out   of   the  heart    "  are  the  issues  of  life,"  it   is  important  to  keep  the 

RESERVOIR  FULL.     It  is  bad  enough  to  have  an  empty  head,  but  an  empty  heart  ia 

worse  still.     For,  other  things  being  equal,  a  man's  force  in  the  world  is  just  in 

proportion  to  the  fulness  of  his  heart.    Heart  is  power.    We  all  want  more  heart  in 

our  Master's  service.    III.  Strive  with  all  diligence  to  keep  the  heart  pure. 

A  full  reservoir  is  not  enough — the  water  must  be  clean.    A  foul  reservoir  means 

spreading  the  seeds  of  pestilence  and  death.     If  the  heart  be  not  pure,  the  thoughts 

will  not  be  pure,  nor  the  conversation,  nor  the  life.      A  scrupulous  conscience  and 

thorough   transparency  of   character  are  all-important.     IV.    Keep   your  heart 

tranquil.     Seek  to  have  a  soul  calm  and  peaceful,  and  at  rest.     The  state  of  the 

heart  has  far  more  to  do  with  one's  comfort,  and  prosperity,  and  success,  than  most 

people  imagine.    From  your  heart,  as  from  a  clear  mountain  spring,  there  shall 

issue  influences  of  health  and  benediction,  to  gladden  your  own  lives  and  to  bless 

all  around  you.     (J.  Thain  Davidson,  D.D.)        Keeping  the  heart: — Either  keep 

thy  heart  with  all  sortb  and  degrees  of  care  and  diligence,  or  keep  thy  heart  as  thy 

most  precious  thing.     1.  Mark  or  attend  unto,  inquire  into  and  study  the  heart. 

2.  The  governance  and  good  management  of  our  hearts,  keeping  all  the  motions 

thereof  in  due  order,  within  fit  compass,  applying  them  to  good,  and  restraining 

them  from  bad  things.     3.  Or  preserving,  guarding,  seQuring  from  mischief  or 

damage.     It  is  a  peculiar  excellency  of  human  nature  that  man  can  reflect  on  all 

that  is  done  within  him,  can  discern  the  tendencies  of  his  soul,  is  acquainted  with 


eaxr.  it.]  PROVERBS.  185 

his  own  purposes.  It  is,  therefore,  his  work  to  regulate  as  well  the  internal  work- 
ings of  his  soul  as  his  external  actions,  to  settle  his  thoughts  on  due  objects,  to 
bend  his  inclinations  into  a  right  frame,  to  constrain  his  affectiona  within  due 
bounds,  to  ground  his  purposes  on  honest  reasons,  and  direct  them  unto  lawful 
matters.  It  is  our  duty  to  be  looking  inward  on  ourselves,  observing  what  thoughts 
spring  up  within  us  ;  what  imaginations  find  most  welcome  harbour  in  our  breasts, 
what  prejudices  possess  our  minds,  <fec.  Thus  we  may  arrive  at  a  competent  know- 
ledge of  ourselves.  This  preserves  from  self-conceit ;  disposes  to  equanimity ; 
qualifies  our  opinion  of  others ;  makes  wise  and  prudent ;  helps  to  reforming  our 
fives  and  regulating  our  devotions,  and  enables  us  properly  to  govern  our  hearts. 
(I.  Barrow,  D.D.)        The  keeping  of  the  heart  a  practicable  and  important  duty : — 

1.  What  is  it  to  kebp  the  heabt  ?  It  evidently  needs  to  be  kept.  It  is  prone  to  go 
astray.  1.  The  heart  is  to  be  kept  from  all  improper  objects  ;  every  object  which 
has  no  proper  connection  with  present  duty.  2.  The  heart  is  to  be  guarded  against 
all  improper  affections.  When  placed  upon  proper  objects,  the  heart  may  have 
very  improper  affections  towards  them.  II.  Snow  how  the  heabt  is  kept.  1.  Men 
should  always  attend  to  those  subjects  only  with  which  they  are  properly  concerned. 

2.  Men  must  pursue  the  same  method  to  keep  their  hearts  from  improper  affec- 
tions, as  from  improper  objects.  They  must,  therefore,  exercise  good  affections. 
Love  will  exclude  hatred  ;  faith  will  exclude  unbelief  ;  repentance  will  exclude  im- 
penitence ;l  submission  will  exclude  opposition ;  humility  will  exclude  pride.  Any 
gracious  exercise  will  exclude  any  sinful  one  :  only  by  the  exercise  of  holiness  can 
the  heart  be  kept  from  sin.  III.  The  impobtance  or  men's  keeping  theib  hearts 
with  the  greatest  care  and  constancy.  1.  While  they  neglect  to  keep  their  hearts, 
all  their  moral  exercises  will  be  sinful.  Those  who  neglect  to  keep  their  hearts  live 
in  the  continual  exercise  of  selfish  and  sinful  affections.  2.  While  men  neglect  to 
keep  their  hearts,  all  their  thoughts  will  be  sinful.  Though  bare  thoughts  have  no 
moral  good  or  evil  in  themselves  considered,  yet  in  connection  with  the  heart  they 
all  acquire  a  good  or  bad  moral  quality.  No  thought  is  indifferent  after  the  heart 
has  been  exercised  about  it.  3.  While  men  neglect  to  keep  their  hearts,  all  their 
words  will  be  sinful.  Men  never  speak  but  of  choice,  so  that  their  hearts  are 
concerned  in  all  their  vain  or  serious  conversation.  4.  While  men  neglect  to 
keep  their  hearts,  aU  their  intentions,  purposes,  or  designs  will  be  evil. 
Every  evU  design  is  first  formed  in  the  heart  of  the  projector.  5.  Let  men 
pursue  what  employment  they  will,  whether  public  or  private,  high  or  low,  civil 
or  religious,  their  daily  business  will  become  their  daily  sin,  unless  they  keep 
their  hearts  with  all  diligence.  6.  Men  must  keep  their  hearts  lest  they  abuse 
all  ithe  blessings  'of  providence  with  which  they  are  favoured,  and  all  the  troubles 
and  afflictions  which  they  are  called  to  suffer.  Improvement — 1.  Men  are  never 
under  a  natural  necessity  of  sinning.  2.  Since  men  can  guard  their  hearts 
against  evil,  they  can  guard  them  also  against  good.  3.  Those  who  neglect  the 
duty  enjoined  in  the  text  are  in  imminent  danger.  4.  None  can  be  sincere 
in  religion  who  entirely  neglect  to  keep  their  hearts.  5.  The  Christian  warfare 
consists  in  watching,  guarding,  and  keeping  the  heart.  6.  It  is  both  important 
and  helpful  diligently  to  attend  the  means  of  grace.  {N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  _  On 
keeping  the  heart : — I.  The  duty  enjoined.  We  must  keep  the  whole  heart  in — 
1.  A  state  of  holy  watchfulness.  2.  A  state  of  continued  devotion.  3.  A  state  of 
joy  and  confidence.  4.  A  state  of  lively  activity.  5.  A  state  of  preparedness  for 
death  and  eternity.  II.  The  mode  of  pebforminq  it  specified.  1.  Under  all  cir- 
cumstances. 2.  In  all  places,  3.  At  all  times.  4.  With  all  intensity  of  solicitude. 
m.  The  motive  designed.  1.  Thoughts  are  formed  there.  2.  Purposes  are 
planned  there.  3.  Words  originate  there.  4.  Actions  proceed  from  thence.  Learn — 
1.  The  means  of  spiritual  safety  :  preservation  of  the  heart.  2.  The  importance 
of  this  exercise.  All  depends  upon  it.  3.  The  necessity  of  cleaving  to  God  vnth 
purpose  of  heart.  4.  Urge  sinners  without  delay  to  believe  the  gospel  and  give 
their  hearts  to  the  Lord.  (J.  Bums,  D.D.)  On  the  government  of  the  heart: — 
Men  are  apt  to  consider  the  regulation  of  external  conduct  as  the  chief  object  of 
religion.  If  they  can  act  their  part  with  decency,  and  maintain  a  fair  character, 
they  conceive  their  duty  to  be  fulfilled.  The  wise  man  advises  us  to  attend  to  our 
thoughts  and  desires.  The  issues  of  life  are  justly  said  to  be  out  of  the  heart, 
because  the  state  of  the  heart  is  what  determines  our  moral  character,  and  what 
forms  our  chief  happiness  or  misery.  I.  The  state  of  the  heart  determines 
our  moral  character.  The  tenor  of  our  actions  will  always  correspond  to  the 
dispositions  that  prevail  within.     On  whatever  side  the  weight  of  inclination  hangs, 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chju».  ir. 

it  will  draw  the  practice  after  it.  Independent  of  all  action,  it  is,  in  truth,  the  state 
of  the  heart  itself  which  forms  our  character  in  the  sight  of  God.  In  the  eye  of  the 
Supreme  Being,  dispositions  hold  the  place  of  actions  ;  and  it  is  not  so  much  what 
we  perform  as  the  motive  which  moves  us  to  performance  that  constitutes  us  good 
or  evil  in  His  sight.  The  rectification  of  our  principles  of  action  is  the  primary 
object  of  religious  discipline.  The  regeneration  of  the  heart  is  everywhere  repre- 
sented in  the  gospel  as  the  most  essential  requisite  in  the  character  of  a  Christian. 
II.  The  state  of  the  heart  forms  oub  principal  happiness  or  misery.  In  order 
to  acquire  a  capacity  of  happiness,  it  must  be  our  first  study  to  rectify  inward  dis- 
orders. Whatever  discipline  tends  to  accomplish  this  purpose  is  of  greater 
importance  to  man  than  the  acquisition  of  the  advantages  of  fortune.  Think  what 
your  heart  now  is,  and  what  must  be  the  consequence  of  remitting  your  vigilance  in 
watching  over  it.  The  human  temper  is  to  be  considered  as  a  system,  the  parts  of 
which  have  a  mutual  dependence  on  each  other.  Introduce  disorder  into  any  one 
part,  and  you  derange  the  whole.     III.  In  what  does  the  government  consist? 

1.  The  thoughts  are  the  prime  movers  of  the  whole  human  conduct.  Many  regard 
thought  as  exempted  from  all  control.  To  enjoy  unrestrained  the  full  range  of 
imagination  appears  to  them  the  native  right  and  privilege  of  man.  To  the 
Supreme  Being  thoughts  bear  the  character  of  good  or  evil  as  much  as  actions.  The 
moral  regulation  of  our  thoughts  is  the  particular  test  of  our  reverence  for  God. 
Thought  give::  the  first  impulse  to  every  principle  of  action.  Actions  are,  in  truth, 
no  other  than  thoughts  ripened  into  consistency  and  substance.  But  how  far  are 
thoughts  subject  to  the  command  of  our  will  ?  They  are  not  always  the  offspring  of 
choice.  Vain  and  fantastic  imaginations  sometimes  break  in  upon  the  most  settled 
attention,  and  disturb  even  th«  devout  exercises  of  pious  minds.  Instances  of  this 
sort  must  be  placed  to  the  account  of  human  frailty.  Allowing  for  this,  there  is 
still  much  scope  for  the  government  of  our  thoughts.  As — (1)  When  the  introduction 
of  any  train  of  thought  depends  upon  ourselves,  and  is  our  voluntary  act.  (2)  When 
thoughts  are  indulged  with  deliberation  and  complacency.  Study  to  acquire  the 
habit  of  attention  to  thought :  acquire  the  power  of  fixing  your  minds,  and  of 
restraining  their  irregular  motions.  Guard  against  idleness,  which  is  the  great 
fomenter  of  all  corruptions  in  the  human  heart ;  it  is  the  parent  of  loose  imagina- 
tions and  inordinate  desires.  Provide  honourable  employment  for  the  native 
activity  of  your  minds.  When  criminal  thoughts  arise,  attend  to  all  the  proper 
methods  of  speedily  suppressing  them.  Impress  your  minds  with  an  habitual 
sense  of  the  presence  of  the  Almighty.  2.  Passions  are  strong  emotions,  occasioned 
by  the  view  of  apprehending  good  or  evil.  They  are  original  parts  of  the  constitu- 
tion of  our  nature  ;  and  there/ore  to  extirpate  them  is  a  mistaken  aim.  Religion 
requires  us  to  moderate  and  rule  them.  Passions,  when  properly  directed,  may  be 
subservient  to  very  useful  ends.  They  are  the  active  forces  of  the  soul.  It  is  the 
present  infelicity  of  human  nature  that  the  strong  emotions  of  the  mind  are 
become  too  powerful  for  the  principle  that  ought  to  rule  them.  Two  principles  may 
be  assumed.  (1)  That  through  the  present  weakness  of  our  understanding,  our 
passions  are  often  directed  towards  improper  objects.  (2)  That  even  when  their 
direction  is  just,  and  their  objects  are  innocent,  they  perpetually  tend  to  run  into 
excess  ;  they  always  hurry  us  towards  their  gratification  with  a  blind  and  dangerous 
impetuosity.  To  govern  our  passions,  we  must  ascertain  the  proper  objects  of  their 
pursuit,  and  restrain  them  in  that  pursuit,  when  they  would  carry  us  beyond  the 
bounds  of  reason.  To  obtain  command  of  passion  is  one  of  the  highest  attainments 
of  the  rational  nature.  To  obtain  it  we  must — 1.  Study  to  acquire  just  views  of  the 
comparative  importance  of  those  objects  that  are  most  ready  to  attract  desire. 

2.  Gain  the  power  of  self-denial ;  which  consists  in  our  being  ready,  on  proper 
occasions,  to  abstain  from  pleasure,  or  to  submit  to  sacrificing,  for  the  sake  of  duty 
or  conscience,  or  from  a  view  to  some  higher  or  more  extensive  good.  3.  Impress 
your  minds  with  this  persuasion,  that  nothing  is  what  it  appears  to  be,  when  yon 
are  under  the  power  of  passion.  4.  Oppose  early  the  beginnings  of  passion. 
Avoid  particularly  all  such  objects  as  are  apt  to  excite  passions  which  you  know  to 
predominate  within  you.  5.  The  excess  of  every  passion  will  be  moderated  by 
frequent  meditation  on  the  vanity  of  the  world,  the  short  continuance  of  life,  the 
approach  of  death,  judgment,  and  eternity.  6.  To  our  own  endeavours  for  regu- 
lating our  passions,  let  us  join  earnest  prayer  to  God.  Lastly,  the  government  of 
the  temper  is  included  in  "keeping  the  heart."  Temper  is  the  disposition  which 
)  emains  after  the  emotions  are  past,  and  which  forms  the  habitual  prosperity  of  the 
i^oul.     The  proper  regulation  of  temper  affects  the  character  of  man  in  every  relation 


CBit.  IT.]  PROVERBS.  137 

which  he  bears.  (1)  With  respect  to  God,  the  good  man  ought  to  cultivate  a  devout 
temper.  (2)  Point  out  the  proper  state  of  our  temper  with  respect  to  one  another. 
A  peaceable,  candid,  kind,  generous,  sympathising  temper.  (3)  The  proper  state 
of  temper  as  it  respects  the  individual  himself.  The  basis  of  all  good  dispositions 
is  humility.  Hence  will  naturally  arise  a  contented  temper ;  and  from  this  will 
spring  a  cheerful  one.  To  the  establishment  of  this  happy  temper,  the  due 
regulation  of  the  thoughts  and  government  of  the  temper  naturally  conduce,  and 
in  this  they  ought  to  issue.  (Hugh  Blair,  D.D.)  The  government  of  the 
passions : — I.  When  do  oub  passions  become  culpable  ?  A  sect  of  ancient 
philosophers  condemned  all  emotion,  held  every  passion  to  be  culpable,  because 
inconsistent  with  that  serenity  of  temper,  that  equal  tranquillity  of  mind,  which 
they  thought  should  ever  be  preserved.  We  cannot,  however,  lay  aside  our  innate 
dispositions,  and  with  equal  indifference  meet  health  or  sickness,  pleasure  or  pain. 
The  Stoical  doctrine  is  better  calculated  for  heaven  than  earth.  The  passions  and 
affections  were  all  originally  designed  to  have  either  our  own  personal  good  or  the 
good  of  others  for  their  object,  though  they  are  too  generally  misapplied  by  our 
corruption,  and  degenerate  into  vices.  Our  rational  and  moral  powers  ought  always 
to  have  dominion  over  the  inferior  principles  of  our  nature.  We  aU  stand  account- 
able for  the  use  of  our  reason,  and  where  reason  points  out  to  us  good  and  evil,  if 
we  choose  the  latter,  we  doubtless  appear  guilty  in  the  eye  of  our  heavenly  Judge. 
If  we  cannot  wholly  extirpate  or  subdue  our  passions,  yet  to  subjugate  them  to 
government  is  not  only  the  duty,  but  the  proper  and  most  important  employment,  of 
a  rational  being.  II.  Our  happiness  here,  as  well  as  hereafter,  is  determined 
BY  the  conduct  OF  OUR  PASSIONS.  When  they  are  duly  regulated,  and  act  under 
the  guidance  and  direction  of  reason,  we  may  promise  ourselves  all  the  happiness 
that  our  station,  or  other  circumstances  of  life,  will  admit.  They  who  are  at  no  pains 
to  discipline  and  govern  their  passions,  but,  disregarding  right  and  wrong,  indis- 
criminately follow  whithersoever  inclination  points  the  way,  may  find  some 
pleasure  in  such  pursuits,  but  none  that  can  compensate  for  the  loss  of  those 
interior  satisfactions,  as  well  as  exterior  advantages,  that  naturally  result  from  a 
wise  and  virtuous  conduct.  III.  The  means  by  which  this  self-government  may 
be  attained.  Consideration,  or  a  right  use  of  reason,  is  our  only  remedy.  We 
must  often  retire  into  ourselves,  and  in  some  calm  hour  of  reflection  review  the 
state  of  the  heart.  Passions,  however  strong  and  vigorous  by  nature,  may  be 
checked  in  their  growth  by  timely  care  and  prudent  opposition.  Let  us  accustom 
ourselves  to  deliberate  before  we  act.  We  should  observe,  with  a  watchful  eye,  all 
our  passions,  desires,  and  affections  ;  keep  a  constant  guard  on  every  avenue  to  the 
heart,  and  be  careful  to  oppose  the  admittance  of  any  wrong  inclination.  In  order 
to  succeed  in  this  arduous  and  important  work,  let  us,  to  our  own  efforts,  add  our 
supplications  to  Him  who  alone  can  order  the  unruly  wills  and  affections  of  sinful 
men.  (G.  Carr,  B.A.)  Governing  our  own  thoughts: — I.  What  power  a  man 
hath  over  his  own  thoughts  1  Some  men,  by  the  very  principles  of  their  make 
and  constitution,  are  much  better  able  to  govern  their  thoughts  than  others.  Some 
that  are  naturally  weaker,  have,  by  long  use  and  many  trials,  obtained  a  greater  power 
over  their  thoughts  than  others.  All  have  a  greater  power  over  the  motions  of  their 
minds  at  some  times  than  at  others.  1.  The  first  motions  of  our  minds  are  very 
little,  if  at  all,  in  our  power.  We  cannot  help  suggestions  coming  to  us.  2.  When 
a  man's  mind  is  vigorously  affected  and  possessed,  either  with  the  outward  objects 
of  sense,  or  with  inward  passions  of  any  kind,  in  that  case  he  hath  little  or  no  com- 
mand of  his  thoughts.  3.  A  man's  thoughts  are  sometimes  in  a  manner  forced 
upon  him,  from  the  present  temper  and  indisposition  of  his  body.  4.  We  have  liberty 
of  thinking,  and  may  choose  our  own  thoughts.  It  is  in  our  power  to  determine 
what  suggestions  we  will  fix  our  minds  upon.  5.  It  is  always  in  our  power  to  assent 
to  our  thoughts,  or  to  deny  our  consent  to  them.  Here  the  morality  of  our  thoughts 
begins.  No  man  is  drawn  to  commit  sin  by  any  state  or  condition  that  God  hath 
put  him  into,  nor  by  any  temptation,  either  outward  or  inward,  that  is  presented 
to  him.  Our  sin  begins  when  we  yield  to  the  temptation.  The  sin  becomes  great 
as  it  grows  into  action.  II.  The  art  of  governing  our  thoughts.  1.  We  must 
rightly  pitch  our  main  designs,  and  choose  that  for  the  great  business  of  our  lives 
that  really  ought  to  be  so.  2.  We  must  avoid  two  things,  viz.,  idleness  and  loos© 
company.  3.  We  must  be  as  attentive  as  possible  to  the  fiirst  motions  of  our  minds ; 
BO  that  when  we  find  them  tending  towards  something  that  is  forbidden,  we  may 
stop  them  at  once.  4.  There  are  some  particular  exercises  which  would  prove 
helpful.     Converse  with   discreet  and   pious  persons ;    reading  good  books,  and 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.it. 

especially  the  Bible  ;  taking  times  for  meditation ;  and  fervent  and  constant  prayer 
to  God.     5.  With  our  diligence  we  must  join  discretion.     We  must  have  a  care  not 
to  "  intend  "  our  thoughts  immoderately,  and  more  than  our  tempers  will  bear,  even  to 
the  best  things.     We  must   so  keep   our  hearts  as   at  the  same  time  to  keep 
our  health  and  the  vigour  of  our  minds.      As  long  as  we  consist  of  bodies  and 
souls,  we  cannot  always  be  thinking  of  serious  things.     {Archbp.  John  Sharp.) 
The  keeping  of  the  heart : — I.  The  sTJOGESirvK  sating,  "Out  of  (the  heart)  are  the 
issues  of  life."     1.  All  our  words  and  actions  originate  there.     "  All  these   evil 
things  come  from  within,  and  they  defile  the  man."      2.  The   moral   quality  of 
every  word  and  action  depends  on  its  inner  motive.    3,  Thoughts  and  feelings 
themselves,  apart  from  actions,  are  all  either  good  or  evil.      "  The  thought  of 
foolishness  is  sin."     4.  Within   the  heart  is   formed  that   "  character "   which 
determines  most  of  the  actions  of  the  man.     We  give  the  name  "  character  "  to 
that  complex  collection  of  tendencies  and  habits  which  grows  up  within  us  all  as 
the  sum  and  result  of  individual  acts  continually  repeated.     The  germs  of  the 
ultimate  character  can  often  be  detected  in  the  child.     6.  The  "  issues  of  life,"  in 
outward  condition,  depend  most  of  all  on  the  heart  within  us.     6.  The  everlasting 
♦'  issues  of  life  "  come  "  out  of  the  heart."    II.  Take  up  the  admonition,  "  Keep  thy 
heart  with  all  diligence."     The  margin  reads,  "  Keep  thy  heart  above  aU  keeping." 
The   common  estimate  of  the  relative  value  of  the  outside  and  the  inside  is 
terribly   astray.     It  creeps  into   our  very  religion.     1.  We  can  avoid  the  evil. 
2.  We  can  fill  up  the  heart  with  good.     (F.  H.  Marling.)         On    keeping    the 
heart : — I.  The  duty  hebe  enjoined.     The  heart  is  the  seat  of  the  thoughts,  the 
will,   and  the  affections.     The   avenues  which  lead  to  this  habitation  are  the 
senses,  through  which  a  great  variety  of  objects  are  ever  soliciting  admission.    By 
the  original  frame  of  our  nature,  there  was  also  another  way  of  admission  into  the 
heart,  viz.,  faith.     Over  these  was  placed  the  judgment,  as  a  faithful  sentinel,  to 
direct  the  will.      Scarcely,  however,  had  this  happy  constitution   of   our  nature 
existed  when,  the  judgment  being  perverted,  the  will  was  induced  to  make  a  wrong 
choice.     Upon  this  great  revolution  in  our  nature,  sensible  objects  began  to  occupy 
our  chief  attention.    They  tend  to  produce  the  utmost  irregularity  in  the  affec- 
tions, and  to  banish  God,  and  heaven,  and  eternity,  from  the  mind.     To  keep  the 
heart  while  in  this  state,  would  only  be  to  shut  up  the  enemy  within  the  walls. 
The  enemy  must  be  ejected.     This  God  promises  to  do.     To  keep  the  heart  with  all 
diligence  is  to  set  a  constant  guard  on  every  avenue  which  leads  to  it.     It  is  to 
exercise  the  strictest  vigilance  over  our  thoughts,  and  to  subject  them  to  the  most 
rigid  scrutiny,  for  the  purpose  of  suppressing,  upon  its  first  appearance,  what  is 
base,   impious,  or  unjust,    and   of    giving  every  possible  encouragement  to  the 
slightest  emotions  of  piety  and  benevolence.     So  nice  and  delicate  are  the  heart's 
springs  of  action,  so  susceptible  is  it  of  impressions  from  external  objects,  and  so 
greatly  is  it  in  danger  of  being  disordered  by  means  of  these,  that  we  can  never  be 
sufficiently  apprised  of  the  manner  in  which  it  may  be  kept  with  safety.     II.  The 
WAY  IN  which  this  DUTY  MAT  BE  BEST  DISCHARGED.     1.  By  Summoning  up  to  the 
view  just  apprehensions  of  God,  of  His  greatness,  and  glory,  and  holiness,  and 
justice,  and  authority,  and  mercy,  and  love,  as  exhibited  in  the  plan  of  redemp- 
tion, and  endeavouring  to  have  these  apprehensions  habitually  impressed  upon  the 
mind.     2.  We  should  beware,  after  having  been  engaged  in  any  of  the  solemnities 
of  religion,  of  exposing  them  suddenly  to  the  renewed  incursion   of  loose  and 
worldly  thoughts,  by  foolish  talking  or  mixing  with  vain  and  giddy  associates. 
8.  We  must  beware  of  evil  company.     And  there  are  secret,  as  well  as  open, 
enemies  of  goodness.     4.  We  must  carefully  abstain  from  idleness,  and  rightly 
occupy   every  portion    of    our  time.      lU.  Eecommend    the    duty    to    serious 
ATTENTION.     You  livc  in  a  world  where  ten  thousand  objects  are  ever  ready  to 
pollute  the  heart,  and  to  seduce  it  from  God.     God  requireth  the  heart  of  man — 
the  whole  heart,  and  nothing  but  the  heart.    A  heart  that   is  not  kept  with 
diligence  is  not  reconciled  to  God  ;  is  not  impressed  with  the  love  of  Jesus ;  is  not 
sanctified  by  the  Spirit,  and  is  not  fit  for  heaven.     (James  Somerville,  D.D.)        The 
duty  and  blessedness  of  keeping  the  heart : — I.  Occasions  when  it  is  of  the  utmost 
MOMENT  to  attend  TO  THIS  DUTY.     1.  When  you  draw  near  to  God  in  the  solemn 
exercise  of  religious  duty.     You  have  then  to  do  with  a  God  who  searches  the 
heart.     Be  upon  your  guard  against  those  vain  excursions  of  the  soul  that  eat  out 
all  the  life  and  spirit  of  devotion.    2.  When  you  are  surrounded  with  an  abundance 
of  worldly  enjoyments.     There  is  something  in  prosperity  that  tends  to  intoxicate 
the  mind.     3.  When  God's  afflicting  hand  is  upon  you.     "  In  the  day  of  adversity 


OEkP.  IV.]  PROVERBS.  139 

consider  " ;  for  consideration  and  a  guard  upon  the  heart  are  needful.  4.  When 
ander  provocations  from  your  fellow-creatures.  These  are  very  trying  periods,  and 
the  spirit  that  is  in  us  often  lusteth  to  resentment  and  retaliation.  Do  not  be  too 
sensitive  of  injuries.  5.  When  your  hands  are  full  of  worldly  business.  We  walk 
in  the  midst  of  snares.  It  is  no  easy  thing  to  keep  our  souls  disengaged,  and  to 
live  above,  while  we  are  in,  the  world.  Love  nothing  with  a  very  strong  affection 
that  is  not  immortal  as  thyself,  and  immutable  as  thy  God.  6.  When  jou  are 
engaged  in  diversions  and  recreations.  Very  many  are  in  excess  given  to  pleasure, 
make  it  the  main  business  of  their  existence.  We  ought  not  to  give  too  much  time 
to  recreations,  nor  seek  them  for  themselves.  7.  When  you  find  any  tumultuous 
passions  are  excited  within  you.  Think  what  inflammable  matter  you  carry  in 
your  bosoms,  and  be  watchful  against  the  approach  of  whatever  may  kindle  it  into 
a  flame.  8.  Keep  thy  heart  with  aU  diligence  in  solitude  and  retirement. 
Solitude  is  not  necessarily  a  blessing.  Then  only  it  is  a  blessing  when  it  is 
employed  piously,  with  holy  feelings  and  a  holy  object  in  view.  Whenever  you  are 
alone,  be  present  with  your  God.  II.  Arguments  ubging  attention  to  this  duty. 
This  duty  is  important,  because — 1.  It  is  the  heart  that  falls  directly  under  the 
cognizance  of  God.  Be  a  man's  actions  ever  so  regular,  if  his  heart  be  not  right 
with  God,  he  will,  when  weighed  in  the  balances,  be  found  wanting.  2.  Because 
of  the  influence  which  the  state  of  the  heart  has  upon  the  conduct.  He  who  is 
concerned  about  making  the  tree  good  will  surely  make  the  fruit  good  also. 
3.  Because  keeping  the  heart  is  essential  to  our  peace.  Is  there  nothing  peaceful, 
pleasant,  comforting,  in  being  masters  over  our  own  spirits,  able  to  suppress  any 
rising  passion,  to  restrain  any  rebellious  lust  that  threatens  the  peace  of  God's 
kingdom  within — of  that  inner  house  of  man,  himself?  What  a  poor,  con- 
temptible, miserable  creature  is  he  who  has  no  rule  over  his  spirit,  in  respect  of 
present  things  as  well  as  future !  III.  Directions  for  keeping  the  heart.  1.  If 
you  desire  to  keep  your  heart,  endeavour  by  all  means  to  know  it.  Endeavour  to 
know  human  nature  in  general,  its  weakness  and  its  corruption.  Above  all,  endeavour 
to  know  your  ovm  heart,  your  particular  weakness  :  knowing  it,  watch  that  point 
carefully.  2.  If  you  desire  to  keep  your  heart,  solemnly  feel  as  in  the  Divine 
presence.  Seriously  consider  that  God  searches  the  hearts,  and  that  He  is  with 
you  wherever  you  are,  and  whatever  you  do.  3.  If  you  would  keep  your  hearts,  be 
often  calling  them  to  account.  I  hope  that  none  of  you  live  without  self-examina- 
tion. 4.  See  to  it  that  your  mind  be  well  furnished.  Lay  in  a  stock  of  useful 
knowledge  from  the  Word  of  God,  from  observations  of  providence,  from  converse 
with  your  fellow- creatures.  5.  If  you  would  keep  your  heart,  be  often  looking  up 
to  Him  who  made  it.  To  find  our  hearts  taken  off  from  dependence  on  ourselves, 
and  fixed  upon  God,  is  a  token  for  good  in  every  part  of  our  Christian  course.  (T. 
Munns,M.A.)  The  custody  of  the  heart: — The  "heart,"  in  Scripture,  implies 
the  whole  spiritual  and  aspiring  part  in  man.  Keeping  the  heart  is  controlling  the 
whole  spiritual  condition  of  our  nature.  I.  The  degree  of  responsibility  implied 
IN  the  command  to  keep  the  he.^bt.  We  are  not  mere  machines,  we  are  free, 
immortal,  intelligent  beings,  fallen  indeed  from  our  first  estate,  crippled  in  body  and 
soul,  yet  raised  again  in  Christ.  We  are  free  to  choose  good  or  ill,  and  therefore 
responsible  for  the  choice.  To  keep  the  heart  is  to  guard  it,  to  watch  it,  to  subdue 
it.  It  is  attempting,  and  by  God's  grace  achieving,  the  work  of  self-conquest. 
The  keeping  must  be  habitual.  Unless  we  have  been  previously  vigilant,  the 
tempter,  when  he  comes,  will  be  sure  to  conquer.  One  of  the  miseries  of  old 
transgressions  is,  that  it  mars  the  keeping  of  the  heart.  We  are  apt  to  fall  back 
into  a  sin  which  we  have  committed  before.  Old  sins  tend  to  soften  the  soul — to 
emasculate  its  energies,  to  destroy  those  habits  of  carefulness  which  are  so  impor- 
tant in  resisting  temptation.  It  is  the  inward  reciprocation  with  the  outward 
temptation  which  forms  the  tempter's  vantage-ground.  Each  sin  diminishes  by  so 
much  our  chance  of  repentance,  inasmuch  as  a  fresh  lesion  and  hurt  has  been 
inflicted  on  the  soul.  II.  We  must  chiefly  regard  our  will  and  our  affections, 
because  these  sway  and  control  the  rest  of  the  inner  man.  By  the  will  we  mean 
that  power  of  the  soul  which  determines  and  chooses;  by  the  affection,  that 
attribute  which  loves  and  adheres.  The  one  is  the  strength  of  the  character,  the 
other  is  its  sweetness  and  beauty.  And  these  are  specially  concerned  in  the  service 
of  God,  for  if  man  fulfils  his  end,  God  is  the  choice  of  his  will  and  the  object  of 
his  affection.  God  is  the  choice  of  man's  will.  The  will  of  man  must  submit  to 
God's  will,  for  God's  wisdom  and  goodness  are  necessities  of  his  being.  By  the 
original  constitution  of  man's  nature,  God  was  the  object  of  his  affection.    Then 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.it. 

he  should  keep  his  affections  for  God  "  above  all  keeping."  m.  All  the  other 
POWERS  or  THE  SOUL  MD8T  ALSO  BE  KEPT ;  for  influences  deteriorating  or  elevating 
are  being  hourly  exercised  upon  them.  The  memory  may  be  filled  with  vile 
images  and  unholy  recollections,  or  it  may  be  stored  with  pious  thoughts  and  the 
sweet  remembrance  of  past  mercies.  The  imagination  may  be  crowded  with  foul 
pictures,  worldly  fancies,  and  daring  speculations,  or  it  may  be  consecrated  by 
visions  of  the  beauty  of  God  and  the  splendours  of  the  New  Jerusalem.  The 
intellect  may  revel  in  the  deceitful  charms  of  scepticism  and  inquiry,  or  it 
may  bow  down  in  adoration  before  the  tremendous  supernatural  truths  of 
the  Christian  Church.  The  judgment  may  take  its  portion  in  this  life  and 
wed  itself  to  earthly  success,  or  it  may  choose  the  better  part — sit  at  Jesus' 
feet  and  listen  to  His  words.  So  the  whole  heart  may  be  perverted  or  directed ; 
and  hence  the  urgent  necessity  of  keeping  it  with  diligence.  (Bp.  A.  P.  Forbes.) 
The  stronghold  of  the  Christian  sentinel: — I.  The  citadel  which  the  Christian 
HAS  TO  GUARD.  The  heart  of  man  is  a  wondrous  mystery,  a  strange  world  in  itself ; 
its  feelings,  affections,  desires,  emotions,  cravings,  reasonings,  wonderings— who 
shall  tell  them  ?  The  heart  given  the  Christian  soldier  in  charge  is  a  heart  that  is 
renewed  and  yet  unrenewed,  that  is  holy  and  yet  unholy,  that  is  spirit  and  yet 
flesh.  Such  is  the  heart  of  every  man  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit.  The  germ  is 
there,  but  all  that  is  good  of  that  germ  has  yet  to  be  unfolded  and  perfected.  So 
long  as  the  heart  is  kept  a  man  is  comparatively  safe,  for  it  is  the  key  of  the 
position.  II.  The  importance  of  maintaining  this  citadel.  Out  of  it  are  the 
issues  of  life  in  man's  whole  course  and  conduct,  and  out  of  it  is  the  final  result  of 
a  man's  career  and  course  of  life.  All  the  streams  of  life  proceed  from  within.  A 
man's  life  is  regulated  by  his  heart.  If  the  heart  be  kept  the  man  is  kept,  and  it 
matters  little  what  else  a  man  keeps ;  for,  after  all,  a  man  is  what  he  is  in  principles, 
in  desires,  in  emotions,  and  affections.  Every  Christian  soldier  must  be  aware 
that  it  is  only  by  constant  vigilance  that  he  can  maintain  the  citadel  and  prevent 
its  being  betrayed.  There  are  two  perils — betrayal  within  and  surprise  from 
without.  There  are  many  who,  instead  of  keeping  their  heart,  leave  its  keeping  to 
Satan.  And  many  fall  because  they  allow  their  hearts  to  get  out  of  their  control. 
{H.  Stowell,  M.A.)  Watch  the  heart: — If  you  would  keep  the  eye  from  injury, 
much  more  keep  the  heart,  so  susceptible  as  it  is  of  complete  disorganisation  from 
the  mere  dust  of  an  evil  thought.  If  there  is  anything  in  the  world  which  should 
be  the  object  of  unsleeping,  anxious  guardianship,  it  is  the  heart.  Then  keep  it 
"above  all  keeping."  It  is  evident,  even  to  reason,  that  without  this  precaution 
of  watchfulness  over  the  heart  every  other  counsel  for  resisting  temptation  must  be 
of  no  avail.  The  heart  is  the  key  of  the  entire  spiritual  position.  But  the  dangers 
of  the  heart  are  not  merely  external.  There  are  many  traitors  in  the  camp.  The 
exports  and  imports  of  the  heart  are  exceedingly  numerous.  What  a  fertility  of 
thought,  sentiment,  impression,  feeling  is  there  in  the  heart  of  a  single  man  ! 
There  are  a  thousand  doors  of  access  to  the  heart.  Passengers  are  busily  passing 
in  and  thronging  out  at  every  door.  Active  steps  must  be  taken  to  ensure  against 
mischief-makers.  Solitude  is  scarcely  less  dangerous  in  our  spiritual  welfare  than 
company,  because  temptations  of  self  and  the  devil  meet  us  then.  The  remedy,  in 
company  or  in  solitude,  is  to  guard,  as  far  as  in  us  lies,  "  the  first  springs  of  thought 
and  will."  By  every  spiritual  man  an  attempt  is  made  to  bring  the  region  of  the 
heart — the  motives,  desires,  affections — under  the  sceptre  of  Christ.  It  will  be 
found  that  aU  the  more  grievous  falls  of  the  tempted  soul  come  from  this — that 
the  keeping  of  the  heart  has  been  neglected,  that  the  evil  has  not  been  nipped 
in  the  bud.  There  is  no  safety  for  us  except  in  making  our  stand  at  the  avenues 
of  the  will  and  rejecting  at  once  every  questionable  impulse.  This  cannot  be  done 
without  watchfulness  and  self-recollection.  Endeavour  to  make  your  heart  a  little 
sanctuary,  in  which  you  may  continually  realise  the  presence  of  God,  and  from 
which  unhallowed  thoughts,  and  even  vain  thoughts,  must  carefully  be  excluded. 
We  must  watch,  but  we  must  also  pray.  Man  must  give  his  exertion,  but  he  must 
never  lean  upon  it.  Prayer  is,  or  ought  to  be,  the  expression  of  human  dependence 
upon  God — the  throwing  ourselves  upon  His  protecting  wisdom  and  power  and 
love.  When  our  Saviour  counsels  us  to  unite  prayer  with  watching  He  counsels 
us  to  throw  ourselves  upon  God,  under  a  sense  of  our  own  weakness  and  total 
insuflBciency.  To  God,  then,  let  us  commit  the  keeping  of  our  souls  in  the  most 
absolute  self -distrust.     {Dean  Ooulbum.)  God  only  judgeth  of  the  heart: — 

I.  An  admonition.  1.  "The  aot :  "  Keep."  Our  hearts  are  untrusty,  unruly,  and 
obTiouB  to  be  surprised ;  for  such  things  we  are  wont  to  keep.     U.  The  obisct  : 


•HAP.  IT.]  PROVERBS.  141 

"  The  heart."  By  " heart"  nnderstand  inward  thoughts,  motions,  and  affections  of 
the  son]  and  spirit,  whereof  the  heart  is  the  chamber.  We  should  keep  our  hearts 
in  a  state  of — 1.  Purity.  2.  Loyalty.  A  loyal  heart  cherishes  no  darling  sin ; 
scruples  at  small  sins ;  hates  sin  at  all  times.  A  loyal  heart  is  the  same  as  a 
"perfect"  heart.  III.  The  means  op  keeping  the  heart  "above  all  keeping." 
Nature  hath  placed  the  heart  in  the  most  fenced  part  of  the  body.  1.  As  those  who 
keep  a  city  have  special  care  of  the  gates  and  posterns,  so  must  we  watch  over  the 
senses,  the  gates  and  windows  of  the  soul,  especially  the  eye  and  the  ear. 
2.  Make  exceeding  much  of  all  good  motions  put  into  our  hearts  by  God's  Spirit, 
and  resist  at  its  first  rising  every  exorbitant  thought  which  draws  to  sin.  3.  Let 
him  that  would  guard  his  heart  take  heed  of  familiar  and  friendly  converse  with 
lewd,  profane,  and  unfrracious  company.  This  "keeping"  must  be  done,  because 
all  spiritual  life  and  living  actions  issue  from  the  heart.  This  issuing  of  our 
works  and  actions  from  the  heart  is  that  which  is  called  sincerity  and  truth,  so 
much  commended  unto  us  in  Scripture.  That  which  is  wanting  in  the  measure  of 
obedience  and  holiness  is  made  up  in  the  truth  and  sincerity  thereof.  (Joseph 
Mede,  B.D.)  The  issues  of  life  out  of  the  heart : — First  the  fountain,  then  the 
streams  ;  first  the  heart,  and  then  the  life-course.  The  issues  of  life  are  manifold ; 
three  of  their  main  channels  are  mapped  out  here — the  "lips,"  the  "eyes,"  and 
the  "feet."  The  corruption  of  the  heart,  the  pollution  of  the  spring-head,  where 
all  life's  currents  rise,  is  a  very  frequent  topic  in  the  Scriptures.  The  precept, 
"  Keep  thy  heart  with  all  diligence,"  sounds  very  like  some  of  the  sayings  of  Jesus. 
He  said,  "  Out  of  the  heart  proceed  evil  thoughts,  murders,  adulteries."  There- 
fore keep  with  all  diligence  that  prolific  spring.  Here,  as  in  all  other  cases,  prayer 
and  pains  must  go  together.  "  Keep  it  with  all  keeping  "  is  the  precise  statement. 
Leave  no  means  untried.  Out  of  our  own  conduct  will  we  be  condemned  if  we 
do  not  effectually  keep  our  own  hearts.  We  keep  other  things  with  success 
as  often  as  we  set  about  it  in  earnest.  In  other  keepings  man  is  skilful  and 
powerful  too,  but  in  keeping  his  own  heart,  unstable  as  water,  he  does  not  excel. 
Keep  it  from  getting  evil,  as  a  garden  is  kept :  keep  it  from  doing  evil,  as  the  sea 
is  kept  at  bay  from  reclaimed  nether  lands.  1.  The  first  of  the  three  streams 
marked  on  this  map  as  issuing  from  an  ill-kept  heart  is  "a  froward  mouth." 
Words  form  the  first  and  readiest  egress  for  evU.  The  power  of  speech  is  one  of 
the  grand  peculiarities  which  distinguish  man.  A  vain,  biting,  untruthful, 
polluted,  profane  tongue  cannot  be  in  the  family  of  God  when  the  family  are  at 
home  in  their  Father's  presence.  The  evil  must  be  put  away  ;  the  tongue  must  be 
cleansed ;  and  now  is  the  day  for  such  exercises.  2.  The  next  outlet  from  the 
fountain  is  by  the  "  eyes."  Let  the  heart's  aim  be  simple  and  righteous.  No 
secret  longings  and  side-glances  after  forbidden  things,  no  crooked  by-ends  and 
hypocritical  pretences.  When  the  eye  is  single  the  whole  body  will  be  full  of  light. 
Straightforwardness  is  the  fairest  jewel  of  our  commercial  crown.  3.  The  last  of 
these  issues  is  by  the  "feet."  Ponder,  therefore,  thy  path.  The  best  time  to 
ponder  any  path  is  not  at  the  end,  not  even  at  the  middle,  but  at  the  beginning  of 
it.  The  right  place  for  weighing  the  worth  of  any  course  is  on  this  side  of  its 
beginning.  Those  who  ponder  after  they  have  entered  it  are  not  in  a  position 
either  to  obtain  the  truth  or  to  profit  by  it.  The  injunction  applies  to  every  step 
in  life,  small  or  great.  The  value  of  weighing  anything  depends  all  on  the  justness 
of  the  balance  and  the  weights.  By  the  Word  of  God  paths  and  actions  will  be 
weighed  in  the  judgment.  By  the  Word  of  God,  therefore,  let  paths  and  actions, 
great  and  small,  be  pondered  now.  {W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  The  fountain  of  life  (to 
children) :  —In  each  one  of  you  there  is  a  small  organ  or  member  which  is  some- 
times called  the  seat  or  throne  of  life.  Its  work  is  to  beat  out  the  blood  to  every 
part  of  the  body,  and  so  to  keep  the  red  stream  of  life  always  moving.  The  text 
speaks  about  another  heart  and  another  life  which  we  all  have.  There  is  a  some- 
thing within  a  child  with  which  he  thinks  and  loves,  hates  and  wishes,  and  that 
something  the  Bible  calls  our  heart.  It  means  your  very  self.  Out  of  this  heart 
are  the  "  issues,"  the  flowings  or  streams,  of  life.  A  man's  real  life  flows  from  his 
love.  Thoughts  and  wishes,  likes  and  dislikes,  love  and  hate — these  are  the  great 
workers  that  build  up  and  pull  down  and  do  all  that  is  done  in  the  world.  Every 
human  life,  good  or  bad,  flows  like  a  stream  from  good  or  bad  thoughts,  good  or 
bad  wishes.  When  a  man  loves  goodness,  longs  for  it,  thinks  about  it,  a  life  full  of 
noble,  kindly  deeds  flows  like  a  pure  stream  out  of  his  heart.  But  if  a  man  likea 
what  is  wrong,  thinks  wicked  thoughts,  a  stream  of  bad  deeds  will  flow  out  of  big 
heart.    God  guards  carefully  the  heart  He  has  put  into  your  body.     He  has  put  the 


142  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I7. 


strongest  bones  all  round  it,  so  that,  though  other  parts  may  be  easily  hurt,  the 
heart  is  safe.     The  text  says  we  should  guard  the  heart  of  our  real  lives — our  mind 

in  the  same  way  "with  all  diligence,"  because,  if  the  heart  goes  wrong,  the 

whole  life  goes  wrong  with  it.  How  can  we  guard  the  heart  ?  By  keeping  bad 
thoughts,  bad  wishes,  out  of  it.  (J.  M.  Gibbon.)  The  heart  more  than  the 
head  : — Most  men  practically  underrate  the  influence  of  the  heart,  compared  with 
that  of  the  head,  on  success  and  happiness.  Keason,  the  intellect,  the  head  and  not 
the  heart,  is  usually  regarded  as  man's  dignity.  But  it  is  his  reason  as  manifested 
in  his  active  and  moral  powers.  Knowledge  is  not  power — personal  power— but 
only  one  of  its  instruments.  The  power  is  not  in  the  knowledge,  but  in  the  moral 
qualities  or  passions  which  accompany  it,  which  lie  behind  it,  constituting  what  is 
called  "  force  of  character."  The  essence  of  greatness,  always  and  everywhere,  is 
a  great  spirit.  If  we  aspire  not  only  to  be  great,  but  to  be  truly  happy,  the  heart 
is  not  only  the  principal  thing,  it  is  almost  everything.  What  is  happiness  but  the 
Bum  total  of  the  gratifications  of  a  man's  affections  and  desires  ?  The  heart  has 
more  to  do  than  the  head  in  determining  the  distinctions  of  character.  A  man's 
real  character  depends,  not  on  his  outward  actions,  but  on  the  principles  from 
which  he  acts— those  principles  which  are  real  springs  of  action.  All  the  distinc- 
tions of  character  resolve  themselves  at  last  into  distinctions  of  disposition  and 
temper,  and  not  of  intellect  or  understanding.  In  everything  pertaining  to  human 
greatness  and  human  happiness,  to  moral  and  Christian  character,  to  final  salva- 
tion, the  heart  is  more  than  the  head.  The  heart  is  the  principal  thing.  Out  of 
that,  and  that  alone,  are  the  issues  of  life.  {James  Walker.)  Dependence  on  our 
inicard  frame  :—l.  The  issues  of  life,  in  a  religious  respect,  depend  upon  the 
HEART.  All  things  relating  to  religious  conduct  are  reducible  either  to  some  matter 
of  belief  or  practice.  How  far  are  belief  and  practice  subject  to  be  influenced  by 
the  heart?  1.  To  begin  with  belief.  How  much  that  depends  upon  the  temper 
and  disposition  of  the  heart  is  easily  seen  from  Scripture,  history,  and  daily 
experience.  2.  Our  practice.  How  far  is  the  practice  apt  to  be  governed  by  the 
inclination  of  the  heart  without  the  concurrence  of  the  judgment,  or  even  in 
opposition  to  it  ?  Men  are  generally  more  swayed  by  their  affections  and  passions 
than  by  their  principles,  and  principles  are  of  very  little  force  or  efiicacy  except 
•when  they  faU  in  with  inclination  or  grow  up  into  it.  Knowledge  is  one  thing  and 
grace  another.  Orthodoxy  is  not  probity.  A  sound  head  may  often  be  consistent 
■with  a  corrupt  heart.  It  is  not  what  we  believe,  but  what  we  alTect  and  incline  to, 
that  determines  us.  But  our  irregular  actions  seem  rather  ultimately  resolvable 
into  the  false  judgments  which  we  make  than  into  affection  or  inclination ;  the 
head  is  first  tainted,  then  the  heart.  The  error,  however,  both  of  judgment  and 
practice  is  really  due  to  the  corruption  of  the  heart.  When  some  sensible  good  is 
presented  to  the  eye  or  to  the  mind  the  man  judges  it  to  be  agreeable  or  pleasant 
to  the  sense,  and  so  far  judges  right.  Yet  this  alone  would  not  determine  his 
choice,  because  other  considerations,  more  weighty,  might  keep  him  from 
it.  But  he  dwells  upon  the  thought  till  his  heart  is  inflamed :  then  he  chooses, 
and  not  till  then.  The  drift  and  bent  of  his  soul  leaning  too  much  toward  it, 
he  cuts  off  all  farther  consideration,  and  is  precipitately  determined  by  it.  It  is 
the  desire,  the  impatience,  the  passion  of  his  heart  that  hurries  him  into  it.  Men 
act  against  principle,  driven  on  by  a  prevailing  passion.  (1)  Either  we  think  not  at 
all  for  the  time  of  the  general  principles  which  we  hold,  but  suffer  them  to  lie 
dormant  and  useless  in  us ;  or  (2)  if  we  think  of  them,  we  neglect  to  apply 
them  to  our  own  particular  case,  imagining  ourselves  to  be  unconcerned  in  them ; 
or  (3)  if  we  do  apply  them,  and  consequently  are  self-condemned  and  sensible 
of  it,  yet  we  hope  to  repent  and  to  be  saved  notwithstanding.  U.  What  is 
iMPLran  OR  contained  in  the  precept  of  the  text.  It  must  consist  of  two 
parts  or  offices- 1.  To  preserve  our  good  dispositions.  2.  To  correct  our 
bad  ones.  These  will  each  of  them  imply  two  other  things  — a  frequent 
examination  of  our  own  hearts,  and  a  constant  endeavour  to  wean  our 
affections  from  this  world  and  to  fix  them  on  another.  (D.  Waterland,  D.D.) 
The  importance  of  keeping  the  heart  .-—A  most  important  reason  is  here  assigned 
lor  "  keeping  the  heart  with  all  diligence,"  because  "out  of  it  are  the  issues  of 
life."  I.  The  heart  in  the  body  of  man  is  the  centre  of  life.  As  the  heart 
is,  so  is  our  general  conduct.  But  if  the  fountain  is  poisoned,  the  streams  will  carry 
death  and  desolation  in  their  course.  If  the  principle  of  the  action  be  defective  of 
vitiated,  the  action  cannot  be  otherwise.  "Keep  thy  heart  with  all  diligence," 
because  the  state  of  it  determines  our  real  character ;  and  because  upon  the  state  of  it 


CHAP.  IV.]  PROVERBS.  143 

essentially  depends  the  comfort  or  wretchedness  of  our  lives.  When  temptations 
suited  to  the  latest  propensity  to  sin  are  presented — when  strong  inducements  are 
offered  to  passion  not  under  due  control — the  practice  will  follow  the  corrupt  desire 
of  the  heart.  Thus  the  evil  heart  will  show  itself,  and,  by  its  acting,  prove  the 
melancholy  truth  that  when  the  heart  itself  is  not  kept,  no  mere  professions,  no 
outward  restrictions,  will  be  sufficient  to  keep  us  from  falling.  But,  further,  a  right 
state  of  heart  is  essential  to  our  own  comfort  and  welfare.  A  man's  happiness 
consists  not  in  the  abundance  of  the  things  which  he  possesses.  These  are  things 
without  a  man,  which  cannot  adapt  themselves  to  his  wants  within.  What  can 
outward  means  avail  in  lessening  the  terrors  of  guilt  in  an  awakened  conscience, 
or  in  calming  the  fears  of  an  approaching  judgment?  To  the  natural  principles  of 
evil  in  the  heart,  moreover,  Satan  is  ever  adapting  his  temptations  and  wiles.  And 
where  lies  his  chief  hope  of  success  ?  Is  it  not  in  our  remissness  ?  Whilst  we 
sleep  he  is  awake.     II.  We  proceed  to  offer  some  suggestions  as  to  the  manner  in 

WHICH  THIS  IMPORTANT    DUTY   MAY   BE    MOST   EFFECTUALLY   DISCHARGED.       1.    The   right 

keeping  of  the  heart  especially  includes  the  government  of  our  thoughts,  our 
passions,  and  our  temper.  If,  either  wilfully  or  through  neglect  and  inattention,  we 
suffer  our  hearts  to  lie  open  to  thoughts  of  foohshness  and  sin,  and  permit  them  to 
lodge  within  us,  then  the  guilt  of  these  thoughts  becomes  our  own.  But  the  due 
control  of  the  passions  is  equally  essential,  if  we  would  keep  our  hearts  aright.  As 
originally  implanted  in  our  nature,  and  kept  in  subserviency  to  reason,  these  were 
designed  to  be  instruments  of  good — the  elements  of  what  was  great  and  virtuous  in 
human  conduct.  But  sin  has  disordered  them  all.  In  the  Christian,  the  passions 
are  subjugated  to  Christ  This  is  an  essential  feature  in  his  character.  2.  But  to 
keep  the  heart  is  also  to  regulate  the  temper.  Whatever  difference  there  may  be  in 
natural  dispositions,  settled  depravity  of  temper,  without  any  effort  to  correct  it, 
can  arise  only  from  the  deep  and  unaltered  corruption  of  our  hearts.  To  oppose  and 
to  destroy  this  natural  and  sinful  bias  is  one  of  the  great  aims  of  the  religion  of  the 
Bible ;  and  where  this  has  been  in  no  measure  secured  it  is  a  mournful  proof  that  the 
heart  has  never  been  brought  or  kept  under  the  influence  of  religion  at  all.  If 
these  things  be  implied  as  essential  to  the  keeping  the  heart,  how  valuable  and 
important  are  those  means  which,  under  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  will  most 
successfully  realise  this  great  object  I  Amongst  these  means,  watchfulness  and 
prayer.  {C.  Buck,  M.A.)  Guarding  the  heart: — More  exactly  the  meaning  is 
this :  "  Keep  thine  heart  beyond  everything  else  you  keep  ;  guard  thine  heart  above 
all  else,  for  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  life."  Not  your  health,  not  your  reputation, 
not  your  business  credit,  not  your  property — beyond  all  these  things  give  time  and 
thought  to  the  culture  of  your  heart.  If  you  must  take  time  from  one  thing  or 
another,  rather  starve  your  business  than  let  your  heart  run  to  waste.  Your  heart 
— what  has  your  heart  got  to  do  with  your  actual  life  ?  John  Stuart  Mill's  father 
thought  it  counted  for  nothing,  or,  rather,  it  was  a  bad  debt,  it  was  a  loss,  it  was  a 
detriment  to  have  a  heart,  to  have  feelings,  to  have  emotions.  Power,  intellect,  and 
strength  of  will,  these  were  the  elements  to  make  a  man,  and  the  less  heart  he 
carried  about  with  him — well,  the  less  dead  weight  and  the  less  risk  of  his  being 
led  wrong.  And  the  Bible  comes  in  and  says  to  the  business  man,  "  Beyond  your 
books  and  your  accounts  and  your  shops  and  your  speculations  and  your  clients, 
watch  over  your  heart,  think  about  it,  take  care  of  it,  toil  to  keep  it  in  health  and  in 
beauty."  The  Bible  comes  and  says  the  same  thing  to  the  servant  girl  trying  to  do 
her  duty  faithfully,  to  the  working  man  wishing  to  improve  his  position  in  the 
world,  to  the  learned  man  bent  on  discovering  new  truth.  Yes,  your  toil,  your 
ambition,  your  researches,  your  discoveries,  commerce,  industry,  learning,  are  all 
of  them  good,  but  the  most  precious  thing  is  the  human  heart.  Whatever  else 
suffers,  see  that  your  heart  does  not  suffer.  This  proverb  runs  right  in  the  teeth  of 
the  whole  mass  of  our  daily  life  ;  runs  against  the  whole  current  and  tendency  of 
our  education,  and  our  habits,  and  our  notions.  The  proverb  gives  its  reason — a 
reason  that  will  stand  and  hold  its  own  in  the  court  of  common  sense,  as  well  as 
at  the  last  judgment.  "  Beyond  everything  else,  take  care  of  your  heart,  for  out  of 
your  heart  are  the  issues  of  your  life."  Not  out  of  your  body,  not  out  of  your 
intellect,  not  out  of  your  business,  not  out  of  your  property,  not  out  of  your 
•wisdom,  not  out  of  your  fame — out  of  your  heart  are  the  essential  elements  and 
sustenance  of  your  life,  its  last  results  for  joy  or  for  sorrow.  "Out  of  the  heart 
are  the  issues  of  life."  The  phrase  makes  a  picture.  You  are  travelling  in 
the  desert  with  a  caravan  over  the  hot  sand.  The  sky  above  you  with  a  sultry 
Bun  in  it,  the  hot  ground  beneath  yoar  feet,  your  eye  wearied,  tired,  inflamed 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

by  the  glare  above,  the  glare  below ;  you  long  to  set  eyes  on  the  green  leaf.  In  the 
distance  you  get  sight  of  something  in  the  air.  You  draw  nearer  to  it,  it  grows  and 
forms  itself,  framed  there  in  the  wilderness  like  a  picture — a  clump  of  palm-trees  ; 
baneath,  green  grass ;  in  the  branches,  birds  singing  ;  lazy  cattle  reclining  on  the 
herbage,  sheep  bleating.  You  penetrate  into  it,  you  discover  the  tents  and  homes 
of  men ;  women  and  children  playing  around,  life,  beauty.  Whence,  whence  all 
that?  Eight  there  in  the  centre  of  it  you  come  on  a  deep,  brimming  pool  of 
water,  fed  by  a  perpetual  fountain,  like  an  eye  looking  up  to  the  sky — ah,  more 
than  an  eye,  the  very  fountain  of  all  that  greenness  and  beauty ;  blossom,  herbage, 
sheep,  cow,  bird,  man,  woman,  child,  all  of  them  the  outcome  of  that  springing 
fountain  of  water.  "  Out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  life."  Poison  it,  and  all  that 
dies.  Turn  it  brackish,  and  all  withers  and  diminishes  and  decays.  Quench  it, 
stop  it,  and  the  desert  flows  over  the  green  oasis.  Like  that  fountain  of  living 
water  is  your  heart  within  you.  Your  heart  it  is  that  makes  your  life  to  flow,  fair, 
radiant,  or  poor,  poverty-stricken,  cold,  dead.  What  is  your  heart  like  ?  What  is 
a  man's  heart  ?  Well,  it  is  not  easy  to  describe  that,  and  yet  we  all  know  well 
enough  what  we  mean  by  it.  We  cannot  just  put  our  finger  on  where  it  is,  or  say 
precisely  what  it  is  ;  but  oh,  how  well  you  know  when  your  heart  bounds  with  joy, 
or  when  it  grips  together  with  sharp  pain,  sorrow,  disappointment !  Oh,  you  know 
it  is  just  the  inner  core  of  cravings  and  hopes  and  eager  wishes  and  conscious 
personal  thoughts  and  plans  and  purposes  and  attributes  that  makes  you  your  own 
very  self,  that  gives  you  your  disposition,  that  makes  up  your  temperament,  that 
settles  your  character,  that  fashions  your  conduct.  Oh,  what  a  blunder  a  man 
makes  when  he  thinks  that  his  life  will  be  planned  and  made  by  his  intellect ! 
There  never  yet  was  a  man  who  thought  that  by  his  mind  he  could  steer  his  own 
course  through  the  world  that  did  not  find  his  heart  steal  a  march  upon  him.  A 
man's  heart — that  is  what  makes  him,  that  is  what  determines  a  man's  choice  at 
all  the  great  critical  points  in  life.  A  man's  heart  it  is  that  settles  what  his  home 
is  to  be,  that  chooses  the  partner  that  is  to  be  his,  for  better,  for  worse,  for  him,  for 
her.  It  is  a  man's  heart  that  chooses  fleshly,  that  chooses  spiritually  ;  that  chooses 
unselfishly,  that  chooses  selfishly ;  that  chooses  for  the  latward  appearance,  or 
chooses  for  heart- worth.  "  Oh,"  you  say,  "  there  is  not  much  heart  in  a  great  many 
of  these  things."  I  beg  your  pardon,  there  is  :  plenty  of  heart,  but  it  is  base,  worldly, 
greedy,  grasping  heart ;  or  silly,  selfish,  vain,  flattered  heart.  When  a  man's  life 
shows  little  or  nothing  of  the  echoes  of  lofty,  generous,  chivalrous  thought  and 
purpose  and  endeavour,  we  constantly  use  a  false  expression,  saying,  "  He  has  got 
no  heart."  How  is  it  that  a  score  of  men  that  are  your  daily  associates  or  friends, 
all  of  them  educated  pretty  much  on  the  same  level,  similar  to  one  another  in 
manner,  of  the  same  deportment,  and  even  the  same  politics — how  is  it  they  are 
all  so  unlike  you  ?  Is  it  that  the  one  man's  talk  is  tiresome  and  wearisome  ? 
How  is  it  that  you  feel  as  if  he  were  made  of  wood  ?  How  is  it  that  the  other  man 
has  that  glow  and  sparkle  that  sends  a  thrill  through  you,  that  stimulates  you,  that 
makes  you  think,  that  so  brings  out  responses  that  you  admire  your  own  clever- 
ness ?  What  makes  the  difference  ?  Why,  it  is  not  the  amount  of  grammar  the 
one  learned  more  than  the  other,  or  that  the  one  has  read  more  books.  No,  not 
that.  It  is  the  inner  core  and  kernel  of  the  one  man  compared  with  what  is  inside 
the  other.  Heart,  rich  heart!  for  out  of  the  heart  in  very  deed  and  truth  are  the 
ripe,  supreme  issues  of  life — life  social,  life  personal,  life  earthly,  and  life  eternal. 
Now,  if  that  be  true,  that  a  man's  life  really  depends,  beyond  everything  else,  on 
his  inner  man,  on  his  heart,  on  his  disposition,  on  his  temperament,  on  his  character 
formed  within  him,  how  is  it  that  we  do  not  take  a  deal  more  trouble  to  take  care 
of  our  hearts  ?  Ah,  there  are  a  lot  of  books  that  talk  about  success  that  are  full  of 
the  devil's  lies.  A  man  is  a  great  success  because  he  died  a  millionaire !  Oh,  a 
man  may  make  himself  a  millionaire  and  miss  making  himself  a  man  in  the  image 
of  God,  in  the  likeness  of  Christ.  Success  in  life  is  measured  by  the  heart  you  die 
with.  Why,  then,  do  not  we  take  more  pains  about  our  hearts?  How  many  of  us 
do  it  ?  For  every  one  of  you  knows  that  is  just  the  thing  we  neglect.  Even  our 
bodily  hearts,  I  suppose,  physicians  would  tell  us,  we  do  not  take  haK  care  enough 
of.  Rather  than  lose  five  minutes  and  miss  a  train  we  run,  and  risk  sudden  death, 
or  actually  damage  the  working  of  the  central  fountain  of  life  in  our  bodies.  And 
how  we  ever  toil  and  tax  the  whole  inner  core  of  that  body  of  ours  for  things  not 
worth  it.  For,  if  a  man  loses  his  health,  what  is  money  to  him  ?  Yes,  we  imagine 
that  our  hearts  take  care  of  themselves.  No  man  imagines  that  his  accounts  will 
collect  themselves.    No  man  imagines  that  hia  house  will  repair  itself.     Why,  you 


CSAJ.  IT.]  PROVERBS.  145 

mast  give  as  mnch  care  to  the  ties  of  love  and  children,  if  you  are  to  keep  these 
beantifnl  and  fair,  as  you  do  to  make  your  garden  free  from  weeds,  and  your  house 
water-tight  and  weather-tight,  and  your  business  a  solvent  concern.    And  besides, 
there  is  another  mistake  that  people  make.   They  say  to  themselves,  "  I  am  not  the 
one  tbat  makes  my  heart.     It  is  the  life  that  I  have  to  live  that  should  make  my 
heart ;  it  is  my  circumstances,  my  fortunes.    I  am  a  very  miserable  man  indeed, 
always  careworn  and  anxiou^  never  able  to  feel  bright  and  cheerful.    When  I  hear 
my  neighbour  whistling  in  the  evening  in  his  garden  I  envy  him ;  but  then  he  has 
not  the  worries  that  I  have."    Very  likely  he  has  got  much  worse  ones,  but  he  has 
got  the  sense  to  leave  them  down  in  the  office.    That  is  how  he  kept  his  health.    It 
was  not  easy.     The  cares  and  anxieties  followed  him  into  the  train,  got  out  at  the 
station,  stole  up  the  garden  ;  but  the  man  had  the  wisdom  and  the  strength  to  slam 
the  door  and  not  let  them  in.    That  is  how  he  kept  his  heart  and  brain  and  health 
np,  and  his  inmost  heart  of  all.    How  is  a  man  to  make  the  most  of  his  heart? 
How  to  keep  it  pure  in  this  foul  world  ?    How  to  lift  it  above  the  grime,  and  the 
dust,  and  the  tear  and  wear  ?    How  to  make  it  large  and  noble,  the  biggest  and 
most  beautiful  according  to  God's  plan  ?    By  not  leaving  it  in  this  world,  but  by 
taking  it  out  of  this  world?    Ah,  no ;  not  out  of  this  world,  but  in  this  world  to 
bring  it  into  another  world ;  not  by  keeping  it  to  yourself  and  making  it  in  the 
measure  of  your  own  self,  but  by  taking  that  heart  of  yours  and  letting  Christ  into 
it — the  real,  simple  human  Jesus.     Oh,  beyond  all  thy  keeping,  keep  thy  heart ! 
and  that   thou   shalt   do   best  by  giving  it   away  to   Christ.      {Prof.  Elmslie.) 
What  is  imported  in  keeping  the  heart,  and  the  bett  means  of  doing  it : — I.  Explain 
THE  MEANING  OF  THIS  PRECEPT.     We  need  not,  it  should  seem,  be  told  that  we  are 
each  of  us  endowed  with  a  power  of  reflecting  upon  our  own  desires  and  affections, 
and  with  a  certain  invariable  standard  within  us,  by  which  we  are  enabled  to  judge 
whether  these  inward  principles  are  right  or  wrong.    Nor  should  we  need  to  be  told 
that  our  affections  and  passions  are  in  a  great  measure  under  the  influence  of 
conscience,  and  of  the  superior  calm  principles,  and  instincts,  by  which  it  was 
intended  they  should  be  controlled.     He  is  the  man  of  worth,  he  only  is  truly  so, 
who  can  hazard  an  appeal  to  the  Searcher  of  Hearts,  that  he  does  not  indulge  any 
vicious  affection  within  him,  but  makes  it  his  constant  business  to  purify  the  heart. 
I  have  only  to  add  farther,  that  the  great  duty  recommended  in  my  text  must  be 
understood  to  signify  that  we  should  watch  over  and  resist  the  first  workings  of 
passion,  the  conceptions  of  lust.     II.  The  most  effectual  helps  fob  oub  doing  this 
WITH  success.     1.  And  here,  in  the  first  place,  we  are  to  turn  our  thoughts  to  our 
Creator.     Frequent  and  serious  contemplation  of  His  perfections,  and  of  the  relation 
iu  which  we  stand  to  Him,  is  undoubtedly  the  most  effectual  of  all  means,  in 
forming  the  heart  to  goodness.     2.  The  second  thing  I  would  recommend  is  a 
viituous  industry.    We   are   formed  for  action  ;  and  when  the  powers  are  not 
employed  in  something  worthy,  they  are  likely  enough  to  find  employment  of 
another  sort.     3.  It  is  of  very  great  importance  that  men  choose  such  to  be  their 
intimate  familiar  acquaintances  as  have  a  right  temper  and  a  just  taste  in  life ; 
that  their  daily  conversation  may  be  such  as  will  not  only  not  endanger  innocence 
and  virtue,  but  contribute  to  the  guarding  and  strengthening  of  them.     There  is  a 
mighty  power  in  conversation,  in  the  behaviour  of  our  familiar  acquaintances,  to 
affect  the  mind,  and  to  render  us  like  them  in  temper.     4.  Conversing  much  with 
the  heart,  observing  the  tendencies  of  the  affections  with  care,  and  endeavouring  to 
preserve  always  a  just  sense  of  things  upon  the  mind,  will  be  found  of  the  greatest 
use.     Taking  the  tendency  of  our  desires  and  inclinations  to  task  with  severity, 
and  examining  the  pretences  under  which  the  various  gratifications  of  them  are 
recommended.    By  such  a  careful  attention  to  ourselves  we  shall  find  out  the  deceit- 
fulness  of  sin,  and  those  snares  which  prejudice  conceals  from  the  unthinking;  we 
shall  be  able  to  resist  temptations  with  firmness  and  resolution  ;  for  in  truth,  the 
success  of  them,  where  they  do  prevail,  is  in  a  great  measure  owing  to  carelessness 
and  inattention.    {Jas.  Duchal,  D.D.)      Keeping  the  heart  (a  sermon  to  children) : — 
AU  wise  people  like  to  go  deeply  into  a  thing,  to  go  to  the  root  of  it.     What  is 
your  root  ?    Where  is  it?    Your  "  heart."    A  little  boy  had  a  very  nice  watch ;  but 
it  would  not  go  right.     It  had  a  very  pretty  case,  and  face  ;  but  it  sometimes  went 
too  fast,  and  sometimes  too  slow.     He  asked  his  mother  what  he  should  do  about 
it.     She  told  him  to  take  it  to  the  watchmaker's.    He  did  so ;  and  he  said,  "  Master 
John,  it  has  its  hands  aU  right,  but  it  will  not  go  right.     Therefore  leave  it  with  me, 
and  come  again  in  a  few  days,  and  I  will  tell  you  what  is  the  matter  with  it." 
John  went  again  to  him  in  a  lew  days,  and  the  watchmaker  said  to  him,  "  I  opened 

11 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

your  watch,  and  I  found  there  was  the  right  numher  of  wheels,  and  pins,  and 
screws  ;  but  I  found  a  little  part  called  '  the  spring  '  which  was  wrong ;  and  because 
the  main-spring  was  wrong,  it  sometimes  went  too  fast,  and  sometimes  too  slow." 
Now,  I  think,  you  are  all  like  watches.  Something  within  you  goes  tick,  tick,  and 
you  have  hands  and  inside  works.  But  how  do  you  go  ?  Sometimes  too  fast,  and 
sometimes  too  slow.  Does  not  the  tongue  sometimes  go  too  fast  or  too  slow  ?  Are 
not  the  feet  sometimes  too  fast  or  too  slow  ?  Are  not  the  hands  sometimes  going 
wrong  ?  How  is  this  ?  Let  us  examine— though  I  am  not  the  watchmaker — God 
is  the  watchmaker :  the  main-spring  is  the  heart.  Everything  in  you  depends 
upon  your  "heart."  God  always  looks  most  at  the  "  heart."  What  do  you  think 
God  will  look  at  in  the  day  of  judgment?  Your  "heart."  That  is  what  He  will 
want  to  know  about.  Now  as  it  is  so  important  to  "  keep  the  heart  "  right,  I  want 
to  try  to  help  you  to  do  so,  by  giving  you  a  little  advice  thereupon.  "  Keep  thy  heart 
with  all  diligence ;  for  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  life."  One  thing  is  to  "  keep  "  it 
as  we  "keep"  a  garden — neat.  Now,  then,  if  you  would  "keep"  your  garden, 
you  must  often  look  into  it.  And  I  will  tell  you  what  you  wiU  find  there — every 
day  there  will  grow  lumps  of  weeds ;  however  well  you  may  have  weeded  it 
yesterday,  you  will  find  more  weeds  to-day.  Pull  them  out !  Then  another  thing 
— you  must  water  it.  This  wants  doing  very  often.  Do  you  know  what  I  mean  ? 
If  not,  look  at  the  fourth  of  John,  to  what  Jesus  Christ  said  about  water,  and  what 
it  is.  Bring  the  Holy  Spirit  into  your  heart.  Pray  that  God  will  pour  good 
thoughts — His  grace— into  your  heart :  that  is  water.  If  you  want  to  "  keep  your 
heart,"  do  not  let  there  be  any  empty  corners  therein.  God  likes  all  boys  and 
girls  to  be  employed — sometimes  at  their  lessons,  sometimes  at  play ;  sometimes 
helping  somebody,  thinking,  reading,  or  playing,  to  be  always  employed.  I  must 
tell  you,  if  you  do  not  always  employ  yourselves — if  you  are  idle,  and  thinking 
about  nothing,  the  devil  is  sure  to  come  into  your  hearts.  Another  piece  of  advice 
I  give  you  is  this,  be  very  particular  whom  you  make  your  intimate  friends.  You 
must  "  keep  your  heart "  from  catching  those  evil  desires  that  naughty  boys  and 
girls  will  suggest.  One  thing  more.  Have  you  not  sometimes,  when  anybody  has 
given  you  anything  uncommonly  valuable,  taken  it  to  your  father,  and  said,  "  It  is 
too  precious  for  me  to  keep,  I  am  afraid  of  losing  it,  do  take  care  of  it  for  me  "  ? 
It  is  very  wise  for  boys  and  girls  to  do  this  with  their  treasures.  Oh,  that  you  would 
do  this  with  your  heart !  You  cannot  "  keep  "  it  yourself  ;  therefore  often  take  it 
to  God:  ask  Him  to  keep  your  heart.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Things  the  heart  is 
like  : — 1.  The  heart  is  a  lamp,  which  the  High  and  Holy  One  has  entrusted  to  our 
care.  Keep  it  well  trimmed.  2.  The  heart  is  a  ship.  Look  to  the  hull  and  the  rudder, 
the  masts,  the  sails,  and  the  rigging.  Have  an  eye  to  the  crew,  and  take  care  what 
merchandise  you  have  aboard  ;  mind  that  you  have  plenty  of  ballast,  and  do  not 
carry  too  much  sail.  3.  The  heart  is  a  temple.  Keep  it  pure  and  undefiled.  4.  The 
heart  is  a  besieged  city,  and  liable  to  attacks  on  all  sides.  While  you  defend  one 
part,  keep  a  good  look-out  on  the  other.    {Old  Humphrey.) 

Vers.  24-27.  Put  away  from  thee  a  froward  mouth. — Lawi  of  life : — A  law  for 
the  tongue,  a  law  for  the  eye,  a  law  for  the  mind,  a  law  for  the  life.  I.  A  demand 
roR  PUKE  LANODAOE.  Speech  is  one  of  the  grand  peculiarities  that  distinguish  man. 
It  is  the  organ  by  which  one  man  can  influence  the  ages.  Yet  it  has  become  the 
vehicle  of  error,  the  channel  of  pollution,  the  utterance  of  blasphemy,  <fec.  A  pure 
heart  is  essential  to  pure  speech.  II.  A  demand  fok  a  straightforward  purpose. 
Have  no  side-glances,  no  by-ends  ;  but  have  a  grand  purpose  on  which  the  eye  of 
the  soul  shall  be  always  fixed.  Straightforwardness  stands  opposed  to  all  sly 
cunning,  all  vacillation,  all  ambiguity  ;  all  double  meanings  and  aims.  III.  A 
DEMAND  FOR  HABITUAL  THOUGHTFULNEss.  Man  was  made  uot  Only  to  think,  but  to 
be  thoughtful.  He  should  walk  the  path  of  life — 1.  Thoughtfully,  not  by 
impulse.  2.  Thoughtfully,  not  by  prejudice.  3.  Thoughtfully,  not  by  custom. 
IV.  A  DEMAND  FOR  UNSWERVING  RECTITUDE.  Duty  is  a  Straight  path.  The  way  of 
Bin  is  serpentine  in  its  shape  as  well  as  in  its  spirit.  Virtue  is  a  straight  line  run- 
ning right  up  to  God.  Any  turn,  therefore,  would  be  wrong  and  riskful.  Take 
care  :  there  are  by-paths  tempting  in  every  direction.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  25.  Let  thine  eyes  look  right  on,  and  let  thine  eyelids  look  straight  before 
thee. — Eyes  right : — These  words  occur  in  a  passage  wherein  the  wise  man 
exhorts  us  to  take  care  of  all  parts  of  our  nature,  which  he  indicates  by  members 
of  the  body.     Every  part  of  our  nature  needs  to  be  carefully  watched,  lest  in  any 


CHAP.  IV.]  PROVERBS.  147 

way  it  should  become  the  cause  of  sin.  Any  one  member  or  faculty  is  readily  able 
to  defile  all  the  rest,  and  therefore  every  part  must  be  guarded  with  care.  Having 
eyes,  use  them ;  using  them,  take  care  to  use  them  honestly.  Some  persons  are 
always  as  if  they  were  asleep.  Others  are  somewhat  awake  mentally,  but  are  not 
looking  right  on ;  they  are  star-gazing  ;  they  lead  but  a  purposeless  life.  A  man 
ought  to  have  a  way ;  it  should  be  a  straight  way ;  and  in  that  straight  way  he 
should  persevere.  The  best  way  for  a  man  is  the  way  which  God  has  made  for 
him.      When  you  are  on  the  King's  highway,  you  may  go  ahead  without  fear. 

1.  Let  Chbist  be  your  way.  If  He  be,  you  wiU  begin  first  to  seek  to  have  Christ. 
Then  you  wiU  want  to  know  Christ.  Then  you  will  go  on  to  obey  Christ.  Then 
you  will  seek  to  be  like  Christ.  II.  Set  tour  eyes  on  Christ  as  your  way.  Think 
of  Him,  consider  Him,  study  Him.  1.  That  you  may  know  the  way  of  life,  let  your 
eyes  be  fixed  on  Him.  2.  That  you  may  follow  Him  well,  follow  Him  wholly. 
Gather  up  all  your  faculties  to  go  after  the  Lord.  3.  Look  alone  to  Jesus,  and  do 
this  to  keep  your  spirits  up.  Some  live  in  retrospection  ;  others  in  unhealthy 
introspection  ;  and  yet  others  carry  much  too  far  a  sort  of  circumspection.  If  you 
begin  to  look  two  ways  at  a  time,  you  will  miss  the  Lord  Jesus.  Under  the  Jewish 
law  no  man  who  had  a  squint  was  allowed  to  be  a  priest.  HI.  Let  youb  eyes 
distinctly  and  directly  look  to  Christ  alone.     1.  Look  not  to  any  human  guide. 

2.  Look  to  Christ  for  yourself.  3.  Look  not  to  any  secondary  aims.  4.  Forget  all 
things  when  seeing  Christ.  5.  Take  care  that  you  continue  gazing  upon  Christ 
until  you  have  faith  in  Him.  (C  U.  Spurgeon.)  Simplicity  : — What  is  in  these 
terms  specially  indicated  is  simplicity  of  principle  and  aim  ;  singleness  of  motive  ; 
an  upright,  unswerving  regard  to  duty.  The  path  of  duty  is  one.  It  is  narrow  and 
straight.  On  it  the  eye  should  constantly  and  steadily  be  set — looking  "right  on," 
not  to  any  seducing  objects  that  present  themselves  on  the  one  hand  or  on  the 
other.  Many  things  may  allure — may  hold  out  tempting  seductions  from  the 
onward  path.  Many  other  paths  may  appear  more  smooth,  more  easy,  and  in  all 
respects  for  the  time  more  desirable ;  but  the  one  and  only  question  must  ever  be, 
What  is  duty  ?  (E.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  Looking  to  our  xoay  of  life  : — God's  people 
have  their  minds  made  up  as  to  all  those  things  which  concern  their  everlasting 
interests.  But  to  know  our  way  is  of  little  use  unless  we  keep  that  way  in  view. 
There  are  many  spiritual  travellers  who  know  the  way  to  Zion,  but  have  not  their 
faces  thitherward.  The  text  is  an  important  motto  for  every  man  who  is  setting 
out  for  heaven.  To  understand  the  use  and  value  of  this  precept,  consider  it — 
I.  As  it  applies  to  the  faith  of  the  child  of  God.  By  the  "  faith  "  is  meant  the 
great  doctrines  on  which  their  hopes  are  grounded.  Often,  in  our  experience,  we 
are  tempted  to  entertain  unworthy  thoughts  of  the  gracious  Saviour ;  to  mix  up 
our  own  works  with  the  plan  of  His  redemption,  to  place  the  confidence  in  frames 
and  feelings,  in  notions  and  professions,  which  should  be  placed  in  Him  alone. 
Against  such  temptations  the  text  provides  a  remedy.  Keep  Jesus  constantly  in 
view.  II.  As  IT  applies  to  the  duties  of  the  child  of  God.  The  text  is  a  pre- 
servative against  unlawful  pleasures  and  indulgences.  It  is  an  exhortation  to  a 
close  and  constant  obedience  to  the  revealed  will  of  God,  and  to  the  duty  of 
Christian  integrity — to  an  honest,  upright,  guileless  conduct  in  aU  our  dealings 
with  mankind.  Seek,  then,  strength  from  God,  that  you  may  continue  steadfast  in 
the  holy  course  of  life,  as  advised  in  this  text.     (A.  Roberts,  M.A.) 

Ver.  26.  Ponder  the  path  of  thy  feet,  and  let  all  thy  ways  be  established. — 
Pondering  the  path : — Mystery  surrounds  me.  I  find  myself  a  resident  of  the 
illimitable  realm  of  the  unknown.  The  commonest  objects  touching  me  on  every 
Bide  start  unanswerable  questions.  But  amidst  these  enveloping  mysteries,  like  a 
rock  in  the  central  ocean,  emerges  this  certainty — "  I  am."  That  means,  I  know 
I  am.  I  am  dowered  with  self-consciousness.  There  is  a  chasm  wide  and  awful 
between  myself  and  everything  which  is  not  myself ;  the  "me"  is  other  than  the 
"  not-me " ;  I  am  a  separate,  solitary  soul.  Amid  all  the  mystery  surrounding 
me,  there  emerges  this  other  certainty — "  I  ought."  That  means,  I  have  the 
power  of  referring  what  I  am  to  the  judgment  of  the  moral  sense.  There  is,  and 
must  be,  an  irreversible  distinction  between  what  I  ought  and  what  I  ought  not. 
There  is  both  a  standard  and  an  ability  of  discrimination.  There  is  a  law  of  right 
and  wrong  of  which  the  moral  sense  takes  cognisance.  Amid  the  mystery  there 
arises  another  certainty — "  I  can."  That  means,  I  dwell  in  the  sphere  of  moral 
freedom ;  the  helm  of  my  being  is  in  the  hand  of  an  unenslaved  volition ; 
I  possess  a  self-determining  and  sovereign  will.    I  am  not  a  thrall,  a  thing;  I 


448  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [ciUP.XT. 

»m  a  power.  There  emerges  this  other  certainty — "  I  will."  That  means,  I 
«xercise  my  power  in  this  direction  or  in  that.  I  will  to  do  the  thing  I  ought  not, 
or  the  thing  I  ought.  Man  is  a  moral  being,  capable  of  choice,  and  actually 
«hoosing.     You  should  ponder  the  path  of  your  feet — I.  Becausb  tour  feet  are 

PBESSING    TOWABD    AN   END    BY  WHICH    TOUB   WHOLE    PREVIOUS    PATH    IN  lilTE  IS  TO  FIND 

FINAL  TEST.  Thomas  Carlyle  says,  "  It  is  the  conclusion  that  crowns  the  work; 
much  more  the  irreversible  conclusion  wherein  all  is  concluded  ;  thus  is  there  no 
life  so  mean  but  a  death  will  make  it  memorable."  As  you  are  going  now  what 
will  that  final  test  of  the  end  declare?  II.  Because  this  moment  tou  are 
CHOosrNG  louB  PATH.  You  should  ask  yourself  whether  it  be  the  right  one. 
III.  Because  the  longer  you  walk  in  the  wrong  path  the  harder  it  will 
BE  to  get  out  of  IT  INTO  THE  BIGHT.  The  awful  law  of  habit ;  the  binding 
power  of  bad  companionships,  &c.  {Homiletic  Magazine.)  Spiritual  anatomy  : 
the  feet : — I.  Their  natural  course.  1.  Found  in  the  way  of  evU.  2.  Which  has 
diverse  paths.  3.  These  paths  fatal  in  their  termination.  II.  Transition  of  the 
EEET  TO  the  WAY  OF  RIGHTEOUSNESS.  1.  Consideration.  2.  Arrestment.  3.  Aban- 
donment of  evil  way.  4.  Prayer.  5.  Decision.  III.  The  feet  consecrated  to 
Divine  service.  1.  They  stand  on  a  rock.  2.  Enjoy  liberty.  3.  Established  by  the 
Lord.  4.  Guided  in  the  way  to  life  eternal.  {J.  Burns,  D.D.)  Life  a  path: — 
1.  Unique,  difficult,  momentous.  2.  This  path,  this  journey,  vrill  be  travelled  but 
once — there  is  never  a  retracing  of  our  steps.  3.  A  false  guide,  a  false  step,  may 
prove  eternally  fatal.  4.  The  path  is  intricate,  and  nothing  short  of  the  utmost 
care,  and  constant  watchfulness,  and  thorough  discipline  of  heart  and  life  can  carry 
one  safely  through  it.  {Homiletie  Monthly.)  Feet  and  eyes  joined  : — The  wise 
man  joins  the  feet  unto  the  eyes,  intimating  that  our  actions  should  be  weighed, 
as  well  as  our  thoughts,  words,  and  looks.  I.  We  must  beforehand  order  all 
well  that  we  go  about.  1.  Lest  we  show  our  folly  to  all  men  by  our  indiscreet 
actions.  2.  Lest  we  run  ourselves  into  danger.  3.  Because  our  actions  are 
dangerous  as  well  as  our  thoughts,  looks,  and  words ;  and  these  were  all  to  be 
ordered.  Bring  all  your  actions  to  the  touchstone  before  you  do  them.  Weigh 
them  in  a  just  balance.  II.  The  meanest  members  of  the  body  must  be  well- 
ordered.  The  foot  is  lowest,  yet  must  not  be  left  at  liberty  to  go  where  it  wUl. 
1.  Because  the  meanest  members  are  of  necessary  use.  2.  Because  they,  being 
disordered,  bring  much  hurt.  III.  Endeavoub  to  act  surely  in  what  you  do. 
Show  your  wisdom  by  your  sure  and  just  acting  according  to  God's  Word,  and  it 
will  stand.  (Francis  Taylor,  B.D.)  Self-examination  explained  and  recom- 
mended : — It  is  our  wisdom  to  look  into  our  own  hearts,  to  inquire  seriously  and 
impartially  into  the  state  of  religion  in  our  minds  ;  that  we  may  form  a  true  judg- 
ment of  our  real  character  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  may  be  better  able  to  regulate 
our  future  conduct.  I.  Explain  the  precept  of  the  text:  "Ponder  the  path  of 
thy  feet."  This  includes— 1.  A  serious  inquiry  into  our  past  conduct,  i.e.,  of  the 
general  tenor  of  our  conduct ;  whether  it  has  been  agreeable  to  our  character  as 
men  and  as  Christians,  agreeable  to  the  dictates  of  right  reason,  and  the  precepts 
of  the  gospel.  2.  A  diligent  examination  of  the  motives  of  our  conduct,  and  the 
principal  ends  we  have  pursued  in  life;  whether  they  are  those  which  religion 
points  out,  or  those  which  are  recommended  by  the  example  of  the  world  around 
us.  Let  us  particularly  attend  to  the  state  of  our  mind.  Our  chief  motive  is  to  be 
the  "  glory  of  God."  This  motive  is  of  all  others  the  most  extensive,  and  where  it 
has  its  due  place  in  the  mind,  will  prove  the  most  effectual  means  of  regulating 
the  conduct.  3.  Considering  attentively  what  our  ruling  passion  is,  and  what 
influence  it  has  had  in  determining  our  conduct.  Every  man  has  something 
peculiar  in  the  make  or  constitution  of  his  mind,  which  inclines  him  more 
strongly  to  some  pursuits  than  to  others,  and  which  consequently  lays  him  moro 
open  to  temptation  from  that  quarter  than  from  any  other.  4.  A  diligent  inquiry 
into  the  present  temper  and  state  of  our  minds ;  the  settled  purpose  and  resolution 
of  the  mind,  the  prevailing  bent  of  the  will  and  affections.  In  what  light  does  sin 
appear  to  us  ?  What  are  our  sentiments  of  the  law  of  God  ?  How  do  we  stand 
affected  towards  the  great  objects  of  faith  ?  5.  The  examination  recommended  in 
the  text  must  be  accompanied  with  a  sincere  resolution  and  a  correspondent 
endeavour  by  Divine  assistance  to  reform  the  errors  of  our  past  life,  and  to  make 
continual  advances  in  virtue  and  goodness.  II.  The  advantages  that  will  attend 
THE  practice  OF  IT.  Steadiness  and  uniformity  of  conduct  is  the  result  of  habitual 
consideration  and  reflection.  1.  This  will  be  a  probable  means  of  securing  us  from 
all  fatal  errors  and  miscarriages,  or  of  restoring  us  to  the  path  of  duty,  if  we  hava 


CHAT.  IT.]  PROVERBS.  149 

wandered  from  it.  2.  The  habit  of  reflection  will  confirm  and  strengthen  the 
mind,  and  enable  as  to  make  continual  advances  in  holiness.     III.  Somb  dikections 

THAT  MAY  ASSIST  US  IN   THE  PEBFOBMANCE    OF   WHAT   HAS    BEEN   BECOMMENDED.       1.  Set 

yourself  as  in  the  presence  of  God.  2.  Implore  the  Divine  direction  and  assistance. 
3.  Be  upon  your  guard  against  the  deceitf  ulness  of  your  own  hearts,  while  you  are 
conversing  with  them.  4.  Fear  not  to  know  the  worst  of  your  case.  5.  Pursue  the 
inquiry  till  you  have  brought  it  to  some  conclusion,  and  faithfully  observe  and 
comply  with  the  admonitions  which  conscience  may  give  you.  6.  Frequently 
renew  the  exercise  of  self-examination  according  to  the  directions  laid  down. 
Improvement — 1.  See  the  great  end  we  should  prc^ose  to  ourselves  by  this  self- 
inquiry.  2.  The  great  importance  of  self-examination  to  the  Christian  life.  (iJ. 
Clark.)  Salutary  eountel : — I.  Pondeb  that  poetion  of  oub  path  which  we  have 
ALESADY  teodden.  1.  Has  it  been  the  way  of  evil?  2.  Have  we  visited  Calvary? 
3.  Has  it  been  a  path  of  usefulness  ?  II.  Pondeb  the  poetion  of  the  path  which 
WE  ABE  NOW  tbeading.  1.  Is  it  lawful  ground  ?  2.  Are  we  following  the  footprints 
of  Jesus  ?  These  are  found,  and  found  only,  in  heavenly  paths.  3.  Is  there  a  light 
shining  upon  the  road  ?  "  The  way  of  the  wicked  is  as  darkness,"  because  it  is 
their  own  evil,  dismal,  unhappy,  and  dangerous  way ;  but  the  path  of  the  justified 
is  that  of  increasing  holiness  and  joy.  III.  Pondeb  that  pobtion  of  oub  path 
which  we  have  yet  to  teead,  1.  It  is  beset  with  snares  and  dangers.  2.  It  passes 
through  the  valley  and  shadow  of  death.  There  is  now  no  other  way  to  immortality. 
3.  It  leads  either  to  heaven  or  to  hell.  [The  Congregational  Pulpit.)  Christian 
casuiitry : — I.  We  ought  to  pondeb  oub  steps  in  beqaed  to  the  pbinciple  fbom 
which  they  peoceed.  An  action  good  in  itself  may  become  criminal  if  it  proceed 
from  a  bad  principle.  The  little  attention  we  pay  to  this  maxim  is  one  principal 
cause  of  the  false  judgments  we  make  of  ourselves.  Would  you  always  take  right 
steps  ?  Never  take  one  without  first  examining  the  motive  which  engages  you  to 
take  it.  II.  We  ought  to  pondeb  oub  steps  in  beqaed  to  the  ciecumstances 
which  accompany  them.  An  action,  good  or  innocent  in  itself,  may  become 
criminal  in  certain  circumstances.  This  maxim  is  a  clue  to  many  cases  of  con- 
science in  which  we  choose  to  blind  ourselves.  We  obstinately  consider  our  actions 
in  a  certain  abstracted  light,  and  do  not  attend  to  circumstances  which  change  the 
nature  of  the  action.  III.  We  ought  to  examine  the  mannebs  that  accompany  oub 
WAYS.  Actions,  good  in  themselves,  become  criminal  when  they  are  not  performed 
with  proper  dispositions.  11.  An  action,  good  in  itself,  may  become  ceiminal  by 
BEING  EXTENDED  BEYOND  ITS  PEOPEE  LIMITS.  "  Be  not  rightcous  ovcrmuch,  neither 
make  thyself  overwise."  1.  In  regard  to  the  mysteries  of  religion.  2.  In  regard 
to  charity.  3.  In  regard  to  closet  devotion ;  in  regard  to  distrusting  yourselves  and 
fearing  the  judgments  of  God.  V.  An  action,  good  when  it  is  peefoemed  by  a  man 
aebived  at  a  ceetain  degree  of  holiness,  becomes  ceiminal  when  it  is  done  bt 
HIM  who  hath  only  AN  iNPERioE  DEGBEE.  If  wc  wish  our  ways  to  be  established, 
let  us  weigh  them  with  the  dififerent  judgments  which  we  ourselves  form  concerning 
them.  Set  the  judgment  which  we  shall  one  day  form  of  them  against  that  which 
we  now  form.  In  order  to  obey  the  precept  of  the  wise  man,  we  should  collect  our 
thoughts  every  morning,  and  never  begin  a  day  without  a  cool  examination  of  the 
whole  business  of  it.    (James  Saurin.) 

Ver.  27.  Turn  not  to  the  right  hand  nor  to  the  left. — Religious  and  moral 
conduct : — Whatever  the  belief  of  men  be,  they  generally  pride  themselves  on  the 
possession  of  some  good  moral  qualities.  The  sense  of  duty  is  deeply  rooted  in  the 
human  heart.  But  as  there  is  a  constant  strife  between  the  lower  and  higher  parts 
of  our  nature,  between  inclination  and  principle,  this  produces  much  contradiction 
and  inconsistency  in  conduct.  Hence  arise  most  of  the  extremes  into  which  men 
run  in  their  moral  behaviour.  One  of  the  first  and  most  common  of  those 
extremes  is  that  of  placing  all  virtue  either  in  justice  on  the  one  hand  or  in 
generosity  on  the  other.  Both  these  classes  of  men  run  to  a  faulty  extreme.  The 
perfection  of  our  social  character  consists  in  properly  tempering  the  two  with  one 
another ;  in  holding  that  middle  course  which  admits  of  our  being  just  without 
being  rigid,  and  allows  us  to  be  generous  without  being  unjust.  We  must  next 
guard  against  either  too  great  severity  or  too  great  facility  of  manners.  He  who 
leans  to  the  side  of  severity  is  harsh  in  his  censures  and  narrow  in  his  opinions. 
The  opposite  extreme  is  more  dangerous — that  of  too  great  facility  and  accommoda- 
tion to  the  ways  of  others.  Such  a  man  views  every  character  with  an  indulgent 
t^   Nothing,  in  moral  conduct,  is  more  difficult  than  to  avoid  turning  here,  either 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  v." 

to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left ;  to  preserve  a  just  medium.  True  religion  enjoins 
us  to  pursue  the  difficult  but  honourable  aim  of  uniting  good-nature  with  fixed 
religious  principle,  affable  manners  with  untainted  virtue.  Further,  we  run  to 
one  extreme,  when  we  contemn  altogether  the  opinions  of  mankind ;  to  another, 
when  we  court  their  praise  too  eagerly.  The  former  discovers  a  high  degree  of 
pride  and  self-conceit.  The  latter  betrays  servility  of  spirit.  He  who  extinguishes 
all  regard  to  the  sentiments  of  mankind  suppresses  one  incentive  to  honourable 
deeds,  and  removes  one  of  the  strongest  checks  on  vice.  He  who  is  actuated  solely 
by  the  love  of  human  praise  encroaches  on  the  higher  respect  which  he  owes  to 
conscience  and  to  God.  Hence,  virtue  is  often  counterfeited,  and  religious  truths 
have  been  disguised,  or  unfairly  represented,  in  order  to  be  suited  to  popular  tastes. 
Then  there  is  the  danger  of  running  to  the  extreme  of  anxiety  about  worldly 
interests  on  the  one  hand  and  of  negligence  on  the  other.  We  need  also  to  be 
warned  against  the  extreme  of  engaging  in  a  course  of  life  too  busy  and  hurried,  or 
of  being  devoted  to  one  too  retired  and  unemployed.  We  are  formed  for  a  mixture 
of  action  and  retreat.  Temper  business  with  serious  meditation,  and  enliven 
retreat  by  returns  of  action  and  industry.  Let  us  study  to  attain  a  regular,  uniform, 
consistent  character,  where  nothing  that  is  excessive  or  disproportioned  shall  come 
forward  to  view.  Turning  neither  to  the  right  hand  nor  to  the  left,  we  shall,  as  far 
as  our  frailty  permits,  approach  to  the  perfection  of  the  human  character.  (Hugh 
Blair,  DJ).) 


CHAPTER  V. 

Vebs.  1-14.  My  son,  attend  irnto  my  wisdom. — Caution  againtt  iexual  tins  : — 
The  scope  of  the  passage  is  a  warning  against  seventh-commandment  sins,  which 
youth  is  so  prone  to,  the  temptations  to  which  are  so  violent,  the  examples  of  which 
are  so  many,  and  which,  where  admitted,  are  so  destructive  to  all  the  seeds  of  virtue 
in  the  soul.  We  are  warned — I.  That  we  do  not  listen  to  the  charms  of  this 
SIN.  1.  How  fatal  the  consequences  will  be!  The  terrors  of  conscience.  The 
torments  of  hell.  2.  How  false  the  charms  are  I  The  design  is  to  keep  them  from 
choosing  the  path  of  life,  to  prevent  them  from  being  religious.  In  order  thereunto, 
to  keep  them  from  pondering  the  path  of  life.  II.  That  we  do  not  appkoach  thk 
BOEDEBS  OF  SIN.  The  cautiou  is  very  pressing.  I.  We  ought  to  have  a  very  great 
dread  and  detestation  of  the  sin.  2.  We  ought  industriously  to  avoid  everything 
that  may  be  an  occasion  of  this  sin,  or  a  step  towards  it.  Those  that  would  keep 
out  of  harm  must  keep  out  of  harm's  way.  3.  We  ought  to  be  jealous  over  our- 
selves with  a  godly  jealousy,  and  not  be  over-confident  of  the  strength  of  our  own 
resolutions.  4.  Whatever  laas  become  a  snare  to  us  and  an  occasion  of  sin,  we 
must  part  with  at  any  cost  (Matt.  v.  28-30).  III.  The  arguments  enforcino  the 
CAUTION.  The  mischiefs  that  attend  this  sin.  1.  It  blasts  the  reputation.  2.  It 
wastes  the  time.  3.  It  ruins  the  estate.  4.  It  is  destructive  to  the  health. 
5.  It  will  fill  the  mind  with  terror,  if  ever  conscience  be  awakened.  Solomon  here 
brings  in  the  convinced  sinner  reproaching  himself  and  aggravating  his  own  folly. 
He  will  then  most  bitterly  lament  it.     (Blatthew  Henry.) 

Ver.  2.  That  thou  mayest  regard  discretion. — The  wise  man's  intention  in  giving 
advice  : — Some  knit  these  words  to  what  follows,  and  understand  them  thus : 
*'  I  wish  thee  to  hearken  to  wise  counsels,  that  thy  heart  may  not  admit  thoughts 
of  the  beauty  of  strumpets,  nor  thy  lips  talk  of  such  wanton  objects  as  they  talk  of, 
but  that  thy  thoughts  and  words  may  be  sober  and  honest."  Others  knit  them  to 
the  words  before,  as  if  he  had  said,  "  Observe  my  wise  precepts,  that  thou  mayest 
well  ruminate  of  them,  and  be  so  full  of  good  thoughts  in  thy  heart,  that  thou 
mayest  be  able  to  produce  them  copiously  in  thy  words  for  the  good  of  others,  as  I 
do  for  thine.  But  especially  that  thou  mayest  know  what  to  think  and  speak  of 
strumpets'  fair  words  and   alluring  carriage."     I.  A  readiness  to  attend   will 

BRING  A  stork  OF  KNOWLEDGE.  II.  LeT  US  GET  READY  EARS  AND  HEARTS  TO  GET 
KNOWLEDGE.  III.  GoOD  THINGS  HEARD  MUST  BE  SERIOUSLY  THOUGHT  ON,  THEN  AND 
AFTER.      IV.    We  MUST   LABOUR  TO  KNOW  SO  AS  NOT   ONLY  TO  UNDERSTAND,  BUT   ALSO  TO 

UTTER  WHAT  WE  KNOW  IN  TIT  WORDS.  That  WO  may  profit  others.  {Francis  Taylor^ 
B.D.) 


CHAP,  v.]  PROVERBS.  151 

Vers.  3-6.  For  the  lips  of  a  strange  woman  drop  as  an  honeycomb. — A  strange 
woman : — One  outside  of  the  true  family  bonds  and  relationships.  This  descrip- 
tion has  been  regarded  by  expositors  as  having  a  double  sense.  1.  It  is  a  portrait 
of  a  harlot,  especially  one  of  foreign  extraction.  2.  It  is  a  representation  of  the 
allurements  of  unsound  doctrine  and  corrupt  worship.  I.  We  have  here  a 
DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  STRANGE  WOMAN.  1.  Her  vile,  unclean,  flattering,  enticing 
speech.  2.  Her  fate :  her  end  bitter,  physical  suffering,  mental  anguish,  spiritual 
distress.  II.  A  word  to  her.  1.  You  are  somebody's  child ;  think  of  the  old 
time,  &c.  2.  You  are  ruining  soul  and  body.  3.  Buining  others  as  well.  4.  The 
woman  that  was  a  sinner  found  mercy,  and  there  is  mercy  for  you.  (Anon.) 
Evil  companionship  : — It  would  not  be  complaisance,  but  cowardice — it  would  be  a 
sinful  softness,  which  allowed  afi&nity  in  taste  to  imperil  your  faith  or  your  virtue. 
It  would  be  the  same  sort  of  courtesy  which  in  the  equatorial  forest,  for  the  sake  of 
Its  beautiful  leaf,  lets  the  liana  with  its  strangling  arms  run  up  the  plantain  or  the 
orange,  and  pays  the  forfeit  in  blasted  boughs  and  total  ruin.  It  would  be  the 
same  sort  of  courtesy  which,  for  fear  of  appearing  rude  and  inhospitable,  took  into 
dock  an  infested  vessel,  or  welcomed,  not  as  a  patient,  but  a  guest,  the  plague- 
stricken  stranger.  {J.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  The  consequences  of  profiigacy  : — - 
This  chapter  consists  of  caution  and.  warning  against  licentiousness  —  the 
lawless  and  irregular  indulgence  of  the  passions — "Youthful  lusts  that  war 
against  the  soul."  Inhumanity  is  the  union  of  two  opposite  natures — the  animal 
with  the  impulses  and  appetites  of  the  brute,  the  spiritual  with  Godlike  aspira- 
tions and  capacities  of  intelligence  and  religion.  Whatever  may  be  the  aspira- 
tions of  the  soul,  we  find  there  is  an  animal  nature  as  really  and  truly  "  us " 
as  the  spiritual  itself.  In  man  the  conjugal  relation  is  associated  with  all  pure 
ideas,  and  is  the  source  and  fountain  of  the  purest  joy ;  the  family  circle  is 
the  nursing-mother  of  all  virtue.  Licentiousness  would  subvert  all  these  con- 
nections. The  Jewish  law  was  so  framed  as  not  to  suffer  any  of  the  daughters 
of  Israel  to  sink  into  harlotry ;  the  text  speaks  of  "  a  strange  woman,"  because  such 
were  usually  persons  from  the  surrounding  nations.  1.  There  is  nothing  so 
expensive  as  sin.  How  many  constitutions,  how  many  fortunes  have  been  blasted 
and  wasted  through  early  subjugation  to  lust  I  2.  God  urges  obedience  to  His 
laws  by  the  happiness,  purity,  and  beauty  of  a  well-ordered,  wise,  and  prudent 
conjugal  connection.  The  young  man  is  surrounded  by  God's  omniscience.  If  he 
does  not  ponder  his  ways,  God  will.  Iniquity,  and  especially  sins  of  this  sort,  tend 
to  gain  a  fixed  habit.  There  is  nothing  so  utterly  repulsive  as  the  picture  of  one  who 
has  grown  old  in  habits  of  grossness.  [T.  Binney.)  Her  steps  take  liold  on  hell. — 
A  beautiful  hell : — One  memorable  night,  a  young  lad  and  an  old  Scotchman  being  iu 
Paris  together,  found  themselves  in  front  of  one  of  the  dens  of  infamy ;  the  fragrance 
of  the  spices  of  Araby  seemed  to  float  in  the  air,  and  the  sound  of  music  and  dancing 
broke  upon  the  ear.  The  glitter  and  dazzle  of  fairyland  was  at  the  door ;  and  the 
Scotch  boy  said,  "  What  is  that?  "  The  body  of  the  friend  to  whom  he  spoke  now 
moulders  in  the  dust ;  the  voice  that  answered  is  now  singing  praises  to  God  on 
high ;  but  the  hand  of  that  Scotchman  came  like  a  vice  to  the  wrist  of  the  lad  who 
was  with  him,  and  the  voice  hardened  to  a  tone  that  he  never  forgot,  as  he  said, 
"Man,  that  is  hell!"  "What!"  It  was  a  new  idea  to  the  country  lad.  Hell 
with  an  entrance  like  that ! — with  all  the  colours  of  the  rainbow ;  with  all  the 
flowers  and  beauty,  and  the  witching  scenery  and  attractions  !  I  thought  hell  was 
ugly ;  I  thought  I  would  get  the  belch  of  sulphur  at  the  pit's  mouth  ;  I  thought 
harpies  on  infernal  wing  would  be  hovering  above  the  pit :  but  here  like  this  ?  Yes, 
I  saw  above  the  gate — and  I  knew  French  enough  to  know  what  it  meant — "Nothing 
to  pay."  That  was  on  the  gate  ;  but,  though  there  be  nothing  to  pay  to  get  in, 
what  have  you  to  pay  to  get  out?  That  is  the  question.  Character  blasted!  soul 
lost !  Mind  that.  Just  examine  your  ways.  Do  not  be  taken  in  by  the  flowers 
and  music,  and  the  beautiful  path  that  is  at  your  feet  this  afternoon.  (John 
Robertson.) 

Ver.  6.  Her  ways  are  moyeable,  that  thou  canst  not  know  them. — The  movable 
ways  of  the  tempter ; — The  wise  man  lets  us  know  how  foolish  it  is  for  men  to  flatter 
themselves  with  the  hope  that  they  shall  by  and  by  be  truly  disposed  and  enabled 
to  repent  of  their  sin.  The  temptress  can  form  her  mode  of  behaviour  into  a 
hundred  shapes  to  entangle  the  heart  of  the  lover.  She  spreads  a  thousand  snares, 
and  if  you  escape  one  of  them,  you  will  find  yourself  held  fast  by  another.  She 
knows  well  how  to  suit  her  words  and  behaviour  to  your  present  humour,  to  lull 


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  t. 

conscience  asleep,  and  to  spread  before  yonr  eyes  such  a  mist  as  shall  prevent  you 
from  being  able  to  descry  the  paths  of  life.  If  you  ever  think  of  the  danger  of 
your  course,  and  feel  the  necessity  of  changing  it,  she  will  urge  you  to  spend  a 
little  time  longer  in  the  pleasures  of  sin.  If  her  solicitations  prevail,  if  you  linger 
within  the  precincts  of  guilt,  your  resolutions  are  weakened,  and  your  passions 
gain  new  strength.  What  is  the  awful  result  ?  The  devil  obtains  more  influence ; 
conscience,  forcibly  repressed,  ceases  to  reclaim  with  so  loud  a  voice ;  God  gives 
you  up  to  the  lusts  of  your  own  heart,  and  leaves  you  to  choose  your  own  delusions. 
Attend,  then,  to  the  wisest  of  men,  who  instructs  you  to  keep  free  of  these  dangerous 
temptations.  ((?.  Lawson,  D.D.)  Movableneis  : — The  text  refers  to  a  sinful 
character  who  endeavours  to  keep  her  companion  in  vice  by  her  movable  ways. 
Few  can  say  with  Paul,  "  None  of  these  things  move  me."  We  are  liable  to  be 
acted  upon  by  influences  within  and  without  us.  It  is  a  grave  weakness  to  be  easily 
movable  to  bad  and  faulty  ways.  Movableness  is  the  prevalent  fault  of  probably 
every  one  of  us.  How  easUy  we  are  moved  to  speak  in  haste.  How  difficult  to 
keep  our  eye  from  being  moved  to  look  on  evil.  We  are  urged  to  fix  our  affections 
on  things  above,  but  who  can  do  this  in  his  own  strength  ?  Are  we  not  movable 
in  our  friendships?  Perhaps  movable  Christians  love  only  themselves;  and  if 
this  be  so,  it  needs  but  a  short  time  and  a  slight  ruffle  against  their  feathers  to 
move  them.  Some  are  easily  movable  from  their  work  for  God  and  for  humanity. 
Some,  perhaps  all  of  us,  at  times,  are  movable  in  our  faith.  Do  not  allow  yourself 
to  be  moved  from  trusting  in  the  love  of  Jesus,  and  never  be  ashamed  of  being 
His  faithful  disciple.  Some  are  moved  from  the  comfort  of  prayer.  {William 
Birch.) 

Vet.  9.  Lest  thou  give  thine  honour  tinto  others. — A  man^s  honour  sunk  in 
sensuality  : — A  good  name  is  better  than  precious  ointment,  but  of  a  good  name 
this  abominable  sin  is  the  ruin.  The  credit  of  David  and  of  Solomon  was  greatly 
sunk  by  it.  By  it  has  the  honour  of  thousands  been  irretrievably  lost.  Life  is  a 
great  blessing,  and  may  be  regarded  as  the  foundation  of  every  earthly  blessing. 
But  unclean  persons  part  with  everything  that  renders  life  worthy  of  the  name, 
and  in  a  literal  sense,  they  often  give  their  years  unto  the  cruel.  Their  lives  are 
lost  in  the  pursuit  of  this  sin  by  the  just  judgment  of  God,  by  its  native  conse- 
quences, or  by  the  accidents  to  which  it  exposes  those  who  practise  it.  And  for 
what  are  these  years  given  away  ?  Did  men  generously  part  with  their  lives  in  the 
defence  of  their  country,  or  for  the  sake  of  a  generous  friend,  the  loss  would  be 
amply  compensated  by  honour,  and  by  the  pleasure  of  a  good  conscience.  But  how 
infatuated  are  they  who  give  their  years  unto  the  cruel,  who  conceal  a  selfish  and 
malignant  heart  under  the  mask  of  love !  All  unlawful  love  is  hatred,  and  all 
tempters  to  it  are  cruel  enemies  to  our  happiness.  Shall  we  then  gratify  inhuman 
enemies,  at  the  expense  of  honour  and  life  and  everything  dear  to  us  ?  These 
false  friends  and  malicious  enemies  rob  you  of  your  honour  and  life,  with  as  much 
eagerness  as  if  they  could  enjoy  these  precious  blessings  of  which  you  are  deprived. 
(G.  Lawson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  11.  And  thou  mourn  at  the  iMt. — Dying  regrets  : — Eeligion  has  one 
undeniable  advantage  to  reconmiend  it — whatever  it  calls  us  to  sacrifice  or  to 
suffer,  it  always  ends  well.  On  the  other  hand,  sin  has  one  undeniable  evil  to 
excite  our  aversion  and  horror — whatever  sensual  pleasures  and  imaginary  profit 
attend  its  course,  it  always  ends  awfully.  I.  The  subject  of  these  regkets.  It  is 
a  man  who  has  disregarded  through  life  the  means  employed  to  preserve  or  reclaim 
him.  Man's  instructors  and  reprovers  may  be  ranked  in  six  classes.  1.  Your 
connections  in  life.  Father,  mother,  friend,  &c.  2.  The  Scriptures.  3.  Ministers. 
4.  Conscience.  5.  Irrational  creatures.  6.  The  dispensations  of  Providence. 
II.  The  period  of  these  regrets.  It  is  a  dying  hour.  1.  Such  a  period  is 
unavoidable.  2.  It  cannot  be  far  off.  3.  It  may  be  very  near.  4.  It  is  sometimes 
prematurely  brought  on  by  sin.  Such  a  period,  if  it  be  not  prematurely  produced 
by  irreligion,  is  always  embittered  by  it.  III.  The  nature  of  these  regrets. 
This  mourning  has  two  attributes  to  distinguish  it.  1.  It  is  dreadful.  A  dying 
hour  has  been  called  an  honest  hour.  2.  It  is  useless.  To  the  individuals 
themselves,  whatever  it  may  be  to  others.  Lessons :  1.  How  good  is  God ! 
2.  How  fallen  is  man!  3.  How  important  is  serious  thought  I  (William  Jay.) 
At  the  last— Last  things  .-—The  wise  man  saw  the  young  and  simple  straying  into 
the  house  of  the  strange  woman.     It  was  not  what  it  seemed  to  be.     Could  he  shed 


CHIP.  ▼.]  PROVERBS.  163 

a  revealing  light  upon  it  ?  He  saw  only  one  lamp  suitable  to  his  purpose ;  it  waa 
named  "  At  the  last."  He  held  this  up,  and  the  young  man's  delusion  was  dispelled. 
He  saw  in  its  light  the  awful  consequences  of  self-indulgence  and  sin.  If  this  lamp 
is  useful  in  this  one  case,  it  may  be  useful  in  others.  I  can  only  compare  my  text 
in  its  matchless  power  to  Ithuriel's  spear,  with  which,  according  to  Milton,  he 
touched  the  toad,  and  straightway  Satan  appeared  in  his  true  colours.  This  lamp 
has  four  sides  to  it.  I.  Death  is  at  the  last.  In  some  sense  it  is  the  last  of  this 
mortal  life  ;  it  is  the  last  of  this  period  of  trial  here  below  ;  it  is  the  last  of  the  day 
of  grace ;  it  is  the  last  of  the  day  of  mortal  sin.  In  the  light  of  death  look  upon 
mortal  sins.  The  greatest  of  human  actions  will  appear  to  be  insignificant  when 
we  come  to  die.  Look  at  our  selfish  actions  in  this  light.  How  will  sin  then 
appear  ?  II.  Judgment  is  at  the  last.  When  we  die,  we  die  not.  When  a  man 
dieth  shall  he  live  again  ?  Ay,  that  he  shall — for  his  spirit  dieth  never.  After 
death  comes  the  judgment.  Look  at  the  past,  the  present,  the  future,  in  the  light 
of  that  judgment.  UI.  Heaven  is  at  the  last.  Look  on  all  our  actions  in  the 
light  of  heaven.  IV.  Hell  is  at  the  last.  See  things  in  that  dread  and  dismal 
light,  the  glare  of  the  fiery  abyss.  How  will  self-indulgence,  unbelief,  procrastination 
look  in  that  light?  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  When  thy  flesh  and  thy  body  are 
consumed. — SMs  recompense: — If  all  men  believed  at  the  beginning  of  their  courses 
of  life  what  they  find  at  the  end,  there  would  be  far  less  power  in  temptation, 
and  many  would  turn  aside  from  those  paths  which  bring  them  to  ruin  ;  but  it  is 
one  of  the  peculiarities  of  youth  that,  while  it  has  unbounded  faith  in  certain 
directions,  it  seldom  has  faith  in  regard  to  mischiefs  which  befall  disobedience. 
There  are  many  reasons  which  conspire  to  make  men  either  over-confident  in  the 
beginnings  of  life,  or  even  audacious.  1.  The  inexperience  and  thoughtlessness 
which  belong  to  the  young.  Thousands  there  are  who  have  taken  no  pains  in  the 
formation  of  their  consciences.  2,  There  is  a  most  defiant  spirit  in  the  young. 
3.  There  is  a  hopefulness  which  frequently  goes  beyond  aU  bounds.  4.  There  are 
reactions  from  an  infelicitous  way  of  teaching  which  tend  to  produce  presumption 
in  the  young.  Especially  the  exaggeration  and  indiscriminate  way  in  which  sin  is 
often  held  forth.  Conventional  sins  are  held  up  before  men  as  representing  sinning, 
until  there  comes  up  a  scepticism  of  the  whole  doctrine  and  the  whole  sad  and 
melancholy  experience  of  sinning.  5.  Men  are  made  presumptuous  in  sinning 
because  they  see  wicked  men  prospering.  They  regard  that  as  the  refutation  of 
half  the  preaching,  and  of  almost  all  the  advice  they  hear.  There  is  a  law  of 
everlasting  rectitude.  There  are  conditions  on  which  men's  bodies  wiU  serve 
them  happily,  and  there  are  conditions  on  which  men's  souls  will  serve  them 
happily.  But  if  a  man  violate  these  conditions,  no  matter  how  secretly,  no  matter 
how  little,  just  as  sure  as  there  is  a  God  in  heaven,  he  must  suffer  the  penalty. 
Every  one  of  the  wrongs  which  a  man  commits  against  his  own  soul  wiU  find  him 
out,  and  administer  its  own  penalty.  There  comes  a  time  when  men  who  are  not 
actually  worn  out  by  excess  of  transgression  do  regain,  to  some  extent,  their  moral 
sense.  After  the  period  of  infatuation  there  comes,  very  frequently,  a  period  of 
retrospection.  It  is  alluded  to  in  the  passage  now  before  us.  The  resurrection  of 
moral  sensibility  comes  through  a  variety  of  agencies — failure,  shame,  affliction,  Ac. 
Sometimes  it  comes  too  late.  I  beseech  you,  young  men,  believe  in  virtue ;  believe 
in  truth ;  believe  in  honesty  and  fidelity  ;  believe  in  honour ;  believe  in  God ;  believe 
in  God's  law  and  in  God's  providence.  Put  your  trust  in  God,  and  in  the  faith  of 
God,  and  not  in  the  seeming  of  deceitful  and  apparently  prosperous  men.  Whatever 
else  you  get,  have  peace,  day  by  day,  with  your  own  conscience.  Whoever  else  you 
offend,  do  not  offend  your  God.  Do  what  is  right,  and  then  fear  no  man. 
{H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  doom  of  the  libertine : — I.  Waste  of  wealth.  It  is  spent 
to  garnish  the  house  of  sin  ;  it  is  so  much  taken  from  home-scenes,  and  legitimate 
pleasures  and  benevolence.  II.  Waste  of  health.  Note  the  corruption  of  licentious 
nations,  as  the  Turks,  &c.  IH.  Waste  of  teabs.  Mourning  at  the  last  is  too  late 
for  proving  the  repentance  to  be  genuine.  {Anon.)  A  dissolute  young  man : — 
I.  A  dissolute  youno  man  with  a  decaying  body.  The  wise  man  foresaw  the  wretched 
physical  condition  to  which  the  dissolute  life  of  the  young  man  whom  he  calls  hia 
son  would  lead.  1.  It  is  a  sad  sight  to  see  a  young  man  decay  at  all.  2.  It  is  mora 
sad  when  the  physical  decay  has  been  produced  by  a  dissolute  life.  II.  A  dissolutb 
TOUNQ  MAN  WITH  AN  ACTtVE  MEMOBY.  1.  He  remembers  the  many  privileges  he  has 
abused.  2.  He  remembers  the  sinful  scenes  of  his  life.  HI.  A  dissolute  youno 
MAN  with  a  tobtubing  CONSCIENCE.  1.  An  agonising  sense  of  self-blamefulnese. 
Conscience  casts  all  excuses  to  the  winds;   it  fastens  the  crime  home   on  the- 


154  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOIt.  [chap.  T. 

individaal  himself.  2.  An  agonising  sense  of  self-min.  The  moral  wail  here 
breathes  the  feeling  of  destruction.  (D.  Thomai,  D.D.)  The  woet  of  wantonness : — 
I.  Lamentation  follows  wantonness.  1.  When  men  find  their  goods  gone  and 
their  bodies  corrupted.  2.  When  they  see  all  their  opportunities  of  doing  good  to 
soul  and  body  gone.  3.  They  feel  God's  hand  heavy  on  them,  as  being  on  the  rack 
of  an  evil  conscience.  11.  The  end  of  wanton  coukses  is  soKROWFUii.  1.  Because 
of  pleasures  past.  2.  Because  of  present  sorrows.  3.  Because  of  pursuing  pain 
that  is  gotten  by  disease.  4.  Because  of  public  shame.  III.  Thb  body  itself  is 
CONSUMED  BY  WANTONNESS.  Because  it  consumes  the  radical  humour  of  the  body. 
{Francis  Taylor,  B.D.) 

Ver.  12.  And  say,  How  have  I  hated  inBtruction,  and  my  heart  despised  reproof. — 
Conscience  as  an  instrument  of  punishment : — These  are  supposed  to  be  the  words 
of  a  young  man  whose  dissolute  life  had  induced  disease  and  want  and  infamy.  He 
stands  out  upon  the  dim  verge  of  life,  a  beacon  light  to  all  who  live  without  God. 
Remorse,  like  a  fierce  vulture,  had  clutched  upon  his  soul,  and  despair  had  cast  the 
shadows  of  a  cheerless  night  around  him.  It  was  from  his  moral  reflections  that  his 
keenest  anguish  arose.  I.  The  natural  authority  of  conscience,  and  its  consequent 
POWER  TO  inflict  PUNISHMENT.  1.  If  wc  would  appreciate  the  capacity  of  the  soul  to 
suffer  through  the  morbid  action  of  the  moral  feelings,  we  must  first  understand  its 
internal  structure,  its  several  faculties  and  powers.  Man  is  endowed  with  various 
powers  of  reason,  of  sensibility,  and  of  action.  Of  the  principles  of  action,  some 
are  mechanical,  as  instinct  and  habit ;  some  are  animal,  as  the  appetites  and  some 
of  the  desires  and  affections ;  and  others  rational,  arising  from  a  knowledge  of  his 
relations  to  other  beings,  and  from  a  foresight  of  the  proper  consequences  of  his 
acts.  He  thus  combines  in  his  nature  those  laws  which  govern  the  brute  creation 
with  those  which  declare  him  to  be  made  in  the  "  image  of  God,"  and  suit  him  to 
a  state  of  moral  discipline.  With  this  complex  nature  he  is  endowed  with  the 
power  of  self-government,  which  implies  the  due  exercise  of  all  the  properties  of  his 
being,  under  the  direction  and  control  of  one  supreme  authority.  This  authority 
is  conscience,  which  God  has  enthroned  in  the  human  breast  with  all  the  attributes 
of  sovereignty.  The  brute  animal  rushes  on  to  the  gratification  of  its  desires 
without  a  thought  beyond  the  immediate  object  in  pursuit.  Man  brings  under  his 
eye  the  just  relations  of  universal  being,  chooses  and  pursues.  2.  Consider  what  a 
monitor  conscience  is.  It  teaches  us  to  perform  in  good  faith,  as  being  right,  that 
which  we  do ;  but  it  does  not  of  itself  supply  an  independent  rule  of  right.  3.  The 
government  of  conscience  is  not  like  that  6t  the  animal  appetites.  Its  voice  is 
gentle  and  persuasive,  often  drowned  in  the  clamour  of  passion,  or  unheeded  in 
the  eager  pursuit  of  forbidden  pleasure.  4.  If  conscience  is  supreme,  according  to 
the  original  constitution  of  our  nature,  then,  whatever  may  be  the  occasional, 
temporary  abuse  it  may  receive  from  the  usurpation  of  the  animal  propensities,  it 
must  upon  the  whole,  and  taking  all  the  range  of  our  existence  into  the  account, 
possess  an  ascendant  power  over  man.  5.  Go  where  you  will,  the  natural  dread  of 
an  accusing  conscience  will  be  found  to  have  been  the  rod  of  terror  to  the  guilty  of 
all  ages.  No  man  will  long  abide  the  direct  action  of  self-reproach.  The  restlessness 
of  the  soul,  under  the  action  of  self-reproach,  has  displayed  itself  upon  a  wide  scale 
in  the  cumbrous  and  often  sanguinary  superstitions  of  the  heathen.  We  have  seen 
the  distress  and  anguish  which  a  sense  of  guilt  produces  in  the  breast  of  the 
awakened  sinner.  II.  The  nature  and  extent  of  the  punitive  action  of 
CONSCIENCE.  In  relation  to  God,  a  consciousness  of  guilt  is  accompanied — 1.  With 
a  sense  of  the  loss  of  Divine  favour  and  fellowship.  2.  A  sense  of  gviilt  is 
accompanied  with  an  apprehension  of  punishment.  In  the  breast  of  every  man 
there  exists  a  belief  that  this  world  is  under  a  providential  government,  from  the 
just  awards  of  which  he  has  something  to  hope  or  to  fear  in  a  future  state  of  being. 
In  relation  to  other  moral  beings,  a  sense  of  guilt  is  accompanied  with — (1)  A  loss  of 
the  confidence  and  esteem  of  the  holy.  (2)  A  consciousness  of  guilt  awakens  remorse, 
a  complex  emotion,  consisting  of  simple  regret  and  moral  disapprobation  of  one's 
self  ;  in  other  words,  it  is  moral  regret.  Practical  considerations  :  1.  How  delusive 
is  that  hope  of  future  happiness  which,  though  it  is  built  upon  the  natural  goodness 
of  God,  manifested  through  a  Mediator,  makes  no  necessary  reckoning  of  a  holy 
life.  It  is  not  in  the  province  of  Omnipotence  to  produce  moral  happiness  in  a 
polluted  soul.  2.  We  here  perceive  the  reasonableness  as  well  as  certainty  of 
future  punishment.  {Freehorn  C.  Hibbard,  M.A.)  Woman's  lamentation  over  a 
wasted  life : — Women  outnumber  men  in  the  family,  in  the  Church,  in  the  State. 


CHAP,  v.]  PROVERBS.  155 

A  God-loving,  God-fearing  womanhood  will  make  a  God-loving,  God-fearing 
nationality.  1.  A  young  woman  who  omits  her  opportunity  of  making  home 
happy.  2.  A  yonng  woman  who  spends  her  whole  life,  or  wastes  her  young 
womanhood,  in  selfish  display.  3.  A  young  woman  who  wastes  her  opportunity  of 
doing  good.  4.  A  young  woman  who  loses  her  opportunity  of  personal  salvation. 
Opportunity  gone,  is  gone  for  ever.  Privileges  wasted,  wasted  for  ever.  The  soul 
lost,  lost  for  ever.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  Self-condemnations: — I.  Sensualists 
WILL  BE  SELP-coNDEMNED  IN  THE  END.  1.  Because  of  the  issue  of  sin  in  general, 
which  must  come  to  a  self-condemnation.  2.  Because  of  the  strength  of  their  sorrow 
arising  out  of  their  troubles.  3.  Because  of  the  force  of  truth,  which  will  overcome 
all  in  the  end.    4.  Because  of  the  power  of  conscience.    II.  That  which  lies  sorest 

UPON  THE  SPIRITS  OF  GROSS  SINNERS  IN  THE  END  IS,  8LIGHTINO  INSTRTJCTION.     1.   BccaUSa 

it  is  a  great  mercy  for  God  to  afford  teachers.  2.  Because  not  hearkening  to 
instruction  is  the  way  to  fall  into  sin,  and  not  hearkening  to  reproof  the  way  to 
abide  in  it.     III.  Wicked  men  heartilt  hate  instruction  and  slight  reproof. 

1.  Because  they  are  contrary  to  their  corrupt  affections  and  wicked  lusts.  2.  It 
appears  that  they  heartily  hate  them  by  the  malice  they  bear  to  the  reprovers  of 
their  sins,  which  is  vehement  and  deadly.  Their  lusts  are  so  strong  on  them  that 
they  hate  and  slight  all  reproofs.    (Francis  Taylor,  B.D.) 

Ver.  13.  And  have  not  obeyed  the  voice  of  my  teachers. — Consequences  of  diS' 
obedience  : — Can  any  state  be  more  distressing  than  that  of  an  individual  who  has 
enjoyed  the  best  opportunities  of  securing  his  own  happiness  and  promoting  that  of 
others,  totally  failing  in  both  these,  and  becoming  the  subject  of  bitter  self- 
reproach  ?  I.  There  is  the  admission  of  having  had  the  great  advantage  of 
teachers.  There  are  scarcely  any  but  have  had  some  very  considerable  advantages 
and  means  of  religious  instruction.  They  involve  you  all  in  a  serious  responsibility 
to  God  and  your  own  conscience.  1.  The  best,  purest,  most  commanding  instruc- 
tion in  the  Bible.  2.  The  living  voice  of  teachsrs,  either  parents  or  ministers,  or 
kind  friends  in  schools.  3.  The  Spirit  of  God  unfolding  the  truth  to  your  under- 
standing  and  conscience ;  striving  with  your  heart,  and  inwardly  calling  you  to 
seek  those  things  which  belong  to  your  peace.  II.  There  is  an  implied  connection 
BETWEEN  instruction  AND  OBEDIENCE.  The  tcxt  admits  the  obligation  resulting 
from  such  advantages.  "  I  ought  to  have  obeyed,  but  I  have  not."  1.  You  are 
bound  to  obey  the  good  instruction  you  have  received,  because  it  is  clearly  the  will 
of  God,  the  Being  who  is  above  all,  and  who  holds  you  amenable  at  His  tribunal. 

2.  By  the  tender  and  unspeakal'le  love  of  the  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ,  who  came  forth 
from  His  Father,  and  became  the  Redeemer  of  men  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself. 

3.  By  a  regard  to  your  own  highest  interests.  Obeying  the  Divine  precepts  is  the 
only  way  to  secure  your  own  peace  of  mind,  your  joy  through  life,  your  hope  in 
death,  and  your  immortal  felicity  after  death.  4.  By  a  regard  to  the  interests  of 
others  to  whom  you  may  be  related  in  this  life.  You  have  social  relations,  duties, 
and  obligations  which  you  ought  to  regard,  and  cannot  neglect  without  great 
criminality.  You  ought  to  become  yourselves,  and  endeavour  to  make  them,  such 
as  God  would  have  us  all  to  be.  5.  By  the  obligation  which  arises  from  your  final 
accountableness  at  the  bar  of  judgment.  III.  There  is  a  confession  that  instruc- 
tion HAD  NOT  BEEN  OBEYED.  This  text  does  not  express  the  case  of  those  who  have 
only  partially,  or  in  some  respects,  failed  of  obedience,  but  have  in  the  main  been 
mindful  of  the  instruction  they  have  received.  It  is  applied  to  those  who  have 
failed  altogether,  and  in  the  general  habits  of  their  mind  and  life  have  disregarded 
the  great  and  holy  principles  inculcated  upon  them  in  early  life.  Some  of  the 
causes  of  this  failure  are — 1.  There  is  in  our  own  hearts  a  disinclination  to  serve 
God,  and  an  aversion  to  the  Divine  precepts.  2.  There  are  innumerable  and 
incessant  temptations  to  forsake  the  guide  of  our  youth.  3.  There  will  be  a  direct 
and  powerful  influence  of  the  worst  kind  exerted  over  those  who  give  themselves  to 
evil  companions.  IV.  There  is  an  expression  of  penitentul  p,"gret  for  dis- 
obedience. The  text  seems  to  be  the  language  of  remorse.  1.  A  perception  that 
our  misery  has  resulted  from  wilful  disobedience,  not  from  ignorance.  2.  The 
feeling  that  this  disobedience  has  been  maintained  against  light  and  knowledge. 
3.  The  consciousness  that  you  once  possessed  all  the  means  necessary  to  promote 
your  happiness  and  secure  your  salvation.    {The  Evangelist.) 

Ver.  15.  Drink  waters  out  of  thine  own  cistern,  and  running:  waters  ont 
of  thine  own  well. — Spiritual   resources: — I.    Man  has  independent  spniiTUAii 


U»  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

BBS0UBCE8.  1.  He  has  independent  sources  of  thought.  Every  sane  man  can 
and  does  think  for  himself.  2.  He  has  independent  sources  of  experience. 
No  two  have  exactly  the  same  experience.  3.  He  has  independent  powers 
of  usefulness.  Every  man  has  a  power  to  do  some  thing  which  no  other 
can.  n.  Man  is  bound  to  use  these  eesources.  "Drink  waters  out  of  thine 
own  cistern."  Do  not  live  on  others'  self-drawing.  1.  Honours  our  own  nature. 
2.  Increases  our  own  resources.  3.  Contributes  to  the  good  of  the  universe. 
The  man  who  gives  only  what  he  has  borrowed  from  others  adds  nothing  to  the 
common  stock.  The  subject — (1)  Indicates  the  kind  of  service  which  one  man 
can  spiritually  render  another.  (2)  Suggests  an  effective  method  to  sap  the  founda- 
tion of  all  arrogant  assumptions.  Let  every  man  become  self-helpful,  and  the 
influence  of  those  who  arrogate  a  lordship  over  the  faith  of  others  will  soon  die  out. 
(3)  Presents  a  motive  for  thankfully  adoring  the  great  Creator  for  the  spiritual 
constitution  He  has  given  us.  We  have  resources,  not  of  course  independent  of 
"  Him,"  the  primal  fount  of  all  power,  but  independent  of  all  creatures.  (Homilist.) 
Family  joys  : — A  painter  lays  down  a  dark  ground  to  lean  his  picture  on,  and 
thereby  bring  its  beauty  out.  Such  is  the  method  adopted  in  this  portion  of  the 
Word.  The  pure  delights  of  the  family  are  about  to  be  represented  in  the  sweetest 
colours  that  nature  yields — wedded  love  mirrored  in  running  waters ;  surely  we 
have  apples  of  gold  in  pictures  of  silver  here.  And  in  all  the  earlier  part  of  the 
chapter  the  Spirit  has  stained  the  canvas  deep  with  Satan's  dark  antithesis  to  the 
holy  appointment  of  God.  The  Lord  condescends  to  bring  His  own  institute  forward 
in  rivalry  with  the  deceitful  pleasures  of  sin.  How  beautiful  and  how  true  the 
imagery  in  which  our  lesson  is  unfolded !  Pleasures  such  as  God  gives  to  His 
creatures,  and  such  as  His  creatures,  with  advantage  to  all  their  interests  can  enjoy 
— pleasures  that  are  consistent  with  holiness  and  heaven,  are  compared  to  a  stream 
of  pure  running  water.  And  specifically  the  joys  of  the  family  are  "  running  waters 
out  of  thine  own  well."  This  well  is  not  exposed  to  every  passenger.  It  springs 
within,  and  has  a  fence  around  it.  We  should  make  much  of  the  family  and  all 
that  belongs  to  it.  All  its  accessories  are  the  Father's  gift,  and  He  expects  us  to 
observe  and  value  them.  But  because  the  stream  is  so  pure,  a  small  bulk  of  foreign 
matter  will  sensibly  tinge  it.  The  unguarded  word,  neglected  thoughtfulnesses, 
or  slovenly  and  careless  ways.  But  careful  abstinence  from  evil  is  only  one,  and 
that  the  lower,  side  of  the  case.  There  must  be  spontaneous  outgoing  activity  in 
this  matter,  like  the  springing  of  flowers,  and  the  leaping  of  a  stream  from  the 
fountain.  All  the  allusions  to  this  relation  in  Scripture  imply  an  ardent,  joyful 
love.  Husband  and  wife,  if  they  are  skilful  to  take  advantage  of  their  privileges, 
may,  by  sharing,  somewhat  diminish  their  cares,  and  fully  double  their  joys.  But 
we  must  take  care  lest  the  enjoyments  of  home  become  a  snare.  God  is  not  pleased 
with  indolence  or  selfishness.  If  the  family  is  well  ordered,  ourselves  will  get  the 
chief  benefit,  but  we  should  let  others  share  it.    (W.  Arnot,  D.D.) 

Ver.  16.  Let  thy  fountains  be  dispersed  abroad. — The  children  of  marriage  : — 
Streams  of  children.  Unlawful  intercourse  is  often  barren.  I.  Childbkn  of  law- 
ful MABBiAGB  ARE  LIKE  RIVERS.     1.  In  plenty.     God's  blessing  goes  with  marriage. 

2.  In  purity.  Pure  fountains  bring  forth  pure  streams.  3.  In  spreading  abroad. 
4.  In  profitableness.  II.  Children  are  a  great  part  of  the  comforts  of  marriage. 
1.  Because  they  are  a  part  of  both  their  ^parents.  2.  Because  they  are  a  firm  bond 
of  love,  peace,  and  reconciliation  to  both  their  parents.  HI.  Parents  need  not  be 
ashamed  of  their  children.  1.  Because  they  come  into  the  world  God's  way,  and 
that  brings  no  shame  with  it.     2.  Because  there  is  hope  that  they  will  be  good. 

3.  Being  well-bred,  they  may  come  to  preferment  in  the  State.  4.  They  are  likely 
to  have  honourable  posterity.    (Francis  Taylor,  B.D.) 

Ver.  17.  Let  them  be  only  thine  own,  and  not  Btrang^ers'  with  thee. — Strangers 
with  thee : — Strangers  with  thee  in  life  1  Those  united  in  Christ  are  those  only 
who  are  united  in  truth.  Strangers  with  thee  in  death !  Alone  wilt  thou  descend 
the  banks  of  that  dark  river.  For  be  assured  the  hosts  of  darkness  and  sin  flee 
terror-stricken  from  its  waters.  The  Lord  and  the  Church  are  with  them  ;  but 
"  strangers  with  thee."  Strangers  with  thee  in  eternity  I  There  the  little  finesses 
and  shams  by  which  rivalry  and  hatred  are  concealed  in  this  life  will  be  torn  away, 
and  the  naked  energies  of  sin  will  stand  isolated  and  single  in  their  intense  and 
repulsive  malignity.     "  Strangers  with  thee."     {Episcopal  Recorder.) 


CffAP.  T.]  PROVERBS.  157 

Ver.  21.  For  the  ways  of  man  are  before  the  eyes  of  the  LorA.— The  method  of 

Providence  for  restraining  evil : — God  announcea  Himself  the  witness  and  judge  of 
man.  The  evil-doer  can  neither  elude  the  all-seeing  eye,  nor  escape  from  the 
almighty  hand.  Secrecy  is  the  study  and  the  hope  of  the  wicked.  A  sinner's 
chief  labour  is  to  hide  his  sin,  and  his  labour  is  all  lost.  Darkness  hideth  not 
from  God.  He  who  knows  evil  in  its  secret  source  is  able  to  limit  the  range  of  its 
operation.  There  is  a  special  method  by  which  this  is  done.  It  is  a  principle  of 
the  Divine  government  that  sin  becomes  the  instrument  for  punishing  sinners. 
His  own  sin  is  the  snare  that  takes  the  transgressor,  and  the  scourge  that  lashes 
him.  The  Maker  and  Ruler  of  all  things  has  set  in  the  system  of  the  universe  a 
self-acting  apparatus,  which  is  constantly  going  for  the  encouragement  of  good  and 
the  repression  of  evil.  The  providential  laws  are  directed  against  the  current  of 
man's  sinful  propensities,  and  tell  in  force  thereon.  They  do  not,  however,  over- 
come and  neutralise,  and  reverse  those  propensities.  Retribution  in  the  system 
of  nature,  set  in  motion  by  the  act  of  sin,  is  like  the  "  Virgin's  kiss "  in  the 
Roman  Inquisition.  The  step  of  him  who  goes  forward  to  kiss  the  image  touches 
a  secret  spring,  and  the  statue's  marble  arms  enclose  him  in  a  deadly  embrace, 
piercing  his  body  through  with  a  hundred  knives.  Verily  a  man  under  law  to  God 
needs  to  "ponder  his  feet."  {W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  Man's  ways  before  God : — Every- 
body can  see  the  cedar  of  Lebanon,  the  pine  of  the  forest,  or  the  hedge  with  its 
convolvulus  and  wild  rose.  They  can  even  see  the  daisy,  the  flower  in  the  grass. 
But  who  Bees  the  grass  ?  He  who  made  the  grass  to  grow  upon  the  mountain.  He 
knows  every  blade  of  it,  and  for  every  blade  has  recognition,  sunshine,  and  dew. 
So  is  it  with  the  lowliest  and  humblest  man  in  this  world  to-day.  God's  eye  loves 
goodness ;  He  delights  in  it ;  and  there  is  no  goodness  which  He  fails  to  recognise 
and  bless.    {W.  L.  Watkinson.) 

Ver.  22.  His  'own  iniquities  shall  take  the  wicked  himself. — Man  a$  known  by 
Ood  and  punished  by  sin  : — I.  Man  as  known  by  God.  The  fact  that  God  knows 
man  thoroughly,  if  practically  realised,  will  have  a  fourfold  effect  upon  the  soul. 
1.  It  will  stimulate  to  great  spiritual  activity.  2.  It  will  restrain  from  the  com- 
mission of  sin.  3.  It  will  excite  the  desire  for  pardon.  4.  It  will  brace  the  soul  in 
the  performance  of  duty.  H.  Man  as  punished  by  sin.  As  virtue  is  its  own 
reward,  so  sin  is  its  own  punishment.  Sin  punishing  the  sinner.  1.  It  will  seize 
him  as  its  victim.  2.  It  will  arrest  him  in  his  career.  Illustrate  Belshazzar. 
3.  It  will  detach  him  from  his  comrades.  4.  It  will  bind  him  as  its  prisoner. 
There  are  the  "  cords  "  of  causation  ;  the  "  cords  "  of  habit ;  and  the  "  cords  "  of 
despair.  5.  It  will  exclude  him  from  knowledge.  6.  It  banishes  him  as  an  exile. 
"  In  the  greatness  of  his  folly  he  shall  go  astray."  Sin  banishes  the  soul  from 
virtue,  heaven,  God  ;  and  reduces  it  to  a  homeless,  friendless  orphan  in  the 
universe.  "  The  seeds  of  our  own  punishment,"  says  Hesiod,  "  are  sown  at  the 
same  time  we  commit  sin."  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  apprehending  nature  of 
$in  : — Nothing  is  so  deceptive  as  sin.  Nothing  so  cruel  and  unrelenting.  Nothing 
80  ruinous  and  destructive.  Some  think  that  sin  is  a  single  act,  and  that  it  passes 
away  with  the  doing.  I.  Sin  will  subely  find  out  the  sinneb.  Conscience  is  one 
of  its  officers.  The  consequences  of  sin  lay  hold  of  the  sinner.  No  man  can 
escape  from  himself.  H.  Sin  will  bubely  being  the  sinneb  to  judgment.  He 
must  answer  for  his  wrong  doing  and  wrong  thinking.  In  his  personal  experience 
something  declares  against  the  sinner.  It  causes  a  disharmony  of  one's  nature. 
At  the  bar  of  judgment  a  penalty  is  declared.  The  judgment  is  a  self-condemna- 
tion. The  penalty  wUl  enforce  itself.  IH.  The  coeds  op  sin  will  hold  the 
SINNEB.  He  cannot  free  himself  from  them.  His  very  being  is  bound  and  fettered 
with  an  adamantine  chain.  Sin  can  never  exhaust  itself.  Continual  sinning 
involves  continual  penalty.  Sin  presents  only  a  hopeless  aspect.  Turning  to  him- 
self, man  turns  only  to  despair.  Practical  lessons — 1.  We  should  not  cherish 
slighting  views  of  sin.  2.  We  should  heartily  loathe  and  detest  it.  3.  We  should 
humbly  resort  to  the  only,  the  gospel,  remedy  for  sin.  Christ  is  the  only  emanci- 
pator from  its  terrible  power.  Only  through  personal  faith  in  Christ  can  any 
guilty  soul  realise  salvation.  {Daniel  Rogers,  D.D.)  Sinners  bound  with  the 
cords  of  sin : — The  first  sentence  of  this  verse  has  reference  to  a  net,  in  which 
birds  or  beasts  are  taken.  That  which  fijst  attracted  the  sinner  afterwards 
detains  him.  This  first  sentence  may  have  reference  to  an  arrest  by  an  officer  of 
law.  The  transgressor's  own  sin  shall  take  him,  shall  seize  him ;  they  bear  a 
warrant  for  arresting  him,  they  shall  judge  him,  they  shall  even  execute  him. 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  T. 

The  second  sentence  speaks  of  the  sinner  being  holden  with  cords.  The  lifelong 
occupation  of  the  ungodly  man  is  to  twist  ropes  of  sin.  The  binding  meant  is  that 
of  a  culprit  pinioned  for  execution.  Iniquity  pinions  a  man.  Make  a  man's  will 
a  prisoner,  and  he  is  a  captive  indeed.  Who  would  not  scorn  to  make  himself  a 
slave  to  his  baser  passions  ?  And  yet  the  mass  of  men  are  such — the  cords  of 
their  sins  bind  them.  I.  The  captivating,  enslaving  powek  of  sin  is  a  solution 
TO  A  GBEAT  MT8TEKY.  1.  Is  it  not  mvsterious  that  men  should  be  content  to  abide 
in  a  state  of  imminent  peril  ?  2.  Before  long  unconverted  men  and  women  will  be 
in  a  state  whose  wretchedness  it  is  not  possible  for  language  fully  to  express.  3.  Is 
it  not  a  wonder  that  men  do  not  receive  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  seeing  that  the 
gospel  is  so  plain  ?  4.  Nay,  moreover,  so  infinitely  attractive.  5.  The  command- 
ment of  the  gospel  is  not  burdensome.  6.  And,  according  to  the  confession  of 
most  sinners,  the  pleasures  of  sin  are  by  no  means  great.  Here  stands  the  riddle, 
man  is  so  set  against  God  and  His  Christ  that  he  never  will  accept  eternal  salva- 
tion until  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  a  supernatural  work,  overcomes  his  will  and  turns 
the  current  of  his  affections.  II.  Though  this  is  the  solution  of  one  mystery,  it 
is  m  itself  a  gbeateb  mystery.  One  reason  why  men  receive  not  Christ  is,  that 
they  are  hampered  by  the  sin  of  forgetting  God.  Another  sin  binds  all  unre- 
generate  hearts  ;  it  is  the  sin  of  not  loving  the  Christ  of  God.  What  a  mystery  it 
is  that  men  should  be  held  by  the  sin  of  neglecting  their  souls !  [C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  lot  of  the  wicked : — I.  Wicked  men  hurt  themselves  more  th.\n  others  can. 
1.  By  their  sins  they  set  all  their  enemies  at  liberty.  2.  Their  plots  for  the  ruin  of 
others  for  the  most  part  light  on  themselves.  II.  Wicked  men  are  taken  in  the 
snares  of  their  own  sins.  1.  The  guilt  of  their  sins  follows  them  wherever  they 
go.  2.  God's  wrath  and  curse  follow  upon  sin.  3.  God  delivers  sinners  over  to 
Satan.  4.  Punishment  attends  on  sin.  HI.  The  snares  of  wicked  men's  sins 
will  hold  them  fast.  1.  The  custom  of  sinning  becomes  another  nature.  2.  God 
ties  the  sinner  fast  to  eternal  punishment  by  his  sins,  and  for  his  sins,  giving  him 
over  to  a  reprobate  sense,  and  by  His  power,  as  by  chains,  keeping  him  in  prison 
tiU  the  great  judgment.  {Francis  Taylor,  B.D.)  The  sinner  self-imprisoned  : — 
At  one  time  many  convicts  were  employed  in  building  high  walls  round  the  prison 
grounds  at  Portland.  Soldiers  posted  above  them  with  loaded  guns  watched  them 
at  their  work.  Every  brick  laid  rendered  their  escape  more  impossible,  and  yet 
they  themselves  were  laying  them.  And  he  shall  be  holden  with  the  cords  of  hia 
Bins. — Sinful  habits  : — I.  Their  formation.  1.  One  sin  leads  to  another  by  reducing 
the  sense  of  odiousness.  2.  By  strengthening  wrong  principles.  3.  By  rendering 
falsehood  necessary  for  purposes  of  concealment.  4.  By  multiplying  opportunities 
for  commission.  5.  By  lessening  the  power  of  resistance.  II.  Their  power. 
1.  As  seen  in  the  criminal.  2.  The  drunkard.  3.  The  swindler.  4.  The  errorist. 
6.  The  gospel-despiser.  Apply — (1)  Beware  what  habits  we  form.  (2)  Mark 
the  increased  difiBculty  of  conversion.  (3)  Watch  over  the  religious  education  of 
the  young  ;  the  formation  of  early  habits.  (G.  Brooks.)  The  self-propagating 
power  of  sin : — In  Scripture,  Divine  providence  and  the  results  of  sin  are  often 
brought  into  immediate  and  close  connection  with  each  other,  as  if  the  pain 
attendant  on  sin  were  a  direct  act  of  God.  But  there  are  other  passages  where  sin 
is  looked  at,  as  bringing  its  own  punishment  with  it  by  the  law  of  the  world 
analogous  to  the  physical  laws  of  nature.  In  the  text  the  results  of  sin  are  repre- 
sented as  taking  place  in  the  natural  order  of  things.  The  sinner  thinks  that  sin 
is  over  and  gone  when  it  is  once  committed.  If  you  put  a  Divine  punisher  of  sin 
out  of  sight,  sin  does  the  work  of  the  executioner  on  the  sinner.  Among  these 
consequences  of  sin  certain  ones  are  often  insisted  upon — such  as  bodily  evils,  loss 
of  temporal  advantages,  fear  of  the  wrath  of  God.  But  there  is  a  far  more  awful 
view  of  sin,  when  we  look  at  it  on  the  moral  side,  as  propagating  itself,  becoming 
more  intense,  tending  to  blacken  and  corrupt  the  whole  character,  and  to  annihilate 
the  hopes  and  powers  of  the  soul.  See  some  of  the  laws  of  character  to  which  these 
consequences  of  sin  can  be  reduced.  I.  The  direct  power  of  sin  to  propagate 
itself  in  the  individual  soul.  Sin  is  the  most  fruitful  of  all  parents ;  each 
new  sin  is  a  new  ever-flowing  source  of  corruption,  and  there  is  no  limit  to 
the  issue  of  death.  1.  Note  the  law  of  habit,  or  the  tendency  of  a  certain 
kind  of  sin  to  produce  another  of  the  same  kind.  This  law  reigns  over 
every  act,  quality,  or  state,  of  the  soul,  to  render  the  sinful  act  easier,  to  intensify 
the  desire,  to  destroy  the  impression  of  danger,  to  increase  the  spirit  of  neglect  and 
delay.  Illustrate  by  the  internal  affection  of  envy,  or  an  external  habit,  such  as 
some  sensual  appetite.     2.  The  tendency  of  a  sin  of  one  kind  to  produce  sina  of 


CHAP.  T.]  PROVERBS.  159 

another  kind.  The  confederacy  of  powers  in  man  admits  of  no  separate  action  of 
any  one  wayward  impulse,  but  as  soon  as  evil  in  one  shape  appears,  it  tends  to 
corrupt  all  the  parts  of  the  soul,  to  disorganise,  to  reduce  other  powers  under  its  own 
control,  and  to  weaken  those  which  resist.  One  sort  of  sin  puts  the  body  or  soul,  or 
both,  into  such  a  state,  that  another  sort  becomes  more  easy  and  natural.  There  is 
an  affinity  between  bodily  lusts.  Any  one  of  them  tends  to  derange  the  soul  by  a 
loss  of  inward  peace.  One  wrong  affection  renders  another  easier.  Even  an 
absorbing  passion,  like  covetousness  or  ambition,  though  it  may  exclude  some 
other  inconsistent  passion,  does  not  reign  alone,  but  has  around  and  behind  it  a 
gloomy  train  of  satellites,  which  are  Uttle  tyrants  in  turn.  A  more  striking  example 
cf  the  connection  between  different  kinds  of  sin  is  seen  when  a  man  resorts  to  a  new 
kind  of  sin  to  save  himself  from  the  effects  of  the  first.  Another  dark  shade  is 
thrown  over  the  malignity  of  sin  from  the  fact  that  it  so  often  makes  use  of  inno- 
cent motives  to  propagate  its  power  over  the  soul.  II.  The  tendency  of  sm  to 
PRODUCE  MOEAiy  BLINDNESS.  Sin  freely  chosen  must  needs  seek  for  some  justification 
or  palliation  ;  otherwise  the  moral  sense  is  aroused,  and  the  soul  is  filled  with  pain 
and  alarm.  Such  justification  cannot  be  found  in  moral  or  religious  truth,  and  of 
this  the  soul  is  more  or  less  distinctly  aware.  Hence  an  instinctive  dread  of  truth 
and  a  wilUngness  to  receive  and  embrace  plausible,  unsound  excuses  for  sin,  which 
neutrahse  or  destroy  its  power.  The  ways  in  which  this  overthrow  of  unperverted 
judgments,  this  rejection  of  light,  tends  to  strengthen  the  power  of  sin,  are  manifold. 
It  decreases  the  restraining  and  remedial  power  of  conscience  ;  it  kills  the  sense  of 
danger,  and  even  adds  hopefulness  to  sin  ;  it  destroys  any  influence  which  the 
beauty  and  glory  of  truth  could  put  forth  ;  in  short,  it  removes  those  checks  from 
prudence,  from  the  moral  powers,  and  from  the  character  of  God,  which  retard  the 
career  of  sin.  III.  Sin  tends  to  benumb  and  eoot  out  the  sensibilities.  This 
view  of  sin  shows  it  in  its  true  Ught  as  a  perverter  of  nature,  an  overturner  of  all 
those  particular  traits,  the  union  of  which,  under  love  to  God,  makes  the  harmony 
and  beauty  of  the  soul.  IV.  Sin  cripples  the  power  of  the  will  to  undertake 
A  reform.  There  are  cases,  very  frequent  in  life,  which  show  a  will  so  long  over- 
come by  the  strength  of  sin  and  by  ill-success  in  opposing  it,  that  the  purpose  of 
reform  is  abandoned  in  despair.  The  outcries  of  human  nature  under  this  bondage 
of  sin  are  tragic  indeed.     V.  Sin  propagates  itself  by  means  of  the  tendency 

OF  MEN  to  associate  WITH  PERSONS  OF  LIKE  CHARACTER,  AND  TO  AVOID  THE  COM- 
PANY OF  PERSONS  OF  AN  OPPOSITE  CHARACTER.  In  the  Operation  of  this  law  of 
companionship  the  evil  have  a  power,  and  an  increasing  power,  over  each  other. 
The  worst  maxims  and  the  worst  opinions  prevail,  for  they  are  a  logical  result  of 
evil  characters.  In  conclusion,  with  the  justice  or  goodness  of  this  system  I  have 
at  present  nothing  to  do.  The  IBible  did  not  set  it  on  foot,  the  Bible  does  not  fully 
explain  it,  but  only  looks  at  it  as  a  dark  fact.  Sin  does  not  cure  itself  or  pave  the 
way  toward  truth  and  right.  The  question  stiU  is  this — Is  there  any  cure  ?  If  there 
be  any  cure  it  must  be  found  outside  of  the  region  which  sin  governs.  I  call  on 
you,  then,  to  find  out  for  yourself  a  cure.  I  offer  you  one — Christ  and  His  gracious 
Spirit.    (T.  D.  Woolsey.) 

Ver.  23.  He  shall  die  without  instruction. — Th^  great  charity  of  early  instruc- 
tion : — All  persons  are  born  in  a  state  of  ignorance  and  darkness  as  to  spiritual 
things ;  therefore  all  young  persons  need  instruction.  Good  instruction  in  youth  is 
God's  appointed  means  to  bring  men  to  the  saving  knowledge  of  Himself,  and  the 
attainment  of  salvation.  The  neglect  of  early  instruction  and  good  education  is 
the  ruin  of  many  a  person  in  both  worlds.  They  Uve  viciously  and  die  desperately ; 
they  pass  from  the  errors  and  works  of  darkness  to  the  place  of  utter  and  eternal  dark- 
ness. They  die  without  instruction,  and  go  astray,  and  perish  in  their  ignorance 
and  folly.  The  time  of  youth  is  the  most  proper  time  in  nature  for  good  instruc- 
tions ;  children  are  apt  to  catch  at  everything  they  hear,  and  to  retain  it  and  repeat 
it.  Their  faculties  are  fresh  and  vigorous,  and  they  are  void  of  those  prejudices 
against  truth  and  virtue  which  they  are  afterwards  Ukely  to  take  up.  1.  Children 
cannot  live  as  Christians  if  they  know  not  the  fundamentals  of  the  Christian 
reUgion.  A  man  can  act  no  better  than  his  principles  dictate  to  him.  2.  For  want 
of  being  grounded  in  the  essentials  of  Christian  doctrine,  young  people  are  easily 
led  into  error  or  heresy.  3.  These  undisciplined  persons  usually  prove  iU  members 
of  the  State,  and  the  very  pest  of  the  neighbourhood  in  which  they  live.  4.  These 
untaught  people  bring  a  reproach  on  our  reUgion  and  the  Church  of  Christ  amongst 
ns.    5.  The  God  who  made  them  will  sorely  reject  them  at  last.     Then  gaining 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [«ba».t. 


efficiency  in  the  religious  education  of  our  young  people  is  supremely  to  be  desired. 
{Jotiah  Woodward,  D.D.)  In  tlie  greatneBS  of  his  folly  lie  shall  go  Mtnj.—The 
greatnets  of  the  sinner's  folly  :—I.  You  deny  boldlt  the  existence  oi-  a  God. 
You  believe  the  world  fatherless  and  forsaken ;  itself  eternal,  or  the  product  of 
chance.  By  your  creed  you  profess  to  be,  or  at  least  to  know,  the  very  God  whose 
existence  you  so  madly  deny.  In  the  greatness  of  your  folly  you  arrogate  to  your- 
selves the  very  perfections  of  Divinity,  while  a  God  is  denied.    II.  Applt  the 

DESCEIPTION  OF  THE  TEXT  TO  THE  CHARACTEB  AND  BISTORT  OF  A  DEIST.      YoU  admit  the 

existence  of  a  Supreme  Being,  but  you  deny  that  the  Scripture  is  His  Word.    The 
work  of  His  hands  is  your  only  Bible,  the  dictates  of  your  unenlightened  con- 
science your  only  law.    III.  Apply   to  the  chabacteb  and  history  of  the  un- 
decided.    The  man  who  allows  the  truth  of  the  Bible,  but  lives  and  feels  as  if  it 
were  false.     Such  conduct  is  full  of  contradictions.     (J.  Angus,  M.A.)        The  ways 
and  issues  of  sin  : — It  is  the  task  of  the  wise  teacher  to  lay  bare  with  an  unsparing 
hand— (1)  The  fascinations  of  sin;    (2)  the  deadly  entanglements  in  which  the 
sinner  involves  himself.     I.  The  glamours   of   sin  and  the    safeguard  against 
THEM.     There  is  no  sin  which  affords  so  vivid  an  example  of  seductive  attraction  at 
the  beginning,  and  of  hopeless  misery  at  the  end,  as  that  of  unlawful  love.     The 
safeguard  against  the  specific  sin  before  us  is  presented  in  a  true  and  whole-hearted 
marriage.     And  the  safeguard  against  all  sin  is  equally  to  be  found  in  the  complete 
and  constant  preoccupation  of  the  soul  with  the  Divine  love.    Forbidding  to  marry 
is  a  device  of  Satan ;  anything  which  tends  to  degrade  or  desecrate  marriage  bears 
on  its  face  the  mark  of  the  tempter.     Our  sacred  writings  glorify  marriage,  finding 
in  it  more  than  any  other  wisdom  or  religion  has  found.     II.  The  binding  results 
OF  bin.    Compare  the  Buddhistic  doctrine  of  Karma.    Buddha  in  effect  taught. 
••  You  are  in  slavery  to  a  tyrant  set  up  by  yourself.    Your  own  deeds,  words,  and 
thoughts,  in  the  former  and  present  states  of  being,  are  your  own  avengers  through 
a  countless  series  of  lives.    Thou  wilt  not  find  a  place  where  thou  canst  escape  the 
force  of  thy  own  evil  actions."     The  Bible  says,  "  His  own  iniquities  shall  take  the 
wicked,  and  he  shall  be  holden  with  the  cords  of  his  sin."    This  is  illustrated  in  the 
sin  of  sensuality.     There  are  four  miseries,  comparable  to  four  strong  cords,  which 
bind  the  unhappy  transgressor.     1.  There  is  the  shame.    2.  The  loss  of  wealth. 
3.  The  loss  of  health.     4.  The  bitter  remorse,  the  groaning  and  the  despair  at  the 
end  of  the  shortened  life.    And  there  is  an  inevitableness  about  it  all.     By  the 
clearest  interworking  of  cause  and  effect,  these  fetters  of  sin  grow  upon  the  feet  of 
the  sinner.     Our  evil  actions,  forming  evil  habits,  working  ill  results  on  us  and  on 
others,  are  themselves  the  means  of  our  punishment.    It  is  not  that  God  punishes, 
sin  punishes  ;  it  is  not  that  God  makes  hell,  sinners  make  it.     This  is  established 
by  the  possible  observation  of  life,  by  a  concurrent  witness  of  all  teachers  and  all 
true  religions.     Sin  may  be  defined  as  "  the  act  of  a  human  will  which,  being  con- 
trary to  the  Divine  will,  reacts  with  inevitable  evil  upon  the  agents."     1.  Every  sin 
prepares  for  us  a  band  of  shame  to  be  wound  about  our  brows  and  tightened  to  the 
torture-point.     2.  Every  sin  is  preparing  for  us  a  loss  of  wealth,  the  only  wealth 
which  is  really  durable,  the  treasure  in  the  heavens.     3.  Every  sin  is  the  gradual 
undermining  of  the  health,  not  so  much  the  body's  as  the  soul's  health.     4.  The 
worst  chain  forged  in  the  furnace  of  sin  is  remorse ;  for  no  one  can  guarantee  to 
the  sinner  an  eternal  insensibility.     Memory  will  be  busy.    Here,  then,  is  the  plain, 
stern  truth,  a  law,  not  of  nature  only,  but  of  the  universe.     How  men  need  One 
who  can  take  away  the  sin  of  the  world,  One  who  can  break  those  cruel  bonds  which 
men  have  made  for  themselves !     (R.  F.  Horton,  D.D.)        The  martyr  of  guilt  ;— 
Sin  is  an  evil  of  fearful  tendencies,  and  necessarily  productive,  if  unchecked,  of 
remediless  consequences.     The  reason  is  obvious.     Moral  evil  corrupts  and  vitiates 
the  mind  itself,  carries  the  contagion  of  a  mortal  disease  through  all  its  affections 
and  powers,  and  affects  the  moral  condition  of  the  man  through  the  whole  duration 
of  his  being.     I.  The  views  it  affords  of  the  power  and  progress  op  evil  in  the 
human  mind.     1.  It  ensnares.    Eeference  is  to  the  methods  adopted  in  the  East  by 
those  who  hunt  for  game,  or  for  beasts  of  prey.     Evil  allures  under  the  form  of 
good.    All  the  way  is  white  as  snow  that  hides  the  pit.     2,  It  enslaves.     St.  Paul 
speaks  of  the  "  bondage  of  corruption,"  and  of  the  hardening  of  the  heart  through 
the  deceitfulness  of  sin.     Sin  gathers  strength  from  custom,  and  spreads  like  a 
leprosy  from  limb  to  limb.     The  power  of  habit  turns  upon  the  principle  that  what 
we  have  done  once  we  have  an  aptitude  to  do  again  with  greater  readiness  and 
pleasure.     The  next  temptation  finds  the  sons  of  folly  an  easier  prey  than  before. 
3.  It  infatuates.     After  a  season,  wickedness  so  far  extends  its  power  from  the 


CHAf.  11.]  PROVERBS.  161 

passions  to  the  understanding  that  men  become  blind  to  the  amount  of  their  own 
depravity,  and  in  this  state  begin  to  fancy  music  in  their  chains.  It  would  seem  to 
be  one  of  the  prerogatives  of  sin,  like  the  fascination  of  the  serpent,  fixst  to  deprive 
its  victims  of  their  senses  and  then  make  them  an  unresisting  prey.  Guard  against 
the  beginnings  of  sin.  Sin  prepares  for  sin.  4.  It  destroys.  The  soul  is  destroyed, 
not  as  to  the  fact  of  its  continued  existence,  but  as  to  all  its  Godlike  capacities  of 
honour  and  happiness.  11.  Some  of  the  cibcumstances  of  agobavation  which 
WILL  TEND  to  EMBITTER  THE  sinneb's  DOOM.  It  must  for  evor  be  a  melancholy 
subject  of  reflection — 1.  That  the  ruin  was  self-caused.  A  man  may  be  injured  by 
the  sins  of  others,  but  his  soul  can  be  permanently  endangered  only  by  his  own.  By 
a  fine  personification,  a  man's  sins  are  here  described  as  a  kind  of  personal  property 
and  possession.  Sin,  remorse,  and  death  may  be  deemed  a  kind  of  creation  of  our 
own.  2.  That  the  objects  were  worthless  and  insignificant  for  which  the  blessings  of 
salvation  were  resigned.  3.  That  you  possessed  an  ample  sufiBciency  of  means  for 
your  guidance  and  direction  into  the  path  of  life.  4.  That  the  evil  incurred  ia 
hopeless  and  irremediable.  HI.  The  interesting  aspect  under  which  this  sub- 
ject TEACHES   us  TO  CONTEMPLATE  THE  DiVINE  DISPENSATIONS.      It  illustrates — 1.   The 

riches  of  God's  mercy  in  forgiving  sin.  2.  The  power  of  His  grace  in  subduing  sin. 
3.  The  wisdom  of  His  providence  in  preventing  sin.  4.  The  urgency  of  His  invita- 
tions to  those  who  are  the  slaves  of  sin.  {Samuel  Thodey.)  Fixed  habits: — A 
rooted  habit  becomes  a  governing  principle.  Every  lust  we  entertain  deals  with  oa 
as  Delilah  did  with  Samson — not  only  roba  as  of  oar  strength,  bat  leaves  as  fast 
bound.    {Abp.  Tillotson.) 


CHAPTER  VL 

Vers.  1-5.  If  thou  be  surety  for  thy  friend. — Social  turetythipt : — The  principles 
of  domestic,  social,  and  political  economy  in  the  Bible  are  far  more  wise,  as  well  as 
righteous,  than  can  be  found  in  human  book  or  periodical.  I.  Suretyship  as  an 
EVIL  TO  BE  DEPLORED.  "  If  thou  be  surety  "  ;  as  &  he  had  said,  "  It  is  a  sad  thing 
if  thou  hast."  It  is  not,  however,  always  an  evil.  There  are  two  things  necessary 
to  render  it  justifiable.  1.  The  case  should  be  deserving.  2.  You  should  be  fully 
competent  to  discharge  the  obligation.  But  the  most  deserving  men  will  seldom 
ask  for  suretyships,  and  the  most  competent  men  will  seldom  undertake  the 
responsibility.  II.  Suretyship  as  an  evil  very  easily  contracted.  Merely 
"  striking  the  hand,"  and  uttering  the  "  words."  One  word,  the  word  ♦*  Yes,"  will 
do  it,  written  or  uttered  in  the  presence  of  a  witness.  Plausibility  will  soon  extract 
it  from  a  pliant  and  generous  nature.  III.  Suretyship  as  an  evil  to  be  strenu- 
ously REMOVED.  "  Deliver  thyself."  1.  Do  it  promptly.  Try  by  every  honest 
means  to  get  the  bond  back  again.  2.  Do  it  beseechingly.  "  Humble  thyself." 
It  is  no  use  to  carry  a  high  hand;  thou  art  in  his  power.  3.  Do  it  effectively. 
Thou  art  encaged  in  iron  law;  break  loose  honourably  somehow,  and  be  free. 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  If  thou  hast  stricken  thy  hand  with  a  stranger. — Striking 
the  hand  : — A  surety  is  one  who  becomes  security  for  a  debt  due  by  another.  The 
customary  or  legal  forms  which  render  suretyship  valid  differ  in  different  countries. 
Allusion  here  is  to  the  practice  of  the  surety  confirming  his  engagement  by  giving 
his  hand  to  the  creditor,  in  presence  of  witnesses.  The  prohibition  must  not  be 
taken  as  unqualified.  There  are  cases  in  which  suretyship  is  unavoidable.  The 
law  sometimes  requires  it.     But  the  less  of  it  the  better.    I.  It  is  wrong  for  a 

MAN  to  come  under  ENGAGEMENTS  THAT  ARE  BEYOND  HIS  ACTUALLY  EXISTING  MEANS. 

Such  a  course  is  not  merely  imprudent ;  there  is  in  it  a  threefold  injustice.  1.  To 
the  creditor  for  whom  he  becomes  surety,  inasmuch  as  the  security  is  fallacious, 
not  covering  the  extent  of  the  risk.  2.  To  his  family,  to  whom  the  payment  may 
bring  distress  and  ruin.  3.  To  those  who  give  him  credit  in  his  own  transactions; 
for,  in  undertaking  suretyships,  he  involves  himself  in  the  risks  of  other  trades 
besides  his  own.  II.  It  is  wrong  to  make  engagements  with  inconsideration 
Ain>  rashness.  The  case  here  treated  is  that  of  suretyship  for  a  friend  to  a  stranger ; 
and  the  rashness  and  haste  may  be  viewed  in  relation  either  to  the  person  or  to  the 
case.  Men,  when  they  feel  the  generous  impulse  of  friendly  emotion,  are  apt  to 
think  at  the  moment  only  of  themselves,  as  if  the  risk  were  all  their  own,  and  to 
forget  that  they  are  making  creditors  and  family  securities,  without  asking  their 

12 


162  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.tX. 

consent,  or  making  them  aware  of  their  risks.  Suretyships  for  strangers  are 
specially  condemned.  {R.  Wardlaic.)  Debtors  and  creditors  : — The  friend  of 
the  surety  here  is  the  debtor,  the  stranger  is  the  creditor.  I.  The  Scripture 
AFFORDS  DIRECTION  FOR  TRADING  AND  CIVIL  coNTERSE.  1.  For  wariness  in  Surety- 
ship here.  2.  For  faithfulness  in  dealing  elsewhere.  But  why  does  the  wise  man 
concern  himself  with  such  matters.  Because — 1.  Religion  guides  best  in  civil 
matters.  2.  The  eighth  commandment  requires  care  of  our  estates.  3.  The  Church 
consists  of  families  and  traders  which  cannot  be  upheld  without  care.  4.  Religion 
is  ill  spoken  of  for  the  careless  ruin  of  professors'  estates.  Then  follow  Scripture 
precedents  in  trading  rather  than  corrupt  men's  examples.  II.  Young  men  should 
BE  ADVISED  BY  THEIR  ELDERS  IN  WORLDLY  AFFAIRS.  They  havc  morc  knowledge 
and  more  experience  than  younger  men.  III.  Rash  suretyship  is  to  be  avoided. 
"  Go  to  the  pleading-place  (forum),  and  among  frequent  contenders  nothing  is  more 
frequently  heard,  than  the  dangers  of  suretyship,  and  the  sighings  of  the  surety." 
1.  Be  not  bound  for  more  than  thou  canst  spare  from  thy  trade  and  charge.  2.  Be 
not  bound  for  idle  persons,  that  are  hkely  to  leave  thee  in  the  lurch,  and  can  show 
no  likelihood  of  ever  paying.  There  be  honest  poor  men  enough  that  will  need 
thy  help  in  this  kind.  Thou  needest  not  to  bestow  thy  means  on  prodigals. 
{Francis  Taylor,  B.D.)  Lending  money  on  interest : — When  the  Mosaic  law  was 
instituted,  commerce  had  not  been  taken  up  by  the  Israelites,  and  the  lending  of 
money  on  interest  for  its  employment  in  trade  was  a  thing  unknown.  The  only 
occasion  for  loans  would  be  to  supply  the  immediate  necessities  of  the  borrower, 
and  the  exaction  of  interest  under  such  circumstances  would  be  productive  of  great 
hardship,  involving  the  loss  of  land,  and  even  of  personal  freedom,  as  the  insolvent 
debtor  and  his  family  became  the  slaves  of  the  creditor  (Neh.  v.  1-5).  To  prevent 
these  evils,  the  lending  of  money  on  interest  to  any  poor  Israelite  was  strictly  for- 
bidden (Lev.  ixv.) ;  the  people  were  enjoined  to  be  liberal,  and  to  lend  for  nothing 
in  such  cases.  But  at  the  time  of  Solomon,  when  the  commerce  of  the  Israelites 
was  enormously  developed,  and  communications  were  opened  with  Spain  and 
Egypt,  and  possibly  with  India  and  Ceylon,  while  caravans  penetrated  beyond  the 
Euphrates,  then  the  lending  of  money  on  interest  for  employment  in  trade  most 
probably  became  frequent,  and  suretyship  also — the  pledging  of  a  man's  own  credit 
to  enable  his  friend  to  procure  a  loan.  (EllicotVs  Commentary.)  Certain  examples 
of  the  binding  character  of  our  own  actions : — The  surety.  The  sluggard.  The 
worthless  person.  I.  The  surety.  The  young  man,  finding  his  neighbour  in 
monetary  difficulties,  consents  in  an  easy-going  way  to  become  his  surety ;  enters 
into  a  solemn  pledge  with  the  creditor,  probably  a  Phoenician  money-lender.  He 
now  stands  committed.  His  peace  of  mind  and  his  welfare  depend  no  longer 
upon  hrmseLt,  but  upon  the  character,  the  weakness,  the  caprice,  of  another.  A 
young  man  who  has  so  entangled  himself  is  advised  to  spare  no  pains,  and  to  let  no 
false  pride  prevent  his  securing  release  from  his  obligation.  There  may,  however, 
be  cases  in  which  a  true  brotherliness  will  require  us  to  be  surety  for  our  friend. 
Ecclesiasticus  says  :  "  An  honest  man  is  surety  for  his  neighbour,  but  he  that  is 
impudent  will  forsake  him."  If  we  can  afford  to  be  a  surety  for  our  neighbour,  we 
can  clearly  afford  to  lend  him  the  money  ourselves.  A  miserable  chain  thought- 
lessness in  the  matter  of  suretyship  may  forge  for  the  thoughtless.  H.  The 
sluggard.  Poverty  and  ruin  must  eventually  overtake  him.  In  every  community 
there  is  a  certain  number  of  people  who  are  constitutionally  incapable.  Examples 
of  insect  life  are  brought  to  teach  and  stimulate  human  beings.  III.  The  worth- 
less characteb.  His  heart  is  as  deceitful  as  his  lips :  he  cannot  be  true  on  any 
terms.  This  kind  of  man  is  the  pest  of  commerce ;  the  bane  of  every  social  circle  ; 
the  leaven  of  hypocrisy  and  malice  in  the  Christian  Church.     (R.  F.  H&rton,  D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  Go  to  the  ant,  thou  sluggard ;  consider  her  ways,  and  be  wise. — Little 
preachers  and  great  sermons  : — There  is  a  twofold  revelation  of  God — in  the  Bible 
and  in  nature.  In  relation  to  this  revelation,  men  divide  into  three  classes — 
1.  Those  who  study  neither.  Their  intellects  are  submerged  in  animalism  and 
worldliness.  2.  Those  who  study  one  and  disparage  the  other.  Some  devout 
Christians  regard  nature  as  not  sufficiently  sacred  and  religious  for  their  investiga- 
tion. Some  scientific  men  try  to  turn  the  results  of  their  researches  against  the 
Bible.  3.  Those  who  reverentially  study  the  teachings  of  both.  They  treat  them 
as  volumes  from  the  same  Author.  The  allusion  in  the  text  shows  that  the  Bible 
encourages  the  study  of  nature.  1.  It  sends  us  to  nature  in  order  to  attest  its 
first  principles.      2.  It  refers  us  to  nature  for  illustrations  of   its  great   truths. 


CHAP.  TX.]  PROVERBS.  168 

3.  It  refers  us  to  nature  in  order  to  reprove  the  sins  it  denounces.  To  reprove 
us  for  our  spiritual  indolence  it  directs  us  to  the  ants.  The  sluggard  we  now 
deal  with  is  the  spiritual  sluggard,  not  the  secularly  indolent  man,  but  the  man 
who  is  neglecting  the  culture  of  his  own  spiritual  nature  and  the  salvation  of 
his  own  soul.  The  ants  teach  these  important  lessons.  I.  That  the  feebleness 
OE  TOUR  POWEB  IS  NO  JUST  REASON  FOB  YOUR  INDOLENCE.  The  ants  Ere  feeble,  but  see 
how  they  work.  Naturalists  have  shown  their  ingenuity  as  architects,  their  industry 
as  miners  and  builders.  Eemember  three  things — 1.  All  power,  however  feeble,  is 
given  for  work.  2.  You  are  not  required  to  do  more  than  you  have  power  to 
accomplish.  3.  All  power  increases  by  use.  II.  That  the  activitt  of  others 
IS  no  just  excuse  for  tour  indolence.  In  the  ant-world  you  will  see  millions  of 
inhabitants,  but  not  one  idler ;  all  are  in  action.  One  does  not  depend  upon 
another,  or  expect  another  to  do  his  work.  The  Christian  world  is  a  scene  of  action, 
but  not  one  of  the  million  actors  can  do  your  work.  III.  That  the  want  of  a 
HELPER  IS  NO  JUST  EXCUSE  FOR  YOUR  INDOLENCE.  Each  aut  is  throwu  upon  his 
own  resources  and  powers.  Self-reliantly  each  labours  on,  not  waiting  for  the 
instruction  or  guidance  of  another.  Trust  your  own  instincts ;  act  out  your  own 
powers  ;  use  the  light  you  have  ;  look  to  God  for  help.  IV.  That  the  providence 
OF  God  is  no  just  reason  for  tour  indolence.  God  provides  for  His  creatures 
through  the  use  of  their  own  powers.  He  does  not  do  for  any  creature  what  He 
has  given  that  creature  power  to  do  for  himself,  1.  Like  these  little  ants,  you 
have  a  future.  2.  Like  these  little  creatures,  you  have  to  prepare  for  the  future. 
3.  Like  these  little  creatures,  you  have  a  specific  time  in  which  to  make  preparation. 
Then  do  not  talk  of  Providence  as  an  excuse  for  your  indolence.  He  has  provided 
for  you  richly,  but  He  only  grants  the  provision  on  condition  of  the  right  employ- 
ment of  your  powers.  There  is  an  inheritance  for  the  good,  but  only  on  condition 
of  their  working.  There  is  a  heaven  of  knowledge,  but  only  for  the  student.  There 
is  a  harvest  of  blessedness,  but  only  to  the  diligent  husbandman.  And  your  harvest- 
time  will  soon  be  over.  (Homilist.)  The  foresight  and  diligence  of  the  ant : — 
The  wisdom  of  providence  is  eminently  conspicuous  in  the  limits  it  has  set  to  the 
faculties  of  the  human  mind.  As  experience  of  the  past  is  of  far  more  importance 
in  the  conduct  of  life  than  the  most  accurate  and  intimate  acquaintance  with  the 
future,  the  power  of  memory  is  more  extensive  and  efi&cient  than  the  faculty  of 
foresight.  It  was  wise  and  merciful  to  afford  us  but  an  indistinct  perception  of 
the  future.  But  here  man  acts  in  opposition  to  the  will  of  his  Maker.  He  has 
withheld  from  us  distinct  knowledge  of  the  future,  yet  how  often  do  we  act  as  if  we 
were  familiarly  acquainted  with  it.  Our  confident  expectation  of  the  continuance 
of  life  encourages  that  indolence  about  their  immortal  interests  in  which  so  many 
of  the  children  of  men  waste  the  season  allotted  for  their  preparation  for  eternity. 
The  admitted  history  of  the  ant  does  more  than  corroborate  and  confirm  the  state- 
ment of  Solomon  in  this  text.  But  it  is  not  as  a  curious  fact  in  natural  history,  or 
even  as  furnishing  a  theme  of  praise  to  the  wise  and  munificent  Author  of  Nature, 
that  the  wise  man  introduces  the  history  and  habits  of  the  ant.  It  is  as  a  rebuke 
to  the  sloth  and  indolence  of  rational  and  accountable  beings.  I.  We  are 
admonished  and  reproved  bt  the  sagacitt  and  care  with  which  the  ants  make 
preparation  for  the  winter.  Nature  has  given  them  an  instinctive  anticipation 
of  the  necessities  and  severity  of  winter.  Grain  after  grain  is  borne  along,  and 
having  been  carefuUy  prepared  against  revegetation,  is  added  to  their  Uttle  store. 
The  winter  of  our  year  is  fast  approaching ;  are  we  making  all  needful  preparations  ? 
II.  We   are   admonished   bt   the   sagacity  with   which  the   ant   selects   and 

SEIZES    THE    PBOPEB    SEASON     OF     PEEPARATION     FOR    WINTER.        The    food    proper    for 

storage  can  only  be  obtained  at  particular  seasons ;  and  if  these  are  neglected, 
want  and  wretchedness  reign  throughout  the  cells.  The  present  life  is  the  season 
in  which  you  are  called  to  make  provision  for  the  days  that  are  to  come.     III.  Thb 

INCESSANT  AND  UNINTERMITTED  ACTIVITT  AND  DILIGENCE  WITH  WHICH  THE  ANT  PLIES 
HEB  SUMMER    TASK   PRESENT   ANOTHER   IMPOETANT   LESSON    OF   WISDOM  TO  THE  RATIONAL 

AND  ACCOUNTABLE  FAMiLT  OF  GoD.  It  is  not  an  occasional  exercise  in  which  this 
curious  creature  is  engaged.  Day  after  day  do  these  industrious  tribes  issue  forth 
to  the  work  of  gathering.  And  here,  again,  they  teach  us  wisdom.  The  great  work 
to  which  religion  calls  us  is  not  one  that  can  be  taken  up  and  laid  aside  at  pleasure. 

IV.   The   HARMONY,   UNION,   AND   CONCORD  WHICH  PREVAIL  AMONG    THB    ANTB    SUGGEST 

A  LESSON  FOR  US.  The  instinct  which  prompts  them  to  assist  each  other  in  their 
busy  labours  has  been  celebrated  as  one  of  the  most  interesting  manifestations  of 
Creating  Wisdom.    How  beautifully  does  it  accord  with  some  of  the  most  frequently- 


164  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  n. 

repeated  precepts  of  the  gospel!  And  also  with  such  counsel  of  the  apostle  aa 
this,    "Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens."      {John  Johnston.)        Sluggishntis : — 

I.  Sltjooishness  OB  IDLENESS  IS  A  GREAT  SIN.  1.  It  is  a  gin  agaiust  nature,  for 
all  living  things  put  out  that  strength  God  hath  given  them.  2.  It  is  against  Ood's 
commandment.  It  is  stealing  for  a  man  to  live  on  other  men's  labours,  and  do 
nothing  himself.  3.  Idleness  produces  many  other  sins :  such  as  disobedience  to 
parents,  drunkenness,  adultery  (as  in  David's  case),  stealing,  lying,  and  cheating. 
4.  Idleness  brings  many  miseries  upon  man :  such  as  diseases,  poverty,  unmerciful- 
ness  in  others,  loss  of  heaven  and  pains  of  hell.  If  the  idler  object  that  he  hurts 
none  but  himself,  we  reply,  "  So  much  the  worse.  Remember,  thou  must  give 
account  of  thy  time ;  of  thy  talents ;  of  thy  thoughts  ;  of  thy  idle  words ;  of  thy 
deeds ;   of    neglecting    thy  family ;   of    doing   no   good   in   the  commonwealth." 

II.  Little  creatubes  mat  teach  great  men  much  wit.  From  the  ant  they 
may  learn  —  1.  Providence.  2.  Labour.  3.  Order.  {Frands  Taylor,  B.D.) 
A  secular  sermon  on  foresight : — The  busy  ant  is  to  be  our  minister.  The  great 
lesson  it  teaches  is  foresight,  the  duty  of  rightly  improving  the  passing  hour,  the 
wisdom  of  making  the  best  of  our  opportunities.  The  faculty  of  foresight,  the 
power  of  doing  something  for  the  future,  is  a  faculty  most  divine.  Rightly 
educated  and  developed,  it  gives  man  peculiar  elevation,  and  invests  him  with 
commanding  influence.  He  who  sees  farthest  will  rule  best.  Foresight  is  not  to 
be  confounded  with  distrust.  The  wise  exercise  of  foresight  makes  life  pleasant — 
1.  By  economising  time.  The  man  who  has  least  to  do  takes  most  time  to  do  it  in. 
Our  greatest  men  have  been  the  most  severe  economists  of  time.  2.  By  systema- 
tising  duties.  Some  persons  have  no  power  of  systematising.  Such  men  fret 
themselves  to  death,  and  do  not  perish  alone.  The  men  in  the  Church  who  do  the 
least  are  generally  the  men  of  leisure.  3.  By  diminishing  difficulties.  To  be  fore- 
warned is  to  be  forearmed.  Foresight  numbers  and  weighs  contingencies.  The 
person  who  is  destitute  of  foresight  multiplies  the  difficulties  of  other  people. 
The  ant  makes  the  best  of  her  opportunities.  Every  life  has  a  summer,  and  every 
life  a  winter.  In  recommending  preparation  for  life's  winter  T  am  not  advocating 
penuriousness.  Covetousness  is  an  affront  to  God.  "  The  liberal  soul  shall  be 
made  fat."  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  A  lazy  man: — Our  text  points  to  the  sluggard — 
the  lazy  man.  "  How  long  wilt  thou  sleep,  0  sluggard  ?  "  There  are  many  lazy 
people  in  the  world.  They  are  generally  not  worth  much,  not  much  wanted,  nor 
of  much  use,  except  as  beacons.  They  are  not  often  prosperous.  "An  idle  man," 
says  Mr.  Spurgeon,  "  makes  himself  a  target  for  the  devil ;  and  the  devil  is  an 
uncommonly  good  shot."  An  idle  man's  heart  is  the  devil's  nest ;  his  hands  the 
devil's  tools ;  while  the  devil  lays  in  wait  for  active,  busy  men,  the  idle  man  is 
actually  waiting  for  the  devil  to  set  him  a  job.  A  race  of  idle  men  would  create  a 
famine.  There  are  men  who  are  absolutely  too  indolent  to  seek  for  salvation,  'tis 
too  much  trouble  I  And  there  are  lazy  Christians  too ;  idlers  in  the  Master's 
vineyard.  "  A  little  sleep,"  &c.  1.  Here  is  a  self-indulgent  man.  This  little 
speech  means,  "  I  am  comfortable ;  don't  disturb  me ;  let  me  alone  to  enjoy 
myself."  This  is  the  wish  of  many  a  sinful  man.  "  Woe  to  them  that  are  at  ease 
in  Zion,"  living  purely  selfish  lives  ;  for  self-indulgence  may,  and  generally  does, 
mean  selfishness.  Self-indulgence  is  easy.  'Tis  easier  to  give  the  reins  to  our 
appetites  than  to  curb  them ;  to  slide  than  to  climb ;  to  please  ourselves  than  to 
deny  ourselves.  If  we  would  be  men  of  mark  for  holiness,  usefulness,  of  eminence 
either  in  things  temporal  or  spiritual,  we  must  know  something  of  seK-denial. 
Men  who  "  take  it  easy  "  rarely  make  much  headway.  Look  round  amongst 
Christian  workers,  business  men,  great  philanthropists,  successful  inventors,  men 
illustrious  or  famous  in  any  walk  of  life  ;  read  the  biographies  of  men  who  have 
been  renovTned  for  any  good  thing — you  will  find  that  they  were  men  of  self-denial, 
not  self-indulgent.  Moses  was  a  self-denying  man  ;  "  he  esteemed  the  reproach  of 
Christ  greater  riches  than  the  treasures  in  Egypt "  ;  and  Moses  prospered ;  he 
became  very  great ;  he  was  appointed  leader  and  commander  of  the  people  of  Israel. 
The  apostles  were  self-denying  men  ;  hear  them :  "  We  have  left  all,  and  have 
followed  Thee."  "A  little  sleep,"  &c.  2.  Here  is  a  procrastinating  man.  He  does 
not  mean  to  sleep  always,  not  even  for  long — only  for  a  little  while.  He  only 
wants  a  "  little  sleep,"  and  then  he  vrill  be  stirring.  Think  of  hours,  days,  lives, 
wasted  in  little  delays  ;  of  souls  lost  by  little  delays  1  No  man  deliberately  intends 
to  be  always  a  slave  to  sin,  the  devil,  his  own  lusts.  Not  always — no ;  but  just 
now  it  is  pleasant,  convenient.  Courage  to  take  now  the  decisive  step — now  1 
To-morrow  may  never  come.     (G.  B.  Foater.)         The  ant  and  its  nest : — The  truth 


CHAP.  Ti.]  PROVERBS,  166 

of  Solomon's  reference  to  the  ant,  which  has  been  questioned  before  now,  is  fully 
vindicated.  Dr.  Macmillan  has  found  the  food  stored  up  in  the  nests  of  the  ants, 
and  he  adds  this  interesting  information  :  *'  Examining  the  seeds  collected  in  the 
nests  of  the  ants  on  the  top  of  the  hill  at  Nice  more  particularly  with  my  magni- 
fying glass,  I  found  to  my  astonishment  that  each  seed  had  its  end  caref uUy  bitten 
off.  And  the  reason  of  this  was  perfectly  plain.  You  know  each  seed  contains 
two  parts — the  young  plant  or  germ  lying  in  its  cradle,  as  it  were,  and  the  supply 
of  food  for  its  nourishment,  when  it  begins  to  grow,  wrapped  round  it.  Now  the 
ants  had  bitten  off  the  young  plant  germ,  and  they  left  only  the  part  which  was 
full  of  nourishment.  And  they  did  this  to  prevent  the  seeds  from  growing  and 
exhausting  all  the  nourishment  contained  in  them.  If  they  did  not  do  this  the 
seed  stored  under  the  ground,  when  the  rains  came,  would  shoot,  and  so  they  wotild 
lose  all  their  trouble  and  be  left  to  starve.  I  could  not  find  in  the  heap  a  single 
seed  that  had  not  been  treated  in  this  way.  Of  course,  none  of  the  seeds  that  had 
their  ends  bitten  off  would  grow ;  and  you  might  as  well  sow  grains  of  sand  as  the 
seed  found  in  ants'  nests."  The  necessity  of  providing  for  the  spiritiuil  experiences 
of  the  future  : — I.  The  important  and  intebestino  truth  which  these  words 
6UQGEST.  That  provision  ought  to  be  made  for  the  future.  1.  We  should  make 
provision  for  the  soul.  2.  What  is  the  kind  of  provision  needed  for  the  soul  ? 
3.  The  period  against  which  we  are  to  make  this  provision.  The  winter  of  death 
and  eternity,  II.  The  season  in  which  this  provision  is  to  be  made.  The 
ants  secure  their  winter  requirements  during  the  summer.  Our  life  may  be  com- 
pared to  summer  for  two  reasons — 1,  Because  during  the  summer  we  have  every 
needful  opportunity  of  getting  ready  for  the  winter.  2.  Because  summer  is  the 
only  time  in  which  this  provision  for  the  winter  can  be  made.  HI.  The  reproof 
which  is  here  given  to  those  who  neglect  to  make  the  provision.  1,  The 
force  of  this  rebuke  arises  from  the  insignificance  of  the  being  by  whose  conduct  we 
are  reproved.  2.  The  disadvantageous  circumstances  in  which  they  are  said  to  be 
placed.  3.  From  that  which  they  make  their  provision.  4.  From  the  season 
against  which  they  provide.  5.  From  the  epithet  applied  to  those  who  are 
negligent.  IV.  The  advice  which  the  wise  man  gives.  1.  A  lesson  of  wisdom. 
2.  A  lesson  of  industry.  3,  A  lesson  of  perseverance.  If  not  making  this  pre- 
paration, what  will  by  and  by  be  our  moral  destitution !  {J.  Coe.)  Industry  : — 
The  indolent  and  improvident  are  here  addressed.  They  are  sent  to  the  inferior 
creation  for  a  lesson ;  and  not  to  the  greatest  and  noblest  of  the  animals,  but  to  one 
of  the  least  and  most  insignificant  of  the  insects.  The  providence  of  the  ant  has, 
by  some  naturalists,  been  questioned.  It  has  been  alleged  that  during  winter  they 
are,  like  seme  other  insects,  in  a  state  of  torpidity,  and  therefore  need  not  the 
precaution  ascribed  to  them  in  ver.  8.  On  this  we  observe — 1.  If  the  fact  of  their 
laying  up  provisions  be  ascertained,  all  analogy  more  than  warrants  the  conclusion 
that  it  is  for  some  end.  2.  It  is  said  the  stock  laid  up  is  not  for  winter,  but  for 
the  sustenance  of  the  young,  when  they  need  the  almost  undivided  attention  of  the 
whole.  But  as  a  proof  of  providence,  this  comes  to  the  same  thing.  3.  The  assertion 
that  the  laying  up  of  provisions  by  the  ant  is  a  mistake  may  not  apply  to  the  ants 
of  every  country.  In  tropical  climates  they  do  lay  up  provisions.  The  maiii 
lesson  the  sluggard  has  to  learn  from  the  ant  is  industry.  Three  grounds  of  this 
duty  are  indicated  in  Scripture — 1,  That  persons  may  not  be  a  burden  on  society 
or  on  the  Church.  2.  That  they  may  be  out  of  the  way  of  temptation  ;  for  there 
are  many  temptations  in  idle  habits.  3.  That  they  may  have  wherewith  to  assist 
others,  whose  needs,  from  unavoidable  causes,  may  be  greater  than  their  own. 
One  perilous  characteristic  of  sloth  is,  that  it  is  ever  growing.  (JR.  Wardlaw.) 
The  teaching  of  the  ant : — Man  was  created  with  more  understanding  than  the 
beasts  of  the  earth.  But  our  minds  are  so  debased  by  our  apostasy  from  God  that 
the  meanest  creatures  may  become  our  teachers.  I.  The  character  of  the  person 
whom  the  wise  man  here  addresses.  The  sluggard  1  Sloth  casteth  into  a  deep 
sleep,  and  in  the  verses  following  the  text  the  sluggard  is  represented  as  in  this 
state.  He  spends  his  time  in  fruitless  wishes.  He  is  discouraged  by  the  least 
opposition.  He  creates  imaginary  dangers  for  himself.  We  know  well  who  they 
are  whose  hands  refuse  to  labour,  who  are  clothed  with  rags,  and  make  poverty  not 
only  their  complaint,  but  their  argument.  But  sloth  is  not  confined  to  the  common 
affairs  of  life,  nor  the  character  of  a  sluggard  to  men  in  any  particular  station. 
There  is  sloth  in  religion;  neglecting  the  one  thing  needful,  the  care  of  our 
immortal  Bonlfl.  H.  The  counsel  ob  advice  which  the  wise  man  hath  given 
us.    The  ant  instructeth  ug  not  by  speech,  but  by  actions.    Therefore  we  are  called 


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

to  "  consider  her  ways  " ;  how  she  is  employed,  and  for  what  ends  she  is  active. 
The  wisdom  we  leam  from  the  ant  is  the  wisdom  of  acting  suitably  to  our  superior 
nature  and  our  glorious  hopes.  We  learn  from  the  ant  three  things — 1.  A  fore- 
sight and  sagacity  in  making  provision  for  the  time  to  come.  How  dreary  must 
the  winter  of  life  be,  when  the  previous  seasons  have  been  passed  in  sloth,  in  idle- 
ness, or  in  folly  1  2.  Activity  and  diligence.  The  ant  never  intermits  her  labours 
as  long  as  the  season  lasts.  Happy  were  it  for  man  that  he  as  faithfully  employed 
his  precious  time  to  render  himseli  useful  in  this  world,  or  to  prepare  for  eternity. 
3.  Sagacity  in  making  use  of  the  proper  season  for  activity.  Opportunity  is  the 
flower  of  time ;  or  it  is  the  most  precious  part  of  it,  which,  if  once  lost,  may  never 
return.  Foresight,  diligence,  and  sagacity  the  ant  employs  by  an  instinct  of 
nature.  She  has  no  guide,  but  we  have  many  guides.  She  "  hath  no  overseer," 
but  man  acts  under  the  immediate  inspection  of  Him  "  whose  eyes  are  as  a  flame 
of  fire."  And  the  voice  of  conscience  in  us  is  the  voice  of  God.  The  ant  "  hath 
no  ruler,"  or  judge  to  call  her  to  account  for  her  conduct ;  but  every  one  of  ns 
must  give  account  of  himself  to  God.  III.  Improvement  of  the  subject.  1.  The 
sluggard  sins  against  the  very  nature  which  God  hath  given  him.  2.  The  sluggard 
sins  against  the  manifest  design  of  providence.  3.  The  sluggard  sins  against  the 
great  design  of  the  gospel.  Let  ns  then  be  no  longer  "  slothful  in  business,"  but 
"  fervent  in  spirit,  serving  the  Lord."  (-R.  Walker.)  Lessons  for  children  from  the 
ant : — An  ant  could  tell  us  strange  things.  She  could  tell  about  the  houses  they 
live  in,  some  of  which  are  forty  stories  high,  twenty  stories  being  dug  out,  one 
beneath  another,  under  the  earth,  and  twenty  stories  being  built  np  over  them, 
above  ground  ;  she  could  tell  about  the  different  kinds  of  trades  they  follow,  how 
some  are  miners,  and  dig  down  into  the  ground  ;  some  are  masons,  and  build  very 
curious  houses,  with  long  walls,  supported  by  pillars,  and  covered  over  with  arched 
ceilings.  She  could  tell  how  some  are  carpenters,  who  build  houses  out  of  wood, 
having  many  chambers  which  communicate  with  each  other  by  entries  and  galleries ; 
how  some  are  nurses,  and  spend  their  whole  time  taking  care  of  the  young  ones ; 
some  are  labourers,  and  are  made,  like  the  negro  slaves,  to  work  for  their  masters  ; 
while  some  are  soldiers,  whose  only  business  it  is  to  mount  guard,  and  stand  ready 
to  defend  their  friends  and  fellow-citizens.  The  ants  teach — I.  A  lesson  of 
industry.  The  ant  is  a  better  example  of  industry  than  even  the  bee.  II.  A  lesson 
OE  PERSEVERANCE.  They  never  get  discouraged  by  any  difficulties  they  may  meet 
with.  Perseverance  conquers  all  things.  III.  A  lesson  of  union.  The  benefits 
of  being  united,  and  working  together.  The  union  of  the  ants  both  preserves 
them  safely  and  enables  them  to  do  great  good.  IV.  A  lesson  of  kindness. 
Ants  are  a  very  happy  set  of  creatures.  There  seems  to  be  nothing  like  selfishness 
among  them.  V.  A  lesson  of  prudence,  or  looking  ahead.  The  power  to  think 
about  the  future,  and  to  prepare  for  it.     (R.  Newton,  D.D.) 

Ver.  7.  Which  having  no  guide,  overseer,  or  ruler. — Overseers  needed : — When 
I  began  to  employ  workmen  in  this  country  (Palestine),  nothing  annoyed  me  more 
than  the  necessity  to  hire  also  an  overseer,  or  to  fulfil  this  office  myself.  But  I 
soon  found  that  this  was  universal  and  strictly  necessary.  Without  an  overseer 
very  little  work  would  be  done,  and  nothing  as  it  should  be.  The  workmen,  every 
way  unlike  the  ant,  will  not  work  at  all  unless  kept  to  it,  and  directed  in  it  by  an 
overseer,  who  is  himself  a  perfect  specimen  of  laziness.  He  does  absolutely  nothing 
but  smoke  his  pipe,  order  this,  scold  that  one,  and  discuss  the  how  and  the  why 
with  the  men  themselves,  or  with  idle  passers  by.  The  ants  manage  far  better. 
Every  one  attends  to  his  own  business  and  does  it  well.     {W.  Thomson.) 

Ver.  9.  How  long  wilt  thou  sleep,  0  sluggard  ?  when  wilt  thou  arise  out  of 
thy  sleep  ? — The  sleeper  aroused  .-—The  various  authors  of  Scripture  are  accurately 
acquainted  with  the  human  character.  Among  numerous  defective  habits  and 
characteristics  of  our  nature,  which  Solomon  points  out  and  condemns,  is  that  of 
indolence ;  excessive  fondness  for  ease  and  personal  indulgence.  The  language  of 
the  text  may  be  used  in  connection  with  the  affairs  of  relipion  and  of  the  soul. 
I.  The  state  which  is  deprecated.  It  is  a  state  of  "  sleep  " — a  moral  condition 
of  which  corporeal  sleep  furnishes  the  most  apt  representation.  1.  Notice  its  moral 
characteristics.  The  state  of  slopp  is  a  state  of  forpetfulness,  a  state  of  ipnorance, 
and  a  stn'e  of  insensibility.  What  man  is  to  the  material  world  in  a  state  of 
rorporeal  sleep,  that  he  is  to  the  spiritual  world  when  he  is  influenced  by  his  original 
and  his  natural  rasyiuna.     The  s'nvitual  characteristics  of  man's  condition,  illus- 


CHA*.  VI.]  PROVERBS.  167 

trated  by  the  metaphor  of  the  text,  will  be  found  to  be  borne  out  by  the  entire  and 
nniform  testimony  of  the  "Word  of  God.  That  testimony  is,  from  the  commence- 
ment to  the  close,  a  record  of  human  depravity,  operating  in  connection  with  for- 
getfnlness,  with  ignorance,  and  with  insensibility,  and  hence  deriving,  and  hence 
preserving  over  the  species  its  empire  of  corruption  and  of  abominable  foulness. 
2.  Notice  its  penal  evUs.  Sleep  is  a  state  of  privation  and  insecurity.  The  charac- 
teristics we  have  noticed  are  not  involuntary,  they  are  wiKul.  They  are  not  unfor- 
tunate, they  are  guilty.  They  are  heinous  and  flagrant  transgressions  against  the 
law,  and  against  the  authority,  of  God.  And  hence  it  is,  they  expose  the  persons 
indulging  them  to  a  dispensation  of  displeasure  and  of  wrath.  II.  The  change  which 
IS  DESIRED.  There  should  be  an  awaking  and  "  arising  out  of  sleep."  1.  In  what 
does  this  change  consist  ?  The  spiritual  awakening  which  is  desired  constitutes  a 
condition  precisely  the  reverse  of  that  which  already  has  been  defined.  It  consists 
in  a  state  in  which  man  exchanges  forgetfulness  for  remembrances,  ignorance  for 
illumination,  and  insensibility  for  sensitiveness  and  tendemesa.  Spiritual  truth  is 
now  discerned,  contemplated,  believed,  and  felt ;  and  it  produces  in  the  mind  all 
the  affections,  and  in  the  life  all  the  habits,  for  which  it  was  designed :  repentance, 
pray  erf  ulness,  love  to  God,  zeal  for  God,  obedience  to  God,  diligence  in  working  out 
the  salvation  of  the  soul,  and  intense  and  constant  aspirings  after  a  state  of  salva- 
tion in  the  glory  of  another  world.  The  penal  evils,  which  formerly  dwelt  over  the 
horizon  of  the  spirit  as  with  the  darkness  of  midnight,  are  dispelled,  and  are  made 
to  disappear.  2.  How  is  this  change  produced  ?  There  is  one  Agent,  by  whose 
power  it  must  exclusively  and  efficaciously  be  performed — the  agency  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  of  God.  The  Divine  Spirit  is  the  one  efficacious  source  of  all  that  is  holy 
and  redeeming  in  the  character  and  circumstances  of  man.  But  there  are  certain 
means,  appointed  by  the  authority  of  God,  to  be  addressed  by  those  who  have  been 
changed  to  those  who  have  not,  and  in  connection  with  them  it  is  that  the  Spirit 
produces  the  desired  and  happy  result.  Illustration  of  the  use  of  means  is  found 
in  the  parable  of  the  valley  of  diy  bones.  The  system  of  means  exists  with 
remarkable  plenitude  and  sufficiency  in  the  dispensation  of  the  gospel.  III.  The 
APPEAL  WHICH  IS  ENEOECED.  The  challenge  implies  that  there  ought  to  be  no  pro- 
crastination or  delay  in  the  change  which  is  desired  and  pleaded  for.  Pleading 
with  sinners,  I  would  say — 1.  Consider  the  protracted  period  of  time  during  which 
you  have  indulged  in  slumber  already.  2.  Consider  the  increased  difficulty  of 
awakening  the  longer  the  slumber  is  indulged.  3.  Consider  the  rapidly  approach- 
ing termination  of  life,  and  arrival  of  judgment  and  eternity.  (James  Parsons.) 
Too  much  sleep  : — As  waking  idleness  was  condemned  before,  so  sleepy  idleness  is 
condemned  here.  Sloth  begets  sleep.  I.  God  will  call  men  to  a  reckoning  fob 
THEIR  TIME.  1.  God  givcs  US  time  as  a  talent  in  trust.  2.  God  looks  for  some 
good  from  men  in  their  time.  II.  Too  much  sleep  is  as  bad  as  waking  idleness. 
1.  Overmuch  sleep  is  the  fruit  of  idleness.  Men  that  have  much  to  do  have  little 
mind  or  time  for  sleep.  2.  As  httle  good  is  done  in  sleep  as  in  waking  idleness. 
Moderate  your  sleep.  Too  much  sleep  makes  a  man  heavy  and  dull-witted. 
{Francis  Taylor,  B.D.)  The  danger  of  delaying  repentance  : — We  have  the  slug- 
gard's picture  drawn  in  reference  to  his  eternal  concerns.  He  is  one  that  puts  off 
his  great  work  from  time  to  time.  Here  is  something  supposed.  The  sleeper  con- 
vinced that  he  has  slept  and  neglected  his  work.  The  sleeper  convinced  that  he 
must  awake  and  set  to  his  work.  The  sleeper  resolved  to  awake  and  mind  his 
business.  Something  expressed.  A  delay  craved.  The  quantity  of  this  delay  :  it 
is  but  a  little  in  the  sluggard's  conceit.  The  mighty  concern  he  is  in  for  this  delay. 
"We  have  the  fatal  issue  of  the  course.  Delays  are  dangerous.  Consider  what  ruin 
comes  upon  him ;  how  this  ruin  comes  upon  him — swiftly,  silently  and  surprisingly, 
irresistibly.  This  is  all  owing  to  the  cursed  love  of  ease.  The  delay  and  putting 
off  repentance  or  salvation-work  is  a  soul-ruining  course  among  gospel-hearers. 
I.  "Why  is  it  that  gospel-hearers  delay  .vnd  put  off  repentance?  1.  Satan 
has  a  great  hand  in  this.  He  is  always  urging  either  that  it  is  too  soon  or  else 
that  it  is  too  long  adoing.  2.  The  cares  and  business  of  the  world  contribute  much 
to  this.     The  predominant  love  of  carnal  ease.     4.  The  predominant  love  of  sin. 

5.  A  natural  aversion  and  backwardness  to  holiness.  When  light  is  let  into  the 
mind,  but  the  aversion  still  remains  in  the  will,  what  can  be  expected  but  that  the 
business  of  repentance,  which  they  dare  not  absolutely  refuse,  will  be  delayed  ? 

6.  The  hope  of  finding  the  work  easier  afterwards.  7.  A  large  reckoning  on  the 
head  of  time  that  is  to  come.  8.  A  fond  conceit  of  the  easiness  of  salvation-work. 
9.  A  conceit  of  sufficient  ability  in  ourselves  to  turn  ourselves  from  sin  unto  Goi 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

II.  This  delattno  is  a  souL-BtriNiNa  coubss.  1.  It  is  directly  opposite  to  the  gospel 
call,  which  is  for  to-day,  not  for  to-morrow.  All  the  calls  of  the  gospel  require 
present  compliance.  2.  It  is  threatened  with  ruin.  And  this  threatening  has  been 
accomplished  in  many  whom  their  slothful  days  have  caused  to  perish.  3.  When- 
ever grace  touches  the  heart  men  see  that  it  is  so.  4.  It  has  a  native  tendency  to 
Boul-ruin.  The  state  of  sin  is  a  state  of  wrath,  where  ruin  must  needs  compass  a 
man  about  on  every  hand.  The  longer  men  continue  in  sin,  spiritual  death 
advanoeth  the  more  upon  them.  While  they  remain  in  this  state  there  is  but  a 
step  betwixt  them  and  death,  which  you  may  be  carried  over  by  a  delay  of  ever  so 
short  a  time.  Use  1.  For  information:  That  delayers  of  repentance  are  self- 
destroyers,  self-murderers.  By  delays  the  interest  of  hell  is  advanced.  Satan  is 
most  busy  to  ply  the  engine  of  delays.  They  are  sinners'  best  friends  that  give 
them  least  rest  in  a  sinful  course.  Use  2.  Of  lamentation  :  Thou  knowest  not  the 
worth  of  a  precious  soul,  which  thou  are  throwing  away  for  what  will  not  profit. 
Thou  knowest  not  the  excellency  of  the  precious  Christ.  Thou  knowest  not  the  worth 
of  precious  time.  Thou  knowest  not  the  weight  of  the  wrath  of  God.  Thou  dost 
not  observe  what  speed  thy  ruin  is  making  while  thou  liest  at  ease.  Thou  dost  not 
observe  how  near  thy  destruction  may  be.  Thou  dost  not  observe  how  utterly 
unable  thou  art  to  ward  off  the  blow  when  it  comes.  Use  3.  Of  reproof  to  delayers 
of  salvation-work:  To  delaying  saints.  A  delay  of  righting  their  case  when 
matters  are  wrong,  by  receiving  their  repentance  and  the  actings  of  faith. 
The  delaying  to  give  up  some  bosom-idol  that  mars  their  communion  with 
God.  The  delaying  to  clear  their  state  before  the  Lord.  The  delaying  of  some 
particular  duty,  or  piece  of  generation -work,  which  they  are  convinced  God  calls 
them  to.  The  delaying  of  actual  preparation  for  eternity.  To  delaying  sinners  : 
Is  the  debt  of  sin  so  small  upon  thy  head  that  thou  must  run  thyself  deeper  in  the 
debt  of  God's  justice  ?  Is  not  the  holy  law  binding  on  thee  ?  Who  has  assured 
thee  that  ever  thou  shalt  see  the  age  thou  speakest  of  ?  Who  has  the  best  right  to 
thy  youth  and  strength?  Ye  middle-age  people,  why  do  ye  delay  repentance? 
I  exhort  you  all  to  delay  repentance  and  salvation-work  no  longer.  (T.  Boston, 
D.D.) 

Ver.  12.  A  naughty  person,  a  •wicked  man,  ■walketh  wltli  a  froward  mouth. — A 
bad  man: — I.  The  poetrait  of  a  bad  man.  1.  He  is  perverse  in  speech.  He 
has  no  regard  for  truth  or  propriety.  False,  irreverent,  impure,  audacious.  2.  He 
is  artful  in  his  conduct.  "  Winketh  with  his  eyes,"  &c.  He  expresses  his  base 
spirit  in  crafty  and  clandestine  and  cunning  methods.  He  is  anything  but 
straightforward  and  transparent.  3.  Mischievous  in  purpose.  "  Deviseth  mis- 
chief." Malevolence  is  his  inspiration.  He  rejoiceth  in  evil.  II.  The  doom  of  a 
BAD  MAN.  "  Therefore  shall  his  calamity  come  suddenly."  This  doom  is — 
1.  Certain.  The  moral  laws  of  the  universe  and  the  Word  of  God  guarantee  the 
punishment  of  sin.  2.  Sudden.  "  Suddenly  shall  he  be  broken."  The  suddenness 
does  not  arise  from  want  of  warning,  but  from  the  neglect  of  warning.  3.  Irre- 
mediable. "  Without  remedy."  When  once  his  doom  is  fixed,  there  is  no 
alteration.  "As  the  tree  falls,  so  it  must  lie."  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  False 
liberty : — In  human  nature,  as  in  every  other,  there  is  an  innate  love  of  freedom. 
But  alas !  in  human  nature,  as  fallen,  this  principle,  good  in  itself,  has  taken  a 
sadly  perverse  direction.  It  is  too  often  the  mere  love  of  following,  without 
restraint,  our  own  inclinations.  And  while  aversion  to  restraint  is  common  to  all, 
it  is  peculiarly  strong  in  the  bosom  of  youth.  The  freedom,  not  the  want  of  it,  is 
sometimes  the  thing  really  to  be  ashamed  of.  {R.  Wardlaw.)  Naughtiness  . — 
"  A  man  of  Belial."  Perhaps  an  unthrifty  man  ;  certainly  a  lawless  man.  A 
man  of  naughtiness.  A  child  of  the  devil.  I.  A  notoriously  wicked  man  cares 
FOB  NO  LAWS  OF  GoD  OR  MAN.  1.  He  hath  stopped  the  mouth  of  his  conscience 
with  his  sins.  2.  He  has  no  love  to  either  God  or  man,  therefore  he  disregards 
both.  3.  He  fears  neither,  and  therefore  slights  their  laws.  4.  He  sees  many 
escape,  and  such  examples  harden  their  hearts.  II.  Such  a  man's  life  is  alto- 
gether WICKED.  1.  His  thoughts  are  altogether  earthly.  2.  All  his  delight  is  in 
wickedness.  IH.  A  perverse  mouth  is  a  sure  mark  op  an  unoodly  man.  1.  Few, 
or  only  the  extremely  wicked,  will  talk  or  boast  of  their  wickedness.  2.  When 
men  are  grown  to  this  height  they  are  beyond  the  "  Cape  of  Good  Hope."  A  crooked 
mind  will  make  a  crooked  mouth.  Take  heed.  God  hath  given  thee  a  mouth  to 
speak  to  His  glory,  not  to  dishonour  Him,  nor  to  proclaim  thine  own  sham*. 
iFrancit  Taylor,  B.D.) 


CHAP.  Ti.]  PROVERBS.  1C9 

Yer.  13.  He  Trtnketli  witb  bis  eyes,  be  apeaketli  with  his  feet,  he  teacheth  with 
hlB  fingers. — Secret  ways  of  speaking  : — The  wicked  man  not  only  abuseth  hig 
mouth,  but  also  his  eyes,  feet,  and  fingers.  When  he  is  ashamed,  or  wants 
power  to  utter  his  mind  as  he  would  in  words,  he  makes  it  known  by  signs ; 
showing  forth  his  spleen,  lust,  or  contempt  by  his  eyes,  feet,  or  fingers.  He  is 
much  addicted  to  perverse  speeches  who,  when  his  tongue  fails,  speaks  with  hia 
other  members.  He  cannot  hold ;  he  must  make  his  mind  known  to  his  brethren 
in  evil  some  way  or  other.  He  makes  known  occasions  of  evil  to  his  companions 
by  signs.  He  acts  his  part  to  draw  others  to  folly.  What  he  cannot  or  dare  not 
persuade  to  by  words,  that  he  doth  by  gestures.  His  tongue  is  not  sufficient  to 
express  his  wickedness.  He  useth  gestures  instead  of  words.  He  omits  no  way  to 
stir  up  others  to  wickedness.  He  useth  three  quick  members,  that  are  easily 
moved,  to  show  his  quick,  wicked  wit  by  them.  He  abuses  all  the  members  of  his 
body,  but  especially  eyes,  feet,  and  hands,  to  be  signs  of  lewdness.  He  is  wholly 
composed  of  fraud,  and  while  he  counterfeits  goodness  in  words,  practices  mischief 
by  signs.  The  fro  ward  person  cannot  always  speak  well,  and  therefore  must 
sometimes  hold  his  peace,  and  show  his  mind  by  tokens,  lest  his  wicked  disposition 
be  discovered.  I.  A  wicked  man  makes  his  mind  known  by  his  eyes.  So  Eliphaz 
conceived  of  Job  (Job  xv.  12.  See  also  Psa.  xxxv.  19).  1.  In  general.  There  is 
a  faculty  in  all  the  members,  some  way  or  other  to  express  the  thoughts  of  the 
heart,  though  not  so  clear  as  in  the  tongue.  Men  use  these  faculties  when  they  are 
ashamed  to  speak  what  they  would  have,  or  would  be  understood  only  by  their 
partners  in  evil,  to  whom  they  give  particular  known  tokens.  2.  In  particular. 
Men  by  the  eyes  give  signs  of  wantonness.  Men  wink  for  flattery,  as  conniving 
at,  or  tacitly  commending  what  others  say  or  do.  Or  for  derision,  as  intimating 
secretly  to  a  friend  that  another  man's  words  or  actions  are  ridiculous.  Or  for 
secret  solicitation  to  another,  to  do  some  evil,  as  to  strike  or  wound  a  man.  II.  A 
wicked  man's  feet  can  speak.  They  speak — 1.  Eage  and  anger,  as  when  men 
stamp  with  their  feet.  2.  Murder,  when  they  go  apace  to  take  occasion  to  kill. 
3.  Wantonness.  So  the  treading  on  the  toe  is  commonly  interpreted  by  wantons. 
HI.  A  WICKED  man's  fingers  teach  folly.  1.  Anger.  Men  hold  out  the  finger  by 
way  of  threatening.  2.  Derision.  We  can  mock  with  our  fingers.  3.  Mischief. 
By  lifting  up  the  finger  giving  a  sign  to  hurt  others.  {Ibid.)  How  character  it 
expressed : — Naughty  people  think  that  no  one  knows  anything  about  their 
naughtiness,  when  the  truth  is,  that  everybody  knows  it.  The  inward  character 
of  the  man  is  expressed  through  mouth,  eyes,  hands,  and  feet.  I.  Eyes.  "Ho 
winketh  with  his  eyes."  How  much  of  the  character  the  eye  expresses  !  There  is 
the  open,  clear,  intelligent  look  that  speaks  volumes.  There  is  the  low,  cunning 
look,  the  guilty,  stealthy  look  of  the  criminal — well  known  and  easily  detected  by 
experts.  The  eye  speaks  all  the  motions  of  the  mind.  It  can  command,  entreat, 
repel,  invite,  subdue.  Emerson  says,  "  The  eye  obeys  exactly  the  action  of  the 
mind."  H.  Feet  express  the  chabacter.  Compare  the  firm  step  of  the  business 
man  and  the  shuffling  wriggle  of  the  loafer.  How  much  of  bad  character  is 
expressed  in  the  word  "  tramp"!  The  Bible  often  designates  the  whole  character 
of  a  man  by  the  word  "  walk."  III.  Hands  have  a  language.  The  wave  of  the 
hand,  the  use  of  the  hands  in  public  address,  the  sign  or  signal  between  two 
persons.  The  dumb  talk  together  with  their  hands.  Learn — 1.  If  you  would  be 
received  as  a  worthy  person,  you  must  be  worthy  at  heart.  2.  If  you  would  be 
known  as  upright,  you  must  be  such  at  heart.  3.  If  you  aspire  to  rank  in  the 
community  as  a  lady  or  gentleman,  you  must  be  such  in  every  fibre  of  your  being. 
Character  always  carries  its  own  certificate  with  it.     (George  H.  Smyth.) 

Vers.  16-19.  These  six  things  doth  the  Lord  hate. — The  seven  abominable 
things : — A  catalogue  of  evils  specially  odious  to  the  Infinite  One.  I.  Haughtt 
BEARING.  "  A  proud  look."  Pride  is  frequently  represented  in  the  Bible  as  an 
offence  to  the  Holy  God.  Haughtiness  is  an  abomination,  because  it  implies — 
1.  Self-ignorance.  2.  Unkindness.  3,  Irreverence.  U.  Verbal  falsehood. 
"A  lying  tongue."  1.  Falsehood  always  implies  a  wrong  heart.  A  pure  heart 
supplies  no  motive  for  falsehood.  Vanity,  avarice,  ambition,  cowardice  are  the 
parents  and  patrons  of  lies.  2.  Falsehood  always  has  a  bad  social  tendency.  It 
disappoints  expectations,  shakes  confidence,  loosens  the  very  foundations  of  social 
order.  III.  Heartless  cruelty.  "  Hands  that  shed  innocent  blood."  Cruelty 
implies — 1.  An  utter  lack  of  sympathy  with  God's  creatures.  2.  An  utter  lack  of 
Eyrjapathy  with  God's  mind.     He  who  inflicts  pain  is  out  of  sympathy  both  with 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

the  universe  and  with  his  Maker.  IV.  Vicious  schemino.  "  A  heart  that 
deviseth  wicked  imaginations."  There  are  some  hearts  so  bad  that  they  are  ever 
inventing  some  evil  thing.  Illustrate  by  antediluvian  man.  V.  Mischzevodb 
EAOEBNE88.  "  Feet  swift  in  running  to  mischief."  They  not  only  do  mischief,  but 
they  do  it  eagerly,  with  ready  vigilance ;  they  have  a  greed  for  it.  VI.  Social 
8UANDEB.  The  slanderer  is  amongst  the  greatest  of  social  curses.  He  robs  hia 
fellow-creature  of  his  greatest  treasure — his  own  reputation,  and  the  loving  con- 
fidence of  his  friends.  VII.  Disturbing  strife.  "And  he  that  soweth  discord 
among  brethren."  He  who  by  tale-bearing,  ill-natured  stories,  and  wicked  inven- 
tions produces  the  disruptions  of  friendship,  is  abhorrent  to  that  God  who  desires 
His  creatures  to  live  in  love  and  unity.     This  subject  serves  to  show  three  things — 

1.  The  moral  hideousness  of  the  world.     These  seven  evils  everywhere  abound. 

2.  The  immaculate  purity  of  God.  He  hates  these  things.  Therefore  they  are 
foreign  to  himself.  3.  The  true  mission  of  the  godly — to  endeavour  to  rid  the 
world  of  the  evils  offensive  to  Heaven.    (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  20.  My  son,  keep  thy  father's  commandment,  and  forsake  not  the  law  of 
thy  mother. — Words  of  counsel  to  schoolboys : — While  your  recollections  of  home  are 
fresh  I  am  anxious  to  direct  your  thoughts  to  one  or  two  matters  to  which  those 
recollections  may  possibly  give  a  weight  and  a  force  which  they  might  not  otherwise 
possess.  I.  Cherish  home  ties  as  among  tour  most  sacred  possessions.  One 
of  the  dangers  of  public  school-life  is  learning  to  disparage  feelings  of  affection  for 
the  home.  It  is  not  manly  to  scorn  those  boys  who  are  at  times  "  home-sick." 
The  truest  manliness  is  not,  and  cannot  be,  divorced  from  tenderness  ;  and  while 
I  would  enforce  with  all  my  heart  the  necessity  for  courage  in  facing  the  first 
trouble  of  a  schoolboy's  life,  I  would  remind  all  who  listen  to  me  that  the  boy  who 
retains  most  strongly  his  affection  for  his  home  will  grow  up  a  truer  man  and  a  truer 
gentleman  than  the  youth  who  casts  those  affections  on  one  side  as  something  to 
be  ashamed  of.  H.  Do  not  suppose  that  school  life  is  in  any  way  intended 
TO  SUPERSEDE  YOUR  HOME  LIFE.  Most  of  you  havc  come  from  homes  in  which  you 
have  been  the  objects  of  Christian  thoughtfulness,  and  the  subjects  of  religious 
training.  The  higher  branches  of  what  is  called  "  secular  knowledge  "  are  but 
branches  of  the  teaching  that  was  begun  at  home.  Secular  is  not  opposed  to 
sacred.  Is  not  all  learning  sacred?  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of 
wisdom";  and  there  is  no  true  knowledge  which  may  not  be  said  to  have  its 
spring  there.  In  the  text  Solomon  means  by  the  "  father's  commandment"  those 
principles  of  godliness  and  virtue  which  are  inculcated  in  every  Christian  home. 
Not  one  of  you  has  come  here  to  begin,  and  not  one  of  you  will  here  complete,  his 
education.  When  God  sends  us  into  the  world  it  is  that  we  may  be  educated  for 
Him — trained  for  Him.  That  training — with  all  its  defects  and  failings — begins 
in  the  home,  and,  wherever  we  may  afterwards  go,  and  under  whatever  circum- 
stances we  may  afterwards  be  placed,  our  after-life  is  only  a  continuation  of  what 
our  home  life  has  been.  When  you  leave  school,  carry  your  home  life — those 
affections  and  feelings  which  have  been  wakened  in  you  in  the  midst  of  those 
whom  you  love — carry  these  into  your  after-life,  for  without  them  life  will  be 
incomplete.  HI.  Never  be  ashamed  of  your  religion.  John  Angell  James 
attributed  his  position  as  a  Christian  man  to  the  courage  of  a  fellow-apprentice, 
who  kneeled  by  his  bedside  to  pray,  when  James  was  neglecting  to  do  so  through 
feelings  of  shame.  That  apprentice  dared  to  do  right.  He  was  not  ashamed  to 
have  it  known  that  he  prayed  to  God.  It  was  said  of  an  old  naval  officer,  two  or 
three  hundred  years  ago,  that  as  he  feared  God,  he  knew  no  other  fear.  IV.  Give 
YOUR  hearts  wholly  to  the  God  of  your  fathers.  Youth  is  the  fittest  time  for 
religion,  as  it  is  the  best  time  for  learning  anything.  While  your  hearts  are  still 
fresh,  and  still  susceptible  o'  good  impressions,  yield  them  up  to  the  Saviour.  {F, 
Wagstaff.) 

Ver.  22.  "When  thou  goest,  it  shall  lead  thee.— The  comfort  of  the  thought  of 
God's  guidance  in  after-life  of  those  brought  up  in  His  fear  and  love  : — Who  is 
there  who  has  never  felt  in  his  heart  a  wish  for  some  one  to  advise,  direct,  and 
help  him?  There  is  an  Adviser,  a  Helper,  promised  to  us,  able,  powerful  to  guide 
and  help  us  with  unerring  wisdom  through  any  difficulties  or  troubles — the 
gracious  Father,  the  redeeming  Son,  the  Spirit  that  maketh  holy.  All  of  us  need, 
daily  need,  such  a  Companion,  such  a  Comforter.  Those  who  will  meet  together 
and  receive  God's  blessing  from  the  hand  of  the  bishop  in  confirmation,  where  will 


CHAP.Ti.]  PROVERBS.  171 

they  all  be  in  a  few  years,  nay,  perhaps  when  another  year  has  passed  over  their 
heads  ?  Wherever  they  may  be,  this  one  thing  awaits  them,  temptation — temp- 
tation as  different  as  their  own  circumstances  and  dispositions,  but  still  temptation. 
The  old  fables  and  monkish  legends  represent  Satan  coming  in  different  shapea 
to  one  another  according  to  their  particular  weakness — to  one  as  a  gold-finder 
showing  his  hidden  treasure,  to  another  as  a  handsome  winning  man,  offering  a 
life  of  pleasure,  to  another  as  a  beautiful  woman  enticing  to  ways  of  sin.  But 
all  these  mean  the  same  thing — that  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil  shape  their 
temptations  so  as  best  to  catch  each  unprotected  soul.  There  is  no  saying  what  that 
temptation  will  be  like ;  for  to  each  it  may  be  different  according  to  where  he  is,  and 
what  he  is.  Some  may  be  tempted  by  getting  on  in  the  world,  some  by  not  getting  on, 
some  by  idle  follies,  some  by  busy  f  oUies.  Let  their  life  be  what  it  may,  we  can  comfort 
ourselves  with  the  thought  that  they  are  prepared,  that  they  have  had  the  best  kind 
of  preparation,  that  which  cometh  from  God  only,  the  knowledge  of  His  mercies 
and  promises,  the  help  of  His  Holy  Spirit.  Shall  we  try  to  look  a  little  more  closely 
down  the  long  avenue  of  time,  and  see  them  as  they  will  be  ;  some  we  can  fancy 
taking  root  here,  spreading  out  their  branches  safely  under  the  shelter  of  Christ's 
Church  ;  some  may  be  found  settling  far  away,  some  not  settling  at  all,  but  drifting 
hither  and  thither  on  the  changeful  tides  of  life ;  but  what  of  their  souls,  which 
will  be  bettering  or  worsening  from  day  to  day  ?  We  have  trained  them  to  know, 
to  fear,  and  to  love  the  Lord  their  Saviour,  their  Comforter,  their  God ;  and  that 
God  has  promised  His  all-powerful  Spirit  shall  garrison  their  souls,  and  strengthen 
them  to  fight  the  life-long  fight  of  faith,  if  they  will  not  slacken  or  desert  His 
service.  So  we  will  cheer  ourselves  with  the  thought  that  as,  like  Joseph,  they 
have  been  bred  up  in  the  fear  and  nurture  of  the  Lord,  so  they  wiU  be  able  to  render 
as  good  an  account  of  themselves.  (Archdeacon  Mildmay.)  When  thou  awakest, 
it  shall  talk  with  thee. — Man's  counsellor : — I.  The  subject  of  this  statement 
— WHAT  IT  IS  that  WILL  DO  THIS.  The  commandmcnt  and  law  of  religious  and 
well-instructed  persons  come  to  be  equivalent  to  the  law  of  God.  "  It "  really  stands 
for  God's  book.  "Talk"  is  expressive  of  that  familiarity  and  friendship  which 
may  come  to  be  established  between  the  mind  and  heart  of  a  young  man  and  the 
wisdom  of  God  personified  and  embodied  in  the  book.  There  is  a  sacred  familiarity, 
an  affectionate  friendship,  an  intercourse  of  tenderness.  Two  or  three  things 
characterise  this  sacred  converse  and  intercourse.  1.  It  will  talk  with  you  on  the 
most  important  subjects.  2.  It  will  talk  with  you  in  all  sorts  of  ways.  3.  It  will 
talk  with  authority.  There  is  nothing  harsh,  nothing  grating  in  its  tone  of 
authority  if  the  heart  be  right.  But  it  will  talk  with  honest  plainness.  This  friend 
wiU  speak  to  you  with  openness  and  honesty,  and  with  the  plainness  of  reproof. 
Two  or  three  things  you  must  carry  with  you  in  order  that  this  converse  may  be 
fully  beneficial.  1.  You  must  be  on  terms  of  sincerity  with  the  Bible.  You  must 
not  come  reluctantly,  nor  with  doubt,  nor  to  ridicule ;  you  must  not  come  in  an 
improper  spirit  of  questioning.  This  book  treats  a  man  just  as  one  man  treats 
another.  To  the  "  froward  it  will  show  itself  froward."  2.  There  must  be  serious 
and  earnest  prayer  for  God's  enlightening  and  guiding  Spirit.  3.  There  must  be 
frequent  and  sometimes  prolonged  and  deep  meditation  on  the  words  spoken. 
There  are  three  ways  in  which  may  be  illustrated  the  time  that  is  here  indicated — • 
"  When  thou  awakest."  1.  Take  the  expression  literally.  When  you  come  back 
in  the  morning  to  consciousness.  2.  Take  the  expression  figuratively.  At  par- 
ticular times,  through  the  force  of  inward  thoughts  or  of  outward  circumstances,  a 
young  man  may  suddenly  wake  up  to  his  peril,  foolishness,  sin — to  duty,  the  great- 
ness of  life,  the  past,  the  future.  3.  Youth  figuratively  is  emphatically  a  time  of 
awakening  to  the  realities  of  life.  The  young  man  wakes  up  to  his  personal 
individuality,  to  a  sense  of  his  obligations,  feeling  that  there  are  now  many  things 
which  depend  on  his  own  judgment— upon  himself.  II.  The  object  of  discouksb 
IN  THE  CHAPTEK.  To  wam  the  young  man  against  things  which  may  injure  and 
ruin  in  a  worldly  point  of  view.  And  there  is  a  far  greater  connection  between 
the  ruin  of  a  man  in  a  worldly  respect  and  the  ruin  of  the  soul  than  people  are 
apt  to  imagine.  Three  causes  of  ruin — 1.  Want  of  caution.  Illustrated  in  giving 
your  name  in  a  bond  or  guarantee  for  another.  Speculations,  hazardous  schemes, 
efforts  to  get  profit  without  giving  sweat.  It  is  God's  law  that  we  shall  purchase 
everything  with  the  sweat  of  our  brow  ;  and  all  hazardous  speculations,  all  gambling 
transactions,  are,  in  fact,  efforts  to  evade  this  law.  2.  Indolence.  There  are  some 
people  who  seem  to  be  asleep  all  day  long.  3.  Profligacy.  There  is  not  only  the 
seduction  of  man  by  the  harlot,  but  the  injury  of  man  by  his  fellow-man.     This 


172  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cair.ru 

last  is  a  more  complicated  crime  than  the  first.  The  man  who  gives  way  to  any 
impure  form  of  vice  is  said  to  "lack  nnderstanding,"  to  "destroy  his  own  soul." 
III.  The  chabacteristics  of  a  man  who  is  on  the  boad  to  euin.  Along  with 
the  evil  imaginations  of  the  heart,  a  false  tongue,  and  the  love  of  sowing  discord, 
there  is  a  loss  of  manliness,  of  transparency,  of  sincerity,  and  the  like.  Con- 
clusion :  1.  Give  a  spiritual  turn  to  the  teaching  of  the  chapter,  and  see  what 
spiritual  thoughts  may  be  educed  from  it.  2.  Invite  young  men  who  accept  the 
Christian  faith  to  devote  themselves  to  God's  service  in  the  beginning  of  life. 
3.  Being  so  devoted,  see  that  ye  be  not  led  away  and  seduced  from  your  steadfastness 
by  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil.  Look  ahead ;  always  consider  consequences. 
You  are  living  under  great  moral  laws,  and  you  can  no  more  alter  those  laws,  you 
can  no  more  avoid  their  working  out  their  results,  than  you  can  turn  the  sun  from 
its  course.  Beware  of  doing  any  one  thing,  of  giving  way  to  any  one  temptation, 
from  which  grievous  results  may  arise.  (Thomas  Binney.)  The  talking  book  : — 
It  is  a  very  happy  circumstance  when  the  commandment  of  our  father  and  the 
law  of  our  mother  are  also  the  commandment  of  God  and  the  law  of  the  Lord. 
Happy  are  they  who  have  a  double  force  to  draw  them  to  the  right — the  bonds  of 
nature  and  the  cords  of  grace.  God's  law  should  be  a  guide  to  us — "  When  thou 
goest,  it  shall  lead  thee  "  ;  a  guardian  to  us — "  when  thou  sleepest " — when  thou 
art  defenceless  and  off  thy  guard — "  it  shall  keep  thee"  ;  and  a  dear  companion  to 
us — "when  thou  awakest,  it  shall  talk  with  thee."  I.  We  perceive  that  the  Word 
IB  LIVING.  How  else  could  it  be  said — "It  shall  talk  with  thee"?  1.  It  is  living, 
because  it  is  pure  truth.  Error  is  death,  truth  is  life.  The  tooth  of  time  devours 
all  lies.  Truth  never  dies.  2.  It  is  the  utterance  of  an  immutable,  self -existing 
God.  So  the  Word  is  sure,  steadfast,  and  fuU  of  power.  It  is  never  out  of  date. 
3.  It  enshrines  the  living  heart  of  Christ.  The  living  Christ  is  in  the  book ;  you 
behold  His  face  on  almost  every  page.  4.  The  Holy  Spirit  has  a  peculiar  connection 
with  the  Word  of  God.  The  work  of  the  Spirit  in  men's  hearts  is  done  by  the  texts 
which  ministers  quote  rather  than  by  their  explanations  of  them.  Take  care,  then, 
how  you  trifle  with  a  book  which  is  so  instinct  with  hfe.  II.  We  perceive  that 
THE  Word  is  personal.  "  It  shall  talk  with  thee."  1.  God's  Word  talks  about 
men,  and  about  modern  men ;  about  the  paradise  of  unfallen  manhood,  the  fall,  the 
degeneracy  of  the  race,  and  the  means  of  its  redemption.  2.  God's  Word  speaks  to 
men  in  all  states  and  conditions  before  God — to  sinners  and  to  the  children  of 
God.  3.  God's  Word  is  personal  to  all  our  states  of  mind.  It  goes  into  all  details 
of  our  case,  let  our  state  be  what  it  may.  4.  God's  Word  is  always  faithful.  You 
never  find  the  Word  of  God  keeping  back  that  which  is  profitable  for  yon.  This 
suggests  a  httle  healthful  self-examination.  "  How  does  the  Word  of  God  speak  to 
my  soul  ?  "  III.  We  perceive  that  Holt  Scripturb  is  vert  familiab.  "  Talk  with 
thee."  To  talk  signifies  fellowship,  communion,  familiarity.  Scripture  speaks  the 
language  of  men  ;  it  comes  down  to  our  simplicity ;  it  is  familiar  as  to  all  that 
concerns  us ;  it  answers  inquiries.  IV.  We  perceive  that  the  Word  of  God  is 
responsive.  "  With  thee,"  not  "  to  thee."  Talk  with  a  man  is  not  all  on  one  side. 
To  talk  with  a  man  means  answering  talk  from  him.  Scripture  is  a  marvellously 
conversational  book ;  it  talks  and  it  makes  men  talk.  V.  We  perceive  that  Scrip- 
ture IS  influential.  When  the  Word  of  God  talks  with  us,  it  influences  us. 
AU  talk  influences  more  or  less.  This  book  soothes  our  sorrows,  and  encourages  us. 
It  has  a  wonderfully  elevating  power.  It  warns  and  restrains.  It  sanctifies  and 
moulds  the  mind  into  the  image  of  Christ.  It  confirms  and  settles  us.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  23.  The  law  Is  light — The  law  i$  light : — The  fitness  and  beauty  of  this 
comparison  of  the  law  of  God  with  light  are  seen  immediately.  If  we  consider  the 
nature  of  law  we  find  that  it  is  like  the  nature  of  sunlight.  There  is  nothing  so 
pure  and  clean  as  light,  and  there  is  nothing  so  pure  and  stainless  as  the  Divine 
law.  There  is  nothing  so  ubiquitous  as  light.  It  is  everywhere.  How  very  like 
this  light  in  the  material  universe  is  the  law  of  God  in  the  rational.  The  one 
naturally  suggests  and  symbolises  the  other.  The  moral  law  is  the  ordinance  which 
establishes  and  governs  the  moral  universe.  The  command,  "  Let  there  be  light," 
founded  and  sustains  the  material  world ;  and  the  command,  "Let there  be  supreme 
love  of  God,"  founds  and  sustains  the  rational  and  responsible  world.  Both 
commands  are  universal  and  all-pervading.  Within  the  rational  and  reasonable 
sphere  law  is  everywhere.  But  there  are  different  degrees  of  moral  light  as  there 
are  different  degrees  of  natural  light.     Our  object  now  is  to  show  the  similarity 


CBJkT.  Ti.]  PROVERBS.  178 

between  the  moral  law  and  the  material  light  hj  looking  at  its  influences  and  effects 
in  the  soul  rather  than  bj  analysing  its  intrinsic  nature.  I.  The  hobai.  law  bz- 
TSALS  liiKS  suNLiaBT.  It  makes  the  sin  which  still  remains  in  the  Christian  a 
visible  thing.  Believers  are  continually  urged  in  the  Scriptures  to  bring  their  hearts 
into  the  light  of  God's  law  that  they  may  see  the  sin  that  is  in  them.  If  we  would 
thoroughly  understand  our  intricate  and  hidden  corruption,  we  must  by  prayer  and 
reflection  intensify  the  light  of  the  moral  law  that  it  may  penetrate  more  deeply 
into  the  deep  mass,  even  as  the  naturalist  must  concentrate  the  light  of  the  sun 
through  the  lens  if  he  would  thoroughly  know  the  plant  or  the  insect.  Every 
Christian  who  is  at  all  faithful  to  himself  and  to  God  has  experienced  these  illumi- 
nating and  revelatory  influences  of  the  law.  But  for  the  believer  the  law  makes  its 
disclosures  in  a  hopeful  and  salutary  manner.  The  believer  has  been  delivered 
from  the  condemning  power  of  the  law.  The  "  curse "  of  the  law  Christ,  hig 
Surety,  has  borne  for  him.  II.  The  law  tob  the  BEiincviB  in  Chbist  attbacts 
LIKE  THE  LIGHT.  Light  in  the  material  world  universally  attracts.  When  the  sun 
rises  up  and  bathes  the  world  in  light  how  all  nature  rises  up  to  meet  it  1  Just  so 
does  the  moral  law  attract  the  world  of  holy  beings.  They  love  the  law  for  its 
intrinsic  excellence,  and  seek  it  with  the  whole  heart.  Their  very  natures  are  pure 
like  the  law,  and  like  always  attracts  like.  If  there  be  in  any  soul  even  the  least 
degree  of  real  holiness,  there  is  a  point  of  attraction  upon  which  the  law  of  God  will 
seize  and  draw.  There  is  a  continual  tendency  and  drift  of  a  holy  soul  towards 
God.  This  view  of  the  Divine  law  as  an  attractive  energy  is  an  encouraging  one  to 
the  believer.  It  affords  good  grounds  for  the  perseverance  of  the  saints.  III.  The 
LAW  fob  the  beliiveb  IN  Chbist  INVIO0BATE8  LIKE  LIGHT.  This  poiut  of  resem- 
blance is  not  quite  so  obvious.  We  more  commonly  think  of  the  air  as  the 
invigorating  element  in  nature,  yet  it  is  true  of  the  light  that  its  presence  is  neces- 
sary in  order  that  the  spirits  of  a  man  may  be  lively  and  in  vigorous  action.  The 
plant  that  grows  up  in  the  darkness  is  a  pale  and  weak  thing.  Similar  is  the  effect 
of  the  moral  law  upon  one  who  is  resting  upon  Christ.  For  the  disciple  of  Christ 
the  law  is  no  longer  a  judge,  but  only  an  instructor.  The  terrors  of  the  law  have 
lost  their  power.  The  law  also  invigorates  him,  because,  by  virtue  of  his  union  with 
Christ,  it  has  become  an  inward  and  actuating  principle.  His  heart  has  been  so 
changed  by  grace  that  he  now  really  loves  the  law  of  God.  For  the  believer  the  law 
is  the  strength  of  holiness.  IV.  The  law  fob  the  believeb  in  Chbist  bbjoices 
LIKE  THE  light.  It  is  related  in  ancient  story  that  the  statue  of  Memnon,  when 
the  first  rays  of  the  morning  gilded  it,  began  to  tremble  and  thrill  and  send  forth 
music  like  a  sweet  harp.  And  such  is  the  joy-giving  influence  of  righteous  law  in 
the  heavenly  world,  and  such  is  its  effect  in  the  individual  believer.  It  follows  from 
this  unfolding  of  the  subject  that  the  great  act  of  the  Christian  is  the  act  of  faith, 
and  the  great  work  of  the  Christian  is  to  cultivate  and  strengthen  his  faith.  The 
moral  law,  like  the  material  light,  reveals,  attracts,  invigorates,  and  rejoices  only 
because  the  soul  sustains  a  certain  special  relation  to  it.  (G.  T.  Shedd,  D.D.) 
Our  lamp  and  light : — Here  the  adjuncts  of  good  precepts  given  by  godly  parents 
are  set  down,  which  show  the  good  to  be  gotten  from  them.  I.  Godly  parents 
HAVE  MANY  WATS  TO  auiDE  THEiB  CHiLDBEN.  By  Commands,  laws,  wise  reproofs, 
examples.  11.  Directions  of  godly  parents  are  a  great  help  to  show  us  the 
BIGHT  paths  of  life.  1.  Godly  parents  are  careful  that  their  directions  should 
agree  with  God's  Word.  2.  And  they  have  walked  themselves  in  the  ways  which 
they  command.  III.  Wise  reproofs  are  vest  profitable  fbom  a  wise  mam. 
1.  They  are  useful  in  the  Church  and  commonwealth  and  family.  2.  Because  as 
instructions  keep  men  from  sinful  courses,  so  reproofs  bring  men  out  of  them  and 
back  to  good  ways  again.  Then  be  more  careful  to  give  reproofs  to  your  friends. 
Be  patient  in  bearing  reproof,  and  make  a  good  use  of  it.     (Franeit  Taylor,  B.D.) 

Ver.  24.  To  keep  thee  from  the  evil  womajL — The  tin  of  uneleannes* : — 1.  One 
great  kindness  God  designed  men  in  giving  them  His  law  was  to  preserve  them 
from  this  sin.  2.  The  greatest  kindness  we  can  do  ourselves  is  to  keep  at  a 
distance  from  this  sin.  Arguments  urging  this  caution  are — (1)  It  is  a  sin  that 
impoverishes  men.  (2)  It  threatens  death  ;  it  kills  men.  (3)  It  brings  guUt  upon 
the  conscience  and  debauches  it.  (4)  It  ruins  the  reputation,  and  entails  perpetual 
infamy.  (5)  It  exposes  the  adulterer  to  the  rage  of  the  jealous  husband.  {Matthew 
Henry.) 

Yer.  27.  Can  a  man  take  fire  In  his  bosom,  and  his  clothes  not  be  burned  ? — The 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

danger  of  playing  with  enticements  to  sin  : — The  law  of  the  acquisition  of  knowledge 
is  that  the  mind  knows  the  unknown  through  the  known.  It  gets  at  the  distant 
through  the  near,  and  at  the  near  through  the  nearer.  It  ascends  to  the  Divine 
through  the  human,  and  through  the  material  and  the  temporal  mounts  up  to  the 
spiritual  and  eternal.  As  a  consequence,  the  teaching  of  the  Scriptures  in  the 
feature  alluded  to  is  more  specific  and  intelligible  to  such  a  creature  as  man  than  it 
could  be  in  any  other  mode.  The  words  of  the  text  directly  refer  to  the  sin  of 
adultery.  The  wise  man  directs  youth  to  the  best  defence  against  every  tendency 
to  this  evil.  That  defence  he  finds  in  the  remembrance  of,  attention  to,  and  con- 
formity with,  the  family  training  he  received  in  the  morning  of  life.  Then,  in  a 
manner  remarkably  elegant,  he  places  before  him  the  advantages  he  would  reap  by 
assuming  towards  the  law  the  attitude  prescribed.  The  law  is  here  personified  as  a 
wise  counsellor,  as  a  careful  guardian,  and  as  an  interesting  companion.  That  law 
wiU  preserve  against  the  particular  dangers  to  which  age  and  circumstances  make 
the  young  peculiarly  liable.  It  is  of  prime  importance  to  be  kept  from  the  "  strange 
woman."  In  the  text  the  wise  man  returns  again  to  the  necessity  of  directly  resist- 
ing the  evil  in  the  occasion  of  it,  in  the  temptation  to  it,  and  that  from  the  con- 
sideration of  the  impossibility  of  playing  with  the  enticement  without  falling  into 
the  sin.     I.  EvEBy  temptation  presented  to  man  addresses  itself  to  a  nattjrb 

THAT   IS    ALREADY   CORRUPT,  AND    THEREFORE    LIABLE    TO   TAKE    TO    IT.       It  appears  f  rom 

the  history  of  mankind  that  there  is  force  enough  in  temptation,  by  keeping  the 
mind  in  fellowship  with  it,  to  influence  even  holy  creatures  so  as  to  make  them  fall. 
So  it  happened  with  our  first  parents  in  Eden.  If  there  was  such  force  in  tempta- 
tion when  there  was  nothing  but  holiness  in  the  mind,  what  must  be  its  power  to  a 
creature  that  is  already  depraved  ?  Wherever  you  find  a  man  you  find  a  sinner. 
The  bias  of  our  nature  is  towards  sin,  the  original  propensity  of  our  minds  is  in  the 
direction  of  evil.  Here  lies  the  danger  of  playing  with  temptation.  There  is  some- 
thing in  thee  that  is  advantageous  to  it.  The  whole  moral  nature  of  man  is 
impaired.  The  moral  deterioration  of  mankind  is  such  as  to  expose  them  to  various 
assaults  of  temptation,  and  if  any  one  boldly  frequents  infectious  places,  dallying 
with  and  fondUng  the  disease,  it  is  impossible  for  him,  possessing  the  nature  he 
does,  to  escape  the  contagion.     11.  Man,  in  playing  with  the  temptation,  puts 

HIMSELF     directly     IN     THE     WAY     THAT     LEADS     NATURALLY     TO      SIN.         Every      sin 

has  certain  enticements  peculiar  to  itself.  The  great  moral  defect  of  thousands 
is  that  they  do  not  recognise  the  sin  in  the  enticement  thereto.  Show  how, 
by  playing  with  temptation,  a  man  may  develop  into  a  thief,  a  gambler, 
or  a  drunkard.  Scripture  not  only  forbids  the  sin  itself,  but  also  all  the 
occasions  to  it,  and  the  first  motions  of  the  heart  towards  it.  Do  you  desire  not  to 
fall  into  any  sin,  then  shut  your  ears  that  you  hear  not  the  voice  of  the  temptation  ; 
turn  your  eyes  away  from  looking  at  it ;  bind  yourself  to  something  strong  enough 
to  keep  you  from  falling  into  its  snare.  When  a  man  plays  with  the  temptation 
he  is  in  the  middle  of  the  road  which  leads  into  the  sin.     III.  Playing  with  the 

TEMPTATION    TO    ANY    EVIL    SHOWS    SOME    DEGREE    OF    BIAS    IN    THE     NATURE    TO    THAT 

PARTICULAR  EVIL.  It  is  in  the  communion  of  the  mind  with  the  temptation  that 
power  resides,  and  if  there  be  in  the  mind  a  sufficient  amount  of  virtue — of  virtue 
the  direct  opposite  of  the  sin  to  which  the  temptation  prompts — to  keep  a  man  on 
his  guard  from  playing  with  it,  he  is  perfectly  safe  from  any  injury  that  may  be 
inflicted  by  it.  In  truth,  when  it  is  so  the  temptation  is  to  him  no  longer  a 
temptation.  When  a  man  hates  the  sin  with  perfect  hatred  the  temptation  to  it 
is  hateful  to  him,  and  he  avoids  not  only  the  sin  itself,  but  all  occasions  to  it  and 
all  things  that  might  lead  thereto.  There  is  in  each  one  of  us  separately  some 
predisposition  to  some  particular  sin,  just  as  in  some  bodily  constitutions  there  is  a 
predisposition  to  certain  fevers.  There  may  be  something  in  a  man's  organism 
making  him  incline  beforehand  to  some  special  sin,  and  thus  placing  him  under  an 
obligation  to  exercise  special  vigilance  against  that  sin.  Natural  predispositions 
these  may  be  called ;  but  there  are  others,  the  result  of  habit  only,  equally  powerful 
in  their  influence  and  equally  dangerous  if  any  advantage  be  given  them  to  show 
themselves.  And  sometimes  the  natural  predispositions  are  strengthened  by  habit. 
When  a  man  plays  with  any  temptation  it  is  proof  of  some  bias  toward  the  sin 
which  is  the  direct  object  of  the  temptation.  The  playing  with  the  temptation  is 
nothing  else  than  the  heart  reaching  out  after  the  sin,  the  lust  conceiving  in  the 
mind.  IV.  Playing  with  temptation  only  brings  man  into  contact  with  sin 
OH  its  agreeable  sidk,  and  thus  gives  it  an  advantage  to  make  an  impression 
rxTOUBABLB  10  iTBEiiF  ON  THS  HZMD.     It  must  be  Confessed  that  sin  has  its  pleasure. 


OBIP.  Ti.]  PROVERBS.  175 

It  means  the  immediate  satisfaction  of  the  depraved  propensities  of  the  nature. 
Only  the  pleasure  of  sin  is  in  the  temptation.  There  you  see  the  impossibility  for 
any  one  to  dally  with  it  without  falling  a  prey  to  it.     V.  Mak,  through  platino 

WITH  TEMPTATION,  WEAKENS  HIS  MORAL  RESISTANCE  TO  THE  SIN,  AND  GRADUALLY  GETS  SO 

WEAK  THAT  HE  CANNOT  RESIST  IT.  When  a  man  entertains  evil  suggestion  his  moral 
force  begins  to  be  undermined.  One  depraved  thought  invites  another.  Playing 
with  temptation  eats  away  the  moral  energy.  The  conscience  at  last  gets  so 
depraved  that  it  permits  unforbidden  what  it  once  condemned,  and  so  step  by  step, 
almost  unwittingly  to  himself,  the  man  finds  himself  utterly  powerless  to  resist 
temptation.  And  that  is  not  all,  but  playing  with  the  temptation  keeps  a  man 
from  the  only  means  through  which  he  might  acquire  strength  to  overcome  the  sin. 
VI.  Man,  bv  plating  with  temptation,  at  last  tempts  the  Spirit  of  God  to  with- 
draw His  protection  from  him,  and  to  leave  him  to  himself  and  a  pret  to  his 
LUST.  Scriptures  teach  that  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  exerts  His  influence  in  different 
ways  to  keep  one  from  sin.  Sometimes  He  overrules  external  circumstances.  At 
other  times  He  influences  the  mind  by  means  of  certain  reflections,  so  that  the 
temptation  fails  in  its  effect  upon  him.  When  a  man  continues  to  play  with 
temptation,  permitting  his  heart  always  to  run  in  the  channel  of  his  lust,  beginning 
to  give  way  to  his  first  impulses  and  desires,  he  vexes  and  grieves  God's  Spirit  and 
gradually  offends  Him  so  much  that  He  withdraws  from  him,  withholds  His 
protection  and  allows  the  temptation  in  all  its  force  to  assault  him  at  a  time  when 
lust  is  strong  and  the  external  opportunity  perfectly  advantageous.  And  the  result 
ifi  he  falls  a  prey  to  the  temptation.     {Owen  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  30.  If  he  steal  to  satisfy  his  soul  when  he  is  hungry. — Theft  through 
necessity : — The  deceitful  and  perverting  influence  of  sin  requires  careful  considera- 
tion. WhUe  as  yet  it  is  only  a  principle  in  the  mind,  and  not  ripened  into  an 
external  action,  it  draws  into  its  service  the  various  powers  of  imagination, 
invention,  and  even  reason  itself.  By  these  powers  the  forbidden  object  is 
represented  as  a  source  of  peculiar  enjoyment,  or  it  is  invested  with  features  of 
external  attraction,  or  it  is  exhibited  as  fitted  to  gratify  curiosity  at  least,  and  to 
extend  the  sphere  of  natural  knowledge.  Even  after  the  principle  is  matured  into 
action,  and  its  fatal  consequences  begin  to  be  felt,  it  employs  the  same  powers  to 
find  excuses  and  apologies  for  the  act.  The  sources  from  which  apologies  are 
drawn  are  exceedingly  numerous.  But  this  is  the  striking  peculiarity  of  sin,  that 
it  seeks  with  greatest  eagerness  to  draw  them  from  the  character,  the  providence, 
or  the  Word  of  God.  The  passage  now  before  us  seems  to  hold  out  an  excuse  for 
stealing,  or  at  least  to  take  off  the  odiousness  and  criminality  of  it.  I.  The 
aspect  of  this  act  in  the  sight  of  men.  The  text  implies  that  by  men  it  is 
considered  as  venial  or  excusable.  But  it  is  the  act  under  special  limitations. 
1.  Limited  exclusively  to  food.  The  thing  stolen  is  not  classed  as  property.  It 
is  that  which  is  seldom  coveted,  and  never  for  its  own  sake  except  under  the 
influence  of  hunger.  But  this  can  never  be  drawn  into  an  excuse  for  stealing  in 
general.  The  food  is  supposed  to  be  taken  by  the  thief  only  when  he  is  hungry. 
It  is  not  inspired  by  covetousness,  but  by  hunger.  This  is  a  very  important 
limitation.  Food  may  be  stolen  with  as  much  criminality  as  any  other  thing,  for 
it  may  be  turned  into  money.  2.  But  the  feeling  of  hunger  itself  is  restricted  by 
the  text.  The  purpose  for  which  it  supposes  food  to  be  stolen  is  to  satisfy.  The 
thief  must  take  no  more  even  of  it  than  is  necessary  to  extinguish  present  hunger. 
He  is  not  permitted  to  carry  any  away  either  to  provide  against  future  necessity, 
or  to  procure  anything  which  he  may  be  anxious  to  possess.  3.  Food  is  supposed 
to  be  stolen  merely  to  "  satisfy  the  soul" — that  is,  to  preserve  the  life.  The  thief 
must  be  at  the  point  of  extreme  necessity,  at  which,  if  he  did  not  commit  the  act 
under  consideration,  he  would  actually  surrender  his  life.  H.  The  aspect  of  this 
ACT  IN  THE  sight  OF  GoD.  The  text  does  not  state  that  God  regards  this  thief  with 
indulgence.  The  context  implies  that  this  individual  has  incurred  the  penalty 
of  the  law,  and  must  be  punished  if  he  be  found.  Mercy,  which  sets  aside  the 
demands  of  the  law,  is  only  sin,  and,  if  generally  acted  on,  would  be  attended  with 
the  most  ruinous  consequences.  The  mercy  of  man  is  a  very  inadequate  medium 
for  contemplating  the  mercy  of  God.  Though  the  act  under  consideration  may 
seem  perfectly  innocent  to  man,  it  may  appear  highly  criminal  and  dangerous  in 
the  sight  of  God.  The  justice  of  this  estimate  may  be  clearly  perceived  by  attend- 
ing to  this  case  of  necessity  in  two  aspects.  1.  If  the  thief  has  been  involved  in 
this  necessitoQB  condition  by  his  own  misconduct — by  idleness,  intemperance,  or 


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHip.n, 

ftny  other  immoral  habit — he  is  plainly  guilty.  The  very  necessity  to  which  he  has 
been  reduced  is  a  sinful  necessity,  since  it  has  been  occasioned  by  his  own  mis- 
conduct. 2.  When  he  has  been  involved  in  it  by  the  providence  of  God.  Even  in 
this  view  the  act  under  consideration  is  decidedly  sinful.  It  is  a  serious  mis- 
improvement  and  abuse  of  God's  providence.  We  may  see  that  even  the  most 
extreme  case  of  necessity  will  not  warrant  unbelief  and  the  commission  of  sin. 
It  is  better  to  surrender  even  life  itself  than  give  way  to  an  immoral  and  criminal 
act.  A  case  can  never  occur  in  which  one  precept  of  the  law  may  be  set  aside 
in  order  to  avoid  the  violation  of  another.  The  case  in  which  life  is  in  danger  is 
evidently  the  most  extreme ;  it  plainly  comprehends  every  other.  If  the  law  is 
not  to  be  broken  in  the  superior,  it  is  not  to  be  broken  in  the  inferior  case  ;  if  it  is 
not  to  be  violated  when  life  is  at  stake,  it  is  much  less  to  be  violated  when  any 
inferior  benefit  is  at  stake.  (George  Hislop.)  Accused  of  theft  : — At  one  of  the 
annual  Waterloo  banquets  the  Duke  of  Wellington  after  dinner  handed  round  for 
inspection  a  very  valuable  presentation  snuff-box  set  with  diamonds.  After  a  time 
it  disappeared,  and  could  nowhere  be  found.  The  Duke  was  much  annoyed.  The 
guests  (there  being  no  servants  in  the  room  at  the  time)  were  more  so,  and  they  all 
agreed  to  turn  out  their  pockets.  To  this  one  old  officer  most  vehemently  objected, 
and  on  their  pressing  the  point  left  the  room,  notwithstanding  that  the  Duke  begged 
that  nothing  more  might  be  said  about  the  matter.  Of  course  suspicion  fell  on  the 
old  officer  ;  nobody  seemed  to  know  much  about  him  or  where  he  lived.  The  next 
year  the  Duke  at  the  annual  banquet  put  his  hand  in  the  pocket  of  his  coat,  which 
he  had  not  worn  since  the  last  dinner,  and  there  was  the  missing  snuff-box  1  The 
Duke  was  dreadfully  distressed,  found  out  the  old  officer,  who  was  living  in  a 
wretched  garret,  and  apologised.  "But  why,"  said  his  Grace,  "did  you  not 
consent  to  what  the  other  officers  proposed,  and  thus  have  saved  yourself  from 
the  terrible  suspicion?"  "Because,  sir,  my  pockets  were  full  of  broken  meat, 
which  I  had  contrived  to  put  there  to  save  my  wife  and  family,  who  were  at  that 
time  literally  dying  of  starvation."  The  Duke,  it  is  said,  sobbed  like  a  child  ;  and 
it  need  not  be  added  that  the  old  officer  and  his  family  suffered  no  more  from  want 
from  that  day. 

Ver.  32.  He  that  doeth  it  destroyetli  his  own  aouL — The  iuieide  of  the  soul : — 
Lovely  as  maiden  purity  is,  and  crowned  with  benedictions  though  it  is  by  Christ, 
we  have  here  to  learn  its  excellence  and  fear  its  loss,  by  the  sad,  stern  picture  of 
impurity  and  shameless  sin.  In  these  sad  proverbs  of  purity  the  wise  man  pictures 
to  us  in  fearful  personification  wisdom's  rival  standing  in  the  same  great  thorough- 
fares of  earth  and  bidding  to  her  shameful  pleasures  the  simple  youth  who  throng 
the  broad  and  crowded  way.  This  is  no  fancy  picture  allegorising  the  dangers  of 
youth.  It  is  drawn  from  reality,  from  every-day  life.  There  is  no  mistake  in  the 
outline,  no  exaggeration  in  the  colouring.  The  power  of  sin  lies  in  its  pleasure. 
They  are  mistaken  who  assert  that  there  are  no  gratifications  in  the  enjoyments  of 
sense.  Were  there  none,  they  would  not  be  so  diligently  sought.  Sin,  which  brings 
death  to  the  soul,  is  yet  sweet  to  the  taste.  The  more  we  sin  the  more  perverted 
becomes  our  taste,  the  more  clamorous  for  further  indulgence.  But  these  stolen 
waters  of  sinful  pleasure  are  not  always  sweet.  Pleasant  though  they  may  be  at  the 
first,  they  will  yet  become  bitter  indeed.  Much  of  the  sinner's  peril  grows  out  of  his 
simple  ignorance.  Sin  naturally  brings  with  it  temporal  and  physical  suffering. 
But  the  pleasures  of  the  sensualist  are  the  preludes  to  a  misery  words  refuse  to 
paint.  The  sentence  that  to  the  "defiled  and  unbelieving  nothing  is  pure"  is 
fulfilled  to  the  letter.  Even  the  innocent  pleasures  of  conversation  become  to  the 
sensualist  defiling,  for  he  turns  them  into  the  foul  channel  of  his  own  base  thought. 
The  mind  and  conscience  of  the  impure  are  defiled.  The  mental  faculties  of  the 
depraved  and  sensual  lose  at  once  and  for  ever  the  power  of  discerning  and 
appreciating  that  which  is  excellent,  lovely,  and  true.  The  deep  things  of  God 
are  no  subjects  for  the  lover  of  sensual  sin  to  dwell  upon.  Sensuality  not  only 
prevents  us  from  exercising  our  mental  powers  with  freedom  and  profit,  but  it  also 
wastes  and  enfeebles  those  powers  themselves.  Long  since  has  this  enfeebling  of 
the  intellectual  man  been  noticed  as  the  result  of  impurity  of  life.  The  sensualist 
must  make  his  choice  between  intellect  and  mental  imbecility.  "If  any  man  defile 
the  temple  of  God,  which  is  our  body,  him  will  God  destroy."  This  avenging 
work  of  destruction  is  well-nigh  accomplished  here  on  earth.  Body,  spirit,  and 
soul — all  is  impure.  But  to  the  pure  all  things  are  pure.  Unheeding  the  solioita- 
tiona  of  the  wanton,  they  go  straight  on  their  way.    And  this  purity  may  be  oura. 


CHIP.  Tn.]  PROVERBS.  17? 

Not  indeed  gained  by  our  own  strength,  nor  by  any  strength  sare  that  which  is  fonnd 
at  the  foot  of  the  Cross.  Why  may  we  not  thus  purify  ourselres  ?  To  the  life  of 
purity  we  are  called  throughout  the  Book  of  Proverbs,  and  the  cry  of  heavenly  Wisdom 
ia,  I'  Seek  early,  for  the  early  seekers  shall  find."    {Bp.  William  Steven*  Perry.) 


CHAPTER  Vn. 


TsB.  1.  My  son  keep  my  words,  and  lay  np  my  commandments  with  thee. — 
Parental  preeepU  : — "  Lay  up."  Hebrew,  "  hide."  A  metaphor  from  treasure  not 
left  open  in  the  house,  but  locked  up  in  chests  unseen,  lest  it  should  be  lost,  or  got 
away.    I.  Children  uust  beubhbsb  pabents' wobds.    1.  Their  words  of  instruction. 

2.  Of  charge  or  command.  3.  Of  commendation,  for  that  is  a  great  encouragement 
to  do  well.  4.  Of  consolation,  which  revives  the  spirit  of  good  children  in  their 
troubles.  6.  Of  promise.  6.  Of  prohibition.  7.  Of  reprehension.  8.  Of  com- 
mination.  The  spring  of  parents'  words  is  love — ^yea,  when  they  chide.  The  end 
and  result  of  all  their  speeches  is  their  children's  good.  11.  The  heabt  is  tbk 
KBciPTACLB  FOR  ooDLT  PRECEPTS.  There  they  must  be  laid  up.  1.  They  are  very 
precious  in  themselves.  Common  things  lie  about  the  house.  Choice  things  are 
locked  up.  2.  They  are  very  profitable  to  us,  and  such  things  easily  creep  into  our 
hearts.  3.  The  heart  is  the  secretest  place  to  lodge  them  in.  4.  It  is  the  safest 
place.  Good  precepts  should  be  as  ready  in  our  thoughts  as  if  we  had  them  in  our 
eyes.     (Francis  Taylor,  B.D.) 

Ver.  5.  Tliat  they  may  keep  thee  from  the  strangre  woman. — Heavenly  wisdom 
protective  : — I.  Knowledge  is  a  special  ukans  to  keep  us  from  wantonness. 
1.  By  way  of  excellency.  Wisdom  is  far  more  beautiful  than  the  fairest  strumpet 
in  the  world.     2.  By  her  good  counsel.     Wisdom  will  advise  thee  for  thy  good. 

3.  By  sweet  and  pleasant  discourse  far  more  pleasant  to  a  pious  heart  than  all  the 
wanton  songs  in  the  world.  4.  By  arming  thee  against  all  objections.  Keep  in 
with  knowledge,  and  thou  shalt  be  sure  to  keep  out  of  harlots'  paws.  II.  Thb 
EALse  WOMAN  18  A  STRANGER.  Possibly  in  the  sense  of  being  a  foreigner,  and  not 
considering  herself  in  the  control  of  our  moral  laws.  1.  A  stranger  in  regard  to 
marriage.  Then  thou  hast  no  right  to  her.  2.  A  stranger  in  regard  to  carriage. 
Thou  canst  not  look  for  any  good  respect  from  her.  III.  The  false  woman  is  a. 
FLATTERER.  1.  The  difference  between  her  words  and  her  deeds  prove  it.  She 
speaks  like  a  friend,  and  acts  like  an  enemy.  2.  The  difference  between  her  first 
and  her  last  words  proves  it.  She  will  surely  turn  against  thee  when  thy  money  is 
spent.    She  wUl  sink  thee  with  fair  words.    (Ibid.) 

Ver.  7.  A  young  man  void  of  understanding:. — A  youth  void  of  understanding : — 
Solomon  was  pre-eminently  a  student  of  character.  His  forte  lay  in  the  direction 
of  moral  philosophy,  in  the  sense  of  the  philosophy  of  morals.  I.  The  special 
PERIL  OF  GREAT  CITIES.  Humau  uatuie  remains  the  same  in  every  age.  The 
descriptions  of  the  temptations  that  assailed  the  youth  of  Jerusalem  and  Tyre 
answers  precisely  to  what  we  see  in  our  own  day.  Therefore  the  counsels  and 
warnings  of  the  ancient  sage  are  as  valuable  and  fitting  as  ever.  The  vastness  and 
multitudinousness  of  our  modern  cities  provide  a  secrecy  which  is  congenial  to 
vice.  In  all  great  towns  solicitations  to  vice  abound  as  they  do  not  elsewhere. 
Every  passion  has  a  tempter  lying  in  wait  for  it.  Whatever  be  your  temperament 
or  constitution,  a  snare  will  be  skiKuUy  laid  to  entrap  you.  Vice  clothes  itself  here 
in  its  most  pleasing  attire,  and  not  seldom  appears  even  under  the  garb  of  virtue. 
n.  The  evil  of  late  hours.  The  devil,  like  the  beast  of  prey,  stalks  forth  when 
the  sun  goes  dovra.  Night  is  the  time  for  unlawful  amusements  and  mad  con- 
vivialities and  lascivious  revelry.  Now  Jezebel  spreads  her  net,  and  Delilah  shears 
the  locks  of  Samson.  Young  men,  take  it  kindly  when  I  bid  you  beware  of  late 
hours.  Your  health  forbids  it ;  your  principles  forbid  it ;  your  moral  sense  forbids 
it ;  your  safety  forbids  it.  Purity  loves  the  light.  Late  hours  have  proved  many  a 
young  man's  ruin.  III.  The  danger  of  foolish  company.  "Simple"  in  the  Book 
of  Proverbs  means  silly,  frivolous,  idle,  abandoned.  You  could  almost  predict  with 
sertainty  the  future  of  one  who  selected  such  society.     The  ruin  of  most  young  mfi 

13 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tn. 

is  due  to  bad  company.  It  is  commonly  the  finest  natures  that  are  first  pounced 
upon.  The  good-hearted,  amiable  fellow,  with  open  countenance  and  warm  heart 
and  generous  disposition,  is  at  once  seized  by  the  vermin  of  the  pit,  and  poisoned 
with  every  kind  of  pollution.  Take  care  with  whom  you  associate.  There  are 
men  who  will  fawn  upon  you,  and  flatter  you,  and  call  you  good  company,  and 
patronise  you  wonderfully,  and  take  you  anywhere  you  wish  to  go  ;  and — allow  you 
to  pay  all  expenses.  As  a  rule,  a  companion  of  loose  character  is  the  most  mean 
and  selfish  of  creatures.  "  Void  of  understanding."  Understanding  is  more  than 
wisdom,  more  than  knowledge ;  it  is  both  and  something  besides.  It  is  a  mind 
well-balanced  by  the  grace  of  God ;  it  is  the  highest  form  of  common-sense, 
sanctified  by  a  genuine  piety.  No  man's  understanding  can  be  called  thoroughly 
sound  until  it  has  been  brought  under  the  power  of  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus. 
Your  only  security  against  the  perils  of  the  city,  of  the  dark  night,  and  of  evil 
company,  your  only  safety  amid  the  lusts  that  attack  the  flesh,  and  the  scepticisms 
that  assail  the  mind,  is  a  living  faith  in  God,  a  spiritual  union  with  Christ.  {J. 
Thain  Davidson,  D.I).)  A  beacon  to  young  men  : — Now  reason  is  the  glory  of 
man.  It  is  a  light  within  the  soul  by  which  he  is  exalted  above  the  brutes  that 
perish.  And  yet  God  often  charges  men  with  displaying  less  judgment  than  the 
mere  animal  creatures  (Isa.  i.  3).  I.  The  evidences  of  this  state.  How  can 
we  know  with  certainty  the  young  who  are  void  of  understanding  ?  1.  Those  who 
throw  off  the  restraints  and  counsels  of  their  parents  and  friends.  When  counsel 
and  supervision  are  most  needed  they  are  rejected,  and  who  so  fit  to  guide  and  counsel 
as  the  parent?  2.  Those  who  become  the  companion  of  the  foolish  and  wicked. 
No  other  influence  will  be  so  disastrous  on  our  highest  interests  as  that  of  evQ 
companionship.  It  wUl  insidiously  undermine  every  good  principle.  3.  Those 
who  disregard  the  opinions  of  the  wise  and  good  around  them.  4.  Those  who 
neglect  the  institutions  of  religion.  The  atmosphere  of  religious  ordinances  is  that  of 
health  and  life  to  every  virtue  and  grace  of  the  soul.  By  neglecting  Divine  ordinances 
and  services,  the  heart  and  mind  run  fallow.  5.  Those  who  yield  themselves  up 
to  sensual  gratifications.  The  text  refers  to  the  ensnaring  woman.  "  For  at  the 
window  of  my  house  I  looked  through  my  casement,"  &c.  How  fearful  the  result! 
Money,  reputation,  health,  mind,  morals,  life,  and  the  soul,  all  sacrificed !  IL  Its 
EVIL  BESULTS.  1.  The  morally  evil  condition  of  the  youths  themselves.  Here  are 
powers  perverted — talents  prostituted — sin  and  misery  increased.  2.  The  pernicious 
influence  they  exert  on  others.  Every  such  youth  has  his  young  friends  and 
relations,  all  of  whom  may  be  corrupted  by  his  conduct.  3.  The  eternal  misery  to 
which  they  are  hastening.  III.  The  only  remedy.  1.  Immediate  and  genuine 
repentance.  Prompt  consideration.  2.  There  must  be  the  yielding  of  the  heart  to 
Christ.  Christ  alone  can  open  the  blind  eyes,  expel  the  foul  spirit,  renew  the 
heart.  3.  By  the  regulation  of  the  life  by  the  Word  of  God.  4.  Union  to,  and 
fellowship  with,  God's  people.  {J.  Bums,  D.D.)  The  ignorance  and  folly  of  the 
man  of  pleasure  : — It  is  a  mortifying  truth  that  that  age,  which  of  all  others  stands 
most  in  need  of  advice,  thinks  itself  the  least  in  want  of  it.  Youth  is  warm  even  in 
its  desires,  hasty  in  its  conceptions,  and  confident  in  its  hopes.  Talk  to  it  when  its 
passions  are  high,  or  when  pleasure  is  glittering  around  it,  it  will  in  all  likelihood 
look  upon  you  as  come  to  torment  it  before  its  time,  and  will  none  of  your  reproof. 
The  particular  error  of  youth  is  its  pursuit  of  licentious  pleasures.  This  writer 
gives  us  an  interesting  picture  of  a  young  man,  confident  in  his  own  wisdom,  and 
relying  on  his  own  strength,  met  by  a  character  whom  the  world  has  denominated 
Pleasure.  He  paints  to  us  the  charms  which  she  displays  for  his  seduction, 
describes  the  flattery  of  her  tongue,  the  crafty  wiliness  of  her  allurements,  and 
shows  us  his  simple  heart  won  by  her  deceptions,  and  following  her  guilty  call. 
I.  The  man  of  pleasure  betrays  an  utter  want  of  acquaintance  with  his  ow» 
BEING.  It  is  among  the  foremost  arguments  in  support  of  this  kind  of  life  that  it  is 
only  in  conformity  with  that  nature  which  God  has  given  us.  But  your  nature,  as 
long  as  it  is  without  the  renovation  of  the  Eternal  Spirit,  cannot  possibly  be  made 
your  guide.  In  reality  full  of  diseases,  the  man  imagines  himself  in  perfect  health. 
Bound  in  misery  and  iron,  he  dreams  that  he  is  happy  and  at  liberty.  In  following 
his  carnal  desires  a  man  is  surely  "  void  of   understanding."    II.  The  man   of 

PLEASURE    SHOWS   HIS   IGNORANCE   AND    FOLLY   IN   HIS  WANT   OF   ACQUAINTANCE  WITH    HIS 

DUTIES  IN  THIS  WORLD.  The  sius  of  Impurity  are  doubly  sinful,  inasmuch  as  they 
incapacitate  the  follower  of  them  from  those  exertions  to  which  he  is  bound  in 
whatever  state  of  life  it  hath  pleased  God  to  call  him.  The  libertine  imagines  that 
his  duties  are  easily  reconcilable  with  his  pursuits  of  pleasure ;  and  in  few  cases 


CHAP,  TO.]  PROVERBS.  179 

does  he  show  himself  more  void  of  anderstanding.  It  is  their  direct  tendency  to 
enervate  the  spirit ;  to  absorb  the  native  vigour  of  the  mind ;  to  extinguish 
generous  ambition,  that  incitement  to  worthy  deeds ;  and  to  drown  all  in  dissipation, 
indolence,  and  trifling.  The  pagans  made  the  temple  of  honour  lie  through  the 
temple  of  virtue.  III.  The  libektine  snows  his  want  of  understanding  in  his 
IGNORANCE  OR  DEFIANCE  OF  OMNIPOTENCE.  Of  all  the  instanccs  of  want  of  wisdom,  a 
disregard  of  the  injunctions  of  Almighty  God  is  surely  the  most  absurd,  as  well  as 
the  most  wicked.  And  it  never  can  be  confined  to  yourself,  but  involves  often  the 
misery,  and  always  the  guilt,  of  others.  The  man  bent  on  pleasure  seldom  con- 
siders whom  he  offends,  whom  he  injures,  whose  confidence  he  abuses,  whose 
innocence  he  betrays,  what  friendship  he  violates,  or  what  enmities  he  creates. 
Your  first  vice  might  arise  from  the  seduction  of  bad  companions,  but  a  continuance 
of  it  becomes  your  own  sin.  IV.  The  libertine  acts  in  opposition  to  his  own 
CONVICTION.  There  is  always  an  inward  monitor  whispering  against  him.  Eouse, 
then.  Break  from  the  infatuating  circle.  No  longer  miscaU  the  things  of  this 
world.  {G.  Mathew,  M.A.)  The  young  man  void  of  understanding  : — Under- 
Btanding  or  reason  is  the  glory  of  human  nature.  It  is  the  "  candle  of  the  Lord," 
to  light  us  on  our  destiny.  Where  this  is  not,  you  have  a  traveller  on  a  devious 
path  without  light,  a  vessel  on  a  treacherous  sea  without  rudder  or  compass.  Who 
is  the  young  man  void  of  understanding  ?  1.  One  who  pays  more  attention  to  his 
outward  appearance  than  to  his  inner  character.  He  sacrifices  the  jewel  for  the 
casket.  2.  One  who  seeks  happiness  without  rather  than  within.  But  the  well  of 
true  joy  must  be  found  in  the  heart,  or  nowhere.  3.  One  who  identifies  greatness 
with  circumstances  rather  than  with  character.  But  true  greatness  is  in  the  soul, 
and  nowhere  else.  4.  One  who  is  guided  more  by  the  dictates  of  his  own  nature 
than  by  the  counsels  of  experience.  He  acts  from  the  suggestions  of  his  own 
immature  judgment.  He  is  his  own  master,  and  will  be  taught  by  no  one.  5.  One 
who  lives  in  show  and  ignores  realities.  He  who  lives  in  these  pursuits  and 
pleasures  which  are  in  vogue  for  the  hour,  and  neglects  the  great  realities  of  the 
Boul  and  eternity,  is  "  void  of  understanding."  [Homilist.)  A  simple  youth  void 
of  understanding  : — The  young  man  Solomon  had  in  mind  perhaps  thought  himself 
wise,  but  in  the  opinion  of  the  sober  and  virtuous  part  of  mankind,  he  was  one  of 
the  most  infatuated  of  men.  When  may  a  young  man  be  spoken  of  as  "  void  of 
miderstanding  "  ?  1.  When  he  suffers  his  mind  to  remain  unacquainted  with  the 
great  principles  of  religion.  2.  When  he  follows  the  dictates  of  his  own  corrupt 
heart.  How  shall  we  account  for  all  that  wickedness  which  abounds  in  the  world 
if  there  is  no  bad  principle  from  which  it  breeds  ?  Take  corruption  out  of  the 
heart,  and  this  world  would  become  a  paradise.  Simple  souls,  instead  of  checking 
the  evil  principle  within  them,  rather  give  it  the  greatest  indulgence.  3.  When  he 
throws  himself  in  the  way  of  temptation.  Snares  abound.  There  is  hardly  a  step 
in  our  way  in  which  we  do  not  run  some  hazard  of  stumbling.  Have  we  not  often 
complied  when  we  ought  to  have  resisted  ?  Sin  is  sometimes  so  artfully  disguised 
that  it  loses  its  deformity,  and  we  are  insensibly  drawn  into  the  commission  of  it. 
Is  it  not,  then,  wise  and  prudent  to  keep  at  a  distance  and  not  to  tamper  with 
temptation  ?  The  old  serpent  is  too  cunning  and  subtle  for  us,  and  if  we  throw 
ourselves  in  his  way  we  must  fall.  4.  When  he  has  not  resolution  to  withstand 
the  allurements  with  which  he  may  be  surrounded.  We  can  hardly  hope  to  escape 
alliuement  altogether.  AU  depends  on  our  yielding  to  or  resisting  first  enticements. 
And  what  avails  the  most  enlightened  understanding  if  we  have  not  firmness  to 
follow  its  dictates  ?  5.  When  he  does  not  hearken  to  the  admonitions  of  those  who 
are  older  and  more  experienced  than  himself.  Vanity  and  self-conceit  are  too 
natural  to  young  minds,  and  numbers  have  been  led  away  by  them.  Positive  and 
headstrong,  they  refuse  to  be  admonished,  and  scorn  to  be  controlled.  Hence  they 
run  headlong  into  vice,  and  involve  themselves  in  misery.  6.  When  he  flatters 
himself  with  seeing  long  life  and  many  years.  This  is  very  natural  to  youth.  But 
there  is  nothing  more  vain  and  uncertain.  Can  there  be  a  greater  defect  of  under- 
standing than  to  flatter  one's  self  with  what  we  may  never  enjoy  ?  (D.  John- 
tton,  D.D.)  A  young  man  void  of  understanding : — 1.  One  who  makes  light  of 
parental  restraints  and  counsels.  No  young  man  is  walking  in  safe  paths  who  is 
engaged  in  pursuits  or  pleasures  which  a  wise  father  or  a  tender  mother  would  be 
mortified  and  grieved  to  see  him  mixed  up  with.  2.  One  who  neglects  the  culti- 
vation of  his  mind.  If  knowledge  is  power,  ignorance  is  weakness.  The  mind 
must  be  carefully  trained  in  order  that  the  soul  may  fulfil  her  destiny  upon  earth, 
and  be  prepared  for  a  more  glorious  existence  hereafter.     3.  One  who  is  content  to 


J80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip,  tix. 


live  an  idle  and  aimless  life.  To  spend  the  golden  hoars  of  existence  in  irresolution 
and  idleness,  with  no  definite  purpose,  betrays,  as  much  as  anything  could  do,  the 
lack  of  good  sense.  4  One  who  chooses  his  bosom  companions  from  the  ranks  of 
the  thoughtless  and  the  profane.  We  are  naturally  social  beings,  and  seek  for 
pleasure  in  ttie  company  of  others.  5.  One  who  yields  to  the  enticements  of  foUy 
and  wickedness.  As  soon  as  he  reaches  the  point  when  he  is  indifferent  to  the 
opinion  of  the  wise  and  the  good,  his  case  may  well  be  set  down  as  desperate.  Tho 
young  are  always  surrounded  by  temptations,  and  every  evil  thought  which  ia 
allowed  a  resting-place  in  the  mind  vitiates  and  corrodes  the  fibres  of  the  soul,  and 
every  sinful  deed  unnerves  the  arm  and  paralyses  the  essential  power  of  manhood. 
6.  One  who  makes  light  of  religion.  Religion  never  encouraged  anybody  to  be 
indolent  and  improvident;  never  led  him  into  the  haunts  of  vice;  never  wasted  his 
substance  in  riotous  living;  never  dragged  a  single  victim  to  the  prison  or  the 
gaUows.  All  its  offices  in  the  world  have  been  elevating  and  beneficent.  Unbelief 
is  not  a  misfortune,  but  it  is  the  sin,  the  damning  sin,  of  the  world.  Men  first  do 
wrong  and  then  believe  wrong  in  order  to  escape  from  its  consequences.  True 
religion  will  make  you  abhor  sin,  and  draw  you  to  Christ,  the  Redeemer ;  it  will 
strengthen  you  for  duty,  and  nerve  you  for  endurance.  It  will  give  songs  in  the 
night,  and  through  the  grave  and  gate  of  death  it  will  brighten  your  pathway  to 
eternal  glory.     {John  N.  Norton.) 

Ver.  8.  He  went  the  way  to  her  house. — Oeeasiont  of  $in : — I.  Maitt  occasions  ov 
8IN  PRESENT  THEMSiLVES  uNLOOKiD  FOB.  1.  All  places  afford  temptatioHS.  2.  All 
times  have  theirs.  3.  All  things  afford  it.  4.  So  do  all  conditions,  all  actions, 
and  all  persons.  Therefore  we  need  to  keep  a  constant  watch,  since  we  are  not 
secure  in  any  place,  time,  or  condition.  Then  suspect  all  things  with  a  holy 
suspicion.  II.  It  is  danqebocs  comino  niar  bad  houses.  1.  Much  danger  may 
come  from  within.  2.  Much  danger  from  without ;  for  ruffians  and  quarrellers 
haunt  such  places.  3.  Judgment  may  be  feared  from  heaven.  III.  Idleness  is 
THE  NURSE  OF  WANTONNBSs.  1.  BecEUse  uaturc  is  corrupt,  and  of  all  sins  most 
inclines  to  wantonness.  2.  The  soul  is  very  active  both  in  our  waking  and 
sleeping,  and  if  it  move  us  not  to  good  it  will  move  us  to  bad  actions.  3.  Because 
labour  removes  the  rubs  in  the  way  of  wantonness.  Spiritual  duties  and  labour  in 
our  vocation  take  the  heart,  eyes,  and  ears  off  from  wanton  objects.  The  heart  set 
at  liberty  by  idleness  falls  upon  them  with  greediness.  4.  God's  judgment  follows 
idleness  to  give  such  over  to  wantonness.  Take  heed  of  idleness.  Many  think  it 
either  no  sin  or  a  light  one.     {Francit  Taylor,  B.D.) 

Ver.  16.  I  have  decked  my  bed  with  coverings  of  tapestry.— .4  luxurious  bed  : — 
"  I  have  exhausted  the  toil  of  myself  and  bought  the  toil  of  others  to  increase  the 
luxury  of  my  rest.  Come  and  see  the  courtly  elegance  with  which  my  bed  is 
decked.  Long  and  weary  days  have  I  laboured  at  the  counting-house,  at  the 
workshop,  or  at  the  desk.  And  now  my  bed  is  decked.  Come  and  look.  Place 
yourself  at  my  chamber  window  and  tell  me  what  you  see  now  and  what  you  will 
see  next  year."  1.  "  I  see  thee  lying  on  this  bed  which  thou  hast  decked,  fretful,  rest- 
less, and  miserable.  Thou  hast  found  out  too  late  that  enjoymont  is  more  painful 
than  expectation.  2.  I  see  thee  dying  on  the  same  bed.  May  God  grant  thee  mercy ! 
but  if  He  does  it  is  in  spite  of  the  luxury  with  which  thou  art  surrounded.  3.  I  see 
thee  lying  in  another  bed.  It  is  narrow,  and  though  well  quilted  and  smoothed, 
yet  it  has  no  room  for  the  weary  body  to  turn,  or  for  the  feverish  head  to  lift 
itself."  "  I  have  decked  my  bed  with  peace.  And  though  its  coverings  are  but 
scanty,  and  though  sorrow  and  desolation  have  taken  their  seats  by  its  side,  yet 
peace  remains.  And  there  is  one  like  unto  the  Son  of  Man  whose  gracious  face 
ever  shines  on  me  from  before  this,  my  poor  resting-place,  so  that  though  deserted 
and  wretched,  His  love  gives  me  a  comfort  this  world  can  neither  give  nor  take 
away.     Come  and  see."     "  I  have  come,  oh,  saint  of  God  I  and  I  see  three  sights. 

1.  Destitution  and  pain  are  indeed  about  thee  as  thou  Uest  on  that  rude  couch ; 
but  peace  and  love  reign  there,  and  who  shall  prevail  against  the  Lord's  elect  ? 

2.  I  see  thee  in  thy  dying  hour.  Deserted  and  miserable  thou  mayest  be,  but 
angelic  forms  are  hovering  over  thee,  and  I  hear  a  voice  speaking  as  man  can 
never  speak,  saying,  '  Come,  thou  beloved  of  My  Father ! '  3.  I  see  thee  in  thy 
narrow  bed,  but  I  see  something  else  behind.  For  I  see  that  great  city,  the  holy 
Jerusalem,  having  the  glory  of  God.  And  I  hear  a  voice  there  saying,  '  Who  is 
this  who  is  arrayed  in  white  robes  ?  and  whence  came  he  ?  '    And  I  say  unto  him. 


•BAP.  vn.]  PROVERBS.  181 

'  Sir,  thon  knowest.'  And  the  voice  says,  '  He  is  one  of  them  that  came  out 
of  great  tribulation,' "  Ac.     (Christian  Treiuury.) 

Ver.  21.  With  her  mtioh  fair  speech  she  caused  him  to  yleld.^  -Good  and  bad 
speech : — There  is  a  force  in  words  which  it  is  often  almost  impossible  to  resist. 
Good  words  have  a  wonderful  virtue  in  them  to  work  upon  the  mind,  and  a  great 
part  of  the  good  which  we  are  called  to  do  in  the  world  is  to  be  accomplished 
by  means  of  that  little  member,  the  tongue.  But  corrupt  minds  are  often  found  to 
have  greater  intelligence  in  persuading  men  to  sin  because  human  nature  is 
depraved,  and  needs  only  a  temptation  to  draw  men  to  the  practice  of  the  worst  of 
evils.  No  words  have  greater  force  in  them  to  persuade  men  to  sin  than  the 
flatteries  of  the  strange  woman,  and  therefore  the  apostle  Paul,  who  directs  us  to 
strive  against  sin,  calls  loudly  to  us  to  flee  youthful  lusts.  Such  lusts  can  scarcely 
be  conquered  but  by  flight,  because  the  temptations  to  them,  when  they  meet  with 
a  simple  mind  and  an  impure  heart,  are  like  sparks  of  fire  lighting  upon  stubble 
fully  dry.  The  force  that  is  in  the  tongue  of  the  strange  woman  will  not  excuse 
the  deluded  youth ;  for  his  yielding  to  her  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  depravity 
of  his  own  heart,  which  inclines  him  to  prefer  the  advice  of  a  bad  woman  to  the 
counsels  of  the  Supreme  and  Eternal  Wisdom.    (G.  Lawton.) 

Yer.  22.  As  a  fool  to  the  correction  of  the  stocks. — Slaughter  of  young  men : — 
1.  We  are  apt  to  blame  young  men  for  being  destroyed,  when  we  ought  to  blame 
the  influences  that  destroy  them.  Society  slaughters  a  great  many  young  men  by 
the  behest,  "  You  must  keep  up  appearances."  Our  young  men  are  growing  up  in  a 
depraved  state  of  commerciaJ  ethics,  and  I  want  to  warn  them  against  being 
slaughtered  on  the  sharp  edges  of  debt.  For  the  sake  of  your  own  happiness,  for 
the  sake  of  your  good  morals,  for  the  sake  of  your  immortal  soul,  and  for  God's 
sake,  young  man,  as  far  as  possible  keep  out  of  debt,  2.  Many  young  men  are 
slaughtered  through  irreUgion.  Take  away  a  young  man's  religion,  and  you  make 
him  the  prey  of  evil.  If  you  want  to  destroy  a  young  man's  morals  take  his  Bible 
away.  You  can  do  it  by  caricaturing  his  reverence  for  Scripture.  Young  man, 
take  care  of  yourself.  There  is  no  class  of  persons  that  so  stirs  my  sympathies  as 
young  men  in  great  cities.  Not  quite  enough  salary  to  live  on,  and  all  the 
temptations  that  come  from  that  deficit.  Unless  Almighty  God  help  them  they 
will  all  go  under.  Sin  pays  well  neither  in  this  life  nor  in  the  next,  but  right 
thinking,  right  believing,  and  right  acting  will  take  you  in  safety  through  this 
life  and  in  transport  through  the  next.    (T.  De  Witt  Taimage.) 

Ver.  23.  Till  a  dart  Btrike  through  his  lirer. — The  gospel  of  health : — Solomon 
had  noticed,  either  in  vivisection  or  in  post-mortem,  what  awful  attacks  sin  and 
dissipation  make  upon  the  liver,  until  the  fiat  of  Almighty  God  bids  the  soul 
and  body  separate.  A  javelin  of  retribution,  not  glancing  off  or  making  a  slight 
wound,  but  piercing  it  from  side  to  side  "  till  a  dart  strike  through  his  liver." 
Galen  and  Hippocrates  ascribe  to  the  liver  the  most  of  the  world's  moral  depression, 
and  the  word  melancholy  means  black  bile.  Let  Christian  people  avoid  the 
mistake  that  they  are  all  wrong  with  God  because  they  suffer  from  depression 
of  spirits.  Oftentimes  the  trouble  is  wholly  due  to  physical  conditions.  The 
difference  in  physical  conditions  makes  things  look  so  differently.  Another 
practical  use  of  this  subject  is  for  the  young.  The  theory  is  abroad  that  they  must 
first  sow  their  wild  oats  and  then  Michigan  wheat.  Let  me  break  the  delusion. 
Wild  oats  are  generally  sown  in  the  liver,  and  they  can  never  be  pulled  up.  In 
after-life,  after  years  of  dissipation,  you  may  have  your  heart  changed,  but  religion 
does  not  change  the  liver.    God  forgives,  but  outraged  physical  law  never.     (Ibid. ) 

Yer.  24.  Hearken  unto  me  now  therefore,  0  ye  children. — On  impurity : — 
Cicero  says,  "  There  is  not  a  more  pernicious  evil  to  man  than  the  lust  of  sensual 
pleasure ;  the  fertile  source  of  every  detestable  crime,  and  the  peculiar  enemy  of 
the  Divine  and  immortal  souL"  This  is  true  of  all  sensual  pleasures  immoderately 
pursued  and  gratified  beyond  the  demands  of  reason  and  of  nature.    I.  How 

CONTKADICTORY  THE  VICE  OF  IMPCBITT  IS  TO  THE  GREAT  LAWS  OF  NATURE  AND  Of 

REASON,  OF  socrKTT  AND  RELIGION.  1,  It  is  in  Opposition  to  the  first  law  of  our 
nature,  which  enjoins  the  due  subordination  and  subjection  of  our  inferior  appetites 
and  passions  to  the  superior  and  ruling  principle  of  the  soul — that  principle  which 


182  TEE  BIBLICAi.  ILLUSTBATOR.  [cmr.  m. 

distingmshes  man  from  the  animal  creation.  What  can  be  so  degrading  to  onr 
nature  as  to  reverse  this  first  and  important  law  by  giving  the  reins  of  dominion  to 
an  inferior  and  merely  animal  appetite,  implanted  in  us,  as  a  slave,  to  serve  the 
purposes  of  our  temporal  existence  ?  Appetites  are  wholly  of  sense ;  with  them, 
abstractly  considered,  the  mind  has  no  concern.  But  if  indulged  beyond  due 
bounds,  they  darken  the  mind  and  absorb  all  its  noblest  faculties.  2.  It 
opposes  the  laws  of  reason,  whose  peculiar  office  it  is  to  direct  our  conduct  and 
form  our  manners  in  such  a  way  as  becomes  the  rank  and  station  we  bear  in 
the  universe.  What  folly,  then,  to  indulge  a  vice  and  pursue  a  conduct  which 
is  at  once  most  opposite  to,  and  most  derogatory  from,  the  honour  and  the  dictates 
of  reason !  And  can  anything  be  more  so  than  the  unrestrained  gratification  of 
impure  desires,  with  which  reason  is  so  far  from  concurring,  that  men  are  obliged 
to  lull  its  keen  remonstrances  in  the  tumult  of  passion  and  the  hurry  of  sensual 
pursuits?  3.  It  opposes  the  laws  of  society — those  universal  laws  of  justice, 
honour,  and  virtue,  upon  which  all  society  is  founded,  and  upon  the  due  observation 
whereof  the  happiness  and  the  permanence  of  society  depends.  Nothing  conduces 
more  to  corrupt  the  morals  and  deprave  the  minds  of  youth  than  the  unrestrained 
gratification  of  impure  and  lustful  desires ;  nothing  conduces  more  to  spread  a 
general  corruption  of  manners ;  nothing  more  affects  and  harms  the  nearest  and 
dearest  interests  of  men ;  nothing  introduces  more  distressful  injuries ;  and  nothing 
is  a  greater  prejudice  or  discouragement  to  just  and  honourable  marriage.  4.  It 
opposes  the  Divine  laws.  The  Divine  instructions  inform  man  of  the  true  state  of 
his  nature,  of  his  dignity,  fall,  and  possible  restoration.  Man  is  informed  that  his 
triumph  is  sure  and  his  reward  inestimable  if,  superior  to  sense  and  to  appetite,  he 
improves  the  Godlike  principle  of  reason  and  virtue  in  him  and  purifies  himself, 
even  as  his  God,  his  great  pattern  and  exemplar,  is  pure.  There  are  some  con- 
siderations peculiar  to  the  Christian  religion,  drawn  from  the  "  Inhabitation  of 
God's  Holy  Spirit  in  the  bodies  of  believers  as  His  temples,"  and  from  their  being 
incorporated  by  faith  as  living  members  into  the  pure  and  immaculate  body  of 
Jesus  Christ.  Can  men  be  so  senseless  as  to  defile  this  holy  temple  ?  What  can 
the  gratification  of  youthful  lusts  bestow,  adequate  to  the  loss,  to  the  misery  which 
it  wiU  assuredly  occasion  ?  Neither  the  laws  of  God  nor  of  man  are  founded  in 
fancy  or  caprice.  No  precept  is  imposed  with  a  view  to  command  or  prohibit  aught 
that  was  unessential  to  their  well-being.    II.  How  inimical  thb  vice  or  impubitt 

IS  TO  THE    BEST   INTERESTS  OF  OURSELVES  AND  OF  OUR  NEIGHBOURS  !       What  CVer  yOUth 

would  wish  to  arrive  at  true  honour  and  true  happiness  must  scorn  with  a  noble 
fortitude  the  allurements  of  the  harlot  pleasure,  and  implicitly  follow  the  counsels 
of  pure  virtue.  The  practice  of  impurity  never  can,  never  did  or  will,  produce 
aught  but  thorns  and  briars,  "mischiefs  "  and  "  miseries,"  to  others  and  to  ourselves. 
One  peculiar  and  aggravating  circumstance  of  malignity  in  this  vice  is  that  the 
perpetration  of  it  involves  the  ruin  of  two  souls.  You  cannot  be  singly  guilty. 
Have  pity  on  yourselves !  Have  pity  on  the  companions  of  your  sin !  The 
seductions  of  innocence  can  never  be  adequate  to  the  end  proposed.  It  is  a  com- 
plicated guilt.  All  gratifying  of  lustful  passions  must  be  in  a  high  degree  injurious 
to  their  fellow-creatures,  and  particularly  to  the  unhappy  partners  of  their  guilt. 
And  the  vice  of  impurity  is  peculiarly  noxious  and  prejudicial  to  ourselves,  to  the 
mind,  body,  estate,  and  reputation.     {W.  Dodd,  LL.D.) 

Ver.  27.  Her  house  Is  the  way  to  helL — The  way  to  hell : — An  energetic 
expression.  It  is  not  the  place  itself,  but  the  way  to  it.  In  this  case  what  ia 
the  difference  between  the  way  and  the  destination  ?  The  one  is  as  the  other, 
BO  much  so  that  he  who  has  entered  the  way  may  reckon  upon  it  as  a  fatal 
certainty  that  he  will  accomplish  the  journey  and  be  plunged  into  "  the  chamber  of 
death."  No  man  means  to  go  the  whole  length.  A  man's  will  is  not  destroyed  in 
an  instant ;  it  is  taken  from  him,  as  it  were,  little  by  little,  and  almost  imper- 
ceptibly ;  he  imagines  that  he  is  as  strong  as  ever,  and  says  that  he  will  go  out  and 
shake  himself  as  at  other  times,  not  knowing  that  the  spirit  of  might  has  gone 
from  him.  Is  there  any  object  on  earth  more  pathetic  than  that  of  a  man  who 
has  lost  his  power  of  resistance  to  evil,  and  is  dragged  on,  an  unresisting  victim, 
whithersoever  the  spirit  of  perdition  may  desire  to  take  him  ?  It  is  true  that  the 
young  man  can  plead  the  power  of  fascination ;  all  that  music,  and  colour,  and 
blandishment,  and  flattery  can  do  has  been  done :  the  cloven  foot  has  been 
most  successfully  concealed ;  the  speech  has  been  all  garden,  and  paradise,  and 
BweetnesB,  and  joy ;  the  word  hell,  or  perdition,  has  not  been  so  much  as  men- 


CHAP.  Tin.]  PROVERBS.  183 

tioned.  This  is  what  is  meant  by  seduction :  leading  a  man  out  of  himself,  and 
from  himself,  onward  and  onward,  by  carefully  graded  processes,  until  fascination 
has  accomplished  its  work,  and  bound  the  consenting  soul  in  eternal  bondage. 
{J.  Farker,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  Vm. 


Vbb.  1.  Doth  not  Wisdom,  cry  ? — The  personification  of  Witdom : — Whatever  may 
have  been  the  satisfaction  experienced  by  devout  minds  in  reading  this  chapter,  as 
if  it  contained  the  words  of  Christ  and  evidence  of  His  pre-existent  Divinity,  I  dare 
not  withhold  what  I  believe  to  be  the  true  principle  of  interpretation.  The 
objections  to  its  meaning  Christ,  or  the  Word,  ere  He  became  flesh,  when  "  in  the 
beginning  He  was  with  God,  and  was  God,"  are  to  my  mind  quite  insuperable. 
For  example — 1.  It  should  be  noticed  that  the  passage  is  not  so  applied  in  any  part 
of  the  New  Testament.  Had  any  New  Testament  writer  expressly  applied  any 
part  of  the  chapter  to  the  Son  of  God,  this  would  have  been  a  key  which  we  could 
not  have  been  at  liberty  to  refuse.  2.  Wisdom  here  is  a  female  personage.  All 
along  this  is  the  case.  Now  under  such  a  view  the  Scriptures  nowhere  else,  in  any 
of  their  figurative  representations  of  "  the  Christ,"  ever  thus  describe  or  introduce 
Him,  3.  Wisdom  does  not  appear  intended  as  a  personal  designation,  inasmuch 
as  it  is  associated  with  various  other  terms,  of  synonymous,  or  at  least  of  corre- 
sponding, import.  4.  The  whole  is  a  bold  and  striking  personification  of  the 
attribute  of  wisdom,  as  subsisting  in  Deity  (see  ver  12 :  "I  wisdom  dwell  with 
prudence,  and  find  out  knowledge  of  witty  inventions  ").  5.  Things  which  are  true 
of  a  Divine  attribute  would  naturally  be  susceptible  of  application  to  a  Divine 
person.     (R.  Wardlaw.) 

Ver.  2.  She  standeth  in  the  top  of  high  plaees. — The  purpose  and  range  of 
Wisdom  : — She  sets  up  her  tower  everywhere,  and  speaks  to  all  mankind.  That  is 
the  true  wisdom.  When  we  come  to  understand  the  purpose  and  range  of  true 
wisdom,  our  business  will  be  to  see  how  many  people  we  can  get  in,  not  how  many 
we  can  keep  out.  Sometimes  we  shall  endeavour  to  enlarge  the  gate,  if  haply  we 
may  bring  some  one  in  who  otherwise  would  be  kept  outside.  Wisdom  does  not 
whisper;  she  cries  :  she  puts  forth  her  voice  ;  she  asks  the  assistance  of  elevation  ; 
where  men  are  found  in  greatest  number  she  is  found  in  greatest  activity. 
Universality  is  a  proof  of  the  gospel.  Any  gospel  that  comes  down  to  play  the 
trick  of  eclecticism  ought  to  be  branded,  and  dismissed,  and  never  inquired  for. 
We  want  ministers  that  will  speak  to  the  world,  in  all  its  populations,  climes, 
languages,  and  differences  of  civihsation  and  culture.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver,  4.  Unto  you,  0  men,  I  call;  and  my  voice  is  to  the  sons  of  man. — God 
revealed  in  the  universe  and  in  humanity  : — The  truth,  which  can  guide  us  to 
perfection  and  to  happiness,  is  teaching  us  always  and  everywhere.  God  surrounds 
us  constantly  with  His  instruction.  The  universal  presence  of  Truth  is  the  subject 
before  us.  Wisdom  is  omnipresent.  The  greatest  truths  meet  us  at  every  turn. 
God  is  on  every  side,  not  only  by  His  essential  invisible  presence,  but  by  His 
manifestations  of  power  and  perfection.  We  fail  to  see  Him,  not  from  want  of 
light,  but  from  want  of  spiritual  vision.  In  saying  that  the  great  truths  of  religion 
are  shining  all  about  and  within  us,  I  am  not  questioning  the  worth  of  the  Christian 
revelation.  The  Christian  religion  concentrates  the  truth  diffused  through  the 
universe,  and  pours  it  upon  the  mind  with  solar  lustre.  We  cannot  find  language 
to  express  the  worth  of  the  illumination  given  through  Jesus  Christ.  But  He 
intends,  not  that  we  should  hear  His  voice  alone,  but  that  we  should  open  our  ears 
to  the  countless  voices  of  wisdom,  virtue,  and  piety,  which  now  in  whispers,  now 
in  thunders,  issue  from  the  whole  of  nature  and  of  life.    I.  The  voice  or  Wisdom — 

THAT  is  or  MORAL  AND  RELIGIOUS  TRUTH SPEAKS    TO    US  FROM  THE  UNIVERSE.       Nature 

everywhere  testifies  to  the  infinity  of  its  Author.  It  proclaims  a  perfection 
illimitable,  unsearchable,  transcending  all  thought  and  utterance.  There  is  an 
impenetrable  mystery  in  every  action  and  force  of  the  universe  that  envelops  our 
daily  existence  with  wonder,  and  makes  sublime  the  famUiar  processes  of  the 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohat.  vm. 

commonest  arts.  How  astonishingly  does  nature  differ  in  her  modes  of  production 
from  the  works  of  human  skill.  In  nature,  vibrating  with  motion,  where  is  the 
moving-energy  ?  What  and  whence  is  that  principle  called  life — life,  that  awful 
power,  so  endlessly  various  in  the  forms  it  assumes — life  that  fills  earth,  air,  and 
sea  with  motion,  growth,  activity,  and  joy — life  that  enlivens  us — what  is  it  ?  An 
infinite  universe  is  each  moment  opened  to  our  view.  And  this  universe  is  the  sign 
and  symbol  of  infinite  power,  intelligence,  purity,  bliss,  and  love.  It  is  a  pledge 
from  the  living  God  of  boundless  and  endless  communications  of  happiness,  truth, 
and  virtue.  A  spiritual  voice  pervades  the  universe,  which  is  all  the  more  eloquent 
because  it  is  spiritual,  because  it  is  the  voice  in  which  the  All-Wise  speaks  to  all 
intelligences.     11.  The  voice  of  Wisdom  uttebs  itself  fbom  the  world  of  uobazi 

AUD  INTBLLIOENT  BEINGS,  THE  HUMANITY  OF  WHICH  WE  EACH  FOEM  A  PART.      This  topiC 

is  immense,  for  the  book  of  human  nature  has  no  end.  New  pages  are  added  to 
it  every  day  through  successive  generations.  Take  one  great  lesson,  which  all 
history  attests — that  there  is  in  human  nature  an  element  truly  Divine,  and 
worthy  of  all  reverence ;  that  the  Infinite  which  is  mirrored  in  the  outward  universe 
is  yet  more  brightly  imaged  in  the  inward  spiritual  world  or,  in  other  words,  that 
man  has  powers  and  principles,  predicting  a  destiny  to  which  no  bounds  can  be 
prescribed,  which  are  full  of  mystery,  and  even  more  incomprehensible  than  those 
revealed  through  the  material  creation.  1.  They  who  disparage  human  nature  do 
so  from  ignorance  of  one  of  the  highest  oflBces  of  wisdom.  The  chief  work  of 
Wisdom  consists  in  the  interpretation  of  signs.  The  great  aim  is  to  discern  what 
the  visible  present  signifies,  what  it  foreshows,  what  is  to  spring  from  it,  what  is 
wrapped  up  in  it  as  a  germ.  This  actual  world  may  be  defined  as  a  world  of  signs. 
What  we  see  is  but  the  sign  of  what  is  unseen.  In  life  an  event  is  the  prophetic 
sign  and  forerunner  of  other  coming  events.  Of  human  nature  we  hardly  know 
anything  but  signs.  It  has  merely  begun  its  development.  2.  In  estimating 
human  nature  most  men  rest  in  a  half-wisdom,  which  is  worse  than  ignorance. 
They  who  speak  most  contemptuously  of  man  tell  the  truth,  but  only  half  the 
truth.  Amidst  the  passions  and  selfishness  of  men  the  wise  see  another  element — 
a  Divine  element,  a  spiritual  principle.  Half- wisdom  is  the  root  of  the  most  fatal 
prejudice.  Man,  with  all  his  errors,  is  a  wonderful  being,  endowed  with  incom- 
prehensible grandeur,  worthy  of  his  own  incessant  vigilance  and  care,  worthy  to  be 
visited  with  infinite  love  from  heaven.  The  Infinite  is  imaged  in  him  more  visibly 
than  in  the  outward  universe.  This  truth  is  the  central  principle  of  Christianity, 
What  is  the  testimony  of  human  life  to  the  Divine  in  man?  Take  the  moral 
principle.  What  is  so  common  as  the  idea  of  right  ?  The  whole  of  human  life  is 
a  recognition  in  some  way  or  other  of  moral  distinctions.  And  no  nation  has 
existed,  in  any  age,  that  has  not  caught  a  glimpse  at  least  of  the  great  principles 
of  right  and  wrong.  The  right  is  higher  altogether  in  its  essential  quality  than  the 
profitable,  the  agreeable,  the  graceful.  It  is  that  which  must  be  done  though 
all  other  things  be  left  undone,  that  which  must  be  gained  though  all  else  be  lost. 
Every  human  being  is  capable  of  rectitude.  The  power  of  resisting  evil  exists  in 
every  man,  whether  he  will  exercise  it  or  not.  The  principle  of  right  in  the  human 
heart  reveals  duty  to  the  individual.  Here,  then,  we  learn  the  greatness  of  human 
nature.  This  moral  principle — the  supreme  law  in  man — is  the  law  of  the  universe. 
Then  man  and  the  highest  beings  are  essentially  of  one  order.  It  is  a  joyful 
confirmation  of  faith  thus  to  find  in  the  human  soul  plain  signatures  of  a  Divine 
principle,  to  find  faculties  allied  to  the  attributes  of  God,  faculties  beginning  to 
unfold  into  God's  image,  and  presages  of  an  immortal  life.  And  such  views  of 
human  nature  will  transform  our  modes  of  relationship,  communication,  and 
association  with  our  fellow-beings.  They  will  exalt  us  into  a  new  social  life.  They 
will  transform  our  fellowship  with  God.  How  little  we  know  ourselves  I  How 
unjust  are  we  to  ourselves !  We  need  a  new  revelation — not  of  heaven  or  hell — but 
of  the  Spirit  within  ourselves.  (W.  E.  Charming,  D.D.)  The  voice  of  Divine 
Wisdom  : — I.  It  is  a  voice  btbivino  fob  the  eab  of  all.  II.  It  is  a  voice  wobtht 
or  THE  EAR  OF  ALL.  1.  Her  communications  are  perfect.  2.  They  are  intelligible. 
3.  Precious.  4.  Exhaustless.  5.  Eectifying.  6.  Original.  What  Divine  Wisdom 
gives  is  undeniably  unborrowed.  {HomUitt.)  Christ  calling  to  men  : — There  are 
two  suitors  for  the  heart  of  man.  The  one  suggests  the  pleasures  of  sense,  the  other  the 
delights  of  religion.  The  earthly  suitor  is  the  world,  the  heavenly  suitor  is  Christ. 
I.  The  speakeb.  II.  The  object  He  has  in  view.  Our  salvation :  our  temporal 
and  eternal  happiness.  UI.  The  pebsons  to  whom  He  speaks.  Not  to  fallen 
angels,  but  to  the  song  of  men.    He  utters  His  voice  in  every  possible  variety  of 


CHAP,  vm.]  PROVERBS.  185 

place,  if  so  be  that  by  any  means  He  might  save  some.  The  self-destrnction  of  the 
impenitent.  (Charles  Clayton,  M.A.)  The  matter  of  Wisdom's  speech : — Her 
exhortation.  Her  commendation.  I.  God's  especial  care  is  fob  men.  1.  Because 
there  is  no  creature  upon  earth  more  to  be  wondered  at  than  man.  2.  Because  God 
hath  made  him  more  capable  of  instruction  than  other  creatures.  3.  Because  man 
IS  most  capable  of  getting  good  by  instruction.  4.  Because  God  sent  His  Son  into 
the  world  to  become  man  for  the  good  of  man.  U.  God  looks  that  man  should 
LEABN.  1.  God  takes  great  pains  with  him.  2.  God  is  at  great  cost  with  him. 
III.  All  soets  of  men  may  be  taught  by  Wisdom's  voice.  1.  There  is  a  capacity 
left  in  mean  men.  2.  Common  gifts  of  illumination  are  bestowed  on  mean  men, 
aa  well  as  great  ones.  It  reproves  great  men  if  they  are  ignorant ;  and  men  of 
meaner  rank  cannot  be  excused  if  they  are  ignorant.  {Francis  Taylor,  B.D.) 
Wisdom  offered  to  the  sons  of  men : — Wisdom  shows  herself  to  be  truly  wise  by 
recognising  the  different  capacities  and  qualities  of  men :  "  Unto  you,  0  men,  I 
call ;  and  my  voice  is  to  the  sons  of  man."  Children  who  are  at  school  are  accus- 
tomed to  distinguish  between  viri  and  homines — between  the  strong  and  the  weak. 
•'  Unto  you,  0  men,  I  call  " — strong,  virile,  massive — "  and  my  voice  is  to  the  sons 
of  man  " — the  lesser,  the  weaker,  the  more  limited  in  capacity,  but  men  still — and 
I  will  accommodate  my  speech  to  the  capacity  of  every  one,  for  I  have  come  to 
bring  the  world  to  the  temple  of  understanding.  Then  there  is  further  discrimina- 
tion ;  we  read  of  the  "  simple  "  and  of  the  "  fools."  "  Simple  "  is  a  word  which,  as 
we  have  often  seen,  has  been  abused.  There  ought  to  be  few  lovelier  words  than 
«'  simple  " — without  fold,  or  duplicity,  or  complexity,  or  involution  :  such  ought  to 
be  the  meaning  of  simple  and  simplicity.  Wisdom  comes  to  fools,  and  says  she 
will  work  miracles.  Could  a  man  say,  "I  am  too  far  gone  for  Wisdom  to  make 
anything  of  me,"  he  would  by  his  very  confession  prove  that  he  was  still  within  the 
range  of  salvation.  "To  know  one's  self  diseased  is  half  the  cure":  to  know  one's 
self  to  be  ignorant  is  to  have  taken  several  steps  on  the  way  to  the  sanctuary  of 
wisdom.  This  might  be  Christ  speaking;  yea,  there  are  men  who  have  not 
hesitated  to  say  that  by  "  Wisdom  "  in  this  chapter  is  meant  the  Wisdom  of  God  in 
history,  the  Logos,  the  eternal  Son  of  God.  Certainly,  the  wisdom  of  this  chapter 
seems  to  follow  the  very  course  which  Jesus  Christ  Himself  pursued  :  He  will  call 
all  men  to  Himself — the  simple,  and  the  foolish,  and  the  far  away  ;  He  will  make 
room  for  all.  A  wonderful  house  is  God's  house  in  that  way,  so  flexible,  so  expan- 
sive ;  there  is  always  room  for  the  man  who  is  not  yet  in.  So  Wisdom  will  have 
men,  and  sons  of  man  ;  simple  men,  foolish  men.  By  this  universality  of  the  offer 
judge  the  Divinity  of  the  origin.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  universal  call  of  the 
gospel : — I.  The  call  of  the  text  to  spibitual  duty  is  addressed  to  all  men. 
II.  Calls  and  invitations  sebve  the  following  impoetant  purposes.  1.  They 
show  us  our  duty  and  obligation,  2.  They  show  the  connection  betwixt  the  state  to 
which  we  are  called  and  the  enjoyment  of  the  blessing  promised.  3.  They  point 
out  and  hold  before  us  what  must  be  accomplished  in  us,  if  ever  we  be  saved. 
4.  They  are  intended  to  shut  us  up  to  the  faith  now  revealed,  6.  They  are  designed 
to  show  us  what  we  ought  to  pray  for.  6.  They  are  to  shut  US  out  of  all  so-called 
neutral  ground  in  spiritual  things.     (John  Bonar.) 

Ver.  5.  Ye  fools,  be  ye  of  an  understanding  heart. — Are  you  afoot? — The  word 
"  fool"  is  derived  from  a  Latin  verb,  signifying  "to  be  inflated  with  air  "  ;  substan- 
tive, "a  wind-bag."  So  a  fool  is  a  witless,  blundering  creature,  one  whose  conduct 
is  not  directed  by  ordinarily  good  sense  or  judgment.  All  who  do  not  serve  God  are 
fools,  according  to  the  Bible  way  of  looking  at  things.  Many  are  Bible  fools  who 
are  not  fools  according  to  the  world's  idea.  I.  He  is  a  fool  who  buys  the  wealth 
OF  the  wobld  with  the  biches  of  heaven.  Does  not  the  soul  far  outvalue  the 
body  ?  Is  not  eternity  greater  than  time  ?  Thousands  choose  the  tinsel  before  the 
real  gold,  as  did  the  wicked  cardinal,  who  said,  "  I  prefer  a  part  in  the  honours  of 
Paris  to  a  part  in  the  happiness  of  heaven."    II.  He  is  a  fool  who  supposes  hb 

CAN  freely  indulge  IN   BIN,  AND   STILL  KEEP   IT   UNDER   HIS   CONTROL.       Men  Say  they 

will  go  80  far  in  the  direction  of  this  or  that  sin,  and  then  stop  short.  As  well 
might  a  man  allow  his  train  of  loaded  waggons  to  run  down  a  steep  declivity,  until 
half  the  descent  was  made,  before  he  applied  the  brakes.  Dr.  Johnson  says,  "  The 
diminutive  chains  of  habit  are  generally  too  small  to  be  felt  till  they  are  too  strong 
to  be  broken."  HI.  Ha  is  a  fool  who,  having  once  received  djjuby,  becklesslt 
EXPOSES  HIMSELF  TO  IT  A  SECOND  TIME.  In  Other  words,  He  is  a  fool  who  learns 
nothing  from  his  own  folly.    The  wise  man  is  a  wary  man  ;  and  having  received 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  vm. 

injury  in  any  direction  once,  he  keeps  clear  of  that  coast  ever  after.  "  Experience," 
one  has  said,  "  is  one  of  the  most  eloquent  of  preachers  ;  but  she  never  has  a  large 
congregation."  IV.  He  is  a  fool  who  waits  till  to-morrow  before  he  becomes 
RELIGIOUS.  What  has  any  one  to  do  with  to-morrow  ?  Does  he  know  that  he  will 
ever  see  it  ?  Men  may  trifle  with  their  religious  opportunities  until  they  are  lost 
beyond  recall.  Until  you  enter  fully  and  lovingly  into  the  service  of  God  you  are 
living  like  fools,  because  unnecessarily  imperilling  your  highest  and  most  urgent 
interests — because  you  are  living  at  enmity  with  Him  in  whose  favour  is  everlasting 
life,  and  in  whose  displeasure  is  everlasting  death.     {A.  F.  Forrest.) 

Ver.  6.  Hear;  for  I  will  speak  of  excellent  things. — The  excellency  of  wisdom : — 
Wisdom  is  represented  as  making  a  public  appearance  in  a  rude,  ignorant,  and 
corrupt  world,  loudly  proclaiming  her  doctrines  and  counsels,  and  calling  upon  all  men 
to  hearken  to  them.  What  consideration  could  be  more  powerful  to  engage  their 
attention  than  this,  that  she  speaketh  of  "  excellent  things  "  :  the  opening  of  her 
lips  is  of  "right  things,"  and  her  mouth  speaketh  "truth."  I  propose  to  show 
that  this  is  the  just  character  of  the  instructions  and  precepts  of  religious  virtue. 

I.    The  EXCELLENCE  OF   THE  DOCTRINES   AND    INJUNCTIONS   OF  WISDOM,  ABSOLUTELY  AND 

IN  THEMSELVES.  We  must  fix  an  idea  of  excellence,  making  it  the  standard 
whereby  to  try  everything  which  pretendeth  to  that  character.  There  must  be 
some  common  and  plain  rule  wherein  all  men  are  agreed,  and  which  must  have  so 
deep  a  foundation  in  nature  as  the  necessary  invariable  determination  of  our 
minds.  If  you  suppose  the  character  of  excellent  and  right  to  be  the  result  of 
arbitrary  human  constitutions,  it  would  never  be  uniform.  But  our  notions  of 
excellent  and  right  are  before  the  consideration  of  all  laws,  appointments,  orders, 
and  instructions  whatsoever;  for  we  bring  aU  these  to  the  test  in  our  own  minds,  and 
try  them  by  a  sense  which  we  have  prior  to  any  of  them.  Nor  does  this  sense 
depend  on  any  positive  declaration  of  God's  will.  The  original  idea  of  excellence 
is  essential  to  our  nature.  It  is  one  of  those  perceptions  to  which  we  are  neces- 
sarily determined  when  the  object  fitted  to  excite  it  is  presented  to  us.  There  is  a 
test,  or  power  of  discerning,  in  the  mind.  And  this  discerns  the  excellency  of 
religious  things.  Set  right  and  true  against  their  opposites,  in  any  case  wherein 
you  are  competent  judges,  and  you  will  see  to  which  of  them  your  own  minds  must 
necessarily  give  the  preference.  There  is  eternal  truth  in  all  God's  testimonies ; 
they  are    founded    on    self-evident    maxims.      II.  Compare  the  doctrines  and 

PRECEPTS  OF  WISDOM  WITH   OTHER  THINGS  WHICH   AKE  MOST  VALUED  BY  HAS,  AND  SHOW 

THEIR  SUPERIOR  WORTH.  That  wisdom  is  better  than  rubies,  pearls,  or  whatever 
else  can  be  described  in  this  world,  is  shown — 1.  In  that  none  of  them  come  up  to 
the  character  of  excellence  before  insisted  on,  and  which  must  be  attributed  to 
wisdom.  They  all  have  only  a  limited  and  relative  worth.  2.  The  most  precious 
treasures  of  this  world  are  not  valued  but  with  some  regard  to  virtue,  but  religious 
wisdom  is  necessarily  esteemed  excellent  independently  of  them,  and  without  any 
manner  of  regard  to  them.  3.  The  things  of  this  world,  which  rival  wisdom  in 
our  esteem,  have  many  inconveniences  attending  the  acquisition  and  use  of  them, 
■which  do  not  affect  this  invaluable  possession.  Application :  (1)  We  should  hear 
the  counsels  of  wisdom,  make  it  our  choice,  and  use  our  utmost  endeavours  to 
attain  it.  (2)  We  should  entertain  our  minds  with  the  excellency  of  wisdom  as  a 
very  agreeable  contemplation.  (3)  The  excellence  of  wisdom  should  affect  the  cha- 
racters of  men  in  our  esteem,  and  regulate  our  regards  to  them.    {J.  Abernethy,  M.A.) 

Ver.  7.  For  my  month  shall  speak  truth. — The  doctrines  of  religion  have  their 
evidence  in  themselves  : — I.  Confirm  and  illustrate  this  proposition.  1.  Those 
things  which  religion  requires  of  us  are  such  as  Reason  herself,  when  she  forms  her 
judgment  aright,  cannot  but  approve,  or,  at  most,  cannot  justly  refuse  her  assent 
to  them.  This  will  appear  with  respect  to  the  practical  commands  and  duties  of 
religion.  The  duties  which  seem  to  bear  hardest  upon  human  nature  are  repent- 
ance, mortification,  contempt  of  this  world,  loving  our  enemies,  suffering  persecu- 
tion for  righteousness'  sake,  and  the  like  ;  which  do  all  recommend  themselves  to 
our  minds  by  their  reasonableness.  Though  we  have  not  the  same  clue  of  reason 
to  conduct  us  through  all  the  high  mysteries  of  our  faith,  yet  here  also  reason  will 
justify  us  in  yielding  a  firm  and  un controverted  assent  of  mind  to  them,  as  having 
solid  grounds  of  authority  to  rely  upon,  for  the  belief  of  them,  which  cannot 
possibly  deceive  us.     II.  The  concurrent  judgment  and  approbation  of  all  wise 

AND  good  men  both  AS  TO  THE  EVIDENCE  AND  REASONABLENESS  OF  THESE  DOCTRINES 


CHAP,  vni.]  PBOVERBS.  187 

AND  LAW8.  The  judgment  of  such  persons  ought  to  he  of  great  weight  and  moment, 
as  being  a  judgment  based  on  personal  experience.  These  men  not  only  know  the 
truth,  but  feel  such  a  sensible  force  and  power  of  it  upon  their  minds,  as  both 
enlightens  their  understanding  to  discern  its  real  excellency,  and  gently  bends  their 
wills  to  receive  and  embrace  it.  Faith  is  no  hasty  and  blind  credulity,  but  a  sober 
and  rational  assent  of  mind,  built  upon   sure  and  solid  principles.    III.  Such 

PEESOKS  AS  HAVE  NO  UNJUST  PREJUDICES  AGAINST  RELIGION  PREVAILING  IN  THEIB 
MINDS  WILL  SOONER  BE  BROUGHT  TO  EXAMINE  THE  SEVERAL  PROOFS  AND  TESTIMONIES    OP 

ITS  TRUTH  AND  DiviNE  AUTHORITY.  A  fair  examination  of  these  proofs  will  not  fail 
of  giving  them  entire  satisfaction.  In  dealing  with  the  Jews,  our  Lord  Jesus 
appealed  to  the  consonancy  of  His  doctrine  with  their  own  established  law.  He 
submitted  His  life  and  doctrine  to  their  trial.    IV.  Thet  who  fairly  examine  the 

TRUTHS  OF  religion,  AND  ARE  DISPOSED  TO  EMBRACE  THEM  UPON  SUFFICIENT  EVIDENCE, 
SHALL  HAVE  THAT  INTERNAL  ILLUMINATION  OF  God'S  HoLT  SpIRIT  WHICH  SHALIi 
CLEARLY   DISCOVER   THE    EXCELLENCY   AND    AGREEABLENESS   OF    THEM   TO  THEIR    MINDS. 

God  will  not  give  them  a  full  and  intuitive  view  into  the  great  and  sublime 
mysteries  of  religion.  God  will  give  such  knowledge  as  our  present  faculties  can 
receive.  1.  Religion  is  very  plain  and  intelligible  to  all  those  who  are  willing  to 
understand  it.  2.  Prejudice  gains  an  almost  invincible  power  over  the  minds  of 
men.  3.  The  more  men  improve  in  the  knowledge  and  practice  of  religion,  the 
greater  will  be  their  satisfaction  in  it.  The  best  men  will  have  the  most  important 
secrets  of  God's  will  revealed  to  them.    {John  Cornwall,  D.D.) 

Yet.  10.  Receive  my  instruction,  and  not  silver. — The  commendation  of  wisdom : — • 
I.  Knowledge  must  be  received.  1.  Do  not  refuse  knowledge  offered  you  in  the 
Book  of  God.  2.  Do  not  refuse  instruction  offered  you  by  God's  ministers. 
n.  Knowledge  must  be  received  by  way  of  instruction.  Instruction  is  neces- 
sary, as  it  does  not  come  by  nature,  and  God  does  not  teach  it  now  by  miracle. 
III.  Knowledge  must  be  more  readily  received  than  silver  ob  gold.  It  can  do 
that  which  gold  and  silver  can  never  do.  It  is  the  best  riches.  More  is  gotten  by 
labouring  for  knowledge  than  for  money.     (Francis  Taylor,  B.D.) 

Ver.  11.  For  wisdom  is  better  than  rubies. — Rubies  : — This  jewel  is  called  a 
sardius  in  two  places  in  the  Bible.  The  name  comes  from  the  Latin  "Euber,"  which 
means  red,  and  this  name  is  given  to  the  ruby  because  of  its  colour.  It  is  some- 
times called  a  carbuncle.  We  may  regard  the  ruby  as  representing  love  or  charity. 
What  is  there  about  the  ruby  on  account  of  which  love  or  charity  may  be  compared 
to  it  ?  What  did  people  in  olden  times  think  the  ruby  could  do  ?  I.  Cure  sorrow. 
It  was  thought  that  a  ruby  had  the  power  of  driving  away  sadness  from  their 
hearts,  or  of  curing  their  sorrows.  That  was  not  true,  but  this  is  true — if  we  have 
this  ruby,  a  heart  of  love  to  Jesus,  it  will  help  to  cure  our  own  sorrows,  and  help 
us  to  cure  other  people.  II.  Shine  in  the  dark.  Stories  used  to  be  told  of 
rubies  and  other  jewels  being  employed,  instead  of  lamps,  in  dark  caverns,  to  give 
light,  just  as  if  they  had  power  in  themselves  to  shine  like  so  many  suns.  But 
this  was  a  mistake.  It  is  only  true  of  the  Bible  ruby.  Eeal  love  to  anybody,  and 
especially  the  love  of  Jesus,  will  shine  in  the  dark.  And  when  we  speak  of  love 
shining  in  the  dark,  we  mean  that  it  will  give  us  help  and  comfort  in  trouble.  It 
will  make  us  able  to  do  and  suffer  things  that  we  never  could  do  without  it. 
III.  Keep  them  from  harm.  People  used  to  carry  a  ruby  about  them  as  a  sort  of 
charm.  It  is  only  the  Bible  ruby  that  can  keep  from  danger.  Loving  and  trusting 
God  will  be  a  true  charm.  "The  ruby  heart  will  keep  us  from  getting  hurt. 
(R.  Newton,  D.D.)  The  supreme  worth  of  wisdom : — ^What  does  Wisdom  offer  ? 
She  offers  to  surpass  in  value  everything  that  men  have  yet  honoured  with  their 
appreciation.  She  will  put  aside  rubies,  and  things  that  are  to  be  desired,  and  all 
gold,  and  she  will  stand  alone,  absolutely  unique  in  worth.  Gold  may  be  lost, 
rubies  may  be  stolen ;  desire  may  say,  "I  cannot  pant  and  gasp  any  longer,  I  have 
been  filled  to  satiety:  let  me  die."  Nor  are  these  things  to  be  ignored  as  to  their 
temporary  value  and  uses.  He  is  a  foolish  man  who  despises  gold  and  rubies  and 
pearls  and  choice  silver  :  he  is  more  foolish  still  who  thinks  they  can  buy  him  any- 
thing that  he  can  take  into  eternity  with  him.  In  death  all  these  things  leave  the 
possessor.  That  is  a  mournful  reality.  May  not  a  man  take  the  family  jewels 
with  him  ?  No,  not  one.  Must  he  go  into  the  other  world  empty-handed.  Yes, 
empty-handed  :  he  brought  nothing  into  this  world,  and  it  is  certain  he  can  carry 
nothing  out.     Then  we  have  only  a  life-right  in  them  ?    Is  there  anything  that  will 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cha».  Tin. 

go  with  a  man  clear  through  to  the  other  spaces  ?  Yes  :  character  will  go  with 
him.  The  man's  character  is  the  man  himself.  The  wise  man  has  the  key  of  all 
the  worlds.  And  the  fool  has  the  key  of  none  of  them.  He  who  is  without  wisdom 
is  without  riches.  He  who  has  wisdom  has  all  wealth.  The  wise  man  is  never 
solitary.  He  has  the  thoughts  of  ages.  He  is  a  silent  prophet ;  he  will  not  write 
his  prophecies,  but  oh,  how  they  make  him  glow,  how  they  send  a  radiance  into 
his  vision,  how  they  make  him  despise  the  charms,  seductions,  and  blandishments 
of  a  lying  world  that  rattles  the  bag  of  its  emptiness  to  prove  its  treasure  I 
{J.  Parker,  B.D.) 

Ver.  12.  I,  Wisdom,  dwell  with  Prudence. — Prudence : — This  has  been  brought 

into  unmerited  contempt  by  being  associated  with  what  is  really  its  opposite.     The 

abuse  of  the  title  has  led  to  practical  evils.     Individuals  have  been   known  to 

despise  prudence  as  the  most  beggarly  of  the  virtues,  from  a  mistaken  apprehension 

of  its  qualities.     Marking  the  errors  of  the  niggardly — the  muck-worms  of  society 

— some  persons  conclude  at  once  against  the  utility  of  prudence,  and  read  the 

text,  "  There  is  that  scattereth,  and  yet  increaseth,"  in  a  perverted  sense.    Nothing 

will  they  save,  or  provide  for ;  and  so  against  imprudence  in  one  extreme  they 

set  up  imprudence  in  the  other.     There  is  no  such  short  cut  to  happiness ;  the 

spendthrift  is  as  far  off  from  felicity  as  the  save-all.     The  only  security  lies  in  a 

positive  assertion  and  practical  affirmation  of  the  whole  doctrine  and  discipline  of 

prudence  in  its  purity  and  truth.     We  must  conceive  the  right  idea  of  Prudence, 

properly  define  her  characteristics,  arrive  at  an  honest  appreciation  of  her  gifts 

and  graces,  and  devote  ourselves  to  her,  as  her  faithful  ministrants,  in  all  her 

relations,  social,  intellectual,  and  moral.     Such  a  prudence  is  co-mate  with  the 

loftiest  wisdom.     The  prudential  course  of  conduct  would  commend  itself  as  an 

illustration  of  the  most  elevated  philosophy.     It  would  be  at  one  with  the  most 

benevolent  and  beneficent  impulses  of  the  human  heart,  and  at  the  same  time 

insure  the  true  interests  of  every  individual  who  acted  in  obedience  to  its  precepts. 

[The  Scottish  Pulpit.)         Of  religious  prudence  : — According  to  the  general  design 

of  these  proverbial  writings,  wisdom  stands  before  religion,  and  religion  is  expressed 

by  the  fear  of  God.     Prudence  is  either  universal  or  particular.     Universal  prudence 

is  the  same  with  the  doctrine  of  morality,  the  application  of  the  most  proper  means, 

viz.,  virtuous  actions,  towards  the  acquiring  the  chief  end,  the  happiness  of  man. 

And  particular  prudence  is  distinguished  by  the  different  objects  and  ends  about 

which  it  is  conversant,  and  is  the  prosecution  of  any  lawful  design  by  such  methods 

as  shall  appear  to  be  best,  upon  a  due  consideration  of  circumstances.     The  text 

asserts  that  there  is  an  inseparable  connection  between   religion  and  prudence. 

Neither  can  be  without  the  other.     I.  There  is  no  tbue  political  pbudence,  but 

WHAT  IS  founded  UPON  BELiGioN,  OB  THE  FEAB  OP  GoD.     God  has  delivered  the 

government  of  the  world  to  men,  reserving  to  Himself  a  power  over  nature  and  a 

prerogative  over  all  human  counsels  and  actions.     The  first  corruption  in  natural 

philosophy  consisted  in  pretending  to  give  an  account  of  the  world  and  its  original, 

without  an  infinite  understanding  and  first  mover.     And  the  main  corruption  of 

prudence  consists  in  attempting  the  government  of  the  world  by  human  policy, 

without  a  due  submission  to  the  providence  of  God.     Proud  reasoners,  and  the 

sensual  part  of  mankind,  either  wholly  deny  a  providence  or  attribute  very  Uttle 

to  its  superintendency  and  power.     The  universal  history  of  the  world,  and  the 

particular  histories  of  nations  and  families,  are  full  of  the  tragical  end  of  those 

proud  politicians  who  thought  to  govern  without  God,  and  to  be  prudent  without 

religion.    A  natural  sagacity  is  not  sufi&cient  for  man,  who  is  accountable  for  his 

actions,  who  must  engage  on  no  designs  but  what  are  rational,  nor  pursue  them  by 

any  means  but  what  are  just  and  lawful.     The  wisdom  that  degenerates  into  craft 

is  really  mischievous  foUy.    An  uprightness  of  action,  a  constancy  in  virtue,  and 

unmovable  frame  of  mind  and  resolution  of   always  pursuing  what  is  just  and 

beneficial  to  the  public,  by  right  and  laudable  ways,  will  make  a  man  fortunate, 

valuable,  and  reverenced — fit  for  any  trust.     II.  The  pious  pebson  in  the  main  is 

THE  TRULY  JUDICIOUS.     Wisdom  is  the  knowledge  of  things  great,  admirable,  and 

Divine,  whereby  the  mind  is  raised  and  enlarged  into  delightful  contemplations ; 

and  prudence  is  a  right  practical  judgment,  or  the  skill  of  judging  what  we  are  to 

do,  and  what  not,  and  of  distinguishing  between  good  and  evil,  and  the  degrees  of 

each.     The  ancient  moralists  never  allowed  a  wicked  man  to  be  prudent.     They 

declare  that  a  wicked  life  corrupts  the  very  principles  of  true  prudence  and  right 

reason.     Prudence  is  that  virtue  or  power  of  the  soul  whereby  the  mind  deliberates 


CHAP.  Till.]  PROVERBS.  169 

rightly,  and  finds  out  what  is  best  to  be  done,  when  all  things  are  considered ;  or  it 
helps  us  to  discover  what  are  the  best  means  for  obtaining  a  good  end.  Now  it  is 
religion  that  qualifies  the  mind  to  consider  practical  matters  in  their  true  nature 
and  consequences  ;  that  purifies  the  intention,  corrects  the  inclination,  moderates 
the  affections,  and  make  our  deliberations  calm  and  wise.  It  is  the  fear  of  God 
that  sets  bounds  to  prudence,  that  shows  how  far  we  are  to  act  in  any  undertaking, 
and  where  we  are  to  resign  things  up  to  a  higher  Conduct.  It  is  temperance 
that  gives  us  intellectual  vigour,  that  makes  us  masters  of  our  reason.  These,  and 
such-like  virtues,  being  the  prerequisites,  or  ingredients,  of  all  true  prudence,  it  is 
the  pious  man  that  in  the  main  is  the  truly  judicious  person.  But  it  is  the  truly 
pious  man.  It  is  a  very  imperfect  notion  of  prudence  to  think  that  it  consists  in 
an  exact  knowledge  of  the  world,  or  in  getting  a  large  share  and  possession  of  it. 
III.  That  particdlar  prudence  which  is  bequibed  in  the  conduct  of  a  religious 
LiTB.  1.  The  first  rule  for  the  more  prudent  conduct  of  a  religious  life  is,  not  to 
engage  in  things  which  are  above  our  sphere.  2.  Not  presently  to  catch  at  per- 
fection and  the  highest  instances  of  piety.  There  is  an  order  of  duties,  and 
a  gradual  advancement  in  religion.  Enthusiasts  make  mad  work  with  religion. 
3.  Not  to  engage  too  vehemently  in  things  of  an  indifferent  nature.  4.  Not  to  spoil 
a  good  constitution  of  soul  by  any  superstitious  fancies  or  unnecessary  scruples 
of  conscience.  Piety  alone  keeps  men  in  the  right,  the  safe,  the  pleasant  path. 
(Bp.  T.  Mannyngham.)  True  prudence : — Many  men  are  prudent  who  are  not 
wise — that  is  to  say,  they  are  superficially  cautious,  sagacious,  calculating ;  but 
they  are  never  wise.  True  wisdom  is  the  metaphysic  of  prudence.  It  is  tha 
innermost  life  and  reality,  and  it  expresses  itself  in  the  large  prudence  which  sees 
more  points  than  can  be  seen  by  mere  cleverness.  He  that  seeketh  his  life  shall 
lose  it ;  he  that  wUl  throw  away  his  life  for  Christ's  sake  shall  find  it,  and  shall 
thus  prove  himself  in  the  long  run  to  be  the  truly  prudent  man.  Beware  of  the 
prudence  that  is  as  a  skeleton.  The  true  prudence  is  the  living  body,  inhabited  by 
a  living  soul — the  soul  is  wisdom.  Sometimes  wisdom  will  drive  a  man  to  do 
apparently  foolish  things — at  least,  things  that  cannot  be  understood  by  those  who 
live  in  rectangles,  two  inches  by  one  and  a  half.  But  "  Wisdom  is  justified  of  her 
children  "  ;  she  calmly  abides  the  issue  of  the  third  day,  and  raised  again,  she 
vindicates  her  origin  and  declares  her  destiny.     (J.  Carter,  JD.D.) 

Ver.  13.  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  to  hate  evil. — Hatred  of  evil : — A  formal 
definition  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  To  dread  the  punishment  of  sin  seems  to  be  the 
main  feature  in  that  religion  which,  under  many  forms,  springs  native  in  the 
human  heart.  This  is  the  mainspring  which  sets  and  keeps  all  the  machinery 
of  superstition  going.  It  was  a  maxim  of  heathen  antiquity,  that  "  Fear  made 
God."  To  fear  retribution  is  not  to  hate  sin.  It  is  a  solemn  suggestion  that  ever 
the  religion  of  dark,  unrenewed  men  is,  in  its  essence,  a  love  of  their  own  sins. 
Instead  of  hating  sin  themselves,  their  grand  regret  is  that  God  hates  it.  If  they 
could  be  convinced  that  the  Judge  would  regard  it  as  lightly  as  the  culprit,  the  fear 
would  collapse  like  steam  under  cold  water,  and  all  the  religious  machinery  which 
it  drove  would  stand  still.  All  the  false  religions  that  have  ever  desolated  the 
earth  are  sparks  from  the  collision  of  these  two  hard  opposites — God's  hate  of  sin, 
and  man's  love  for  it.  In  Christ  only  may  this  sore  derangement  be  healed.  It  is 
when  sin  is  forgiven  that  a  sinner  can  hate  it.  Instead  of  hating  God  for  His 
holiness,  the  forgiven  man  instinctively  loathes  the  evU  of  his  own  heart,  and 
looks  with  longing  for  the  day  when  all  things  in  it  shall  be  made  new.  Such  is  the 
blessed  fruit  of  pardon  when  it  comes  to  a  sinner  through  the  blood  of  Christ. 
(W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  A  hidden  token  of  the  fear  towards  God  : — It  is  not  merely  in 
enlightenment  of  mind  that  the  fear  towards  God  has  its  result.  "By  the  fear  of 
the  Lord  men  depart  from  evil."  This  departing  from  evil  is  the  practical  mani- 
festation of  a  principle ;  it  is  habitual  practice  founded  on  a  strong  conviction  of 
duty.  In  this  text,  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  connected  with  the  inward  feeling  of 
disUke  for  evU,  Hatred,  like  love,  is  of  the  heart.  I.  This  fear  must  not  be 
MISUNDERSTOOD  AS  TO  ITS  NATURE.  It  may  be  twofold.  The  alarm  that  is  awakened 
by  the  threat  of  violence,  or  of  immediate  privation,  is  one  kind  of  fear.  This  ia 
the  fear  of  dread,  or  terror.  The  other  kind  of  fear  is  of  respect  or  reverence,  and 
this  can  only  dwell  in  the  heart  of  a  friend  towards  a  friend,  or  of  a  faithful  servant 
towards  a  master  worthy  of  esteem,  or  of  a  dutiful  child  towards  an  honoured 
parent.  This  is  the  "  fear  of  the  Lord."  What  other  fear  should  God  be  desirous 
of  receiving  and  acknowledging  at  their  hands  ?    II.  If  thebb  be  this  fear,  thkeb 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tin. 

WILL  ALSO  BE  THE  HATEED  OF  EVIL.  The  Holy  One  Cannot  be  so  indulgent  as  to  pot 
no  difference  between  godly  fear  and  the  love  of  sin.  God  hates  evil  as  abhorrent 
from  His  holy  nature.  To  require  that  we  hate  evil  is  no  more  than  what  the 
holiness  of  His  own  character  requires  from  Himself.  This  requirement  shows  that 
God  would  draw  us  nearer  to  Himself.  As  He  hates  evil,  He  would  have  us  hate  it. 
{J.  Rhenius,  M.A.) 

Ver.  14.  I  have  understanding ;  I  have  strength. — The  self-atsertion  of  Christ  ;— 
Here  is  more  than  a  florid  personification  of  wisdom.  It  is  the  Word  who  is 
from  everlasting — "  Christ  the  power  of  God,  and  the  wisdom  of  God."  I.  The 
BELF-ASSEBTiON  OF  Cheist.  Exhibited  in  three  ways.  1.  Christ  claims  a  boundless 
power  of  satisfying  human  wants.  2.  Christ  claims  for  Himself  the  most  transcen- 
dent ideals.  3.  Christ  claims  the  possession  of  absolute  truth,  by  the  very  form 
and  mode,  as  well  as  by  the  substance,  of  His  teaching.  H.  The  beabing  of  that 
BELT-ASSERTION  ON  CERTAIN  DIFFICULTIES  OF  OUR  DAY.  Take  the  tonc  of  much  of  the 
record  in  the  Old  Testament.  1.  The  Old  Testament  is  a  progressive  system. 
Then  much  of  it  must  be  imperfect.  2.  The  Old  Testament  contains  the  pathology 
and  diagnosis  of  sin.  In  meeting  the  difiSculties  of  the  Old  Testament,  the  self- 
assertion  of  the  "Amen"  is  our  stay.  He  who  spake  the  words  given  in  Matt.  v. 
17,  18,  knew  the  Old  Testament.  We  talk  of  the  extermination  of  the  Canaanites. 
Are  we  gentler  than  He?  We  are  offended  by  the  polygamy  of  the  patriarchs. 
Can  we  survey  marriage  with  a  purer  gaze  than  that  of  the  virgin  eye  which  is  also 
the  eye  of  God?  We  take  the  book  as  it  is  from  the  hand  of  Him  who  says,  "  I  am 
understanding."  3.  Take  the  general  sources  of  unbelief  and  their  salient  charac- 
teristics. The  source  of  unbelief  is  not  always  genuine  thought,  it  is  often  feeble- 
ness of  character  and  moral  enervation.  The  secret  of  strength  is  to  believe  in 
Him  who  says,  "  I  have  strength."     (Abp.  W.  Alexander,) 

Ver.  15.  By  Me  kings  relg^n. — Christian  loyalty : — I.  The  special  cause  that 
WE  HAVE  FOR  INCREASED  THANKFULNESS  TO  GoD.  1.  We  ought  to  be  thankful  for 
any  event  which  tends  to  secure  the  blessings  of  peace  to  our  country.  2.  A  state 
of  peace,  as  it  is  most  conducive  to  the  temporal  interests  of  a  nation,  so  too  it  is 
essential  to  the  interests  of  true  religion.     II.  The  duty  of  prating  constantly 

AND  EARNESTLY  FOR  THOSE  WHO  ARE  LAWFULLY  SET  OVER  US.  {H.     W.     SuUvan^ 

M.A.)  Civil  governments  and  their  subjects: — In  this  chapter  is  the  figure  of 
speech  known  as  prosopcsia,  or  personification,  in  which  any  eminent  quality  or 
distinct  attribute  is  invested  with  personal  powers  and  properties,  and  is  said  to 
hear,  to  speak,  to  govern,  to  suffer,  or  to  enjoy,  and  indeed,  whatever  else  a  person 
amongst  us  is  capable  of  doing.  Jesus  Christ,  the  Messiah,  is  the  personal  and 
essential  Wisdom  of  God.  Here  one  of  His  prerogatives  is  affirmed — He  has 
supreme  control  and  authoritative  influence  over  the  great  ones  of  the  earth.  The 
administration  of  all  things  in  the  natural  and  providential,  as  well  as  in  the 
spiritual  kingdom,  is  confided  into  His  hands.  I.  Crvn,  government  is  of  Divine 
INSTITUTION ;  it  IS  AN  ORDINANCE  OF  GoD.  It  is  not  the  creature  of  chance  ;  nor 
founded  in  the  social  compact ;  or  by  a  sort  of  conventionality  understood  between 
the  governed  and  the  governors ;  but  is  based  on  the  will  of  God.  1.  Prove  this 
by  appeal  to  reason.  God  formed  mankind  with  a  view  to  happiness,  and  civil 
government  is  necessary  to  happiness.  There  can  be  no  happiness  without  order, 
security,  freedom.  It  never  has  been  known  that  human  beings,  in  any  large 
numbers,  have  existed  for  any  considerable  time  without  the  intervention  of 
governments.  2.  Prove  this  by  appeal  to  Scripture  (Rom.  xiii.  1-3  ;  1  Pet.  2-13). 
God  is  not  the  author  of  any  specific  form  or  mode  of  government  in  His  Holy 
Word.  In  the  case  of  Israel  God  dictated  the  special  system  of  political  govern- 
ment known  as  the  Theocracy.  But  in  other  cases  the  mode  of  government  is  left 
to  the  suggestions  of  human  wisdom,  the  improvements  of  time,  and  the  claims 
and  requirements  of  experience  and  of  circumstances.  H.  The  duties  which 
SUBJECTS  OWE  TO  THEIR  CIVIL  GOVERNMENT.  1.  Revcrence  and  respect,  for  con- 
science' sake,  and  for  the  Lord's  sake.  The  language  of  censure  never  becomes 
a  subject  towards  his  ruler  but  under  the  four  following  restrictions — (1)  That  this 
censure  be  founded  in  truth.  (2)  That  we  have  a  good  motive  in  uttering  it. 
(3)  That  we  have  a  right  end.  (4)  That  we  preserve  due  candour,  moderation, 
and  allowance.  2.  Obedience  to  the  laws.  Disobedience  to  the  laws  is  a  sin 
against  the  public,  and  a  virtual  attack  upon  the  social  character  of  man.  3.  Our 
proportion  of  contribution  to  the  exigencies  of  the  State.     4.  We  owe  to  our  rulers 


CHIP,  vm.]  PBOVERBS.  191 

to  defend  and  support  them  in  the  lawful  exercise  of  their  authority.  5.  And 
earnest  prayer  to  God  for  His  blessing  upon  them.  This  is  the  dictate  of  common 
benevolence,  and  is  sanctioned  and  enjoined  by  a  regard  to  the  public  welfare.  It 
is  the  official  character  of  the  civil  governor  that  is  the  ground  upon  which  prayer 
is  claimed  for  him.  The  direction  of  the  faculties  and  talents  and  influence  of  the 
individual  must  materially  interfere  with  the  safety  and  happiness  of  the  com- 
munity. We  may,  therefore,  wisely  implore  God  to  assist  in  their  counsels  those 
whom,  in  His  providence.  He  has  exalted.  (G.  Clayton,  M.A.)  The  connection 
of  our  Lord  Christ  with  earthly  sovereignty : — I.  The  gefts  which  our  Lord 
Christ  has  received  fob  us.  1,  The  speaker.  Wisdom  personified.  Wisdom 
in  itself  is  perfect  only  in  God.  Christ  is  the  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of 
God.  He  is  called  "  the  Word,"  which  is  wisdom  manifested  in  utterance,  and 
issuing  in  streams  of  blessings.  2.  The  gifts.  Counsel,  or  practical  wisdom. 
Sound  wisdom,  or  inward  principles.  Understanding,  shown  in  refusing  the  evil 
and  choosing  the  good.  Strength,  the  gift  necessary  to  complete  the  other  gifts. 
3.  For  whom  has  the  Eedeemer  these  gifts  ?  Generally,  for  the  human  race. 
Specially  for  kings,  and  all  that  are  in  authority.  11.  The  connection  of  oub 
Lord  with  the  sovereignty  of  the  earth.  The  true  sovereignty  of  the  whole 
earth  belongs  to  our  Lord  Christ.  All  other  power  is  simply  derived  from  Him. 
{E.  Bickersteth.)  Thanksgiving  to  Almighty  God : — The  origin  of  kings  may  be 
traced  as  far  back  as  authentic  history  extends.  The  kings  engaged  in  the  Persian 
wars  appear  to  be  among  the  first  of  whom  any  regular  historical  connection  may 
be  reUed  upon  ;  indeed,  we  must  have  recourse  to  the  sacred  writings  of  the  Jews 
for  the  earliest  historical  information.  The  Jewish  historians  frequently  impute 
their  national  calamities  to  the  vices  of  their  monarchs.  The  words  of  this  text 
imply — 1.  A  delegated  authority,  given  by  God  Himself,  in  the  appointment  of 
kings  and  rulers.  2.  That  all  earthly  crowns  must  perish — that  all  earthly 
sovereigns  are  mortal.  It  is  incumbent  on  all  sincere  Christians  on  special 
national  occasions  to  acknowledge  with  gratitude  the  hand  of  Almighty  God,  and 
to  adorn  the  Divine  providence  which  superintends  all  worldly  affairs  ;  and  let  us 
rest  assured  that  the  exercise  of  almighty  power  and  infinite  goodness  is  combined 
with  that  mercy  which  is  so  strikingly  exhibited  throughout  the  vast  range  of 
creation,  and  which  will  be  abundantly  manifested  in  the  realms  of  unfading 
glory.  {N.  Meeres,  B.D.)  Good  government : — 1.  Magistrates  cannot  rule  well 
without  wisdom.  They  need  wisdom  in  consultation  and  in  execution.  2.  Meii 
cannot  make  good  laws  without  wisdom.  In  regard  of  matter  or  manner, 
3.  Princes  cannot  rule  well  without  just  laws.  Bless  God  that  we  live  under  laws, 
and  are  not  left  to  the  mere  will  of  men.  (Francis  Taylor,  B.D.)  The  wisdom 
behind  civil  government : — If  good  laws  against  iU  manners  be,  as  sure  they  are, 
decrees  of  justice,  these  kings  and  princes,  with  inferior  magistrates,  wiU  be  the 
governing  societies,  here  on  earth,  for  public  reformation.  Civil  rulers  should  be 
considered  as  subordinate  to  that  ever-blessed  society  of  the  Father,  Son,  and 
Holy  Spirit  above,  the  one  God  who,  through  the  one  Mediator  between  God  and 
man,  hath  graciously  vouchsafed  to  concern  Himself  for  the  reformation  of  a 
degenerate  world,  that  iniquity  might  not  be,  at  least  so  speedily  or  universally,  its 
ruin.    I.  The  tendency  of  civil  government  to  public  reformation,  in  which 

THE     common     safety    AND     HAPPINESS     18     SO    MANIFESTLY     CONCERNED.      The    Very 

decreeing  of  justice,  or  the  justice  in  good  and  wholesome  laws  decreed,  has  a 
natural  and  evident  tendency  to  public  reformation,  with  aU  its  implied  and  con- 
sequent advantages.  HI  manners  have  given  the  occasion  to  many  good  laws, 
which,  though  they  serve  to  direct  and  confirm  the  good,  yet  are  principally 
designed  to  correct  and  reform  the  bad.  It  is  wrong  and  weakness  to  attempt 
government  by  mere  compulsion.  AU  fit  methods  of  dealing  with  men  must  take 
hold  of  some  principles,  allowed  or  presumed,  if  not  confessed.  The  great 
business  of  good  laws  will  be  more  effectually  to  repress  the  overt  acts  of  those 
vicious  inclinations  which  so  often  lead  men,  in  particular  cases,  contrary  to  the 
general  dictates  of  their  own  deliberate  judgment  and  conscience.  See  the  matter 
and  measure  of  some  of  the  principal  decrees  of  justice  ;  as — 1.  To  God;  that  He 
be  not  openly  affronted  by  the  denial  of  His  being,  neglect  of  evident  duty,  and 
daring  commission  of  notorious  sin.  2.  To  the  community ;  that  private  interests 
give  way  to  that  of  the  public.  3.  To  the  magistrate ;  that  all  needful  defence  be 
provided,  with  a  power  sufficient  for  the  asserting  of  his  just  authority.  4.  To 
subjects  more  generally  considered.  The  saving  and  securing  to  them  those  rights 
and  liberties  which  are  due,  whether  by  common  reason  or  the  particular  reason 


192  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nn. 

and  fuadamental  contract.  5.  To  the  poor;  that  the  disabled  and  destitnte  be 
maintained ;  that  the  able  and  willmg  want  not  work,  nor  the  idle  a  apar  to 
labour.  6.  To  offenders  themselves  ;  that  the  justly  obnoxious  go  not  unpunished, 
nor  yet  their  punishment  outweigh  the  offence,  7.  To  persons  of  merit.  Honour 
and  other  rewards  are  surely  a  point  of  justice  due  to  such.  Surely  such  decrees 
of  justice  are  a  public  testimony  for  virtuous  actions,  and  against  the  contrary 
vices.  Whilst  the  preceptive  part  of  such  decrees  recommends  virtuous  actions  to 
the  understanding,  their  sanctions  of  reward  and  punishment  most  fitly  serve  to 
press  them  on  the  will,  as  powerfully  moving  those  two  great  springs  of  human 
action — hope  and  fear.  The  execution  of  just  decrees  gives  a  standing  and  open 
confirmation  to  them,  as  being  the  abiding  sense  of  our  rulers.  They  have 
evidently  been   well   weighed   and   wisely  resolved.     II.  The  Son   of   God,  thb 

BEFORMING,    SAVING   WiSDOM,    ON    WHOM    GOVERNMENT   DEPENDS.       The    term  "  SOU  "  is 

taken  from  amongst  men,  and  though  it  cannot  exactly  agree  to  Him  who  is  the 
Son  of  God,  yet  certainly  intends  to  lead  us  to  some  such  apprehensions  about  Him 
as  may  be  allowed  to  our  weakness,  and  will  be  suflBcient  for  our  purpose.  The 
salvation  of  men  is  everywhere  in  Sacred  Writ  represented  as  the  great  design  and 
business  of  this  Wisdom,  which  well  knows  that  pride,  arrogancy,  and  the  evil 
way  will  never  comport  with  the  peace  and  welfare  of  men  either  in  their  single 
or  social  capacity.  The  government  of  the  Son  as  Mediator  is  to  be  founded  in 
redemption,  and  exercised  in  a  way  of  reformation.  Religion  in  a  degenerate 
world  is  but  another  name  for  reformation :  especially  the  Christian  religion, 
which  was  to  correct  not  only  the  irreligion  but  also  the  superstitions  of  the  world. 
It  has  been  the  care  of  our  gracious  Redeemer  to  recover  the  declining  reformation 
under  the  happy  influence  of   present    governments.     III.  The  more  immediate 

DEPENDENCE     OF     CIVIL     GOVERNMENT     ON    THE    SON     OF     GoD.       TrUe     it    is    that    OUf 

Saviour's  kingdom  is  not  of  a  secular  but  spiritual  nature :  but  His  subjects  are 
embodied  spirits,  and  have  their  temporal  as  well  as  eternal  concernments.  Civil 
government  decrees  justice — 1.  By  our  Saviour's  purchase  and  procurement. 
2.  Providential  disposal.  3.  Counsel  and  aid.  4.  Appointment  and  authority. 
{Joshua  Oldfield. )  The  Divine  right  of  kings  : — I.  The  authority  or  right  bt 
WHICH  KINGS  REIGN.  Monaichs  and  their  authority  have  an  acknowledged  cause, 
and  that  cause  external  to  themselves.  All  is  derived  from  some  other  person. 
The  person  who  speaks  in  this  passage  could  be  no  other  than  the  eternal  Son  of 
God.  When  St.  John  beheld  our  Lord  in  the  Apocalypse,  he  saw  Him  as  the 
fount  and  origin  of  government,  with  many  crowns  upon  His  head.  Meet  it  waa 
that  the  kings  of  the  sev^al  quarters  of  the  world  should  have  their  being  by  Him 
who  is  King  of  all  the  world  ;  that  all  crowns,  both  the  crown  of  glory  in  heaven 
and  the  crown  of  highest  glory  on  earth,  should  be  held  of  Him.  By  Christ,  the 
Wisdom  of  God,  and  the  Son  of  God,  monarchs  hold  their  rule  and  kingdoms  are 
governed.  They  reign  not  by  His  mere  leave,  but  by  His  express  commission. 
They  reign  in  Him  and  by  Him.  He  reigns  in  them  and  by  them ;  He  in  them  as 
His  deputies,  they  in  Him  as  their  authoriser  ;  He  by  their  persons,  they  by  His 
power.  II.  The  act  of  reigning.  Consider  it  in  three  different  ways.  That 
they  reign  at  all ;  that  they  reign  long ;  that  they  reign  well.  Each  of  these  is 
alike  the  gift  of  God.  By  Him,  His  co-eternal  Word  and  Wisdom,  as  by  a  door, 
they  enter  on  their  reign.  By  Him,  as  by  a  line  which  He  stretches  over  every 
government,  be  it  longer  or  shorter,  they  hold  its  continuance.  Finally,  by  Him, 
as  by  a  rule,  they  reign ;  they  walk  before  the  Lord  their  God ;  consider  whom 
they  represent,  whose  ministers  and  vicegerents  they  are.  It  is  duration  that  con- 
stitutes a  reign.  Now,  without  any  question,  this  depends  on  God.  When  they 
have  begun  they  may  end  quickly,  if  He  who  create  do  not  also  preserve.  And  so 
that  right  reigning,  upon  which  only  a  continuance  of  reign  is  promised.  Can  we 
believe  that  the  complicated  machinery  of  government  can  be  preserved  if  religion 
be  neglected?  But  our  business  now  is  with  subjects,  not  kings.  What  has  been 
said  imposes  duty  on  them.  And  even  as,  if  princes  considered  by  whom  they 
reign,  they  would  reign  better,  so  also,  if  subjects  remembered  the  same  truth, 
they  would  obey  better.  For  if  from  Him  comes  the  authority,  to  Him  is  the  duty 
of  allegiance ;  and  we  are  bound  to  be  subject,  not  for  wrath  only,  but  also  for 
conscience  sake.  Remember  who  it  is  that  speaks.  He  is  Christ,  and  he  is  called 
Wisdom.  If  Christ  speaks,  disloyalty  and  disaffection  are  anti-Christian.  If 
Wisdom  speaks,  they  are  folly.  Folly  in  itself,  and  folly  in  its  consequences.  Let 
Wisdom,  then,  be  still  justified  in  her  children.  (G.  S.  Cornish,  M.A.)  Per  me 
reges  regnant  .---How  do  men  claim  to  be  kings?  how  do  they  hold  their  sovereiga 


eOAT.  vm.]  PROVERBS.  193 

authority  ?  by  whose  grant  ?  Of  the  four  words  of  the  motto,  the  two  latter  (regei 
and  regiiant)  be  two  as  great  matters  as  any  be  in  the  world.  One,  the  persons 
themselves,  as  they  be  kings.  The  other,  the  act  of  their  reigning,  or  bearing  rule 
over  nations.  These  two  latter  words  depend  on  the  two  former — per  me.  By  and 
through  Him  kings  were  first  settled  in  their  reigns.  By  and  through  Him  eyer 
since  upholden  in  their  reigns.  By  and  through  Him  vouchsafed  many  miracu- 
lous preservations  in  their  reigns.  I.  Kings  and  kingdoms  have  their  "peb." 
They  are  no  casualties.  There  is  a  cause  of  a  king's  reigning.  That  cause  is  a 
person.  "  By  Me" — that  is,  not  man  or  angel,  but  God  only;  God  manifest.  By 
Him — 1.  Because  He  was  man.  2.  Because  He  is  wisdom.  3.  Because  on  Him 
the  Father  hath  conferred  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth.  III.  Kings  eeign. 
Consider  this  reigning  three  ways.  1.  As  it  hath  a  beginning.  2.  As  it  hath  con- 
tinuance. 3.  As  it  hath  rectitude  or  obliquity  incident  to  every  act.  These  three 
are  duly  set  on  every  king's  head  through  all  the  story  of  the  Bible.  Such  a  king 
is  said  to  have  been  so  many  years  old  when  he  began  to  reign.  He  reigned  in 
Jerusalem,  or  Samaria,  so  many  years.  And  he  reigned  well  or  ill.  (Bp.  Lancelot 
Andrewes.)  The  authority  of  Divine  Wi$dom : — ^Wisdom  here  speaks  of  herself  as 
the  queen  of  the  world.  Wisdom,  in  the  exercise  of  her  authority — I.  Determines 
THE  destiny  of  RULERS.  1.  It  inspiies  all  the  good  actions  of  kings.  2.  It  con- 
trols all  the  bad  actions  of  kings.  II.  Has  a  special  regard  for  the  good.  Divine 
wisdom  has  heart  as  well  as  intellect ;  it  glows  with  sympathies  as  well  as  radiates 
with  counsels.  III.  Has  the  distribution  of  the  choicest  blessings  fob  man- 
kind.    {David  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Vers.  17.  I  love  them  that  love  Me. — Emotion  and  evidence : — The  mind  must 
reach  religion's  creed  by  help  of  the  heart.  Reason  is  not  to  be  set  aside,  but,  with 
the  value  of  the  rational  faculty  exalted  to  its  highest  honour,  the  affections  of  the 
heart  must  constantly  aid  the  rational  faculty  if  it  is  expected  to  accomplish  much 
in  the  realm  of  moral  truth.  There  must  be  an  attuning  of  the  two  instruments, 
the  objective  truth  and  the  subjective  man,  such  that  the  music  of  the  former  may 
not  be  rejected  as  a  discord  or  lost  because  inaudible.  Wisdom  has  always  distri- 
buted her  truth  to  those  who  love  her.  Those  special  ideas  called  "  religion  "  will 
become  truths  or  doctrines  only  by  help  of  the  heart's  friendship.  Unless  men  can 
reach  some  wish  in  their  favour,  some  partiality  for  them,  it  is  hardly  to  be  sup- 
posed that  mere  logic  will  ever  force  them  upon  individual  or  public  practices.  The 
power  of  the  mind  to  reject  conclusions  not  welcome  to  the  feelings  is  enormous.  It 
is  possible  that  the  poverty  of  evidence,  confessed  in  this  world  to  exist  as  to  vast 
moral  propositions,  comes  from  the  fact  that  earth  was  made,  not  for  a  wicked  but 
for  a  virtuous  race.  Sin  may  have  destroyed  evidence  by  destroying  the  sentiments 
that  made  it  visible.  The  exact  sciences  proclaim  their  ideas  to  all,  and  ask  no 
favour  of  any  kind.  The  evidences  of  Christianity  must  be  weighed  by  a  mind  not 
averse  to  virtue,  not  averse  to  the  being  and  presence  of  a  just  God,  but  full  of 
tender  sympathy  with  man.  By  a  soul  capable  of  sadness  and  of  hope.  (David 
Swing.)  The  characters  whom  Christ  loves  .-—The  love  which  Christ  entertains 
for  His  people  is  an  ailection  the  nature  and  extent  of  which  can  be  learned  only 
from  a  consideration  of  the  causes  which  produce  it.  I.  The  foundation  of  that 
love  was  laid  in  eternity,  n.  Christ  loves  those  who  love  Him  because  He 
HAS  done  and  suffered  SO  MUCH  FOB  THEIR  SALVATION.  He  purchascd  them  with 
His  blood.  From  the  birth  to  the  death  of  His  people  He  watches  over  them  with 
unremitting  attention.  He  forgives  their  sins,  alleviates  their  sorrows,  sympathises 
in  their  trials,  heals  their  backslidings,  wipes  away  their  tears,  listens  to  their 
prayers,  intercedes  for  them  with  His  Father,  enables  them  to  persevere,  and  accom- 
panies them  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death.  All  this  care  and  attention 
naturally  tends  to  increase  His  love  for  them.  HI.  Christ  loves  those  who  love 
Him  because  they  are  united  to  Him  by  strong  and  indissoluble  tees.  The 
union  between  Christ  and  His  people  is  presented  under  various  figures — bride- 
groom and  bride,  vine  and  branches,  head  and  members,  soul  and  body.  The 
bond  of  this  union  on  our  part  is  faith,  but  the  union  itself  is  formed  by  the 
appointment  of  God.  IV.  Christ  loves  those  who  love  Him  because  they 
POSSESS  His  Spirit  and  bear  His  image.  Similarity  of  character  always  tends  to 
produce  affection,  and  hence  every  being  in  the  universe  loves  his  own  image  when- 
ever he  discovers  it.  Christ  loves  His  own  image  in  His  creatures  because  it 
essentially  consists  in  holiness,  which  is  of  all  things  most  pleasing  to  His  Father 
and  Himself.     V.  Christ  loves   those  who  love  Him  because  they  bkjoiox  m 

14 


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cmr.rm. 

AND  RETURN  His  AFFECTION.  It  is  the  natural  tendency  of  love  to  produce  and 
increase  love.  Even  those  whom  we  have  long  loved  on  account  either  of  their 
relation  to  us  or  of  their  amiable  qualities  become  incomparably  more  dear  to  us 
when  they  begin  to  prize  our  love  and  return  it.  Improvement :  1.  This  subject 
may  enable  every  one  to  answer  the  important  question,  Does  Christ  love  me  ?  2.  If 
Christ  loves  those  who  love  Him,  then  He  will  love  those  most  who  are  most  ready 
to  return  His  afifection,  to  do  all  things,  and  to  suffer  all  things  for  His  sake. 
3.  How  happy  are  they  who  love  !  What  happiness,  then,  must  they  enjoy  who 
love  and  are  beloved  by  the  infinite  fountain  of  love,  God's  eternal  Son  !  4.  These 
truths  afford  most  powerful  motives  to  induce  sinners  to  love  Christ.  (E.  Patjson, 
D.D.)  To  whom  will  Wisdom  give  her  good  things  ? — On  them  that  love  her  she 
wiU  bestow  love  again.  On  them  that  seek  her  aright  she  will  bestow  herself. 
There  is  great  use  of  Wisdom,  and  she  hath  great  store  of  wealth  to  bestow.  How 
shaU  we  obtam  this  Wisdom  ?  Love  her  and  get  her.  Love  is  the  best  Master  of 
Arts,  the  surest  teacher.  As  the  good  fruit  of  the  study  of  Wisdom  is  very  great,  so 
the  labour  of  them  that  respect  her  is  not  in  vain.  They  shall  enjoy  both  her  love 
and  herself.     I.  Wisdom  loves  such  as  love  her.     H.  Wisdom  must  be  sought 

FOR     EARLY     AND     DILIGENTLT.       III.    SuCH   AS   SEEK     FOR   WiSDOM    DILIGENTLY     SHALIj 

FIND  HER.  (Francis  Taylor,  B.D.)  The  love  of  wisdom  necessary  to  the  attaining 
of  it ; I.  Explain  the  love  of  wisdom,  and  show  the  sentiments  and  disposi- 
tions THAT  ARE  IMPORTED  IN  IT.  The  affcctions  and  passions  of  the  human  nature 
are  the  moving  springs  which  set  our  active  powers  at  work.  Various  are  the 
methods  by  which  the  objects  of  affection  are  introduced  into  the  mind.  Some 
wholly  by  the  senses,  some  by  reflection,  inquiry,  comparing  things,  and  forming 
general  notions  of  them.  What  is  imported  in  the  love  of  wisdom  is — 1.  A  high 
esteem  of  its  superior  excellency  as  the  result  of  mature  consideration.  2.  That  we 
should  desire  it  above  all  things.  This  Solomon  proposeth  as  a  qualification  and 
means  of  attaining  wisdom.  3.  Love  naturally  showeth  itself  in  the  complacency 
which  the  mind  taketh  in  the  enjoyment  of,  or  even  in  meditating  upon,  the 
beloved  objects.  II.  How  it  contributeth  to  our  obtaining  wisdom.  1.  In 
ordinary  human  affairs  we  see  that  desire  putteth  men  upon  that  labour  and  dili- 
gence which  are  the  ordinary  means  of  success.  2.  The  love  of  wisdom  is  a  dis- 
position highly  pleasing  to  God,  and  to  it  He  hath  made  gracious  promises.  We 
must  conceive  of  the  Supreme  Being  as  a  lover  of  virtue  and  goodness,  of  everything 
which  is  truly  amiable  on  the  account  of  moral  excellence  ;  and  if  it  be  so.  He  hath 
complacency  in  those  of  mankind  whose  affections  are  placed  on  the  same  thing 
which  is  His  delight.  We  have,  therefore,  the  greatest  encouragements  and 
advantages  for  attaining  to  wisdom,  and  we  ought  to  use  all  diligence  in  humble 
and  affectionate  concurrence  with  Him  who  worketh  in  us.  (J.  Abernethy,  M.A.) 
God  lovei  those  that  love  Him: — I.  What  kind  of  love  God  exercises  towards 
them  that  love  Him.  There  is  the  love  of  benevolence  and  the  love  of  com- 
placency. These  two  kinds  of  love  are  of  the  same  nature,  but  distinguished  by  the 
objects  upon  which  they  terminate.  The  love  of  benevolence  terminates  upon  per- 
cipient being,  and  extends  to  all  sensitive  natures,  whether  rational  or  irrational, 
whether  they  have  a  good,  or  bad,  or  no  moral  character.  God  desires  and  regards 
the  good  of  all  His  creatures,  from  the  highest  angel  to  the  lowest  insect.  The 
love  of  complacency  is  wholly  confined  to  moral  beings  who  are  possessed  of  moral 
excellence.  Nothing  but  virtue,  or  goodness,  or  real  holiness  is  the  object  of  God's 
complacence.  II.  What  is  implied  in  men's  loving  God?  1.  Some  true  know- 
ledge of  His  moral  character.  2.  True  love  to  God  implies  esteem  as  well  as 
knowledge.  Esteem  always  arises  from  a  conviction  of  moral  excellence  in  the 
person  or  being  esteemed.  All  men  have  a  moral  discernment  of  moral  objects. 
Sinners  cannot  contemplate  the  infinite  greatness  and  goodness  of  God  without 
discerning  His  infinite  worthiness  to  be  loved.  3.  Their  loving  God  truly  implies  a 
supreme  complacency  in  His  moral  character.  In  the  exercise  of  true  love  to  any 
object  there  is  a  pleasure  taken  in  the  object  itself.  When  men  truly  love  God 
they  take  pleasure  in  every  part  of  His  moral  character.  III.  Why  does  God  only 
love  such  as  first  love  Him  ?  Before  they  first  love  Him  they  are  not  lovely. 
Their  hearts  are  full  of  evil,  and  entirely  opposed  to  all  that  is  good.  They  are 
under  the  dominion  of  selfishness,  which  is  total  enmity  to  all  holiness.  But  there 
is  something  in  God  which  renders  Him  lovely  and  glorious  before  He  loves  sinners  ; 
and  therefore  they  can  love  Him  before  He  loves  them.  Improvement :  1.  If  God 
does  not  love  sinners  before  they  first  love  Him,  then  it  is  a  point  of  more  import- 
ance in  preaching  the  gospel  to  make  them  sensible  that  He  hates  them  than  that 


CHAP,  vm.]  PROVERBS.  195 

He  loves  them.  2.  Then  the  first  exercise  of  love  to  Him  must  be  before  they 
know  that  He  loves  them.  3.  Then  they  must  love  Him,  while  they  know  that  He 
hates  them,  and  is  disposed  to  punish  them  for  ever.  4.  Then  sinners  are  naturally 
as  unwilling  to  embrace  the  gospel  as  to  obey  the  law.  5.  If  God  love  those  who 
first  love  Him,  then  He  is  willing  to  receive  them  into  His  favour  upon  the  most 
gracious  and  condescending  terms.  6.  If  God  does  not  love  sinners  before  they 
love  Him,  then  they  have  no  right  to  desire  or  pray  that  He  would  become  recon- 
ciled to  them  while  they  continue  to  hate  and  oppose  Him.  7.  If  God  loves  sinners 
as  soon  as  they  love  Him,  then,  if  they  properly  seek  Him,  they  shall  certainly  find 
Him.  (N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  Love  retwned : — These  words  do  not  set  forth 
either — 1.  That  Christ's  love  is  produced  by  ours.  Its  source  is  Himself.  2.  Or 
that  Christ's  love  is  since  ours.  It  is  eternal.  3.  Or  that  Christ's  love  is  dependent 
on  ours.  Unchangeable.  4.  Or  that  Christ's  love  is  only  for  those  who  love  Him. 
He  gave  the  greatest  proof  of  it  while  we  were  enemies.  I.  Those  who  eetxirn 
Christ's  liOVE  have  the  evidence  of  His  love  to  them.  H.  Those  who  betubn 
Cheist's  love  beceive  special  manifestations  of  grace  from  Him.  Answered 
prayers,  the  Spirit's  comfort,  success  in  labour,  joys  of  communion.    HI.  Those 

WHO   RETURN    ChRIST'S     LOVE     HAVE     THE     POSITION     AND     TITLE    OF    HiS   LOVED     ONES. 

Brethren,  friends,  sons  of  God.  IV.  Those  who  return  Christ's  love  give  Him 
SPECIAL  GLADNESS.  (R.  A.  Griffin.)  And  those  that  seek  Me  early  shall  find  Me. — 
Diligence  in  seeking  wisdom  always  successful: — The  enjoyments  of  life  are  dis- 
pensed by  the  indiscriminating  hand  of  Providence,  and  often  in  as  large  a  measure 
to  the  unthankful  and  evil  as  to  the  good  and  virtuous.  But  wisdom  is  of  a  peculiar 
nature,  and  it  doth  not  prevent  any  qualifying  dispositions  and  endeavours  in  those 
who  obtain  it.  The  foundation  of  it  is  laid  in  the  faculties  of  the  mind.  Nothing 
can  sufficiently  prove  the  sincerity  of  our  professed  affection  to  wisdom  but  that 
seeking  it  early  which  is  recommended  in  this  text.  I.  Explain  seeking  wisdom 
EARLY.  It  means  this,  that  it  has  the  chief  room  in  our  cares  and  application. 
That  which  is  highest  in  our  esteem,  most  earnestly  desired  and  delighted  in,  will 
naturally  engage  our  first  concern  and  endeavours,  while  matters  of  an  inferior 
consideration  are  justly  postponed.  1.  If  we  would  seek  wisdom  it  must  be  by  the 
constant  use  of  the  proper  means  in  order  to  our  obtaining  it.  2.  Diligence,  or 
"  seeking  early,"  importeth  using  the  best  means  frequently,  and  with  spirit  and 
vigour,  n.  Show  the  advantage  op  it.  We  have  assurance  of  success.  The 
text  contains  an  express  promise  in  the  name  of  wisdom.  1.  Diligence  importeth 
such  dispositions  of  mind  as  must  please  the  Supreme  Being.  2.  Diligence 
in  seeking  wisdom  or  religion  is  really  practising  it.  Commend  the 
importance  of  seeking  wisdom  and  religion  in  the  beginning  of  every 
day,  and  in  youth-time,  which  is  the  morning  of  life.  (J.  Ahernethy,  M.A.) 
Early  seekers  of  Christ  directed  and  encouraged : — I.  What  it  is  to  seek  Christ 
EARLY.  The  expression  is  sometimes  used  for  the  duty  of  prayer,  sometimes  for 
the  whole  of  religion.  To  seek  Christ  is  to  seek  the  true  knowledge  of  Christ,  and 
a  saving  interest  in  Him.  It  is  to  seek  that  He  may  be  all  that  to  us,  and  that  we 
may  be  all  that  to  Him,  for  which  He  is  made  known  and  proposed  in  the  gospel. 
To  seek  ^arly  signifies  carefully,  earnestly,  diligently.  1.  We  are  to  seek 
early  with  reipect  to  the  time  of  life,  or  in  the  younger  part  of  our  days.  The 
greatest  and  most  important  concern  of  all  others  is  not  to  be  put  off  to  the  busy 
time  of  life,  that  is  incumbered  with  the  cares  and  hurries  of  this  world ;  nor  to  old 
age,  that  is  enfeebled  by  decays  and  loaded  with  infirmities.  It  is  never  too  soon 
to  seek  after  Christ,  but  it  may  be  too  late.  2.  We  are  to  seek  Him  early  with 
respect  to  the  day  of  grace,  or  to  our  opportunities  of  seeking  Him.  Whenever  God 
calls  us  by  His  Word  or  providence,  we  should  be  early  and  speedy  in  attending  to 
those  calls.  3.  It  is  to  seek  Him  early  with  respect  to  all  other  things,  or  above 
and  before  all  thing  else.  This  relates  to  the  earnestness  and  fervour  with  which 
He  is  to  be  sought  in  the  younger  part  of  our  days.  It  is  to  seek  Him  with  the 
whole  heart.  II.  What  peculiar  encouragements  there  are  to  such  as  seek 
Christ  early.  1.  Early  seeking  is  most  pleasing  to  Him.  2.  It  is  the  ordinary 
course  of  Divine  grace  to  be  found  of  early  seekers.  3.  Such  have  fewer  obstruc- 
tions in  seeking.  4.  There  are  peculiar  promises  to  such.  (J.  Guyse,  D.D.)  The 
holy  quest : — The  legend  of  the  "  Holy  Grail  "  teUs  us  that  Joseph  of  Arimathea 
came  into  possession  of  the  dish  from  which  the  Saviour  ate,  or,  according  to  another 
version,  the  cup  from  which  He  drank,  when  He  celebrated  the  last  Passover  in  the 
tipper  room  with  His  apostles.  When  Joseph  stood  at  the  Cross,  some  of  the  blood 
which  came  from  the  wounds  of  Christ  fell  into  this  vessel,  and  Joseph  ever  after- 


196  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  rm. 

wards  carried  about  this  relic  with  him  in  all  his  wanderings,  until  at  length  he 
came  to  England.  The  very  presence  of  this  sacred  vessel  had  a  mystic  influence : 
miraculous  cures  were  effected  by  it.  But  at  length,  in  consequence  of  the  wicked- 
ness of  the  land,  this  sacred  vessel  was  no  longer  permitted  to  remain  visible 
amongst  men.  What  could  be  a  worthier  task  of  Christian  knighthood  than  to  go 
in  search  of  it?  Man  is,  by  the  very  constitution  of  his  nature,  a  seeker.  For 
wise  and  good  reasons  God  has  made  us  creatures  of  desire.  It  is  of  the  utmost 
importance  that  this  seeking  instinct  of  our  nature  should  be  wisely  directed.  This 
Book  of  Proverbs  speaks  to  you  of  a  treasure  which  is  worthy  of  your  pursuit,  and 
which  is  the  most  valuable  of  all  treasures.  I.  This  wisdom  is  a  hidden  tbeasuke. 
Never  be  led  astray  by  that  lie  of  the  devil,  that  those  things  which  can  be  seen  are 
the  most  real  and  substantial.  It  is  a  delusion  which  is  the  parent  of  all  ignoble 
life.  The  existence  of  God  is  the  greatest  reality  of  all,  and  yet  your  eye  cannot 
see  God.  You  cannot  see  your  mother's  love.  II.  This  wisdom  is  a  sacred 
TBEAStTEE.  The  grail  was  called  the  holy  grail  because  it  had  sacred  associations. 
God's  own  wisdom  is  that  which  we  are  invited  to  share.  By  wisdom  is  not  meant 
mere  knowledge,  but  that  heavenly  yet  practical  wisdom  which  has  to  do  with  the 
most  sacred  region  of  our  being — the  conscience,  the  affections,  the  will — and 
which  enables  a  man  to  walk  through  life  in  a  right  and  wise  direction,  and  in  a 
spirit  sympathetic  with  the  mind  of  God.  No  man  can  be  said  to  live  wisely  who 
is  living  out  of  harmony  with  God's  own  purpose  concerning  him.  True  wisdom 
enables  us  to  make  a  wise  use  of  all  earthly  knowledge,  but  it  is  itself  a  heavenly 
and  sacred  treasure.  III.  This  wisdom  is  a  pbiceless  treasure.  Wisdom  may 
sometimes  put  a  man  in  the  way  of  obtaining  wealth ;  but  no  amount  of  wealth 
can  ever  buy  wisdom.  The  true  wisdom  will  lead  you  into  the  paths  of  duty, 
honour,  and  integrity.  No  amount  of  wealth  can  by  any  possibility  be  a  com- 
pensation for  the  lack  of  the  priceless  treasure.  IV.  This  wisdom  is  a  life-oivino 
TBEASUBE.  1.  It  is  a  healing  influence.  2.  A  nourishing  influence.  3.  A  life- 
renewing  influence.  V.  This  wisdom  is  a  treasure  which  mat  be  rovyro  by  evert 
EARNEST  seeker.  Id  the  way  of — 1.  Eeverence.  2.  Prayer.  3.  Courage.  4.  Purity. 
I  have  said  that  man  is  born  a  seeker.  It  is  also  true  that  the  elements  of  heroism 
lie  embedded  in  the  very  constitution  of  our  nature.  There  is  plenty  of  room  for 
Christian  knighthood  yet — for  true  chivalry  of  heart  and  life.  Christ  is  the 
Divine  Wisdom  incarnate — the  Word  of  God  in  human  nature.  Then  seek  Christ. 
(T.  Campbell  Finlayson.)  Advantages  of  seeking  God  early  : — The  favour  of  the 
Almighty  has  always  been  bestowed  upon  such  as  remember  Him  in  the  days  of 
their  youth.  See  the  cases  of  Joseph,  Samuel,  Solomon,  Josiah,  Hannah,  Kuth, 
Timothy,  &e.  1.  There  is  an  incalculable  advantage  in  beginning  in  season  a  work 
which  we  know  to  be  long  and  difficult.  2.  Another  advantage  is  the  defence  which 
is  thus  set  up  against  the  encroachments  of  vice.  Youth  is  the  season  of  warm  and 
generous  affections :  the  time  when  inexperience  entices  into  a  thousand  snares ; 
the  season  for  active  exertion.  In  youth,  we  say,  the  future  hinges  on  the  present. 
If  the  thoughts  and  feelings  are  pure,  the  soul  will  be  bright  with  happiness. 
8.  Another  advantage  is  the  promotion  of  happiness  in  the  family  circle,  and  the 
beneficent  influence  thus  exerted  upon  companions  and  friends.  4.  Another  advan- 
tage is  the   indescribable  satisfaction  which  is  afforded  to  parents  and  friends. 

5.  Another  advantage  is  the  ready  access  which  it  affords  to  the  throne  of  grace, 

6.  Another  is  that  we  are  thus  prepared  to  meet  with  a  smile  the  dark  frowns  of 
adversity.  7.  There  is  every  encouragement  for  seeking  early  after  God,  because 
we  are  thus  enabled  to  await,  with  calm  and  holy  resignation,  the  coming  of 
death.  (John  N.  Norton.)  Seeking  God  early  : — The  Hebrew  word  used  denotes 
seeking  at  the  dawn  or  beginning  of  a  day.  From  the  words  "  I  love  them  that 
love  Me  "  it  might  be  inferred  that  man  must  love  God  as  a  preliminary  or  con- 
dition to  God's  loving  man.  The  truth,  however,  is,  that  God's  love  of  man 
must  in  every  case  precede  man's  love  to  God,  and  be  its  chief  producing 
cause.  "We  love  Him  because  He  first  loved  us."  There  is  no  natural  power 
in  men  of  loving  God.  No  one  of  us  will  love  God  because  everything  around 
proves  that  God  loves  him.  Our  love  to  God  is  nothing  else  but  the  reflection 
of  God's  love  to  us.  What  produces  love  to  God  ?  You  cannot  make  yourselves 
love  God.  It  is  God  alone  who  can  make  you  love  God.  When  we  answer  to 
His  love,  becoming  new  creatures  through  the  motions  of  His  Spirit,  then,  as 
though  He  had  not  loved  us  before,  so  endearing  is  the  relationship  into  which  we 
are  brought,  that  He  says  "  I  love  them  that  love  Me."  If  we  cannot  make  our- 
selves  love  God,  we  may  think  over  the  proofs  of  His  love,  we  may  look  at  Hia 


CHAP.  Tin.]  PROVERBS.  197 

picture,  read  over  His  letters,  and  so  put  ourselves  in  the  way  of  receiving  those 
influences  which  can  alone  change  the  heart.  From  the  words  "  Those  that  seek 
Me  early  shall  find  Me  "  we  need  not  argue  that  if  He  has  not  been  sought  early 
it  is  in  vain  to  seek  Him  late.  What  are  the  motives  which  should  conspire  to 
urge  the  young  to  an  immediate  attention  to  the  things  which  belong  unto  their 
peace  ?  1.  The  life  of  the  young  is  as  uncertain  as  that  of  the  old.  Health  and 
strength  are  no  security  against  the  speedy  approaches  of  death.  Now  is  the  only 
moment  of  which  you  are  sure.  2.  They  will  have  much  greater  difiSculty  in  their 
seeking  who  fail  to  seek  early.  Many  suppose  that  one  time  will  be  as  fitting  as 
another,  late  as  early,  for  seeking  the  Lord.  They  think  that,  if  they  live,  repen- 
tance will  be  as  much  within  their  power  twenty  or  thirty  years  hence  as  it  is  now. 
But  this  is  a  supposition  for  which  there  is  no  warrant.  An  old  writer  says,  ••  God 
has,  indeed,  promised  that  He  will  at  all  times  give  pardon  to  the  penitent,  but  I 
do  not  find  that  He  has  promised  that  He  will,  at  all  times,  give  penitence  to  the 
sinful."  By  continuing  in  sin  habits  are  formed  which  wUl  strengthen  into  task- 
masters, and  which,  when  men  grow  old,  will  be  well-nigh  irresistible.  Very  small 
is  the  likelihood  of  producing  any  moral  impression  on  those  who  have  grown  old 
in  forgetfulness  of  God.  We  know  no  so  unpromising  a  subject  of  moral  attack  as 
an  aged  sinner,  always  supposing  him  to  have  heard  the  gospel  in  his  youth.  Then 
give  God  the  prime  of  your  strength,  the  flower  of-  your  days,  the  vigour  of  your 
intellect,  the  ardency  of  your  affections.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  On  the  advantage 
of  early  piety  : — That  the  religion  of  Christ  is,  beyond  all  others,  calculated  to  pro- 
duce private  and  public  felicity  no  man  who  is  acquainted  with  that  religion  can 
doubt.  1.  Those  who  enjoy  the  singular  benefit  of  a  pious  education  have  the 
greatest  probability  of  success  and  perseverance  in  their  course.  Of  two 
travellers  who  have  the  same  journey  to  go,  he  is  much  more  likely  to  accomplish 
it  who,  rising  betimes  in  the  morning,  sets  out  in  all  the  liveliness  and  vigour  of 
his  strength  than  he  who  drowsily  sleeps  till  noon  and  in  the  heat  and  toil  of  the 
day  can  scarce  drag  his  feeble  feet  along.  Good  principles  and  habits,  early  im- 
bibed and  formed,  are  of  such  power  that  they  will  scarcely  permit  a  wide  deviation 
from  right.  2.  As  no  good  either  is  or  can  be  perfected  in  the  human  mind  with- 
out almighty  grace,  so  we  have  the  most  solid  assurance  of  that  Divine  assistance 
when,  in  our  early  days,  we  carefully  cherish  the  influences  of  God's  Holy  Spirit. 
Our  text  is  not  only  a  promise,  it  is  the  most  condescending  call  from  the  Lord  of 
wisdom,  inviting  us  to  His  love.  Love  begets  love.  Our  love  to  Him  shall  be 
repaid  by  His  love  to  us.  3.  Hence  arise  many  striking  advantages.  The  first 
tincture  is  thus  given  to  the  mind,  the  first  bias  to  the  affections  ; J  thereby  right 
habits  and  right  principles  get  the  first  possession  and  preserve  the  inclination  and 
practice  from  those  warping  and  destructive  customs  and  opinions  which  it  is 
difficult  to  bend  again  and  reduce  to  their  original  and  necessary  straightness.  We 
all  know  how  strong  are  the  prepossessions  and  prejudices  of  education — ill  prepos- 
sessions and  unhappy  prejudices — and  we  may  be  perfectly  satisfied  that  good  pre- 
possessions and  prejudices  are  equally  prevalent  and  powerful.  "  The  cask  long 
retains  the  smell  of  the  liquor  with  which  it  was  first  seasoned  "  (Horace).  How 
difficult  it  is  to  gain  the  superiority  over  habits  and  customs,  even  in  the  most 
trifling  matters,  no  man  is  ignorant ;  but  to  subdue  habits  which  have  long  lived 
with  us,  and  gained  our  approbation — habits  of  vice,  to  which  sensual  affections 
have  annexed  pleasure  in  the  gratification ;  totally  to  alter  our  conduct,  to  pluck  out 
the  right  eye  of  a  darling  lust,  to  cut  off  the  right  hand  of  a  profitable  sin — oh, 
how  arduous,  how  painful  1  Here,  then,  we  discern  the  unspeakable  advantage  of 
early  good  habits  and  principles,  which,  preserving  us  in  the  road  of  duty, 
secure  us  from  this  most  difficult,  if  not,  in  some  oases,  impossible  task,  of  cor- 
recting vicious  habits,  and  amending  corrupted  customs  and  notions,  which, 
through  long  possession,  become  intimate  to  men  almost  as  themselves.  And  the 
early  dedication  of  ourselves  to  God  will  be  found  not  less  comfortable  than 
advantageous.  It  will  teach  you  content  in  every  station,  will  enable  you  to 
sail  through  life  with  as  much  ease  and  serenity  as  the  unavoidable  difficulties 
of  this  transitory  state  will  permit ;  will  give  to  your  mind  the  purest 
pleasures  and  most  satisfactory  enjoyments ;  wUl  make  you  a  comfort  to  yourself, 
a  blessing  to  your  friends,  and  an  ornament  to  society.  {W.  Dodd,  LL.D.) 
Early  piety : — 1.  Men  have  souls  and  minds  capable  of  being  very  good  or  very 
bad,  of  enjoying  much  and  suffering  much.  It  is  important  that  a  right  direction 
be  given  early  in  life  to  man's  whole  nature.  This  can  be  secured  in  no  way  but 
by  living,  hearty  piety.    2.  Early  piety  will  have  a  good  effect  in  directing  as  to  a 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tm. 


right  calling  in  life,  and  to  a  choice  of  suitable  companions  and  associates. 
8.  Early  piety  alone  can  surely  protect  us  from  dashing  on  those  rocks  where  so 
many  have  made  shipwreck,  both  for  this  world  and  the  next.  4.  If  we  do  not 
become  pious  in  youth  it  is  very  uncertain  whether  we  ever  shall  become  so  at  all. 
When  men  grow  old  their  hearts  become  harder,  their  wills  more  stubborn,  and 
their  sound  conversion  less  probable.  And  a  large  number  of  the  human  race  die 
before  the  period  of  youth  has  passed.  5.  Should  you  live  through  youth,  how 
can  you  bear  the  heavy  burdens  of  middle  life  without  the  grace  of  God  ?  If  one 
comes  to  old  age,  with  all  its  infirmities,  and  has  not  the  grace  of  God  in  him,  how 
sad  his  condition,  how  cheerless  his  prospects!  Application:  1.  Are  you  young? 
Be  not  wise  in  your  own  conceit.  Live  by  faith  on  the  Son  of  God.  2.  Axe  you 
middle-aged  ?  Is  the  burden  of  cares  heavy  ?  Cast  it  upon  the  Lord.  Trust  in 
the  Lord  and  do  good.  Glorify  Christ  in  your  body  and  spirit,  which  are  His. 
3.  Are  you  aged?  Give  yourself  much  to  devotion.  Set  an  example  of  sweet 
submission  to  the  will  of  God.  The  nearer  you  draw  to  heaven,  the  more  let  its 
light  and  peace  shine  in  your  face,  cheer  your  heart,  and  make  your  life  a 
blessing  to  others.  (W.  S.  Plumer,  D.D.)  Seeking  Christ  early:—!.  Consideb 
WHAT  IT  IS  TO  SEEK  Cheist  eablt.  To  scck  Christ  is  to  seek  the  true  knowledge 
of  Him,  and  a  saving  interest  in  Him.  As  it  relates  to  the  act  of  seeking  Him,  it 
is  to  attend  upon  all  the  means  of  grace  with  seriousness,  faith,  hope,  love,  and 
delight.  We  are  to  seek  early.  With  respect  to  all  other  things,  or  before  and 
above  all  things  else.  This  relates  to  the  earnestness  and  fervour  with  which  He  ia 
to  be  sought.     We  are  to  seek  Him  with  the  whole  heart.    H.  Consideb  what 

SECULAR  ENCOITRAGEMENTS  THERE  ABE  TO  SOCH  AS  SEEK  ChRIST  EABLT  THAT  THEY  SHALL 

FIND  Hm.  1.  Early  seeking  is  most  pleasing  to  Him.  2.  It  is  the  ordinary  course 
of  Divine  grace  to  be  found  of  early  seekers.  3.  Early  seekers  have  fewer  obstruc- 
tions to  their  seeking  and  finding  Christ  than  others  have.  4.  There  are  peculiar 
promises  made  to  early  seekers.  {T.  Eannam.)  Seeking  the  Lord  : — In  seeking 
the  Lord — I.  Keep  two  things  perpetually  m  view  —  His  truth  and  the 
INFLUENCES  OF  His  HoLT  SPIRIT.  Without  His  truth  we  can  have  no  rule,  and 
•without  the  influences  of  His  Holy  Spirit  we  can  have  no  disposition  to  prize  the 
right  rule :  both  are  absolutely  necessary.  II.  Under  the  influence  of  the  Divine 
Spirit  we  shall  invariably  seek  God  as  a  God  of  mercy.  III.  As  a  God  of  peace. 
IV.  As  A  KING.     V.  As  A  GUIDE.     VI.  As  A  PORTION.    Now  Ict  me  apply  my  subject. 

I.  There  are  some  of  you  who  do  not  seek  the  Lord — you  can  live  without  Him 
perfectly  well.  2.  There  are  others  who  seek  the  Lord,  and  perhaps  you  wonder 
why  you  do  not  find  Him.  Now,  examine  yourselves  ;  is  there  not  a  great  deal  of 
hypocrisy,  of  deceit,  in  you  ?  3.  There  are  others  who  seek  Him,  and  seek  Him 
honestly,  and  who  think  they  do  not  find  Him,  when  in  reality  they  do  find  Him. 
They  do  not  find  Him  in  the  consolation  which  they  seem  to  need  ;  but  they  find 
Him  in  principle — they  find  Him  in  driving  guilt  from  the  conscience,  they  find 
Him  in  enabling  them  to  triumph  over  the  tyranny  of  sin.  4.  There  are  others 
who  rejoice  in  the  God  of  their  salvation,  who  can  say,  "I  know  that  I  have 
sought  and  found  the  Lord ;  my  Saviour  is  in  me  the  hope  of  glory.  I  cannot  but 
rejoice  in  Him  at  the  present  moment."  Kejoice  with  trembling.  Remember,  you 
have  many  and  mighty  enemies  within  and  without.  (IF.  Howels.)  Early  seeking 
of  Christ  encouraged : — I.  What  is  implied  in  seeking  the  Lord  Jesus?  1.  A 
decided  conviction  of  the  utter  insufiSciency  of  every  other  object  for  our  happiness 
and  salvation.  2.  A  decided  persuasion  that  in  Christ  Jesus  every  blessing  that 
the  soul  requires  is  to  be  found.  3.  A  strong  desire  to  obtain  an  interest  in  Christ. 
4.  Persevering  efforts   in  the  use  of  all  appointed  means  to  obtain  this  object. 

II.  What  it  is  to  find  Christ,  and  the  happiness  that  results  from  it.  1.  The 
expression,  finding  Christ — (1)  Is  figurative,  and  may  be  considered  as  intimating 
their  obtaining  a  saving  discovery  of  His  character.  (2)  May  intimate  also  their 
forming  a  saving  connection  with  Christ.  (3)  Suggests  their  obtaining  all  the 
blessings  of  salvation.  2.  The  happiness  that  finding  Christ  yields.  (1)  They 
that  find  Christ  obtain  deliverance  from  the  worst  evils — horror  of  conscience, 
burden  of  guilt,  dread  of  Jehovah's  wrath,  tyranny  of  evil  passions,  thraldom  of 
Satan.  (2)  They  obtain  the  most  valuable  advantages.  They  obtain  an  interest  in 
the  favour  of  that  God  who  has  every  blessing  at  His  disposal ;  the  graces  which 
beautify  the  character,  and  give  peace  and  joy  to  the  soul  in  their  exercise ;  an 
illumination  which  solves  their  doubts,  scatters  their  fears,  and  opens  before  them 
scenes  glowing  with  the  splendour  of  eternal  day.  The  heart  now  finds  an  object 
which  can  gratify  its  amplest  wishes,  and  may  rejoice  that  these  advantages  perish 


CHAP,  vm.]  PROVERBS.  199 

not  in  the  using,  and  lie  secure  beyond  the  reach  of  accident.  (3)  They  cherish  the 
most  blessed  hopes  with  regard  to  the  future.  HI.  Those  that  seek  Cheist  eaelt 
HAVE  THE  STKONGEST  BEASON  TO  EXPECT  SUCCESS.  1.  The  Kedeemsr  takes  peculiar 
delight  in  the  movements  of  early  piety.  These,  in  an  especial  manner,  honour 
His  supreme  excellence.  2.  The  young  are  likely  to  seek  Him  with  undivided 
hearts,  and  from  affectionate  choice.  3.  The  young  have  peculiar  reason  to  expect 
the  aids  of  the  Spirit  in  seeking  Christ.  4.  The  language  of  the  text  suggests  that 
those  who  do  not  seek  the  Lord  Jesus  in  their  youth  have  much  reason  to  fear  that 
they  shall  never  find  Him.  Conclusion :  1.  Let  me  beseech  the  young  to  seek  the 
Lord  while  He  may  be  found.  2.  I  exhort  those  who  have  sought  the  Saviour 
early  to  maintain  their  earnestness  in  religion.  3.  Let  those  who  are  in  advanced 
life  consider  their  ways  and  be  wise.  {H.  Belfrage.)  Seekers  who  do  not  seek  in 
vain  : — ^All  the  people  in  the  world  are  seekers,  only  some  people  spend  their  time 
in  seeking  for  silly  and  useless  things.  A  king  that  I  have  heard  of,  instead  of 
ruling  his  people  properly,  neglected  his  duties,  and  spent  his  time  in  going  from 
kingdom  to  kingdom  seeking  for  a  mouse  with  pink  eyes.  What  a  waste  of  time 
for  such  a  man !  Those  who  are  really  learned  have  gathered  their  wisdom  by 
being  ready  to  learn.  I.  Those  who  begin  to  seek  God  early  have  longee  time 
IN  which  to  leaen  about  Him.  People  who  study  music  after  they  have  grown 
up  seldom  become  good  players  or  singers ;  nor  do  I  believe  that  any  one  ever  really 
masters  grammar  who  does  not  begin  to  study  it  thoroughly  at  an  early  age. 
Begin  therefore  at  once  to  learn,  for  you  have  lost  already  more  time  than  you  can 
well  spare.  II.  Begin  eablt,  because  you  will  have  less  to  unle.ven.  Socrates, 
a  wise  man,  charged  one  of  his  disciples  double  fees  because,  he  said,  he  not  only 
had  to  teach  him  how  to  speak,  but  also  how  to  hold  his  tongue.  A  blacksmith 
could  never  become  a  painter,  at  least  not  very  readily,  for  he  would  have  to  unlearn 
so  much.  If  you  fill  your  mind  with  foolish  ideas,  a  vast  amount  of  time  will  be 
required  to  get  rid  of  these  follies  before  you  can  be  instructed  in  wisdom.  HI.  I 
think,  too,  that  you  will  be  more  aedent  and  eager  in  the  puesuit  of  wisdom 
if  you  begin  young,  and  you  will  find  that  history  confirms  the  truth  of  my  opmion. 
You  will  not  be  so  readily  discouraged,  and  will  more  easily  master  your  difficulties 
than  older  people  can.  Little  children-students,  we  are  here  assured,  shall  not 
seek  in  vain,  but  they  will  be  required  to  take  pains.  Columbus  somehow  got  the 
idea  that  America  existed,  and  he  went  to  find  the  great  unknown  land.  Day  after 
day  he  sailed  on  without  seeing  it,  but  he  one  day  spied  some  seaweed  of  a  kind 
different  to  that  known  in  Europe.  This  encouraged  him  to  continue  his  search. 
So  you,  too,  will  sometimes  feel  inclined  to  give  up  in  despair,  but  keep  on ;  it  is 
worth  aU  the  trouble  you  can  ever  expend  upon  it  to  become  wise.  And  what  joy 
it  will  impart  to  you  when  at  length  you  see  what  you  desire  I  (N.  Wiseman.) 
Seek  Jesus  early  : — Our  business  is  to  seek  Jesus  early  in  life.  Happy  are  the 
young  whose  morning  is  spent  with  Jesus  !  It  is  never  too  soon  to  seek  the  Lord 
Jesus.  Early  seekers  make  certain  finders.  We  should  seek  Him  early  by  diligence. 
Thriving  tradesmen  are  early  risers,  and  thriving  saints  seek  Jesus  eagerly.  Those 
who  find  Jesus  to  their  enrichment  give  their  hearts  to  seeking  Him.  We  must 
seek  Him  first,  and  thus  earliest.  Above  all  things  Jesus.  Jesus  first,  and  nothing 
else  even  as  a  bad  second.  The  blessing  is,  that  He  will  be  found.  He  reveals 
Himself  more  and  more  clearly  to  our  search.  He  gives  Himself  up  more  fuUy  to 
our  fellowship.  {C.  H.  Spvrgeon.)  Seeking  Christ  in  the  dawn  of  life :— The 
word  "  early  "  is  not  in  the  original.  The  passage  therefore  might  be  read  thus — 
"  And  those  that  seek  Me  shall  find  Me."  Yet  we  cannot  altogether  throw  out  the 
word  "  early  "  ;  it  seems  to  complete  the  rhythm.  The  word"  seek  "  as  originally 
employed  is  a  word  which  involves  the  meaning  of  seeking  in  the  dawn — just  as 
the  east  is  whitening  a  little,  just  as  the  day  is  being  born.  Thus  we  have  some 
claim  to  the  word  early.  There  are  men  who  do  not  wait  until  midday  in  order  to 
resume  their  journey  after  they  have  been  benighted  ;  they  have,  indeed,  succuinbed 
to  circumstances,  saying,  "  The  darkness  has  overtaken  us,  and  here  we  must  lie  "; 
but  the  moment  there  is  a  streak  in  the  east  up  they  start,  the  staff  is  resumed,  and 
the  journey  is  prosecuted  with  renewed  energy.  This  is  the  image  of  the  text : 
They  that  seek  Me  in  the  dawn  shall  find  Me ;  they  that  seek  Me  at  daybreak ;  they 
that  come  after  Me  ere  the  dew  be  risen  shall  find  Me,  and  we  shall  have  a  long 
morning  talk  together :  when  the  soul  is  young,  when  the  life  is  free,  when  the 
heart  is  unsophisticated,  they  that  seek  Me  in  the  dawn  shall  find  Me,  for  I  have 
been  waiting  for  them,  yea,  standing  by  them  whilst  they  were  sleeping,  and  half- 
hoping  that  the  moment  they  open  their  eyes  they  would  see  Me,  and  exclaim, 


aOO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nn. 

"  Blessed  Spirit,  take  charge  of  my  poor,  young,  little,  frail  life  all  the  day,  and  tell 
me  what  I  ought  to  do."  Fool  is  he  who  begins  the  day  prayerlessly,  who  takes  his 
own  life  into  his  own  hand :  verily  in  doing  so  he  puts  his  money  into  bags  with 
holes  in  them,  and  at  night  he  shall  have  nothing.     (tT".  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  18.  Riches  and  honour  are  with  He ;  yea,  durable  riches  and  righteous- 
ness.— On  gaining  and  using  riches  : — Whatever  is  true  and  substantial  happiness 
even  in  this  life  has  a  necessary  dependence  upon  morality  and  religion.  Wealth 
and  riches  are  but  heavy  encumbrances  and  unprofitable  lumber  if  they  are 
not  made  use  of  to  reward  the  good,  to  excite  the  diligent,  and  to  relieve  the 
oppressed.  But  that  religion  should  be  the  path  that  leads  to  wealth  and  substance, 
and  that  to  be  good  is  the  way  to  become  rich,  seems  to  be  a  paradox  contrary  to 
the  sentiments  of  mankind.  Piety  may  indeed  comfort  us  in  our  wants,  and 
support  us  in  our  afflictions ;  but  that  it  should  be  the  best  factor  to  gain  them  and 
store  them  up  is  an  assertion  so  opposite  to  the  persuasion  of  men  that  it  seems 
like  the  wild  affirmation  of  one  who  would  defend  a  novelty.  I.  Piety  is  the  most 
EFFECT^UAL  MEANS  TO  OBTAIN  EicHES.  1.  Richcs  are  the  gift  of  God,  not  the  goods  of 
fortune.  If  there  is  a  wise  and  provident  Governor  of  the  world,  the  success  of  all 
human  enterprises  depends  upon  His  disposition  of  things.  If  the  men  of  virtue 
and  piety  are  the  favourites  of  the  Almighty,  they  may  expect  bounties  as  the  signs 
of  His  love  ;  if  they  be  His  faithful  servants,  as  rewards  of  their  fidelity.  2.  See 
what  piety  is,  examine  it  in  itself  and  in  its  consequences,  and  we  shall  find  it  to  be 
naturally  productive  of  riches  and  plenty.  Piety  is  the  habitual  practice  of  moral 
and  Divine  virtues,  each  one  of  which  has  a  tendency  to  enrich  its  followers,  e.g., 
industry,  temperance,  humility,  brotherly  love,  liberality,  and  charity.  3.  Credit 
and  reputation  in  the  world  have  a  very  great  dependence  upon  honesty  and  an 
upright  life,  and  they  are  things  absolutely  necessary  for  the  promotion  of  our  health 
and  worldly  interest.  The  only  solid  foundation  of  a  good  name  is  piety  and 
virtue.  4.  Piety  and  virtue  direct  to  the  use  of  those  methods  which  are  honest 
and  lawful.  The  most  honest  means  are  always  the  sweetest.  II.  The  securing 
OF  biches  or  making  them  durable.     This  may  be  considered  in  a  double  respect — 

I.  In  relation  to  ourselves.  2.  In  relation  to  posterity.  Whatever  is  got  by  means 
that  are  repugnant  to  piety  is  not  to  be  kept,  but  must  be  parted  with.  AH  vices 
have  a  natural  tendency  to  impoverish  mankind.  It  is  well  to  note  that  the  efficacy 
of  piety  is  not  bounded  here  ;  it  reaches  beyond  the  grave,  and  entails  its  blessings 
on  future  generations.  The  generation  of  the  faithful  shall  be  blessed.  {William 
Hayley,  M.A.) 

Ver.  20.  I  lead  in  the  way  of  righteonsness. — Substance  the  inheritance  of  the 
saints  : — I.  Jesus  leads  in  the  wat  of  righteousness — 1.  By  leading  them  into  His 
holy,  strict,  and  condemning  law.     2.  By  implanting  sincerity  and  uprightness. 

II.  Jesus  leads  in  the  midst  of  the  paths  of  judgment.  These  paths  of  judg- 
ment are  when  He,  with  His  holy  eye,  scrutinises  the  heart  and  brings  to  light  its 
secret  workings.  He  leads  by  setting  up  a  court  of  judicature  in  the  heart, 
arraigning  the  soul  at  its  bar ;  not  with  vengeance,  as  punishing  a  criminal,  but  as 
a  parent,  after  the  child  has  been  playing  truant  all  day.  III.  Jesus  causes  the 
SOUL  TO  inherit  SUBSTANCE.  Something  solid,  weighty,  powerful,  real,  and  eternal. 
Power  and  life  and  feeling,  and  the  blessed  kingdom  of  God  set  up  with  authority 
in  the  soul.  A  substantial  religion — something  that  is  dropped  into  the  soul  from 
His  own  blessed  self,  something  that  comes  out  of  Himself,  and  out  of  the  fulness 
of  His  own  loving  heart,  to  make  them  rejoice  and  be  glad.  (J.  G.  Philpot.)  In 
the  midst  of  the  paths  of  Judgment. — The  golden  mean  : — In  this  country,  if  you 
walk  in  the  middle  of  the  street  in  the  town,  or  in  the  middle  of  the  road  in  the 
country,  you  are  exposed  to  danger  from  horses  and  vehicles,  for  which  that  part 
of  the  road  was  reserved,  and  therefore  side-paths  and  pavements  have  been  pro- 
vided, where  you  can  take  refuge  from  the  traffic.  It  is  different  in  the  East. 
There  the  roads  are  so  badly  made,  and  so  little  frequented,  that  you  are  always 
safest  in  the  middle.  There  is  a  rock,  perhaps,  on  this  side,  and  a  precipice  or  a 
ditch  on  that,  and  the  edges  of  the  road  are  always  so  rugged  and  uneven  that  only 
the  well-worn  track  in  the  middle  is  available  for  easy  travelling.  And  from  this 
condition  of  Eastern  roads  has  arisen  the  moral  lesson  that  the  middle  of  t^e  path 
of  conduct  is  the  safest  and  the  best.  The  sentiment  may  be  exemplified  in  every- 
thing moral  and  religious.  The  Greeks  of  old  always  spoke  of  the  golden  mean 
between  two  extremes,  and  were  fond  of  proving  that  truth  and  safety  always  lay  in 


CHAP,  vm.]  PROVERBS.  201 

the  middle.  The  wise  man  speaks  of  the  paths  of  judgment.  These  paths  are  on 
either  side  of  the  way  of  righteousness,  which  is  the  middle  ;  and  they  are  called 
paths  of  judgment  because,  if  you  stray  into  them  off  the  strait  and  narrow  way 
of  righteousness,  you  will  meet  with  dangers  and  evils  that  will  assuredly  punish 
you.  The  virtues  that  yield  the  blessings  of  life  are  in  the  middle,  between  the 
vices  that  wreck  and  blight  your  life.  A  little  too  much  on  the  one  side  or  the 
other  makes  all  the  difference  in  the  world  ;  and  so  close  to  each  other  do  the  evils 
you  have  to  avoid  come,  that  narrow  is  the  way  that  leadeth  unto  life,  and  few 
there  be  that  find  it.  The  side-path  may,  therefore,  be  smooth  and  pleasant,  but 
it  leads  to  danger.  The  middle  of  the  road  may  be  rough  and  difficult,  but  it  is 
safe — the  way  of  righteousness,  between  the  paths  of  judgment.  (H.  Macmillan,  D.D.) 

Ver.  21.  That  I  may  cause  them  that  love  Me  to  inherit  substance. — Man't 
enrichment  by  God : — I.  Love — the  love  of  God  as  the  source  of  evekt  blessing. 
II.  The  love  of  created  being  is  excited  by  some  good,  real  or  imaginary,  in  the 

OBJECT  beloved.       III.    Man'S  INDIVIDCfAL  SINS,  WANTS,  AND  NECESSITIES.       IV.    OBSERVE 

THE  WAY  IN  WHICH  MAN  IS  TO  BECOME  RICH.  God  gives  Himself — involving  every  good. 
V.  God  Himself  is  to  be  the  wealth  of  His  family  for  evermore.  {W.  Howels.) 
Real  substance  in  spiritual  things  : — This  is  among  the  golden  sayings  of  the  book. 
In  the  text  is  an  encouragement  to  religion  drawn  from  the  incomparable  benefit 
of  it.  "  They  that  love  Me  shall  not  be  losers  by  Me."  The  Hebrew  word  for 
substance  means  that  which  is :  that  which  hath  a  firm  and  solid  consistency. 
1.  By  substance  maybe  meant  ■  Christ.  He  must  needs  be  substance  who  gives 
being  and  substance  to  everything.  2.  By  substance  is  meant  the  grace  of  the 
Spirit.  That  must  needs  be  substance  which  partakes  of  the  fulness  of  God. 
3.  By  substance  is  meant  salvation,  expressly  called  substance  (Heb.  x.  34). 
I.  The  qualification  of  the  persons.  "  Those  that  love  Me."  1.  The  affection : 
Love.  Love  doth  mellow  and  perfume  holy  duties.  Love  is  that  which  the  Lord 
is  most  delighted  with.  2.  The  object  of  love :  Christ.  Did  men  know  Christ,  it 
were  impossible  to  keep  them  off  from  loving  Him.  II.  The  specification  of  the 
PRIVILEGE.  Why  is  grace  called  substance  ?  1.  For  its  preciousness.  2.  For  its 
suitableness.  3.  For  its  needfulness.  4.  For  its  satisfyingness.  5.  For  its  cer- 
tainty. 6.  For  its  durableness.  Substance  signifies  something  that  runs  parallel 
with  eternity.  That  spiritual  things  must  needs  have  a  real  being  and  substance 
in  them  appears  by  two  convincing  arguments.  (1)  Because  God,  who  is  the 
original  pattern  of  truth,  hath  asserted  it.  (2)  This  is  most  consistent  with  the 
rational  nature.  Learn — 1.  The  incomparable  excellence  of  grace.  2.  See  the 
difference  between  the  things  of  God  and  the  things  of  the  world.  3.  See  the 
egregious  folly  of  those  who  mind  things  of  less  moment,  but  do  not  look  after 
substance  (Isa.  Iv.  2).  Why  do  not  men  labour  more  after  spiritual  substance  ? 
Answer :  1.  Ignorance.  2.  Presumption.  If  we  have  this  spiritual  substance,  we 
can  remember  a  time  when  we  wanted  it.  We  know  how  we  came  by  it.  We 
highly  prize  it.     (T.  Watson.) 

Vers.  22-36.  The  Lord  possessed  me  in  the  beginning:  of  His  way. — Wisdom  the 
first  creation  of  God  : — Here  is  the  noble  idea  which  overturns  at  a  touch  all 
mythological  speculations  about  the  origin  of  things — an  idea  which  is  in  deep 
harmony  with  all  the  best  knowledge  of  our  time — that  there  is  nothing  fortuitous 
in  the  creation  of  the  world  ;  the  Creator  is  not  a  blind  Force,  but  an  intelligent 
Being  whose  first  creation  is  wisdom.  He  is  the  origin  of  a  law  by  which  He 
means  to  bind  Himself ;  arbitrariness  finds  no  place  in  His  counsels ;  accident  has 
no  part  in  His  works ;  in  wisdom  hath  He  formed  them  all.  Here  is  a  clear 
recognition  of  the  principle  that  God's  law  is  a  law  also  to  Himself,  and  that  His 
law  is  wisdom.  He  creates  the  world  as  an  outcome  of  His  own  wise  and  holy 
design,  so  that  "  nothing  walks  with  aimless  feet."  It  is  on  this  theological  con- 
ception that  the  possibility  of  science  depends.  {R.  F.  Horton,  D.D.)  The 
autobiography    of  Wisdom : — I.  As   having  existed   before   all   time.      II.  As 

HAVING  been  present  AT  THE  CREATION.  III.  AS  HAVING  BEEN  IN  EXTERNAL  ASSOCIA- 
TION WITH  THE  Creator.  IV.  As  havimo  felt  before  all  worlds  a  deep  intersst 
IN  man.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  23.  1  was  set  up  flrom  everlastingr. — Christ  set  up  from  everlasting: — 
Doctrine:  That  as  Christ  is  the  everlasting  God,  so,  from  all  eternity.  He  was 
foreordained  and  set  up  for  the  great  service  of  man's  redemption.    I.  To  pbots 


202  TBE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rai. 

THAT  Christ  is  the  everlasting  God.  1.  That  He  existed  before  the  incarnation 
is  evident  from  the  appearance  He  made  to  our  first  parents  in  paradise.  2.  We 
find  His  existence  and  agency  in  the  production  of  all  created  beings.  3.  Bun  up 
to  the  endless  ages  before  the  creation  of  the  world,  and  we  find  Him  existing  or 
ever  the  earth  was.     II.  What  is  imported  in  His  being  set  up  from  everlasting. 

1.  It  supposes  the  council  of  peace,  or  an  eternal  transaction  between  the  Father 
and  the  Son  concerning  the  redemption  of  lost  sinners.  2.  It  implies  the  infinite 
complacency  that  the  Father  and  Son  had  in  each  other  from  all  eternity,  3.  It 
implies  a  Divine  ordination  and  decree,  whereby  He  was  from  eternity  elected  into 
the  great  service  of  man's  redemption.  4.  It  implies  that,  in  consequence  of  the 
decree.  He  was  called  of  God  to  undertake  the  work  of  redemption.  5.  It  implies  His 
own  voluntary  consent  to,  and  complacence  with.  His  Father's  call.  He  was  actually 
set  up  in  time.  (1)  His  first  appearance  was  in  the  promise  made  to  our  first 
parents.  (2)  Set  up  typically  under  the  Old  Testament.  (3)  Set  up  prophetically. 
(4)  Personally  and  actually,  in  His  incarnation,  obedience,  and  death.  (5)  In  His 
resurrection  and  ascension.  (6)  Sacramentally,  in  baptism  and  the  last  supper. 
(7)  In  conversion.  (8)  Will  be  set  up  at  His  second  coming.  III.  For  what  ends 
AND  PURPOSES  Christ  WAS  THUS  SET  UP.  1.  As  a  suu,  to  give  light  to  this  lower 
world.  2.  As  a  second  Adam,  the  head  of  a  new  covenant  of  grace  and  promise. 
3.  As  a  repairer  of  breaches  between  God  and  man.  IV.  The  grounds  and  reasons 
WHY   Christ   was   set   up.     1.  Because  it  was  the  Father's   will   and  pleasure. 

2.  Because  of  the  good-will  He  did  bear  to  man  upon  earth.  3.  Because  of  His 
ability  for  the  undertaking.  4.  Because  He  voluntarily  offered  Himself  for  the 
work  and  service.  5.  Because  from  everlasting  God  foresaw  what  a  revenue  of 
glory  would  accrue  to  the  crown  of  heaven  through  His  mediation.  V.  Application 
OF  the  doctrine.  See  the  antiquity  and  activity  of  the  love  of  God ;  the  stability 
and  perpetuity  of  the  covenant  of  grace  and  of  the  Church ;  the  reason  why  all 
hands  should  be  at  work  to  exalt  Him.     {E.  Erskine.) 

Ver.  30.  And  I  was  daily  His  delight — The  happiness  of  Christ  antecedent  to 
Hit  incarnation : — The  delights  between  the  Father  and  the  Son,  before  His 
assumption  of  our  nature,  were  twofold.  1.  They  delighted  in  one  another 
without  communicating  their  joys  to  any  other  ;  for  no  creature  did  then  exist  save 
in  the  mind  of  God.  2.  They  delighted  in  the  salvation  of  men ;  in  the  prospect 
of  that  work,  though  not  yet  extant.  The  condition  and  state  of  Jesus  Christ 
before  His  incarnation  was  a  state  of  the  most  unspeakable  delight  in  the  enjoy- 
ment of  His  Father.  Consider  this — I.  Negativelt.  1.  He  was  not  abased  to 
the  low  estate  of  a  creature.  2.  He  was  not  under  the  law  in  this  estate.  3.  He 
was  not  liable  to  any  of  those  sorrowful  consequents  and  attendants  of  that  frail 
state  of  humanity  which  afterwards  He  assumed  with  that  nature.  Unacquainted 
with  griefs.  Never  pinched  with  poverty  and  want.  Never  underwent  reproach 
and  shame.  Was  never  offended  with  any  impure  suggestions.  Never  sensible  of 
tortures  and  pains.  There  were  no  hidings  or  withdrawings  of  His  Father.  No 
experience  of  death.  II.  Positively.  1.  A  state  of  matchless  happiness.  2.  A 
state  of  intimacy,  dearness,  and  oneness  with  His  Father.  3.  A  state  of  pure, 
unmixed,  and  ravishing  delight.  III.  Comparatively.  1.  Compare  it  with  the 
delight  that  some  creatures  take  in  each  other,  and  you  will  soon  find  that  they  fall 
infinitely  short  of  this.  2.  Compare  it  with  the  delight  that  God  takes  in  some  of 
His  creatures ;  you  will  find  it  to  come  short  of  the  delight  that  God  takes  in 
Christ.  3.  Compare  it  with  the  delight  that  the  best  of  creatures  take  in  God  and 
Christ;  how  infinitely  short  it  comes  of  the  delight  that  God  takes  in  Christ  1 
Conclusion  :  1.  What  an  astonishing  love  was  this  for  the  Father  to  give  the 
darling  of  His  soul  for  poor  sinners!  2.  Adore  the  love  of  Jesus  to  sinners,  that 
ever  He  should  consent  to  leave  such  a  bosom.  3.  An  interest  in  Jesus  Christ 
is  the  true  way  to  all  spiritual  preferment  in  heaven.  4.  Jesus  Christ  is  worthy  of 
all  love  and  delight.  5.  It  is  a  grievous  thing  to  see  God's  dear  Son  despised, 
slighted,  and  rejected  by  sinners.  6.  Let  us  be  ready  to  forsake  and  leave  all  for 
Christ.  {John  Flavel.)  ChritVa  eternal  felicity : — I.  Christ  was  with  the 
Father  at  the  beginning.  This  censures  the  Arians.  H.  God  the  Father,  as 
He  delighted  in  Christ  at  the  beginning,  so  He  doth  always.  1.  Because  He 
is  His  Son.  2.  Because  He  never  offended  Him.  3.  Because  He  is  always  ready 
to  please  His  Father.  III.  Christ  rejoiced  in  God  the  Father  from  the 
BEGINNING,  AND  DOER  SO  ALWAYS.  Somc  read,  "  I  rcjoice,  or  sport,  always  before 
Him."     [Francii  Taylor,  B.D.)        Rejoicing  always  before  Eim.— Eternal  Wisdom 


CHAP.  Tin.]  PROVERBS.  203 

rejoicing  in  the  events  to  be  revealed  : — If  we  contemplate  the  character  of  Divine 
Wisdom  as  directed  to  earth,  dwelling  amongst  men,  anticipating  the  concerns  and 
circumstances  and  history  of  this  human  world,  we  shall — 1.  Be  led  to  perceive  an 
importance  attaching  to  all  the  ramifications  of  that  history,  to  all  its  epochs  and 
all  its  events.  2.  In  addition  to  this  we  shall  be  led  to  depend,  with  a  degree 
of  delight  and  joy,  on  all  the  arrangements  and  developments  of  this  Wisdom  in 
relation  to  our  circumstances.  3.  And  we  shall  perceive  the  impropriety  of  our 
murmuring ;  and  that  there  is  the  greatest  measure  of  folly,  as  well  as  of  danger, 
in  allowing  ourselves  to  dispute  any  part  of  the  Divine  proceedings.  4.  Such  a 
view  will  induce  us  to  look  with  intelligent  and  instructed  minds  upon  all  the 
things  around  us,  and  to  observe  in  the  various  circumstances  which  transpire 
before  our  view  the  actual  working  out  of  a  plan  arranged  before  eternity.  5.  We 
shall  regard  the  great  Supreme  with  deep  solicitude,  in  order  that  we  ourselves  may 
be  brought  to  see  the  truth  and  results  of  all  that  is  around  us.  6.  We  shall 
anticipate  the  glory  of  that  scene  in  its  fulness  which  we  now  perceive  in 
fragments.  Christ  looked  forward  to  the  production  of  the  world  for  the  sake 
of  the  men  who  would  dwell  on  it.  What  is  more  wonderful  than  the  intellectual, 
physical,  moral,  and  spiritual  being,  man  ?  Consider  the  proofs  of  this  anticipation 
and  delight,  and  the  reason  whence  arises  all  this  delight.     (B.  S.  McAll,  LL.D.) 

Ver.  31.  Rejoicing  in  the  habitable  part  of  His  e&rth.— The  rejoicing  of 
Wisdom  : — I.  Whekk  did  the  Son  op  God  by  anticipation  rejoice  ?  "  Habitable 
part  of  His  earth."  "Sons  of  men."  1.  The  simple  fact  in  itself.  Of  all 
creation  this  insignificant  globe  of  earth  is  singled  out.  And  of  this  globe  its 
habitable  part.  It  is  with  souls  He  would  have  to  do.  It  was  the  empire  of  mind 
upon  the  earth  that  He  in  time  expected  to  assume.  This  puts  an  honour  and 
dignity  upon  our  poor  human  nature  which  it  is  impossible  fully  to  estimate. 
2.  Certain  circumstances  connected  with  this  fact.  What  claims  had  earth's 
inhabitants  upon  His  regard?  We  can  think  of  none.  Man  is  an  insignificant 
being  and  a  sinner.  II.  Why  did  the  etebnal  joy  of  the  Son  of  God  centre 
IN  THIS  EARTH?  This  joy  could  not  have  arisen  from  contemplation  of  our  misery, 
and  far  less  of  our  guilt.  When  He  cast  a  glance  down  to  this  earth,  what  did 
His  mind's  eye  discover  in  its  habitable  parts  ?  He  saw  men  ruined,  and  purposed 
to  save  them.  His  atonement  was  the  chief  ground  of  joy  to  Himself,  because 
the  great  occasion  of  glory  to  His  Father  and  of  good  to  His  people.  Lessons — 
1.  Of  reproof  to  careless  and  Christless  sinners.  2.  Of  consolation  to  believers. 
{N.  Morren,  M.A.)  ChrisVs  joy  in  the  Church  before  His  incarnation  : — Wisdom 
here  is  a  real,  not  an  allegorical  person.  It  is  the  Eternal  Word.  Our  Saviour 
informs  us  that,  as  soon  as  the  world  was  made,  the  habitable  parts  of  it  became 
the  scene  and  subject  of  His  rejoicing.  His  delights  were  with  men  rather  than 
angels.  Yet  He  knew  that  the  world  would  be  wet  with  His  tears  and  stained  with 
His  blood.  Why,  then,  did  He  rejoice  in  the  human  inhabitants  of  the  earth  ?  It 
could  not  be  on  account  of  man's  intellectual  or  moral  excellency.  It  must  be 
because  in  the  world  the  plan  of  redemption  was  to  be  executed,  and  because  men 
were  the  objects  of  it.     Our  Redeemer  rejoiced  in  the  world  because — I.  It  was 

DESTINED    TO    BE    THE    PLACE    IN    WHICH    He    SHOULD    PERFORM    THE    MOST    WONDERFUL 

OF  His  works.  There  He  would  obtain  His  greatest  victory,  make  the  most 
glorious  display  of  His  moral  perfections,  and  in  the  most  signal  manner  glorify 
the  Father.  II.  Because  the  habitable  parts  of  the  earth  were  the  destined 
RESIDENCE  OF  His  THEN  FUTURE  Church.  They  are  all  destined  to  be  filled  with  His 
disciples.  Everywhere  Churches  are  to  be  established.  III.  Our  Redeemer's 
CHIEF  DELIGHTS  AND  PLEASURES  WERE  WITH  MEN.  1.  Bccause  Hc  intended  Himself 
to  become  a  man.  2.  To  many  the  Divine  Redeemer  was  to  become  still  more 
nearly  related.  As  His  Church.  3.  His  delights  partly  lay  in  its  being  more  blessed 
to  give  than  to  receive.  How  ungrateful  and  inexcusable  does  the  treatment 
which  Christ  has  received  from  men  appear  when  viewed  in  the  lightof  this  subject ! 
{E.  Payson,  D.D.)        The  voice  of  God's  eternal  Wisdom  .-—I.  From  the  beginnino 

THE  WELFARE  OF  MAN  ENGAGED  THE  COMPLACENT  REGARD  OF  GoD  OUR  SaVIOUR.       1.    He 

represents  Himself  here  as  deriving  delight  from  the  spectacle  even  of  the  material 
creation,  because  it  was  subservient  to  man.  He  looked  on  material  objects  as 
visible  realisations  of  eternal  types.  On  comparing  them  with  the  originals  in  His 
own  infinite  mind  He  beheld  the  perfect  resemblance,  and  was  satisfied.  He 
beheld  them  in  their  prospective  application,  serving  as  indexes  or  intimations  of 
His  infinite  greatness  to  myriads  of  minds  which  He  purposed  to  create.    He 


204  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tin. 


looked  on  these  objects  as  the  first  in  an  endless  series  yet  to  come.  In  Hia 
first  acts  of  creation  the  Great  Architect  was  laying  the  foundation  of  an  all- 
comprehending  and  eternal  temple.  And  it  was  all  present  in  His  mind,  and  He 
rejoiced  in  the  glorious  prospect.  2.  There  was  the  happiness  of  prospectively 
beholding  the  activity,  enlargement,  and  progress  of  the  whole  system  of  creation 
and  providence.  The  prospect  of  this  development  of  His  great  plan  afforded  Him 
profound  satisfaction.  This  is  evident  because  He  has  sought  at  times  to  throw 
His  Church  into  an  ecstasy  of  delight  by  affording  them  glimpses  of  its  onward 
course ;  for  the  disclosures  of  prophecy  are  such  glimpses.  3.  There  was  the 
happiness  of  prospectively  beholding  the  effects  arising  from  His  gratuitous  inter- 
position for  human  salvation.  4.  Then  there  was  the  happiness  derivable  from 
knowing  that,  important  as  the  recovery  of  man  is,  in  attaining  it  He  should  be 
attaining  an  end  greater  still — attaining  the  greatest  of  all  ends — the  manifestation 
of  the  Divine  glory.      II.  An,  the  Mediator's  communications  and  intercourse 

WITH  pS  ABE  MADE  TO  HARMONISE  WITH  OUR  WELFARE  ALSO.     TsU  US  the  distinguishing 

wants  of  human  nature,  and  we  will  tell  you  the  distinguishing  excellences  of 
Divine  revelation.  1.  From  their  eager  inquiries  and  their  signs  of  reflection  you 
infer  that  they  are  intelligent  beings,  and  from  other  signs  you  infer  that  the 
subjects  which  most  deeply  interest  them  are  those  which  refer  to  their  origin,  their 
character,  and  their  relation  to  the  invisible  and  the  future.  Man's  solution  of 
these  problems  is  puerile,  contradictory,  and  absurd.  What  is  the  Divine  explana- 
tion of  the  mystery  ?  2.  Man  is  manifestly  a  sufferer.  Sorrow  has  but  two  places 
of  refuge — the  sanctuary  and  the  grave.  3.  Man  is  a  personally  sinful  being.  The 
Mediator  has  made  special  provision  for  the  necessities  thus  arising.  The 
vicarious  sacrifice  of  Christ,  while  providing  a  complete  satisfaction  for  human 
guilt,  provides  that  which  we  equally  require — means  for  the  renovation  of  our 
sinful  nature  and  motives  to  a  constant  progress  in  holiness.  So  wonderfully 
adapted  to  the  susceptibilities,  so  exquisitely  adjusted  to  all  the  springs  of  our 
nature  is  the  Cross  of  Christ,  that  in  the  hand  of  the  Spirit  it  relieves  our 
apprehensions,  while  it  quickens  our  sensibility — gives  peace  to  the  conscience 
■while  it  increases  its  activity  and  power — inspires  hope  while  it  produces  humility, 
by  the  very  magnitude  and  splendour  of  the  objects  which  inspire  it — demands 
perfection,  by  presenting  the  affections  with  an  object  calculated  to  produce  it 
4.  But  man  is  not  only  a  rational,  suffering,  sinful  being.  He  is  groaning  and 
travailing  together  in  pain,  casting  anxious  looks  on  the  future,  gazing  on  the 
distant  darkness,  invoking  the  dead.  The  burden  of  his  great  anxiety  is  this,  "  If 
a  man  die,  shall  he  live  again  ?  "  Answering  that,  Jesus  is  "  the  Eesurrection  and 
the  Life."  Such  are  parts  of  that  great  system  of  saving  truth  by  which  the 
Saviour  seeks  to  realise  those  purposes  of  mercy  toward  us,  the  bare  contemplation 
of  which  filled  Him  with  delight.     III.  The  Saviour  rejoices  in  such  parts  of 

THE  earth  as  ABE  SET  APART  FOB  THE  DIFFUSION  OF  HiS  TRUTH  AND  THE  PROMOTION  OF 

His  DESIGNS.  Man  was  to  have  moved  over  the  face  of  the  earth  as  amidst  the 
types  and  symbolic  services  of  a  temple,  where  everything  was  adapted  to  remind 
Him  of  God.  Sin  has  disturbed  this  adjustment  and  thrown  it  in  confusion.  If 
this  is  to  be  remedied,  some  counter-force  must  be  employed.  IV.  What  does 
Christ  expect  from  a  place  thus  distinguished?  1.  He  expects  you  to  sympathise 
with  Him  in  His  regard  for  human  happiness.  2.  He  expects  you  to  aim  at 
results  and  to  look  for  them.  3.  Not  only  expect  the  results,  but  anticipate  the 
consequences  of  those  results.  (J.  Harris,  D.D.)  And  My  delights  were  with  the 
sons  of  men. — Christ's  delight  in  the  sons  of  men;— 1.  "Rejoicing  in  the  habitable 
part  of  His  earth."    (1)  "  The  habitable  parts  of  His  earth  "  are  such  places  where 


(Eph.  ii.  22,  iii.  17 ;  John  iv.  13).  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  rejoiced  in  this  habitable 
part  of  this  earth  from  everlasting,  before  there  was  an  earth  to  be  inhabited. 
2.  The  delights  of  Jesus  Christ,  from  all  eternity,  were  "with  the  sons  of  men." 
(1)  He  knew  that  by  standing  as  a  Surety  for  His  people,  and  bearing  their  guilt 
and  punishment.  He  should  also  bear  away  their  sins.  (2)  He  knew  that  in  saying 
His  people,  through  His  obedience  in  life  and  death,  all  the  Divine  perfections 
would  be  more  remarkably  displayed  and  glorified  than  in  all  the  other  works 
of  God.  (3)  His  delight  proceeded  from  the  pleasing  prospect  that  He  had  of  men 
being  united  to  Himself  by  faith.  (4)  He  delighted  in  the  prospect  of  conveying 
the  riches  of   grace  to  their   souls.     (5)  He   delighted   in   the  prospect  of  their 


CHAT.  Tm.]  PROVERBS.  205 

sincere  services  done  in  faith  and  love.  (6)  He  delighted  in  the  prospect  of  His 
acting  towards  them,  as  the  Prophet  of  His  Church,  to  teach  them  the  mind  and 
vrill  of  God  for  their  salvation.  (7)  He  delighted  in  the  prospect  that  He  had 
from  everlasting,  of  His  people  being  all  brought  home  to  glory,  to  be  for  ever  with 
Him.  The  greatest  honour  that  Jesus  Christ  can  do  to  men  upon  earth  is  to 
delight  in  them.    "  Such  honour  have  all  His  saints  "  (Isa.  Ixii.  4).   This  implies — 

I.  His  interest  in  them.  2.  His  continual  remembrance  of  them.  3.  His  readiness 
to  bestow  His  best  favours  upon  them.  Did  Jesus  Christ  delight  in  His  people  from 
everlasting ;  then  all  the  disciples  of  Christ  should  delight  in  Him  (1  Pet.  ii.  7  ; 
Cant.  T.  10).  {W.  Notcutt.)  Wisdom  resident  in  the  world  : — Wisdom  rejoices  in 
the  habitable  parts  of  the  earth,  not  in  the  monastic  retreats  of  a  dreary  desert 
or  wilderness.  Wisdom's  delights  are  among  the  sons  of  men,  not  in  the  midst 
of  books.  The  inestimable  advantages  gained  in  those  places,  only  become  wisdom 
as  they  are  used  among  men,  just  as  the  wheat,  growing  on  some  distant  prairie, 
where  few  eyes  ever  rest  upon  its  beauties,  becomes  food  only  as  it  reaches  the 
crowded  city,  where  men  are  longing  for  it  and  would  die  without  it.  Wisdom  is 
in  the  world  where  men  are ;  she  delights  to  be  there  ;  we  need  not  leave  the  world 
to  find  her  if  we  will  only  hear  the  voice  of  God  just  where  we  are.  The  sina 
and  failings  of  men  can  speak  warnings  to  us ;  the  needs  of  men  can  stir  oar 
activities ;  the  kindness  and  goodness  of  men  can  point  to  God's  greater  love. 
Everywhere  hands  point  up  to  God  and  our  true  relations  to  Him,  if  only  we  will 
let  Him  be  as  real,  as  truly  personal,  as  the  rest  of  the  world  is  to  us.  .  .  .  Wisdom 
delights  in  the  habitable  parts  of  the  earth,  and  rejoices  to  be  among  the  sons 
of  men.  Can  it  always  be  so  ?  How  often  we  tire  of  the  very  noise  of  our  fellow- 
men,  and  wish  to  flee  afar  off  and  be  at  rest !  Wisdom  cannot  feel  that  exhaustion. 
But  how  often  the  most  habitable  parts  of  the  earth  are  the  very  homes  of  the 
foolishness  of  sin !  We  see  their  wickedness  and  foolishness :  must  not  Wisdom 
itself  see  it  much  more  ?  Are  the  social  regulations  of  our  life  to-day  likely  to 
please  the  heart  of  Wisdom  and  make  her  long  to  be  among  them  ?  How  much 
true  wisdom  do  they  cultivate  among  those  who  are  devoted  to  them  ?  Wisdom 
may  be  in  our  streets,  but  it  must  be  as  a  very  sorrowful  resident,  as  she  sees  soul 
after  soul  that  she  loves  lost  in  the  desire  of  gain,  associating  with  its  fellow-man 
only  for  selfish  purposes.  The  souls  might  delight  her  and  make  her  stay,  but 
would  the  lives  which  she  saw  those  souls  leading  do  so  ?  What  can  we  do  to 
make  society  and  life  generally  worthy  of  this  great  presence  which  is  ever  in  it  ? 
No  laws,  no  customs,  no  institutions  that  we  can  establish  for  business  or  the 
State,  no  prescriptions  that  we  may  make  for  social  life,  will  do  the  work  ;  for  those 
are  impersonal,  and  what  we  have  seen  to  be  valuable  to  the  world  is  the  personal 
presence  of  Wisdom.  And  that  must  find  its  expression  in  our  personal  lives. 
All  that  makes  society  attractive  or  city  life  prosperous  to-day  came  from  God,  and 
in  that  fact  has  its  power  for  us.  For  that  reason  it  cannot  be  ignored  or  put  out 
of  sight.  But  why,  then,  is  it  so  dangerous  to  us  ?  Because  it  destroys  our  sense 
of  personal  responsibility,  which  is  the  great  thing  by  which  we  are  to  show  forth 
the  true  character  of  God's  wisdom.  Be  followers  of  Christ,  personal  friends  of 
Jesus.  Eecognise  the  fact  that  Christ  is  in  all  that  is  good,  and  that  by  being 
true  to  Him  you  cannot  possibly  get  out  of  the  stream  of  the  world's  true  life. 
You  will  have  to  leave  some  things  that  are  false,  you  will  have  to  condemn  them 
by  leaving  them;  but  all  which  truly  belongs  to  men  must  ultimately  be  the 
possession  of  those  who  have  the  Wisdom  whose  delights  are  among  the  sons 
of  men.  {Arthur  Brooks.)  Divine  Wisdom : — I.  The  jot  of  God  in  this  material 
woBLD.    The  Divine  Wisdom  approved  the  result  of  the  Divine  power  and  skill. 

II.  His  DELIGHTS  WERE  WITH  THE  SONS  OF  MEN.  Humanity  has  always  held  a  fore- 
most place  in  the  thoughts  of  God.  1.  Man  as  a  creature  of  God.  The  noblest 
work  that  God  has  placed  upon  the  earth  ;  he  is  the  crown  and  glory  of  this 
terrestrial  creation.  2.  Man  has  sinned.  The  prescient  eye  of  God  from  eternity 
looked  upon  man,  not  only  as  a  creature  endowed  with  high  capabilities,  and  as  an 
offender  against  law  and  a  sufferer  because  of  sin,  but  He  looked  upon  him  as  a 
transgressor  redeemed.  He  looked  on  men  not  only  in  their  connection  with  the 
first  Adam,  but  also  in  their  connection  with  the  second  Adam.  He  foresaw  the 
success  which  should  crown  the  mission  and  sacrifice  of  His  well-beloved  Son. 
(T.  Stephens.)  On  the  benevolence  of  Christ  to  the  human  race : — I.  Our  blessed 
Lord  rejoiced  in  the  habitable  part  of  the  earth  because  He  foresaw  that  the 

PERFECTIONS    OF    GOD     WOULD    BE     MANIFESTED     AND    GLORIFIED.       The    human     TRCe 

appears  to  have  been  created  for  a  twofold  purpose.     1.  To  glorify  God  upon  the 


206  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 


earth.  2.  That  our  Lord  might  defeat  the  infernal  purposes  of  the  malicions 
spirits,  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil.     II.  His  delights  were  with  the  sons  of 

MEN,  THAT    He    MIGHT    MINISTER    TO    THE    COMFORT    AND    HAPPINESS    OF    THEIR    BODIES. 

What  an  amazing  constellation  of  virtues  did  He  exhibit,  and  how  boundless  must 
have  been  that  love  which  led  Him  day  after  day,  amidst  hunger,  and  thirst,  and 
fatigue,  and  suffering,  and  sorrow,  to  relieve  the  wants  of  the  needy  and  restore  to 
the  soundness  of  health  and  r.ctivity  the  miserable  and  forlorn  sufferers  of  calamity 
and  woe !  HI.  His  delights  were  with  the  sons  of  men,  that  He  might 
ENLIGHTEN  THEIR  MINDS  BY  His  WoRD  AND  Spirit.  Many  theories  have  been 
propounded  to  solve  the  mystery  of  the  introduction  of  moral  evil  into  the  world, 
but  no  hypothesis  is  so  credible  or  intelligible  as  that  of  the  Scripture  account  of  the 
fall  of  man.  Our  blessed  Lord  interposed  on  our  behalf,  and  generously  undertook 
to  redeem  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law  and  regain  that  immortal  life  which  we 
had  forfeited  by  our  disobedience.  How  can  we  account  for  such  a  display  of 
unparalleled  benevolence  but  from  His  ardent  desire  to  promote  the  best  interests  of 
men  ?    IV.  His  delights  were  with  the  sons  of  men,  that  He  might  sanctify 

THErR  SOULS   AND   PREPARE    THEM   FOR  THE  ENJOYMENTS  OF  HEAVEN.       We    OUght   tO    bS 

extremely  soUcitous  for  the  salvation  of  our  souls,  and  never  dare  to  imagine  that, 
because  Christ  has  died  for  our  sins,  we  shall  be  saved  without  that  holiness  of 
heart  and  life  which  are  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  m  all  them  that  believe.  (D. 
Davidson.)  Wisdom's  delights  with  the  sons  of  men : — In  these  words  are  revealed 
things  concerning  the  personal,  substantial,  and  self-existent  Wisdorn.  I.  "  My 
DELIGHTS  WERE  WITH  THE  SONS  OF  MEN."  Wisdom,  then,  has  her  delights ;  and 
where  does  she  find  them  ?  The  prime  of  these  delights  is  that  which  He  finds  in 
Himself.  He  has  complacential  delight  in  Himself,  for  He  only  is  perfection, 
independent,  and  eternal.  The  communications  of  His  glorious  attributes  are  also 
His  delight.  These  rest  on  the  sinful  sons  of  men.  The  words  include  the  idea  of 
dwelling  with  the  sons  of  men.  What  led  the  Saviour  to  such  condescension  ?  It 
was  purely  of  His  tender  love  towards  mankind.  Whence  originates  this  love?  In 
His  own  bosom,  and  we  can  say  no  more  and  see  no  farther.  II.  Eejoicing  in  the 
HABITABLE  PARTS  OF  God's  EARTH.  The  Hebrew  is  forcible  and  poetical — "  playing 
or  disporting  on  the  orb  of  God's  earth."  God  formed  the  earth  and  the  world 
with  wisdom,  but  also  with  love,  and  not  only  for  the  benefit,  but  also  for  the 
happiness  of  His  creatures,  and  with  a  special  view  to  the  pleasure  of  the  sons  of 
men.  In  Christ,  the  Wisdom  of  God,  the  same  wonderful  condescension  continues 
still."  He  adapts  Himself  to  our  human  conceptions  ;  brings  His  mysteries  near  to 
ns  in  a  most  gracious  manner  ;  and  the  same  graciousness  is  seen  in  God's  every- 
day communion  with  His  beloved  children.  The  word  "  rejoicing  "  reminds  of 
sweet  music,  and  all  the  music  on  earth  is  made  by  Christ  or  for  Him.  (F.  W. 
Krummacher,  D.D.) 

Ver.  32.  Blessed  are  they  that  keep  My  vraju.— The  claims  of  Divine  Wisdom : — 
I.  These  are  very  simple.  1.  Diligently  study  its  counsels.  2.  Constantly  obey 
its  precepts.  The  teachings  of  Divine  Wisdom  are  not  speculative,  but  regulative. 
They  are  maxims  to  rule  the  life.  II.  Very  important.  1.  Obedience  to  them  is 
happiness.     2.  To  neglect  them  is  ruin.     (David  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  33.  Hear  instruction,  and  be  wise. — Motives  for  hearing  sermons  : — Contempt 
of  God's  Sabbaths  and  disregard  of  ministerial  instruction  are  melancholy 
characteristics  of  the  age  in  which  we  live.  I.  The  tendency  of  preaching  and 
hearing  the  Word  to  promote  our  best  interest.  This  tendency  is  sufficient  to 
enforce  the  duty  recommended  in  my  text.  The  sacred  oracles  are  profitable. 
The  doctrines  revealed  in  them  are  not  doubtful  speculations,  or  light  and  trivial 
matters,  but  truths  of  infallible  certainty,  of  the  most  sublime  and  excellent  nature, 
and,  to  us  men,  of  infinite  importance.  The  learned  as  well  as  illiterate  need  to 
go  to  church  on  their  own  account.  None,  in  this  imperfect  state,  arrive  at  such 
extent  and  exactness  of  Christian  knowledge  as  to  need  no  further  assistance  for 
knowing  more.  For  wise  reasons  the  Bible  was  not  written  in  a  systematic  form. 
In  searching  the  Scriptures  we  need  to  use  the  fittest  and  most  effectual  means  in 
our  power.  What  can  be  better  suited  to  assist  us  in  the  attainment  of  religious 
knowledge  than  the  discourses  of  those  who  have  not  only  made  it  their  chief 
business  to  study  the  sacred  oracles,  but  who,  by  cultivating  their  rational  powers, 
have  acquired  a  facility  of  forming  distinct  conceptions  of  things,  and  of  expressing 
those  conceptions  with  plainness  and  propriety?  And  knowledge,  however  extensive, 


CHlP.rm.]  PROVERBS.  207 

if  it  hath  no  suitable  influence  on  men's  hearts  and  lives,  will  profit  them  nothing. 
Therefore  men  need  a  faithful  monitor,  to  awaken  in  us  a  practical  sense  of  danger 
and  of  duty.  So  sensible  was  Julian  the  apostate  how  wise  an  institution  preach- 
ing was  for  promoting  the  knowledge  and  practice  of  religion,  that  he  appointed 
men  to  preach  moral  philosophy,  and  to  harangue,  publicly,  in  defence  of 
heathenism.  II.  Hearing  the  Wobd  of  God  is  enjoined  by  expbess  Divine 
AUTHORITY.  In  the  Old  Testament  dispensation  (Deut.  xxiv.  8 ;  Eccles.  xii.  9-11 ; 
Neh.  viii.  7-11 ;  Hag.  ii.  11 ;  Mai.  ii.  7)  synagogue  worship  had  to  be  regularly 
attended.  New  Testament  injunctions  are  Eph.  iv.  11-13  ;  1  Tim.  iv.  16  ;  2  Tim. 
ii.  15,  iv.  2  ;  Titus  i.  9,  ii.  1,  7,  8.      III.  The  dreadful  threatenings  denounced 

AND     executed     AGAINST      THOSE     WHO      REFUSE     TO     HEAR      God'S     WoRD.       Such     aS 

Prov.  i.  24-31,  xxi.  16,  xxviii.  9;  Matt.  x.  14;  Heb.  ii.  2,  3,  x.  28,  29,  xii.  25. 
On  the  other  hand,  God  hath  promised  His  special  presence  and  blessing  to  the 
faithful  preaching,  and  conscientious  hearing  of  His  Word.  To  support  and 
strengthen  our  hopes  let  us  review  former  accomplishments  of  these  exceeding 
great  and  precious  promises.  In  how  miraculous  a  manner  hath  the  Word  of  God 
often  triumphed  over  the  greatest  opposition  1     {J.  Erskine,  D.D.) 

Ver.  34.  Blessed  is  the  man  that  heareth  Me,  watching  daily  at  My  gates, 
waiting  at  the  posts  of  My  doors. — Attending  public  instruction  recommended  :— 

1.  The     REASONABLENESS      OF      ATTENDING     ALL     THE     INSTITUTED       MEANS      OF     OUR 

INSTRUCTION.  If  God  had  never  vouchsafed  to  men  a  positive  revelation,  we 
should  have  been  obliged  to  feel  after  virtue  if  haply  we  might  find  it.  And  it  is 
surprising  to  what  lengths  some  have  arrived  without  the  help  of  that  "grace 
which  bringeth  salvation."  But  when  it  hath  pleased  God  to  erect  a  kingdom  in 
the  world,  it  is  great  ingratitude,  a  heinous  contempt  of  God's  authority,  an  affront 
to  His  love,  and  so  must  be  inexcusable  folly  so  to  neglect  our  own  true  interest. 
II.  What  is  imported  in  hearing.  Scripture  represents  this  as  the  sum  of  that 
duty  and  respect  which  God  demandeth  for  Christ  who  is  His  Wisdom,  and  the 
great  revealer  of  His  will  to  mankind.  Whatever  is  meant  by  hearing  Christ,  the 
Wisdom  of  the  Father,  it  is  enjoined  and  enforced  with  all  the  authority  and 
obligatory  power  with  which  any  Divine  precept  can  be  enforced.  Hearing 
importeth  a  serious  and  attentive  consideration,  and  a  diligent  appUcation  of  the 
mind,  to  understand  the  important  contents  of  the  Divine  message.  We  are  to 
understand  by  hearing — 1.  An  attentive  regard  to  instruction.  The  Wisdom  of  God 
hath  the  first  right  to  be  heard,  and  what  He  prescribeth,  to  be    attended   to. 

2.  Hearing  signifies  a  submissive  disposition.  To  hear  is  to  turn  at  the  reproofs  of 
Wisdom,  to  tremble  at  the  threatenings  of  God,  to  hope  in  His  promises,  and 
practise  what  He  enjoineth.  3.  Hearing  Wisdom  importeth  an  absolute  unreserved 
obedience.  III.  The  proper  dispositions  of  mind,  and  the  manner  of  hearing 
AND  USING  ALL  MEANS.  1.  It  importeth  a  sense  of  our  constant  need  of  instruction, 
that  we  may  be  still  making  further  progress  in  knowledge  and  in  grace.  If  this 
be  the  temper  of  our  minds,  it  will  incline  us  to  a  daily  attendance  at  the  gates  of 
Wisdom  ;  that  is,  a  daily  use  of  the  appointed  means  for  our  increase  in  knowledge 
and  virtue.  2.  A  constant  care  and  solicitude  that  the  benefit  of  them  may  not 
be  lost ;  and  particularly  a  strict  vigilance  over  our  own  spirits  and  our  whole 
behaviour.  8.  Patience,  which  is  signified  by  waiting,  is  also  needed.  Our 
progress  to  religious  knowledge  and  virtue  is  gradual.  Patience  is  the  character 
of  a  continuance  in  well-doing,  as  well  as  of  enduring  afflictions.  Always 
endeavour  with  alacrity  and  vigour  to  use  the  means  of  our  religious  instruction 
and  improvement.  {J.  Abemethy,  M.A.)  Watchful  diligence  : — I.  The  way  to 
HAPPINESS  IS  to  hearken  DILIGENTLY  TO  Wisdom's  WORDS.  1.  We  canuot  of  ourselvcs 
find  out  the  way  to  true  happiness.  2.  No  man  can  show  it  to  us.  JI.  We  must 
not  only  hear,  but  watch  fob  Wisdom.  Omit  no  occasion  of  learning,  and  make 
the  best  possible  use  of  every  occasion.  HI.  We  must  not  only  watch  for  awhile, 
WE  MUST  wait  long,  IF  WE  WOULD  GET  WiSDOM.  Give  no  place  to  idleness  and  sloth- 
fulness,  lest  ye  become  unteachable,  and  incapable  of  wisdom.  (Francis  Taylor, 
B.D.)  Waiting  upon  God  : — Profession  without  principle  is  worthless.  He  who 
is  not  an  every-day  Christian  is  no  Christian  at  all.  I.  The  characteristics  of  an 
«vkry-day  Christian.  They  are — 1.  Hearers.  Many  hear,  and  do  not  hear. 
Hearing  implies  profitable  hearing.  Many  do  not  profit.  They  come  to  hear,  but 
not  to  learn,  or  to  practise.  Some  come  fresh  from  the  cares  of  the  world. 
Others  come  with  unclean  hearts.  If  you  would  receive  good  by  attending  at  the 
hoose  of  God,  there  most  be  a  desire  to  profit ;  and  with  a  lively  faith.     2.  They 


208  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rnx. 

are  watchers.  This  implies  frequency,  persererance,  self-denial,  self-abasement, 
and  a  certain  degree  of  anxiety.  3.  They  '♦  wait  at  the  posts  of  His  doors."  That 
is,  attend  those  places,  and  frequently  attend  them,  where  Christ  is  expected. 
II.  Such  a  man  will  msteb  lose  his  bewabd.  1.  He  finds  life.  St.  John  says, 
•'  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life."  Finding  Christ  is  finding  life.  Finding  lif« 
implies  pardon.  With  pardon  we  have  peace,  2.  The  reward  consists  in  the 
favour  of  God.  This  favour  is  enduring.  It  supports  the  sinner  in  the  time  of  his 
trouble.  Lessons :  1.  Though  you  may  be  a  hearer,  a  watcher,  a  waiter  upon 
Christ,  you  must  expect  your  trials.  Do  not  be  surprised  either  at  the  number  or 
the  degree  of  your  trials.  2.  See  that  you  come  in  the  spirit  of  prayer  and  of  faith. 
{H.  Montagu  Villiers,  M.A.)  Waiting  at  Wisdom's  gates: — The  Bible  seldom 
speaks,  and  certainly  never  its  deepest,  sweetest  words,  to  those  who  always  read 
it  in  a  hurry.  Nature  can  only  tell  her  secrets  to  such  as  will  sit  still  in  her  sacred 
temple,  till  their  eyes  lose  the  glare  of  earthly  glory,  and  their  ears  are  attuned  to 
her  voice.  And  shall  revelation  do  what  nature  cannot  ?  Never.  The  man  who 
shall  win  the  blessedness  of  hearing  her  must  watch  daily  at  her  gates,  and  wait  at 
the  posts  of  her  doors.    [F.  B.  Meyer.) 

Ver.  35.  Whoso  flndeth  Me  findethlife. — The  Christian  life  delineated  :  Christ  to 
be  found  in  the  ordinances,  with  the  import  and  happy  effects  of  finding  Him : — 
I.  The  ordinances  are  the  place  where  Christ  is  to  be  eound  of  poor  sinners. 

1.  What  are  the  ordinances?  The  Divine  ordinance  of  meditation.  Christian 
conference  about  spiritual  matters.  Singing  of  the  Lord's  praises.  Prayer.  The 
Word.  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper.  2.  Confirm  this  doctrine.  The  ordi- 
nances are  by  Christ's  own  appointment  the  trysting-places  wherein  He  has 
promised  to  be  found  of  those  that  seek  Him.  Trysting-places  for  sinners,  where 
they  may  be  convinced,  converted,  and  regenerated.  Trysting-places  for  saints, 
where  they  may  receive  life  more  abundantly.  They  are  the  places  wherein  His 
people  seek  Him,  who  know  best  where  He  is  to  be  found.  They  are  what  the 
Lord  has  allowed  His  people  to  supply  the  want  of  heaven,  until  they  come  there. 
3.  Apply  this  doctrine.  It  reproves  those  who  slight  attendance  on  ordinances ; 
those  who  come  to  meet  some  they  have  worldly  business  with ;  who  come,  but  not 
to  find  Christ  there;  who  stand  in  the  way  of  others  attending  on  ordinances. 
It  urges  to  seek  Christ  in  ordinances.  He  is  well  worth  the  seeking.  II.  Peoplb 
MAT  come  to  ordinances  AND  NOT  FIND  Christ.  1.  Rcasons  ou  the  sinner's  side. 
Some  have  no  design  of  finding  Christ  in  ordinances  at  all.  Many  are  indifferent 
whether  they  find  Christ  or  not.  Some  desire  not  to  see  Him  at  all.  Some  cannot 
wait  patiently  at  the  gates.  2.  Improve  this  point.  Seek  Him  sincerely  and 
uprightly  with  all  your  heart.  Seek  Him  honestly  and  generously  for  Himself. 
Seek  Him  fervently,  humbly,  diligently,  mournfully.  Seek  Him  tUl  you  find, 
in.  Then  do  people  find  Christ  when,  upon  a  saving  discovert  op  Christ 
MADE  TO  THEIR  SOULS,  THET  CLOSE  WITH  HiM  BT  FAITH.  1.  Things  in  general 
touching  the  finding  of  Christ.  There  is  a  twofold  finding  of  Him,  initial 
and  progressive.  The  immediate  effect  of  the  former  is  union,  of  the  other 
actual  communion  with  Christ.  Some  things  to  be  observed.  Sinners  in  their 
natural  state  have  lost  God.  Man  is  a  seeking  creature.  There  is  no  satisfying 
of  the  soul  till  it  come  to  God.     God  is  in  Christ,  and  is  to  be  found  in  Him  only. 

2.  More  particularly  explain  the  soul's  finding  Christ.  The  soul  savingly  discovers 
and  discerns  Jesus  Christ  by  a  new  light  let  into  it.  There  is  a  twofold  discovery 
of  Him  in  the  gospel,  objective  and  subjective.  There  are  six  things  the  soul  sees 
in  Christ :  A  transcendent  excellency.  A  fulness  for  the  supply  of  all  wants.  A 
suitableness  to  meet  his  case  and  to  glorify  God.  The  Wisdom  of  God  in  Him. 
An  ability  to  save.  Willingness  to  save.  Upon  this  discovery  of  Christ  made 
unto  and  by  the  soul,  the  soul  closes  with  Christ  by  faith.  Such  a  discovery  is 
not  made  to  the  soul  till  it  be  hunger-bitten.  The  nature  of  the  object  discovered 
speaks  for  itself.  And  the  discovery  is  always  attended  with  a  heart-conquering 
power.  IV.  Sinners  finding  Christ  find  life.  1.  Unfold  that  life  which 
sinners  find.  It  is  a  life  of  grace,  in  regeneration.  A  life  of  favour  with  God. 
A  life  of  new  obedience.  A  life  of  comfort.  And  eternal  life.  2.  What  are  the 
qualities  of  this  life  ?  It  is  a  Divine  life.  A  life  of  the  whole  man.  A  pleasant 
life.  A  persevering  life.  A  growing  life.  8.  Confirm  this  doctrine.  The  sinner 
finding  Christ  finds  all  things  necessary  to  make  him  happy.  Look  to  the  whole 
of  Christ's  purchase,  what  He  bought  for  poor  sinners  with  His  blood  ;  and  the 
soul  finding  Chri«t  finds  it  all,  and  may  say,  "  It  is  all  mine."     (T.  Boston,  D.D.) 


€HAP.  Tin.]  PROVERBS.  S09 

Witdoni't  rewards  : — Some  man  might  say,  "  Why  should  we  watch  so  much  for 
Wisdom  ?  What  shall  we  get  by  so  much  labour  ?  Lest  any  should  refuse 
and  despise  Wisdom,  as  terrified  with  the  mention  of  so  much  pains  in  getting, 
Wisdom  promises  large  rewards  of  life  and  favour  from  God.  Heavy  things  grow 
light,  when  great  rewards  are  propounded.  And  if  any  man  be  inquisitive  to  know 
what  is  that  blessedness  promised  to  such  as  take  pains  to  get  Wisdom,  she  tells 
them  that  their  diligence  in  seeking  her  shall  be  recompensed  in  a  most  copious 
reward.  As  if  she  had  said,  "  They  that  find  Me  shall  not  obtain  some  vulgar 
matter  of  little  weight,  but  an  incomparable  treasure  of  all  good  things 
— to  wit,  life,  which  all  men  naturally  desire,  and  eternal  life,  which  only 
God  can  give,  and  all  that  a  man  can  justly  desire;  and  so  shall  he  be  fully 
happy  in  God's  favour,"  (Francis  Taylor,  B.D.)  Life : — The  life  that  is  found 
in  Christ,  who  is  our  life — the  life  which,  if  diligently  sought,  shall  be  assuredly 
found,  and  which,  when  found,  fills  the  soul  with  joy  and  peace.  I.  The  advan- 
tage OF  sEEKiNo  Christ.  We  seek  not  only  Him  personally,  but  all  that  is  in 
Him.  We  seek  Him  in  whom  all  fulness  dwells,  and  in  seeking  Him  all  the 
fulness  that  dwells  in  Him  becomes  ours.  In  finding  Christ  we  find  happiness, 
holiness,  and  heaven ;  pardon,  peace,  a  quiet  conscience,  relief  from  the  weary  load 
of  sin.  II.  What  do  we  find  in  Chkist  ?  Life  is  the  great  aim  of  all  sentient 
beings  ;  to  obtain  life,  and  having  obtained  it,  to  preserve  it.  Inquire,  by  way  of 
contrast,  what  is  gained  by  that  life  which  is  found  elsewhere  than  in  Christ? 
Sometimes  life  is  sought  in  pleasure,  in  the  world,  in  the  love  of  things  of  the 
world,  and  in  sin.  Mistaking  the  great  object  of  living,  and  pursuing  a  career  of 
sin,  men  find  that  sin  bringeth  forth  death — death  of  body  and  of  aoul,  death  for 
time,  and  death  throughout  eternity.  There  is  a  more  excellent  way,  a  way  which 
has  the  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is  and  of  that  which  is  to  come.  The  true 
life  commences  here.  This  life  of  ours  is  a  pilgrimage.  "  Ho  that  findeth  life " 
finds  a  life  that  is  clothed  with  immortality,  that  revels  in  eternal  day,  that  climbs 
unwearied  the  everlasting  hills,  that  wears  the  crown  of  everlasting  victory. 
[Robert  Magiiire,  M.A.)  And  shall  obtain  favour  of  the  Lord. — Sinners  interested 
in  Christ  obtaining  favour  of  the  Lord: — I.  Show  some  things  supposed  in  this 
tbuth  tending  to  clear  the  meaning  of  it.  1.  There  is  a  treasure  of  favour 
for  poor  sinners  with  the  Lord.  A  treasure  speaks  preciousness,  variety,  and 
abundance.  2.  This  treasure  is  locked  on  sinners  out  of  Christ,  they  have  no 
access  to  it.  3.  The  sinner  once  interested  in  Christ  has  free  access  to  the 
treasure,  to  bring  forth  from  thence  whatever  he  needs.  4.  The  sinner,  when 
interested  in  Christ,  will  still  be  needing,  while  he  is  in  this  world.  6.  It  is  the 
privilege  and  duty  of  believers  to  bring  forth  and  fetch  supply  for  all  their  wants 
out  of  that  treasure.  II.  Show  wherein  the  soul  once  interested  in  Christ 
shall  obtain  FAvorn  of  the  Lord.  1.  In  prosperity.  They  shall  have  balancing 
grace,  to  make  them  carry  evenly  and  usefully.  Balancing  providences ;  some 
such  mixture  of  bitterness  in  their  cup  as  keeps  them  from  miskenning  themselves. 

2.  In  personal  outward  affliction.  But  they  shall  be  bettered  by  it;  supported 
under  it,  and  have  deliverance  in  due  time.  3.  In  desertion.  They  shall  never  be 
totally  or  finally  forsaken.  4.  In  temptation.  They  shall  either  be  made  to  keep 
their  ground  against  the  temptation,  or  at  least  temptation  shall  not  be  allowed  to 
gain  a  complete  victory  over  them.  5.  Even  when  fallen  into  sin,  the  Lord  will 
not  leave  them,  nor  cast  them  off.  6.  In  time  of  public  calamity.  They  shall 
either  be  hid,  or  gracious  favour  shall  be  mixed  with  the  trouble,  or  the  sting 
shall  be  taken  out  of  it.  7.  Death.  They  shall  then  be  freed  from  sin  and  freed 
from  trouble.  III.  Confirm  this  doctrine.  1.  Sinners  have  a  right  to  the  whole 
treasure  of  favour  in  Christ,  in  whom  they  are  interested.  2.  Jesus  Christ  is  the 
dispenser  of  the  treasure,  the  high  Steward  of  the  house  of  heaven.  3.  The  enjoy- 
ment is  secured  by  the  covenant  of  promises.  4,  They  have  each  of  them  a 
private  key  to  the  treasure,  and  that  is  faith.  Improve  this  doctrine — (1)  In  a 
way  of  information  ;  (2)  in  a  way  of  encouragement.  IT.  Boston,  D.D.)  What 
found  with  wisdom  t — I.  Wisdom  mat  be  found.  Else  these  promises  were  annexed 
in  vain,     II.  If  wisdom  be  found,  life  is  found  withal.    1.  Natural,    2.  Spiritual. 

3.  Eternal  life.  III.  Not  only  life,  but  God's  favour  is  gotten  also  by  oettino 
WISDOM.  1.  He  shall  find  favour  from  God  in  receiving  Him.  2.  He  shall  find 
favour  from  God  in  rewarding  him  here.  3.  He  shall  find  favour  from  God  in 
preserving  him  from  many  dangers.  4.  He  shall  receive  favour  from  God  in 
preferring,  or  crowning  him  with  eternal  glory  in  heaven.  Use — 1.  To  confute  the 
doctrine  of  merits.     2.  Seek  wisdom  earnestly  and  truly ;  not  faintly  and  hypo- 

15 


210  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

critically,  seeing  ye  look  not  only  for  life,  but  also  for  God's  favour  from  thence, 
•which  is  the  very  cause  of  life,  and  the  very  life  of  life  itself.  {Francis  Taylor, 
B.D.)  The  favour  of  God  obtained  by  wisdom: — The  intention  of  this  text  is 
to  represent  a  very  great  blessedness  to  good  men,  whether  in  the  present  or  a  future 
state,  annexed  to  wisdom,  or  religious  virtue,  in  consequence  of  their  obtaining 
God's  favour.  I.  How  great,  how  sobstantial  and  comprehensive  a  felicity  this 
IS.  It  will  be  easily  allowed,  if  we  consider  our  most  obvious  notions  of  the  Deity, 
as  a  Being  infinitely  perfect  and  all-sufficient,  the  fountain  of  life  and  happiness. 
We  judge  of  the  importance  of  any  person's  favour,  and  of  the  security  and 
advantage  which  may  arise  to  ourselves  from  it,  by  his  power  and  capacity.  It  is 
impossible  that  God's  favourites  should  be  unhappy,  because  He  neither  wanteth 
power  to  effect  what  His  good-will  inclineth  to,  nor  wisdom  to  contrive  the  best 
method  for  their  safety  and  advantage.  Though  there  are  objects  suitable  to  the 
inclinations  God  hath  planted  in  our  nature,  yet  even  supposing  them  sought  after, 
and  enjoyed  without  sin,  they  come  short  of  being  our  true  felicity,  both  in  the 
perfection  of  degree  and  in  the  duration  of  them.  They  cannot  yield  solid  con- 
tentment and  satisfaction  to  the  mind  of  man,  because  they  are  too  low  in  their 
kind  for  its  high  capacity ;  and  they  are  of  a  perishing  nature  ;  pleasure  is  but  for 
a  season,  honour  only  an  empty  shadow ;  nothing  can  be  more  variable  and 
uncertain  than  it  is.  But  the  favour  of  God  is  a  substantial  good,  and  never- 
failing  foundation  of  hope  and  spring  of  comfort ;  it  extendeth  to  all  possible 
cases,  and  is  a  support  in  the  most  distressed  situation  of  affairs.     II.  Upon  what 

GROUNDS  MAY   WE  EXPECT  THAT,  IF  WE   FIND  WISDOM,  WE    SHALL  OBTAIN  F.WOUR    OF    THE 

Lord  ?  How  can  men  do  anything  that  is  good  out  of  a  regard  to  the  Deity,  unless 
they  first  believe  Him  to  be  good,  and  a  lover  of  virtue  ?  The  greatest  corruptions 
of  religion  and  morality  have  taken  their  rise  from  wrong  notions  of  God.  But 
how  doth  it  appear  that  the  wise  and  virtuous  obtain  favour  of  the  Lord,  since  His 
providence  doth  not  distinguish  them  by  marks  of  favour,  but,  by  the  confession  of 
the  sacred  writers  themselves,  they  are  in  as  bad  a  condition  with  respect  to  the 
affairs  of  this  life  as  the  wicked?  This  objection  hath  been  advanced  against  the 
equity  and  wisdom  of  Providence,  and  as  seeming  to  prove  that  the  affairs  of  this 
world  are  under  no  intelligent  direction,  but  left  to  blind  chance  or  necessity ;  but 
this  is  not  conclusive  against  the  doctrine  of  the  text  for  the  following  reasons : 
1.  The  present  state  is  appointed  in  the  wisdom  of  God  to  be  a  state  of  discipline 
and  improvement.  2.  The  sufferings  of  good  men  in  the  present  state  may  be 
considered  as  trials,  and  it  is  consistent  with  the  favour  of  God  to  His  servants 
that  He  should  try  them  in  order  to  their  growth  in  virtue,  and  so  becoming  still 
more  the  objects  of  His  favour.  3.  We  must  keep  in  mind  those  things  promised 
in  the  gospel.  Two  practical  reflections.  (1)  See  what  is  the  noblest  end  of  life, 
the  worthiest  of  our  affections,  our  choice,  and  of  our  most  diligent  and  constant 
endeavours,  that  we  may  attain  it.  (2)  The  way  to  obtain  this  end  is  plainly 
marked  out  to  us  in  Scripture,  and  it  is  very  inexcusable  folly  and  thoughtlessness 
if  we  mistake  it.     (J.  Abemethy,  M.A.) 

Ver.  36.  He  that  Binneth  against  Me  wrongeth  hla  own  soul. — The  sinner 
wrongeth  his  own  soul : — I.  What  are  we  to  understand  by  a  man  sinning  against 
Christ?  1.  To  take  partial  views  of  His  glorious  gospel.  2.  When  He  would 
■wreathe  His  gentle  yoke  about  our  necks,  to  kick  at  the  restraint,  and  refuse  it. 
3.  To  coldly  hear  the  offers  of  His  grace,  and  grieve  His  Holy  Spirit  in  not  fully 
and  spiritually  accepting  them.  II.  How  can  we  be  said  to  hate  the  only  Being 
who  can  save  us  ?  This  expression  seems  wholly  inconsistent  with  the  natural 
dispositions  of  men.  Yet  as  a  fact,  men  may  be  seen  all  around  us  loving  the  ways 
of  death.  1.  We  may  be  said  to  love  death  when  we  suffer  and  encourage  our 
desires  to  go  forth  and  loiter  about  the  precincts  of  it.  The  thoughts  and  desires  of 
a  man  tell  us  what  he  is.  2.  We  love  the  captivity  of  death  when  we  make  but 
few  and  faint  efforts  to  break  the  chains  of  it.  III.  How  does  a  sinner  who  loves 
death  wrong  his  own  soul?  1.  He  does  it  by  choosing  to  be  a  beggar  in  the  midst 
of  riches.  2.  He  does  it  when  he  treats  his  soul  as  a  fleeting  mortal  thing.  We  do 
it  great  wrong  when  we  labour  to  fill  it  with  too  much  of  the  creature,  and  with  too 
little  of  Christ.  (F.  G.  Crossnuin.)  Sinners  wrong  themselves: — 1.  They  snatch 
their  souls  away  from  wisdom.  2.  They  spoil  (rob)  their  souls.  3.  They  infect 
their  souls  with  the  guilt  of  sin.  4.  They  corrupt  them  with  the  filth  of  sin. 
5.  They  disgrace  their  souls.  6.  They  torment  their  souls  with  the  pangs  of 
conscience.     7.  They  betray  their  souls  to  sin.     8.  They  destroy  them  eternally. 


CHAP.  VIII.]  PROVERBS.  211 

{Francis  Taylor,  B.D.)  Wronging  one's  self: — It  would  be  repugnant  to  our 
moral  sense  to  overlook  the  consequences  of  sin,  and  put  on  the  same  plane  one 
whose  life  had  been  one  of  spotless  purity  and  a  grey-haired  sinner  who  had  at  the 
eleventh  hour  found  pardon.  "  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth  that  shall  he  also  reap" 
is  an  inflexible  law.  Notice  certain  particulars  in  which  the  principle  is  seen. 
1.  Opportunities  are  lost.  A  man  wrongs  his  own  soul  by  the  sinful  neglect  of 
God's  commands  in  his  early  years.  Those  grand  years  freighted  with  golden 
chances  of  service  for  God  and  humanity,  can  never  be  recalled.  2.  Moral  growth 
is  arrested.  You  may  secure  the  resumption  of  arrested  processes  in  a  crystal  or  a 
plant,  but  as  you  ascend  the  scale  of  being  difiSculties  increase.  In  one's  moral 
nature  the  law  we  illustrate  holds  inexorable  sway.  He  that  sinneth  against  God 
dwarfs,  deadens,  and  stultifies  his  better  faculties.  Take  a  single  faculty,  like  the 
memory.  There  is  retention  as  well  as  reception.  The  passing  thought,  the 
momentary  impulse,  the  fugitive  desire  we  entertain — all  these  are  ours ;  yea,  they 
are  us.  We  are  ever  enriching  or  defacing  our  moral  life  through  the  faculty  of 
memory.  3.  Look  at  the  true  end  of  our  life  here,  service  for  God  and  our 
fellow-men.  If  that  service  is  unrendered,  it  remains  undone  for  ever.  4.  Look 
at  the  effects  of  our  sin  on  others.  True  religion  in  a  man  is  that  which  earnestly 
and  habitually  makes  for  righteousness  and  holy  obedience.  If  it  does  not  keep 
from  sin,  it  is  not  a  religion  sufficient  to  save.  {H.  A.  Stimson,  D.D.)  Wronging 
the  soul : — Of  all  created  things  the  soul  of  man  most  resembles  the  Deity.  It  is 
like  Himself  in  its  nature.  The  soul  is  a  being  possessed  of  volition,  with  powers  of 
imagining  the  loftiest  themes,  of  conceiving  and  working  out  the  most  difficult 
inquiries.  The  Divine  image  is  still  traced  upon  the  soul.  It  is  therefore  true  that 
"he  who  sinneth  against  God  sinneth  against  (wrongeth)  his  own  soul."  I.  The 
siNNEB  WRONGS  HIS  OWN  SOUL  IN  THIS  WORLD,  BT  DEBASING  IT.  Indulgence  in  vice 
wrongs  and  destroys  the  moral  nature.  Even  the  intellectual  faculty  is  hurt  and 
wronged  by  sin.  Sensuality  debases  the  mind.  He  who  is  the  slave  of  sin  occupies 
a  lower  position  in  creation  than  the  man  who  by  virtue  asserts  the  high  prerogative 
of  nature,  who  by  his  goodness  and  righteousness  strives  to  assimilate  his  soul  to 
God.  He  wrongs  the  soul  who  makes  it  subservient  to  the  base  requirements  of  the 
body.  The  intellectual  faculty  will  censure  sin,  and  so  will  the  moral  faculty. 
Therefore  these  properties  should  be  cultivated.  The  conscience  is  seared  by 
indulgence  in  sin,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  is  giueved.  II.  Sin  wrongs  the  soul  by 
SUBJECTING  IT  TO  PUNISHMENT  IN  THE  WORLD  TO  COME.  That  this  is  true  is  evident 
from  the  teaching  of  nature  as  well  as  religion.  The  mind  has  reasoned  correctly 
when  it  wrought  out  for  itself  the  doctrine  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  and 
proved  an  existence  beyond  the  grave.  The  living  being  is  not  the  outer  frame. 
Consciousness  is  perceived  to  be  a  simple  and  indivisible  power — an  essential 
property  of  the  mind.  The  destruction  of  matter  cannot  of  necessity  be  considered 
the  destruction  of  living  agents.  The  destruction  of  the  body  and  all  its  organs 
does  not  necessarily  involve  the  destruction  of  the  reflecting  powers ;  they  may 
not  even  be  suspended  in  death.  Upon  the  immortality  of  the  soul  philosophy 
speaks  the  precepts  of  religion.  Behold,  then,  the  excellency  of  the  soul,  and  the 
guUt  of  him  who  wrongs  it.  How  is  it  possible  that  he  who  wrongs  the  heavenly 
Essence  can  escape  the  just  judgments  of  God?  But  the  Christian  can  realise  the 
dignity  of  the  soul  from  other  considerations.  He  has  the  evidence  of  his  own 
heart.  Christianity  requires  the  submission  of  the  whole  heart ;  the  acceptance  of 
its  mysteries ;  the  noblest  self-denial,  the  most  exalted  virtue,  the  highest  holiness, 
the  perfection  of  humanity.  But  who  except  the  Christian  can  realise  this  ?  From 
the  death-bed  of  the  unbelieving  may  be  learned  the  misery,  here  and  hereafter,  of 
those  who  wrong  their  own  soul.  {David  Ross,  B.A.)  The  wronged  soul: — 
I.  The  WRONG  sin  does  the  nature  op  the  soul.  1.  Sin  is  inhuman.  2.  Sin  is 
unnatural.  3.  Sin  is  the  degradation  of  human  nature.  II.  The  wrong  sin  does 
THi  capacities  OF  THE  SOUL.  The  soul  of  man  is  a  great  capacity  for  God.  There 
is  no  punishment  worse  than  the  habit  of  sin,  which  comes  from  sinning.  To  do 
wrong  is  worse  than  to  suffer  any  calamity.  Pain  is  soon  over,  misfortune  is  for  a 
moment,  calamity  is  temporary.  But  sin  is  permanent.  It  does  an  irreparable 
injury  to  the  soul.  It  keeps  man  out  of  his  heritage.  It  defeats  the  end  for  which 
man  was  made.  God  made  us  in  His  image.  III.  The  wrong  sin  does  the  poweb 
OP  THB  SOUL.  1.  The  conscience,  which  is  that  power  of  the  soul  by  which  we 
recognise  the  moral  quality  of  actions.  2.  Sin  also  wrongs  the  will.  Sin  enfeebles 
man  at  the  most  vital  part  of  his  nature.  Sin  wrongs  the  soul  in  every  faculty  and 
power.      Conclusion:   (1)   Of  all  evils  that  man  can  know  or  suffer,  sin  is  the 


212  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  Tin. 

worst.  (2)  The  sinner  makes  his  own  hereafter.  Remember  that  heaven  is  a  holy 
soul  in  a  holy  place.  (3)  I  cannot,  I  dare  not,  close  without  a  word  of  hope  for  any 
troubled  and  penitent  soul.  (S.  Z.  Batten.)  The  self -dettr oyer : — The  particular 
truth  of  the  text  is,  that  sin  is  not  only  an  offence  to  God,  whom  no  man  hath  seen 
or  can  see,  but  it  is  a  distinct  and  irreparable  injury  to  the  man,  the  sinner  himself. 
And  that  is  the  only  way  to  get  hold  of  man.  Tell  a  man  that  by  sinning  he  is 
hurting  the  unseen  God,  and  what  does  he  care  ?  You  can  only  get  hold  of  a  man 
in  so  far  as  any  truth  you  teach  or  any  requisite  you  demand  impinges  upon 
himself.  Touch  the  little  Self  and  you  have  put  a  hook  in  the  nose  of  leviathan. 
God  can  make  you  possess  in  your  bones  the  effects  of  your  moral  action. 
(J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  wrong  done  to  the  toul  by  unbelief: — I.  Uneklief,  ob  a, 
sinneb's  not  believino,  accepting,  closing  with,  and  besting  on  Chbist  fob 
salvation,  is  the  sin  against  Chbist  bt  way  of  eminenct.  What  treatment  of 
Christ  is  it  that  is  this  sinning  against  Him  ?  There  is  a  doctrinal  and  a  practical 
treatment  of  Him.  Living  ignorant  of  Christ  and  the  fundamental  truths  of  the 
gospel.  Living  insensible  of  our  absolute  need  of  Christ.  Not  believing  the 
doctrines  of  the  gospel.  Of  this  treatment  of  Christ  there  are  two  evidences  :  their 
not  seeking  Him  with  the  utmost  diligence  ;  their  seeking  life  and  salvation  some 
other  way — the  way  of  the  covenant  of  works  or  the  way  of  uncovenanted  mercy. 
n.  Confibm  this  doctbine.  1.  Faith  in  Christ  is  honouring  Him  in  a  special 
manner  ;  therefore  unbelief  must  be  a  special  dishonour.  2.  Unbelief  is  the  great 
Antichrist  in  the  heart,  sitting  up  there  in  downright  opposition  to  the  Son  of  God. 
3.  This  sin  engrosses  the  whole  soul  to  itself  against  Christ.  4.  It  is  the  sin  that 
ruins  the  hearers  of  the  gospel,  with  whom  Christ  has  to  do.  5.  It  is  equal  to  the 
grossest  sins  against  the  light  of  nature.  6.  It  is  above  these  sins  in  heinousness. 
7.  It  has  none  that  goes  beyond  it  but  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost.  8.  It  is  a 
sin  directly  striking  against  the  glorious  oflBce  wherewith  Christ  is  invested,  and 
while  He  is  in  the  actual  exercise  of  that  oflSce.   HI.  Unbelief  is  sin  against  Chbist 

BT  WAT  OF    EMINENCT,  AND  THIS  APPEAE8  FBOM  A    VIEW    OF  SOME   PABTICULAR   PIECES    OF 

MALiGNiTT  WBAPPED  UP  THEBEiN.  1.  It  is  a  despising  Him  as  the  Father's  choice. 
2.  It  is  a  trampling  on  His  love  in  taking  the  mediatory  office.  3.  It  is  a  treating 
of  Him  as  if  He  were  an  impostor.  4.  It  is  a  contempt  poured  upon  His  precious 
blood.  5.  It  is  a  frustrating  of  the  ends  of  the  death  of  Christ,  as  far  as  lies  in  the 
unbeliever's  power.  6.  It  is  a  declining  of  His  government  most  reproachfully. 
From  this  doctrine  learn  lessons  for  saints,  for  sinners,  for  all.  IV.  The  sinneb 
AGAINST  Chbist  bt  unbelief  wbongs  his  own  soul.  1.  Wrongs  his  own  soul  really. 
He  does  in  very  deed  do  hurt  and  bring  damage  to  himself,  body  and  soul.  He 
keeps  his  soul  in  a  state  of  alienation  from  God.  He  keeps  his  soul  under  the 
goUt  of  all  his  sins.  In  a  state  of  inability  to  do  what  is  good  or  acceptable  in  the 
sight  of  God.  It  fixes  the  soul  in  a  state  of  condemnation.  2.  Wrongs  his  own 
soul  only  ;  not  Christ  whom  he  sins  against.  All  sin  is  against  the  mind  and 
honour  of  Christ,  but  no  sin  is  against  His  happiness.  {T.  Boston,  D.D.) 
The  indignity  of  tin  : — There  are  various  definitions  of  sins,  each  one  of  which  is 
true  according  to  our  standpoint.  If  we  regard  sin  as  a  violation  of  man's  true 
destiny,  which  destiny  we  read  not  only  in  God's  loving  command,  but  also  in  the 
very  law  of  man's  own  being,  then  sin  is  the  transgressing  of  the  law.  If  we  regard 
sin  as  variation  from  the  right,  the  good,  the  true,  then  sin  is  unrighteousness.  If 
we  regard  sin  as  the  negation  of  man's  true  nature  as  a  spiritual  beings  and  the 
identifying  of  him  with  the  things  of  sense,  then  sin  is  materialism.  If  we  regard 
sin  as  the  fixing  of  the  affections — affections  that  were  intended  for  glories  beyond 
the  stars — upon  the  perishing  thing  of  this  world,  then  sin  is  worldliness.  And, 
finally,  if  we  regard  sin  as  the  failure  or  refusal  of  the  soul  to  apprehend  and  con- 
fide in  the  unseen,  then  sin  is  unbelief.  But  it  is  always  the  one  and  self-same 
thing,  the  same  grim  and  ghastly  thing — in  the  godless  man  of  the  world,  and 
the  ruffian  who  outrages  law,  and  the  smooth  libertine  and  vulgar  thief ;  in  the 
respectable  atheist  who  says  there  is  no  God,  and  the  brave  outlaw  who  lives  his 
creed  and  acts  upon  his  belief.  For,  while  sins  differ,  sin — the  evil  root  out  of 
which  all  sins  proceed — is  the  same.  Sins  are  but  symptoms ;  the  disease  called 
sin  lies  deeper  in  the  soul.  And  oh  !  it  is  an  awful  thought,  well  calculated  to 
humble  us  all  into  the  very  dust,  that  no  matter  what  our  sins  may  be — no  matter 
how  decent,  how  respectable,  how  secret — they  each  and  all  proceed  out  of  the 
same  fell  disorder  as  the  sins  of  the  veriest  wretch  who  outrages  man's  laws  and 
exhausts  man's  patience  by  his  wickedness!  And  now  that  sin  has  been  traced  to 
its  last  analysis,  let  us  consider  its  results  on  the  soul.    It  was  Wisdom  that  of  old 


CHAP,  vin.]  PROVERBS.  218 

spoke  the  words  of  my  text,  and  her  voice  is  still  uplifted  among  the  sons  of  men, 
"  He  that  sinneth  against  Me  wrongeth  his  own  soul."  It  is  true  that  he  wrongs 
the  souls  of  others  also.  But  it  is  not  of  this  that  I  now  speak.  The  worst  wrong, 
the  deepest  indignity,  is  done  to  the  soul  that  commits  the  sin.  1.  He  wrongs 
his  soul  by  the  degradation  he  inflicts  upon  it,  the  evil  that  he  scatters  through  it. 
The  soul  comes  as  a  new  creation  from  God.  It  is  enshrined  in  a  body  that  inherits 
evil — evil  propensities,  insurgent  affections ;  and  it  has  a  hard  struggle  at  best,  and 
cannot  win  the  victory  but  by  the  help  of  God.  But  the  man  who  sins  makes  a 
voluntary  surrender  of  the  nobler  to  the  baser  part,  and  so  appropriates  the 
frailty  of  the  baser  nature,  and  makes  it  a  part  of  his  soul's  being.  Each  sin  by  a 
certain  reflex  action  spreads  disorder  through  man's  whole  nature.  In  this  way  the 
very  bodily  appetite  may  become  the  appetite  also  of  the  soul.  Oh,  grim  and 
ghastly  are  the  evils  which  sin  inflicts  upon  the  body !  It  dulls  the  eye,  and  palsies 
the  hand,  and  banishes  manly  grace  from  the  brow,  and  coarsens  and  brutalises  the 
human  face  Divine.  But  something  far  more  dreadful  than  this  befalls  the  sinner. 
The  soul  takes  on  the  vice  of  the  body.  The  worst  symptom  of  drunkenness,  for 
instance,  is  not  the  craving  of  the  body,  but  the  craving  of  the  soul.  The  soul  of 
the  inebriate  begins  to  crave  the  false  excitement  of  drink,  and  an  obliquity  corre- 
sponding to  that  of  the  body  begins  to  set  up  in  the  soul.  The  eye  of  the  drunkard 
sees  false  or  sees  double  :  the  mind's  eye  begins  to  see  false  also.  And  so  it  comes 
to  pass  that  the  soul  of  the  drunkard  becomes  untruthful.  This  is  the  reason  that 
men  cannot  trust  the  word  of  a  drunkard.  So  also  the  deadly  sin  of  impurity. 
The  very  mind  and  conscience  become  defiled.  The  mind  panders  to  the  body.  Oh, 
horrible  degradation  !  And  so  we  find  that  there  is  a  correspondence  and  correla- 
tion between  different  kinds  of  sin.  The  sensual  man  is  always  a  cruel  man.  The 
drunkard  is  a  liar.  The  thief  is  simply  covetous  and  selfish,  just  like  the  worldling 
and  the  miser.  In  all  these  things  man's  whole  nature  is  shamed  and  dishonoured. 
In  all  his  being  he  is  degraded  and  coarsened  by  his  sin.  2.  And  this  becomes  all 
the  more  evident  when  we  examine  the  wrong  which  sin  does  to  man's  characteristic 
powers.  And  first,  his  intellectual  faculties,  his  reason,  his  power  to  know.  It  is 
a  great  and  awful  truth,  little  heeded,  little  understood,  that  all  the  powers  of  man's 
intellect  are  blunted  and  weakened  by  sin.  Who  has  not  seen  the  splendour  of 
some  lordly  intellect  first  dimmed,  then  obscured,  by  excess  or  foUy,  until  its 
fitful  light  would  blaze  at  intervals,  and  then  go  out  in  piteous  darkness,  or  fade 
into  still  more  pitiable  imbecility  ?  But  even  more  pitiable,  if  possible,  is  it  to  see 
the  royal  intellect  of  man  forced  into  the  base  service  of  the  world,  and  compelled 
to  drudge  like  a  very  slave  in  the  interest  of  sordid  vice,  or  avarice,  or  other 
selfishness.  Who  does  not  know  how  such  intellect  declines  into  trickery  or  beastly 
cunning,  and  it  watches  like  a  fox  for  a  chance  to  deceive,  or  Uke  a  predatory  beast 
to  seize  its  prey  ?  To  such  a  man  high  thoughts  and  noble  purposes  become  simply 
impossible.  Not  less  disastrous  and  dishonouring  is  the  influence  of  sin  on  man's 
moral  nature — on  his  power  to  discriminate  and  choose  between  right  and  wrong. 
Of  the  debilitating  effect  of  sin  upon  the  will  of  man  I  need  not  speak  at  length. 
All  observation  and  all  experience  prove  that  this  is  its  immediate,  unvarying, 
inevitable  effect.  He  who  once  yields  to  do  wrong  will  find  it  harder  the  next  time 
to  do  right,  until  he  speedily  becomes  powerless  to  choose  God  and  resist  evil.  But 
of  the  darkening,  paralysing  effect  of  sin  upon  a  moral  sense  not  so  much  is  com- 
monly thought,  though  such  effect  is  not  less  immediate  and  inevitable.  The  moral 
sense,  which  at  first  is  quick  to  discriminate,  begins,  under  the  pressure  of  sin,  to 
lose  the  keenness  of  perception.  The  high  sense  of  honour  and  of  truthfulness  is 
dulled.  The  good  seems  to  be  less  good,  and  the  evil  does  not  seem  to  be  so  very 
evil,  until  at  last  that  soul  calls  evil  good  and  good  evil.  Woe  to  the  soul  that  is 
in  such  a  case  !  He  has  abdicated  his  throne,  and  lost  his  regal  state,  and  broken 
his  sceptre,  and  flung  away  his  crown.  Finally,  even  more  debasing  is  the  effect  of 
sin  upon  the  affections.  This  would  seem  to  be  the  worst  degradation  of  all — that 
man  should  not  only  sin  his  intellect  and  will  and  conscience  away,  but  that  he 
should  love  his  shame,  that  his  soul  should  be  enamoured  of  its  degradation.  And 
yet,  who  does  not  know  that  even  this  is  the  effect  of  sin?  Through  it  men  learn 
to  love  the  base  things  of  this  world  and  lose  the  power  to  love  the  nobler  things. 
What  is  life  to  such  a  soul  but  shame  ?  What  shall  death  be  but  the  beginning  of 
an  eternal  bereavement  ?  One  word  in  conclusion.  All  the  effects  of  sin  may  be 
summed  up  in  one  dreadful  word — death.  The  dying  of  the  soul,  the  decay  of  its 
faculties,  the  languishing  of  its  strength — the  progressive  unending  dying  of  an 
immortal  soul,  with  all  its  unending  anguish  of  unsatisfied  longing,  unfulfilled 


214  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vin. 

desire,  baffled  hope,  pitiless  remorse,  remediless  desire — this  is  the  dread  reality  at 
which  men  ought  to  tremble.  It  is  no  chimera  of  imagination  ;  it  is  no  spectre  of 
the  future — it  is  a  present  reality.  It  is  doing  its  ghastly  work  even  now  in  every 
soul  where  sin  reigns.  For  the  soul  that  sins  is  dying.  The  wages  of  sin  is  death. 
{Bp.  S.  S,  Harris.)  The  self-hurt  of  sin  : — Wisdom,  as  used  here,  is  the  law  of 
God  concerning  human  life  and  conduct,  and  sin  is  the  transgression  of  that  law. 
The  text,  not  in  a  spirit  of  haughty  denunciation,  but  with  sad  and  kindly  warning, 
declares  that  he  who  transgresses  that  law  wrongs  his  own  soul,  is  the  author  of  hia 
own  sorrow  and  suffering  and  loss.  God's  laws,  under  His  immediate  direction, 
work  out  the  penalty  of  their  own  violation ;  in  part  here,  fully  hereafter.  All 
God's  purposes  in  us  are  accomplished  by  the  operation  of  beneficent  law.  To  break 
the  law  is  to  thwart  His  purposes,  and  bring  the  ruin  which  naturally  follows  such 
a  course.  The  law  of  the  piano  is,  that  its  strings  shall  be  tuned  in  harmony,  and 
that  under  the  skilful  touch  of  the  key  light-cushioned  hammers  shall  strike  them 
so  that  they  give  out  genuine  music.  But  if  you  fail  to  tune  them  in  harmony,  and 
then,  lifting  the  lid,  strike  them  with  iron  hammers,  you  get  discord  and  destruction. 
You  have  transgressed  the  law  of  the  piano.  The  law  of  the  watch  is  to  submit  to 
balance-wheel  and  regulator  ;  take  off  the  one  and  misplace  the  other,  and  your 
watch  reports  falsely  all  the  time.  You  have  transgressed  its  law.  The  law  of  the 
circulation  of  the  blood  is  from  heart  to  artery,  capillary,  and  back  again  by  the 
veins  ;  and  as  it  goes  it  repairs  waste,  carries  off  useless  matter,  and  gives  health 
and  strength.  But  if  you  open  an  artery  and  send  the  blood  outside  its  course,  you 
die.  You  have  transgressed  the  law.  How  sinful  and  self-destructive,  then,  is  the 
violation  of  law,  and  how  fatally  does  he  who  thus  sins  wrong  his  own  soul  I  I.  SiK 
AGAINST  SPIRITUAL  LAW.  1.  The  law  of  nutrition.  Hunger,  flavour,  and  the  delight  of 
the  palate  are  God's  arrangements  for  insuring  the  taking  of  proper  food  to  repair  the 
waste  and  supply  the  growth  of  the  body.  Break  the  law,  and  eat  for  the  sake  of 
pleasing  the  palate  or  increasing  sociability,  then  indigestion,  dulness,  sleeplessness 
at  night  and  sluggishness  by  day  follow.  Who  shall  estimate  the  sin  against  the 
temple  of  the  soul?  2.  The  nervous  system.  Its  motor  power  is  intended  to  carry 
messages  from  the  mind  to  the  muscles,  ordering  work  done  and  motion  performed. 
Properly  governed  and  temperately  used,  what  usefulness,  health,  and  abundance  of 
valuable  labour  accomplished  may  result  1  Abuse  it,  and  exhaustion,  prostration, 
paralysis  follow.  II.  The  spieitual  hurt.  1.  To  the  truth-perceiving  faculties. 
The  judgment  and  reason,  acting  under  the  restraint  of  a  pure  conscience,  leads  to 
the  truth  in  a  thousand  ways  :  in  business,  society,  pleasure,  habits,  indulgences — • 
in  all  necessary  things — and  the  life  is  guided  in  righteousness  and  wisdom.  But 
let  unholy  ambition,  improper  desire  for  gain,  any  form  of  wicked  selfishness,  get 
control  of  these  faculties,  and  how  they  become  warped,  blinded,  and  misguided  ! 
2.  To  the  power  of  self-control.  This  is  the  battle  of  growing  evil  habits  against 
the  will — growing  more  and  more  impatient  of  restraint,  more  and  more  defiant  of 
conscience  and  will,  till  appetite,  strengthened  into  habit,  leads  manhood  captive 
and  blots  out  every  hope  and  joy.  3.  To  the  religious  nature.  Properly  acted  upon 
by  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  becomes  God's  audience-chamber  in  the  soul ;  the  natal 
chamber  of  the  holiest  purposes ;  the  place  where  the  strength  comes  which  gives 
martyr-power.  Sinned  against,  the  demons  of  superstition,  distrust,  hatred  of 
good,  vile  affections,  scepticism,  and  cold,  dark  atheism  come  in  to  torment  the 
soul.  To  the  joys  of  memory  and  hope.  Every  life  gathers  up  all  its  past  and  holds 
it  in  its  present  possession  for  evermore  by  faithful  memory ;  and  if  that  past  be 
one  of  holy  purpose  and  noble  endeavour,  every  record  it  holds  will  be  a  joy  for 
ever;  its  pains  will  turn  to  pleasui-e,  its  hardships  to  victories,  its  struggles  to 
triumphs.  But  if  its  records  be  of  deceit  and  dishonesty,  of  lust  and  recklessness, 
then  remorse  pours  her  bitterness   into  every  recollection.      IH.   He  that  sins 

AGAINST  WISDOM  INTERFERES  WITH  God'S  PURPOSES    FOR    HIS   FUTURE.       God    haS   great 

ambitions  for  us.  1.  He  would  build  in  us  a  noble  character.  Sin  defeats  His 
wish,  and  makes  us  in  character  ignoble.  2.  He  would  make  us  useful;  sin  makes 
us  hurtful  to  others.  3.  He  would  make  us  happy ;  sin  makes  us  wretched, 
utterly  and  for  ever.  4.  He  would  have  us  grow  in  spiritual  beauty,  symmetry, 
and  power;  sin  deforms,  enfeebles,  and  mars  our  being.  (C  N.  Sims,  D.D.) 
The  wrong  which  sin  does  to  human  nature  : — The  sinner  does  a  wrong,  indeed,  to 
others.  Sin  is,  to  all  the  dearest  interests  of  society,  a  desolating  power.  It  brings 
misery  into  the  daily  lot  of  millions.  But  all  the  injury,  great  and  terrible  as  it  is, 
which  the  sinner  does  or  can  inflict  upon  others,  is  not  equal  to  the  injury  that  he 
inflicts  apoQ  himself.  Does  any  one  say  he  is  glad  that  it  is  himself  that  he  injures 


CHIP,  vm.]  PROVERBS.  215 

most?  What  a  feeling  of  disinterested  justice  is  that!  Because  he  has  not  only 
wronged  others,  but  ruined  himself,  is  his  course  any  the  less  guilty,  or  unhappy, 
or  unnatural  ?  I  say  unnatural ;  and  this  is  a  point  on  which  I  wish  to  insist,  in 
the  consideration  of  that  wrong  which  the  moral  offender  does  to  himself.  The 
world,  alas  !  is  not  only  in  the  awful  condition  of  being  filled  with  sin,  and  filled 
with  misery  in  consequence,  but  of  thinking  that  this  is  the  natural  order  of  things. 
Sin  is  a  thing  of  course ;  it  is  taken  for  granted  that  it  must  exist  very  much  in  the 
way  that  it  does ;  and  men  are  everywhere  easy  about  it,  as  if  they  were  acting 
out  the  principles  of  their  moral  constitution,  and  almost  as  if  they  were  fulfilling 
the  will  of  God.  1.  Sin  does  a  wrong  to  reason.  There  are  instances  in  which  sin, 
in  various  forms  of  vice  and  vanity,  absolutely  destroys  reason.  There  are  other 
and  more  numerous  cases  in  which  it  employs  the  faculty,  but  employs  it  in  a  toil 
most  degrading  to  its  nature.  There  is  reasoning,  indeed,  in  the  mind  of  a  miser; 
the  solemn  arithmetic  of  profit  and  loss.  There  is  reasoning  in  the  schemes  of 
unscrupulous  ambition  ;  the  absorbing  and  agitating  intrigue  for  office  or  honour. 
There  is  reasoning  upon  the  modes  of  sensual  pleasure ;  and  the  whole  power  of  a 
very  acute  mind  is  sometimes  employed  and  absorbed  in  plans,  and  projects,  and 
imaginations  of  evil  indulgence.  But  what  an  unnatural  desecration  is  it,  for 
reason — sovereign,  majestic,  all-comprehending  reason — to  contract  its  boundless 
range  to  the  measure  of  what  the  hand  can  grasp  ;  to  be  sunk  so  low  as  to  idolise 
outward  or  sensitive  good ;  to  make  its  god  not  indeed  of  wood  or  stone,  but  of  a 
sense  or  a  nerve  !  2.  Sin  is  a  kind  of  insanity.  So  far  as  it  goes,  it  makes  man  an 
irrational  creature ;  it  makes  him  a  fool.  The  consummation  of  sin  is  ever,  and 
in  every  form,  the  extreme  of  folly.  And  it  is  that  most  pitiable  folly  which  is  puffed 
up  with  arrogance  and  self-sufficiency.  The  infatuation  of  the  inebriate  man,  who 
is  elated  and  gay  just  when  he  ought  to  be  most  depressed  and  sad,  we  very  well 
vmderstand.  But  it  is  just  as  true  of  every  man  that  is  intoxicated  by  any  of  his 
senses  or  passions,  by  wealth,  or  honour,  or  pleasure,  that  he  is  infatuated — that  he 
has  abjured  reason.  What  clearer  dictate  of  reason  is  there  than  to  prefer  the 
greater  good  to  the  lesser  good  ?  But  every  offender,  every  sensualist,  every 
avaricious  man,  sacrifices  the  greater  good — the  happiness  of  virtue  and  piety — for 
the  lesser  good,  which  he  finds  in  his  senses  or  in  the  perishing  world.  Nor  is  this 
the  strongest  view  of  the  case.  He  sacrifices  the  greater  for  the  less,  without  any 
necessity  for  it.  He  might  have  both.  A  pure  mind  can  derive  more  enjoyment 
from  this  world  and  from  the  senses  than  an  impure  mind.  What  bad  man  ever 
desired  that  his  child  should  be  like  himself  ?  And  what  a  testimony  is  this,  what 
a  clear  and  disinterested  testimony,  to  the  unhappiness  of  a  sinful  course !  How 
truly,  and  with  what  striking  emphasis,  did  the  venerable  Cranmer  reply,  when 
told  that  a  certain  man  had  cheated  him :  "  No  he  has  cheated  himself."  3.  Sin 
does  a  wrong  to  conscience.  There  is  a  conscience  in  every  man,  which  is  as  truly 
a  part  of  his  nature  as  reason  or  memory.  The  offender  against  this,  therefore, 
violates  no  unknown  law  nor  impracticable  rule.  From  the  very  teaching  of  his 
nature  he  knows  what  is  right,  and  he  knows  that  he  can  do  it ;  and  his  very 
nature,  therefore,  instead  of  furnishing  him  with  apologies  for  wilful  wrong,  holds 
him  inexcusable.  He  will  have  the  desired  gratification ;  and  to  obtain  it  he  sets 
his  foot  upon  that  conscience,  and  crushes  it  down  to  dishonour  and  agony  worse 
than  death.  4.  Sin  does  a  wrong  to  the  affections.  How  does  it  mar  even  that 
image  of  the  affections,  that  mysterious  shrine  from  which  their  revealings  flash 
forth,  "  the  human  face  Divine  "  ;  bereaving  the  world  of  more  than  half  its  beauty ! 
Can  you  ever  behold  sullenness  clouding  the  clear,  fair  brow  of  childhood — or  the 
flushed  cheek  of  anger,  or  the  averted  and  writhen  features  of  envy,  or  the  dim 
and  sunken  eye  and  haggard  aspect  of  vice,  or  the  red  signals  of  bloated  excess 
hung  out  on  every  feature,  proclaiming  the  fire  that  is  consuming  within — without 
feeling  that  sin  is  the  despoiler  of  all  that  the  affections  make  most  hallowed  and 
beautiful  ?  But  these  are  only  indications  of  the  wrong  that  is  done  and  the  ruin 
that  is  wrought  in  the  heart.  Nature  has  made  our  affections  to  be  full  of  tender- 
ness ;  to  be  sensitive  and  alive  to  every  touch ;  to  cling  to  their  cherished  objects 
with  a  grasp  from  which  nothing  but  cruel  violence  can  sever  them.  But  sin  enters 
into  this  world  of  the  affections,  and  spreads  around  the  death-like  coldness  of  dis- 
trust ;  the  word  of  anger  falls  like  a  blow  upon  the  heart,  or  avarice  hardens  the 
heart  against  every  finer  feeling ;  or  the  insane  merriment,  or  the  sullen  stupor  of 
the  inebriate  man  falls  like  a  thunderbolt  amidst  the  circle  of  kindred  and  children. 
Oh  !  the  hearts  where  sin  is  to  do  its  work  should  be  harder  than  the  nether  millstone ; 
yet  it  enters  in  among  affections,  all  warm,  all  sensitive,  all  gushing  forth  in 


216  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

tenderness ;  and,  deaf  to  all  their  pleadings,  it  does  its  work  as  if  it  were  some 
demon  of  wrath  that  knew  no  pitj,  and  heard  no  groans,  and  felt  no  relenting ! 
(0.  Dewey,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Vbbs.  1-6.  Wisdom  bath  bnilded  her  house.  —  Witdom'i  invitation:  —  Th6 
Bible  is  fully  of  mystery,  not  merely  in  its  doctrines,  but  also  in  the  manner  and  in 
the  language  by  which  the  truths  of  revelation  are  brought  before  us.  In  the 
personification  of  this  passage.  Wisdom  is  seen  sympathising  with  man,  caring  for 
man,  loving  man,  dififusing  abroad  amongst  men  the  benefits  of  harmony,  and  of 
purity,  and  of  eternal  life.  I.  The  provision  made  by  heavenly  Wisdom  fob  the 
BPiBrrDAi  WANTS  OF  MEN.  When  Wisdom  is  here  represented  as  having  furnished 
her  house,  and  built  her  dwelling,  you  have  an  idea,  a  correct  conception  of  the 
Church  of  God.  God  is  the  builder  of  the  Church,  and  the  foundation  is  deep, 
broad,  and  wide,  and  altogether  sufficient  for  the  purposes  of  human  salvation. 
Men  are  represented  as  living  stones,  quickened  and  animated,  and  hewn  and  fitted 
to  occupy  the  position  for  which  they  are  intended,  cemented  by  Divine  love,  held 
in  attraction  to  the  foundation,  and  consequently  held  in  relation  to  each  other.  In 
the  passage  the  building  is  characterised  by  stability  and  durability.  "  Seven 
pillars."  Pillars,  in  Scripture,  are  emblems  of  strength,  beauty,  and  durability. 
The  number  seven  is  indicative  of  perfection.  Every  pillar,  every  buttress, 
every  support  that  Christianity  needs  the  wisdom  of  God  has  provided.  In  the 
passages  is  the  further  idea  of  a  gracious  and  adequate  provision.  "  She  hath 
killed  her  killings."  This  is  the  idea  of  sacrifice.  The  idea  of  what  is  grateful 
and  refreshing  is  likewise  presented.  '•  She  hath  mingled  her  wine."  Easterns 
mingled  their  wines  in  order,  by  the  power  of  spices,  to  make  them  more  attractive, 
and  to  strengthen  their  flavour.  Then  the  "  table  is  furnished."  Divine  truth  in 
its  simplest  and  most  complicated  form — Divine  truth  that  can  guide,  and  purify, 
and  train  the  spirit  up  for  heaven — the  truth  that  can  make  you  free — the  truth 
that  can  bless  you  with  present  happiness  and  eternal  glory,  is  presented  in  the 
gospel.  The  provision  of  infinite  love,  then,  is  precisely  adapted  to  your  need. 
II.  The  invitation  presented  to  mankind  to  accept  of  this  pbovision.  1.  The 
parties  employed  to  utter  the  invitation.  When  Wisdom,  as  the  queen  of  heaven, 
spreads  her  table,  she  sends  out  her  maidens.  They  are  emblems  of  feebleness, 
purity,  and  attractiveness ;  and  this  is  just  the  character  of  the  messengers  that 
were  sent  out  by  the  Lord.  2.  The  persons  to  whom  the  invitation  is  directed. 
Here  represented  as  being  foolish,  indiscreet,  unwise,  incompetent  to  guide  their 
own  affairs,  incapable  of  obtaining  that  support  and  comfort  which  they  need. 
Here  is  a  correct  idea  of  the  ruined,  the  guilty,  and  the  helpless  condition  of  man. 
The  gospel  is  preached  to  the  ignorant,  the  guilty,  and  the  wretched.  3.  The 
scene  of  proclamation  is  described.  It  is  made  in  the  chief  places  of  congress,  at 
the  opening  of  the  gate,  and  the  going  in  of  the  doors.  This  teaches  us  that  the  pro- 
clamation is  to  be  made  in  the  midst  of  large  multitudes  of  people.    III.  The 

CONSIDEBATION    BY    WHICH    THIS    INVITATION    IS    ENFORCED     AND    PRESSED    HOME    UPON 

ATTENTION.  There  is  not  the  mere  announcement  of  provision,  not  the  mere 
proclamation  of  the  fact,  but  an  entreaty  on  the  part  of  those  who  go  out  with  the 
messages.  "Forsake  the  foolish  and  live."  Life  is  valuable — all  life  is  valuable. 
The  life  of  religion,  the  life  of  God  in  the  soul  of  man,  is  the  highest  form  of  life. 
There  is  an  appeal  in  the  text  to  the  love  of  enjoyment.  There  is  an  appeal  also 
to  the  love  of  wisdom.  Have  you  obeyed  the  invitation?  {George  Smith,  D.D.) 
The  rival  hanqiuts  (with  verses  13-18)  : — I.  The  resemblances  between  them 
are  set  forth  in  a  very  striking  manner.  1.  It  is  the  same  class  of  men  that  is 
invited.  They  are  in  both  cases  "  the  simple,"  "  the  void  of  understanding." 
2.  The  invitations  are  similar  in — (1)  Their  universality ;  (2)  their  publicity  (vers. 
3  and  14) ;  and  (3)  their  urgency.  Wisdom  sends  forth  her  messengers,  and  so, 
presumably,  does  Folly.  II.  But  the  differences  are  no  less  marked.  1.  In  the 
banquets  themselves.  Wisdom  has  built  her  grand,  substantial  palace  or  temple 
(ver.  1),  in  virtue  of  her  share  in  creation  (chap.  viii.  30),  and  she  has  provided  a 
satisfying,  nourishing,  and  gladsome  feast  (ver.  2).  Not  so  Folly.  In  consistency 
with  her  parasitic  nature,  it  is  not  her  own  goods  that  she  creates  and  prepares,  but 


Chap,  jx.}  PROVERBS.  217 


she  invites  to  the  abuse  or  illicit  enjoyment  of  the  goods  God  has  already  bestowed. 
Wisdom  sits  as  a  princess  in  her  rightful  home  ;  Folly  is  hardly  more  than  at  the 
door  of  her  house,  which  is  not  described.  2.  In  the  inducements  presented.  These 
are  not  the  feasts  themselves,  but  additional  commendations  setting  forth  their 
relative  advantages.  In  the  one  case  satisfying  and  nourishing  viands  are  offered, 
whose  result  is  Itfe ;  in  the  other,  the  thing  presented  is  pleasure,  and  that  which  is 
to  give  it  is  only  spoken  of  in  a  mysterious,  allusive  way.  It  is  the  illicit  and 
secret  enjoyment  that  is  the  charm.  But  if  the  Queen  of  Sheba  declared  that  ••  the 
half  had  not  been  told  her  "  of  the  true  wisdom,  how  much  of  the  truth  is  kept 
back  in  the  promises  and  fair  speeches  of  Folly  I  Those  who  are  once  within  her 
house  are  to  all  intents  and  purposes  dead  men,  and  are  as  if  they  were  already  "in 
the  depths  of   Sheoll"      {St.  J.  A.  Frere,  M.A.)        Wisdom's  house: — I,  "What 

PEKSON  IS  ALLUDED  TO  BT  THE  DESIGNATIOK  OF  "  WiSDOM  "  ?  (chap.  ViU.  22-31).      Here 

we  have  the  eternity  of  Christ  plainly  set  forth  ;  His  absolute  Sovereignty  saying, 
"  By  Me  kings  reign  and  princes  decree  justice."  He  also  assures  us  of  His  love  : 
•'  I  love  them  that  love  Me,  and  those  that  seek  Me  early  shall  find  Me."  He  also 
speaks  of  His  extensive  resources  :  "  Kiches  and  honour  are  with  Me,  yea  durable 
riches  and  righteousness."  H.  The  house  which  Wisdom  has  built.  1.  An 
indestructible  house.  He  formed,  in  the  counsels  of  eternity,  by  unerring  wisdom, 
a  plan  which  no  finite  mind  could  have  ever  suggested,  and  which  can  admit  of  no 
improvement.  We  are  thankful  for  a  good  plan,  when  we  reflect  that  the  per- 
manence of  a  buUding  is  often,  in  some  measure  at  least,  dependent  upon  it.  This 
building  rests  on  the  securest  foundation — the  three  persons  in  the  ever-blessed 
Trinity,  the  perfections  of  God,  and  the  all-sufficient  righteousness  of  the  incarnate 
One.  It  reposes,  not  on  the  yielding  sand  of  human  merit  or  mortal  workmanship, 
but  on  the  Eock  of  Ages,  which  time  cannot  crumble  or  change.  Not  only  is  the 
foundation  quite  safe  and  immovable,  but  the  superstructure  is  equally  strong.  In 
fact,  it  is  perfectly  invincible.  "  She  hath  hewn  her  seven  pillars."  Pillars  are 
used  as  the  supports  and  ornaments  of  buildings,  and  the  number  seven  is  the 
symbol  of  perfection.  We  take  the  seven  pillars  to  denote  perfect  strength  and 
beauty.  We  next  observe  that  Wisdom's  house  affords  perfect  security  to  its 
inhabitants.  It  is  a  fortress,  a  strong  tower,  a  house  of  defence,  a  castle  of  safety, 
to  those  who  enjoy  the  privilege  of  dwelling  in  it.  2.  A  house  of  instruction.  It  is 
emphatically  the  house  of  Wisdom.  A  school  where  the  best  lessons  are  taught,  in 
the  best  possible  mode  of  teaching,  and  by  the  best  of  all  teachers.  3.  A  banquet- 
ing house  (ver.  2).  The  Church  of  the  hving  God  is  a  banqueting-hall  in  which  we 
have  the  gospel  feast  prepared  and  exhibited  for  all  who  have  a  spiritual  appetite ; 
and  the  invitation  is  freely  and  earnestly  given  to  all,  for  there  is  plenty  of  room 
and  an  abundance  of  provisions.  The  entertainment  is  in  reality  a  feast  upon  a 
sacrifice,  and  what  is  that  sacrifice  on  which  all  who  wish  may  feast  but  the  sacrifice 
of  Christ,  "  the  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world  "  ?    {S.  Waller.) 

Vers.  3,  4.  Whoso  is  simple,  let  him  turn  in  hither. — The  choice  of  wisdom : — 
Life  is  reduced  to  an  alternative ;  there  is  clearly  marked  out  for  us  all,  at  the 
beginning  of  our  life,  that  all  is  one  thing  or  the  other,  wisdom  or  folly.  To  these 
two  voices,  all  the  noise  and  tumult  of  life,  and  all  the  diverse  voices  in  your  own 
souls,  may  be  reduced.  They  are  all  either  the  caU  of  the  wisdom  of  God,  or  they 
are  the  call  of  folly,  sense,  and  sin.  Let  me  counsel  you,  then — I.  To  choose.  The 
curse  of  men — and  of  young  people  especially — is  that  they  drift  into  passions  and 
habits  before  they  know  where  they  are.  But  it  is  a  low  and  discreditable  thing  for 
men,  old  or  young,  that  they  should  be  the  creatures  and  sport  of  the  mere  circum- 
stances around  them.  All  your  life  should  have  in  it  the  deliberation  and  the 
resolve  of  a  calm,  settled  choice.  Here  is  the  manliness  of  manhood,  that  a  maa 
has  a  reason  for  what  he  does,  and  has  a  will  in  doing  it.  Be  the  masters  and  lords 
of  the  circumstances  in  which  you  stand.  There  are  two  courses  in  life.  There 
are  but  two.  The  two  are  utterly  irreconcilable  and  discordant.  You  cannot  have 
them  both.  Then  be  men,  and  choose.  II.  Choose  wisdom.  1.  Look  at  these  two 
personified  claimants — Wisdom  and  Folly.  Wisdom  is  closely  connected  with 
uprightness  of  heart.  It  is  both  an  intellectual  and  a  moral  excellence.  Wisdom 
has  rectitude  for  an  essential  part  of  it,  the  fibre  of  its  very  being  is  righteousness 
and  holiness.  This  wisdom  is  not  only  an  attribute  of  the  human  souL  We  rise 
to  righteousness.  If  a  man  would  be  wise,  it  must  be  with  a  wisdom  that  was  in 
God  before  it  is  in  him.  Our  prayer  should  be,  "  In  Thy  wisdom  make  us  wise." 
A  further  step  has  to  be  taken.     Christ  is  the  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God. 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chu.  ix. 

There,  in  that  living  person,  is  the  highest  embodiment  of  all  wisdom.  All  which 
is  not  of  God  is  the  "  foolish  woman."  All  which  does  not  inhere  in  Christ,  and 
appeal  to  us  through  and  from  Him,  is  that  clamorous  and  persistent  voice  which 
leads  us  all  astray,  if  we  listen  to  it.  The  world  and  sense — these  are  her  grossest 
forms.  But  there  are  less  offensive  forms  besetting  us  all.  III.  Choosk  now. 
Wisdom  appeals  to  conscience.  FoUy  appeals  only  to  the  sense  of  pleasure  and 
the  desire  for  its  gratification.  Both  ask  for  your  decision  now.  There  is  a  strange 
tendency  to  put  off  decision.  But  it  is  an  awful  risk  for  a  man  to  run.  Every  day 
that  you  live  makes  it  less  likely  that  you  will  choose.  Every  day  that  you  live 
makes  it  harder  for  you  to  choose  aright.  Every  day  that  you  live  takes  away  some 
of  the  power  of  resolving,  and  takes  away  some  motive  to  resolve.  {A. 
Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Ver.  5.  Come,  eat  of  My  bread. — Wisdom't  invitation  : — I.  Thb  invitatxon.  He 
who  invites  is  the  Son  of  God — in  the  Proverbs  represented  as  '*  Wisdom."  Of 
His  generous  invitation  we  remark — 1.  That  its  acceptance  is  open  to  every  human 
being  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  The  God  of  the  gospel  is  no  respecter  of  persons. 
2.  This  invitation  is  urged  with  affectionate  earnestness.  How  are  men  to  be 
•'compelled  "  ?  Not  by  coercion  or  legal  enactments — not  by  bribery  or  the  civil 
power — but  by  the  mercies  of  God,  and  the  gentleness  of  Christ.  3.  There  is  such 
a  character  in  the  invitations  of  the  gospel  as  leaves  those  inexcusable  who  reject 
them.  Some  excuse  themselves  on  the  ground  that  a  self-denial  which  is  beyond 
them  is  required,  others  on  the  ground  of  previous  engagements.  Speculations, 
worldliness,  even  domestic  relationships,  are  pleaded  as  excuses.  U.  Inducement3 
TO  THE  ACCEPTANCE  OF  THE  INVITATION.  What  would  be  inducements  to  accept  an 
invitation  to  a  feast  ?  1.  Rank  of  the  person  inviting.  Who,  then,  is  it  invites  to  the 
feast  of  the  gospel?  2.  The  guests  whom  you  were  to  meet.  This  company  is 
select.  It  is  composed  of  the  wise  and  the  good  of  every  name :  all  are  on  a  level 
at  the  feast  of  salvation.  3.  The  occasion  of  the  entertainment.  This  is  intended 
to  supply  you  with  immortal  food,  and  to  feed  you  with  the  meat  that  endureth  unto 
everlasting  life.  4.  The  consequences  that  may  result  from  a  refusal.  Refusing 
this,  you  risk  the  favour  of  God.  (J.  JR.  Hibbard.)  The  soul's  diet : — The  verse, 
most  of  it,  metaphorical,  setting  out  Wisdom's  instructions  under  the  similitude  of 
a  feast,  to  which  persons  invited  come  and  comfortably  refresh  themselves  with 
meat  and  drink.  I.  The  soul's  diet  is  of  Christ's  providing.  This  was  prefigured 
in  the  manna,  and  foreshadowed  in  the  rock,  that  miraculously  gave  water  to  the 
people.  1.  The  Word  is  from  Him  which  feeds  the  soul.  2.  The  Sacrament  of  the 
Lord's  Supper,  whereby  we  are  fed,  was  of  His  institution,  yea,  of  His  own  adminis- 
tration the  first  time.  3.  He  hath  authority  from  heaven  to  find  diet  for  souls. 
4.  None  but  He  can  provide  wholesome  diet.  II.  Men  must  come  where  Christ's 
spiritual  provisions  are  to  be  had.  1.  We  are  invited  to  come,  and  it  is  dis- 
courtesy to  refuse  a  friendly  invitation.  2.  We  are  commanded  to  come,  and  it  ia 
disobedience  not  to  come.  3.  The  feast  is  prepared  for  us.  4.  The  benefits  gotten 
by  it  may  aUure  you  to  come  for  it.  III.  We  must  make  use  of  Wisdom's  provision 
A8  WELL  AS  COME.  Coming  to  a  feast  doth  no  good  if  men  be  sullen,  and  will  not 
eat  or  drink.  1.  Our  profitable  use  of  God's  ordinances  is  required.  2.  We  are 
informed  beforehand  to  what  end  we  are  invited.  3.  The  gift  of  this  undeserved 
favour  should  make  us  ready  to  receive  it.  4.  No  good  will  come  to  us  by  this 
spiritual  food  if  we  feed  not  on  it.  They  who  feed  well  get  much  good  to  their 
souls.  (F.  Taylor,  B.I).)  Wisdom's  invitations  : — It  seems  to  me  as  if  this 
moment  were  throbbing  with  the  invitations  of  an  all-compassionate  God.  I  have 
been  told  that  the  Cathedral  of  St.  Mark's  stands  in  a  square  in  the  centre  of  the 
city  of  Venice,  and  that  when  the  clock  strikes  twelve  at  noon  all  the  birds  from  the 
city  and  the  regions  round  about  the  city  fly  to  the  square  and  settle  down.  It  came 
in  this  wise:  A  large-hearted  woman  passing  one  noonday  across  the  square  saw 
some  birds  shivering  in  the  cold,  and  she  scattered  some  crumbs  of  bread  among 
them,  and  so  on  from  year  to  year  until  the  day  of  her  death.  In  her  will  she 
bequeathed  a  certain  amount  to  keep  up  the  same  practice,  and  now,  at  the  first 
stroke  of  the  bell  at  noon,  the  birds  begin  to  come  here,  and  when  the  clock  has 
struck  twelve  the  square  is  covered  with  them.  How  beautifully  suggestive  I  Christ 
comes  out  to  feed  thy  soul  to-day.  The  more  hungry  you  feel  yourselves  to  be,  the 
better  it  is.  It  is  noon,  and  the  gospel  clock  strikes  twelve.  Come  in  flocks  !  Come 
as  doves  to  the  window!  All  the  air  is  filled  with  the  liquid  chime :  Come  !  come  t 
come  I     {T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 


CHAP  IX.]  PROVERBS.  219 

Yer.  6.  Forsake  the  foolisb,  and  live;  and  go  in  the  way  of  mider> 
standing. — The  foolish  way  forsaken  : — True  religion  includes  two  particulars, 
called  in  Scripture  ceasing  to  do  evil,  and  learning  to  do  well.  I.  What 
ARK  THE  TWO  WATS  MENTIONED  i»  ouB  TEXT — namely,  the  way  of  the 
foolish  and  the  way  of  understanding?  1.  And  with  regard  to  the  character 
of  the  foolish — whom  and  whose  ways  we  are  to  forsake — how  different 
is  the  estimate  of  the  Word  of  God  from  the  current  opinions  of  mankind  !  The 
world  usually  account  that  man  foolish  who  does  not  make  the  things  of  this  life, 
in  one  or  other  of  its  aspects,  the  great  object  of  his  desires.  The  covetous  man 
thinks  him  foolish  who  neglects  the  pursuit  of  riches,  or  is  not  skilful  in  obtaining 
them ;  the  man  of  pleasure,  him  who  does  not  endeavour  to  secure  ease  and  amuse- 
ment ;  the  ambitious  man,  him  who  does  not  attain  worldly  honours.  But,  in  the 
estimate  of  Scripture,  though  we  had  the  worldly  wisdom  of  each  or  all  these 
classes  of  persons,  and  had  not  something  infinitely  above  it,  we  should  be 
numbered  among  the  foolish.  The  rich  man  spoken  of  by  our  Lord,  whose  ground 
brought  forth  plentifully,  was  accounted  a  fool.  And  why?  Because  he  was 
laying  up  treasures  for  himself  upon  earth,  and  was  not  rich  towards  God  ;  because 
he  disregarded  the  great  end  and  object  of  his  being ;  because  he  made  no  prepara- 
tion for  death.  In  short,  sin  of  every  kind — irreligion,  disobedience  to  God,  and 
carelessness  respecting  our  immortal  interests — is  called  in  Scripture  foolishness. 
And  can  any  folly  be  greater  than  sporting,  as  it  were,  upon  the  brink  of  eternity ; 
calling  down  upon  us  the  anger  of  our  Almighty  Creator ;  rejecting  the  means 
which  He  has  provided  for  our  pardon  and  reconciliation,  or  perverting  the  gospel 
of  His  mercy  to  our  own  destruction  ?  2.  Such  being  the  way  of  the  foolish,  we 
may  easily  infer  what  is  the  way  of  understanding.  •'  Behold,"  said  Job,  "  the 
fear  of  the  Lord,  that  is  wisdom;  and  to  depart  from  evil  is  understanding."  "  The 
knowledge  of  the  Holy,"  says  Solomon,  in  the  chapter  from  which  our  text  is  taken, 
"  is  understanding  "  ;  and  "  a  good  understanding,"  says  the  psalmist,  "  have  all 
they  who  do  His  commandments."  II.  The  importance  of  forsaking  the  one  and 
GOING  in  the  other.  "  Foisake  the  foolish,  and  live ;  and  go  in  the  way  of  under- 
standing." 1.  And  let  us  inquire  why  we  must  forsake  the  foolish,  ungodly 
companions,  ungodly  practices,  ungodly  thoughts,  ungodly  books,  everything  that 
is  ungodly.  It  might  be  sufi&cient  to  satisfy  our  reason  to  answer,  that  our  Creator 
has  commanded  us  to  forsake  them.  But,  in  addition,  He  is  pleased  to  appeal  to 
our  hopes  and  fears,  by  promises  and  threatenings.  "Forsake  the  foolish,  and 
live " ;  implying  that  the  ways  of  the  foolish  are  waya  of  death.  Shall  we  not, 
then,  forsake  so  dangerous  a  pa.h,  a  path  beset  with  thorns  and  snares.  2.  But, 
in  addition  to  the  command  to  forsake  the  foolish,  our  text  adds,  "  And  go  in  the 
way  of  understanding."  These  two  duties  are  indeed  inseparable  ;  for  the  first 
step  out  of  the  path  of  destruction  is  a  step  in  the  path  of  life ;  yet  it  is  important 
that  each  should  be  particularly  noticed,  because  we  are  too  apt  to  content 
ourselves  with  a  few  feeble  advances,  a  few  superficial  attainments  in  religion,  as 
if  the  victory  were  complete  when  we  are  but  girding  on  our  armour  for  the  war- 
fare.  It  is  not  enough  that  we  have  learned  that  the  ways  of  sin  are  ways  of  bitter- 
ness and  folly  ;  we  must,  in  addition,  learn  what  is  the  way  of  understanding :  we 
must  walk  in  the  paths  of  righteousness.  And  infinitely  important  is  it  that  we 
should  go  in  this  way  of  understanding ;  for  by  no  other  path  can  we  arrive  at  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.  The  language  of  the  text  shows  us  that  religion  involves 
active  and  zealous  exertion.  There  is  one  path  to  be  forsaken,  and  another  to  be 
discovered  and  pursued.  To  forsake  means  more  than  careless  indifference,  or 
partial  reformation,  or  a  temporary  suspension  of  our  evil  habits.  It  is  a  fixed  and 
determined  resolution.    (The  Christian  Observer.) 

Vers.  7-9.  Reprove  not  a  scomer,  lest  he  hate  thee. — Reproof: — ^How  to  give  it, 
and  how  to  take  it.  Eeproofs  are  like  sharp  knives,  very  needful  and  very  useful ; 
but  they  sliould  not  be  in  the  hands  of  children.  Those  who  handle  them  rashly 
will  wound  themselves  and  their  neighbours.  Sometimes  reproofs  are  unskilfully 
administered,  and  sometimes  unfaithfully  withheld.  The  scomer  is  the  principal 
figure  in  the  scene  of  the  text.  He  is  in  a  state  of  nature.  He  has  no  spiritual  life 
or  light.  He  is  a  blusterer.  He  is  hollow- sounding  brass.  He  magnifies  himself. 
He  laughs  at  the  good  and  at  goodness.  Accustomed  to  exaggerate  everything,  ha 
exaggerates  even  his  own  wickedness.  He  glories  in  his  shame.  If  you  reprove 
such  a  scorner,  you  will  probably  get  to  yourself  shame.  You  have  trampled  on  a 
snake,  and  it  is  his  nature  to  spurt  forth  his  venom  on  you.    Your  stroke  has 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

Btirred  up  every  motive  •within  the  scomer  to  redouble  his  blasphemy.  If  yon 
could  find  the  scomer  aJone,  his  courage  would  not  be  so  great.  Whisper  softly 
into  his  ear  your  solemn  reproof.  Find  a  soft  spot  about  him,  or  make  one  by 
deeds  of  kindness.  If  you  gain  a  brother  thus,  it  is  a  bloodless  victory.  The  joy 
is  of  the  purest  kind  that  lies  within  our  reach  on  earth.  The  second  half  of  the 
lesson  is,  "  Eebuke  a  wise  man,  and  he  will  love  thee."  There  is  a  double  blessing  ; 
one  to  him  who  gets  reproof,  and  one  to  him  who  gives  it.  It  is  the  mark  of 
a  wise  man  that  he  loves  the  reprover  who  tells  him  his  fault.  {W.  Arnot,  D.D.) 
Reproof : — I.  As  injdbiously  administebed.  A  scorner  is  a  man  distinguished  by 
Belf-ignorance,  audacity,  callousness,  vanity,  and  irreverence.  His  grand  aim  is, 
by  little  sallies  of  wit  and  ridicule  to  raise  the  laugh  against  his  superiors.  To 
reprove  these  is  injurious.  It  does  them  no  service,  but  it  brings  pain  to  yourself. 
There  are  men  beyond  the  reach  of  elevating  influences,  and  it  is  worse  than  waste 
of  labour  to  endeavour  improving  them.  II.  As  usefdllt  administebed.  1.  By 
rebuking  a  wise  man  you  enlist  his  affection.  Every  true  man  will  feel  grateful 
for  wise  counsels.  2.  By  instructing  a  wise  man  you  render  him  a  benefit.  Give 
instruction  to  a  wise  man,  and  he  will  be  yet  wiser.  {David  Thomas,  D.D.) 
Godly  admonitions  received  by  the  wise : — Iron,  which  is  one  of  the  baser  metals, 
may  be  hammered,  and  subjected  to  the  most  intense  heat  of  the  furnace ;  but 
though  you  may  soften  it  for  the  time,  you  can  never  make  it  ductile  like  the 
precious  metals.  But  gold,  which  is  the  most  excellent  of  all,  is  the  most  pliant 
and  easily  wrought  on,  being  capable  of  being  drawn  out  to  a  degree  which 
exceeds  belief.  So  the  most  excellent  tempers  are  the  most  easily  wrought  on  by 
spiritual  counsel  and  godly  admonitions,  but  the  viler  sort,  like  the  iron,  are 
stubborn,  and  cannot  be  made  pliant.  (H.  G.  Salter.)  The  scorner  left  alone  : — 
The  invitation  of  Wisdom  is  addressed  only  to  the  simple,  not  to  the  scorner.  She 
lets  the  scorner  pass  by,  because  a  word  to  him  would  recoil  only  in  shame  on 
herself,  bringing  a  blush  to  her  queenly  face,  and  would  add  to  the  scorner's 
wickedness  by  increasitig  his  hatred  of  her.  Her  reproof  would  not  benefit  him, 
but  it  would  bring  a  blot  upon  herself :  it  would  exhibit  her  as  ineffectual  and 
helpless.  The  bitter  words  of  a  scorner  can  make  wisdom  appear  foolish,  and 
cover  virtue  with  a  confusion  which  should  belong  only  to  vice.  "  Speak  not 
in  the  hearing  of  a  fool ;  for  he  will  despise  the  wisdom  of  thy  words."  Indeed, 
there  is  no  character  so  hopeless  as  that  of  the  scorner ;  there  proceeds  from  him, 
as  it  were,  a  fierce  blast,  which  blows  away  all  the  reproaches  which  goodness 
makes  to  him.  Reproof  cannot  come  near  him ;  he  cannot  find  wisdom,  though 
he  seek  it ;  and  as  a  matter  of  fact,  he  never  seeks  it.  If  one  attempts  to  punish 
him,  it  can  only  be  with  the  hope  that  others  may  benefit  by  the  example ;  it  wiU 
have  no  effect  upon  him.  To  be  rid  of  him  must  be  the  desire  of  every  wise  man, 
for  he  is  an  abomination  to  all,  and  with  his  departure  contention  disappears. 
They  that  scoff  at  things  holy,  and  scorn  the  Divine  Power,  must  be  left  to  them- 
selves until  the  beginnings  of  wisdom  appear  in  them — the  first  sense  of  fear  that 
there  is  a  God  who  may  not  be  mocked,  the  first  recognition  that  there  is  a  sanctity 
vhich  they  would  do  well  at  aU  events  to  reverence.    (R.  F.  Horton,  D.D.) 

Ver.  9.  Give  instruction  to  a  wise  man,  and  lie  will  be  yet  wiser. — The  wise 
man  rendered  wiser  by  instruction : — It  is  an  infallible  mark  of  true  wisdom,  to 
profit  by  instruction.    I.  Take  a   more  accueatk  vntw  of  the  wise  man  ;   and 

INQUIEE   WHO   IT   IS  THAT  MAY   BE   TAKEN   FOB  SUCH.       1.    He  who  propOSCS  tO  himSClf 

Bome  end  in  what  he  does,  and  pursues  that  end  in  a  rational  and  dexterous 
manner.  2.  A  truly  wise  man  is  the  same  as  a  good  man.  3.  He  who  to  his 
resolution  to  make  the  attainment  of  moral  goodness  the  great  object  of  hie 
existence  adds  a  fixed  and  unalterable  determination  to  pursue  this  according  to 
Divine  direction.     II.  Instbuction  mat  be  given  even  to  the  advantage  of  the  wise. 

1.  No  truly  wise  man  will  account  it  impossible  to  make  accessions  to  his  wisdom. 

2.  Every  wise  man,  whatever  be  the  nature  of  his  wisdom,  will  wish  it  to  be 
increased  as  much  as  possible.  3.  Whenever  instruction  is  given  to  him  which  is 
adapted  to  his  character  and  circumstances  he  will  account  himself  happy  in 
having  it,  and  will  be  the  better  for  it.  III.  When  instbuction  is  given  to  a 
wise  man,  he  will  yet  be  wiseb.  1.  He  will  endeavour  to  find  out  the  motive 
of  the  person  giving  it.  2.  He  will  consider  the  nature  and  tendency  of  the 
instruction  or  advice  given.  3.  He  will  pray  that  God  may  give  him  to  gee  what 
is  most  valuable,  and  that  He  may  influence  his  heart  to  profit  by  what  is 
good.     {Sketches    of    Four    Hundred     Sermons.)  The   wise    are    willing    to 


CHAP.  XX.]  PROVERBS.  291 

Uam  from  any  one: — President  Lincoln  once  said  that  he  was  willing  to 
learn  from  any  one  who  conld  teach  him  anything.  Dor6  seems  to  hare 
had  a  like  spirit.  Some  years  ago,  a  clever  yonng  Englishwoman — something 
more  than  an  amateur  artist — was  brought  one  day  by  some  friends  to  Dord't 
studio.  Unlike  most  Englishwomen,  tiiis  was  a  very  impulsive  and  irre- 
pressible young  person;  and  she  offered  the  frankest  criticism  of  all  the  works 
around.  The  picture  on  which  Dor6  was  then  engaged  occupied  her  attention 
particularly;  and  not  content  with  recommending  various  improvements,  she 
suddenly  caught  the  brush  from  the  artist's  hand,  and  saying  cooUy,  "  Don't  you 
think,  Mr.  Dor6,  that  a  touch  of  this  kind  would  be  an  improvement  there?  "  she 
actually  altered  the  artist's  work  with  her  own  audacious  fingers.  Her  friends 
were  rather  astonished,  and  one  of  them  afterwards  took  occasion  to  apologise  to 
him  for  her  impulsiveness.  Dor6  seemed  only  surprised  to  find  that  any  apology 
or  explanation  should  be  considered  necessary.  He  thought  there  was  some  justice 
in  the  suggestion  thus  practically  made,  and  it  seemed  to  him  quite  natural  that 
one  artist  should  help  another.  It  did  not  seem  to  have  occurred  to  him  that  there 
was  anything  presumptuous  in  the  volunteer  effort  of  the  young  beginner  to  lend  a 
helping  hand  to  one  of  the  most  celebrated  and  successful  artists  of  the  day. 
(Christian  Age.) 

Ver.  10.  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom. — A  jutt  conception  0/ 
God  : — There  are  two  things  which  sincere  religion  can  never  fail  of  attaining,  one 
of  which  is  the  greatest  ingredient — nay,  the  very  foundation  of  all  happiness  in 
this  world,  and  the  other  is  the  happiness  and  immortality  which  wait  for  us  in 
the  world  to  come.  The  latter  we  can  only  enjoy  now  through  faith  and  hope ; 
but  the  former  is  present  with  us,  the  certain  consequence  and  necessary  attendant 
upon  a  mind  truly  virtuous  and  religious.  I  mean,  the  ease  and  satisfaction  of 
mind  which  flow  from  a  due  sense  of  God  and  religion,  and  the  uprightness  of  our 
desires  and   intentions   to   serve  Him.     I.  A  just  conception  of  God,  of   H18 

EXCELLKNCKS  AND  PEBFECTI0N3,  IS  THE   TBUE   FOUNDATION   OF   EELIGION.      Fear  iS   not 

a  voluntary  passion.  We  cannot  be  afraid  or  not  afraid  of  things  just  as  we 
please.  We  fear  any  being  in  proportion  to  the  power  and  will  which  we  conceive 
that  being  to  have  either  to  hurt  or  to  protect  us.  The  different  kinds  of  fear  are 
no  otherwise  distinguishable  from  one  another  than  by  considering  the  different 
conceptions  or  ideas  of  the  things  feared.  The  fear  of  a  tyrant  and  the  fear  of  a 
father  are  very  different  passions ;  but  he  that  knows  not  the  difference  between 
a  tyrant  and  a  father  will  never  be  able  to  distinguish  these  passions.  A  right  and 
due  fear  of  God  presupposes  a  right  and  due  conception  of  God.  If  men  misconceive 
concerning  God,  either  as  to  His  holiness  and  purity,  or  to  His  justice  and  mercy, 
their  fear  of  Him  will  not  produce  wisdom.  The  proposition  of  the  text  is  equivalent 
to  this — a  just  notion  and  conception  of  God  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom.  We 
experience  in  ourselves  different  kinds  and  degrees  of  fear,  which  have  very  different 
effects  and  operations.  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  not  an  abject,  slavish  fear ;  since 
God  is  no  tyrant.  The  properties  of  religious  fear,  as  mentioned  in  Scripture,  are 
various.  It  is  clean.  It  is  to  hate  evil.  It  is  a  fountain  of  life.  In  it  is  strong 
confidence.  The  fear  of  God  signifies  that  frame  and  affection  of  soul  which  is 
'  the  consequence  of  a  just  notion  and  conception  of  the  Deity.  It  is  called  the  fear 
of  God  because,  as  majesty  and  power  are  the  principal  parts  of  the  idea  of  God, 
so  fear  and  reverence  are  the  main  ingredients  in  the  affection  that  arises  from  it. 
It  follows  that  none  should  be  void  of  the  fear  of  God,  but  those  who  only  want 
right  notions  of   God.     II.  The  just  conception  of  God  is  the  right  bule  to 

FORM   our  judgments   BY,    IN   ALL   PARTICULAR   MATTERS   OF   RELIGION.      Wisdom  here 

means  true  religion.  There  is  religion  which  is  foUy  and  superstition,  that  better 
suits  with  any  other  name  than  that  of  wisdom.  If  the  fear  of  God  only  in  a 
general  way  shows  us  the  necessity  of  religion,  and  leaves  us  to  take  our  chance  in 
the  great  variety  of  forms  and  institutions  that  are  to  be  found  in  the  world,  it 
may  be  our  hap  to  learn  folly  as  well  as  wisdom,  upon  the  instigation  of  this 
principle.  But  the  fear  of  God  further  teaches  us  wherein  true  religion  consists. 
In  natural  religion  this  is  evidently  the  case,  because  in  that  state  there  is  no 
pretence  to  any  other  rule  that  can  come  into  competition  with  this.  It  is  from 
the  notion  of  a  God  that  men  come  to  have  any  sense  of  religion.  When  we 
consider  God  as  lord  and  governor  of  the  world,  we  soon  perceive  ourselves  to  be 
in  subjection,  and  that  we  stand  obliged,  both  in  interest  and  duty,  to  pay  obedience 
to  the  Supreme.    Take  from  the  notion  of  God  any  of  the  moral  perfections  that 


822  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CH1».  XX. 

belong  to  it,  and  you  will  find  such  alteration  must  influence  religion  likewise,  which 
will  degenerate  in  the  same  proportion  as  the  notion  of  God  is  corrupted.  The 
superstitious  man,  viewing  God  through  the  false  perspectives  of  fear  and  suspicion, 
loses  sight  of  His  goodness,  and  sees  only  a  dreadful  spectre  made  up  of  anger  and 
revenge.  Hence  religion  becomes  his  torment.  That  only  is  true  religion  which  is 
agreeable  to  the  nature  of  God.  Natural  religion  is  the  foundation  upon  which 
revelation  stands,  and  therefore  revelation  can  never  supersede  natural  religion 
without  destroying  itself.  The  difference  between  these  two  is  this :  in  natural 
reUgion  nothing  can  be  admitted  that  may  not  be  proved  and  deduced  from  our 
natural  notions.  Everything  must  be  admitted  for  some  reason.  But  revelation 
introduces  a  new  reason,  the  will  of  God,  which  has,  and  ought  to  have,  the 
authority  of  a  law  with  us.  As  God  has  authority  to  make  laws.  He  may  add  to 
our  duty  and  obhgations  as  He  sees  fit.  It  is  not  therefore  necessary  that  aU  parts 
of  a  revelation  should  be  proved  by  natural  reason :  it  is  sufficient  that  they  do  not 
contradict  it ;  for  the  will  of  God  is  a  sufficient  reason  for  our  submission.  The 
essentials  of  rehgion,  even  under  revelation,  must  be  tried  and  judged  by  the  same 
principle.  No  revelation  can  dispense  with  virtue  and  holiness.  All  such  doctrines 
and  aU  such  rites  and  ceremonies  as  tend  to  subvert  true  goodness  and  holiness 
are  not  of  God's  teaching  or  introducing.  The  way  to  keep  ourselves  stedfastly  in 
the  purity  of  the  gospel  is  to  keep  our  eye  constantly  on  this  rule.  Could 
enthusiasm,  or  destructive  zeal,  ever  have  grown  out  of  the  gospel  had  men  com- 
pared their  practices  with  the  natural  sense  they  have  of  God  ?  Could  religion 
ever  have  degenerated  into  foUy  and  superstition  had  the  true  notions  of  God  been 
preserved,  and  all  religious  actions  been  examined  in  the  Ught  of  them  ?  Some, 
taking  religion  to  be  what  it  appears  to  be,  reject  all  religion.  Could  men  have 
judged  thus  perversely  had  they  attended  to  the  true  rule,  and  formed  their 
notions  of  religion  from  the  nature  and  wisdom  of  God,  and  not  from  the  follies 
and  extravagances  of  men  ?  How  can  the  f oUy  and  perverseness  of  others  affect 
your  duty  to  God  ?  How  came  you  absolved  from  all  religion,  because  others  have 
corrupted  theirs?  Does  the  error  or  ignorance  of  others  destroy  the  relation 
between  you  and  God,  and  make  it  reasonable  for  you  to  throw  off  all  obedience  ? 
The  fear  of  God  will  teach  you  another  sort  of  wisdom.  (Thomas  Sherlock,  D.D.) 
The  fear  of  the  Lord : — I.  This  principle  will  peepaee  you  for  dischaegino  in  an 

ACCEPTABLE  MANNER  THE  DUTIES  WHICH  YOU  OWE  MORE  IMMEDIATELY    TO    YOUR   MaKER. 

It  is  the  fear  of  the  Lord  iJone  that  can  inspire  and  animate  your  devotions.  The 
sense  of  His  glorious  presence  wiU  inspire  a  higher  tone  of  adoration,  will  give  a 
deeper  humility  to  your  confessions,  and  add  a  double  fervour  to  your  prayers. 
II.  This  principle  will  have  a.  most  salutary  influence  on  the  whole  tenor  of 
TOUR  CONDUCT.  The  dictates  of  reason  and  conscience,  considered  as  the  commands 
of  God,  acquire  thereby  the  force  of  a  law;  the  authority  of  the  lawgiver  is 
respected,  and  it  becomes  a  powerful  motive  to  obedience.  IH.  But  will  not  this 
FEAR  OF  the  Lord  ABRIDGE  THE  HAPPINESS  OF  LIFE  ?  The  impression  that  we  act 
continually  under  the  inspection  of  an  Omniscient  Judge — will  it  not  impose  a 
restraint  on  our  conduct  ?  WiU  it  not  check  the  gaiety  of  our  hearts  and  diffuse  a 
gloom  over  the  whole  of  our  existence  ?  If,  indeed,  the  Almighty  were  a  capricious 
tyrant,  who  delighted  in  the  miseries  of  His  creatures,  if  the  fear  of  the  Lord  were 
that  servile  principle  which  haunts  the  minds  of  the  superstitious,  then  you  might 
complain,  with  justice,  that  the  yoke  of  religion  was  severe.  But  it  is  a  service  of 
a  more  Uberal  kind  which  the  Kuler  of  the  world  requires.  It  is  a  restraint  to 
which,  independently  of  religion,  prudence  would  admonish  you  to  submit.  It  is 
not  a  restraint  from  any  innocent  enjoyment,  but  from  misery  and  infamy  and 
guUt.  (W.  Moodie,  D.D.)  The  beginning  of  wisdom  : — This  text  occurs  several 
times  in  the  Old  Testament,  showing  its  importance ;  and  it  really  sums  up  the 
teaching  of  the  Bible  for  all  classes  and  ages,  and  is  one  strikingly  adapted  for 
urging  upon  us  the  early  religious  education  of  our  children.  I.  What  is  "  the 
liAR  or  THE  Lord  "  ?  1.  The  right  knowledge  of  Him  in  what  He  is— (1)  In 
creation.  (2)  In  providence.  (3)  As  revealed  in  His  Word.  2.  And,  consequent 
upon  this— (1)  Reverence  of  Him.  (2)  Belief  in  His  Word.  (3)  Love  for  Him  as 
a  Father.  (4)  Obedience  to  Him  as  a  Master  (Mai.  i.  6).  Mark  how  a  child,  as  it 
leama  its  duty  to  an  earthly  parent,  is  thus  trained  in  its  relation  to  its  heavenly 
Father.  11.  This  is  true  wisdom,  which  means  here  the  knowledge  of  Divine 
things,  rightly  used.  When  we  fear  the  Lord  we  are  wise,  because— 1.  The  heart 
is  then  taught  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  2.  We  set  a  right  value  on  things  temporal  and 
eternal.     3.  We  listen  to  the  words  of  Jesua  and  of  the  Scriptures,  and  repent  and 


CHIP,  n.]  PROVERBS.  825 

believe  the  gospel  (Luke  x.  42;  2  Tim.  iii.  15).  4.  We  seek  to  know  and  carefully 
follow  His  holy  will  (Eph.  v.  17).  5.  We  walk  in  a  sure  path  of  peace  and  safety 
(chap,  iii.  17).  III.  But  our  text  states  that  this  tear  op  the  Lord  is  the 
BEGiNNiNO  OP  WISDOM.  1.  It  is  at  the  root  of  all  true  wisdom ;  for  we  are  never 
truly  wise  till  we  begin  here,  and  only  then  do  we  know  how  to  deal  rightly  with  all 
things.  2.  It  is  only  reasonable  then,  and  our  solemn  and  bounden  duty,  to  teach 
our  children  these  blessed  things  early.  3.  And  God  has  confirmed  the  truth  of 
the  text  by  making  this  thoroughly  practicable.  Mark  how  the  relations  and 
circumstances  of  a  child  prepare  it  for  learning  :  What  God  is  as  a  Father.  What 
Christ  is  as  a  Saviour.  What  the  Holy  Ghost  is  as  a  Teacher.  Also  what 
repentance,  faith,  obedience,  &c.,  are,  and  the  opposite  of  all  these.  Note  the 
parables  of  Scripture.  4.  And  the  Holy  Ghost  can  reach  a  child's  heart ;  hence 
the  parent's  encouragement  to  pray,  and  to  use  teaching  in  faith  and  perseverance. 
(C.  J.  Goodhart,  M.A.)  True  religion  the  evidence  of  a  good  understanding  : — 
We  all  naturally  desire  happiness.  We  all  know  that  obtaining  it  greatly  depends 
on  a  wise  choice  of  our  conduct  in  life  ;  and  yet  very  few  examine,  with  any  care, 
what  conduct  is  likeliest  to  procure  us  the  felicity  that  we  seek.  There  is  deeply 
rooted  in  the  heart  of  man  an  inbred  sense  of  right  and  wrong,  which,  however 
heedlessly  overlooked  or  studiously  suppressed  by  the  gay  or  the  busy  part  of  the 
world,  will  from  time  to  time  make  them  both  feel  that  it  hath  the  justest  authority 
to  govern  all  that  we  do,  as  well  as  power  to  reward  with  the  truest  consolation 
and  punish  with  the  acutest  remorse.  Some  see  the  absolute  necessity  of  bringing 
virtue  and  duty  into  the  account  when  they  deliberate  concerning  the  behaviour 
that  leads  to  happiness ;  but  they  affect  to  set  up  virtue  in  opposition  to  piety,  and 
think  to  serve  the  former  by  deprecating  the  latter.  Perhaps  only  relatively  few 
venture  to  deny  the  existence  of  a  First  Cause.  If  there  exists  a  Sovereign  of  the 
universe,  almighty  and  all-wise,  it  cannot  be  a  matter  that  we  are  unconcerned  in. 
He  must  have  intended  that  we  should  pay  Him  those  regards  which  are  His  due 
— a  proper  temperature  of  fear  and  love :  two  affections  which  ought  never  to  be 
separated  in  thinking  of  God ;  whichever  is  expressed  implies  the  other.  This  is 
the  true  wisdom  of  man.  Consider  its  influence — I.  On  the  conduct.  God  has 
not  planted  in  us  passions,  affections,  and  appetites,  to  grow  up  wild  as  accident 
directs,  but  to  be  diligently  superintended,  weeded,  and  pruned,  and  each  confined 
to  its  proper  bounds.  It  would  both  be  unjust  and  unwise  to  reject  the  smallest 
inducement  to  any  part  of  goodness ;  for  we  greatly  need  every  one  that  we  can 
have.  But  it  is  extremely  requisite  to  observe  where  our  chief  security  lies,  and 
place  our  chief  trust  there.  The  reasonableness,  the  dignity,  the  beauty  of  virtue 
are  doubtless  natural,  and  ought  to  be  strong  recommendations  of  it.  No  motive, 
however,  is  at  all  times  sufficient,  excepting  only  the  fear  of  God,  taught  as  the 
truth  is  in  Jesus.  This  is  one  unchangeable  motive,  level  to  the  apprehension  of 
every  person,  extending  to  the  practice  of  every  duty,  including  at  once  every 
moral  disposition  of  heart  and  every  prudent  regard  to  our  own  good.  The  fear  of 
God  can  pierce  the  inmost  recesses  of  our  minds  and  search  the  rightness  of  our 
most  secret  desires.  Eeverence  of  God's  authority  will  make  us  fear  to  injure  the 
meanest  of  our  fellow-creatures,  and  hope  of  sharing  in  His  bounty  will  teach  us  to 
imitate  it  by  the  tenderest  exercise  of  humanity  and  compassion.  II.  What  effect 
the  fear  op  God  must  have  on  the  enjoyment  of  our  lives.  It  will  make  bad 
people  uneasy.  It  restrains  persons  from  dissolute  pleasures.  It  gives  a  peculiar 
seriousness  and  awe  to  the  minds  of  men.  It  moderates  the  liveliness  of  over-gay 
dispositions.  As  to  the  sufferings  of  life,  religion  prevents  many  and  diminishes 
the  rest.  True  religion  being  of  such  importance,  there  are  some  things  which  may 
justly  be  expected  of  mankind  in  its  favour.  1.  That  they  who  have  not  yet 
carefully  searched  into  the  groimds  of  it  should  not  take  upon  them  to  treat  it 
with  scorn  or  even  disregard.  2.  It  may  be  expected  also  that  they  who 
profess  to  examine  should  do  it  fairly.  3.  They  who  are  so  happy  as  to  believe 
should  secure  and  complete  their  happiness  by  what  alone  can  do  it — a  suitable 
behaviour.  On  all  accounts,  therefore,  it  is  our  most  important  concern  to 
cultivate  and  express  the  affections  of  piety,  which  are  indeed  the  noblest  move- 
ments of  our  souls  towards  the  worthiest  object,  towards  the  attainment  of  the  most 
blessed  end.     {Arehbp.  Seeker.) 

Ver.  11.  For  by  Me  thy  days  shall  be  mnltiplled. — Of  the  wisdom  of  being 
religious  : — No  desire  is  so  deeply  implanted  in  our  nature  as  that  of  preserving  and 
prolonging  our  life.    Life  and  health  are  the  foundation  of  all  other  enjoyments. 


324  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  ix. 

The  principal  point  of  wisdom  in  the  conduct  of  hnman  life  ia  so  to  ose  the 
enjoyments  of  this  present  world  as  that  they  may  not  themselves  shorten  that 
period  wherein  it  is  allowed  us  to  enjoy  them.  Temperance  and  sobriety,  the 
regular  government  of  our  appetites  and  passions,  are  the  greatest  instances  of 
human  wisdom.  Beligion  adds  strength  to  these  things  by  annexing  the  promise 
of  God's  immediate  blessing  to  the  natural  tendency  and  consequences  of  things. 
••The  fear  of  the  Lord"  and  "the  knowledge  of  the  Holy"  are  two  synonymous 
expressions,  signifying  ••  the  practice  of  virtue  and  true  religion."  I.  Thb  practisb 
OF  BEUQioN  IB,  IN  OBNEBAi<,  man's  TRUEST  WISDOM.  The  wholc  tenor  of  Scripture 
concurs  in  setting  forth  the  wisdom  of  being  virtuous  and  religious.  Compare 
with  the  wisdom  in  understanding  the  arts  and  sciences.  Wisdom  of  men  in  being 
able  to  overreach  and  defraud  each  other  ;  wisdom  of  political  skiU ;  wisdom  in 
words  and  artful  representations  of  things ;  wisdom  in  searching  out  the  secrets  of 
nature.  The  only  wisdom  that  all  men  are  capable  of,  and  that  all  men  ar« 
indispensably  obliged  to  attain,  is  the  practical  wisdom  of  being  truly  religious. 
II.  The  practise  of  beugion  tends  to  prolonq  our  life  and  lengthen  our  days. 
Promises  of  health  and  life  are  frequent  in  the  Old  Testament.  See  the  fifth 
commandment  with  promise.  There  are  threatenings  of  the  wicked  in  the  Old 
Testament,  which  declare  their  days  shall  be  shortened.  In  the  nature  of  things 
men  destroy  themselves  and  shorten  their  days  by  many  kinds  of  wickedness. 
According  to  the  same  natural  order  and  tendency  of  things,  by  peace  and  charity 
men  are  preserved  from  destruction ;  by  temperance  their  bodies  are  maintained  ia 
health  ;  by  quiet  of  conscience  and  satisfaction  of  mind  is  a  new  life  added  to  their 
spirits.  In  the  positive  appointment  and  constitution  of  Providence  there  was  yet 
more  assurance  of  the  doctrine.  The  temporal  promises  of  the  Old  Testament 
cannot  now  be  applied  with  any  certainty  under  the  New,  where  eternal  life  is  so 
much  more  clearly  revealed.  III.  How  is  this  blessing  to  be  desired  bt  Christians 
UNDER  THE  GOSPEL  STATE.  The  gospel  givcs  a  mean  notion  of  the  present  life  and  a 
glorious  representation  of  the  happiness  of  that  to  come,  so  that  a  devout  man  may 
wish  to  be  delivered  from  the  miseries  of  this  sinful  world.  But  the  best  men 
need  prolonged  lives  on  earth  for  their  own  amendment  and  improvement;  and  if 
not  for  their  own,  for  the  sake  of  others.  It  may  also  be  reminded  that  duties  are 
entrusted  to  us,  and  we  must  not  shirk  them.  And  the  longest  life  here  is  but  a 
moment  in  comparison  of  eternity.  We  ought  to  make  it  the  main  care  of  our 
lives  to  secure  our  eternal  happiness  hereafter ;  only  then  do  length  of  days  become 
a  blessing.  (S.  Clarke,  D.D.)  The  criterion  of  true  wisdom: — The  temporal 
interests  of  one  man  are  so  bound  up  with  those  of  many  others  that  you  can 
scarcely  find  the  individual  of  whom  it  may  be  said  that  he  plans  for  himself  alone, 
or  acts  for  himself  alone.  If  we  stretch  our  thoughts  from  temporal  things  and  fix 
them  on  spiritual,  will  the  same  thing  hold  ?  Hardly  perhaps,  for  we  can  scarcely 
suppose  that,  through  destroying  his  own  soul,  a  man  may  also  destroy  the  souls 
of  many  others.  Unto  every  one  amongst  us  there  is  vouchsafed  a  sufficiency  of 
means,  so  that  he  who  perishes  does  not  perish  through  being  involved  in  the  ruin 
of  another,  but  through  having  wrought  his  own  individual  destruction.  Neither 
religion  nor  irreligion  can  be  said  to  propagate  themselves,  as  industry  and  idleness 
in  temporal  things.  Religion,  in  the  most  emphatic  sense,  is  a  thing  between  each 
of  us  and  God.  I.  The  criterion  of  wisdom.  If  a  man  be  wise  at  all,  he  is  wise 
for  himself.  The  prime  object  of  every  class  of  society  is  the  advancing  its  own 
interests.  Men  are  set  down  as  wise  chiefly  in  proportion  as  practical  results  shall 
prove  them  to  have  been  wise  for  themselves.  Nevertheless,  unless  the  wisdom 
have  a  heavenly  character  it  cannot  in  any  degree  render  the  possessor  truly  wise 
for  himself.  If  I  be  wise  for  myself  I  must  be  wise  by  making  provision  for  the 
vast  expansion  of  my  being,  and  not  by  limiting  attention  to  that  period  which  is 
nothing  but  its  outset.  He  cannot  be  wise  for  himself  who  dishonours  himself, 
who  degrades  himself,  who  destroys  himself.  Can  a  man  be  pronounced  to  have 
been  wise  for  himself  before  whose  tomb  a  nation  may  be  burning  its  incense  of 
gratitude  for  his  discoveries,  whilst  his  spirit  is  brooding  in  darkness,  and  silence, 
and  anguish  over  the  vast  infatuation  which  caused  God  to  be  forgotten  whilst 
science  is  pursued  ?  A  man  may  be  wise  in  all  that  the  world  calls  wisdom,  and 
yet  in  no  sense  wise  for  himself.  Unless  a  man  has  been  wise  for  eternity  he  has 
not  been  wise  for  himself.  Only  that  wisdom  which  is  from  above,  the  wisdom 
which  consists  in  knowing  God  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  He  has  sent,  can  make  a 
man  truly  wise.  II.  The  advantage  of  possessing  this  wisdom  is  altogether 
PSBSONAL.     So  far  as  the  present  life  is  concerned  the   consequences    of    the 


CBAF.  XX.]  PROVERBS.  225 

possession  or  non-possession  of  wisdom  are  not  confined  to  the  indiridnal 
himself.  The  words  of  Solomon  had  respect  to  the  fatare  rather  than  to  the 
present.  The  future  consequences  are  altogether  personal.  From  this  flows 
the  final  woe  of  the  impenitent.  A  terrible  punishment  is  solitary  confine- 
ment. There  may  be  solitariness  in  hell.  "  Knowing,  therefore,  the  terror 
of  the  Lord,  we  persuade  men."  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  gain  of  the 
wise : — I  apply  this  text  to  the  all-absorbing  and  Titally  important  matter — 
evangelical  religion.  It  may  be  paraphrased  thus:  He  that  is  truly  wise,  will 
find  it  to  his  own  personal  everlasting  advantage;  it  is  his  interest  as  well  as 
his  duty  to  be  made  wise  unto  salvation  :  but  he  who  scorns  religion  will  find  his 
scorning  eventually  infinitely  to  his  disadvantage.  I.  The  decided  subjection  or 
THE  HEART  TO  GoD  IS  THE  ONi/T  TBUE  WISDOM.  It  is  wisdom  in  the  abstract.  It  is 
wisdom  contrasted  with  every  other  acquisition.  By  religion  is  meant  faith  in  Jesus 
Christ.  Beligion  is  a  vague  term  which  may  be  applied  to  that  which  is  true,  that 
which  is  false,  and  that  which  is  formal.  I  mean  by  it,  that  faith  in  Jesus  Christ 
which  is  the  entire  submission  of  the  heart  to  Him,  and  a  practical  devotedness  of 
the  life  to  His  service.  This  is  not  only  wisdom  in  the  abstract,  but  wisdom  of  a 
peculiar,  personal,  individual  importance.  H.  He  who  accomplishes  this  is  an 
nnriNiTB  gainer.  1,  He  gains  the  possession  of  the  elements  of  present  happiness. 
If  the  possession  of  a  truly  religious  character  does  not  in  its  own  nature  exempt 
an  individual  from  the  calamities  of  life,  it  dwes  what  is,  on  the  whole,  far  more 
effectual  and  more  elevating  to  his  character — it  enables  him  to  bear  them.  2.  He 
gains  the  prospect  of  a  saved  eternity.  The  truly  converted  man  is  the  only  being 
on  the  face  of  the  earth  who  has  a  rational  hold  upon  the  blessedness  of  heaven. 
ni.  He  who  scorns  religion  is  an  infinite  loser.  To  scorn  is  to  despise  religion  ; 
to  scoff  at,  to  ridicule,  to  reject,  to  neglect  it.  He  who  will  not  repent  is  a  soomer. 
He  who  puts  off  the  concerns  of  religion  is  a  scorner.  He  who  is  self-righteous  is 
a  scorner.  Whatever  the  scorner  is  to  bear,  he  is  to  bear  alone.  1.  He  is  to  bear 
his  own  sins.  The  Christian's  sins  have  been  home  by  the  Saviour  in  whom  he 
trusts.  The  scorner  has  relinquished  all  claims  upon  the  precious  Saviour  and  His 
promises  ;  he  consents  to  bear  the  weight  of  his  own  sin.  2.  He  has  to  bear  the 
weight  of  his  own  sorrows.  The  scorner  throws  by  the  precious  balm  of  Gilead. 
He  may  take  the  miserable  comfort  of  bending  to  the  stroke  of  necessity,  but  it  is  a 
satisfaction  filled  with  secret  repinings  and  sorrows  of  the  heart.  3.  Look  at  this 
matter  in  relation  to  eternity.  The  scorner  will  bear  the  scorn  of  heaven  and  of 
hell.  4.  The  scorner  will  bear  his  own  eternal  self-reproaches.  If  there  is  any  one 
thing  on  earth  more  difiBcult  to  endure  than  another,  it  is  the  accusation  of  a  man's 
own  conscience.  The  mental  anguish  of  consciously-deserved  distress  is  intolerable. 
(G.  r.  Bedell,  B.D.)  But  if  thou  scomest,  thou  alone  shalt  hear  it,— The 
advantages  of  a  tractable  person : — I.  The  benefit  which  ensues  from  hearkening 
TO  GOOD  COUNSEL.  1.  The  title  or  denomination  of  a  tractable  person.  He  is  a 
"  Wiseman."  It  is  a  part  of  wisdom  for  a  man  to  suspect  his  own  wisdom,  and  to 
think  that  it  is  possible  for  him  to  deceive  hunself.  It  is  a  part  of  wisdom  to 
discern  between  good  and  evil — to  know  what  is  to  be  left  and  what  is  to  be 
embraced.  It  is  a  part  of  wisdom  to  know  one's  best  friends,  and  to  give  them  all 
encouragement  of  being  further  friendly  to  us  by  hearkening  to  their  counsel. 
2.  The  benefit  that  accrues  unto  this  wise  man.  He  is  wise  unto  himself.  This 
wisdom  redounds  to  a  man's  own  furtherance  and  account.  He  is  much  better  for 
it  every  way.  Wise  for  thyseK — in  thy  inward  man ;  in  thine  outward  man,  thy 
body  and  estate ;  in  thy  relations  :  there  is  no  better  way  of  providing  for  those  who 
belong  to  thee  than  by  labouring  to  walk  in  good  ways.  No  man  serves  God  in 
vain.  This  is  true  for  this  life  and  for  the  life  to  come.  God  bestows  graces  and 
rewards  them.  God  has  involved  our  own  good  in  His  glory,  so  that  while  we 
endeavour  to  promote  the  one  we  advance  the  other.  We  are  no  further  wise  our- 
selves than  we  are  wise  for  our  own  souls.  11.  The  inconvenience  of  the  neglect 
of  good  counsel.  The  simple  inconvenience:  "Bear  his  scorning."  Scomers 
are  such  as  have  but  mean  thoughts  of  religion.  Such  as  decline  it  for  themselves. 
Such  as  deride  and  scoff  at  it.  The  grounds  of  scorning  are  unbelief,  pride  and 
self-conceitedness,  thraldom  and  addiction  to  any  particular  lust.  Scorning  ia 
surely  followed  by  punishment,  and  in  the  expression  "  thou  shalt  bear  it "  is 
indicated  the  indefiniteness,  the  universality,  and  the  unavoidableness  of  the 
punishment.  Scorners  persist  in  sin,  and  thus  aggravate  it  so  much  the  more  to 
themselves.  Scorners  undervalue  the  kindness  of  reproof,  and  slight  the  motions 
of  God's  Spirit  in  them.    Beware,  then,  of  the  sin  of  scorning  1     (T.  Horton,  D.D.) 

16 


226  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

The  profit  of  Wisdom  : — She  shows  that  she  aims  not  at  any  emolument  or  profit  of 
her  own,  but  at  the  good  of  others,  to  whom  she  directs  her  precepts,  and  by  keeping 
of  them  from  miseries  which  otherwise  they  shall  inevitably  suffer.  I.  Ouk  wisdom 
PBOFiTS  NOT  Jesus  Christ,  nob  doth  oub  scobninq  hubt  Him.  Because  no  man  can 
make  God  wiser,  holier,  or  happier.  He  is  above  aU  scorns.  He  needs  not  our 
approbation.  He  can  raise  up  others  that  shaU  honour  Him  more  than  we  can 
dishonour  Him.  U.  Oub  wisdom  may  pbofit  oueselves.  It  may  make  men  happy. 
1.  It  brings  profit  to  us  in  regard  of  our  credit.  All  states  reverence  and  prefer  wise 
men.  2.  In  regard  of  means.  Wise  men  ordinarily  thrive  in  all  trades.  3.  It  is 
profitable  to  the  body  and  preserveth  life.  4.  It  is  profitable  to  the  soul.  It 
preserveth  it  from  destruction.  IH.  Our  scobninq  hurts  ourselves.  1.  Because 
it  frustrates  the  means  of  our  salvation.  Who  will  regard  that  word  which  he 
scorns  ?  2.  It  gives  God  just  cause  of  our  condemnation.  No  man  will  endure  his 
word  should  be  scorned,  much  less  will  God.  {F.  Taylor,  B.D.)  The  superiority 
of  religion  over  infidelity : — In  the  language  of  Solomon,  to  be  wise  is  to  be 
religious,  and  this  language  is  at  once  correct  and  comprehensive.  That  alone 
deserves  the  name  of  wisdom  which  embraces  all  the  important  interests  of  man, 
and  which  reaches,  in  its  effects,  through  the  whole  extent  of  his  rational  existence. 
True  philosophy  consists  in  a  practical  acquaintance  with  our  duties  and  destination 
as  rational  and  immortal  beings,  and  in  rendering  this  acquaintance  subservient  to 
the  regulation  of  our  affections  and  habits,  so  as  to  promote  every  virtuous  disposi- 
tion, and  thus  to  prepare  the  soul  for  a  state  of  purer  and  more  dignified  enjoyment. 
This  is  not  only  to  be  truly  wise,  but  to  be  wise  for  ourselves.  That  is  not  properly 
a  man's  own  for  the  possession  of  which  he  has  no  permanent  security.  It  is  the 
pecuUar  excellence  of  religion  that  whilst  it  detracts  nothing  from  the  virtuous 
satisfactions  which  arise  from  honourable  labour  in  any  sphere  of  life,  it  superadds 
the  consciousness  of  Divine  favour.  Much  has  been  said  and  written  of  the 
tendency  of  mere  moral  virtue,  independently  of  religious  hopes,  to  make  men 
happy.  Whatever  promotes  self-government  and  temperance,  and  thus  restrains 
those  excesses  which  are  inimical  to  health  and  peace,  is  wise ;  but  this  is  not  being 
wise  for  ourselves  upon  the  best  plan.  It  leaves  out  the  animating  considerations 
■which  religion  alone  can  furnish.  Here  lies  the  superiority  of  religious  wisdom. 
Besides  all  the  sources  of  pleasure  which  are  common  to  the  Christian  with  the 
man  of  the  world,  it  opens  others  of  its  own  by  furnishing  objects  of  research  to 
the  understanding  and  interest  to  the  heart  infinitely  more  excellent  and  durable 
than  any  to  which  mere  worldly  wisdom  can  pretend.  Can  he,  then,  be  wise  for 
himself  who  prefers  the  plan  of  worldly  wisdom  to  that  wisdom  which  is  from 
above  ?  What  is  there  of  life  or  of  joy  in  this  wretched  philosophy  that  should 
gain  it  so  many  proselytes  ?  What  should  we  gain  by  following  their  example  ? 
We  might  be  flattered  by  empty  praise  as  being  unusually  wise.  If  you  care  for 
such  honour,  it  is  of  easy  acquisition.  You  have  only  to  deny  your  God  and 
renounce  your  expectations  from  futurity,  and  it  is  done.  But  if  you  inquire  what 
you  will  get  in  return,  there  are  none  to  answer  you.  Let  the  advocates  of  unbelief 
estimate  the  advantages  of  their  system  as  high  as  they  please  above  ours,  yet  will 
that  advantage  dwindle  into  insignificance  in  the  eye  of  true  wisdom  when  the 
remotest  probability  of  future  account  becomes  a  part  of  the  computation.  And 
where  are  such  advantages  to  be  found  ?  And  what  must  you  lose  in  order  to  gain 
them  ?  But  they  say,  "  Truth  is  wisdom ;  and  truth  must  be  supported,  be  the 
consequences  what  they  may."  But  is  their  so-called  truth  more  than  opinion? 
And  every  probabiUty  is  on  the  side  of  the  being  of  God  and  dependence  of  humanity 
on  Him.  Can  there  be  wisdom,  for  ourselves  or  for  others,  in  renouncing  the 
cheering  views  of  Christianity  for  the  dreary  systems  of  infidehty  ?  {Jas.  Lindsay, 
D.D.)  The  danger  of  not  complying  with  the  gospel-call : — This  verse  is  the 
epilogue  or  conclusion  of  the  gospel-treaty  with  sinners.  The  entertainment  the 
gospel  meets  with  is  twofold,  and  there  are  two  sorts  of  gospel-hearers :  compliers 
■with  the  gospel-call ;  these  are  called  the  wise :  refusers ;  these  are  styled  scorners. 
I.  If  thou  bb  no  complieb  with  the  oobpel-call  thou  art  a  scorner  of  it  :  there 
is  no  middle  course.     Thou  art  not  a  compiler  with  the  gospel-call  as  long  as — 

1.  Thou  entertainest  any  prejudice  against  rehgion  and  wilt  not  come  to  Christ. 

2.  Thou  art  in  a  doubt  whether  to  come  or  not,  or  delayest  and  putteth  off.  3.  If 
thou  dost  come,  but  dost  not  turn  from  thy  sins  unto  God  in  Christ  sincerely, 
thoroughly,  and  universally,  thou  dost  not  comply.  By  not  complying  with  the 
gospel-call  thou  abusest  the  mercy,  goodness,  and  patience  of  God.  Thou  lookest 
on  the  gospel-call  as  a  trifling,  inconsiderable  thing.    Thou  exposest  it  to  shame 


CHAP.  II.]  PROVERBS.  227 

and  dishonour.  Thou  failest  of  thy  fair  promises.  Thou  makest  thyself  merry 
with  thy  disobedience  to  this  call.     Is  not  that  scorning  ?    II.  If  thou  comply  with 

THE  GOSPKL-CALIi  THOU  SHALT  THEREIN  ACT  WISELY  FOB   THYSELF.       The  profit  dsSCends 

to  themselves  ;  it  does  not  ascend  to  God.  To  confirm  this,  consider — 1.  God  is 
infinite  in  perfections,  self-sufiQcient,  and  therefore  the  creatures  can  add  nothing  to 
Him.  2.  All  the  goodness  and  profitableness  of  men  or  angels,  or  any  creatures, 
can  add  nothing  to  Him.  But  by  complying  thou  shalt  advance  thine  own  interest. 
(T.  Boston.) 

Vers.  13-15.  A  foolish  woman  is  clamorous. — The  foolish  woman  : — This  might 
be  understood,  in  all  truth,  of  the  "  strange  woman  "  with  her  enticements  ;  but  I 
am  strongly  inclined  to  interpret  the  passage  of  Folly  as  an  allegorical  personage  set 
in  contrast  with  Wisdom — Folly  under  all  the  forms  and  phases  which  it  assumes 
in  the  world  ;  all  being  included  under  this  personification  that  entices  from  the 
gates  of  that  house  where  Wisdom  receives  and  entertains  her  guests.  The 
characteristics  of  this  second  personage  are  the  reverse  of  those  of  Wisdom.  They 
are  ignorance  and  thoughtless  emptiness :  what  is  wanting  in  solid  and  substantial 
ideas  is  made  up  by  loud  clamour  and  noisy  importunity.  She,  too,  hath  builded 
her  house.  She,  too,  hath  provided  her  entertainment.  She,  too,  invites  her  guests. 
The  houses  are  over  against  each  other — on  opposite  sides  of  the  way.  Wisdom's 
is  on  the  right  hand ;  Folly's  on  the  left.  They  are  thus  in  the  vicinity  of  each 
other ;  it  being  the  very  purpose  of  Folly  to  prevent,  by  her  allurements,  those 
who  pass  by  from  entering  the  doors  of  Wisdom.  Each  addresses  her  invitations, 
and  uses — but  from  very  different  motives — every  art  of  persuasion.  Folly  presents 
all  her  captivating  allurements  to  the  lusts  and  passions  of  corrupt  nature ;  and 
she  shows  her  skill  in  seduction  by  holding  out,  in  promise,  the  secret  enjoyment 
of  forbidden  sweets.  There  are  pleasures  in  sin.  It  is  from  these  that  its  tempta- 
tions arise.    Alas  !  Folly  has  the  heart  of  man  wholly  on  her  side,     {R.  Wardlaw.) 

Ver.  14.  For  she  sitteth  at  the  door  of  her  house. — The  ministry  of  temptation  : — 

I.  As  CONDUCTED  BY  DEPRAVED  WOMAN.  A  foolish  woman  is  here  the  emblem  of 
wickedness  in  the  world.  1.  She  is  ignorant.  Blind  to  spiritual  realities  and 
claims.  She  is  in  the  kingdom  of  darkness.  2.  She  is  clamorous.  Full  of  noise 
and  excitement ;  bearing  down  all  objections  to  her  entreaties.  3.  She  is  audacious. 
Modesty,  which  is  the  glory  of  a  woman's  nature,  has  left  her.  4.  She  is  persuasive. 
She  admits  that  her  pleasures  are  wJong,  and  on  that  account  more  delectable. 

II.  As  DiKECTED  TO  THE  INEXPERIENCED  IN  LIFE.  To  whom  docs  she  especially 
direct  her  entreaties  ?  Not  to  the  mature  saint  stalwart  in  virtue.  She  calls 
"  passengers,"  the  "  simple  ones."  III.  As  tending  to  a  most  miserable  destination. 
The  ministry  of  temptation  is  very  successful  as  conducted  by  depraved  woman. 
1.  This  woman  obtained  guests.  2.  Her  guests  were  ruined.  3.  Her  guests  were 
ruined  contrary  to  their  intention.  (Homilist.)  The  pleasures  of  sin : — One  of 
the  foul  spirits  that  assail  and  possess  men  is  singled  out  and  delineated,  and  this 
one  represents  a  legion  in  the  background.  This  is  no  fancy  picture.  It  is  drawn 
from  life.  The  plague  is  as  rampant  in  our  streets  as  it  is  represented  to  be  in  the 
Proverbs.  Mankind  have  sat  for  the  picture :  there  is  no  mistake  in  the  outline, 
there  is  no  exaggeration  in  the  colouring.  Let  no  youth  ever  once,  or  for  a  moment, 
go  where  he  would  be  ashamed  to  be  found  by  his  father  and  his  mother.  This 
woman  is  the  figure  of  all  evil — the  devil,  the  world,  the  flesh,  whatever  form  they 
may  assume  and  whatever  weapons  they  may  employ.  The  one  evil  spirit,  dragged 
forth  from  the  legion  and  exposed,  is  intended  not  to  conceal,  but  to  open  up  the 
generic  character  of  the  company.  In  this  life  every  human  being  is  placed  between 
two  rival  invitations,  and  every  human  being  in  this  life  yields  to  the  one  or  to  the 
other.  The  power  of  sin  lies  in  its  pleasure.  If  stolen  waters  were  not  sweet,  none 
would  steal  the  waters.  This  is  part  of  the  mystery  in  which  our  being  is  involved 
by  the  fall.  Our  appetite  is  diseased.  In  man  fallen  there  is  a  diseased  relish  for 
that  which  destroys.  There  is  an  appetite  in  our  nature  which  finds  sweetness  in 
sin.  And  the  appetite  grows  by  what  it  feeds  on.  It  is  only  in  the  mouth  that  the 
stolen  water  is  sweet ;  afterwards  it  is  bitter.  One  part  of  the  youth's  danger  lies 
in  his  ignorance :  "  He  knoweth  not  that  the  dead  are  there."     (W.  Arnot,  D.D.) 

Ver.  15.  To  call  passengers  who  go  right  on  their  w&js. — The  tempted  onet : — 
"Who  are  the  tempted  ?  Young  people  who  have  been  well-educated ;  these  she 
will  triumph  most  in  being  the  ruin   of.      I.  What   their   real  character  is. 


328  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [caxr.a, 

"  PftSBengers  that  go  right  on  their  ways  " ;  that  have  been  trained  up  in  the  paths  of 
religion  and  virtue,  and  set  out  very  hopefully  and  well ;  that  seemed  determined 
and  designed  for  good,  and  are  not  (as  that  young  man  in  chap.  vii.  8)  "  going  the 
way  to  her  house."  Such  as  these  she  has  a  design  upon,  and  lays  snares  for,  and 
uses  all  her  arts,  all  her  charms,  to  pervert  them  ;  if  they  go  right  on,  and  will  not 
look  toward  her,  she  will  call  after  them,  so  urgent  are  these  temptations.  11.  How 
THE  FOOLISH  WOMAN  BEPRESENTS  THBM.  She  calls  them  "simple"  and  "wanting 
understanding,"  and  therefore  courts  them  to  her  school,  that  they  may  be  cured  of 
the  restraints  and  formalities  of  their  religion.  This  is  the  method  of  the  stage, 
where  the  sober  young  man  that  has  been  virtuously  educated  is  the  fool  in  the 
play,  and  the  plot  is  to  make  him  seven  times  more  a  child  of  hell  than  his  profane 
companions,  under  colour  of  polishing  and  refining  him,  and  setting  him  up  for 
a  wit  and  a  beau.  What  is  justly  charged  upon  sin  and  impiety  (ver.  4)  that  it  is 
folly,  is  here  very  unjustly  retorted  upon  the  ways  of  virtue ;  but  tiae  day  will  declare 
who  are  the  fools.     (Matthew  Henry.) 

Vers.  17,  18.  But  he  knoweth  not  that  the  dead  are  Vhn9.— The  fatal  banquet  ;— 
Here  two  texts.     Preach  concerning  a  couple  of  preachers ;  one  by  usurpation,  the 
other  by  assignation :  the  world's  chaplain,  and  the  Lord's  prophet.    First,  the 
delightfulness  of  sin ;  second,  converted  Solomon.    The  text  of  the  one  is  from 
hell's  scriptum  est.    The  text  of  the  other  is  the  word  of  eternal  truth.    We  are  here 
presented  with  a  banquet.     The  inviter  is  a  degenerate  woman,  representing  sin 
— such  as  ambition,  pride,  engrossing,  bribery,  faction,  riot,  oppression.     The  cheer 
is  presented  in   several   dishes — waters,    stolen,   secret;    bread,  eaten   in   secret, 
pleasant.     Sins  may  be  in  some  sense  likened  to  waters.     1.  Water  is  an  enemy 
to  digestion.    2.  Water  dulls  the  brain.   3.  Grace  is  compared  to  fire,  gracelessnesa 
to  water.     4.  Water  is  a  baser  element,  as  it  were,  sophisticate  with  transfusion. 
6.  Physicians  say  that  water  is  a  binder.     On  the  other  hand— (1)  Waters  mnndify 
and  cleanse ;  but  these  soil  and  infect.     (2)  Waters  quench  the  thirst,  and  cool  the 
heat  of  the  body  ;  but  these  rather  fire  the  heart  and  inflame  the  affections.     (3)  We 
say  of  water,  "  It  is  a  good  servant,  though  an  ill  master  " ;  but  we  cannot  apply  this 
to  sin.     It  is  not  good  at  all ;  indeed,  less  ill  when  it  serves  than  when  it  reigns. 
The  nature  of  these  waters  is  not  more  pernicious  than  their  number  is  numerous. 
The  first  course  of  these  waters  are  such  sins  as  more  immediately  rob  God.  Atheism 
ifl  the  highest  theft  against  God,  because  it  would  steal  from  Him,  not  His  goods,  but 
Himself.  Heresy  soon  tickles  the  brain,  and  makes  a  man  drunk.  This  sin  robs  God  of 
His  truth.  Sacrilege  robs  God  of  His  goods.  Faction  robs  God  of  His  order  and  peace. 
Profaneness  robs  God  of  His  glory.     The  second  sort  of  stolen  waters  are  those  sins 
which  mediately  rob  God,  immediately  our  brethren,  depriving  them  of  some  comfort 
or  right  which  the  inviolable  law  of  God  hath  interested  them  to — such  as  irreverence, 
murder,  adultery,  thievery,  slander,  flattery.     The  third  sort  of  stolen  waters — 
sins  which  immediately  rob  ourselves — such  as  pride,  epicurism,  idleness,  envy, 
drunkenness,  covetousness.      Stolen — in  this    consists  the  approbation  of  their 
sweetness,  that  they   come  by    stealth,  and  are   compassed   by    dangerous  and 
forbidden  pains.    A  second  argument  of  their  sweetness  is  their  cheapness.     What 
a  man  gets  by  robbery  comes  without  cost.     A  third  argument  is  derived  from  our 
corrupt  affections.     Sin  pleaseth  the  flesh.     The  other  service  at  this  banquet  is 
bread ;  bread  of  secrecies,  bread  of  pleasure.     Bread  implies  much  health,  great 
comforts,  fulness  of  all  requisite  good  things.     Since  the  devil  will  put  the  form  of 
bread  upon  his  tempting  wickedness,  let  us  examine  what  kind  of  bread  it  is.     The 
seed  is  corruption ;  the  influences  that  ripen  the  seed  are  temptations ;  when  ripe 
it  is  cut  down  by  the  sickle  of  the  devil's  subtlety ;  it  is  threshed  out  with  the  flail 
of  his  strength ;  the  flood  of  concupiscence  drives  the  mill  that  grinds  it.     The  mill 
consists  of  two   stones— pleasure  and  profit.     The  leaven  is  the  colourable  and 
fallacious  arguments  that  persuade  the  sweetness  of  this  bread.     The  oven  that 
bakes  it  is  our  own  evil  affections.     It  is  called  "  bread  of  secrecy."    Unjust  things 
love  privacy.    But  God  sees.     Satan's  guests  unhappily  come  from  the  end  of  a 
feast  to  the  beginning  of  a  fray.     All  sinful  joys  are  dammed  up  with  a  "  but." 
The  devil  does  but  cozen  the  wicked  with  his  cates.   The  punishtoents  of  the  wicked 
are  most  usually  in  the  like;  proper  and  proportional  to  their  offences.      The 
perdition  that  follows  the  feast  of  sin  destroys  a  man  in  his  goods,  in  his  good  name, 
in  his  health,  in  his  soul.     The  tempted  are  called  the  dead.    There  are  three  kinds 
of  death — corporal,  spiritual,  eternal.     Corporal,  when  the  body  leaves  this  life; 
spiritual,  when  the  soul  forsakes  and  is  forsaken  of  grace ;  eternal,  wheu  both  shall 


CHAP.  X.]  PROVERBS.  S29 

be  thrown  into  hell.  The  text  has  also  the  attempted,  the  new  gnest  whom  sin 
strives  to  bring  in  to  the  rest.  He  is  described  by  his  ignorance :  "  Elnoweth  not." 
Five  kinds  of  ignorance:  human,  natural,  affected,  invincible,  proud.  The  place 
of  the  banquet  is  the  "  depths  of  hell."  This  amplifies  the  misery  of  the  guests  in 
three  circumstances.  1.  Their  weakness:  they  are  soon  in.  2.  The  place:  hell. 
3.  The  unrecoverableness  of  it:  the  depth  of  hell.  By  hell  is  meant  the  deep 
bondage  of  wicked  souls,  Satan  having  by  sin  a  full  dominion  over  their  consciences. 
(T.  Adams.) 

Ver.  18.  Her  gnesti  are  in  the  depths  of  hell. — Whose  guests  shall  we  be  f — It  is 
through  blindness  and  inconsideration  that  any  man  is  entangled  in  the  snares  of 
the  foolish  woman.  We  are  naturally  starving  creatures,  and  cannot  find  happiness 
within  ourselves.  As  every  man  must  have  food  to  satisfy  the  natural  cravings  of 
hunger,  so  every  soul  must  have  some  gratification  to  the  desires  of  happiness. 
Wisdom  and  FoUy  do  each  spread  a  leash  for  men.  The  question  is,  Whose  guests 
shall  we  be  ?  And  did  we  possess  any  wisdom,  or  any  true  and  well-directed  self- 
love,  it  might  be  easily  decided.  The  entertainments  of  Wisdom  are  soul-quickening 
provision.  They  that  hear  her  calls  shall  eat  that  which  is  good,  and  their  souls 
shall  live  for  ever.  The  guests  of  Wisdom  are  in  the  heights  of  heaven.  They 
feast  on  the  hidden  manna,  and  on  the  fruits  of  the  tree  of  life.  The  provisions  of 
the  foolish  woman  are  a  deadly,  though  perhaps  a  slow,  poison.  Her  guests  have 
their  portion  with  the  wicked  giants  who  brought  on  the  world  a  universal  deluge, 
and  with  the  inhabitants  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  who  are  set  forth  for  an  example, 
suffering  the  vengeance  of  eternal  fire.  Let  us  consider  where  Joseph  now  is,  and 
what  blessings  are  come  upon  the  crown  of  the  head  of  him  who  so  bravely  resisted 
temptations  the  most  alluring  and  the  most  threatening.  Let  as,  on  the  other 
hand,  remember  Sodom  and  Gomorrah.    {Q.  Lawson.) 


CHAPTEB  X. 

YxB.  L  A  wise  son  maketh  a  glad  father. — A  son*$  wisdom  a  fatfier's  joy : — 
The  first  proverb  is  a  characteristic  specimen  of  its  kind.  It  is  in  your  power 
to  make  your  father  glad,  and  God  expects  you  to  do  it.  Here  is  one  of  the  sweetest 
fruits  of  wisdom — a  son's  wisdom  is  his  father's  joy.  A  son  who  breaks  his 
mother's  heart — can  this  earth  have  any  more  irksome  load  to  bear  ?  Foolish  son  I 
it  is  not  your  mother  only  with  whom  you  have  to  deal.  God  put  it  into  her  heart 
to  love  you,  to  watch  over  you  night  and  day,  to  bear  with  all  your  waywardness, 
to  labour  for  you  to  the  wasting  of  her  own  life.  All  this  is  (Jod's  law  in  her  being. 
Her  Maker  and  yours  knew  that  by  putting  these  instincts  into  her  nature  for  your 
good  He  was  laying  on  her  a  heavy  burden.  But  He  is  just.  He  intended  that  she 
should  be  repaid.  His  system  provides  compensation  for  outlay.  There  are  two 
frailties — a  frailty  of  infancy  and  a  frailty  of  age.  God  has  undertaken,  in  the 
constitution  of  His  creatures,  to  provide  for  both.  Where  are  His  laws  of 
compensation  written  ?  One  on  the  fleshy  table  of  the  heart,  the  other  on  the 
table  of  the  ten  commandments.  He  who  knows  what  is  in  man  would  not  confide 
to  instinct  the  care  of  an  aged  parent.  For  that  He  gave  distinct  command. 
There  is  the  mother's  title  to  her  turn  of  cherishing.  You  dare  not  dispute  her 
right,  and  you  cannot  withstand  her  Avenger.  {W.  Amot,  D.D.)  Parental 
solicitude : — This  arises — I.  Fbom  the  impkbfection  op  pabknts  on  thxib  own 
PARTS.  We  all  want  our  children  to  avoid  our  faults.  Children  are  very  apt  to  be 
echoes  of  the  parental  life.  IL  From  our  conscious  inefficibnct  and  unwisdom 
OF  DiscrpLiNB.  Out  of  twenty  parents  there  may  be  one  who  understands  how 
thoroughly  and  skilfully  to  discipline.  We,  nearly  all  of  us,  are  on  one  side  or 
on  the  other.  The  discipline  is  an  entire  failure  in  many  houses  because  the 
father  pulls  one  way  and  the  mother  pulls  the  other  way.  To  strike  the  medium 
between  severity  and  too  great  leniency  is  the  anxiety  of  every  intelligent  parent, 
in.  From  thb  bablt  dkvblopment  of  chiloish  sinfulness.     IV.  Because  oub 

YOUNO   people   ABE    SURROUNDED   BY   SO   MANY   TEMPTATIONS.        (T.  De  Witt  Talmagc.) 

The  influence  of  the  child's  character  upon  the  parent's   heart : — I.  The   holt 

CHABACTSB   OF    A    CHILD    aLASDENS    THB    HEABT    OF   A   PABENT.      1.    He   SeeS   in   it   the 


230  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

best  results  of  his  training.  2.  The  best  guarantee  for  his  son's  happiness. 
II.  The  unholt  chabactkr  of  a  child  saddens  the  heabt  oe  a  pabent.  Especially 
a  mother.  AH  her  toils,  anxieties,  have  been  fruitless.  A  heavy  cloud  lies  on 
her  soul.  (Homilist.)  A  foolish  son  is  the  heaviness  of  his  mother. — The 
mother's  torrow : — The  word  "  heaviness  "  means,  in  this  connection,  sadness, 
sorrow,  dejection  of  mind,  a  wounded  spirit,  a  broken  heart.  "  Foolishness " 
denotes,  not  merely  an  intellectual  weakness,  nor  merely  a  religious  want,  but 
in  general,  any  grand  moral  deficiency  in  the  whole  complex  economy  of  character. 
I.  The  touno  man  neglectful  of  his  intellectual  culture.  In  all  the  infinite 
range  of  being,  after  you  leave  the  irrational,  until  you  reach  the  Divine,  there  is 
none  whose  "  education  is  finished."  Every  young  man  ought  to  be  giving  diligent 
heed  to  his  intellectual  development  and  discipline.  The  word  "  foolishness  "  here 
is  the  antithesis,  not  of  "  learning,"  but  of  "  wisdom" — two  very  different  things. 
Learning,  in  its  profoundness,  is  not  possible  to  all  young  men.  Education, 
i.e.,  eduction — a  drawing  forth,  a  development.  Not  a  mind  infused  with  erudition, 
but  a  mind  led  forth  to  think.  As  thinking  is  hard  work,  and  most  men  are  lazy, 
few  willingly  think.  They  prefer  to  buy  thought.  A  true  mother's  first  thought  is 
her  child's  education.  This,  however,  often  errs  sadly,  in  undue  forcing,  or  in 
undue  attention  to  merely  light  literature.  II.  The  indolent  young  m-vn.  1.  The 
man  who  has  no  regular  business.  The  young  man  of  inherited  wealth,  or  the 
poor  young  man  who  has  neither  energy  nor  ambition  to  rise.  2.  The  man  who, 
having  a  business,  does  not  attend  to  it.  (1)  In  some  cases  this  results  from  sheer 
indolence.  The  man  has  no  bone  or  sinew  in  him,  no  instinct  of  effort,  no 
adaptation  for  work.  Among  men  of  strong  hands  he  is  simply  a  mistake.  (2)  In 
other  cases  this  results  from  a  wrong  choice  of  business.  The  man  got  into  a 
sphere  for  which  he  had  no  adaptation  either  mental  or  physical.  Men  are  every- 
where out  of  place,  maladjusted,  and  so  they  fail.  And  by  this  first  failure  some 
men  are  hopelessly  discouraged.  (3)  In  other  cases  this  results  from  false  theories 
of  success.  The  man  is  a  believer  in  good  luck  and  grand  chances.  He  trusts  to 
fortune  and  waits  for  opportunity.  (4)  In  other  cases  the  failure  results  from 
divided  application  and  energy.  The  man  attempts  too  much.  Ignoring  the 
principle  of  a  division  of  labour  as  the  grand  law  of  civilisation,  he  affects  the 
practical  barbarism  of  attempting  to  do  everything.  Every  efficient  thing  God 
ever  made  does  its  own  work  always,  and  its  own  work  only.  Life  is  too  short  for 
the  accomplishment  of  great  tasks  with  divided  energies.  Be  the  reason  of  the 
failure  what  it  may,  the  world  is  full  of  men  who,  with  a  business  to  do,  never 
succeed  in  it.  Life  swarms  with  indolent  and  inefficient  men.  And  all  such  sons 
are  a  heaviness  to  their  mother.  Mothers  want  their  sons  to  be  something  and  to 
do  something.  III.  The  young  man  who  selects  a  wrong  business  or  pursues 
it  with  a  wrong  spirit.  The  grand  aim  to-day  is  to  get  rich  speedily.  The 
practical  theory  is  that  all  business  is  honourable  in  proportion  to  its  revenues ; 
but  never  was  a  theory  more  false.  AU  honest  business  is  equally  honourable. 
The  young  man  should  engage  in  no  work  requiring  the  slightest  violation  of  a 
dictate  of  conscience.  Evil  work  may  have  large  revenues,  but  such  success  is 
simply  infamous.  The  man  who  wins  it  thus  is  a  disgrace  to  his  generation. 
Woman's  nature  is  alive  with  lofty  and  chivalrous  sentiments.  A  son's  spotless 
honour  is  his  mother's  glory.  IV.  The  young  man  who  makes  choice  of  un- 
principled, immoral,  irreligious  companions.  Choose  your  companions  as  you 
would  if  they  were  to  go  in  daily  to  your  mother's  fireside.  Beware  of  the  young 
man  of  fashion.  Beware  of  the  sceptical  young  man.  There  are  those  who  think 
freely  and  speak  freely  of  human  nature  and  of  religion — Freet'uinkers.  Beware 
of  the  young  man  of  practical  immorality.  He  is  a  sharper  in  business,  untruthful, 
a  Sabbath-breaker,  a  profane  swearer,  a  quarreller;  his  associations  are  with  fast 
men ;  he  has  no  reputation  for  purity.  V.  The  young  man  who  has  become  eviii 
HIMSELF.  It  seems  impossible  that,  coming  from  a  happy  Christian  home,  any 
young  man  should  ever  go  so  widely  astray.  But  alas  1  the  strange  thing  happens. 
We  see  it  every  day.  What  a  fearful  "heaviness"  this  brings  to  a  mother's  heart. 
Parental  love  becomes  agony  when  a  child  turns  to  evil  courses.  To  save  you 
from  this  dire  moral  pestilence  a  parent  would  gladly  lay  down  life.      VI.  Tiia 

young  man  WUO  lives  in    neglect    OF    PERSONAL   RELIGION.       To  SolomOU    "  wisdoUl  " 

in  its  last  analysis  is  personal  piety,  and  "  foolishness  "  is  practical  irrcli;^ion. 
You  may  sneer  at  religion  and  think  it  noble  and  wise  to  call  yourself  infidel. 
Your  mother  does  not.  To  her  religion  is  a  life  and  power.  Surely  an  impenitent 
BOD   is  a  "heaviness"   to  his  mother.    {C.    Wadsworth.)         The  young   man't 


CHAP.  X.]  PROVERBS.  231 

progrett : — In  these  rerses  you  may  make  out  a  sort  of  snccessive  parallel  history 
of  two  human  beings  from  the  cradle  to  the  grare.  I.  These  two  touwg  mtK 
AT  HOME.  Children  at  home.  Character  begins  to  be  developed  very  soon.  Very 
little  boys  may  sometimes  indicate  those  tempers  and  dispositions  which,  upon  the 
one  side  shall  make  the  father's  heart  "  glad,"  or  on  the  other,  fill  the  mother  with 
"heaviness."  II.  These  two  totjno  men  goino  out  (ver.  5).  The  great  lee^on 
from  this  verse  is,  the  importance  of  taking  time  by  the  forelock,  using  advantages 
when  we  have  them.  It  does  not  do  to  neglect  advantages ;  seize  upon  them,  use 
them,  do  everything  in  its  season.  Two  things  young  men  should  not  do  :  they 
should  neither  anticipate  nor  procrastinate.  HI.  These  two  young  men  qettino 
ON.  They  are  now  men  in  business  for  themselves,  having  their  own  responsi- 
bilities. Here  is  an  infallible  rule  :  "  He  becometh  poor  that  dealeth  with  a  slack 
hand;  but  the  hand  of  the  diligent  maketh  rich."  Two  kinds  of  slackness  of 
hand :  he  may  do  the  thing  half-asleep,  carelessly ;  he  may  not  keep  tight  hold 
on  the  profits.  The  man  who  works  with  vigour  and  with  thought,  whose  whole 
soul  and  mind  and  heart  work,  as  well  as  his  hand — he  understands  the  price  at 
which  his  profits  are  obtained.  IV.  These  two  young  men  in  belation  to  success. 
"  Treasures  of  wickedness  profit  nothing,  but  righteousness  delivereth  from  death." 
Two  men  may  get  rich — the  one  by  wickedness,  trickery,  wrong;  the  other  by 
industry,  probity,  diligence.  "  Righteousness "  here  probably  signifies  "  bene- 
Tolence,"  "  beneficence."  The  property  of  the  man  who  is  selfish  and  covetous 
will  do  him  no  good.  Eiches  may  be  the  means  of  grace  as  well  as  anything  else. 
The  beneficent  man  looks  at  his  wealth  as  a  thing  which  is  to  be  used  for  God. 
V,  These  two  young  men  in  relation  to  change.  In  the  alteration  of  circumstance, 
in  misfortune,  what  a  difference  there  is  between  the  fall  of  a  man  who  has  a 
thorough  character  and  that  of  a  man  who  has  not.  VI.  These  two  young  men  in 
RELATION  to  THE  END.  "  Blcssings  are  upon  the  head  of  the  just,  but  violence 
covereth  the  mouth  of  the  wicked."  The  wicked  here  means  the  flagrantly  wicked. 
When  the  just  man  grows  old  he  is  crowned  with  respect  and  love ;  but  the 
wicked  old  man  receives  "violence."  The  same  people,  exasperated,  unable  to 
bear  him  any  longer,  "  cover  his  mouth  "  and  put  him  out  of  the  way.  There 
is  no  spectacle  on  earth  so  painful  as  that  of  a  wicked  old  man.  VII.  Now  fob 
THE  EPITAPH.  "  The  memory  of  the  just  is  blessed,  but  the  name  of  the  wicked 
shall  rot."  The  memory  of  just  parents  is  better  than  a  fortune  to  the  children. 
The  very  name  of  the  wicked  shaU  become  putrid  and  offensive.  The  two  great 
principles  which  rightly  tone  the  fortunes  of  the  young  man  are,  willingness  to 
learn  and  uprightness  of  walking.  Everything  must  be  done  "  uprightly." 
(T.  Binney.)  Foolish  sons  : — I  never  can  forget  my  interview  with  a  widowed 
mother  who  sent  for  me  to  counsel  with  her  over  her  only  son,  who  for  the  first 
time  had  been  brought  home  by  a  policeman  and  laid  helpless  in  the  hall.  It  was 
the  adder's  first  sting  in  a  mother's  heart.  I  said,  "  This  is  the  turning-point  of 
your  boy's  life:  harshness  now  will  ruin  him;  love  him  now  more  than  ever." 
Said  she,  "  He  is  penitent  this  morning,  and  says  it  shall  be  the  last  time."  It  was 
not.  Such  first  times  are  seldom  last  times.  The  burden  grew  heavier,  till  at  last 
the  mother's  prayer  moved  the  Hand  to  move  the  heart,  and  he  was  plucked  as  a 
brand  from  the  burning  and  brought  into  the  fold  of  Christ.  And  it  is  not  only 
the  drunken  or  debauched  son  that  lies  heavy  on  the  mother's  heart.  Sin  leads  to 
other  follies  and  breeds  other  griefs.  When  I  see  a  young  man  who  has  superior 
advantages  for  culture  wandering  into  low  companionship,  pitching  his  household 
tent  over  against  Sodom,  I  say,  "  There  is  a  foolish  son  who  will  be  the  heaviness 
of  his  mother."  When  I  see  beardless  self-conceit  talking  about  the  scientific 
scepticism  of  the  day,  and  pretending  to  Eationalism  and  doubts  about  God's  Book 
and  the  Cross  of  Christ,  and  scofiing  at  what  the  Isaac  Newtons  and  the  Luthers 
and  Wesleys  and  Chalmers  bowed  down  before  with  overawed  spirit — sneering  at 
the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints — I  predict  a  career  that  will  be  a  heaviness  to 
the  mother.     (T.  L.  Cuyler,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  Treasures  of  wickedness  profit  nothing,  but  righteousness  delivereth 
from  death. — The  profits  of  wickedness  and  of  righteousness : — In  nothing  is  our 
common  proneness  to  self-deception  more  conspicuously  manifested  than  in  the 
erroneous  estimate  which  we  form  respecting  this  world  and  the  next.  Of  the  one 
we  think  as  though  it  could  never  have  an  end ;  of  the  other  as  though  it  could 
never  have  a  beginning.  I.  The  tkeasures  op  wickedness  profit  nothing. 
"  Treasures  of  wickedness "  should  mean  wealth  which  has  been  acquired  by 


282  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  x. 

dabions  or  nnjustifiable  methods,  or  which  is  applied  to  unhallowed  or  forbidden 
purpoBes.  But  it  may  be  used  to  signify  all  wealth  bearing  no  relation  to  the 
command  and  will  of  the  Almighty ;  all  wealth  in  the  acquisition  and  expenditure 
of  which  reUgion  has  no  influence.  But  take  the  present  life  only,  and  appearances 
are  against  the  statement  of  this  text.  What  wiU  not  riches  do  and  obtain  for 
men !  Some  things  they  will  not.  They  cannot  give  health  to  the  languid,  ease 
to  the  tormented,  nor  Mfe  to  the  dead.  Therefore,  with  all  their  fair  appearances, 
they  profit  nothing.  They  bring  with  them  no  solid,  substantial  happiness ;  no 
joy  upon  which  the  soul  can  confidently  repose  itself  ;  no  strength  to  endure  trials 
in  adversity.  If  they  could,  we  have  stiU  to  keep  in  mind  that  man  is  destined  for 
an  eternal  existence,  and  for  him  the  hour  is  coming  in  which  all  must  confess  that 
riches  are  useless — nothing  in  the  sight  of  immortal  man,  much  less  in  the  sight  of 
an  eternal  God.  II.  What  is  meant  by  biohteodsness,  and  in  what  sense  it 
DELivERETH  FROM  DEATH.  The  lighteousness  which  delivereth  from  death  is  not 
our  own  righteousness  properly  so-called,  but  the  righteousness  of  Christ.  This 
righteousness,  however,  involves  a  righteousness  of  our  own,  which  is,  in  its 
nature,  a  necessary  fruit,  and  without  which  it  cannot  really  exist.  The  righteous- 
ness adverted  to  by  Solomon,  in  the  case  of  the  Jews,  was  first  a  ceremonial  and 
then  a  meritorious  righteousness.  For  us  there  is  first  an  imputation  of  the  perfect 
righteousness  of  Christ,  and  secondly,  an  actual  righteousness  of  our  own ;  the 
first  being  the  cause  of  our  justification,  and  the  second  its  natural  and  necessary 
consequence.  The  righteous  man  is  he  who  has  accepted  the  salvation  of  Christ, 
is  in  the  leading  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  has  the  testimony  of  his  conscience  that, 
in  simplicity  and  godly  sincerity,  he  daily  labours  to  combine  a  holy  life  with 
a  humble  and  contrite  heart.  Such  a  righteousness  delivers,  not  from  bodily  death, 
but  from  all  those  evils  that  are  represented  by,  and  consummated  in,  death.  To 
disappointment  religion  opposes  hope ;  to  suffering,  patience  ;  to  the  loss  of  earthly 
friends,  the  friendship  of  One  who  "  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother."  In  the  hour  of 
calamity,  disease,  and  death  itself,  righteousness  is  proved  to  be  the  only  lasting, 
sustaining  remedy.  {Thomas  Dale,  M.A.)  Treasures  of  wickedness  may  mean 
either  treasures  wickedly  got  or  treasures  wickedly  spent,  or  both.  Such  treasures 
profit  nothing  unto  the  bestowment  of  true  happiness.  (R.  Wardlaw.)  Wealth : — 
No  moral  system  is  complete  which  does  not  treat  with  clearness  and  force  the 
subject  of  wealth.  The  material  possessions  of  an  individual  or  of  a  nation  are,  in 
a  certain  sense,  the  prerequisites  of  all  moral  life.  The  production  of  wealth,  if 
not,  strictly  speaking,  a  moral  question  itself,  presses  closely  upon  all  other  moral 
questions.  Wisdom  will  be  called  upon  to  direct  the  energies  which  produce 
vrealth,  and  to  determine  the  feelings  with  which  we  are  to  regard  the  wealth  which 
is  produced.  Moral  problems  mightier  still  begin  to  emerge  when  the  question  of 
distribution  presents  itself.  If  production  is  in  a  sense  the  presupposition  of 
all  moral  and  spiritual  life,  no  less  certainly  correct  moral  conceptions — may  we 
not  even  say,  true  spirrtual  conditions  ? — are  the  indispensable  means  of  determining 
distribution.  In  our  own  day  this  question  of  the  distribution  of  wealth  stands  in 
the  front  rank  of  practical  questions.  Religious  teachers  must  face  it.  Socialists 
are  grappling  with  this  question  not  altogether  in  a  religious  spirit.  But  all 
socialism  is  not  revolutionary.  In  the  teaching  of  the  Book  of  Proverbs  on  this 
subject  note — I.  Its  frank  and  full  recognition  that  wealth  has  its  advantages 
AND  poverty  its  DISADVANTAGES.  There  is  no  Quixotic  attempt  to  overlook,  as 
many  moral  and  spiritual  systems  do,  the  perfectly  obvious  facts  of  life.  The 
extravagance  and  exaggeration  which  led  St.  Francis  to  choose  poverty  as  his 
bride  find  no  more  sanction  in  this  ancient  wisdom  than  in  the  sound  teaching 
of  our  Lord  and  His  apostles.  As  poverty  is  a  legitimate  subject  of  dread,  there 
are  urgent  exhortations  to  diligence  and  thrift,  quite  in  accordance  with  the 
excellent  apostolic  maxim,  that  if  a  man  will  not  work  he  shall  not  eat ;  while 
there  are  forcible  statements  of  the  things  which  tend  to  poverty  and  of  the  courses 
which  result  in  comfort  and  wealth.    II.  But,  making  all  allowance  fob  the 

ADVANTAGES    OF    WEALTH,     WE    HAVE   TO    NOTICE   SOME  OF  ITS  SEBIODS  DRAWBACKS.       To 

begin  with,  it  is  always  insecure.  If  wealth  has  been  obtained  in  any  other  way 
than  by  honest  labour  it  is  useless,  at  any  rate  for  the  owner,  and  indeed  worse 
than  useless  for  him.  There  is  wealth  of  another  kind,  wealth  consisting  in  moral 
and  spiritual  qualities,  compared  with  which  wealth,  as  it  is  usually  understood, 
is  quite  paltry  and  unsatisfying.  A  little  wisdom,  a  little  sound  understanding, 
or  a  little  wholesome  knowledge,  is  more  precious  than  wealth.  III.  Positive 
counsels  about  money  and  its  acquisition.     We  are  cautioned  against  the  fever  of 


CHAP.  X.]  PROVERBS.  233 

money-getting ;  we  are  counselled  to  exercise  a  generous  liberality  in  the  disposal 
of  such  things  as  are  ours.  Happy  would  that  society  be  in  which  all  men  were 
aiming,  not  at  riches,  but  merely  at  a  modest  competency,  dreading  the  one 
extreme  as  much  as  the  other.  {R.  F.  Horton,  D.D.)  The  worthle$snes$  of  a 
wicked  man's  wealth,  the  valu^  of  a  righteous  marl's  character : — I.  The  wobth- 
LESSNESs  OF  A.  WICKED  man's  WEALTH.  It  will  "profit  nothing."  The  wicked  man 
gets  treasures  here,  and  often,  indeed,  the  more  wicked  a  man  is  the  more  he 
succeeds.  The  fool  of  the  gospel  became  rich.  But  of  what  real  profit  is  wealth  to 
the  wicked  ?  It  feeds  and  clothes  him  well  as  an  animal.  It  may  give  him 
gorgeous  surroundings.  1.  It  "  profits  him  "  nothing  in  the  way  of  making  him 
truly  happy.  It  cannot  harmonise  those  elements  of  his  nature  which  sin  has 
brought  into  conflict ;  it  cannot  remove  the  sense  of  fault  from  his  conscience ; 
it  cannot  fiU  him  with  a  bright  hope  for  the  future.  2.  It  "  profits  him  "  nothing 
in  the  way  of  obtaining  the  true  love  of  his  fellow-men.  Men  take  oft  their  hats  to 
the  wealthy,  but  there  is  no  genuine  reverence  and  love  where  there  is  not  the 
recognition  of  goodness.  3.  It  "  profits  him "  nothing  in  the  dying  hour  or  in 
the  future  world.  He  leaves  it  all  behind.  Money  was  the  curse  of  Judas. 
II.  The  value  of  a  bighteods  man's  chabacteb.  The  righteous  shall  be  delivered 
from  death,  from  that  which  is  the  very  essence  in  the  evil  of  physical  death — 
the  sting  of  sin ;  and  entirely  from  spiritual  death.  The  soul  of  the  righteous 
shall  never  famish.  On  the  contrary,  it  shall  increase  in  vigour  for  ever.  There  is 
no  want  to  them  that  fear  Him.  {Homilist.)  What  money  cannot  do  : — A 
millionaire  who  had  been  born  a  poor  boy,  and  whose  money  had  become  his  idol, 
was  showing  his  house  and  grounds  to  a  Quaker.  The  genial  Friend  praised  them 
and  said  it  was  all  wonderfully  beautiful.  "  The  almighty  doUar  has  done  it  all," 
said  the  millionaire.  "What  cannot  money  do?"  The  Quaker  looked  sadly  at 
him.  He  said,  "  Thy  question  reminds  me  of  the  people  in  the  desert.  They 
bowed  down  to  the  golden  caK  and  said  it  was  that  which  brought  them  out  of 
Egypt.  As  it  turned  out  it  hindered  them  and  kept  them  out  of  the  promised 
land.  It  would  be  an  awful  thing  if  thy  gold  kept  thee  out  of  heaven.  You  say, 
'  What  cannot  money  do  ? '    It  cannot  deliver  thy  soul." 

Yer.  3.  The  Lord  will  not  suffer  the  seal  of  the  righteous  to  famish. — The  Lord 
and  the  righteous : — I.  God  has  bountifully  peovided  even  fob  the  unoodlt. 
Has  He  shown  such  concern  for  the  wicked  as  to  provide  for  them  in  the  gospel 
"a  feast  of  fat  things  fuU  of  marrow,"  and  will  He  disregard  the  righteous? 
n.  God  is  peculiaely  intebested  in  the  welfabe  of  the  bighteous.  The 
righteous  are  God's  "  peculiar  treasure  above  all  people."  HI.  God  has  pledged 
His  wobd  that  they  shall  neveb  want  anything  that  is  good.  Exceeding 
numerous,  great  and  precious  are  the  promises  which  God  has  given  to  His  people. 
He  may  seem  to  leave  His  people  in  straits,  but  it  shall  be  only  for  the  more  signal 
manifestation  of  His  love  and  mercy  towards  them.  1.  A  word  of  reproof.  Many 
do  not  make  their  profiting  to  appear  as  they  ought.  2.  A  word  of  consolation. 
Some  may  put  away  from  them  this  promise  under  the  idea  that  they  are  not  of 
the  character  to  whom  it  belongs.  {Skeletons  of  Sermoru.)  The  famishing  of  the 
soul : — It  is  of  temporal  supplies  the  wise  man  is  here  speaking.  The  "  famishing 
of  the  soul  "  might  be  understood,  with  great  truth,  of  the  proper  and  peculiar  life 
of  the  soul.  But  the  connection  demands  a  different  interpretation.  Soul  is  often 
used  to  signify  the  "person"  and  the  "animal  life."  It  may  have  reference  to 
that  weakness  and  fainting  of  spirit  which  is  the  result  of  the  corporeal  exhaustion 
produced  by  the  extremity  of  want.     [R.  Wardlaw.) 

Ver.  4.  The  hand  of  the  diligent  maketh  rich. — Diligent : — Our  life  is  dependent 
on  our  industry.  It  is  good  for  man  that  he  should  have  to  labour.  Were  God  to 
do  all,  we  should  truly  leHre  Him  to  do  it,  not  caring  to  co-operate  with  the  Divine 
Husbandman  in  the  culture  of  the  field  of  life.  By  the  "  diligent "  we  are  to  under- 
stand the  nimble-handed — those  who  are  active  and  agile,  who  will  lose  nothing 
for  want  of  rising  early  and  peering  about  in  the  darkness  if  they  may  but  catch  a 
glimpse  even  of  an  outline  of  things.  The  persons  referred  to  in  the  text  are  those 
who  take  account  of  microscopic  matters — they  are  particular  about  the  smallest 
coins,  about  moments  and  minutes,  about  so-called  secondary  engagements  and 
plans.  The  true  business  man  lives  in  the  midst  of  his  business.  We  are  not  far 
from  the  sanctuary  of  God  when  we  are  listening  to  such  proverbs  as  these. 
(J.  Parker,  DJD.)       Idleness  and  industry : — I.  The  hand  of  the  one  is  "  diligent," 


234  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

THE  OTHER  IS  "SLACK."      11.    ThE  SOUL  OF  THE  ONE  SEIZES  OPPORTUNITIES,  THE  OTHER 

NEGLECTS  THEM.  The  industrious  man  makes  opportunities.  He  does  the  work  of 
the  season.    The  other  lets  opportunities  pass.    He  "  sleepeth  in  harvest."    III.  Thb 

DESTINY   OF   THE    ONE    IS   PROSPERITY,    THAT    OF    THE    OTHER    RUIN.        The    man    In    the 

gospel  who  employed  his  talents  got  the  "  Well  done  !  "  of  his  Master  and  the  ruler- 
ship  over  many  things.  Laziness  everywhere  brings  ruin.  "  Drowsiness  clothes  a 
man  in  rags."  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Diligent  in  business: — This  rule  applies 
alike  to  the  business  of  life  and  the  concerns  of  the  soul.  The  law  holds  good  iu 
common  things.  The  earth  brings  forth  thorns  Instead  of  grapes  unless  it  be 
cultivated  by  the  labour  of  man.  A  world  bringing  forth  food  spontaneously  might 
have  suited  a  sinless  race,  but  it  would  be  unsuitable  for  mankind  as  they  now  are. 
The  fallen  cannot  be  left  idle  with  safety  to  themselves.  The  necessity  of  labour 
has  become  a  blessing  to  man.  The  maxim  has  passed  into  a  proverb,  "  If  you  do 
not  wait  on  your  business,  your  business  will  not  wait  on  you."  That  diligence  is 
necessary  to  progress  in  holiness  is  witnessed  by  all  the  Word  of  God  and  all  the 
experience  of  His  people.  It  would  be  a  libel  on  the  Divine  economy  to  imagine 
that  the  tender  plant  of  grace  would  thrive  in  a  sluggard's  garden.  The  work  i3 
difficult,  the  times  are  bad.  He  who  would  gain  in  godliness  must  put  his  soul  into 
the  business.  But  he  who  puts  his  soul  into  the  business  will  grow  rich.  When 
all  counts  are  closed  he  who  is  rich  in  faith  is  the  richest  man.  (W,  Arnot,  D.D.) 
Slack  hand : — Lazy  hand.  Sloth  is  the  mother  of  poverty.  Or  tne  words  may  be 
rendered  the  hand  of  deceit.  Without  diligence  honesty  can  scarcely  be  expected. 
Next  unto  virtue  let  children  be  trained  up  to  industry,  for  both  poverty  and  fraud 
are  commonly  the  effect  of  sloth.  {B.  E.  Nicholls,  M.A.)  Diligence  and 
prosperity  : — A  connection  exists  between  the  bounty  of  God  and  the  duty  of  man. 
All  things  are  of  God,  and  our  dependence  upon  Him  is  absolute  and  imperative. 
There  is  a  perfect  accordance  between  the  established  law  of  nature  and  the  law  of 
grace.  The  former  of  these  combines  a  dependence  upon  God  for  daily  subsistence 
with  the  necessity  of  effort  to  procure  it.  The  latter  tells  us,  and  insists  upon  it, 
that  while  by  grace  we  are  saved  through  faith  which  is  the  gift  of  God,  we  are 
nevertheless  to  "  work  out  our  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling."     I.  Apply 

SENTIMENT  OF   TEXT   TO    THE    ORDINARY   AFFAIRS    OF    LIFE.       With    rCSpect    tO    temporal 

blessings.  The  purposes  of  God  are  never  carried  into  effect  without  the  use  of 
those  means  by  which  they  are  intended  to  be  accomplished.  The  application  of 
these  means  is  indispensable  to  the  attainment  of  the  end.  If  we  neglect  these,  it 
will  be  worse  than  folly  to  hope  for  any  blessing.  What  are  the  appointed  means 
by  which  a  beneficent  providence  supplies  the  temporal  wants  of  man  ?  1.  Diligence 
or  industry.  An  unoccupied  and  idle  man  countervails  all  the  laws  both  of  his 
animal  and  intellectual  frame  and  wages  war  upon  every  organ  of  his  material 
structure.  The  law  of  industry  is  a  benevolent  law.  If  you  would  make  a  man 
miserable,  let  him  have  nothing  to  do.  Idleness  is  the  nursery  of  crime.  2.  Economy. 
He  who  wastes  what  providence  gives  him  may  not  complain  of  it  being  with- 
held or  withdrawn.  Nature  and  observation  are  constantly  reading  us  this  lesson. 
In  all  that  God  does  there  is  nothing  lost,  nothing  thrown  away,  nothing  but  what 
is  designed  for  some  useful  purpose.  Every  natural  substance  that  does  not  retain 
its  original  form  passes  into  some  other  that  is  equally  important  in  its  way. 
There  is  no  example  of  the  entire  destruction  of  anything  in  the  universe.  The 
Lord  Jesus  did  not  deem  it  mean  to  be  frugal.  Meanness  is  more  justly  chargeable 
to  waste  and  prodigality.  He  that  is  regardless  of  little  things  will  be  very  apt  to 
be  careless  of  those  that  are  greater.  3.  A  sacred  regard  to  the  Lord's  day.  If  a 
man  would  make  the  most  of  human  life,  to  say  nothing  of  the  life  to  come,  he 
must  be  a  conscientious  observer  of  this  consecrated  day.  Other  collateral  means 
are,  a  sacred  regard  to  truth,  honesty  in  every  transaction,  rectitude  and  integrity 
of  character.  II.  Apply  sentiment  of  the  text  to  the  interests  of  the  soul. 
Many  events  may  transpire  which  will  frustrate  the  most  diligent  in  their  enterprise. 
Sickness,  infirmity,  calamity,  treachery.  But  it  is  never  so  in  the  case  of  the  soul. 
There  is  an  opulence  in  the  Divine  benignity  which  satisfies  the  desire  of  every 
praying  spirit.  Note  there  is  a  certainty  in  the  promise.  Labour  for  the  meat 
which  endureth  unto  everlasting  life  shall  be  rewarded  in  the  issue  to  the  extent  of 
our  largest  expectations.  And  at  the  last  his  joy  will  be  full.  He  has  gained  the 
true  riches  and  is  rich  indeed.  (J.  Everitt.)  Advantages  of  virtuous  industry : — 
I.  The  industrious  man  accomplishes  very  many  things  which  are  profitable 
TO  himself  and  others  in  numberless  respects.  How  many  of  his  own  wants  and 
those  of  others  does  he  not  thus  relieve  I    How  many  gourcea  of  welfare  does  he 


CHAP.x.]  PROVERBS.  235 

not  open  to  himself  and  others !  11.  If  the  industrious  man  executes  many  useful 
matters,  he  executes  them  ■with  fae  moke  ease  and  dextkbitt  than  it  he  weke 
NOT  iNDCSTKious.  He  has  no  need  of  any  long  previous  contest  with  himself.  He 
understands,  he  loves  the  work  ;  has  a  certain  confidence  in  himself,  and  is  more 
or  less  sure  of  success.  HI.  The  industrious  man  unfolds,  exercises,  pebeects  his 
powEES ;  not  only  his  mechanical,  but  also  his  nobleb,  his  mental  powebs. 
IV.  The  industrious  man  lives  in  the  true,  intimate,  entibe  consciousness  of  himself, 
and  of  that  which  he  is  and  does.  He  actually  rejoices  in  his  life,  his  faculties, 
his  endowments,  his  time.  V.  The  industrious  man,  who  is  so  from  principle  and 
inclination,  expebiences  neithee  languob  nob  ikksomeness.  Never  are  his 
faculties,  never  is  his  time,  a  burden  to  him.     VI.  The  industrious  man  has  A 

FAB  GBEATEB  KELISH  FOB  EVEBT  INNOCENT  PLEASUBB,  FOB  EVEBT  KELAXATION,  THAT  HB 

ENJOYS.     He  alone  properly  knows  the  pleasure  of  rest.     VII.  The  industrious  man 

ALONE    FULFILS    THE    DESIGN    FOB    WHICH    HE    IS    PLACED    ON    EAETH,    and    may   Say    SO 

to  himself,  and  may  in  the  consciousness  of  it  be  contented  and  cheerful.  (G.  J. 
Zollikofer.) 

Yer.  5.  He  that  gatheretb  In  suxnnier  Is  a  wise  son :  bat  he  that  sleepeth  In 
haryest  is  a  son  that  causetb  shame. — Summer  and  harvest : — I.  God  affobds  you 
OPPOETUNITIES  FOB  GOOD.  He  favours  you  with  seasons  which  may  be  considered 
as  your  harvest.  1.  You  are  blessed  with  a  season  of  gospel  grace.  2.  You  have 
a  season  of  civil  and  religious  liberty.  3.  Some  are  living  in  a  religious  famQy, 
where  they  have  the  benefit  of  instruction,  prayer,  and  example.  4.  Some  have 
seasons  of  disciplinary  trouble.  5.  Some  have  seasons  of  conviction.  6.  All  have 
the  susceptible  time  of  youth.  H.  The  necessity  of  diligence  to  impbove  your 
EEAPiNG  SEASON.  1.  Consider  how  much  you  have  to  accomplish.  2.  Consider  the 
worth  of  the  blessings  that  demand  your  attention.  3.  Eemember  that  your  labour 
wiU  not  be  in  vain  in  the  Lord.  4.  Your  season  for  action  is  limited  and  short. 
5.  Eeflect  upon  the  consequences  of  negligence.  Having  made  no  provision  for 
futurity — for  eternity — your  ruin  is  unavoidable.  A  strict  account  will  be  required 
of  all  your  talents  and  opportunities.  {William  Jay.)  Using  our  opportunities  : — 
Our  efforts  in  life  must  be  seasonable.  There  is  a  religious  forethought.  He  who 
neglects  to  gather  in  summer  neglects  the  bounties  of  the  Lord  as  well  as  neglects 
his  own  future  necessities.  The  man  who  sleeps  in  harvest  is  pronounced  a  fool, 
because  he  lets  his  opportunity  slip.  The  historian  writes  concerning  Hannibal 
that  when  he  could  have  taken  Eome  he  would  not,  and  when  he  would  he  could 
not.  We  are  to  be  men  of  opportunity — that  is  to  say,  we  are  to  buy  up  the 
opportunity,  to  redeem  the  time.  When  God  opens  a  gate  He  means  that  we 
should  go  through  it,  and  pass  into  all  the  inheritance  beyond.  There  was  a  king 
of  Sicily  who  was  called  "  The  Lingerer,"  not  because  he  stayed  tiU  opportunity 
came,  but  because  he  stayed  till  opportunity  was  lost.  There  is  a  time  to  wait  and 
a  time  to  act.  Overlong  waiting  means  loss  of  chance,  for  the  king  has  passed  by, 
and  the  gates  are  closed  ;  but  to  wait  patiently  until  everything  is  ripe  for  action  is 
the  very  last  expression  of  Christian  culture.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Summer,  the 
Christian's  gathering -time  : — I.  The  pebson  spoken  of.  "A  wise  son."  II.  The 
SEASON  IN  WHICH  THE  WISE  SON  EXEKTS  HIMSELF.  "  In  summei."  And  why  is  the 
gospel  dispensation  represented  by  summer  ?  1.  Winter  is  over  and  gone.  His 
reign  was  tyrannical  and  cold.  But  now  summer  returns.  So  the  gospel  dispensa- 
tion reveals  to  us  the  bright  extended  beams  of  the  Sun  of  Bighteousness.  2.  In 
winter  the  face  of  nature  is  squalid  and  deformed.  But  summer  comes  ;  and,  by  a 
touch  surpassing  magic,  beauties  on  beauties  start  into  view.  So  the  gospel 
dispensation  mollifies  the  hard  heart,  removes  the  deformity  of  sin  from  the  soul, 
adorns  the  temper  and  the  conversation  with  all  the  beauties  of  holiness.  3.  In 
winter  the  heavens  distil  no  kindly  influence ;  all  is  adverse  to  vegetation.  But 
when  summer  returns  the  air  breathes  balm,  the  clouds  drop  fatness,  and  the  earth 
is  fertilised.  So  the  gospel  brings  along  with  it  refreshing  clouds  of  spiritual 
influences.  4.  In  winter  no  flowers  adorn  the  earth;  their  beautiful  tints,  their 
savoury  smell  and  deliciite  foims  sleep  in  the  earth ;  but  in  summer  these  appear 
in  rich  profusion  and  of  variegated  colours.  In  like  manner  the  gospel  dispensation 
is  attended  with  a  rich  profusion  of  gracious  young  converts,  whose  souls  are 
endowed  with  knowledge,  faith,  and  affection,  and  breathe  forth  a  precious  perfume, 
as  the  Holy  Spirit  breathes  on  them.  5.  In  winter  we  search  the  orchard  and 
garden  in  vain  for  fruit.  But  when  summer  returns  we  mark  with  grateful 
pleasure  the  pleasant  contrast,  and  gather  the  mellow  fruits  of  various  hues  and 


8S6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.x. 

flayoars.  In  like  manner  the  gospel  dispensation  is  attended  with  a  variety  of 
frnits  to  the  praise  of  God  the  Father.  III.  I  would  now  direct  your  attention  to 
THE  EXBBCI8E  IN  WHICH  THE  WISE  SON  IS  ENGAGED.  "  He  gathereth  in  summer,"  or 
during  the  gospel  dispensation.  1.  He  gathereth  a  knowledge  of  God  and  of  his 
duty  to  Him,  as  these  are  revealed  in  God's  Word  and  the  dispensations  of  His 
grace.  2.  He  gathereth  holy  tempers,  which  cause  him  to  resemble  his  heavenly 
Father  in  watchfulness,  patience,  meekness,  and  forbearance.  3.  He  gathereth  an 
experimental  knowledge  of  God's  providence.  These  are  heavenly  fruits ;  they 
will  not  corrupt,  nor  can  they  be  pilfered ;  they  will  last  for  ever,  and  the  happy 
soul  will  relish  them  through  the  endless  ages  of  eternity.  In  conclusion,  see  from 
this  subject — 1.  The  character  of  one  who  believes  and  practises  the  true  religion  : 
he  is  a  "  wise  son."  2.  The  excellency  of  the  gospel  dispensation.  It  is  a  season 
which  affords  every  means  and  opportunity  to  promote  the  peace  and  comfort  of 
the  soul.  3.  The  duty  and  responsibility  of  the  young.  (James  Logan,  M.A.) 
Youthful  neglect : — Walter  Scott,  in  a  narrative  of  his  personal  history,  gives  the 
following  caution  to  youth :  "If  it  should  ever  fall  to  the  lot  of  youth  to  peruse 
these  pages,  let  such  readers  remember  that  it  is  with  the  deepest  regret  that  I 
recollect,  in  my  manhood,  the  opportunities  of  learning  which  I  neglected  in  my 
youth ;  and  through  every  part  of  my  literary  career  I  have  felt  pinched  and 
hampered  by  my  own  ignorance,  and  I  would  this  moment  give  half  the  reputation 
I  have  had  the  good  fortune  to  acquire  if  by  so  doing  I  could  rest  the  remaining 
part  upon  a  sound  foundation  of  learning  and  science."  Thrift  of  time  : — Every 
moment  lost  in  youth  is  so  much  character  and  advantage  lost ;  as,  on  the  other 
hand,  every  moment  employed  usefuUy  is  so  much  time  wisely  laid  out  at  prodigious 
interest.  It  was  to  the  young  Mr.  Gladstone  was  speaking  when  he  said,  "  Thrift 
of  time  will  repay  you  in  after-life  with  a  usury  of  profit  beyond  your  most  sanguine 
dreams."  Opportunity  to  be  used  : — In  our  present  career  a  man  has  but  one 
chance.  Time  does  not  fly  in  a  circle,  but  forth,  and  right  on.  The  wandering, 
squandering,  desiccated  moral  leper  is  gifted  with  no  second  set  of  early  years. 
There  is  no  fountain  in  Florida  that  gives  perpetual  youth ;  and  the  universe 
might  be  searched  probably  in  vain  for  such  a  spring.  Waste  your  youth  ;  in  it 
you  shall  have  but  one  chance.  Waste  your  middle  life  ;  in  it  you  shall  have  but 
one  chance.  Waste  your  old  age  ;  in  it  you  shall  have  but  one  chance.  It  is  an 
irreversible  natural  law  that  character  attains  final  permanence,  and  in  the  nature 
of  things  final  permanence  can  come  but  once.  This  world  is  fearfully  and 
wonderfully  made,  and  so  are  we,  and  we  shall  escape  neither  ourselves  nor  these 
stupendous  laws.  It  is  not  a  pleasant  thing  to  exhibit  these  truths  from  the  side  of 
terror ;  but,  on  the  other  side,  these  are  truths  of  bliss,  for,  by  this  very  law,  through 
which  all  character  tends  to  become  unchanging,  a  soul  that  attains  a  final 
permanence  of  good  character  runs  but  one  risk,  and  is  delivered  once  for  all 
from  its  torture  and  unrest.  It  has  passed  the  bourne  from  behind  which  no  man 
is  caught  out  of  the  fold.     {Christian  Age.) 

Yer.  7.  The  memory  of  the  Just  is  blessed :  but  the  name  of  the  wicked  shall 

rot. — The  remembrance  of  good  and  forgetting  of  bad  men : — I.  How   great   a 

CONCERN  MEN  NATURALLY  HAVE  TO  LEAVE  AN  HONOURABLE  MEMORY  BEHIND  THEM.       This 

idea  is  implied  in  the  text,  not  expressed.  All  men  in  all  ages  have  desired  and 
endeavoured  that  others  should  entertain  a  good  opinion  of  them,  and  if  possible  a 
great  one.  To  this  pursuit,  multitudes  have  sacrificed  their  ease,  their  interest,  the 
dearest  of  their  other  passions,  and  their  lives  themselves.  They  who  know  they 
have  forfeited  their  title  to  &  good  character  labour  hard,  by  concealing  and 
palliating  matters,  to  retain  as  much  as  they  can  of  it.  A  truly  good  person  will 
always,  in  the  first  place,  "seek  the  honour  which  cometh  from  God  only."  But 
Btill,  desire  of  being  esteemed  by  our  fellow-creatures  is  a  natural,  and  therefore  an 
innocent  passion,  prompts  us  to  what  is  right,  and  supports  us  in  it.  And  we  have 
also  earnest  desire  of  being  remembered,  as  much  to  our  advantage  as  possible, 
after  we  are  gone.  Though  we  shall  not  be  within  reach  of  hearing  what  is  said  of 
us,  nor  shall  we  be  benefited  by  praise  or  hurt  by  reproach.  Therefore  some  treat 
all  concern  for  posthumous  praise  and  fame  as  a  mere  absurdity.  But  as  virtuous 
and  beneficent  actions  are  by  far  the  most  certain  way  of  procuring  any  durable 
esteem  from  mankind,  so  planting  in  us  a  desire  of  such  esteem  as  may  endure 
when  we  are  gone  is  providing  no  small  security  for  our  good  behaviour  here. 
And  so  this  desire  becomes  an  important  blessing  to  us.  "  A  good  life  hath  but  a 
few  days;  but  a  good  name  endureth  for  ever"  (Son  of  Sirach).     All  this  must 


CHAP.  X.]  PROVERBS.  237 

be  cautionely  understood  of  snch  reputation  only  as  is  truly  good ;  sought  from 
proper  motives,  and  pursued  by  proper  means.  II  people  affect  to  be  admired  for 
excellences,  which  they  have  not,  their  attempt  at  cheating  mankind  will  probably 
be  as  Tain  as  it  is  certainly  unjust.  Scripture  not  only  stigmatises  those  "  whose 
glory  is  in  their  shame,"  but  warns  against  so  excessiye  an  admiration,  even  of 
things  in  themselves  valuable,  as  interferes  with  the  superior  regard  we  owe  to  real 
piety  and  virtue.    11.  What  cabb  thk  ooodnkss  and  justich  or  God  hath  takbm 

THAT  BY  WOKTHT  CONDXTCT  WB  SHALL  OBTAIM  OXTR  DBSIBB  AND  BT  A  CRIMINAL  ONB  FAIL  OS- 
IT  HNTiRELT.  There  is  a  particular  providence  causing  the  memory  of  the  just  and 
good  to  flourish  out  of  their  ashes,  and  blasting  that  of  the  wicked.  Worthy  men 
would  be  pleased  to  have  present  respect  paid  to  their  characters,  as  well  as  future 
to  their  memories.  And  it  is  paid  in  good  measure,  though  the  deficiencies  in  this 
respect  are  great :  due  often  to  imperfections  or  eccentricities  in  the  goodness,  often 
to  party  zeal  and  to  envy.  It  would  probably  not  be  to  the  advantage  of  good 
persons,  but  far  from  it,  to  have  all  the  debt  which  mankind  owes  them  paid 
immediately.  It  might  endanger  their  humility,  lead  them  to  an  uncharitable 
contempt  of  others,  and  a  hazardous  confidence  in  themselves.  When  once  good 
men  are  removed  to  another  state,  all  the  reasons  which  made  it  unsafe  for  them 
to  receive  praise  in  this  are  over ;  and  most  of  the  reasons  that  made  others 
unwilling  to  bestow  it  are  over  too.  Generally  speaking,  they  who  deserve  well 
have  at  length  due  acknowledgments  paid  to  their  memory.  The  undeserved 
regard  of  the  ungodly  in  this  life  seldom  outlasts  them  any  considerable  time ;  the 
name  of  the  wicked  soon  rots.    III.  In  what  hannbb  mat  wb  bbst  conteibutb  to 

THB  DUE  payment  OP  THOSB  VBBY  DnTFHBENT  BEOABDB  WHICH  BKLONQ  TO  THK  MEMOBT 

or  THB  BAD  AND  THE  GOOD.  Vehemeuce  and  bitterness  in  speaking  of  those  whom 
we  dislike,  either  when  they  are  living  or  when  dead,  is  opposed  to  the  spirit  of  our 
religion.  Tet  we  are  not  prevented  from  forming  and  expressing  just  judgments 
at  suitable  times.  For  the  most  part  the  name  of  the  wicked,  if  let  alone,  will  rot 
of  itself ;  and  all  that  we  shall  need  to  do  is,  not  to  undertake  the  nauseous  and 
fruitless  ofiice  of  embalming  it.  The  regards  due  to  the  just  are  briefly  these :  that 
we  believe  th^m,  on  good  evidence,  to  be  the  good  persons  they  were  in  reality ;  that 
we  consider  their  virtues  with  due  esteem,  and  their  imperfections  with  due  candour; 
that  we  vindicate  their  names  from  unjust  imputations,  and  make  honourable  mention 
of  them  whenever  a  fit  opportunity  offers  ;  that  we  warn  and  arm  ourselves  against 
the  temptations,  both  of  prosperity  and  adversity,  by  observing  how  they  have  gone 
through  each  ;  that  we  incite  ourselves  to  aim  at  more  perfection  in  all  Christian 
graces,  by  seeing  in  them  what  heights  of  piety  and  goodness  are  attainable ;  that  we 
learn  watchfulness  from  their  falls  ;  and  that  we  thank  God,  in  our  retirements,  for 
the  instructions  which  His  providence  hath  vouchsafed  to  us  in  their  good  lives. 
(T.  Seeker.)  The  memory  of  the  just : — So  far  as  this  world  is  concerned,  every 
one  of  us  will  soon  cease  to  be  a  man,  and  be  no  more  than  a  memory.  Every  man 
leaves  behind  him  some  kind  of  a  memory ;  and  it  depends  entirely  on  what  the 
man  has  been  as  to  what  the  memory  shall  be.  There  are  memories  that  do  rot ; 
those  that  dwell  on  them,  and  take  a  delight  in  them,  are  poisoned  by  the  contact, 
and  all  whose  feelings  are  healthy  and  pure  keep  at  a  distance,  and  feel  as  if  in  the 
presence  of  something  that  was  corrupt  and  evil.  But  however  short  life  may  be,  it 
is  long  enough  for  a  man  to  do  something  that  will  leave  a  memory  in  the  world 
which,  when  he  is  gone,  shall  be  a  blessing  to  other  men.  I.  The  memory  of  the 
JUST  IS  BLESSED  AS  AN  EXAMPLE  OP  HOLY  LIVING.  We  uever  cau  SCO  the  force  of 
precept  fully  if  we  never  see  precept  embodied  in  action.  You  can  never  give  a 
man  a  clear  notion  of  what  the  image  of  God  is  unless  you  give  him  an  opportunity 
of  watching  for  years  the  life  of  a  man  who  has  walked  with  God.  The  memory  of 
such  a  man  acts  as  a  restraint,  both  upon  the  unconverted  and  upon  the  child  of 
God,  when  he  is  pressed  by  temptation.  The  memory  of  such  a  man  acts  as  an 
encouragement.  We  are  apt  to  think  that  the  law  of  God  is  too  high  for  us,  that 
we  cannot  expect  to  be  thoroughly  consistent  Christians.  And  yet,  why  not?  Wa 
think  those  men  that  we  see  so  good  must  be  different  in  nature  from  us.  But  the 
grace  that  made  them  so  holy  is  as  free  for  us  as  it  was  for  them.  The  memory  is 
not  only  an  encouragement,  it  is  also  a  stimulus.  When  we  hear  what  the  good 
have  done  we  feel  a  reproach  that  we  have  not  done  more.  That  memory  is  blessed 
which  comes  acting  upon  the  spirits  of  men  after  a  man  is  gone,  and  impelling 
them  to  follow  him  in  the  ways  of  usefulness  and  goodness.  Such  a  memory  is  a 
stimulus  to  early  consecration  to  God ;  to  full  and  laborious  consecration  to  God. 
n.  The  memory  of  the  just  is  blessed  as  an  example  op  holy  dying.     Even  thosa 


238  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

v?ho  do  not  care  about  living  well  would  like  to  die  well.  Others  look  upon  a  happy 
death  only  in  the  light  of  a  suitable  close  of  a  good  life.  There  is  something 
blessed  in  seeing  the  last  days  of  good  men.  III.  The  memory  of  thk  jtst  is 
BLESSED  AS  A  TIE  TO  ANOTHER  WORLD.  Ate  there  not  many  of  us  to  whom  God  has 
given  ties  of  this  kind  to  that  better  land  ?  The  blessing  in  this  way  counteracts 
the  curse ;  the  curse  strikes  right  and  left  with  the  stroke  of  death,  and  we  see  our 
dearest  objects  falling  before  our  eyes.  But  then  the  blessing  comes ;  they  are 
redeemed ;  their  spirits  are  in  heaven ;  and  our  affections  turn  to  the  same  objects 
as  before.  But  now  those  affections,  instead  of  being  a  tie  to  earth,  are  a  tie 
to  heaven,  where  those   we  love   have  gone.      (William  Arthur,  M.A.)  The 

rememhrance  of  a  noble  name : — Who  would  not  preserve  a  noble  name  ?  Tha 
recollection  of  such  a  name  is  a  continual  inspiration.  From  that  recollection 
many  things  may  be  shed  that  are  mere  matters  of  detail,  but  the  substance  and 
the  honour,  the  real  quality  and  worth,  abide  with  us  evermore.  Who  need  be 
ashamed  to  own  that  he  had  a  just  father  and  a  virtuous  mother?  No  man 
blushes  when  he  cites  the  name  of  a  conqueror  who  worked  heroically  and  succeeded 
perfectly  in  the  great  warfare  of  life.  Just  memories  are  flowers  we  cannot  allow 
to  fade ;  we  water  them  with  our  tears ;  by  them  we  enrich  and  ennoble  our  prayers, 
and  by  them  we  animate  ourselves  as  by  a  sacred  stimulus.  Blessed  are  they  who 
have  a  noble  past,  a  yesterday  crowded  with  memories  of  things  beautiful  and 
lovable ;  they  can  never  be  lonely,  they  can  never  be  sad ;  they  walk  in  the  company 
of  the  just  and  true,  and  the  silence  of  the  communion  does  not  diminish  its  music. 
Here  is  a  fame  which  is  possible  to  every  man.  It  is  not  possible  for  us  all  to  win 
renown  in  fields  of  battle,  in  walks  of  literature,  in  lives  of  adventure,  or  in  regions 
of  discovery  and  enterprise — that  kind  of  renown  must  be  left  to  the  few,  the  elect 
who  are  created  to  lead  the  world's  civilisation  ;  but  the  renown  of  goodness,  the 
fame  of  purity,  the  reputation  of  excellence — these  lie  within  the  power  of  the 
poorest  man  that  lives.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  memory  of  the  just : — The  mind 
often  goes  back  in  review  of  the  past  human  world.  On  this  great  field  there  are 
presented  all  the  grand  varieties  of  character.  They  come  to  view  in  great  divisions 
and  assemblages — in  mass,  as  it  were — bearing  the  broad  distinctions  of  their 
respective  ages,  nations,  and  religions.  Here  and  there  individuals  stand  up 
conspicuously  to  view — of  extraordinary  and  pre-eminent  character  and  action. 
What  an  odious  and  horrid  character  rests  upon  some.  They  seem  to  bear  eternal 
curses  on  their  heads.  And  these  have  gone  in  that  same  character,  unaltered,  into 
another  world,  and  that  a  state  of  retribution.  But  there  has  been  "  a  multitude 
that  no  man  can  number,"  bearing  on  earth  and  bearing  away  from  it  the  true 
image  of  their  Father  in  heaven.  The  saints  of  God  in  the  past  time  are  presented 
as  a  general  comprehensive  object  to  our  memory.  And  we  have  many  of  "  the  just" 
retained  in  memory  as  individuals.  They  abide  in  memory,  and  ever  will,  kept 
alive,  as  it  were,  the  images,  the  examples,  the  personifications  of  what  we  approve, 
admire,  and  feel  that  we  ought  to  love  and  to  be.  Now,  their  memory  "  is  blessed," 
Belf-evidently  so,  for  the  mind  blesses  it,  reverts  to  it  with  complacency  mingled 
with  solemnity.  It  is  blessed  when  we  consider  them  as  practical  illustrations, 
verifying  examples  of  the  excellence  of  genuine  reUgion.  Their  memory  is  blessed 
while  we  regard  them  as  diminishing  to  our  view  the  repulsiveness  and  horror  of 
death,  and  as  associated  with  the  most  blessed  things  through  all  time.  (J.  Foster.) 
The  two  memories  : — It  is  a  trite  saying  that  the  present  is  the  only  period  of  time 
we  can  call  our  own ;  but  it  is  a  saying  not  less  true  than  trite.  Now  is  the  moment 
of  action.  By  our  acts  in  this  living  present  we  shall  become  a  power  as  a  memory. 
In  our  footsteps  our  successors  will  trace  our  characters  as  the  geologist  traces  those 
of  the  beasts  and  birds  of  antediluvian  fame.  I.  What  does  the  text  assert  of  the 
NAME  AND  MEMORY  OF  THE  WICKED  ?  1.  A  wioked  mau's  memory  lives  in  his  children. 
Sometimes  as  a  beacon  to  warn  of  danger.  2.  In  their  sins  the  wicked  perpetuate 
their  memory.  Those  who  are  not  content  to  be  in  the  road  to  hell  themselves,  but 
must  inveigle  others  into  the  same  accursed  paths,  surely  fasten  their  memories  on 
the  souls  of  their  victims.  What  putrid  animal  matter  is  to  our  physical  senses 
the  memory  of  the  wicked  shall  be  to  our  moral  sensibilities  when  they  are  gone. 
II.  The  MEMORY  OP  THE  RIGHTEOUS  IS  BLESSED.  True,  as  a  rule,  in  the  case  of  the 
children  of  the  good  man.  Exceptions  prove  the  rule.  Let  our  children  find  us 
faithful  to  our  principles,  to  our  professions,  to  our  Saviour,  and  when  we  are  gone 
cur  memory  "  shall  be  blessed."  The  memory  of  the  just  shall  be  blessed  in  their 
actions — their  acts  live  long  after  they  are  gone,  in  their  effects.  Illustrate  by  the 
memories  of  the  martyrs  and  reformers.     And  there  are  martyrs  in  humble  life. 


CHAP.x.]  PROVERBS.  239 

We  have,  then,  a  work  to  do,  that  our  memories  may  be  a  blessing  and  not  a  curse, 
that  we  may  leave  footprints  behind  for  others  to  walk  in.  (IF.  Morris.)  '  Blessed 
memories  : — I.  The  memory  of  the  jtjst  is  blessed  ix  theer  inherent 
WORTH.  Contrast  Abraham,  Moses,  Daniel,  Paul,  Luther,  &c.,  with  Pharaoh, 
Voltaire,  Paine,  (fee.  Of  the  former,  the  mention  of  their  names  is  as  ointment 
poured  forth,  beautiful,  fragrant,  and  costly ;  while  the  latter  are  only  regarded  with 
pity  and  regretted  as  a  waste.  II.  The  memory  of  the  just  is  blessed  in  theib 
influential  words.  Their  words  are  blessed — 1.  In  Christian  conversation.  2.  In 
the  public  mention  of  them.  3,  In  quiet  meditation.  And  they  are  influential,  as 
is  evident — (1)  In  the  history  of  the  Christian  Church.  (2)  In  the  annals  of 
profane  history.  (3)  In  the  efforts  of  human  progress.  IH.  The  memory  op  thb 
JUST  IS  BLESSED  IN  THEIR  IMPORTANT  WORKS.  1.  In  the  books  they  have  written. 
2.  In  the  inspiration  they  have  given.  3.  In  the  effects  they  have  produced. 
Application  :  "What  sort  of  memory  are  we  weaving  for  ourselves  ?  One  to  be 
blessed,  and  that  will  remain  unforgotten  in  the  world  ?  or  one  that  will  decay, 
"  rot,"  and  around  which  there  will  cling  no  loving  and  permanent  memories  of 
Divine  or  human  blessedness  ?     (T.  Colclough.) 

Ver.  8.  The  wise  in  heart  will  receive  commandments :  but  a  prating  fool  shall 
fall. — The  wise  take  advice,  fools  only  give  it : — Here  is  one  of  the  most  valuable 
results  of  wisdom.  It  is  not  what  it  gives,  but  what  it  receives.  It  receives  com- 
mandments. This  receptiveness  is  a  prime  characteristic  of  the  new  heart.  As 
the  thirsty  ground  drinks  in  the  rain,  so  the  wise  in  heart  long  for,  and  live  upon, 
God's  Word.  This  receptiveness  is  a  most  precious  feature  of  character.  Blessed 
are  they  that  hunger,  for  they  shall  be  filled.  "  A  prating  fool  shall  fall."  All  his 
folly  comes  out.  The  fool,  being  empty,  busies  himself  giving  out  instead  of  taking 
in,  and  he  becomes  still  more  empty.  From  him  that  hath  not  shall  be  taken. 
He  is  known,  by  the  noise  he  makes,  to  be  a  tinkling  cymbal.  People  would  not 
have  known  that  his  head  was  so  hollow  if  he  had  not  been  constantly  ringing  on 
it.  To  receive  a  lesson  and  put  it  in  practice  implies  a  measure  of  humility; 
whereas  to  lay  down  the  law  to  others  is  grateful  incense  to  a  man's  pride  and  self- 
importance.  The  Lord  Himself  pointed  to  the  unsuspecting  receptiveness  of  a 
little  child,  and  said  that  this  is  the  way  to  enter  the  kingdom.  (W.  Arnot,  D  D.) 
A  prating  fool : — A  fool  of  lips ;  a  lip-fool.  1.  The  self -conceited  are  generally 
superficial.  There  is  much  talk  and  little  substance ;  words  without  sense ;  plenty 
of  tongue,  but  a  lack  of  wit.  Light  matter  floats  on  the  surface,  and  appears  to  aU  ; 
what  is  solid  and  precious  hes  at  the  bottom.  The  foam  is  on  the  face  of  the 
waters ;  the  pearl  is  below.  2.  The  reference  may  be  to  the  bluster  of  insubordi- 
nation ;  the  loud  protestations  and  boastings  of  his  independence  on  the  part  of  the 
man  who  resists  authority  and  determines  to  be  "  a  law  unto  himself."  (R. 
Wardlaw.) 

Ver.  9.  He  that  walketh  uprightly  walketh  surely. — Upright  walking  sure  walk- 
ing : — I.  Describe  the  practice  itself.  To  walk  doth  signify  our  usual  course  of 
deahng,  or  the  constant  tenor  of  our  practice.  Uprightly  means  "  in  perfection," 
or  "  with  integrity  "  ;  it  denotes  sincerity  and  purity  of  intention.  "  He  that  walketh 
uprightly  "  imports  one  who  is  constantly  disposed  in  his  designs  and  dealings  to 
bear  a  principal  regard  to  the  rules  of  his  duty  and  the  dictates  of  his  conscience. 
n.  Proof  of  the  security.  1.  An  upright  walker  is  secure  of  easily  finding  his 
way.  If  we  will  but  open  our  eyes,  the  plain,  straight,  obvious  road,  the  way  of 
the  just,  is  right  in  view  before  us.  The  ways  of  iniquity  and  vanity,  ill  designs 
and  bad  means  of  executing  designs,  are  very  unintelligible,  very  obscure,  abstruse, 
and  intricate.  The  ways  of  truth  are  graven  in  very  legible  characters  by  the  finger 
of  God  upon  our  hearts  and  consciences.  An  upright  man  doth  hardly  need  any 
conduct  beside  his  own  honesty.  If  ever  such  a  man  is  at  a  loss  as  to  his  course, 
he  hath  always  at  hand  a  most  sure  guide  to  conduct  or  direct  him.  2.  The 
upright  walker  doth  tread  upon  firm  ground.  He  builds  upon  solid,  safe,  approved 
and  well-tried  principles.  3.  The  upright  person  doth  walk  steadily.  His  integrity 
is  an  excellent  ballast,  holding  him  tight  and  well  poised  in  his  deportment. 
4.  The  way  of  uprightness  is  the  surest  for  dispatch,  and  the  shortest  cut  toward 
the  execution  or  attainment  of  any  good  purpose.  5.  The  way  of  uprightness  is  in 
itself  very  safe,  free  of  danger,  tending  to  no  mischief.  6.  The  way  of  uprightness 
is  fair  and  pleasant.  7.  He  that  walketh  uprightly  is  secure  as  to  his  honour  and 
credit.    By  pure  integrity,  a  man  first  maintaineth  a  due  respect  and  esteem  unto 


240  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

himself,  then  preserreth  an  entire  reputation  with  others.  8.  The  particular 
methods  of  acting  which  uprightness  disposeth  to  observe  do  yield  great  security 
from  troubles  and  crosses  in  their  transactions.  9.  An  upright  walker  hath  perfect 
security  as  to  the  final  result  of  aflairs,  that  he  shall  not  be  quite  baffled  in  his 
expectations  and  desires.  10.  It  is  an  infinite  advantage  of  upright  dealing  that  at 
the  last  issue,  when  all  tilings  shall  be  most  accurately  tried  and  impartially 
decided,  a  man  is  assured  to  be  fully  justified  in  it,  and  plentifully  rewarded  for  it. 
Upright  simplicity  is  the  deepest  wisdom,  and  perverse  craft  the  merest  shallow- 
ness. He  who  is  true  and  just  to  others  is  most  faithful  and  friendly  to  himself,  who- 
ever doth  abuse  his  neighbour  is  his  own  greatest  foe.  {I.  Barrow,  D.D.)  The 
path  of  duty  the  path  of  nafety : — I.  It  is  so  bbcatjsh  Omnipote»<ce  guards  thk 

TRAVILLER    (Psa.    llXllv.    14).       II.    It    IS    80,   HOWEVBB   PEBILOU3   IT    MAT     SOMETIMES 

APPEAR.  Moses,  at  the  Red  Sea,  felt  it  perilous,  but  onwards  he  went,  and  was  safe. 
Joshua,  at  the  Jordan,  felt  it  perilous.  He  proceeded,  and  was  safe.  David  con- 
fronting Goliath  ;  Daniel,  in  the  Uon's  den,  kept  on  and  were  safe  (see  Isa.  xxxiii. 
15).  {HonHist.)  Of  the  lecurity  of  a  virtuous  courte  : — An  important  maxim : 
in  the  practice  of  virtue  there  is  safety.  Much  higher  praise  than  this  may  be 
bestowed  upon  it.  Let  the  evidence  for  immorality  be  reckoned  uncertain,  still  it 
remains  the  truth,  that,  for  this  life,  a  virtuous  course  is  the  safest  and  the  wisest. 
Uprightness  is  the  same  as  integrity  or  sincerity.  It  impUes  a  freedom  from  guile 
and  the  faithful  discharge  of  tvery  known  duty.  An  upright  man  allows  himself 
in  nothing  that  is  inconsistent  with  truth  and  right.  He  hates  alike  all  sin,  and 
practises  every  part  of  virtue,  from  an  unfeigned  attachment  to  it  established  in  his 
soul.  This  is  what  is  most  essential  to  the  character  of  an  upright  man.  He  ia 
governed  by  no  sinister  ends  or  indirect  views  in  the  discharge  of  his  duties. 
1.  Uprightness  of  character  comprehends  in  it  right  conduct  with  respect  to  God. 
Such  a  man,  in  his  religion,  is  that  which  he  appears  to  ba  to  his  fellow-creatures. 
His  religious  acts  are  emanations  from  a  heart  full  of  piety.  2.  Implies  faithfulness 
in  all  our  transaotions  with  ourselves.  The  upright  man  endeavours  to  be  faithful  to 
himself  In  all  that  he  thinks  and  does,  and  to  divest  his  mind  of  all  unreasonable 
biases.  He  wishes  to  know  nothing  but  what  is  true,  and  to  practise  nothing  but 
what  is  right.  3.  Includes  eandour,  fairness,  and  honesty  in  all  our  transactions 
with  our  feUow-creatures.  An  upright  man  may  ba  depended  on  in  all  his  pro- 
fessions and  engagements.  All  his  gains  are  gains  of  virtuous  industry.  Ha 
maintains  a  strict  regard  to  veraeity  in  his  words,  and  to  honour  in  his  dealings. 
Such  a  man  walks  "  surely."  1.  Consider  the  safety  which  such  a  person  enjoya 
with  respect  to  the  happiness  of  the  present  life.  Think  of  the  troubles  that  men 
bring  on  themselves  by  deviating  from  Integrity.  The  path  of  uprightness  is 
straight  and  broad.  He  that  walks  in  it  walks  in  the  light,  and  may  go  on  with 
resolution  and  confidence,  inviting  rather  than  avoiding  the  inspection  of  his  fellow- 
creatures.  2.  Upright  conduct  is  commonly  the  most  sure  way  to  obtain  success  in 
our  worldly  concerns.  The  most  sure  way,  but  not  always  the  shortest.  Universal 
experience  has  proved  that  "  honesty  is  the  best  policy."  An  upright  man  must 
commend  himself  by  degrees  to  aU  that  know  him.  He  has  always  the  greatest 
credit,  and  the  most  unembarrassed  affairs.  The  disadvantages  under  which  he 
labours  are  counterbalanced  by  many  great  advantages.  Though  his  gains  may 
be  small,  they  are  always  sweet.  He  has  with  him  an  easy  conscience,  the  blessing 
of  God,  and  security  against  numberless  grievous  evUs.  3.  Consider  the  security 
which  an  upright  conduct  gives  with  respect  to  another  world.  It  must  be  possible 
that  there  should  be  a  future  state.  We  may  well  secure  the  best  condition  and 
greatest  safety  in  it.  And  the  practice  of  religious  goodness  is  the  proper  means  to 
be  used  for  this  purpose.  The  happiness  of  every  successive  period  of  our  human 
life  is  made  to  depend,  in  great  measure,  on  our  conduct  in  the  preceding  periods. 
All  we  observe  of  the  government  of  the  Deity  leads  us  to  believe  that  He  must 
approve  righteousness  and  hate  wickedness.  To  act  righteously  is  to  act  like  God. 
And  there  are  many  reasons  which  prove  that  the  neglect  of  virtue  may  be  followed 
by  a  dreadful  punishment  hereafter — e.g.,  the  presages  of  conscience.  These  reasons 
the  Christian  religion  confirms.  And  should  all  that  reason  and  Christianity  teach 
ufl  on  this  point  prove  a  delusion,  stUl  a  good  man  will  lose  nothing,  and  a  bad  man 
will  get  nothing.  Inferences :  (1)  How  much  we  are  bound  in  prudence  to  walk 
uprightly  I  Even  if  we  regard  only  our  present  interest.  (2)  In  view  of  another 
state  of  existence  the  prudence  of  a  virtuous  course  is  greater  than  can  be  expressed. 
(3)  All  that  has  been  said  is  true,  though  there  should  be  the  greatest  uncertainty 
with  respect  to  the  principles  of  religion.    (4)  With  what  serenity  of  mind  a  good 


Otiy.  x,]  PROVERBS.  241 

man  may  proceed  through  life.  WhatcTer  is  true  or  false,  he  has  the  consciousness 
of  being  on  the  safe  side,  and  there  is,  in  all  eases,  a  particular  satisfaction  attend- 
ing such  a  consciousness.  (R.  Price,  D.D.)  Uprightnest  a  man'$  greatett 
ieeunty  : — The  supreme  aim  of  men  is  to  secure  that  which  they  esteem  their  chief 
interest,  and  to  pursue  it  upon  the  surest  grounds.  Man's  ultimate  end  is 
happiness.  I.  Explain  thb  words  of  the  t«xt.  Walking  signifies  the  course  of 
our  lives.  Walking  honestly  or  deceitfully,  walking  in  light,  in  darkness,  and  the 
like,  is  nothing  else  but  living  righteously  or  wickedly,  behaving  a  man's  self 
honestly  or  deceitfully  in  the  world.  Uprightly  signifies  in  perfection,  or  with 
integrity ;  it  denotes  honesty  and  sincerity  of  intention.  He  who  lives  uprightly  is 
he  who  in  the  general  course  of  his  life  bears  a  constant  regard  to  God  and  His 
commandments.  To  walk  surely  is  to  be  in  a  safe  condition  ;  to  be  out  of  danger 
of  falling  into  any  extreme  calamity.  The  sum  of  the  wise  man's  assertion  is  this : 
He  that  in  the  whole  course  of  his  life  acts  sincerely  and  justly,  with  a  continual 
respect  to  the  reason  of  things,  and  to  the  law  of  God  ;  that  carries  on  all  his  under- 
takings by  fair  and  equitable  means,  avoiding  all  frauds  and  deceits,  all  base  and 
unworthy  practices — this  man  takes  the  wisest  and  surest  course  to  succeed  in  all 
his  designs,  respecting  either  his  present  or  his  future  happiness.  11.  Pkovb  the 
TRUTH  OF  THE  ASSERTION.  1.  The  Upright  man  begins  to  act,  or  sets  out,  upon 
the  best  and  surest  grounds.  To  the  undertaking  and  prosecuting  any  design  upon 
good  grounds,  it  is  requisite — (1)  That  the  reasons  upon  which  a  man  undertakes  it, 
be  firm  and  stable,  and  such  as  will  not  change.  (2)  That  he  be  well  assured  that 
the  way  he  intends  to  go  will  lead  him  right  to  the  end.  (3)  That  he  be  sure  not  to 
mistake  the  way.  2.  In  the  continuance  and  whole  course  of  his  affairs  he  has 
the  greatest  probability  not  to  fall  into  any  considerable  disappointment  or  calamity. 
And  this  for  two  reasons.  (1)  Because  tiie  way  of  uprightness  is  in  itself  freest 
from  danger,  and  according  to  the  natural  constitution  of  things,  least  liable  to 
misfortunes  and  disappointments.  (2)  Beeauis  it  is  guarded  and  protected  by  uhe 
peculiar  favour  and  providence  of  God.  3.  In  the  end  and  last  issue  of  things 
the  upright  man  has  the  utmost  security,  whatever  disappointments  he  may  before 
meet  withal,  that  his  designs  shall  then  be  crowned  with  the  most  perfect  success. 
It  is  the  event  and  final  issue  of  things  that  determines  the  wisdom  or  folly  of  any 
action.  The  upright  man  will  at  the  end  appear  to  have  chosen  the  wiser  course — 
(1)  Upon  account  of  that  peace  of  conscience  which  will  attend  him  at  the  hour  of 
death ;  (2)  of  the  happiness  which  will  attend  him  after  death — a  state  of  joy 
unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  What  the  upright  man  has  done  shall  then  be 
vindicated  and  approved,  and  what  he  has  suffered  shall  be  abundantly  made  good. 
[S.  Clarke,  D.D.)  The  centre  of  gravity : — The  term  "upright,"  as  applied  to 
character,  seems  eminently  direct  and  simple  ;  yet  in  its  origin  it  is  as  thoroughly 
figurative  a  word  as  any  can  be.  It  is  a  physical  law  declared  applicable  to  a  moral 
subject.  When  a  man's  position  is  physically  upright,  he  can  stand  easily  or  bear 
much.  He  is  not  soon  wearied  ;  he  is  not  easily  broken  down.  But  if  his  limbs 
are  uneven,  or  his  posture  bent,  he  is  readily  crushed  by  the  weight  of  another ;  he 
is  soon  exhausted  even  by  his  own.  There  is  a  similar  law  in  the  moral  depart- 
ment. There  is  an  attitude  of  soul  which  corresponds  to  the  erect  position  of  the 
body,  and  is  called  uprightness.  The  least  deviation  from  the  line  of  righteousness 
will  take  your  strength  away,  and  leave  you  at  the  mercy  of  the  meanest  foe. 
There  is  evidence  enough  around  us  that  righteousness  presides  over  the  govern- 
ment of  the  world.  Although  men  are  not  righteous,  yet  righteousness  is  in  the 
long  run  the  sweetest  way  to  success  even  among  men.  As  an  upright  pillar  can 
bear  a  greater  weight  than  a  leaning  one,  so  moral  rectitude  is  strong  and  obliquity 
weak.  A  true  witness  will  bear  an  amount  of  cross-questioning  which  is  sufficient 
to  weigh  twenty  false  witnesses  down.  Truth  stands  longer  and  bears  more  among 
men  than  falsehood.  This  law,  operating  in  the  world,  is  a  glory  to  God  in  the 
highest.  It  visibly  identifies  the  moral  Governor  of  mankind  with  the  Maker  of 
the  world.  (W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  The  safety  of  religion : — The  term  "  walk " 
signifies  a  course  of  conduct.  To  walk  uprightly  is  to  pursue  a  course  of  upright- 
ness, or  integrity.  He  who  pursues  such  a  course  walks  safely.  God  is  righteous. 
Being  such.  He  must  regard  the  righteous  with  approbation  and  complacency. 
I.  What  sentiments  are  safe,  or  what  mat  wb  bafelt  bklikvk  ?  1.  It  is  safe  to 
believe  the  Scriptures  are  a  revelation  from  God.  2.  To  believe  in  the  immortality 
of  the  soul  and  in  a  future  state  of  retribution.  3.  To  believe  that  men  are 
naturally  destitute  of  holiness,  or  in  other  words,  wholly  sinful.  4.  That  a  moral 
renovation  or  change  of  heart  is  necessary  to  salvation.     6.  In  the  proper  Divinity 

17 


242  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  X. 

of  Jesus  Christ.  6.  That  Christ  has  made  an  atonement  for  sin,  and  that  we  must 
be  justified  by  faith  in  Him,  and  not  by  our  own  works.  7.  That  all  men  will  not 
be  saved.  II.  What  practice  is  safe  ?  All  who  are  called  Christians  may  be 
divided  into  two  classes.  One  is  distinguished  by  a  strict,  the  other  by  a  lax 
interpretation  of  the  Divine  precepts.  Which  of  these  two  classes  pursues  the  safe 
course  ?  Which  is  most  dangerous — to  have  too  little  religion  or  too  much  ?  Surely 
he   only   who   walks   strictly  walks   safely.      (E.   Payson,   D.D.)  The  upright 

walker : — The  man  who  walks  uprightly  is  relieved  from  all  fear,  and  is  inspired 
by  the  very  spirit  of  courage.  He  knows  that  he  means  to  be  right,  to  do  right, 
and  therefore  he  can  challenge  the  world  to  find  fault  with  him.  He  glories  in  an 
honest  purpose.  The  man  who  goes  through  life  by  crooked  paths,  sinuously 
endeavouring  to  avoid  royal  thoroughfares,  will  be  discovered,  and  because  he  haa 
a  consciousness  of  this  ultimate  detection  he  lives  a  life  of  perpetual  unrest. 
The  man  who  perverts  his  ways  shall  be  instructed  by  misfortune.  He  would 
not  Usten  to  more  genial  teachers,  he  put  away  from  him  the  spirit  of  counsel 
and  understanding,  so  the  grim  monitor  known  by  the  name  of  Mis- 
fortune, comes  and  conducts  his  schooling,  compelling  him  to  read  hard  words, 
and  to  undergo  severe  discipline.  Honesty  is  a  child  of  the  daylight,  and 
true  honour  works  for  no  advantage,  but  submits  itself  to  the  most  searching 
analysis  and  criticism.  "  The  righteous  are  bold  as  a  lion."  {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
How  to  be  strong,  safe,  happy,  and  eternally  progressive : — This  is  a  practical 
maxim  which,  if  generally  adopted  and  carried  out  in  action,  would  change  the 
whole  aspect  and  condition  of  the  world,  producing  order,  peace,  and  happiness 
where  now  reign  only  disorder,  misery,  and  crime.  What  is  it  to  be  right  ?  It  is 
to  have  our  feeling,  sentiments,  and  conduct  conformed  to  the  will  of  God,  the 
eternal  rule  of  right ;  or  it  is  to  think,  feel,  and  act  in  accordance  with  the  im- 
mutable standard  of  truth  and  right  revealed  in  the  Word  of  God.  How  extensive 
a  thing  right  is  1  It  takes  in  both  the  inner  and  outer  man ;  both  the  duties  which 
we  owe  to  ourselves,  and  those  which  we  owe  to  our  fellow-men  and  to  God.  I.  To 
BE  EIGHT  IS  TO  BE  STRONG.  All  the  varlous  facultics  God  has  given  us  attain 
their  most  perfect  development,  activity,  and  strength  only  when  they  are  nurtured 
and  trained,  and  are  exercised  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  right.  This  is  true 
of  body,  mind,  and  heart.  This  is  supported  by  Bible  examples.  This  is  a  source 
of  strength  which  can  be  found  nowhere  else.  It  brings  the  whole  man  into  har- 
mony with  himself,  reason,  conscience,  will — and  all  these  into  harmony  with  God 
and  the  great  forces  of  His  moral  government  and  providence.  Strength  in  being 
right  is  real  strength.  II,  To  be  bight  is  to  be  safe.  This  must  be  true,  since 
God  and  His  government  are  on  the  side  of  right,  and  all  His  perfections  are 
pledged  for  the  safety  and  ultimate  well-being  of  them  that  obey  His  laws.  He 
walks  in  the  light  who  is  right.  It  is  true,  even  in  regard  to  our  temporal  interests, 
that  to  be  right  is  to  be  safe.  We  sometimes  see  a  man  apparently  prosperous 
and  happy  in  a  course  of  wrong-doing.  But  he  is  all  the  while  in  danger.  The 
path  of  Tightness  may  not  always  be  the  shortest  way  to  temporal  prosperity,  but 
it  is  always,  in  the  long  run,  the  surest.  Much  more,  to  be  right  is  to  be  safe  in 
regard  to  our  spiritual  and  eternal  interests.  III.  To  be  right  is  to  be  happy. 
This  might  be  inferred  with  entire  certainty  from  the  design  of  the  Creator  in 
making  us  free  moral  agents  ;  from  the  faculties  He  has  given  us,  and  the  laws  He 
has  impressed  on  our  being  and  ordained  for  our  obedience ;  and  also  from  the 
various  provisions  of  His  providence  and  grace,  as  well  as  from  the  abundant 
teachings  and  promises  of  His  Word.  The  happiness  of  God  consists  in  His  being 
right.  He  is  infinitely  happy  because  He  is  infinitely  righteous,  true,  just,  and 
good.  IV.  To  be  right  is  to  be  in  a  position  of  eternal  progress  in  all 
that  adds  dignity  and  blessedness  to  an  immortal  nature.  What  have  we  to 
do,  in  this  state  of  probation,  to  secure  the  highest  good  of  our  souls  ?  how  rise  to 
the  highest  dignity  and  happiness  which  our  immortal  natures  are  made  capable  of 
attaining  ?  Only  one  answer  can  be  given.  It  is  by  being  right :  right  with  God, 
right  with  our  own  moral  and  immortal  nature,  and  right  with  the  principles  of 
that  eternal  government  which  the  Creator  has  ordained,  and  under  which  we  are 
to  live  for  ever  and  ever.  The  man  who  is  right  has  God  on  his  side,  and  the 
laws  of  the  universe  on  his  side,  and  all  good  beings  on  his  side ;  and  into  whatever 
part  of  the  universe  he  may  remove,  God  is  there,  surrounding  him  with  His  ever- 
lasting favour,  and  he  cannot  be  otherwise  than  safe  and  happy.  Practical  lessons : 
1.  God  exercises  a  moral  government  over  this  world.  He  has  made  us  free  moral 
agents.     He  has  placed  us  under  wise  and  benevolent  laws,  sanctioned  by  rewards 


OHAP.  X.]  PROVERBS.  24S 

and  punishments,  which  are  sure  to  follow  in  the  line  of  right  or  wrong-doing. 
Besults  are  not  complete  in  this  life.  Things  are  now  in  progress  ;  the  full  conse- 
quences of  human  conduct  lie  in  the  future.  But  what  we  see  here  is  sufficient  to 
convince  us  that  God  reigns  over  this  world  as  a  righteous  moral  Governor.  2.  We 
may  learn  what  is  true  policy.  It  is  always  and  in  all  circumstances  to  do  what  is 
right.  Cunning,  compromise,  artifice,  expediency,  and  fraud  may  seem  to  work 
•well  for  a  time,  but  mischief  and  evil  are  sure  to  come  in  the  issue.  The  effect 
always  is  to  corrupt  moral  principle,  to  weaken  conscience,  to  darken  the  mind, 
and  to  arm  providence,  and  the  course  of  nature,  and  the  Word  of  God  against 
those  who  thus  sacrifice  right  for  expediency,  and  principle  for  pohcy.  3.  No 
change  in  a  man's  life  is  so  great  as  when  he  is  truly  converted  from  sin  to 
holiness,  and  comes  under  the  law  of  right  as  his  ruling  principle  of  action.  It 
changes  his  whole  state  and  prospects  for  eternity.  4.  How  urgent,  then,  are  the 
reasons  for  seeking  to  be  right  above  all  things  else — right  with  ourselves,  right 
with  our  fellow-men,  right  with  God  and  the  eternal  laws  and  principles  of  His 
government.  (J.  Hawes,  D.D.)  The  practice  of  religion  enforced  by  reason: — 
Walking  represents  an  active  principle  in  an  active  posture.  As  the  nature  of  man 
carries  him  out  to  action,  the  same  nature  renders  him  solicitous  about  the  issue 
and  event  of  his  actions.  A  man  must  take  care  not  to  be  deceived  in  the  rule 
■which  he  proposes  for  the  measure  of  his  actions.  This  he  may  be — 1.  By  laying 
false  and  deceitful  principles.  2.  In  case  he  lays  right  principles,  yet  by  mistaking 
in  the  consequences  which  he  draws  from  them.  He  who  guides  his  actions  by 
the  rules  of  piety  and  religion  lays  these  two  principles  as  the  great  ground  of  all 
that  he  does.  (1)  That  there  is  an  infinite,  eternal,  all-wise  mind  governing  the 
affairs  of  the  world,  and  taking  such  an  account  of  the  actions  of  men  as,  accord- 
ing to  the  quality  of  them,  to  punish  or  reward  them.  (2)  That  there  is  an  estate 
of  happiness  or  misery  after  this  life,  allotted  to  every  man,  according  to  the 
quality  of  his  actions  here.  Consider  these  principles  under  a  threefold  supposition. 
I.  As  CERTAiNLT  TRUE.  It  is  necessary  that  there  should  be  some  first  mover ; 
and  if  so,  a  first  being ;  and  the  first  being  must  infer  an  infinite,  unlimited  perfec- 
tion in  the  said  being.  AU  other  perfection  must  be  derived  from  it,  and  so  we 
infer  the  creation  of  the  world.  If  God  created  the  world.  He  must  govern  it,  and 
this  by  means  suitable  to  the  natures  of  the  things  He  governs,  and  to  the  attain- 
ment of  the  proper  ends  of  government.  As  man  is  a  moral  agent,  he  must 
be  governed  by  laws,  and  these  sustained  by  sanctions.  While  a  man  steers 
his  course  by  these  principles  he  acts  prudentially  and  safely.  The  presuming 
pinner  can  have  only  two  excuses.  1.  That  God  is  merciful,  and  will  not  be  so 
severe  as  His  word.  2.  That  a  future  repentance  is  possible.  But,  upon  suppo- 
pi^ion  of  the  certain  truth  of  the  principles  of  religion,  he  who  walks  not  uprightly 
has  neither  from  the  presumption  of  God's  mercy  reversing  the  decree  of  His 
justice,  nor  from  his  own  purposes  of  a  future  repentance,  any  sure  ground  to  set 
his  foot  upon,  but  in  this  whole  course  acts  as  directly  in  contradiction  of  nature, 
as  he  does  in  defiance  of  grace.  II.  As  probable.  Probability  does  not  properly 
make  any  alteration,  either  in  the  truth  or  falsity  of  things ;  but  only  imports  a 
different  degree  of  their  clearness  or  appearance  to  the  understanding.  The  first 
rudiments  and  general  notions  of  religion,  natural  religion,  are  universal.  These 
consist  in  the  acknowledgment  of  a  Deity,  and  of  the  common  principles  of  morality, 
and  a  future  estate  of  souls  after  death.  But  if  there  were  really  no  such  things, 
how  could  this  persuasion  come  to  be  universal  ?  Can  we  conceive  that  the  whole 
world  has  been  brought  to  conspire  in  the  belief  of  a  lie  ?  It  is  sufficient  to  render 
unbelief  inexcusable,  even  upon  the  account  of  bare  reason,  if  so  be  the  truth  of 
religion  carry  in  it  a  much  greater  probability  than  any  of  those  ratiocinations 
that  pretend  the  contrary.  Proved  by  two  considerations.  1.  That  no  man,  in 
matters  of  this  life,  requires  an  assurance  either  of  the  good  he  designs  or  of  the 
evil  which  he  avoids  from  arguments  demonstratively  certain,  but  judges  himself 
to  have  sufficient  ground  to  act  upon,  from  a  probable  persuasion  of  the  event  of 
things.  2.  Bare  reason  will  oblige  a  man  voluntarily  and  by  choice  to  undergo 
any  less  evil,  to  secure  himself  from  the  probability  of  an  evil  incomparably 
greater.  Since  probability,  in  the  nature  of  it,  supposes  that  a  thing  may  or  may 
not  be  so,  for  anything  that  yet  appears,  or  is  certainly  determined  on  either  side, 
we  will  here  consider  both  sides  of  this  probabiUty.  (1)  It  is  one  way  possible,  that 
there  be  no  such  thing  as  a  future  state  of  happiness  or  misery  for  those  who  have 
lived  well  or  ill  here.  Then  he  who,  upon  the  strength  of  a  contrary  belief, 
abridged  himself  in  the  gratification  of  his  appetites,  sustains  only  this  •vil — if  it 


244  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  x. 

be  evil — that  he  did  not  please  his  senses  as  he  might  have  done.  (2)  Bnt,  on  the 
other  side,  it  is  probable  that  there  will  be  such  a  future  estate,  and  then  how 
miserably  is  the  voluptuous,  sensual  unbelierer  left  in  the  lurch  I  HI.  As  FALaE. 
Even  on  this  account  he  who  walks  uprightly  walks  more  surely  than  the  wicked 
and  profane  liver.  1.  In  reputation  or  credit.  2.  In  respect  of  the  ease,  peace, 
and  quietness  which  he  enjoys  in  this  world.  3.  In  the  health  of  his  body. 
Virtue  is  a  friend  and  help  to  nature.  It  may  be  said  that  many  sinners  escape 
the  calamities  of  life.  But  this  may  be  due  to  their  luck,  or  benign  chance. 
Many  more  sinners  are  plunged  into  calamities  by  their  sins  than  escape  them. 
And  sin  has  in  itself  a  natural  tendency  to  bring  men  under  all  evils,  and  if  per- 
sisted in,  will  infallibly  end  in  them.  (R.  South.)  Walking  uprightly: — 
Happiness  is  the  favourite  wish  and  the  alluring  object  which  every  living  creature 
pursues.  In  pursuing  the  end  all  are  agreed,  but  in  the  ways  of  securing  the  end 
they  differ  widely.  The  choice  of  these  means  shows  a  man  to  be  wise  or  foolish, 
religious  or  wicked.  Man,  besides  his  innate  appetite  for  happiness,  has  a  superior 
principle  in  him,  which  is  reason ;  and  reason  wUl  inform  him  that  happiness,  all 
joy  and  no  sorrow,  is  unattainable  and  impossible  under  present  conditions.  The 
only  way  to  obtain  true  happiness  is  to  walk  uprightly.  It  may,  however,  be  said, 
that  although  the  position  in  the  text  should  be  allowed  to  be  true,  yet  it  contains 
a  truth  of  very  little  use  or  comfort  to  us,  and  a  promise  which  none  of  us  can 
apply  to  his  own  person  ;  seeing  that  we  are  all  sinners  in  various  degrees.  Two 
observations  take  off  the  force  of  this  objection.  1.  Though  uprightness  means 
goodness,  and  an  upright  man  is  a  perfect  and  righteous  man,  this  is  not  the 
character  here  represented.  Here  uprightness  is  a  social  virtue,  producing  a  good 
conduct  towards  others.  He  who  in  all  his  dealings  is  honest,  sincere,  charitable, 
candid,  and  friendly,  will  in  return  receive  good-usage  and  escape  ill-usage.  The 
promised  reward  of  safety  is  also  of  the  social  kind,  namely,  security  and  pe.ice, 
honour  and  reputation,  esteem  and  favour,  encouragement  and  assistance,  rather 
than  the  future  rewards  of  righteousness.  Any  person,  therefore,  may  apply  this 
oncouragcment  to  well-doing  to  himself.  3.  Though  we  should  suppose  the 
uprightness  r.ientioned  in  the  text  to  mean  goodness  in  general,  and  a  goodness  to 
which  we  cannot  pretend,  yet  we  may  hope  to  make  some  advances  towards  it, 
and  consequently  may  hope  to  come  in  for  some  share  of  the  reward.  If  he  who 
walketh  uprightly  in  all  respects,  walketh  surely  in  all  respects,  he  who  endeavours 
to  do  BO,  and  on  several  occasions  does  walk  uprightly,  will  obtain  some  degree  of 
safety  and  security,  proportionably  to  his  moriJ  improvements.  I.  Thk  ways  of 
THB  BiGHTEOUs  AM  PLAIN,  DIRECT,  BviN  WATS.  Nothing  is  Icss  difficult  than  to 
know  our  duty,  and  our  interests  also,  if  there  be  a  sincerity  of  intention,  and  an 
integrity  of  heart.  Christian  faith  and  Christian  practice  are  plain  and  per- 
spicuous so  far  as  they  are  of  universal  importance  and  of  absolute  necessity. 
The  ways  of  the  unrighteous  are  dark,  crooked,  rough,  and  slippery  ways.  What 
is  to  be  said  beforehand  for  the  obtaining  of  criminal  pleasures  ?  And  how  much 
is  to  be  given  up  ?  What  are  the  consequences  of  such  proceedings  ?  and  what 
the  vain  hopes  on  which  such  a  person  relies  ?     II.  He   who  walks  uprightlt 

ACTS    UPON    GOOD    MORAL    PBINCIPLKS,  WHICH   WILL   STAUD   THB    TEST  OE  THE    8TKICTEST 

scbutint:.  The  belief  of  these  principles  is  absolutely  necessary  even  for  upholding 
civil  government  and  preserving  human  society.  All  other  springs  and  motives  of 
action,  besides  reason  and  religion,  are  fickle  and  various.  An  upright  person  in 
all  cases  and  conditions  is  the  same  person  and  goes  the  same  way.  By  this  he  is 
secured  from  diffidence  and  self-distrust  and  distraction  of  mind.     III.  He  that 

WALKETH    uprightly    HAS   TAKEN    THB    PBOPER    WAT    TO    ATTAIN    ALL    THAT    A    MAN    CAN 

REASONABLY  HOPE  AND  DKsiBE  IN  THIS  WORLD.  Thls  proper  Way  Scripture  calls  the 
straight  and  the  plain  way,  viz.,  the  way  of  diligence  and  benevolence,  of  honour, 
honesty,  and  integrity,  which  may  seem  to  be  slow,  but  is  both  sure  and  speedy 
also.  IV.  He  who  designs  only  what  is  just  and  beasonablk  can  bun  no  gbeat 
HAZABD.  He  is  not  likely  to  receive  any  great  injury  from  intriguing  men,  or 
trouble  from  the  vain  and  busy  world.  Nor  is  he  likely  to  raise  up  adversaries. 
Serenity,  satisfaction,  and  a  just  confidence  always  attend  upon  him.  Good  dis- 
positions of  the  heart,  like  great  abilities  of  the  mind,  are  open,  free,  unsuspicious, 
courageous,  and  liberal.  The  upright  person  is  constant  and  consistent  with  him- 
self ;  his  heart  and  his  face,  his  mind  and  his  speech,  his  professions  and  his 
deeds  agree  together.  So  men  place  confidence  in  him.  He  is  secure  as  to  the 
final  result  of  affairs,  the  main  end,  and  the  considerable  purposes  of  human  life. 
If  prosperity  consists  in  a  satisfaction  of  mind  upon  the  whole,  he  cannot  fail  of 


CHIP.  X.]  PROVERBS.  245 

being  prosperous.  V.  Eitheb  thekb  ib  a  rimjRE  statb  ob  there  ib  not.  In 
either  case  the  upright  man  is  safe.  He  alone  can  make  the  best  of  both  worlds. 
Do  not,  then,  be  weak  enough  to  grieve  or  repine  at  the  seeming  prosperity  of  the 
wicked  sons  of  fortune,  who  obtain  a  greater  influence  of  worldly  favours  than 
many  persons  far  better  than  themselves.  (J.  Jortin,  D.D)  The  upright 
walker : — His  walk  may  be  slow,  but  it  is  sure.  He  that  hasteth  to  be  rich  shall 
not  be  innocent  nor  sure  ;  but  steady  perseverance  in  integrity,  if  it  do  not  bring 
riches,  will  certainly  bring  peace.  In  doing  that  which  is  just  and  right  we  are 
like  one  walking  upon  a  rock,  for  we  have  confidence  that  every  step  we  take  is 
upon  solid  and  safe  ground.  On  the  other  hand,  the  utmost  success  through 
questionable  transactions  must  always  be  hollow  and  treacherous,  and  the  man 
who  has  gained  it  must  always  be  afraid  that  a  day  of  reckoning  will  come,  and 
then  his  gains  will  condemn  him.  Let  us  stick  to  truth  and  righteousness.  By 
God's  grace  let  us  imitate  our  Lord  and  Master,  in  whose  mouth  no  deceit  was  ever 
found.  Let  us  not  be  afraid  of  being  poor,  nor  of  being  treated  with  contempt. 
Never,  on  any  account  whatever,  let  us  do  that  which  our  conscience  cannot  justify. 
If  we  lose  inward  peace,  we  lose  more  than  a  fortune  can  buy.  If  we  keep  in  the 
Lord's  own  way,  and  never  sin  against  our  conscience,  our  way  is  sure  against  all 
comers.  Who  is  he  that  can  harm  us  if  we  be  followers  of  that  which  is  good  ? 
We  may  be  thought  fools  by  fools  if  we  are  firm  in  our  integrity  ;  but  in  the  place 
where  judgment  is  infallible  we  shall  be  approved.  [G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  In- 
tegrity most  successful : — A  straight  line  is  the  shortest  in  morals  as  well  as  in 
geometry.  {Isaac  Barrow.)  An  upright  posture : — An  upright  posture  is  easier 
than  a  stooping  one,  because  it  is  more  natural,  and  one  part  is  better 
supported  by  another;  so  it  is  easier  to  be  an  honest  man  than  a  knave. 
(T.  Skelton.) 

Ver.  11.  The  mouth  of  the  righteous  is  a  well  of  life. — Streams  in  the  desert : — 
A  man  who  receives,  professes,  and  obeys  the  truth,  is  like  a  well  of  water  ;  while 
a  man  who  retains  the  form  of  religion,  but  denies  its  power,  is  like  a  waterless  well. 
I.  The  true  believer  is  like  a  well.  The  likeness  between  the  natural  and  the 
spiritual  may  be  thus  traced.  1.  In  the  manner  of  its  flow.  It  is  an  overflow. 
When  the  well  flows  for  the  benefit  of  others,  itself  is  full.  Itself  is  satisfied,  and 
out  of  its  abundance  it  flows  over  to  satisfy  the  wants  of  others.  When  a  Christian 
has  not  much  for  himself,  he  has  nothing  for  his  neighbours.  As  the  full  well 
must  run  over,  so  the  satisfied  soul  must  make  known  in  some  form  the  Saviour's 
love.  2.  In  the  effects  of  its  overflow.  It  refreshes  and  fertilises  the  surrounding 
barrenness.  Travellers  always  take  special  notice  of  the  effects  produced  by  springs 
on  certain  spots  in  the  desert.  They  make  oases.  So  the  neighbourhood  feels  the 
effect  of  the  presence  of  Christians.  There  cannot  be  a  lively  Christian  in  a  godless 
family,  or  a  lively  Church  in  a  godless  neighbourhood,  without  some  spiritual 
commotion  among  those  who  are  near.  3.  As  to  source  whence  the  well  gets  its 
supply.  Though  the  water  springs  up  from  beneath,  the  supply  has  come  down 
from  above.  So  the  Christian  says,  "  All  my  springs  are  in  Thee."  The  facts  in 
nature  are  well  known.  For  Christians,  all  depends  on  the  supply  they  get  from  a  • 
covenant  God.  The  Spirit  poured  out  reaches  by  hidden  paths  the  veins  of  the 
heart,  and  fills  it — then  it  can  overflow  in  blessing.  This  truth  is  taught  as  a 
doctrine  (John  vii.  37-39),  and  manifested  in  the  experience  of  the  disciples 
(Luke  ix.  54).  EC.  A  hypocrite  is  like  a  well  without  water.  He  who  has 
neither  the  profession  nor  the  power,  is  not  a  well  at  all.  He  who  has  the  profession 
but  not  the  power  is  a  well,  but  there  is  no  water  in  it.  Counterfeit  Christians  are 
not  simply  useless,  they  are  destroyers  (compare  Jude  ver.  12 :  "  Clouds  without 
water  ").  Christian  professors  need  to  see  well  to  it  that  they  are  not  deceiving  and 
destroying  their  neighbours.  Their  profession  constitutes  them  wells,  but  what  if 
they  are  wells  without  water  ?  When  God  finds  us  dry,  we  have  cause  to  fear  lest 
He  visit  us  in  judgment,  and  cut  off  from  us  our  own  supply.    Practical  lessons : 

1.  Some  wells  are  not  empty,  and  yet  are  as  useless  as  if  they  were.  They  are 
filled  with  bitter  water.  Some  professing  Christians  with  knowledge  and  correct 
principles,  nevertheless  are  of  an  angry,  biting,  censorious,  iqalicious,  proud,  selfish 
spirit.     Let  Christians  imitate  the  gentleness  as  well  as  the  faithfulness  of  Christ. 

2.  Some  wells  are  not  empty,  and  yet  are  as  useless  as  if  they  were.  They  are 
filled,  or  nearly  filled,  with  stagnant  water.  The  water  is  stagnant,  for  none  has 
found  its  way  in  for  a  long  time  from  the  secret  channels,  and  none  has  run  out 
over  the  brim.    Secret,  earnest,  constant  getting  of  the  fulness  that  is  hid  in 


246  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOIt.  [cHir.  X. 

Christ  is  the  only  sare  way  of  being  blessed  yourself  and  becoming  a  blessing  to 
others.    {Christian  Treasury.) 

Ver.  12.  Hatred  atirreth  up  stxifea :  but  love  coyereth  all  sins. — The  hiding  work 
of  love : — Love  is  not  a  New  Testament  virtue  or  grace,  nor  is  it  left  for  the  New 
Testament  to  praise  it  in  high  strains  of  music.  From  the  beginning  love  has  been 
an  angel  in  the  world,  gladdening  men  by  its  brightness,  soothing  men  by  its  per- 
suasiveness, and  luring  souls  with  infinite  gentleness  towards  all  that  is  true  and 
beautiful.  Love  takes  the  largest  view  of  liie — it  does  not  vei  itself  with  temporary 
details,  with  transient  aberrations ;  it  looks  down  into  the  very  core  and  substance 
of  the  soul,  and,  knowing  that  the  heart  is  true  in  its  supreme  desires,  it  covers 
many  flaws  and  specks,  yea,  even  faults  and  sins,  in  the  hope  that  concealment  may 
destroy  their  influence  and  their  very  existence.  There  is  a  covering  up  which  is  a 
vain  concealment,  a  merely  deceitful  trick ;  no  such  covering  up  is  meant  here : 
this  is  rather  the  covering  up  with  which  God  covers  the  iniquities  of  the  pardoned 
man,  the  sins  of  him  who  has  confessed  all  his  guilt,  and  desired  an  exercise  of  the 
Divine  mercy.  Love  is  not  mere  sentiment,  an  easy-going  action  of  the  mind,  too 
self-complacent  and  self-indulgent  to  enter  with  energy  into  any  moral  inquiry. 
The  love  which  is  commended  in  Scripture  is  an  ardent  love,  keen,  critical, 
sagacious,  far-sighted,  not  imagining  that  things  are  destroyed  because  they  are 
concealed  ;  it  is  the  love  of  God  which  at  all  costs  must  expel  sin  from  the  universe, 
and  set  up  the  kingdom  of  God  among  men.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Charity  like  the 
orchid  : — In  tropical  forests  the  orchids  thrust  out  long  floating  roots  into  mid-air, 
from  the  impure  vapours  of  which  they  draw  their  nourishment.  They  live  on 
trunks  of  huge  decaying  trees,  which,  as  decomposition  proceeds  very  rapidly, 
would,  if  left  alone,  fill  the  air  with  poisonous  gases.  But  the  orchid  swings  in  rich 
festoons  over  the  rotting  boughs:  covers  the  deformity  with  its  own  loveliness, 
absorbs  all  foul  exhalations  and  turns  them  into  the  perfume  of  its  own  sweet 
flowers.  Charity  is  this  beautiful  orchid,  covering  human  frailty,  clearing  away 
harsh,  suspicious,  and  cruel  slanders ;  breathing  forth  merciful  judgments,  com- 
passionate sympathy.     {James  Neil,  M.A.) 

Ver.  13.  In  the  lips  of  him  that  hath  luderstanding  wisdom  is  found. — Con- 
trasts:— I.  An  tNTELLECTUAi  coNTBAST. — The  difference  existing  between  men  in 
relation  to  the  amount  of  knowledge  is  of  vast  variety.  The  disparity  arises  from 
a  difference  in  mental  constitution,  and  in  educational  opportunities.  The  intel- 
ligent man — 1.  Communicates  wisdom.  When  he  speaks  men  are  enlightened, 
their  minds  are  set  to  think,  and  their  spirits  are  refreshed.  2.  Accumulates 
wisdom.  It  is  a  characteristic  of  knowledge  in  the  mind  that  with  its  increase 
there  is  an  increase  both  in  the  mind's  desire  for  larger  intelligence,  and  in  its 
capacity  for  it.  Of  the  man  void  of  understanding  Solomon  says  two  things. 
There  is  a  "  rod  for  his  back,"  and  "  his  mouth  is  near  destruction."  He  is  the 
subject  of  coercion ;  he  has  not  intelligence  enough  to  be  swayed  by  argument. 
Hence  his  language  is  so  mischievous,  he  babbles  and  blabs  so  recklessly,  meddling, 
perhaps,  with  other  men's  concerns,  that  he  brings  ruin  on  himself,  his  mouth  is 
always  near  destruction.  II.  A  social  contrast.  Social  differences  among  men 
are  as  great  as  the  mental.  The  rich  man's  confidence  is  in  his  "strong  city." 
But  he  cannot  shut  out  disease,  bereavement,  death,  or  care.  The  tendency  of 
wealth  is  to  dispose  its  possessors  to  trust  to  safety  where  no  safety  is.  IH.  A 
MOBAii  CONTRAST.  Accordiug  to  the  constitution  of  things  righteous  labour  tends  to 
life,  bodily,  mental,  and  spiritual.  Sin  is  here  put  in  contrast  with  life,  and  it  is 
the  true  antithesis.  Sin  is  death,  the  death  of  the  true,  the  divine,  and  the  happy. 
{Homilist.) 

Ver.  14.  Wise  men  lay  up  knowledge. — Experience  kept  for  use  : — Another  brief 
definition  of  wisdom.  Many  get  knowledge,  and  let  it  go  as  fast  as  they  get  it. 
They  put  their  winnings  into  a  bag  with  holes.  The  part  of  wisdom  is  to  treasure 
up  experience,  and  hold  it  ready  for  use  in  the  time  and  place  of  need.  Everything 
may  be  turned  to  account.  Even  losses  may  be  converted  into  gains.  Let  nothing 
trickle  out  and  flow  away  useless.  None  of  the  wisdom  comes  for  nothing,  either 
to  old  or  young.  Our  Father  in  heaven  gives  us  the  best  kind  ;  and  the  best  kind 
is  that  which  is  bought.  The  saddest  thing  is  when  people  are  always  paying,  and 
never  possessing.  The  cleverest  people  are  in  many  cases  the  least  successful.  A 
man  of  moderate  gifts,  but  steadfast  acquisitiveness,  lays  up  more  than  a  man  of  the 


CHAP.  X.]  PROVERBS.  247 

brightest  genius,  whether  the  treasure  sought  he  earthly  substance  or  heavenly 
wisdom.  Men,  looking  on  the  outward  appearance,  make  great  mistakes  in  judging 
of  men.  Those  who  give  out  little  noise  may  have  laid  up  much  wisdom.  (W. 
Amot,  D.D.)  Wise  men  lay  up  knowledge  : — In  Eastern  countries  men  lay  up 
garments,  and  pride  themselves  in  the  number  of  their  suits  of  apparel.  In  our 
land  men  lay  up  money.  But  this  is  not  "wisdom."  In  Egypt  Joseph  laid  up 
com  for  the  day  of  famine ;  and  in  Syria  men  lay  up  water  for  the  summer  in 
cisterns  under  their  houses.  This  is  wisdom ;  but  still  it  is  not  the  wisdom  of 
which  Solomon  speaks.  The  astronomer  lays  up  the  knowledge  of  the  stars  ;  and 
the  botanist  lays  up  the  knowledge  of  plants  and  flowers.  This  is  wisdom,  but  it  is 
not  that  of  which  the  text  speaks.  The  knowledge  that  is  best  for  us  is  the  know- 
ledge of  God  Himself ;  and  though  the  knowledge  of  His  works  is  good,  the  know- 
ledge of  Himself  is  far  better.  It  is  only  this  knowledge  that  can  make  you  happy, 
or  bring  blessing  to  your  soul.  A  poor  woman,  that  could  not  read  a  word,  once 
said  to  me,  "You  see  I'm  no  scholar  ;  but  I'm  Christ's  scholar,  and  that  will  do." 
Yes,  it  was  enough  ;  for  it  made  her  "  wise  unto  salvation."  She  was  one  of  the 
wise  women  that  "  lay  up  knowledge."  This  is  the  knowledge  which  you  must 
have  ;  you  will  find  it  in  the  Bible ;  and  the  Holy  Spirit  is  most  willing  to  become 
your  teacher.     {Christian  Treasury.) 

Ver.  15.  The  rich  man's  wealth  Is  his  stronir  city. — The  money  power  : — Here  he 
is  describing  what  is,  rather  than  prescribing  what  ought  to  be.  In  all  ages  and  in 
all  lands  money  has  been  a  mighty  power,  and  its  relative  importance  increases 
with  the  advance  of  civilisation.  It  does  not  reach  the  Divine  purpose ;  but  it 
controls  human  action.  The  Jews  wield  this  money  power  in  a  greater  degree  than 
any  other  people.  Over  against  this  formidable  power  stands  the  counterpart 
weakness — "the  destruction  of  the  poor  is  their  poverty."  This  feebleness  of  the 
body  politic  is  as  difficult  to  deal  with  as  its  active  diseases.  If  pauperism  be  not 
so  acute  an  affection  as  crime  it  is  more  widely  spread,  and  requires  as  much  of  the 
doctor's  care.  Besides  being  an  ailment  itself,  it  is  a  predisposition  to  other  and 
more  dangerous  evils.  We  are  under  law  to  God.  The  wheels  of  His  providence 
are  high  and  dreadful.  If  we  presumptuously  or  ignorantly  stand  in  their  way, 
they  will  crush  us  by  their  mighty  movements.  We  must  set  ourselves,  by  social 
arrangements,  to  diminish  temptations,  and  by  moral  appliances  to  reclaim  the 
vicious,  if  we  expect  to  thrive  or  even  to  exist  as  a  community.  Money  answereth 
all  things  in  its  own  legitimate  province  of  material  supply,  but  when  beyond  its 
province  you  ask  it  to  stop  the  gaps  which  vice  is  making,  it  is  a  dumb  idol — it  has 
no  answer  to  give  at  all.  A  large  proportion  of  the  penniless  are  in  a  greater  or 
less  degree  reckless.  Partly  their  recklessness  has  made  them  poor,  and  partly 
their  poverty  has  made  them  reckless.  When  a  multitude  who  are  all  poor  combine 
for  united  action,  rash  and  regardless  spirits  gain  influence  and  direct  their  course. 
Money,  though  a  bad  master,  is  a  good  servant.  Money  to  the  working  man  would 
answer  all  the  ends  which  a  strike  contemplates,  if  each,  by  patient  industry  and 
temperance,  would  save  a  portion  for  himself.  The  whole  community  of  rich  and 
poor,  linked  together  in  their  various  relations,  may  be  likened  to  a  living  body. 
The  promiscuous  mass  of  human  beings  that  are  welded  together  by  their  necessities 
and  interests  in  this  island  is  like  a  strong  swimmer  in  the  sea,  and  alas !  it  is  too 
often  like  "  a  strong  swimmer  in  his  agony."  Two  truths  stand  out  conspicuously 
from  all  the  confusion.  The  world  has  a  righteous  Ruler,  and  the  Ruler  has  a 
dislocated  world  to  deal  with.  {W.  Amot,  D.D.)  The  destruction  of  the  poor  is 
their  poverty. — The  destruction  of  the  poor : — 1.  Poor  people  mostly  remain  poor, 
for  want  of  the  means  of  rising.  2.  The  poor  are  sometimes  despised  and  down- 
trodden by  the  proud.  3.  They  are  often  reckless,  spending  their  little  foolishly. 
But  for  this  numbers  would  be  richer.  4.  They  are  especially  tempted  to  dis- 
honesty.    {Wesleyan  S.  S.  Magazine.) 

Ver.  18.  He  that  uttereth  a  slander  is  a  fooL — The  folly  of  slander  .— 
I.  Slandebing  is  foolish,  as  sinful  and  wicked.  All  sin  is  foolish  upon  many 
accounts.  To  lie  simply  is  a  great  fault,  being  a  deviation  from  that  good  rule 
which  prescribeth  truth  in  all  our  words.  Of  all  lies  those  certainly  are  the  worst 
which  proceed  from  malice,  or  from  vanity,  or  from  both,  and  which  work  mischief ; 
such  slanders  are.  To  bear  any  hatred  or  ill-will  towards  any  man  is  a  heinous 
fault.  Of  this  the  slanderer  is  most  guilty  in  the  highest  degree.  Incurable  are 
the  wounds   which  the  slanderer  inflicteth,  irreparable  the   damages  which  ha 


248 


TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 


[CHA».  X. 


(     ho 

'       ?2 


causeth,  indelible  the  marks  which  he  leaveth.    All  injustice  is  abominable  ;  and 
of  this  the  slanderer  is  most  deeply  guilty.     The  slanderer  may  indeed  conceive  it 
no  great  matter  that  he  committeth  ;  because  he  doth  not  act  in  a  boisterous  and 
bloody  way,  but  only  by  words,  which  are  subtle,  slim,  and  transient  things.     'Tis 
only  an   imaginary  stain  that  he  daubeth   his   neighbour  with ;    therefore    he 
supposeth  no  great  wrong  done.     But  these  conceits  arise  from  great  inconsiderate- 
ness   or  mistake.    II.  The   slanderer   is   a   fool,    because   he   maketh   whono 
JUDGMENTS  AND  VALUATIONS  OF  THINGS.     And  accordingly  driveth  on  silly  bargains 
for  himself,  in  result  whereof  he  proveth  a  great  loser.     The  slanderer  may  pretend 
that  what  he  does  is  for  the  sake  of  orthodox  doctrines,  or  for  advantage  of  the  true 
Church.    This  indeed  is  the  covert  of  innumerable  slanders ;  zeal  for  some  opinion, 
or  some  party,  beareth  out  men  of  sectarian  and  factious  spirits  in  such  practices ; 
they  may  do,  they  may  say,  anything  for  those  fine  ends.     This  plea  will  in  no 
wise  justify  such  practices.     Truth  does  not  need,  and  it  loathes  and  scorns  the 
tronage  and  the  succour  of  lies.     To  prostitute  the  conscience,  or  sacrifice  our 
onesty,  for  any  cause,  in  any  interest  whatever,  can  never  be  warrantable  or  wise. 
III.  The  slanderer  is  a  fool,  because  he  useth  improper  means  and  preposterous 
METHODS  OF  EFFECTING  HIS  PURPOSES.     The  Straight  Way  is  always  shorter  than  the 
oblique  and  crooked.     The  plain  way  is  easier  than  the  rough  and  cragged.     Using 
strict  veracity  and  integrity,  candour  and  equity,  is  the  best  method  of  accomplish- 
ing good  designs.     IV.  The  slanderer  is  a  very  fool,  as  bringing  many  great 
inconveniences,  troubles,  and  mischiefs  on  himself.     1.  A  fool's  mouth   is  his 
destruction.     If  any  kind  of  speech  is   destructive  and  dangerous,  then  is  this 
slander  kind  most  dangerous  of  all.     Men  will  rather  pardon  a  robber  of  their 
goods,  than  a  defamer  of  their  good  name.     2.  The  slanderer  is  apprehended  as  a 
common  enemy ;  all  men  are  rendered  averse  from  him,  and  ready  to  cross  him. 
3.  All  ingenious  and  honest  persons  have  an  aversion  from  the  practice  of  the 
slanderer,  and  cannot  entertain  it  with  any  acceptance  or  complacence.     It  is  only 
ill-natured   and  ill-nurtured,   unworthy  and  naughty    people,    that   are  willing 
auditors  or  encouragers  thereof.     4.  The  slanderer  doth  banish  himself  from  aU 
conversation  and  company.     5.  He  derogateth  wholly  from  his  own  credit  in  all 
matters  of  discourse.     6.  This  practice  is  perpetually  haunted  with  most  trouble- 
some companions,  inward  regret,   self-condemnation,  fear  and  disquiet.     7.  The 
consequence  of  this  practice  is  commonly  shameful  disgrace,  with  an  obligation  to 
retract,  and  render  satisfaction ;   for  seldom  doth  calumny  pass  long  without  being 
detected  and  confuted.    8.  He  can  never  have  sound  quiet  in  his  mind,  he  can 
never  expect  pardon  from  heaven,  without  acknowledging  his  fault,  repairing  the 
wrong  he  hath  done,  restoring  that  good   name  of  which  he  dispossessed  his 
neighbour.     9.  This  practice  doth  also  certainly  revenge  itself,  imposing  on  its 
actor  a  perfect  retaliation,  an  irrecoverable  infamy  to  himself,  for  the  infamy  he 
ed  to  others.     10.  The  slanderer  doth  banish  himself  from  heaven  and  happi- 
ness, doth  expose  himself  to  endless  miseries  and  sorrows.     Is  not  he,  then,  who, 
out  of  malignity  or  vanity,  to  serve  any  design,  or  soothe  any  humour  in  himself  or 
others,  involves  himself  in  all  these  great  evils,  a  most  desperate  and  deplorable 
fool  ?     Persons  of  a  generous  and  honest  mind  cannot  but  scorn  to  debase  and 
defile  themselves  by  so  mean  and  vile  a  practice ;  and  so  do  those  who  seriously 
profess  Christianity  ;  that  is,  the  religion  which  peculiarly  above  aU  others  prescribeth 
the   constant  truth,   strictest  justice,   and   highest    charity.     (I.   Barrow,   D.D.) 
The  tongue  : — Sent  by  his  master  to  purchase  the  best  dish  the  market  could  supply, 
.^sop  provided  only  tongues,  which  were   served   up  with  different  sauces  for 
every  course;  ordered  afterwards  to  provide  the  worst  things  he  could  find,  he 
again    appeared    with    a    supply    of    tongues.     The    moral  is    obvious.     I.  Thb 
LANGUAGE  OF  DECEIT  (vcr.  18).     Lying  is  a  sin  committed  by — 1.  The  fr.lse  witness 
(chap.   xiv.  5).     2.  The  dishonest  tradesman   (chap,  xx,  14).    II.  The  languaqb 
OF  BLANDER   (ver.  18).     "  The    safe  rule  as  to  the  government  of  the  tongue    in 
society,"  says  Dean  Goulburn,  "  is  to  stand  at  a  very  respectful  distance  from  all 
such  topics  as  our  neighbour's  conduct  and  character."     III.  Thb  language  of 
PROFUSION   (ver.  19).     It  is  better  to  say  nothing  than  that  what  we  say  should  be 
nothing  to  the  purpose.     Profuse  talkers  often  transgress  the  law  of — 1.  Reverence 
(Ecoles.   V.  2).     2.  Courtesy.     Conversation  is  not  merely  talking  to  people,  but 
talking  with  people  (Rom.  xv.  2).     3.  Integrity.     When  speech  runs  in  advance 
of  thought,   it   is  apt  to  run   in   advance  of   truth    (Col.    iv.   6 ;     Titus  ii.  8). 
4.  Prudence  (John   xvi.    12).      The    restraint  of  the  tongue  is  a  Christian    duty 
(Matt,  xxvii.  14 ;    James  i.  26).     IV.  The  languaqb  of  instruction  (vers.  20,  21). 


CHIP.  X.]  PROVERBS.  249 

Two  figures  are  nsed.  "  Choice  silver  "  represents  worth.  Good  words  are  a  choice 
heritage.  They  are  valuable  because  they  create  good  thoughts  and  often  lead  to 
good  acts  (Psa.  xxiiv.  11).  The  21st  verse  gives  us  the  thought  of  food  ("feed 
many  ").  The  words  of  the  true  man  of  God  are  food  for  the  soul.  The  lips  of 
the  righteous  utter  the  words  of  wisdom  (ver.  30),  for  there  is  a  vital  connection 
between  what  a  man  is  and  what  he  says  and  does  (Acts  It.  20;  Cor.  It.  13). 
(H.  Thorne. ) 

Ver.  19.  In  the  multitude  of  words  tbere  wantetb  not  sin. — The  iin  of  gab  : — 

Carlyle  says,  "  There  is  a  great  necessity  indeed  of  getting  a  little  more  silent  than 
we  are.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  finest  nations  in  the  world — England  and  America 
— are  going  away  into  wind  and  tongue ;  but  it  will  appear  sufiSciently  tragical 
by  and  by,  long  after  I  am  away  out  of  it  (the  world).  Silence  is  the  eternal  duty 
of  a  man.  '  Watch  the  tongue '  is  a  very  old  precept,  and  a  most  true  one."  The 
most  thinking  men  of  aU  ages  have  felt  a  similar  conviction  of  the  enormous  evil 
of  garrulousness.  I.  It  is  a  bin  against  thb  speaker  himself.  A  man  whose 
tongue  is  always  wagging,  is  doing  a  serious  injury  to  his  own  intellectual  and 
spiritual  nature.  1.  Great  volubility  is  a  substitute  for  thought.  The  man  mis- 
takes words  for  thoughts.  Plato  says,  "  As  empty  vessels  make  the  loudest  sound, 
so  they  that  have  the  least  wit  are  the  greatest  babblers."  2.  Great  volubility  is  a 
quietus  to  thought.  The  man  who  has  the  power  of  talking  without  thinking  will 
soon  cease  to  think ;  his  mental  faculties  fall  into  disuse  under  the  constant 
pressure  of  verbosii^s.  II.  It  is  a  sin  against  the  heaber.  Such  men — 
1.  Waste  the  precious  time  of  the  hearer.  2.  They  foster  self-deception.  The  most 
ignorant  as  well  as  the  largest  congregations  attend  the  ministry  of  the  garrulous 
preacher.  3.  They  propagate  crude  opinions  instead  of  divine  principles.  "  We 
have  two  ears  and  but  one  tongue,  that  wa  may  hear  much  and  talk  little." 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  20.  The  heart  of  the  wicked  is  little  worth. — The  heart  not  good  where 
the  practice  it  evil : — It  is  a  dangerous  opinion  that  however  a  man  may  deviate  in 
his  general  practice  from  the  habits  of  morality  and  religion,  yet  still  he  may  be 
possessed  of  a  good  heart  at  bottom.  If  we  trace  the  rise  and  progress  of  this  bane- 
ful opinion,  we  shall  find  its  origin  in  the  confusion  of  ideas  prevalent  relative  to 
the  determination  of  what  is  to  be  called  good,  and  what  evil.  This  has  given  rise 
to  so  untoward  and  irreligious  a  separation  of  the  heart  of  a  man  from  his  outward 
actions,  as  to  decide  that  the  former  may  continue  to  be  good,  while  the  latter  are 
continually  evil.  This  notion  is  supported  by  much  irreligious  literature.  There 
are  writers  who  affect  to  measure  the  worth  of  every  action  by  the  standard  of 
sensibility — an  ambiguous  word,  that  is  made  to  overleap  every  fence  of  judgment, 
to  throw  down  every  bulwark  of  rational  conviction,  and  to  exalt  itself  above  every- 
thing that  is  serious,  solid  and  virtuous.  The  heart  of  such  an  one  as  pursues 
wicked  courses,  notwithstanding  all  the  insinuations,  assertions,  and  misrepresenta- 
tions of  most  dangerous  and  deceitful  writers  of  every  kind,  "  is  of  little  worth,"  and 
yet  it  is  a  false  and  sinful  principle  to  maintain  the  contrary.  If  such  a  heart  can 
be  called  good,  then  must  virtue  and  vice  have  changed  their  names  and  qualities ; 
then  must  religion  consist  in  a  total  disregard  for  all  serious  impression  and  an  ab- 
solute f  orgetf  ulness  of  Almighty  God ;  then  did  our  blessed  Saviour  deliver  the 
admirable  precepts  of  Christianity,  to  be  corrected,  revised,  altered,  and  overturned 
by  the  maxims  of  worldly  honour.  As  youthful  folly  is  but  too  generally  the 
foundation  of  sin,  so  is  infidelity  but  too  often  its  superstructure  or  final  result ;  and 
the  heart  is  undoubtedly  the  seat  or  fruitful  parent  of  both.  The  heart,  in  a  natural 
sense,  is  the  seat  of  life  and  action.  The  heart  signifies,  in  a  moral  sense,  the  vital 
principle  of  all  good  and  evil,  of  all  that  purifies  or  defiles  a  man,  of  all  that  pro- 
cures him  blame  or  praise,  and  that  renders  him  justly  liable  to  reward  or  punish- 
ment, either  in  this  life  or  another.  "  As  a  man  thinketh  in  his  heart,  so  is  he,"  so 
are  his  actions.  Is,  then,  every  one  who  doeth  any  evil  corrupt  at  heart  ?  No  ; 
every  one  doth  evil  at  times.  But  if  any  one  should  think  he  might  do  much 
evil  without  corrupting  his  heart,  he  is  grievously  mistaken,  and  will  soon  find 
himself  so.  May  not  a  man's  actions  be  so  poised  between  good  and  evil,  that  it  is 
hard  to  determine  which  preponderates  ?  There  is  a  mixture  of  good  and  evil  in 
every  character,  but  this  is  seldom  in  such  equal  proportions  as  makes  it  difficult 
to  ascertain  whether  the  good  or  evil  preponderates.  It  is  hardly  possible  for  any 
length  of  time  to  keep  the  balance  even  betwixt  the  good  and  the  evil.    Either  good 


850  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t. 

habits  ■will  ere  long  gain  the  ascendancy  in  the  heart,  or  evil  ones.  Another 
objection  is — Do  we  not  say  there  are  no  hopes  of  reclaiming  such  an  one,  he  is 
bad  at  heart ;  and  does  not  this  seem  to  imply  that  a  man  may  have  committed  a 
great  deal  of  evil  before  he  can  be  said  to  be  bad  at  heart  ?  While  the  heart  is 
balancing  between  good  and  evil,  we  may  not  call  it  bad  ;  when  it  bends  down  and 
keeps  down  on  the  evil  side,  it  is  bad,  and  most  difficult  to  be  reclaimed  by  any 
human  means.  Yet  we  may  not  say  that  any  heart  becomes  so  bad  as  to  be  beyond 
all  convicting  and  converting  influences.  But  it  may  be  said — Is  there  not  a  degree 
of  evil  actions  where  the  heart  is  manifestly  good  ?  The  persons  hinted  at  in  this 
objection  are  those  who  have  the  best  intentions  in  the  world,  the  best  dispositions, 
but  whose  understandings  and  judgments  do  not  keep  pace  with  the  excess  of  their 
goodness.  Such  persons  do  not  always  plan  with  discretion,  or  execute  with  pru- 
dence. And  they  are  often  the  dupes  of  crafty  and  designing  persons.  A  good 
heart  is  liable  to  error.  Since,  then,  there  is  no  foundation  for  that  pernicious 
opinion  that  a  man's  heart  may  be  good  whilst  the  general  tenor  of  his  actions  is 
immoral  and  evil,  let  us  earnestly  avoid  being  misled  by  such  idle  sophistry,  such 
false  reasoning.  Let  us  not  listen  to  the  specious  allurements  of  refined  sentiment, 
or  to  the  subtleties  of  vain  philosophy.  Let  us  not  set  up  the  imaginations  of  man 
above  the  plain  doctrines  and  precepts  of  God.     {C.  Moore,  M.A.) 

Yer.  22.  The  blessing  of  the  Lord,  it  maketh  rich,  and  He  addeth  no  sorro'w 
with  it. — Riches  in  God's  blessing  : — I.  God's  blessing  gives  matekial  wealth. 
The  silver  and  the  gold  are  His,  and  He  gives  them  to  whomsoever  He  will.  He 
who  rules  in  the  highest,  reaches  down  to  the  minutest  concerns  of  this  world, 
and  controls  them  aU.  II.  God's  blessing  makes  eich.  His  blessing  is  riches, 
although  the  wealth  of  the  world  should  all  flee  away.  There  are  two  ways  of 
acquiring  wealth.  Some  people  grow  rich  without  God's  blessing,  and  some  grow 
rich  by  it.  The  god  of  this  world  gives  riches  to  his  subjects  sometimes,  when 
neither  giver  nor  getter  own  the  supremacy  of  the  Almighty;  and  God  Himself 
gives  riches  to  some  who  are  His  children.  Wherein  lies  the  difference,  since  both 
the  godly  and  the  godless  have  gotten  wealth  ?  It  lies  here  :  God  addeth  no  sorrow 
with  it,  but  that  other  lord  does.  Sorrow  is  sure  to  come  with  ill-gotten  wealth. 
It  lies  like  a  burning  spark  on  the  conscience,  which  will  not  out  all  the  rich  man's 
days.  Sometimes  the  wealth  is  scattered  by  public  judgments.  Sometimes  it 
becomes  the  source  of  family  strife.  There  are  many  arrows  of  judgment  in  the 
Almighty's  quiver.  If  you  take  God  into  your  counsels,  and  so  grow  rich,  there 
will  be  no  bitterness  infused  into  your  gains.  A  human  soul  is  so  made  that  it 
cannot  safely  have  riches  next  it.  If  they  come  into  direct  contact,  they  will  clasp 
it  too  closely ;  if  they  remain,  they  wither  the  soul's  life  away ;  and  if  they  are 
violently  wrenched  off,  they  tear  the  soul's  life  asunder.  Whether,  therefore,  you 
keep  them  or  lose  them,  if  you  clasp  them  to  your  soul  with  nothing  more  spiritual 
between,  they  will  become  its  destroyer.  Certain  tortures  that  savages  have 
invented  and  applied  to  the  human  bodies  bear  an  analogy  to  the  process  by 
which  his  money  makes  the  miser  miserable,  alike  when  it  abides  with  him  and 
when  it  departs.  They  wrap  the  body  of  the  living  victim  all  round  in  a  thick 
impermeable  plaster,  and  then  set  him  free.  If  the  covering  remains  all  the  pores 
of  the  body  are  clogged,  the  processes  of  nature  are  impeded,  and  the  life  pines 
away ;  if  it  is  torn  off,  it  tears  the  skin  with  it, — the  pain  is  sooner  over,  but  it  is 
more  severe.  Thus  the  soul  of  a  thorough  worldling  is  either  choked  by  wealth 
possessed,  or  torn  by  wealth  taken  away.  Out  of  that  dread  dilemma  he  cannot 
wriggle.  The  laws  of  God  have  shut  him  in.  The  Maker  of  the  soul  is  its  portion. 
He  made  it  for  Himself.  When  riches  are  clasped  closest  to  the  heart,  He  is  slighted 
and  dishonoured.  If  you  be  Christians,  if  you  have  put  on  Christ,  great  riches 
may  come  and  go ;  you  will  not  be  clogged  while  you  have  them  ;  you  will  not  be 
naked  when  they  leave.  But  if  the  wealth  be  the  first  and  inner  wrapping  of  the 
soul,  how  shall  that  soul  ever  get  into  contact  with  the  Saviour,  that  life  from  its 
fountain  may  flow  into  the  dead  ?  It  is  easy  for  a  Christian  to  be  rich,  but  hard 
for  a  rich  man  to  become  a  Christian.  {W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  New  hopes  for  a  new 
year  : — Whatever  may  be  your  ideas  of  your  own  powers  and  resources — whatever 
may  be  the  confidence  that  you  put  in  man,  or  the  trust  that  you  repose  in  princes 
— you  may  be  quite  sure  of  this,  that  it  is  only  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  that 
maketh  rich,  and  that  addeth  no  sorrow.  The  blessings  of  God  are  not  marred  or 
mixed  with  evil.  Paraphrase  the  text  thus — "All  that  God  gives  to  do  us  good 
really  secures  our  goo:l  without  any  admixture  of  evil."     Two  facts  in  connection 


CHAP.  X.]  PROVERBS.  251 

with  the  Divine  blessing.  I.  It  enbiches.  Some  Divine  gifts  are  granted  in  dis- 
pleasure. It  is  possible  to  connect  sorrow  with  that  which  God  intends  ultimately 
to  prove  a  blessing.  Sometimes  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  is  material  and  temporal 
wealth,  as  in  the  case  of  Abraham  and  of  Job.  Much  wealth  is,  alas  !  gotten  by 
vanity  and  dishonesty — by  treachery  and  falsehood  and  over-reaching,  and  by  that 
indefinable  sin,  but  that  exceedingly  common  sin,  covetousness.  Sorrow  was  added 
in  the  case  of  Lot's  wealth  ;  but  then  Lot  added  the  sorrow.  There  was  no  sorrow 
with  the  portion  of  Abraham.  More  frequently  the  blessing  is  not  wealth,  but 
food  convenient  for  us.  I  know  the  great  number  of  the  poor,  but  there  is  a  far 
greater  number  of  persons  not  poor.  Our  attention  is  often  directed  to  the  poverty 
which  exists,  but  I  think  we  do  not  sufficiently  look  at  the  competency  which  exists. 
Where  poverty  is  permitted,  how  often  do  you  see  godliness  with  contentment. 
You  cannot  always  say  of  riches,  "  Godliness  with  riches  is  great  gain."  The 
blessing  of  the  Lord  turns  every  possession  into  wealth.  Children,  when  blessed 
by  God,  are  a  heritage  from  the  Lord.  Friends,  when  blessed  by  God,  are  as  so 
many  ministers  and  servants  and  priests  of  God  to  us.  Money,  when  blessed  by 
God,  instead  of  being  the  root  of  all  evil,  is  the  source  and  means  of  much  good. 
Honour  and  reputation,  when  blessed  by  God,  instead  of  being  traps  and  snares 
and  stumbling  blocks,  are  an  exalted  position  upon  which  light  may  shine  for  the 
good  of  others,  and  the  glory  of  our  Father  in  heaven.  Some  things  wrapped  up 
in  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  are  of  priceless  value.  He  who  has  the  blessing  of 
salvation  is  rich  indeed.  To  acquire  good  things  is  to  prevent  all  misgiving  as  to 
the  right  of  possession.  Temporal  prosperity,  if  chosen  for  you  by  your  Father  in 
heaven,  is  not  only  a  condition  in  which  you  may  lawfully  be  found,  but  one  in 
which  you  may  feel  secure  and  safe.  In  this  state  there  is  no  suspicion  as  to  the 
power  of  keeping  what  we  have,  and  there  is  no  alloy  in  the  use  or  enjoyment. 
Providence  over  both  material  and  spiritual  things  is  fully  co-operative  with  a  man 
whose  position  is  created  by  the  blessing  of  the  Lord.  He  can  look  his  fellow-men 
in  the  face  concerning  his  prosperity — even  his  temporrJ  prosperity — and  can 
speak  of  all  he  has  without  bringing  a  blush  upon  his  cheek.  Then  try  to  get 
God's  blessing  upon  everything — body,  soul,  and  spirit ;  upon  the  husband,  upon 
the  wife,  and  upon  the  children,  upon  your  means  of  livelihood,  upon  your 
property,  upon  your  friendships  and  connections,  and  upon  all  your  pursuits. 
{Samiiel  Martin.) 

Ver.  23.  It  is  as  sport  to  a  fool  to  do  mischief. — Moral  phases  of  life  : — Human 
life  has  its  spiritual  and  moral  as  well  as  its  material  and  intellectual  side.  Five 
things  in  these  verses  of  great  moral  significance.  I.  Wealth  making  happy. 
Great  temporal  possessions  are  often  the  occasion  of  mental  suffering.  They 
awaken  in  the  mind  harassing  cares,  painful  anxieties,  and  distressing  suspicions. 
Wealth  reached  in  harmony  with  the  will  of  God,  and  employed  in  the  service  of 
benevolence  and  truth,  has  no  sorrow,  but  tends  to  happiness  in  many  ways. 
II.  Mischief  done  in  spoet.  There  is  an  innocent  sport.  The  sport  meant  here 
is  that  which  does  injury  to  the  reputation,  the  property,  the  peace,  the  comforts  of 
others.  Sport  that  turns  the  serious  into  ridicule,  that  makes  merry  in  deeds  of 
nefarious  wickedness.  It  is  the  fool  that  makes  a  mock  at  sin ;  to  the  wise  man 
sin  is  too  grave  a  matter  to  laugh  at.  III.  Justice  done  to  all.  The  anticipation 
of  the  righteous,  and  the  forebodings  of  the  wicked,  shall  both  one  day  be  realised. 
There  is  at  times  in  every  guilty  conscience  a  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment. 
There  is,  on  the  other  hand,  in  every  godly  soul  a  desire  for  a  higher  spiritual  good. 
IV.  Indolence  causing  vexation.  Vinegar  sets  the  teeth  on  edge,  and  smoke  gives 
pain  to  the  eyes.  Both  irritate  and  annoy,  so  an  indolent  messenger  provokes  hig 
master.  Laziness  is  vexatious.  V.  Charactek  revealed  in  its  issues.  Gccd 
character  prolongs  life,  and  yields  joy.  The  character  of  the  wicked  abbreviates 
life,  and  ends  in  ruin.  How  full  is  the  Bible  of  human  life !  God  has  filled  it 
with  humanity  in  order  that  it  might  interest  men,  and  improve  them.     {Homilist.) 

Ver.  24.  The  fear  of  the  wicked,  it  sball  come  upon  him;  but  the  desire  of  the 
righteous  shall  be  granted. — A  contrast : — Scripture  is  a  book  full  of  the  strongest 
contrasts.  As  in  the  work  of  an  eminent  painter,  it  contains  light  and  shade. 
I.  Who  are  the  wicked  ?  We  must  not  confine  our  ideas  to  the  notoriously 
profligate.  As  long  as  a  man  is  uncalled  of  God,  and  unregenerate,  he  is  a 
stranger  to  all  that  is  truly  spiritual,  and  knows  not  the  true  nature  of  sin. 
Malachi  describes  the  righteous  thus,  "  He  serveth  God."    He  describes  the  \vicl;ed 


852  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [0Hi».  x. 

thus,  "  He  serveth  Him  not."  The  wicked  servant  "  hid  his  Lord's  talent  in  the 
earth."  In  the  description  of  the  sheep  and  goats,  there  is  no  mark  of  profligacy 
fixed  on  the  goats.  The  great  besetting  sin  of  the  unregenerate  man  is  pride. 
Neglect  of  Christ,  contempt  of  Christ,  impenitence,  carnality,  and  worldliness,  God 
declares  to  be  the  great  condemning  sin  of  the  world.  Whoever  and  whatever  the 
wicked  may  be,  they  must  have  their  fear.  II.  The  righteous  and  theib  desibe. 
Who  are  the  righteous?  They  are  the  justified.  They  are  the  sanctified.  A  man 
trusting  to  his  own  righteousness  cannot  be  a  holy  man.  The  very  first  elements 
of  holiness  are  wanting  in  him — humiliation  before  God,  real  acquaintance  with 
God,  real  desire  after  God.  It  is  a  great  delusion  to  imagine  that  a  justified  soul 
is  not  also  sanctified.  The  activity  of  spiritual  life  shows  itself  in  spiritual  desire. 
It  wants  pardon,  peace,  righteousness,  happiness.  What  encouragement  does  the 
text  give  to  these  desires  ?  There  is  no  limit,  no  exception,  no  peradventure.  "  It 
shall  be  granted."  (J.  Harrington  Evans,  M.A.)  The  desire  of  the  righteous 
granted : — I.  Who  is  the  righteous  man  ?  1.  He  whom  God  counts  so.  2.  He 
whom  God  makes  so,  by  possessing  him  with  a  principle  of  righteousness.  3.  He 
who  is  practically  righteous.  II.  What  are  the  desires  of  the  righteous  man  ? 
1.  Communion  with  God.  2.  Enjoyment  of  holy  ordinances.  3.  The  personal 
presence  of  the  Lord  (Phil.  i.  23).  III.  What  is  meant  by  granting  these 
DESIRES  ?  (Psa.  cxlv.  19  ;  ixxvii.  4  ;  ixi.  2.)  The  desires  of  God  and  the  righteous 
agree  together.  They  are  the  life  of  all  their  prayers,  and  God  delights  in  these. 
{John  Bunyan.)  The  desire  of  the  righteous  : — Because  it  is  a  righteous  desire  it 
is  safe  for  God  to  grant  it.  It  would  be  neither  good  for  the  man  himself,  nor  for 
society  at  large,  that  such  a  promise  should  be  made  to  the  unrighteous.  Let  us 
keep  the  Lord's  commands,  and  He  will  rightfully  have  respect  to  our  desires. 
When  righteous  men  are  left  to  desire  unrighteous  desires,  they  will  not  be  granted 
to  them.  But  then  these  are  not  their  real  desires ;  they  are  their  wanderings  or 
blunders  ;  and  it  is  well  that  they  should  be  refused.  Their  gracious  desires  shall 
come  before  the  Lord,  and  He  will  not  say  them  nay.  Does  the  Lord  deny  us  our 
requests  for  a  time  ?  Let  the  promise  for  to-day  encourage  us  to  ask  again.  Has 
He  denied  us  altogether  ?  We  will  thank  Him  still,  for  it  always  was  our  desire 
that  He  should  deny  us  if  He  judged  a  denial  to  be  best.  As  to  some  things,  we 
ask  very  boldly.  Our  chief  desires  are  for  holiness,  usefulness,  likeness  to  Christ, 
preparedness  for  heaven.  These  are  the  desires  of  grace  rather  than  of  nature — 
the  desires  of  the  righteous  man  rather  than  of  the  mere  man.  God  will  not  stint 
us  in  these  things,  but  will  do  for  us  exceeding  abundantly.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Fears  realised  and  hopes  fulfilled : — The  difference  between  the  righteous  and  the 
wicked  lies  not  in  the  existence  of  these  emotions  of  fear  and  hope  now,  but  in 
their  issue  at  last.  In  each  character  there  are  the  same  two  emotions  now ;  in 
each,  at  the  final  reckoning,  one  of  these  emotions  will  be  realised  and  the  other 
disappointed.  It  is  not  difficult  to  ascertain  what  are  the  chief  fears  and  desires  of 
a  wicked  man.  Cleaving  to  his  sins,  he  is  in  enmity  against  God.  The  terrors  of 
the  Lord  glance  from  time  to  time  like  lightning  in  his  conscience.  He  fears  the 
wrath  of  God,  and  the  punishment  of  sin.  What  does  he  desire  or  hope?  His 
desire  for  time  is  the  indulgence  of  his  appetites;  his  desire  for  eternity  is  that 
there  should  be  no  God,  or  at  least,  that  He  should  not  be  just  to  mark  iniquity. 
What  becomes  of  the  fears  of  the  righteous  ?  What  becomes  of  the  darkness 
when  the  daylight  shines?  When  Christ  comes,  His  coming  shall  be  morning. 
The  saints  are  subject  to  fears.  The  promise  to  believers  is  not  that  they  shall 
never  fear  ;  it  is  that  the  thing  feared  will  never  come  upon  them.  Their  desire  is 
that  they  may  be  pardoned  through  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  renewed  after  His 
image.  When  these  are  the  desires  of  our  souls,  how  safe  we  are !  {W.  Amot,  D.D.) 
Look  to  the  end:  a  contrast: — The  wisest  saying  of  a  certain  heathen  philosopher 
was,  **Look  to  the  end."  God  asks,  "What  will  ye  do  in  the  end?"  We  say, 
"  All  is  well  that  ends  well,"  which  is  true  if  it  ends  everlasting  well.  The  text 
points  to  the  issue,  the  upshot,  the  end,  of  two  different  classes  of  men — the 
wicked  and  the  righteous ;  it  indicates  as  well  as  expresses  the  "  end  of  the 
wicked " — his  hopes  perish,  his  fears  come  upon  him ;  the  "  end  of  the 
righteous" — his  fears  are  dispelled,  his  hopes  are  consummated  and  realised. 
What  a  contrast  I  If  the  man  hoped  for  nothing  beyond  success,  prosperity,  long 
life,  fortune,  fame,  distinction,  position,  rank,  renown,  pleasure ;  when  he  has  got 
them  he  hath  his  reward,  what  he  sought,  and  what  he  desired.  And  now  what 
has  he  left  ?  "  Vanity  d(  vanities,"  if  all  ends  here.  Often  such  a  man's  hope 
comes  to  an  end  with  reference  to  this  world  only.    They  try  to  make  hope  for 


OBAj.x.]  PROVEBBS.  «» 

themselTes ;  bat  self-made  hopes  are  but  vain  hopes.  And  sach  »  man's  fears  vn 
realised  and  accomplished.  The  boldest,  most  hardened,  most  sensual  men,  hare 
their  fears.  What  is  a  man's  fear,  when  at  last  it  comes  upon  a  man?  And  there 
is  the  contrast  in  both  these  respects.  The  fears  of  the  righteous  shall  all  Tanish. 
Righteous  men  cannot  but  have  fears,  and  thej  are  full  of  fears.  The  reward  of 
his  fears  is,  that  they  shall  not  come  upon  him.  The  desires  of  the  righteous  shall 
be  granted.  They  may  be,  because  they  are  kept  in  harmony  with  God's  will,  and 
the  righteous  stand  in  God's  favour .    {H.  Stowell,  M.A.) 

Ver.  27.  The  fear  of  the  Lord  prolongeth  days. — Long  life  apromtted  ble$$ing:— 
We  may  wish  for  one  another  long  life.  Every  one  wishes  it  for  himself.  It  is  a 
mistake  to  regard  this  wish  as  an  infirmity.  Strong  love  of  life  is  not  necessarily 
sinful.  1.  Long  life  is  distinctly  promised  in  Scripture  as  a  blessing  to  God'a 
people,  both  in  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.  2.  See  why  long  life  is  a  blessmg. 
Because  God  rewards  the  good  works  of  His  people.  He  enables  them  to  do  good 
works,  and  rewards  their  work.  The  reward  is  not  "salvation"  but  "glory." 
Life,  like  health,  intellect,  influence,  is  a  talent,  lent  to  us  for  our  Master's  service 
and  our  own  profit ;  the  greater  the  loan  the  larger  the  profit ;  the  longer  it  is  in 
trust,  the  fuller  the  results.  There  are  difiBculties  in  the  way  of  accepting  this 
truth.  One  is  the  seemingly  contradictory  language  of  Scripture  on  the  subject. 
Some  passages  speak  of  early  departure  as  a  blessing.  This  is  true  only  in  special 
cases.  And  we  must  distinguish  between  things  good  and  desirable  in  them- 
selves, and  things  which  become  so  by  God's  appointment.  Another  objection  ig 
this— Admitting  that  long  life  is  a  blessing,  and  a  promised  blessing,  still  we  do  not 
see  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise.  We  see  young  saints  departing,  and  old  sinners 
remaining.  In  reply  it  may  be  urged  that,  if  we  could  take  the  average  of  life,  we 
should  find  it  to  be  in  favour  of  godly  men.  And  the  exceptions  to  the  rule  are 
more  apparent  than  real.  In  many  cases  we  see  only  the  pious  death,  we  are  not 
acquainted  with  the  whole  previous  life.  It  may  be  that  the  good  man,  whose 
early  death  so  distresses  and  perplexes  us,  has,  in  early  life,  deserved  that  his  days 
should  have  been  thus  shortened.  And  the  cases  of  early  death  are  simply 
exceptions  to  a  generally  working  law.  3.  What  practical  bearing  shall  this  truth 
have  upon  our  lives?  We  have  rescued  this  text  from  the  strained  interpretation 
of  those  who  do  not  look  on  long  life  as  m  itself  a  blessing.  We  have  learned  the 
true  meaning  and  use  of  this  longing  after  life  which  all  men  feel.  It  is  no  small 
gain  to  our  peace  of  mind,  when  we  can  see  that  this  love  of  life  is  not  always  an 
infirmity  or  a  sin,  but  that  the  Christian  may  lawfully  desire  long  life,  as  a  longer 
time  of  working  and  suffering  for  Christ.  And  such  a  lawful  desire  for  long  life 
gives  the  strongest  motive  for  rightly  using  life  as  it  passes.  4.  The  tendency  of 
vice  is  to  shorten  men's  days.  The  text  implies  that,  as  life  is  a  talent  given  to  be 
rightly  used,  so,  if  abused,  it  is  taken  away  from  the  possessor.  We  desire  a 
longer  life  for  the  ungodly  and  careless,  because  we  know  that  life  is  an  oppor- 
tunity for  salvation;  we  would  give  the  wicked  further  chance  of  repentance. 
(Abp.  W.  C.  Magee.)  The  fear  of  the  Lord  prolongeth  dayt  .-—There  is  no  doubt 
about  it.  The  fear  of  the  Lord  leads  to  virtuous  habits,  and  these  prevent  that 
waste  of  life  which  comes  of  sin  and  vice.  The  holy  rest  which  springs  out  of 
faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  also  greatly  helps  a  man  when  he  is  ill.  Every  physician 
rejoices  to  have  a  patient  whose  mind  is  fully  at  ease.  Worry  kills,  but  confidence 
in  God  is  like  healing  medicine.  We  have  therefore  all  the  arrangements  for  long 
life,  and  if  it  be  really  for  our  good,  we  shall  see  a  good  old  age,  and  come  to  our 
graves  as  shocks  of  corn  in  their  season.  Let  us  not  be  overcome  with  sudden  expec- 
tation  of  death  the  moment  we  have  a  finger-ache,  but  let  us  rather  expect  that  we 
may  have  to  work  on  through  a  considerable  length  of  days.  And  what  if  we 
should  soon  be  called  to  the  higher  sphere?  Certainly  there  would  be  nothing  to 
deplore  in  such  a  summons,  but  everything  to  rejoice  in.  Living  or  dying  we  are 
the  Lord's.  If  we  live,  Jesus  will  be  with  us ;  if  we  die,  we  shall  be  with  Jesus. 
The  truest  lengthening  of  life  is  to  live  while  we  live,  wasting  no  time,  but  using 
every  hour  for  the  highest  ends.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  28.  The  hope  of  the  righteous  shaU  he  gladness.— On  hopet  and  disap. 
pointments  —I.  We  are  not  to  expect  permanence  in  oub  acquisitions.  On  the 
lot  of  some  men  Providence  is  pleased  to  bestow  a  longer  continuance  of  prosperity 
than  on  that  of  others.  But  as  the  term  of  that  continuance  is  hidden  from  us,  all 
flattering  and  confident  expectations  are  without  foundation.     Human  life  never 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  X. 


stands  still  for  any  long  time.  It  is  by  no  means  a  fixed  and  steady  object,  like  a 
mountain  or  rock.  Nor  is  it  a  still,  smooth  stream  with  the  same  constant  tenor. 
Amid  such  vicissitudes  of  time  and  life,  who  has  any  title  to  reckon  upon  the 
future?  To  faults  all  are  subject,  to  troubles  all  are  exposed.  To  look  for 
entire  exemption  from  faults  or  troubles  is  to  court  disappointment.  We  must  not, 
however,  sadden  the  present  hour  by  dwelling  on  the  thoughts  of  future  disappoint- 
ment. What  is  given  us,  let  us  cheerfully  enjoy,  and  render  thanks  to  Him  who 
bestows  it.  Virtue,  conjoined  with  prudence,  may  reasonably  afford  the  prospect 
of  good  days  to  come.  II.  We  ake  not  to  expect,  fhom  oub  intekcouese  with 
OTHERS,  ALL  THAT  SATISFACTION  WHICH  WE  FONDLY  WISH.  What  the  individual  either 
enjoys  or  suffers  by  himself,  exhibits  only  an  imperfect  view  of  his  condition.  In 
the  present  state  of  human  affairs  we  are  closely  interwoven  with  one  another. 
These  associations  open  a  field  within  which  our  wishes  and  expectations  find  an 
ample  range.  Among  persons  of  all  characters  and  descriptions  many  an  expec- 
tation must  perish,  and  many  a  disappointment  be  endured.  All  are  jealous  of 
the  high  pretensions  of  others.  Hence  the  endless  mortifications  which  the  vain 
and  self-conceited  suffer.  Hence  the  spleen  and  resentment  which  is  so  often 
breaking  forth,  disturbing  the  peace  of  society  and  involving  it  in  crimes  and 
miseries.  Were  expectations  more  moderate  they  would  be  more  favourably 
received.  Did  we  more  rarely  attempt  to  push  ourselves  into  notice  the  world 
would  more  readily  allow  us,  nay,  sometimes  assist  us  to  come  forward.  In  the 
closer  connections  which  men  form  of  intimate  friendship  and  domestic  life  there 
is  still  more  reason  for  due  moderation  in  our  expectations  and  hopes.  For  the 
nearer  that  men  approach  to  each  other,  the  more  numerous  the  points  of  contact 
are  in  which  they  touch,  the  greater  indeed  will  be  the  pleasure  of  perfect  symphony 
and  agreements  of  feelings ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  if  any  harsh  and  repulsive 
sensations  take  place,  the  more  grating  and  pungent  will  be  the  pain.  From 
trifling  misunderstandings,  arising  from  the  most  frivolous  causes,  spring  much  of 
the  misery  of   social  and  domestic  life.     IH.  We  are  not  to  expect  constant 

GRATITUDE  FROM  THOSE  WHOM   WE  HAVE    MOST    OBLIGED   AND    SERVED.       Gratcful  SeUSa- 

tions  for  favours  received  are  very  generally  felt.  When  no  strong  passions 
counteract  these  sensations,  grateful  returns  are  generally  intended,  and  often  are 
actually  made.  But  then  our  expectations  of  proper  returns  must  be  kept  within 
moderate  bounds.  Many  circumstances,  it  is  to  be  remembered,  tend  to  cool  the 
grateful  emotion.  Time  always  deadens  the  memory  of  benefits.  As  benefits 
conferred  are  sometimes  underrated  by  those  who  receive  them,  they  are  sometimes 
overvalued  by  those  who  confer  them.  On  persons  of  light  and  careless  minds  no 
moral  sentiment  makes  any  deep  impression.  With  the  proud  spirit,  which  claims 
everything  as  its  due,  gratitude  is  in  a  great  measure  incompatible.     On  the  other 

hand IV.  Whatever  course  the  affairs  op  the  world  take,  the  good  man  may 

JUSTLY  hope  to  ENJOY  PEACE  OF  MIND.  To  the  sceptic  and  the  profligate  this  will  be 
held  as  a  very  inconsiderable  object  of  expectation  and  hope.  But  surely  the 
peace  of  an  approving  conscience  is  one  of  the  chief  ingredients  of  human 
happiness,  if  it  be  tempered  with  true  humiUty,  and  regulated  by  Christian  faith ! 
He,  whose  study  it  is  to  preserve  a  conscience  void  of  offence  towards  God  and 
man,  will  have,  in  every  state  of  fortune,  a  ground  of  hope  which  may  justly  be 
denominated    gladness.     He   has  always    somewhat    to    rest   upon  for   comfort. 

V.  A  GOOD  MAN  HAS  GROUND  TO  EXPECT  THAT  ANY  EXTERNAL  CONDITION  INTO  WHICH,  IN 
THE  COURSE  OF  HUMAN  AFFAIRS,  HE  MAY  PASS,  SHALL,  BY  MEANS  OF  VIRTUE  AND  WISD03I, 
BE    RENDERED,    IF    NOT    PERFECTLY    AGREEABLE,    YET    TOLERABLY    EASY    TO    HIM.       The 

inequality  of  real  happiness  is  not  to  be  measured  by  the  inequality  of  outward 
estate.  The  wise  and  good  man  hopes  to  find,  or  make,  his  state  tolorable  to 
himself.  In  some  corner  of  our  lot  there  are  always  comforts  that  may  be  found. 
And  the  spirit  of  man  will  long  sustain  his  infirmities.     VI.  We  have  ground  to 

EXPECT,  FROM  THE  ORDINARY  COURSE  OF  HUMAN  AFFAIRS,  THAT  IF  WE  PERSEVERE  IN 
studying    to    do    OUR   DUTY  TOWARDS  GoD  AND  MAN,  WE  SHALL  MEET  WITH  THE  ESTEEM, 

THE  LOVE,  AND  CONFIDENCE  OF  THOSE  WHO  ARE  AROUND  US.  In  regard  to  moral 
qualifications  the  world  is  ready  to  do  justice  to  character.  No  man  is  hurt  by 
hearing  his  neighbour  esteemed  a  worthy  and  honourable  man.  The  basis  of  all 
lasting  reputation  is  laid  in  moral  worth.  Great  parts  and  endowments  may 
sparkle  for  a  while  in  the  public  eye.  Candour  and  fairness  never  fail  to  attract 
esteem  and  trust.  The  world  commonly  judges  soundly  in  the  end.  The  good 
man  is  likely  to  possess  many  friends  and  well-wishers,  and  to  have  few  enemies. 
This  subject,  in  its  treatment,  has  been  limited  to  what  the  righteous  man  has  to 


CHAP.  X.]  PROVERBS.  255 

hope  for  in  the  ordinary  course  of  the  world.  But  it  has  to  be  added  that  there  is 
a  hope  laid  up  for  him  in  heaven.  He  knows  that  "  in  due  season  he  shall  reap  if 
he  faint  not."  For  here,  or  yonder,  his  hope  is  perpetual  gladness.  [Hugh  Blair, 
jD.D.)  The  hope  of  the  righteous: — The  righteous  here  meant  are  those  right 
with  God.  I.  Its  foundation  is  good  :  "  The  righteous  is  an  everlasting  founda- 
tion "  (ver.  25),  therefore  not  swept  away,  as  too  often  the  hopes  of  the  wicked. 
II.  "  The  eighteous  shall  never  be  moved  "  (ver.  30).  Confidence  in  this  brings 
gladness  to  the  Christian's  heart.  III.  No  removal  bt  death  from  God.  The 
character  they  bear  is  a  security  against  death.  "  Righteousness  delivereth  from 
death"  (ver.  2).  IV.  The  fact  that  the  righteous  have  an  almighty  Keeper 
AND  Provider  makes  their  hope  one  of  gladness.  "  The  Lord  wiU  not  suffer  the 
soul  of  the  righteous  to  famish  "  (ver.  3).  V.  Thus  we  see  "  The  labour  of  the 
righteous  tendeth  to  life  "  (ver.  16).  Careful,  thoughtful,  systematic  in 
whatever  employment  he  chooses,  he  so  works  that  the  labour  itself  promotes  life. 
VI.  Thus  another  reason  why  the  hope  of  the  righteous  is  gladness  is  the  assurance: 
*'  The  desire  of  the  righteous  shall  be  granted."  VII.  Thus  another  reason 
for  his  gladness :  "  The  lips  of  the  righteous  feed  mant  "  (ver.  21).  The 
righteous  man,  being  a  student  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  treasuring  His  precepts  in 
the  heart,  is  able  to  employ  his  lips  in  feeding  many.  VIII.  In  the  use  or  his  lips 
TO  bless  others  another  reason  is  found  for  his  gladness  :  "  The  lips  of  the 
righteous  know  what  is  acceptable  "  (ver.  32).  The  right  words  are  spoken  to  the 
helpfulness  of  others  and  to  the  glory  of  God.  IX.  A  final  reason  for  the  hope  of 
the  righteous  bringing  gladness  is  found  in  that  his  resources  are  unfailing  : 
"  The  mouth  of  the  righteous  man  is  a  well  of  life  "  (ver.  11).  He  has  in  himself 
a  living  well,  and  a  well  as  drawn  from  is  life-giving.  Such  is  the  assurance  of  the 
Master :  "  The  words  that  I  speak  unto  you,  they  are  spirit,  and  they  are  life  " 
(John  vi.  63).  (G.  H.  Morss.)  The  hope  of  the  righteous  best : — The  expecta- 
tion of  the  man  who  has  his  portion  in  this  life  is  continually  deteriorating ;  for 
every  hour  brings  him  nearer  to  the  loss  of  all  his  treasures.  But  "  the  good  hope 
through  grace  "  is  always  approaching  its  realities,  and  therefore  grows  with  the 
lapse  of  time  more  valuable  and  more  lively.  As  it  is  spiritual  in  its  quality, 
and  heavenly  in  its  object,  it  does  not  depend  on  outward  things,  and  is  not  affected 
with  the  decays  of  nature.  Like  the  Glastonbury  thorn,  it  blossoms  in  the  depth 
of  winter.  The  hope  of  the  one  is  a  treasure  out  at  interest  which  is  continually 
augmenting;  that  of  the  other  resembles  stock,  the  capital  of  which  has  been 
continually  invaded,  until  the  last  pound  is  ready  to  be  consumed.  {H.  G.  Salter.) 
The  hopes  of  the  righteous,  and  of  the  wicked  : — No  subject  is  of  so  much  importance 
to  man  as  religion.  On  no  subject  is  it  so  desirable  that  right  views  should  be 
possessed.  Yet  in  religion  to  what  extremes  of  formalism  and  folly,  absurdity  and 
asceticism,  men  proceed.  Multitudes  identify  religion  with  a  tiresome  routine  of 
forms  and  ceremonies.  And  many  build  their  hopes  of  heaven  on  the  groundwork 
of  austerities.  In  one  direction  we  see  men  placing  religion  in  little  more  than  a 
name,  regardless  of  all  the  duties  and  dispositions  and  devotions  of  which  it 
consists.  In  another  direction  our  attention  is  arrested  by  people  who  are  so 
ascetic  as  to  think  it  sinful  to  smile.  The  text  contains  a  powerful  corrective  of  all 
those  false  impressions  of  religion  which  moody  and  soured  examples  of  it  may 
have  produced.  I.  The  character  depicted.  The  righteous.  Not  one  who 
fulfils  every  requirement  of  God's  law  ;  nor  one  strictly  honest  in  dealing  with  his 
fellow-men.  If  sinful  man  is  to  be  righteous  before  his  Maker,  he  must  be  so — ■ 
1.  By  Divine  imputation.  2.  By  spiritual  renovation.  3.  By  habitual  practice. 
We  demand  a  lustrous  manifestation  of  probity  as  well  as  piety.  Good  works  are 
as  essential  to  salvation  as  a  sound  creed  and  a  changed  heart.  II.  The  Divine 
possession  of  this  character.  We  are  justified  in  describing  this  hope  as  Divine, 
because — 1.  It  has  a  Divine  Author.  2.  A  Divine  foundation.  3.  A  Divine 
tendency.  IH.  The  blessed  fruit  of  this  DivurE  possession.  Gladness.  IV.  The 
AWFUL  contrast  WHICH  THE  TEXT  PRESENTS.  A  contiast  In  charactcr,  and  in 
destiny.     (.E.  Dewhirst.) 

Ver.  29.  The  way  of  the  Lord  is  strength  to  the  upright. — The  two-fold 
aspect  of  the  Divine  working : — The  words  "  shall  be  "  in  the  second  clause  are 
supplementary  and  unnecessary.  They  destroy  the  completeness  of  the  antithesis 
between  the  two  halves  of  the  verse.  It  is  the  same  way  which  is  strength  to  one  man 
and  ruin  to  another,  and  the  moral  nature  of  the  man  determines  which  it  shall  be 
to  him.    I.  Put  clearly  the  meaning  and  bearing  of  these  words.    "  The  way  of 


S56  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  X. 

the  Lord  "  means  religion,  considered  as  the  way  in  which  God  desires  a  man  to 
walk.  Bat  here  it  means  the  road  in  which  Ood  walks  Himself,  the  solemn  foot- 
steps of  God  through  creation,  providence  and  history.  To  many  modem  thinkers 
the  whole  drift  and  tendency  of  human  affairs  affords  no  sign  of  a  person  directing 
these.  This  ancient  teacher  had  keener  ears.  But  not  only  does  the  expression 
point  to  the  operation  of  a  personal  Divine  will  in  human  affairs,  but  it  conceives 
of  that  operation  as  one,  a  uniform  and  consistent  whole.  It  is  "  the  way."  It  is 
a  grand  unity.  A  man  can  know  about  this  way,  though  it  may  be  hard  to  under- 
stand. It  is  all  on  the  side  of  the  good ;  it  is  all  against  every  form  of  evil. 
God's  actions  do  not  change,  but  a  man's  character  determines  which  aspect  of 
them  he  sees,  and  has  to  experience.  The  word  "  strength  "  is  used  in  a  somewhat 
archaic  signification,  that  of  a  "  stronghold."  Hebrew  is  "fortress."  This  "  way 
of  the  Lord"  is  like  a  castle  for  the  shelter  of  the  shelterless  good  man;  but  a  castle 
is  a  frowning  menace  to  besiegers  or  enemies.  II.  Illustrate  and  applt  the 
PRINCIPLES  TAUGHT  HERE.  1.  The  Order  of  the  universe  is  such  that  righteousness 
is  life,  and  sin  is  death.  On  the  whole,  things  do  work  so  that  goodness  is  blessed- 
ness, and  badness  is  ruin.  What  modem  phraseology  calls  "  laws  of  nature,"  the 
Bible  calls  "the  way  of  the  Lord,"  and  the  manner  in  which  these  help  a  man  who 
conforms  to  them,  and  hurt  or  kill  him  if  he  does  not,  is  an  illustration  on  a  lower 
level  of  the  principle  of  our  text.  2.  In  our  physical  life,  as  a  rule,  virtue  makes 
strength,  sin  brings  punishment.  3.  In  higher  regions,  on  the  whole,  goodness 
makes  blessedness,  and  evil  brings  ruin.  All  the  power  of  God's  universe,  and  all 
the  tenderness  of  God's  heart,  are  on  the  side  of  the  man  who  does  right.  All . 
things  serve  the  soul  that  serves  God,  and  all  war  against  him  who  wars  against 
his  Maker.  4.  This  will  be  made  more  evident  in  the  future.  It  is  possible  that 
the  one  manifestation  of  God  in  a  future  life  may  be  in  substance  the  same,  and 
yet  that  it  may  produce  opposite  effects  upon  oppositely  disposed  souls.  People 
speak  of  rewards  and  punishments  as  if  they  were  given  and  inflicted  by  simple 
Divine  volition,  and  did  not  stand  in  any  necessary  connection  with  holiness  on  the 
one  hand,  or  with  sin  on  the  other.  5.  The  very  crown  of  the  ways  of  God,  the 
work  of  Christ,  and  the  record  of  it  in  the  gospel,  have  most  eminently  this  double 
aspect.  God  meant  nothing  but  salvation  for  the  whole  world  when  He  sent  us 
this  gospel.  We  may  make  of  that  gospel  a  "  stone  of  stumbling  and  a  rock  of 
offence."     (J.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Ver.  81.  The  mouth  of  the  Just  bringreth  forth  wiBiom.— Piety  a  peculiar  orna- 
ment to  the  aged  : — ^I.  Who  mat  properly  be  called  old  people  ?  Old  and  young 
are  relative  terms,  and  admit  of  different  significations.  Children  always  think 
their  parents  are  old.  They  are  old  who  have  grey  hairs  here  and  there  upon 
them.  The  distinction  in  ages  has  always  been  considered  as  an  important  dis- 
tinction by  all  mankind,  who  have  marked  it  by  some  peculiar  symptoms  or  visible 
effects  which  the  different  periods  of  life  produce  on  the  body  or  on  the  mind.  God 
leaves  it  to  every  individual  to  judge  for  himself  when  the  precepts  to  the  young 
bind  him,  and  when  the  precepts  to  the  old  bind  him.  Every  one  should  judge 
justly.  II.  What  is  to  be  understood  bt  the  piety  of  old  people  ?  It  is  called 
their  righteousness.  Righteousness  is  often  used  in  Scripture  to  denote  holiness 
in  heart  and  life.  Righteousness  is  true  holiness,  which  is  the  moral  excellence  of 
all  moral  beings,  and  the  essence  of  all  vital  piety  in  mankind.  The  piety  of  old 
people  implies  two  things.  1.  Their  cordial  belief  in  the  great  truths  of  the  gospel. 
All  true  piety  is  founded  on  the  knowledge,  the  belief,  and  the  love  of  the  great  and 
peculiar  truths  of  the  gospel.  2.  The  practice  of  the  duties,  as  well  as  the  belief  of 
the  doctrines,  of  the  gospel.  It  is  generally  true  that  aged  Christians  have  lived  a 
long  time  in  the  way  of  holiness  and  obedience  to  the  Divine  commands.  The 
promises  of  the  gospel  are  expressly  made  to  those  who  overcome,  to  those  who 
continue  in  well-doing,  and  to  those  who  endure  unto  the  end.  Internal  piety 
always  produces  external  obedience  to  the  precepts  of  the  gospel.  Though  the 
oldest  Christians  never  arrive  at  sinless  perfection  in  this  life,  yet  they  generally 
grow  in  grace  as  they  grow  in  years.  Though  the  piety  of  the  young  and  that  of 
the  old  are  essentially  alike,  yet  the  piety  of  the  aged  has  a  specific  and  superior 
excellence.  III.  In  what  respects  is  the  piett  or  the  aged  thehi  peculiar 
ORNAMENT  ?  Piety  adorns  the  hoary  head,  and  spreads  a  peculiar  beauty  over  the 
aged.  1.  Their  piety  appears  with  peculiar  purity.  Through  the  sanctified  discip- 
line of  a  life-experience.  Aged  piety  is  tried,  purified,  refined  piety.  2.  Their 
piety  hides  the  infirmities  and  imperfections  which  are  peculiar  to  their  age.    They 


CHAJ.M.]  PROVERBS.  S67 

often  become  more  amiable  in  their  age  than  thej  were  in  their  fall  yigonr  and 
activity.  3.  Their  piety  renders  them  useful,  when  they  would  otherwise  be  useless 
and  burdensome  to  the  world.  They  are  still  capable  of  serring  God  and  their 
generation,  by  their  examples,  their  instructions,  their  admonitions,  and  their 
prayers.  The  pious  examples  and  instructions  of  aged  parents  are  often  tenfold 
more  valuable  to  their  families  than  all  the  wealth  and  respectability  they  can 
bestow  upon  them.  4.  Their  piety  makes  them  happy  in  themselves  and  pleasant 
to  others.  Improvement.  1.  There  are  many  more  old  people  than  are  usually 
reckoned  such.  2.  They  ought  always  to  be  treated  with  respect.  3.  The  want  of 
piety  is  a  peculiar  blemish  in  the  character  of  the  aged.  4.  Aged  saints  have  great 
reason  to  be  thankful  for  what  God  has  done  for  them.  {N.  Emmons,  D.D.) 
The  speech  of  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  compared : — Solomon  attaches  great 
importance  to  the  power  of  the  tongue  to  work  good  or  ill.  I.  The  speech  of  thk 
GOOD  MAN  IS  VALUABLE,  THAT  OE  THE  OTHER  IS  WOBTHLESS.  Solomou  brings  the  heart 
and  the  tongue  into  comparison,  rather  than  the  tongue  of  each,  to  express  the  idea 
that  speech  is  always  the  outcome  and  exponent  of  the  heart.     11.  The  speech  of 

THE  OOOD  MAN  IS  NOUBISHINO,  THAT  OF   THE   OTHEB   IS   KILLINO.      HoW    One    SOul    Can 

nourish  and  invigorate  another  by  the  language  of  truth  and  love.  The  spiritual 
destroyer  of  humanity  makes  corrupt  words  his  wings  to  bear  him  through  the 
world.  III.  The  speech  of  the  good  man  is  wise,  that  of  the  otheb  is  foolish. 
The  words  of  him  whose  intellect  is  under  the  teachings  of  God,  and  whose  heart 
is  in  vital  sympathy  with  Him,  are  wise  words.  The  policies  propounded  by  the 
wicked  may  seem  wise  at  first,  but  time  always  exposes  their  folly,  and  brings  its 
disciples  to  confusion  and  shame.  IV.  The  speech  of  the  good  man  is  acceptable, 
THAT  of  the  otheb  IS  PERVEESE.  The  words  of  truth  are  always  acceptable  to  God, 
as  they  are  also  to  all  thoughtful  and  candid  men.  There  is  a  "  frowardness  "  in 
the  utterances  of  the  wicked  that  is  distasteful  to  all  consciences,  and  repugnant  to 
the  heart  of  God  and  the  good.  What  are  the  elements  of  good  moral  speech  ? 
Sincerity  and  purity.  By  sincerity  is  meant  the  strict  correspondence  of  the  lan- 
guage with  the  sentiments  of  the  heart.  By  purity  is  meant  the  strict  corres- 
pondence of  those  sentiments  with  the  principles  of  everlasting  right.     {Homilist.) 


CHAPTER  XI. 

Veb.  1.  A  false  balance  is  an  abomination  to  the  Lord. — The  heinousnett  of 
injustice  done  under  the  pretence  of  equity  : — The  proverbs  of  this  book  are  often 
figurative,  and  of  a  very  strong  and  extensive  meaning.  The  words  of  the  text 
imply  the  odiousness,  not  only  of  false  weights  or  balances,  but  likewise  of  all  things 
of  the  like  nature  and  consequence ;  of  all  unfair  and  unfaithful  actions ;  of  all 
unequal  and  injurious  proceedings.  There  are  two  kinds  of  injustice ;  the  one  open 
and  barefaced,  the  other  secret  and  disguised,  so  cunningly  clothed  and  adorned, 
that  it  appears  like  justice  itself.  The  text  manifests  the  odiousness  of  this  latter 
kind.  A  false  balance  is  always  made  use  of  under  the  plausible  pretence  of  doing 
justice,  though  it  has  the  contrary  effect.  This  latter  kind  of  injustice  is  more 
abominable  than  the  other.  (1)  In  its  nature.  This  is  a  complication  of  crimes 
and  mischiefs,  the  other  is  simple  injustice.  This  is  always  vile  and  ungenerous. 
(2)  In  its  consequences.  We  have  far  less  security  against  this  kind  of  unjust 
actors,  so  that  the  mischiefs  of  it  are  more  certain  and  inevitable.  Force  can  repel 
force,  but  it  cannot  repel  treachery.  God  does,  in  a  great  measure,  reserve  cases  of 
this  nature  for  His  own  peculiar  tribunal  in  the  great  and  dreadful  day.  This  kind 
of  injustice  is  an  "  abomination "  to  Him ;  the  word  implies  an  extraordinary 
degree  of  hatred  and  detestation.  (Laurence  Echard,  A.M.)  Uprightness: — 
I.  Uprightness  portrayed.  1.  Commercial  integrity  (ver.  1).  There  is  an 
inspection  of  weights  and  measures  going  on  daily  of  which  few  are  cognisant 
(Lev.  xix.  35,  36).  The  God  of  heaven  is  a  God  of  detail.  2.  Lowliness  of  spirit 
(ver.  2).  Uprightness  is  not  uppishness.  3.  Integrity  of  purpose  (ver.  3).  "  The 
crooked,  winding  policy  of  ungodly  men,"  says  Scott,  "  involves  them  in 
increasing  wickedness."  4.  A  right  estimate  of  wealth  (ver.  4).  The  upright  man 
will  consider  how  his  gains  will  look  in  the  day  of  judgment.  II.  Uprightness 
REWARDED.     1.  The  favour  of  the  Lord  (ver.  1).     2.  Guidance  (ver.  3).     He  who 

18 


258  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

does  right  will  be  rightly  led  (John  vii.  17;  Psa.  cxii.  4).  3.  Deliverance  (ver.  4). 
The  respect  of  others  (ver.  10).  5.  The  good  of  others  (ver.  11).  (H.  Thome.) 
The  false  balance : — Text  taken  in  literal  and  material  sense,  as  applying  to  that 
great  world  of  fraud  and  imposition  and  over-reaching  in  which  we  live,  and  the 
subject  is  our  duty  as  Christians  in  the  midst  of  it.     I.  The  manifest  truth  of 

THE  assertion  OF   THE   TEXT,  AND  THE  GROUNDS  ON  WHICH  IT  RESTS.       God  is  a  God  of 

justice.  Truth,  pure  and  unspotted,  is  the  very  essence  of  the  Divine  character. 
Wherever  there  is  deceit  in  the  world,  wherever  injury,  wherever  oppression,  there 
is  God's  anger  and  loathing  accompanying  it.  The  false  balance,  which  is  an 
abomination  to  the  Lord,  where  do  we  not  see  it  around  us?  From  the  powerful 
guides  of  public  opinion,  each  assuming  to  be  written  in  the  interest  of  justice  and 
truth,  but  each,  almost  without  exception,  warping  justice  and  truth  by  false  state- 
ments, false  inferences,  predetermined  conclusions,  down  to  the  petty  fraud,  in 
measure  and  weight,  which  you  will  find  in  any  chance  shop  you  enter,  certain 
known  and  avowed  avoidances  or  disguises  of  truth,  are  every  day  practised,  and 
acquiesced  in  as  inevitable.  The  evil  is  in  every  class.  But  the  mischief  is  not 
universal.  But  Christian  men  and  women  sin  by  tacit  acquiescence  in  these  wrong 
things.     II.  How  may  we  best  separate   ourselves  from,  and  discourage  the 

FALSE  balance,  AND  UPHOLD  AND    CLEAVE    TO    THE    JUST  WEIGHT  ?       We  mUSt  not  begin 

with  mere  practical  details.  The  secret  of  all  wrong  is  the  false  balance  within  the 
heart ;  the  real  cheating  begins  there.  Is  our  estimate  of  men  and  things  which 
guides  our  action  the  real  and  true  one,  or  some  artificial  one,  that  is  altogether 
wrong,  and  leading  us  altogether  wrong  ?  Men  who  know  what  is  right  are  some- 
times mixed  up  with  the  system  of  fraud.  Why  ?  Because  they  will  not  let 
recognised  religious  principle  hold  the  balance  nor  regulate  the  estimate  formed  of 
the  relative  importance  of  men  and  things.  "  I  must  think,"  such  a  man  says,  "  as 
others  think ;  I  must  do  as  others  do."  If  we  would  get  rid  of  the  false  balance 
without,  and  in  our  streets  and  markets,  we  must  begin  within  ourselves.  Were 
buyers  honest,  sellers  would,  by  compulsion,  be  honest  too.  Here  the  fault  begins. 
Practical  suggestions  :  conscientiously  regulate  the  bestowal  of  employment  and 
patronage :  there  are  certain  signs  by  which  even  the  dull  of  discernment  may 
discern  the  tokens  of  fraud  and  pretension.  Be  not  an  admirer  of  the  system  of 
universal  cheapness.  (Dean  Alford.)  Deception  in  business  : — Many  are  pleased 
at  the  dexterity  with  which  they  practise  their  deceptions.  The  fraud  is  undis- 
covered, and  being  undiscovered,  is  unfelt  by  those  on  whom  it  is  practised,  and 
what  is  never  known  and  never  felt  can  be  no  harm.  So  they  think.  But  God 
Bees  it,  and  He  estimates  the  action  on  no  such  principle ;  nor  is  it  the  principle  on 
which  you  would  estimate  it  were  you  the  party  defrauded.  You  have  no  idea, 
in  your  own  case,  of  admitting  that  what  is  not  missed  is  not  lost ;  or  that  the 
cleverness  of  the  fraud  is  any  palliation  of  it.  You  do  not  think  the  better  of  the 
merchant  with  his  "balances  of  deceit,"  that  the  unfairness  of  the  balance  is 
ingeniously  concealed.  You  do  not  regard  it  as  a  compensation  for  the  property 
abstracted  from  your  plundered  house  or  warehouse,  that  the  impression  of  your 
keys  has  been  adroitly  obtained,  or  the  mode  of  entrance  skilfully  devised  and 
expertly  executed.  You  do  not  approve  the  laws  of  ancient  Sparta  which,  to 
encourage  cleverness  and  sleight  of  hand,  rewarded  instead  of  punishing  the 
youthful  thief  who  could  steal  without  detection.  Depend  upon  it,  if  you  plume 
yourself  on  the  dexterity  with  which  you  have  contrived  and  executed  a  plan  for 
cozening  your  neighbour,  it  will  be  no  palliation  with  God,  nor  will  any  amount  of 
Buch  dexterity  produce  any  abatement  of  His  sentence  of  condemnation.  It  is  the 
moral  principle,  or  want  of  principle,  in  which  the  evil  lies,  and  the  very  measure 
of  thought  and  contrivance  expended  for  the  purpose  of  ensuring  success  in  the 
contravention  of  God's  law,  instead  of  diminishing,  will  serve  to  aggravate  your 
guilt  in  His  sight.  The  "  abomination "  will  be  only  the  more  loathsome. 
{R.  Wardlaw.) 

Ver.  2.  Wlien  pride  cometh,  then  cometh  shame. — Pride  : — I  shall  first  describe 
to  you  the  several  kinds  of  pride  among  mankind,  and  show  you  their  folly  and 
wickedness ;  and,  secondly,  point  out  to  you  the  beauty  and  advantage  of  their 
opposite  virtue,  humility.  I.  The  vice  of  pride  puts  on  a  great  variety  of  appear- 
ances, AND  18  found  in  EVERY  RANK  AND  CONDITION  OF   HUMAN  LIFE.      Pride  of  StatiOH 

claims  our  first  notice.  "  Man  being  in  authority,"  is  too  apt  to  be  "  proud  at 
heart " ;  to  be  "  puffed  up  "  with  this  distinction  ;  to  consider  himself  as  a  being  of 
a  higher  order  than  the  rest  of  his  fellow  sinners ;  and  to  look  upon  those  with 


CHAP.  II.]  PROVERBS.  259 

disdain  who  are  lower  in  the  scale  of  society  than  himself.  But  what  do  the 
Scriptures  say  to  such  a  vain  and  foolish  mortal  as  this  ?  They  tell  him  that 
"  man  will  not  long  abide  in  honour,  seeing  he  may  be  compared  to  the  beast  that 
perisheth."  They  tell  him  that  "men  of  high  degree  are  a  lie  ;  to  be  laid  in  the 
balance,  they  are  altogether  lighter  than  vanity."  2.  Nor  is  the  pride  of  birth  less 
unreasonable  than  that  of  rank.  Even  a  heathen  in  ancient  times  could  see  its 
absurdity,  and  say,  "  for  as  to  family  and  ancestors,  and  what  we  have  not  done 
ourselves,  we  can  scarcely  call  those  things  ours."  3.  Of  the  same  wicked  and 
foolish  character  is  pride  of  riches.  Reason  tells  us  that  riches  cannot  give 
dignity  of  character,  superiority  of  intellect,  vigour  of  body,  endowments  of  mind, 
peace  of  conscience,  cheerfulness  of  heart,  or  any  one  of  those  advantages  which 
form  the  chief  blessings  of  life;  and,  therefore,  are  a  very  insufiBcient  foundation 
for  "  pride  of  heart."  4.  Pride  of  talent,  and  pride  of  learning,  also  ill  become 
"  man  that  is  born  of  a  woman."  A  disease,  an  accident,  "  a  sudden  terror,"  may 
overset  the  mind,  and  turn  all  our  hght  into  "utter  darkness."  Of  the  pride  of 
beauty,  in  order  to  show  its  folly,  it  need  only  be  said,  in  the  language  of  inspira- 
tion, "  surely  all  flesh  is  grass,  and  all  the  goodliness  thereof  is  as  the  flower  of  the 
field  ;  the  grass  withereth,  and  the  flower  fadeth."  5.  The  pride  of  judgment,  also, 
which  is  too  often  the  pride  of  the  young  and  ignorant,  is  of  the  like  foolish 
description,  and  is  equally  rebuked  by  the  Holy  Scriptures.  It  is  a  commou  and 
a  true  observation,  that  those  who  know  least  generally  imagine  that  they  know 
most,  and  know  best.  6.  But,  of  all  kinds  of  pride,  spiritual  pride,  or  the  conceit 
and  boast  of  being  holier  than  others,  is  the  worst  description  of  this  bad  passion : 
most  hateful  to  God,  and  most  dangerous  to  our  souls.  II.  Opposite,  however,  as 
the  mid-day  sun  to   "  utter  darkness,"   is   the   chaeactek  given  in   Scripture 

OF    lowliness    or   humility  :    AND    THE  VIEW  OF    THE    BLESSINGS  WHICH    ARE    PROMISED 

UPON  THOSE  IN  WHOM  IT  IS  FOUND.  "  When  pride  Cometh,  then  cometh  shame  :  but 
with  the  lowly  is  wisdom."  When  we  consider  the  nature  of  man,  fallen  and  far 
gone  from  original  righteousness,  one  might  well  think  that  men  should  of  their 
own  accord  see  the  propriety,  the  necessity,  of  the  grace  of  humility  in  their 
character.  Our  Lord  has  bound  meekness  and  poverty  of  spirit  upon  our 
consciences  by  His  injunctions,  and  encouraged  our  obedience  to  His  injunctions 
by  assuring  us  that  "  the  meek  and  the  poor  in  spirit  shall  inherit  the  kingdom 
of  heaven."  He  has  declared  to  us  that  those  who  "  humble  themselves  shall  be 
exalted"  ;  and  finally,  to  give  the  greatest  possible  weight  and  effect  to  what  He 
said,  He  left  us,  in  His  own  practice,  the  most  perfect  example  of  the  graces  which 
He  enjoined  to  His  followers :  for  "  He  made  Himself  of  no  reputation,"  &c. 
(R.  Warner.)  The  advent  and  evil  of  pride  : — I.  The  advent  of  pride.  Pride 
is  inordinate  self-appreciation.  This  feeling  comes  to  a  soul ;  it  is  not  born  in  it. 
Infancy  and  childhood  are  free  from  it.  How  does  it  come?  1.  By  associating 
only  with  inferiors.  2.  By  practically  ignoring  the  true  standards  of  character. 
When  we  lose  sight  of  the  eternal  law  of  rectitude,  and  judge  ourselves  only  by  the 
imperfect  standards  around  us,  pride  is  likely  to  come.  3.  By  a  practical  disregard 
to  the  majesty  of  God.  The  conscious  presence  of  God  humbles.  II.  The  evil  of 
PRIDE.  "  Then  cometh  shame."  The  man  who  has  formed  a  false  and  exaggerated 
estimate  of  self  must  be  disappointed  one  day.  Man  must  always  find  his  level ; 
he  must  come  to  reaUties.  1.  Shame  of  folly.  The  soul  bursts  with  a  sense  of  its 
own  foolish  estimate.  2.  Shame  of  guilt.  Pride  is  a  wrong  state  of  mind,  and 
hence  shame  follows  it.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  shame  of  pride  : — The  haughty 
and  overbearing  conduct  of  Cardinal  Wolsey  created  him  many  secret  enemies,  and 
it  was  his  ostentation  and  love  of  power  which  caused  him  to  lose  the  favour  of  his 
sovereign.  Proud  of  his  talents,  his  wealth,  his  position,  his  sole  aim  was  to  raise 
himself  still  higher,  all  his  actions  being  directed  to  his  own  aggrandisements  ;  and 
this  eagerness  lay  at  the  root  of  his  downfall,  it  being  impossible  for  him  to  please 
Henry  in  the  matter  of  the  divorce  without  losing  all  hope  of  the  popedom.  He 
felt  severely  the  shame  of  his  first  disgrace,  and  offered  to  surrender  both  office  and 
wealth  to  avert  the  king's  displeasure ;  but,  being  allowed  to  retire  to  his  arch- 
bishopric, he  again  excited  the  envy  of  his  political  rivals  by  his  pride  and  love  of 
show,  and,  being  arrested  for  high  treason,  the  whilom  leader  of  the  State  died 
broken-hearted  on  his  journey  to  London.  Pride : — Among  all  the  vices  against 
which  Solomon  has  cautioned  us  (and  he  has  scarce  left  one  untouched),  there  is  none 
upon  which  he  animadverts  with  more  severity,  or  to  which  he  more  frequently 
recalls  our  attention,  than  the  vice  of  pride  ;  for  which  there  may  be  many  reasons 
assigned,  but,  more  particularly,  two  seem  to  deserve  our  consideration.     1.  The 


360  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cnkt.rx. 

lint  is  the  extensiveness  of  the  sin.  Other  rices  tyrannise  orer  partioalar  ages, 
and  triumph  in  particular  countries.  Rage  is  the  failing  of  youth,  and  ararice  of 
age ;  revenge  is  the  predominant  passion  of  one  country,  and  inconstancy  the 
characteristic  of  another ;  but  pride  is  the  native  of  every  country,  infects  every 
climate,  and  corrupts  every  nation.  2.  The  second  reason  may  be  drawn  from  the 
circumstances  of  the  preacher.  Pride  was  probably  a  crime  to  which  Solomon 
himself  was  most  violently  tempted,  since  he  was  placed  in  every  circumstance 
that  could  expose  him  to  it.  He  was  a  king  absolute  and  independent,  and  by 
consequence  surrounded  with  sycophants  ready  to  second  the  first  motions 
of  self-love,  to  comply  with  every  proposal,  and  flatter  every  failing.  But 
Solomon  had  not  only  the  pride  of  royalty  to  suppress,  but  the  pride  of 
prosperity,  of  knowledge,  and  of  wealth.  I.  The  natube  or  pbidk,  with  its 
ATTENDANTS  Aio)  CONSEQUENCES.  Pride,  simply  considered,  is  an  immoderate  degree 
of  self-esteem,  or  an  over-value  set  upon  a  man  by  himself,  and,  like  most  other 
vices,  is  founded  originally  on  an  intellectual  falsehood.  But  this  definition  sets 
this  vice  in  the  fairest  light,  and  separates  it  from  all  its  consequences,  by 
considering  man  without  relation  to  society,  and  independent  of  all  outward 
circumstances.  Pride,  thus  defined,  is  only  the  seed  of  that  complicated  sin  against 
which  we  are  cautioned  in  the  text.  In  speculation  pride  may  be  considered  as 
ending  where  it  began,  and  exerting  no  influences  beyond  the  bosom  in  which  it 
dwells ;  but  in  real  life  pride  will  always  be  attended  with  kindred  passions,  and 
produce  effects  equally  injurious  to  others,  and  destructive  to  itself.  1.  He  that 
overvalues  himself  will  undervalue  others,  and  he  that  undervalues  others  will 
oppress  them.  Pride  has  been  able  to  harden  the  heart  against  compassion,  and 
stop  the  ears  against  the  cries  of  misery.  It  makes  masters  cruel  and  imperious, 
and  magistrates  insolent  and  partial.  It  produces  contempt  and  injuries,  and 
dissolves  the  bond  of  society.  Nor  is  this  species  of  pride  more  hurtful  to  the 
world  than  destructive  to  itself.  The  oppressor  unites  heaven  and  earth  against 
him.  2.  He  that  sets  too  high  a  value  upon  his  own  merits  will,  of  course,  think 
them  ill-rewarded  with  his  present  condition.  He  will  endeavour  to  exalt  his 
fortune  and  his  rank  above  others,  in  proportion  as  his  deserts  are  superior  to 
theirs.  Once  fired  with  these  notions,  he  will  attempt  to  increase  his  fortune  and 
enlarge  his  sphere;  and  how  few  there  are  that  prosecute  such  attempts  with 
innocence,  a  very  transient  observation  will  sufficiently  inform  us.  To  pride,  there- 
fore, must  be  ascribed  most  of  the  fraud,  injustice,  violence,  and  extortion,  by  which 
wealth  is  frequently  acquired.  3.  Another  concomitant  of  pride  is  envy,  or  the 
desire  of  debasing  others.  A  proud  man  is  uneasy  and  dissatisfied,  while  any  of 
those  applauses  are  bestowed  on  another,  which  he  is  desirous  of  himself. 
4.  Another  consequence  of  immoderate  self-esteem  is  an  insatiable  desire  of 
propagating  in  others  the  favourable  opinion  he  entertains  of  himself.  He  there- 
fore tortures  his  invention  for  means  to  make  himself  conspicuous,  and  to  draw  the 
eyes  of  the  world  upon  him.  But  for  the  most  part  it  is  ordered  by  Providence  that 
the  schemes  of  the  ambitious  are  disappointed,  so  that  "  still  when  pride  cometh, 
then  cometh  shame,  but  with  the  lowly    is  wisdom."     II.  Some  of  the  usual 

MOTfVES    TO   PRIDE,    AND    HOW    LITTLE    THEY   CAN    BE    PLEADED    IN    EXCUSE    OT    IT.        A 

superior  being  that  should  look  down  upon  the  disorder  and  corruption  of  our 
world,  that  should  observe  the  shortness  of  our  lives,  the  weakness  of  our  bodies, 
the  continual  accidents,  or  injuries,  to  which  we  are  subject;  the  violence  of  our 
passions,  the  irregularity  of  our  conduct,  and  the  transitory  state  of  everything 
about  us,  would  hardly  believe  there  could  be  among  us  such  vice  as  pride.  Yet  so 
it  is,  that  however  weak  or  wicked  we  may  be,  we  fix  our  eyes  on  some  other  that  is 
represented  by  our  self-love  to  be  weaker,  or  more  wicked,  than  ourselves,  and  grow 
proud  upon  the  comparison.  Another  common  motive  to  pride  is  knowledge,  a 
motive  equally  weak,  vain,  and  idle,  with  the  former.  Learning  indeed,  imperfect 
as  it  is,  may  contribute  to  many  great  and  noble  ends,  and  may  be  called  in  to  the 
assistance  of  religion.  But  how  little  reason  have  we  to  boast  of  our  knowledge, 
when  we  only  gaze  and  wonder  at  the  surface  of  things  ?  When  the  wisest  and 
most  arrogant  philosopher  knows  not  how  a  grain  of  corn  is  generated,  or  why  a 
stone  falls  to  the  ground  ?  But  were  our  knowledge  far  greater  than  it  is,  let  us 
yet  remember  that  goodness,  not  knowledge,  is  the  happiness  of  man  !  There  is 
another  more  dangerous  species  of  pride,  arising  from  a  consciousness  of  virtue  ; 
so  watchful  is  the  enemy  of  our  souls,  and  so  deceitful  are  our  own  hearts,  that  too 
often  a  victory  over  one  sinful  inclination  exposes  us  to  be  conquered  by  another. 
This  kind  of  pride  is  generally  accompanied  with  great  uncharitableness,  and 


CHIP.  XI.]  PROVERBS.  261 

eevere  censures  of  others,  and  maj  obstrnct  the  great  duty  of  repentance,  m.  Thb 
AicuBLENsss  AKD  sxcELLEMCK  OF  KVuxhiT!.  To  evince  bejood  opposition  the 
excellence  of  this  yirtue,  we  may  observe  that  the  life  of  our  Lord  was  ona 
continued  exercise  of  humility.  [John  Taylor,  LL.D.)  Pride  leading  to  thame:— 
Tirmond,  one  of  the  Czar's  ablest  surgeons,  and  to  whom  he  was  much  attached, 
having  died,  his  widow  married  a  young  barber  from  Dantzic,  who  was  somewhat 
more  expert  in  gallantry  than  in  surgery ;  as  he  became  very  wealthy  by  this 
marriage,  he  made  a  great  figure  at  Moscow.  Being  one  day  sent  for  by  the  Czar, 
he  went  to  court  in  a  magnificent  dress,  and  in  one  of  his  elegant  carriages.  Peter 
examined  him,  and  roughly  told  him  he  was  a  blockhead,  and  immediately  called 
in  a  troop  of  valets  and  peasants,  whom  he  ordered  him  instantly  to  shave.  Th» 
gentleman  barber  was  under  the  necessity  of  obeying,  to  the  great  amusement  of 
the  whole  court,  and  with  the  same  parade  in  which  he  had  arrived,  he  was  then 
permitted  to  return.  {Christian  Weekly.)  Proud  and  lowly  : — Pride  consists  in 
an  immoderate  self-esteem,  and  places  its  happiness  in  esteem  and  honour  from 
others.  No  sin  is  more  foolish  than  this,  it  springs  from  ignorance  of  God,  of 
ourselves  and  other  men,  and  by  the  very  means  which  it  uses  for  the  accomplish- 
ments  of  its  ends,  ensures  disappointment.  In  seeking  glory  it  finds  disgrace. 
Pride  made  Nebuchadnezzar  a  brute.  It  destroyed  Herod  with  worms.  It  turned 
Lucifer  into  Beelzebub.  By  other  sins,  man  rebels  against  God;  by  pride  he 
usurps  His  crown  and  dignity.  No  wonder,  then,  that  God  looks  up  all  those  that 
are  proud,  and  abaseth  them.  Humble  men  think  of  themselves  as  they  ought 
to  think.  They  desire  that  God  may  be  honoured,  even  at  the  expense  of  their 
own  honour.     ((?.  Law$on.) 

Ver.  3.  The  Integrity  of  the  uprigrht  shall  groide  fb»m.— Integrity  the  bett  guide 
both  in  religious  inquiries  and  in  moral  coTiduct : — The  policy  of  the  world,  like  the 
world  itself,  is  fluctuating  and  deceitful.  Uncertain  both  in  its  objects  and  its 
means,  it  knows  nothing  of  that  steadfastness  which  religious  principle  communis 
cates  both  to  mind  and  conduct.  The  shifts  and  windings  of  those  who  are  guided 
by  no  higher  principles  than  those  of  pride  and  avarice  would  be  truly  ludicrous 
if  they  were  not  accompanied  with  serious  mischief.  Integrity,  originating  in  the 
honest  feelings  of  nature,  exalted  by  piety,  and  cherished  by  serious  reflections 
upon  the  ends  of  a  probationary  state,  is  our  purest  guide  amidst  all  the  temptations 
and  difiSculties,  through  all  the  vicissitudes  and  perplexities,  both  in  thought  and 
in  action,  which  are  continually  occurring  in  the  journey  of  life.  By  integrity  is 
meant  a  steady  determination  to  abide  by  the  profession  of  important  truth,  however 
unfashionable,  and  to  be  upright  in  all  transactions  with  the  world,  at  whatever 
expense  of  temporary  ease  and  interest.  I.  Intkorttt  is  the  surest  guide  to 
EVERY  PBACTiCAi.  PURPOSE  IN  ouB  RELIGIOUS  INQUIRIES.  Thcsc  inquiries  have  unfor- 
tunately been  perplexed  and  mystified  by  the  polemics  of  Churches  and  sects.  Of 
course  it  is  integrity,  enlightened,  to  a  certain  degree,  by  a  right  education,  that  is 
meant.  Go  to  the  Bible  with  the  sincere  desire  of  gaining  the  knowledge  of  prac- 
tical and  consolatory  truths,  without  any  sectarian  bias,  and  it  is  impossible  that 
you  should  err  in  anything  that  might  affect  your  practice  here,  or  your  salvation 
hereafter.    Your  integrity  will  guide  you  in  all  that  is  essential.     II.  Integritt 

IS  OUR  BEST  GUIDE  IN  OUB  WORLDLY  TRANSACTIONS,  AS  MEN  AND  AS  MEMBERS  OF  SOCIETT. 

It  is  the  great  solver  of  all  moral  difiSculties.  Whence  do  these  originate  ?  They 
are  generated  by  that  interference  of  complicated  interests,  which  embarrasses  and 
perverts  the  minds  of  those  who  have  no  settled  principle  to  which  they  can  refer 
amidst  the  ever-varying  plans  of  worldly  wisdom.  Integrity,  enlightened  by  the 
truths,  and  fortified  by  the  promises  of  the  gospel,  admits  of  no  hesitation  on 
account  of  any  temporary  inconvenience,  to  which  an  honest  conduct  may  expose 
us.  In  public  concerns,  the  surest  way  to  outwit  cunning  and  artifice  would  be  to 
fix  only  upon  such  objects  as  reason  can  indicate  and  conscience  may  approve. 
Truth,  in  the  hands  of  wisdom  and  courage,  has  a  commanding  aspect,  which 
would  confound  the  subtle  chicanery  and  pitiful  arts  of  a  selfish  and  low-minded 
diplomacy.  And  in  private  transactions  between  man  and  man  it  holds  equally 
true  that  enlightened  integrity,  acting  with  perseverance  upon  a  settled  plan, 
ultimately  gains  the  very  end  by  upright  means  which  in  the  cunning  and  dishonest 
fail  a  thousand  times  for  once  that  they  succeed.  Integrity  makes  a  man  rich 
in  character,  and  that  ensures  him  the  best  chance  of  gaining  earthly  success  and 
wealth.  {Jot.  Lindsay,  D.D.)  On  integrity  at  the  guide  of  life  : — A  man  of 
integrity  is  one  who  m«Jies  it  his  constant  rule  to  follow  the  road  of  duty  according 


262  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  a. 

as  the  "Word  of  God  and  the  voice  of  his  conscience  point  it  out  to  him.  The 
upright  man  is  guided  by  a  fixed  principle  of  mind.  Hence  you  find  him  ever  and 
everywhere  the  same.  In  what  manner  does  such  integrity  serve  as  the  guide  of  hi3 
life  ?  To  conduct  ourselves  in  human  affairs  with  wisdom  and  propriety  is  often 
a  matter  of  no  small  difficulty.  Amidst  that  variety  of  characters,  of  jarring 
dispositions,  and  of  interfering  interests,  which  is  found  among  those  with  whom  we 
have  intercourse,  we  are  frequently  at  a  stand  as  to  the  part  most  prudent  for  us  to 
choose.  In  public  and  in  private  life,  the  doubt  started  by  the  wise  man  frequently 
occurs.  Who  knoweth  what  is  good  for  man  in  this  life  ?  In  such  situations  as 
these,  the  principle  of  integrity  interposes  to  give  light  and  direction.  The  virtuous 
man  has  one  oracle,  to  which  he  resorts  in  every  dubious  case.  He  consults  his 
conscience.  The  principle  of  integrity  will  always,  if  we  listen  to  it  impartially, 
give  a  clear  decision.  1.  The  guidance  of  integrity  is  the  safest  under  which  we 
can  be  placed.  The  road  in  which  it  leads  us  is,  upon  the  whole,  freest  from 
dangers.  The  man  of  the  world  aims  at  higher  things,  and  more  rapid  success, 
than  the  man  of  moderation  and  virtue.  But,  at  the  same  time,  he  incurs  greater 
risks  and  dangers.  No  calculation  of  probabilities  can  ensure  safety  to  him  who  is 
acting  a  deceitful  part.  He  who  follows  the  guidance  of  integrity,  walks  in  the 
high  road,  on  which  the  light  of  the  sun  shines.  The  principle  of  integrity  by  no 
means  excludes  prudence  in  the  conduct  of  life.  It  implies  no  improvident  or 
thoughtless  simplicity.  2.  The  path  of  integrity  is  the  most  honourable.  Integrity 
is  the  foundation  of  all  that  is  high  in  character  among  mankind.  He  who  rests 
upon  an  internal  principle  of  virtue  and  honour  will  act  with  a  dignity  and  bold- 
ness of  which  they  are  incapable  who  are  wholly  guided  by  interest.  That  firmness 
which  the  consciousness  of  rectitude  inspires  gives  vigour  and  force  to  his  exertions 
on  every  great  occasion.  It  adds  double  weight  to  all  the  abilities  of  which  he  is 
possessed.  They  who  oppose  him  are  obliged  to  honour  him.  Such  a  man  is 
trusted  and  relied  on,  as  well  as  esteemed.  3.  The  plan  of  conduct  on  which  the 
man  of  integrity  proceeds  is  the  most  comfortable,  attended  with  the  greatest 
satisfaction  to  his  own  mind.  His  reference  of  aU  his  actions  to  Divine  appro- 
bation furnishes  another  source  of  satisfaction  and  peace.  4.  The  man  of 
integrity  has  in  view  the  prospect  of  immortal  rewards.  True  integrity  will  prove 
the  truest  wisdom  both  for  this  world  and  the  next.  {Hugh  Blair,  D.D.) 
Integrity  a  good  guide : — Nehemiah  was  brave  and  upright ;  and  his  integrity 
guided  him  to  honour  and  renown,  and  his  righteousness  delivered  his  friends  and 
their  enterprise  from  disaster  (Neh.  vi.  10-16).  Haman  was  perverse  and  wicked  ; 
his  ways  were  crooked  ;  he  conspired  to  take  away  the  lives  of  others ;  and  on  the 
gallows  which  he  had  set  up  for  Mordecai  he  himself  was  hung :  and  so  "  the 
transgressor  was  taken  in  his  own  naughtiness  "  (Esther  vii.  10). 

Ver.  5.  The  righteousness  of  the  perfect  shall  direct  his  way. — The  Divine 
nature  of  righteousness  : — Not  unreasonably  this  book  of  Proverbs  charged  with 
unspirituality.  It  is  not  a  manual  of  devotion.  It  is  not  a  setting  forth  of  eternal 
principles  of  truth.  It  is  a  collection  of  homely  aphorisms  applicable  to  the 
practical  life  of  man.  But  these  proverbs  rest  upon  spiritual  principles,  and  they 
are  saved  from  narrowness  by  the  way  in  which  they  explain,  amplify,  and  qualify 
each  other.  The  great  pervading  principle  of  the  book  is  righteousness,  its  Divine 
nature,  and  its  blessed  fruits.  I.  The  fundamental  principle  of  this  book,  and 
OF  ALL  moral  TEACHING.  "  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  reap."  This 
by  the  world  is — 1.  Denied  in  practice.  2.  Denied  in  theory.  The  theory  is  false 
that,  live  as  you  like,  the  result  will  be  the  same.  It  is  contradicted  by  experience. 
It  is  inconsistent  with  the  very  being  of  a  God.  II.  Special  statement  of  the 
PRINCIPLES.  1.  "  The  righteousness  of  the  perfect  shall  direct  his  way."  Note 
the  leading  words.  "  Perfect,"  not  faultless,  but  upright.  Not  consciously  or 
intentionally  reserving  anything  from  God.  "  His  righteousness."  Not  his  own, 
but  God's  ;  yet  made  his  own  by  free  adoption  of  his  will.  "  Its  work."  Not  an 
arbitrary  reward.  2.  "  Wicked  fall  by  his  own  wickedness."  Generally  speaking, 
failure  is  worked  for,  and  comes  as  payment.  Apply  to  (1)  Man's  earthly  hfe. 
(2)  To  man's  spiritual  life.  {W.R.  Clarke,  M. A.)  Goodness  required  by  God: 
— The  main  characteristic  of  aU  heathen  religions  is  that  their  gods  do  not  demand 
righteousness,  but  certain  outward  and  formal  observances.  Sacrifices  must  be 
offered  to  them,  their  vindictive  temper  must  be  propitiated,  their  anger  averted ; 
if  the  dues  of  the  gods  are  paid,  the  stipulated  quantity  of  corn  and  wine  and  oil, 
the  tithes,  the  first-fruits,  the  animals  for  the  altar,  the  tribute  for  the  temple,  then 


CHAP.  XI.]  PROVERBS.  263 

the  worshipper,  who  has  thus  discharged  his  ohligations,  may  feel  himself  free  to 
foUow  out  his  own  tastes  and  inclinations.  In  the  Eoman  religion,  for  example, 
every  dealing  with  the  gods  was  a  strictly  legal  contract ;  the  Koman  general  agreed 
with  Jupiter  or  with  Mars  that  if  the  battle  should  be  won  a  temple  should  be 
built.  It  was  not  necessary  that  the  cause  should  be  right,  or  that  the  general 
should  be  good  ;  the  sacrifice  of  the  wicked,  though  offered  with  an  evil  intent, 
was  as  valid  as  the  sacrifice  of  the  good.  In  either  case  the  same  amount  of  marble 
and  stone,  of  silver  and  gold,  would  come  to  the  god.  In  the  Eastern  religions  not 
only  were  goodness  and  righteousness  dissociated  from  the  idea  of  the  gods,  but 
evil  of  the  grossest  kinds  was  definitely  associated  with  them.  The  Phoenician 
deities,  like  those  of  the  Hindoos,  were  actually  worshipped  with  rites  of  murder 
and  lust.  Every  vice  had  its  patron  god  or  goddess,  and  it  was  forgotten  by  priest 
and  people  that  ijoodness  could  be  the  way  of  pleasing  God,  or  moral  evil  a  cause 
of  offence  to  Him.  Even  in  Israel,  where  the  teaching  of  revelation  was  current 
in  the  proverbs  of  the  people,  the  practice  generally  followed  the  heathen  concep- 
tions. All  the  burning  protests  of  the  inspired  prophets  could  not  avail  to  convince 
the  Israelite  that  what  God  required  was  not  sacrifice  and  offering,  but  to  do 
justice,  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with  Him.  Again  and  again  we  find 
that  the  high  places  were  frequented,  and  the  ritual  supported  by  men  who  were 
sensual,  unjust,  and  cruel.  The  Sabbath  Day  was  kept,  the  feasts  were  duly 
observed,  the  priests  were  handsomely  maintained,  and  there,  it  was  supposed,  the 
legitimate  claims  of  Jehovah  ceased.  What  more  could  He  desire?  This  is  surely 
the  most  impressive  proof  that  the  truth  which  is  under  consideration  is  far  from 
being  obvious.  So  far  from  treating  the  truth  as  a  truism,  our  Lord  in  all  Hi3 
teaching  laboured  to  bring  it  out  in  greater  clearness,  and  to  set  it  in  the  forefront 
of  His  message  to  men.  He  painted  with  exquisite  simplicity  and  clearness  the 
right  life,  the  conduct  which  God  requires  of  us,  and  then  likened  every  one  who 
practised  this  life  to  a  man  who  builds  his  house  on  a  rock,  and  every  one  who 
does  not  practise  it  to  a  man  who  builds  his  house  on  the  sand.  He  declared,  in 
the  spirit  of  the  Book  of  Proverbs,  that  teachers  were  to  be  judged  by  their 
fruits,  and  that  God  would  estimate  our  lives  not  by  what  we  professed  to  do, 
but  by  what  we  did ;  and  He  took  up  the  very  language  of  the  book  in  declaring 
that  every  man  should  be  judged  according  to  his  works.  In  every  word  He 
spoke  He  made  it  plain  that  goodness  is  what  God  loves,  and  that  wickedness 
is  what  He  judges  and  destroys.  In  the  same  way  every  one  of  the  apostles 
insists  on  this  truth  with  a  new  earnestness.  St.  John  more  especially  reiterates 
it,  in  words  which  sound  even  more  like  a  truism  than  the  sayings  of  this 
book :  "  He  that  doeth  righteousness,  is  righteous  even  as  He  is  righteous  " ; 
and,  "If  ye  know  that  He  is  righteous,  ye  know  that  every  one  also  that  doeth 
righteousness  is  begotten  of  Him."    (JR.  F.  Eorton,  D.D.) 

Ver.  7.  The  hope  of  unjust  men  perisheth. — The  terrible  in  human  history : — 
There  are  two  terrible  events  in  this  text.  I.  Death  meeting  the  wicked  man. 
"  The  wicked  man  dieth."  1.  Death  does  not  wait  for  reformation  of  character. 
2.  The  greatest  enemies  of  God  and  His  universe  are  overcome.  There  is  a 
stronger  power  than  that  of  the  wicked.  II.  Hope  leaving  the  human  soul. 
What  is  dearer  to  the  soul  than  hope?  The  soul  lives  in  and  by  hope. 
Shakespeare  says,  "  The  miserable  hath  no  medicine,  but  only  hope."  When 
the  wicked  man  dieth,  he  loses  this  hope.  Hope  of  liberty,  of  improvement,  of 
honour,  of  happiness.  He  dieth,  and  carrieth  nothing  away.  {D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
The  hope  of  the  wicked : — Men  derive  almost  the  whole  of  their  happiness  from 
hope.  The  wicked  man  laughs  at  the  righteous  because  he  lives  by  hope  ;  but  the 
wicked  man  himself  does  the  same.  The  present  situation  of  the  wicked  man 
never  yields  him  the  pleasure  which  he  wishes  and  expects,  but  there  is  ever 
something  in  view,  in  which,  could  he  but  obtain  it,  he  would  find  rest.  If  his  hopes 
are  deferred,  his  heart  is  sick;  if  they  are  accomplished  he  is  still  unsatisfied; 
but  he  comforts  himself  with  some  other  hope,  Uke  a  child,  who  thinks  he  sees 
a  rainbow  on  the  top  of  a  neighbouring  hill,  and  runs  to  take  hold  of  it,  but  sees  it 
as  far  removed  from  him  as  before.  Thus  the  life  of  a  wicked  man  is  spent  in 
vain  wishes  and  toils  and  hopes,  till  death  kills  at  once  his  body,  his  hope,  and 
his  happiness.     (G.  Lawson.) 

Ver.  8.  The  righteous  is  delivered  out  of  trouble,  and  the  wicked  cometh  in  hla 
Btead. — Trouble  in  its  relation  to  the  righteous  and  the  wicked: — All  men  hava 


264  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.xx. 

their  troubles.  The  relation  of  the  good  and  the  bad  to  trouble  is  strikingly 
different.  I.  Tmc  siOHTXons  ar«  going  out  of  trouble.  The  troubles  of  the 
righteous  arise  from  physical  infirmities,  mental  difiBculties,  secular  anxieties, 
moral  imperfections,  social  dishonesties,  falsehoods,  and  bereavements.  But  the 
fact  is,  that  they  are  being  delivered  out  of  these  troubles.  1.  Partially,  they  are 
being  delivered  out  of  trouble  now.  2.  Completely,  they  will  be  delivered  out 
of  all  trouble  at  death.  II.  The  wicked  abe  going  into  trouble.  They  are  going 
deeper  into  trouble  every  step  they  take.  They  are  forging  thunderbolts  and 
nursing  storms.  The  trouble  they  are  going  into  is  unmitigated.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
Retributive  justice  : — Thus  do  these  two  classes  change  places  in  the  dispensations 
of  God.  The  same  Providence  often  marks  Divine  faithfulness  and  retributive 
justice.  The  Israelites  were  delivered  out  of  the  trouble  of  the  Red  Sea;  the 
Egyptians  came  in  their  stead.  Mordecai  was  delivered  from  the  gallows  ;  Haman 
was  hanged  upon  it.  The  noble  confessors  in  Babylon  were  saved  from  the  fire ; 
their  executioners  were  "  slain  "  by  it,  Daniel  was  preserved  from  the  lions;  his 
accusers  were  devoured  by  them.  Peter  was  snatched  from  death  ;  his  jailors  and 
persecutors  were  condemned.  Thus  "  precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  is  "  the 
life,  no  less  than  "  the  death,  of  his  saints."  To  what  source  but  his  own  free  and 
sovereign  love  can  we  trace  this  special  estimation  ?  (C.  Bridges.)  The  wicked 
cometh  in  his  stead : — Shadrach,  Meshach,  and  Abednego  came  unhurt  out  of  the 
"  burning  fiery  furnace " ;  whilst  the  men  who  cast  them  in  were  slain  by  the 
fierceness  of  the  heat  (Dan.  iii.  22-27.)  Daniel  was  taken  up  alive  and  un- 
injured out  of  the  lions'  den  ;  whilst  the  men  who  had  accused  him  were  cast  into 
the  same  den,  and  the  lions,  which  had  not  touched  Daniel,  "  brake  all  their  bones 
in  pieces"  before  they  reached  "  the  bottom  of  the  den"  (Dan.  vi.  23,  24). 

Ver.  9.  An  hypocrite  with  his  mouth  destroyeth  his  neighbour :  but  throngh 
knowledge  sball  the  Just  be  delivered. — Hypocrisy  and  knowledge : — The 
hypocrite  is  one  who  feigns  to  be  what  he  is  not — one  whose  life  is  a  lie. 
Selfish,  he  wears  the  costume  of  benevolence ;  false,  he  speaks  the  language  of 
sincerity  and  truth.  I.  Hypocrisy  is  destructive.  The  hypocrite,  by  his 
deception,  has  often  destroyed  the  reputation,  the  peace,  and  the  soul  of  his 
neighbour.  Hypocrisy — 1.  Implies  the  pernicious.  A  consciousness  of  wrongness 
within  is  the  cause  of  all  hypocrisy.  2.  Employs  the  pernicious.  Misrepresentations 
are  its  instruments.  II.  Knowledge  is  restorative.  Knowledge  here  is  in 
antithesis  with  hypocrisy.  Eeal  knowledge  is  truth,  reality.  It  scatters  the 
clouds  of  ignorance  and  error,  and  raises  the  soul  to  light,  freedom,  purity  and 
blessedness.  (D.  Thomas,  D,D.)  The  iruincere : — This  verse  may  be  understood 
with  a  reference  to  all  insincere  professions  of  friendship  and  good  intentions — to 
all  insinuating  and  flattering  pretensions,  adopted  for  the  purpose  of  effecting 
a  particular  end.  How  many  are  there  who,  for  objects  of  their  own  deceive 
others ;  no  matter  what  the  result  may  be  to  the  deceived,  provided  the  deceiver 
but  accomplish  his  selfish  aim.  In  religion,  the  hypocrite  has  a  purpose.  His 
religion  is  not  real.  He  assumes  the  cloak  to  cover  some  secret  design.  The 
verse  itself  suggests  the  design — the  undermining  of  the  principles  of  others.  He 
insinuates  himself  into  confidence.  The  confidence  increasing,  he  becomes  by 
degrees  more  and  more  bold,  till,  by  slow  steps,  he  unsettles  the  principles,  shakes 
the  faith,  dissipates  the  seriousness,  and  ruins  the  souls  of  others.  Hypocrites  are 
awful  stumbling  blocks.     (R.  Wardlaw.) 

Ver.  10.  When  it  goeth  well  with  the  righteous,  the  city  rejoiceth. — The  public 
conscience  in  relation  to  moral  character : — Down  deep  beneath  the  errors,  follies, 
vanities  of  the  community,  there  is  a  conscience.  That  conscience  points  evermore 
to  the  right  and  the  just,  as  the  needle  to  the  pole.  I.  The  public  conscience  in 
relation  to  the  righteous.  1.  Public  conscience  is  gratified  by  the  prosperity  of 
the  righteous.  2.  Public  conscience  acknowledges  the  usefulness  of  the  righteous. 
n.  Public  conscience  in  relation  to  the  wicked.  1.  It  rejoices  in  their  ruin. 
2.  It  acknowledges  their  mischief.  The  •'  mouth  of  the  wicked  " — the  channel  of 
impieties,  falsehoods,  impurities,  and  innumerable  pernicious  errors  have  caused  in 
all  ages,  and  is  still  causing,  the  overthrow  of  states.  (Homilist.)  The  tribute 
to  righteousness : — This  is  a  tribute  to  righteousness  which  must  come  sooner  or 
later.  There  is  a  heart  in  the  city  as  well  as  in  the  individual  man  ;  a  kind  of 
civic  personality  as  well  as  a  narrow  individuality.  When  principles  of  the 
highest  morality  govern  the  life  of  the  city  there  is  rejoicing  everywhere,  because 


CHAP.  XI.]  PROVERBS.  265 

where  righteousness  is  the  blessing  of  God  is,  and  the  blessing  of  God  maketh 
rich,  and  no  sorrow  is  added  to  that  infinite  and  tender  benediction.  It  is  singular 
indeed  that  even  bad  men  rejoice  when  good  principles  are  so  received  and  applied 
as  to  revive  commercial  industry  and  commercial  confidence,  and  create  a  healthy 
state  of  feeling  as  between  nation  and  nation,  and  city  and  city.  When  the  wicked 
man  perishes  there  is  shouting  of  gladness,  although  there  may  have  been  during 
his  lifetime  adulation  and  hypocritical  compliment  paid  to  him.  The  wicked  man 
never  did  anybody  any  lasting  good.  He  always  took  away  more  than  he  gave, 
and  he  never  pronounced  a  kind  word  except  with  a  stinging  spirit,  and  even  in  his 
superficial  benedictions  there  was  nothing  enduring,  nothing  solid  and  lasting  in 
the  comfort  which  he  pretended  to  bestow.  The  wicked  man  imagines  that  he  is 
popular,  but  his  imagination  is  vain.  He  is  only  made  use  of,  looked  for  in  order 
that  he  may  help  in  a  time  of  emergency,  or  iu  Bome  way  be  unconsciously 
debased  to  uses  the  full  range  and  purpose  of  which  he  does  not  perceive.  Every 
one  is  proud  to  recall  the  repute  of  a  righteous  man.  It  is  like  reminding  others 
of  gardens  of  beauty,  orchards  of  delight,  landscapes  rich  in  all  features  of 
excellence  and  attractiveness ;  the  name  of  the  righteous  is  a  name  of  health ;  it 
is  breathed  as  with  the  fresh  air  of  heaven  ;  men  delight  to  hear  it  and  find  their 
honour  even  in  its  repetition.  By  the  blessing  of  the  upright  the  city  is  exalted, 
but  it  is  overthrown  by  the  mouth  of  the  wicked.  The  upright  may  be  for  a  time 
opposed,  but  for  a  time  only  ;  the  issue  is  certain  ;  truth  will  prevail,  and  they  who 
oppose  the  upright  shall  come  to  humiliation,  if  not  to  contrition,  and  to  such  a 
sense  of  injury  inflicted  upon  the  innocent  as  will  elicit  from  them  words  of 
compunction,  petitions,  and  supplications  for  pardon.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  When 
the  wicked  perish,  there  is  shouting. — Joy  in  the  fate  of  the  wicked : — On  the  death 
of  Henry  HI.  of  France,  whose  character  was  a  contemptible  mixture  of  weakness, 
folly,  and  vice,  the  Parisians,  who  had  long  held  their  king  in  distrust  and 
contempt,  gave  themselves  up  to  most  disgraceful  excesses  of  joy,  and  the  Duchess 
of  Montpensier  ran  about  the  streets  crying,  "  Good  news,  good  news  1  the  tyrant 
is  dead  !  "  Robespierre  was  conveyed  to  the  place  of  execution  amid  shouts  and 
execrations  of  the  populace,  who  were  frantic  with  joy  at  the  downfall  of  the 
tyrant,  the  women  dancing  about  the  procession  in  the  most  insane  manner. 
There  was  great  rejoicing  in  Ireland  when  it  was  known  that  James  Carey,  the 
informer,  had  been  shot.  {J.  L.  Nye.)  When  Mordecai  triumphed  over  Haman, 
•'  the  city  of  Shushan  rejoiced  and  was  glad  "  (Esther  viii.  15).  "  When  the  wicked 
perish,  there  is  shouting."  When  Athaliah  was  slain,  "  all  the  people  of  the  land 
rejoiced"  (2  Kings  xi.  20). 

Ver.  11.  By  the  blessing  of  the  upright  the  city  is  exalted. — A  political  maxim : — 
To  the  morals  of  men  is  imputed  the  public  prosperity  or  misfortunes.  By 
"  upright  "  is  meant,  men  of  sufficient  abilities  for  the  stations  which  they  fill,  and 
of  piety  and  resolution  enough  to  discharge  the  duties  of  their  places.  1.  When 
righteous  magistrates  are  in  authority,  good  laws  are  enacted,  and  impartially  ad- 
ministered ;  virtue  meets  with  its  encouragements  and  vice  with  its  due  restraints  and 
punishments.  2.  The  faithful  dispensers  of  the  sincere  Word  of  God  must  needs 
contribute  very  much  to  the  happiness  of  the  place  where  they  live.  Those  who 
propagate  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  excite  men  to  glorify  Him,  must  in  reason  be 
esteemed  the  instruments  of  men's  felicity.  3.  Every  upright  man,  of  what 
station  soever,  is  a  blessing  to  the  place  where  he  lives,  if  he  have  so  much  of 
a  public  spirit  and  principle  of  humanity  in  him  as  to  desire  his  neighbour's 
prosperity  as  well  as  his  own  ;  and  if  he  be  ready  upon  all  reasonable  occasions  to 
do  good  offices  to  others,  such  a  man  is  a  good  member  of  any  civilised  community. 
The  other  part  of  the  text  deals  with  a  contrary  cause  and  effect.  1.  At  the 
tribunals  of  justice,  in  trials  of  right  and  wrong,  an  unjust  sentence  has  often 
proceeded  from  the  mouth  of  a  partial  judge,  a  corrupt  jury,  or  a  false  witness. 
2.  In  dispensing  the  Divine  Word,  and  treating  of  the  mysteries  and  doctrines  of 
religion,  it  is  of  most  destructive  consequences  to  the  people,  if  the  mouth  of  the 
wicked  have  the  handling  of  them ;  for  then  the  people  will  be  sure  to  be  divided 
by  that  religion  which  was  designed  to  unite  them,  and  be  emboldened  to  disobey 
God  by  the  authority  of  His  own  misinterpreted  Word.  Pure  religion  is  certainly 
the  very  best  cement  of  civil  society,  as  mightily  enforcing  the  duties  of  unity, 
peace,  and  love  among  men :  but  religion  corrupted  in  the  doctrines  of  faith  and 
practice  carries  with  it  the  seeds  of  endless  strife  and  contention,  and  ministers 
occasion  to  continual  debates  and  animosities.     3.    In    the    daily  affain    and 


266  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  xx. 


transactions  of  common  life,  the  mouth  of  the  wicked  does  much  towards 
destroying  the  public  good.  If  this  be  well  demonstrated,  it  is  a  fair  warning  to 
all  cities  which  are  concerned  for  their  own  preservation,  that  they  be  very  careful 
to  increase  the  upright,  and  diminish  the  number  of  the  wicked  among  them.  Let 
as  then  exert  ourselves,  upon  all  just  occasions,  in  the  cause  of  truth,  to  the 
extermination  of  aU  that  is  contrary  to  it.  So  shall  we  both  entitle  ourselves  and 
those  whom  we  shall  reduce  from  error  to  the  gracious  protection  of  God  in 
this  life  present,  and  to  His  everlasting  salvation  in  that  which  is  to  come. 
{W.  Reading,  M.A.)  A  good  man  a  bles$ing  to  the  city  : — When  Hezekiah 
"  wrought  that  which  was  good  and  right  and  truth  before  God,"  the  Lord  saved 
Jerusalem  from  the  hand  of  every  enemy,  and  made  the  city  prosperous  (2  Chron. 
xxiii.  22,  30.)  But  it  is  overthrown  by  the  mouth  of  the  wicked. — The  men  of 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  were  foul  of  mouth ;  it  was  an  open  sepulchre ;  and, 
because  of  their  sins,  God  overthrew  the  two  cities  (Gen.  lix.  25). 

Vers.  12,  13.  He  that  is  void  of  wisdom  desplseth  his  neighbour. — Types  of 
character  in  social  life  : — Four  distinct  types  of  character.  I.  The  insolent.  Men 
destitute  of  all  true  respect  for  their  fellows.  They  are  uncivil  and  rude,  sneering, 
saucy,  abusive.  II.  The  eespectfui,.  He  is  neither  precipitant  in  the  judgment 
he  forms  of  men,  nor  hasty  in  his  language.  He  is  the  true  gentleman  of  society : 
cautious,  prudent,  polite.  HI.  The  tattler.  A  tale-bearer  is  one  who  will  take 
in  your  secrets,  and  hasten  to  his  neighbour  to  pour  them  into  his  greedy  ears. 
He  has  a  witching  ear  to  know  your  concerns.  He  is  not  always  malicious  in 
spirit,  but  he  is  always  dangerous.  He  is  always  defending  friendships,  starting 
suspicions,  and  creating  animosities.  IV.  The  trustwoktht.  The  antithesis  to 
the  tale-bearer.  He  is  a  dependable  friend ;  he  will  listen  to  your  secrets  as  things 
too  sacred  for  speech.  Tou  can  trust  him  with  your  life,  he  wiU  never  betray  you. 
{Homilist.)  Tale-bearers  unloading  refuse  : — "  It  was  told  me  in  the  strictest 
confidence,  but  you  won't  teU !  "  "  No,"  was  the  quiet  reply  ;  "  I  prefer  not  to 
hear  it.  What  right  have  you  to  tell  what  you  virtually  promised  not  to  communi- 
cate ;  I  am  sure  I  have  no  right,  and  I  have  no  desire  to  know  what  does  not 
belong  to  me  to  know."  There  are  people  who  use  their  friends  as  dumping- 
grounds,  and  unload  on  them  any  choice  bits  of  scandal  they  may  chance  to  pick 
up,  as  though  they  were  conferring  a  favour.  As  long  as  human  nature  is  what  it 
is,  there  will  be  plenty  of  such  unloading  to  be  done  ;  but  what  noble  mind  wishes 
to  be  put  to  such  ignoble  uses,  and  to  have  made  in  any  part  of  his  spiritual 
domain  a  scavenger  heap  ?  The  perfect  character,  like  the  perfectly  kept  house, 
has  no  dark  and  dusty  corners.  It  is  kept  sweet  and  pure  in  every  part.  There  is 
no  place  where  a  foul  garment  or  a  malodorous  rag  may  be  tucked  away  and 
hidden.  Fire  and  water  and  the  broom  and  duster  in  a  modern  house  keep  all 
things  clean.  There  is  no  more  reason  why  there  should  be  nesting-places  of  evil 
in  the  soul  than  why  there  should  be  dust  upon  our  furniture.  The  pure  sunlight 
of  God  let  into  dark  places  cleanses  and  keeps  them  clean.  The  person  who  in 
confidence  would  taint  another  is  not  a  friend,  but  an  enemy.  (Christian  Age.) 
Tale-bearers  traders  in  scandal : — The  word  means  "  a  hawker,"  or  "  travelling- 
chapman  " ;  and  the  tale-bearer  is  a  trader  in  scandal,  an  itinerant  busybody.  A 
shrewd  heathen  was  wont  to  say,  "  Tale-bearers  should  be  hung  up  by  the  tongue, 
and  tale-hearers  by  the  ears." 

Ver.  14.  Where  no  counsel  is,  the  people  fall. — The  value  of  advice  : — Kings  and 
rulers  stand  in  special  need  of  counsel.  When  a  ruler  is  surrounded  by  good 
counsellors  he  and  his  people  are  safe.  We  can  trace  this  truth  in  the  rise  and  fall 
of  nations.  God's  advice  is  one  of  our  most  valuable  helps,  and  the  text  teUs  us 
not  to  neglect  it.  Man  is  apt  to  go  astray.  His  judgment  is  sometimes  misled ; 
while  his  affections  are  corrupted,  and  his  will  is  ungoverned.  I.  Why  do  we 
NEED  ADVICE?  The  first  reason  is  found  in  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  evils  to  which 
we  are  exposed.  Sin  has  a  strangely  deluding  influence  over  those  whom  it  tempts. 
Here  there  is  scope  of  need  for  wise  counsels,  which  may  enforce  the  np^lected 
voice  of  conscience.  Advice  is  also  necessary  in  consequence  of  special  circum- 
stances in  which  we  are  placed.  We  are  involved  in  difficulties  from  which  others 
are  required  to  rescue  us.  "  Where  no  counsel  is,  the  people  fall."  II.  Whebk 
ABB  WE  TO  SEEK  ADVICE  ?  We  should  Dot  ask  for  it  except  when  we  really  require 
it.  To  be  ever  at  a  loss  what  to  do  unless  we  are  "  advised  "  is  a  characteristic  of 
a  life  that  is  usually  spent  to  little  purpose.    The  secret  of  a  useful  course  through 


CHAP.  XI.]  PROVERBS.  267 

the  world  lies  in  a  measure  of  self-reliance.  At  other  times  when  advice  Is  sought 
there  is  a  foregone  conclusion,  and  a  man  only  wishes  to  have  his  own  views  con- 
firmed. Out  of  its  proper  place  advice,  instead  of  being  a  help,  is  almost  a  hin- 
drance to  a  right  decision.  It  is  not  safe  to  go  indiscriminately  to  all  sorts  of 
people  with  a  statement  of  our  difficulties,  and  entreaties  for  advice  in  dealing  with 
them.  This  disposition  is  the  evidence  of  a  weak  mind  and  an  irresolute  will. 
There  is  no  real  safety  in  the  counsel  sought  in  the  confessional.  Supreme 
wisdom  comes  to  us  with  greatest  force  when  it  flows  through  the  channel  of  hearts 
bound  closely  to  our  own.  III.  How  to  take  advice.  The  danger  of  resenting 
counsel,  when  it  is  unpleasant,  is  one  with  which  we  are  all  more  or  less  familiar. 
Those  who  give  advice  should  always  be  pure  of  their  warrant  to  do  so.  But  the 
more  experience  a  man  has  the  less  disposed  he  will  be  to  give  advice  unsought. 
Men  are  rarely  careful  enough  in  their  way  of  giving  disagreeable  advice.  There 
is  a  spirit  and  a  manner  in  some  counsels  which  it  is  not  in  human  nature  to  bear. 
But  we  must  take  care  lest  we  be  displeased  with  others  whose  advice  we  get, 
simply  because  we  dislike  it.  All  are  not  good  counsellors  who  try  to  lead,  and  we 
cannot  too  carefuUy  test  the  words  of  advice  which,  on  every  hand,  are  spoken  to 
as.  When  we  are  in  doubt  as  to  their  value,  we  must  weigh  them  in  the 
balance  of  God's  sanctuary;  and  if  they  speak  not  according  to  His  law,  it  is 
because  there  is  no  truth  in  them.  The  Great  Adviser  is  always  interested  in 
us.  Eeliance  on  help  from  above  is  verified  by  the  experience  of  all  good  men. 
(A.  MacEwen,  D.D.) 

Ver.  16.  A  gracious  woman  retalneth  honour. — The  honour  of  woman  : — Here  the 
sexes  are  put  in  beautiful  apposition  :  woman  is  gracious,  man  is  strong.  Gracious- 
ness  dissociated  from  strength  has  indeed  an  influence  all  its  own  ;  strength  dis- 
sociated from  graciousness  is  mere  strength,  and  is  wanting  in  aU  those  attributes 
which  excite  and  satisfy  the  deepest  confidences  of  the  world.  A  woman  can  work 
miracles  by  her  graciousness.  She  knows  how  to  enter  the  sick  chamber  noise- 
lessly. She  knows  how  to  enter  the  room  without  violence,  ostentation,  or  impres- 
siveness,  which  signifies  vanity  and  display.  Woman  can  speak  the  gentle  word, 
and  look  the  gracious  look,  and  use  the  magical  touch  of  friendship  and  trust,  and, 
in  short,  can  carry  her  own  way  without  appsaring  to  do  so  by  the  very  force  of 
tenderness,  sympathy,  and  persuasiveness.  Who  would  raise  the  foolish  question 
whether  grace  or  strength  is  the  more  desirable  attribute  ?  Each  is  desirable  in  its 
own  way ;  a  combination  that  is  the  very  perfection  of  character.  Strength  and 
beauty  are  in  the  house  of  the  Lord.  The  great  column  looks  all  the  better  for  the 
beautiful  capital  which  crowns  and  enriches  it.  Men  should  endeavour  to  cultivate 
grace,  tenderness,  all  that  is  charmful  in  spirit,  disposition,  and  action.  This 
cannot  be  done  by  mere  mimicry  ;  it  is  to  be  done  by  living  continually  with  Christ, 
studying  His  spirit,  entering  into  all  His  purposes,  and  reproducing,  not  mechani- 
cally, but  spiritually,  as  much  as  possible  of  all  that  was  distinctive  of  His  infinite 
character.  The  Bible  has  ever  given  honour  to  woman.  He  is  a  fool  and  an 
unjust  man  who  wishes  to  keep  women  in  silence,  obscurity,  and  in  a  state  of 
unimportance ;  and  she  is  a  foolish  woman  who  imagines  that  she  cannot  be 
gracious  without  being  strong,  and  who  wishes  to  sacrifice  her  graciousness  to 
some  empty  reputation  for  worthless  energy.  It  is  not  good  for  the  man  to  be 
alone,  for  he  is  without  grace  ;  it  is  not  good  for  the  woman  to  be  alone,  for  she  is 
without  strength  ;  when  men  and  women  stand  to  one  another  in  the  right  Christian 
relation  they  will  complete  one  another,  and  together  constitute  the  Divine  idea  of 
humanity.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  17.  The  merciful  man  doeth  good  to  his  own  souL — The  merciful  man : — 
Our  God  is  a  God  of  mercy.  Since  He  is  full  of  mercy  Himself,  He  is  well  pleased 
when  He  sees  us  exercise  the  same  towards  our  fellow-creatures.  The  wise  man 
here  does  not  speak  of  tenderness  towards  others.  The  merciful  man  he  here 
represents  is  a  self-interested  individual.  He  "  doeth  good  to  his  own  soul."  The 
merciful  is  he  who  is  alive  to  his  eternal  interests,  who  is  seeking  the  good  of  that 
treasure  which  is  committed  to  him — "  his  own  soul."  How  may  you  promote  this 
most  desirable  of  all  objects  ?  1.  He  who  would  do  good  to  his  own  soul  must 
carefully  avoid  all  manner  of  sin,  whether  in  thought,  word,  or  deed.  The  thoughts 
must  be  watched.  We  are  to  be  careful  of  the  words  which  we  utter,  so  that  we 
may  not  make  our  tongues  the  instruments  of  evil-speaking,  lying,  and  slandering. 
And  careful  also  of  our  conduct  and  action.    2.  Another  mark  of  the  object  being 


268  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  xt. 

kept  in  view,  is  the  habitual  study  of  the  Word  of  God.  The  Scriptures  testify  of 
Christ,  and  point  Him  out  as  the  "  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life."  3.  Attention  to 
the  means  of  grace.  4.  He  endeavours  to  realise  an  interest  in  the  merits  and 
atonement  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  6.  The  merciful  man,  who  does  good  to  his 
own  soul,  does  bo  only  by  placing  his  entire  dependence  upon  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
(D.  Slyman,  B.A.)  The  generous  and  the  ungenerous  : — L  A  generous  disposi- 
tion IS  A  BLESSING  TO  ITS  POSSESSOR.  1.  A  merciful  man  doeth  good  to  his 
intellectual  faculties.  It  is  a  psychological  fact  that  the  intellect  can  only  see 
clearly,  move  freely,  and  progress  vigorously  as  it  is  surrounded  by  the  atmosphere 
of  disinterested  affection.  Selfishness  blinds,  cripples,  enervates  the  intellect. 
2.  A  merciful  man  doeth  good  to  his  moral  sentiments.  Conscience  approves  only 
of  the  actions  that  spring  from  love.  H.  An  ungenerous  disposition  is  a  curse 
TO  its  possessor.  Unmercifulness  of  disposition  breeds  the  fiends  of  envy,  jealousy, 
malice,  remorse,  fear,  suspicion,  pride,  that  torment  the  soul.  (Homilist.)  Mercy 
to  sufferers  and  to  offenders : — Mercy  to  sufferers  is  the  disposition  to  relieve ; 
mercy  to  offenders  is  the  disposition  to  forgive.  The  two  are  infinitely  united 
in  God.  Under  His  government  all  sufferers  are  offenders.  It  is  only  as  offenders 
that  they  are  sufferers,  and  when  He  pardons  the  offence  He  cancels  the  sentence 
to  suffering.  And  in  every  good  man  the  two  are  united.  They  should,  indeed, 
be  regarded  as  one  principle,  operating  in  different  departments.  The  merciful 
man,  whether  considered  in  the  one  light  or  in  the  other — in  exercising  forgiveness 
or  in  relieving  distress — "  doeth  good  to  his  own  soul  "  ;  he  effectually  consults  his 
own  interests.  In  the  exercise  of  the  generous  and  kindly  affections  there  is  a 
genuine  and  exquisite  happiness.     [R.  Wardlaw.) 

Ver.  18.  The  wicked  worketh  a  deceitful  work. — The  wicked  and  the  ju^t : — There 
is  here  a  startling  contrast  between  them,  in  their  work  and  in  their  reward, 
I.  Their  work.  1.  There  is  intentionally  set  before  us  a  good  specimen  of  a  bad 
man.  He  is  a  man  who  works,  and  works  hard  in  his  own  way.  Some  evil-doers 
are  idle,  profligate,  sensual,  devilish.  Such  seldom  deceive  themselves,  and  but 
rarely  deceive  others.  But  here  is  described  a  man  who  is  very  likely  to  deceive 
both  himself  and  others.  Wicked  men  are  often  shrewd  men  of  the  world  and 
clever.  They  are  zealous  and  laborious  men,  though  the  objects  they  aim  at  may 
be  unworthy  and  bad.  Their  mistake  is  not  in  the  way  they  work,  but  in  the  thing 
they  work  for.  If  all  Christians  were  as  eager  in  their  pursuit  of  truth  and  charity 
and  all  good  works  as  worldly  men  are  in  their  search  after  riches  and  pleasures, 
what  a  difference  it  would  make  1  Whilst  the  wicked  man  works  in  earnest  fashion 
for  time,  does  he  attempt  any  like  efforts  for  eternity  ?  It  is  a  mistake  to  think 
the  bad  man  does  not  care  for  eternity  at  all.  Multitudes  attempt  to  serve  two 
masters.  A  man  who  works  with  all  his  strength  for  worldly  success  often  per- 
suades himself  that  he  will  be  able  to  work  for  eternity  too.  Does  he  then  labour 
for  the  "  meat  that  endureth  unto  eternal  life"?  Nay,  at  this  point  his  wisdom 
is  at  fault,  the  deceitfulness  of  his  work  begins  to  appear.  He  is  no  better  than  a 
spiritual  impostor  and  spendthrift.  He  knows  nothing  of  the  faith  which  awakens 
the  generous  and  noble  impulses  of  humanity,  which  touches  the  heart  and  makes 
the  life  holy.  He  is  altogether  ignorant  of  the  quickening  and  sanctifying  grace  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  2.  Not  such  is  the  work  of  the  righteous.  He  "  soweth  righteous- 
ness." The  sowing  of  the  seed  is  the  crowning  act  of  the  husbandman's  prepara- 
tion for  a  crop.  All  his  other  work  goes  for  nothing  unless  it  be  consummated  by 
this  work.  The  wicked  is  said  to  work,  but  the  just  sows  righteousness.  The  text 
describes  a  work  of  faith.  He  who  "  sows  righteousness  "  does  it  in  order  that  he 
may  hereafter  gather  in  the  harvest.  What  is  the  seed  he  sows?  (compare 
Hos.  X.  12).  To  "  sow  righteousness,"  to  "  sow  in  righteousness,"  and  to  "  sow  to  the 
Spirit,"  all  means  the  same  thing.  It  is  to  live  righteously,  to  do  righteous  actions, 
to  perform  acts  of  devotion  and  piety  to  God,  and  to  do  works  of  truth  and  justice 
»nd  charity  towards  our  neighbour.  It  is  to  learn  to  do  the  will  of  God,  looking 
forward  to  a  future  harvest,  "  having  respect  unto  the  recompense  of  the  reward." 
Bighteousness  in  Scripture  is  a  universal  virtue,  containing  in  itself  all  other 
virtues.  A  man  must  gather  his  seed  before  he  can  sow  it.  He  who  is  to  "  sow 
righteousness "  must  first  obtain  a  supply  of  the  precious  fruit  of  righteousness. 
Whence  can  this  supply  be  fetched?  II.  Their  reward.  1.  Working  a  deceitful 
•work  means  working  so  as  to  deceive  others.  There  is  no  real  truth  in  a  bad  man. 
He  is  sure  to  deceive,  whenever  deceit  will  serve  his  ends.  He  will  cast  truth  to 
the  winds  whenever  truth  calls  upon  him  to  suffer,  either  in  his  own  person,  or  in 


CHIP.  XI.]  PROVERBS.  269^ 

his  parse,  or  in  the  good  opinion  of  others.  Another  rendering  is,  "  the  wicked 
winnetii  deceitfnl  wages."  His  work  wUl  betray  him  to  his  rain,  and  will  in  the 
end  ntterly  disappoint  his  own  hopes.  His  work  wUl  break  down  jast  where  it 
ought  to  stand,  and  fail  altogether  when  his  need  is  the  greatest.  2.  Mark  well  the 
bright  and  refreshing  contrast.  "  To  him  that  soweth  righteoasness  shall  be  a 
sare  reward."  The  seed  which  has  been  sown  in  hope  may  lie  for  a  long  time 
beneath  the  clods,  and  may  seem  to  be  dead  as  well  as  buried.  But  as  surely  as 
God's  Word  is  true,  it  will  spring  up  and  grow,  and  ripen  for  a  harvest  of  unspeak- 
able  joy.  The  reward  of  the  righteous  is  a  reward  of  grace  and  mercy.  He  that 
has  "  sown  righteousness  "  most  plentifully  will  look  for  his  sure  reward  only  from 
the  mercy  of  God,  through  Jesus  Christ.  We  live  in  diflBcult  times,  no  doubt,  but 
every  age  has  its  own  trials,  and  the  men  of  every  age  are  ready  to  believe 
that  no  trials  are  as  bad  as  theirs.  The  only  safe  way  is  the  same  in  every 
age.  It  is  to  "sow  righteousness."  {W.  Bonner  Hopkins,  B.D.)  To  hJTn 
that  soweth  righteousness  shall  be  a  sure  reward.— Tfte  spiritual  tillage : — The 
husbandry  and  harvest  of  the  righteous : — This  is  a  counter-plea  to  that  profane 
principle  of  the  atheists,  who  say,  "It  is  in  vain  to  serve  God."  I.  What  it  is  to 
sow  BIGHTE0USNES8.  It  is  the  same  as  to  "  sow  to  the  Spirit."  The  gracious 
course  of  consecrating  a  man's  self  unto  God  in  the  practice  of  godliness.  There 
is  likeness  betwixt  the  practice  of  godliness  and  the  sowing  of  seed.  1.  In  some 
things  which  go  before  sowing — the  preparation  and  fitting  of  the  ground,  and 
the  choice  of  seed  to  put  in  the  ground.  In  like  manner  there  must  be  in  the 
practice  of  godliness  the  preparation  of  the  heart  and  the  choice  of  particulars 
belonging  to  a  Christian  course.  2.  In  the  act  of  sowing,  which  may  include  the 
time  of  sowing  and  the  plenty  of  sowing.  In  the  spiritual  business  the  seed-time 
for  righteousness  is  in  this  life ;  the  opportunity  must  be  taken  when  it '  comes. 
And  to  sow  righteousness  is  to  be  rich  in  good  works.  3.  In  the  things  that  follow 
after  sowing.  The  fields  must  be  hedged,  the  cattle  shut  out,  the  birds  driven 
away,  the  stones  picked  out,  and  the  field  watched  to  see  how  it  goes  on.  In 
spiritual  matters  it  is  vain  to  have  entered  into  a  good  course  if  it  be  not  continued. 
The  signs  of  the  practice  of  godliness  are — (1)  The  submitting  a  man's  self  to  have 
his  heart  broken  up  by  the  power  of  God's  Word  ;  (2)  a  diligent  inquiry  into  the 
best  way  of  pleasing  God  ;  (3)  a  pressing  forward  amid  many  encumbrances  ;  (4) 
a  striving  and  caring  to  he  fruitful  in  good  works ;  (5)  a  watching  over  a  man's 
course  with  a  continued  diligence.  11.  What  is  the  subk  kew.uid  ?  This  is  either 
in  the  life  present  or  in  that  which  is  to  come.  Kewards  in  this  life  are  both 
outward  and  inward :  outward  so  far  forth  as  the  wisdom  of  God  shall  see  it  fitting. 
The  inward  is  peace  of  conscience,  arising  out  of  the  comfortable  assurance  of 
God's  favour.  This  is  a  joy  working  even  in  afflictions.  The  reward  in  the  lite  to 
come  cannot  be  expressed.  Scripture  reasoneth  concerning  the  certainty  of  this 
reward  by  a  proverbial  speech,  "  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth  that  shall  he  also 
reap."  Holiness  in  the  seed,  happiness  in  the  harvest.  And  by  the  truth  of  God'a 
promise.  There  is  a  double  reward — a  reward  of  favour  and  a  reward  of  debt. 
The  doctrines  to  be  collected  are — 1.  That  the  practice  of  godliness  is  a  matter 
which  requireth  great  industry.  2.  That  the  full  reward  of  religion  is  not  to  be 
looked  for  immediately  on  the  practice  of  religion.  Sowing  and  reaping  come  not 
at  once.  3.  That  the  Lord  will  surely  reward  those  which  faithfully  labour  in  His 
service.  Though  there  be  many  a  storm  after  our  sowing,  the  harvest  will  come, 
and  we  shall  be  comforted .  Farmers  pay  their  workmen  straight  after  their  labour, 
before  the  corn  be  ripe,  but  the  payments  are  of  far  less  value  than  the  com.  God 
bestoweth  upon  His  all  that  they  have  sown,  and  the  hire  shall  far  exceed  the 
travail.  (S.  Hieron.)  The  two  pursuits  with  their  respective  ends  : — Denuncia- 
tions of  wrath  against  the  wicked  are  no  less  common  in  Scripture  than  declara- 
tions of  mercy  to  the  penitent.  The  promises  of  almighty  love  are  often  repeated  ; 
no  less  frequent  are  the  proclamations  of  almighty  justice.  The  doom  of  the 
impenitent  is  no  less  certain  than  the  rewards  of  the  righteous.  Solomon  seems  to 
place  before  us  in  these  words  the  life  of  the  righteous  and  the  life  of  the  ungodly 
contrasted  with  the  respective  objects  which  they  have  in  view  and  the  different 
ends  to  which  they  lead.  I.  The  wicked  wokketh  a  deceitful  work.  The  object 
which  he  pursues  seems  to  promise  him  great  things,  but  it  generally  fiJls  him  with 
disappointment  and  chagrin.  The  characters  of  the  wicked  are  various,  but  in  one 
point  they  all  agree — "they  forget  God."  They  practically  forget  Him.  They 
salve  over  their  own  consciences  by  thoughts  of  impunity.  They  liave  no  love  to 
God's  name,  no  inclination  to  obey  His  laws  ;  they  are  by  consequence  without  the 


270  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  n. 

strongest  bond  of  duty  in  man,  which  is  love.  The  law  of  God  is  hateful  to  them, 
because  it  puts  constraint  upon  their  appetites  and  evil  designs.  And  they  are 
without  the  bond  of  fear.  As  God's  judgments  are  out  of  sigLt,  so  they  are  out  of 
mind.  The  pursuit  of  evil  cannot  minister  to  happiness  even  here  below.  It  is 
attended  with  manifold  woes,  even  upon  earth.  Sin,  in  most  cases,  is  connected 
with  punishment.  "  He  that  pursueth  evil  pursueth  it  to  his  death."  It  is  the 
death  of  hope,  peace,  reputation,  and  a  good  conscience.  It  is  often  the  cause  of  a 
premature  temporal  death.  The  pursuit  of  evil  is  the  necessary  school  and  prepara- 
tion for  eternal  death.  II.  The  diffebent  ends  to  which  the  life  op  the  bighteous 
AKD  the  life  of  the  UNGODLY  LEAD.  What  is  rightcousuess  ?  Other  terms  are 
godliness,  holiness,  the  new  man.  What  is  meant  is  not  the  righteousness  of  forms, 
but  an  inward  disposition  manifested  by  corresponding  conduct,  the  new  heart  and 
the  new  life.  It  is  the  godliness  which  is  opposed  to  the  bodily  exercise  that 
profiteth  little.  Such  righteousness  tendeth  to  life.  It  has  a  natural  and  necessary 
tendency  to  promote  present  peace  and  eternal  glory.  In  Scripture  the  words  life 
and  death  are  used  for  happiness  and  misery.  The  righteous  are  necessarily 
training  themselves  for  eternal  happiness,  independently  of  that  promise  which 
secures  to  them  "the  crown  of  glory  that  fadeth  not  away."  There  must  be  a 
fitness  for  heaven,  a  character  acquired  upon  earth  which  is  suitable  to  the  abode 
of  the  just.  The  righteousness  of  which  we  speak  is  conformity  of  heart  and  life 
to  Jesus  Christ ;  it  is  union  of  soul  with  Him,  a  likeness  to  His  example  ;  it  has  a 
measure  of  His  holiness  and  perfection.  Kighteousness  disposes  and  fits  a  man  for 
the  enjoyment  of  God,  for  it  cultivates  those  faculties  of  the  soul  which  are  called 
into  exercise  in  heaven.  Kighteousness  rests  upon  the  basis  of  love.  The  acquiring 
of  this  righteousness  is  the  preparation  for  the  enjoyment  of  God.  Already  the 
righteous  have  communion  with  the  Father  of  their  spirits  and  with  the  "  spirits 
of  the  just  made  perfect."  This  being  so,  the  passage  for  them  is  easy  from  this 
world  to  eternity.  But  righteousness  also  has  a  tendency  to  promote  present 
happiness.  The  righteous  live  in  the  favour  of  God.  They  have  peace  of  con- 
Bcience.  They  fear  no  evil.  They  can  look  on  death  without  alarm.  Righteous- 
ness has  a  natural  tendency  to  promote  our  welfare  by  conciliating  the  favour  of 
the  good  and  the  respect  of  all.  And  the  reward  laid  up  in  heaven  is  sure.  In 
conclusion,  address  two  classes:  Those  who  are  seeking  after  righteousness — a 
word  of  cheer.  Those  who  are  "working  a  deceitful  work " — a  word  of  warning. 
{H.  J.  Hastingt,  M.A.)  The  deceitfulness  of  sin  : — Opposites  illustrate  each 
other.  Of  this  principle  considerable  use  is  made  in  the  sacred  Scriptures. 
I.  Opposite  chabactees.  The  idea  of  righteousness  is  equality,  as  the  equilibrium 
of  a  pair  of  scales.  Applied  to  moral  or  religious  natures  it  means  a  correspon- 
dence between  our  obligations  on  the  one  hand  and  our  performance  on  the  other. 
So  it  becomes  obedience  or  conformity  to  the  law.  The  radical  meaning  of  the 
word  "wicked"  is  inequality,  unfairness.  In  a  moral  sense  a  want  of  correspon- 
dence between  duty  and  performance,  or  nonconformity  to  righteous  laws.  Wicked- 
ness is  disorder,  incongruity,  deception,  an  unsound  principle,  naturally  producing 
a  deceitful  work.  II.  Opposite  pbactices.  Righteousness  renders  to  all  their  due. 
Where  wrong  sentiments  are  indulged  wrong  dispositions  and  practices  naturally 
follow.  Hence  result — 1.  Treachery  towards  friends.  2.  Fraud  and  falsehood  in 
business.  3.  Extortion  and  oppression.  4.  Maladministration ;  a  never-ceasing 
theme  of  complaint.  In  all  such  cases  the  work  is  a  "deceitful  work" — deceitful 
in  its  nature,  operation,  and  results.  III.  Opposite  eesults.  1.  God  convinces 
the  sinner  of  his  unrighteousness.  2.  Enlightens,  transforms,  and  renews  the  soul. 
The  renewed  begins  to  sow  righteousness.  To  him  there  is  a  sure  reward.  Pause 
and  inquire  whether  such  a  change  has  been  effected  in  you.  Pray  for  convincing 
and  converting  grace.  Persevere  through  evil  and  through  good  report.  {Sketches 
of  Four  Hundred  Sermons.)  The  reward  of  sowing  righteousness  : — In  the  Bible 
a  righteous  person  is  one  who  loves  and  serves  God,  i.e.,  one  who  is  a  true  Christian. 
When  people  become  true  Christians  themselves  they  want  to  do  all  they  can  to  try 
to  make  other  people  Christians.  All  the  good  things  that  such  people  do  in  this 
•way  the  Bible  calls  righteousness.  Sowing,  in  the  text,  means  doing.  Righteous- 
ness, in  the  text,  means  kind  acts,  good  works  of  any  kind,  that  Christian  people 
do  out  of  love  to  Jesus  and  from  a  desire  to  make  others  love  Him.  And  thus  we 
find  out  that  "  sowing  righteousness "  means  doing  good.  Righteousness  is  the 
best  seed  in  the  world  to  sow.  1.  Because  of  the  size  of  the  field  in  which  this 
sowing  may  be  carried  on.  2.  Because  of  the  number  and  kind  of  sowers.  Farmers 
are  only  one  class  of  men.    All  classes  of  persons  may  be  sowers  of  righteousness. 


CHlP.M.]  PROVERBS.  271 

3.  Because  of  the  certainty  of  the  reward.  Farmers  hope  for  harvest,  but  cannot 
be  quite  sure.  The  reward  of  sowing  righteousness  is  made  up  of  pleasure  and 
profit.  Sometimes  the  profit  is  found  in  this  life.  But  the  best  part  of  the  reward 
is  in  heaven.  (R.  Newton,  D.D.)  The  evil  and  the  good : — Men  separate 
morally  into  two  great  divisions.  See  them — I.  As  they  appear  at  work.  1.  Evil 
works  deceitfully.  It  deceives  the  individual  possessor ;  it  makes  his  very  life  a 
fiction.  It  deceives  others.  It  fabricates  and  propagates  falsehood.  2.  The  good 
works  righteously.  Being  righteous  in  heart,  he  is  charged  with  righteous  principles, 
which  he  sows  as  seed  in  the  social  circle  to  which  he  belongs.  II.  As  thet  appear 
IN  RETRIBUTION.  All  works,  the  bad  as  well  as  the  good,  bring  results  to  the  worker. 
These  results  are  the  retribution  ;  they  are  God's  return  for  labour.  1.  The 
righteous  reap  life.  Life  of  the  highest  kind — spiritual.  Life  of  the  highest  degree 
— immortal  blessedness.  2.  The  wicked  reap  death — the  death  of  all  usefulness, 
nobility,  and  enjoyment.  III.  As  they  appear  before  God.  1.  God  observes  moral 
distinctions.  2.  God  is  affected  by  moral  distinctions.  What  He  sees  He  feels. 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Yer.  19.  As  righteousness  tendeth  to  life  :  so  he  that  pursueth  evil  pursueth  it 
to  his  own  death. — The  reward  of  righteousness : — Life  and  death  are  objects  of 
universal  interest.  Life  here  is  life  spiritual  and  eternal.  Death  is  viewed  as 
involving  separation   and   exclusion  from   God.      I.  Kighteousness  proves  the 

SPIRITUAL  LIFE  TO  BE  BEGUN  IN  OUR  SOULS  ;    EVIL  SHOWS  THAT  OUR  SOULS  ARE  STILL  DEAD 

IN  SIN.  Naturally  we  are  all  dead  in  sin.  There  is  a  life  which  God's  life-giving 
Spirit  begins  in  us.  One  of  the  most  marked  indications  of  its  existence  is 
righteousness  developing  itself  in  the  whole  character  and  conduct.     II.  Eighteous- 

NESS  IS  CONNECTED  WITH  THE  SPIRITUAL  NOURISHMENT  WHICH  MAINTAINS  LIFE! ; 
EVIL    WITH    THE    NEGLECT    OF    SUCH    NOURISHMENT,     WHICH    OCCASIONS     DEATH.       Man'S 

spiritual  nature  must  receive  spiritual  sustenance.  The  soul  that  is  quickened  to 
righteousness  hungers  and  thirsts  after  righteousness,  and  God  bestows  upon  it  what 
it  seeks,  so  as  to  nourish  it  and  strengthen  it.     III.  Righteousness  leads  to 

COURSES   of   action  WHICH   PROLONG   LIFE  ;    EVIL,  FROM   ITS  VERY  NATURE,  CONDUCTS  TO 

DEATH.  God's  ways  tend  not  only  to  the  preservation  and  prolongation  of  life  in 
this  world,  but  to  the  full  enjoyment  of  life  for  evermore.     IV.  Eighteousness 

ASSOCIATES  us  WITH  THOSE  WHO  ARE  ALIVE  TO  GoD,  THUS  HELPING  TO  MAINTAIN  LIFE  IN 
THE  SOUL  ;   EVIL   UNITES  US  TO  THOSE  WHO  ARE  SPIRITUALLY  DEAD,  AND  BRINGS  US   INTO 

THE  SAME  STATE  WITH  THEM.  To  bc  the  Hviug  among  the  dead  is  no  easy  thing. 
If  voluntarily  we  associate  with  the  dead,  imbibing  their  spirit,  and  following  their 
ways,  we  must  be  conformed  in  likeness  to  them.  V.  Eighteousness  ensures  the 
Divine  protection,  so  that  life  is  guarded  and  defended  ;  evil  incurs  God's 
wrath,  which  is  death.  Life  is  a  brittle  thing.  The  great  God  who  gives  it 
is  ready,  however,  to  ward  off  all  the  dangers  which  may  menace  it.  His  favour  is 
life ;  His  frown  is  death.  VI.  Righteousness  conducts  to  life  everlasting  m 
HEAVEN ;  EVIL  TO  ETERNAL  DEATH  IN  HELL.  The  world  of  glory  shaU  be  peopled 
by  the  righteous.  The  evil  and  unbelieving  shall  inhabit  the  world  of  woe. 
(Anon.)  Pursuing  evil : — The  "  sure  reward  "  in  the  preceding  verse  is  "  life  "  in 
this ;  and  as  that  reward  is  sure  in  the  one  case,  the  "  deceitfulness  of  the  wicked's 
work "  Ues  in  its  effecting  "  death  "  as  its  result  instead  of  "  life."  He  who 
"pursueth  evU"  may  overtake  it,  and  may  boast  himself  in  the  success  of  his 
pursuit.  But  the  very  evil  that  he  overtakes  shall  slay  him.  It  is  as  if  a  man 
were  to  pursue  a  serpent,  captivated  by  the  beauty  of  its  appearance,  in  its  shifting 
and  glistening  hues,  but  ignorant  of  the  venom  of  its  sting,  or  its  fang,  and  in  the 
act  of  laying  hold  of  it,  were  to  receive  the  deadly  wound.  Death  treads  on  the 
very  heels  of  the  man  who  "  pursueth  evil " ;  and  when  he  overtakes  the  evil, 
death  overtakes  him.  {R.  Wardlaw.)  The  natural  history  of  evil : — Every 
sinner  plans  and  acts  against  his  own  personal  interest ;  and  fond  as  he  is  of  life, 
he  is  a  self-destroyer.  He  is  allured  by  false  appearances,  enveloped  in  sense  and 
sensual  delights,  and  follows  a  path  that  ends  in  destruction.  I.  The  commence- 
MBNT  OF  MORAL  EVIL  IN  THE  HUMAN  SOUL.  He  is  bom  in  a  stato  of  impurity.  Evil 
is  interwoven  in  the  very  texture  of  his  being.  It  commenced  with  the  first  family 
of  the  human  race,  and  the  evil  spirit  of  unrighteousness  has  been  transmitted  from 
father  to  son.  When  a  man  is  not  properly  acquainted  with  the  corruption  of  his 
nature,  he  mistakes  a  want  of  opportunity  to  sin  for  moral  purity  of  heart,  and  the 
absence  of  temptation  for  a  truly  virtuous  mind.  Evil  in  actual  operation  in 
human  life — 1.  Springs  up    in    thoughts.     2.  Finds  expression  in    overt    acts. 


272  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».xi. 

n.  The  PBoaRBSs  or  mobal  kyil.  "  He  that  pursueth  evil."  There  is  not  the  root 
only,  bat  also  the  tree  and  the  growth.  A  man  seldom  becomes  a  sadden  profligate. 
By  a  continaance  in  evil  the  feelings  become  less  affected  with  its  enormity,  the 
conscience  is  less  tender  and  scrupulous,  the  base  inclinations  and  passions  of  the 
heart  gather  strength,  and  temptation  finds  an  easy  dupe  to  every  impioas  proposaL 
Sin  has  not  a  resting-place.  It  carries  within  itself  the  power  of  perpetual  motion. 
Sin  hardens  the  heart.  IIL  The  completion  of  mobal  EvrL.  It  has  its  seed-time, 
its  growth,  and  its  harvest.  1.  The  completion  of  sin  is  the  death  of  reputation. 
2.  The  death  of  enjoyment.  3.  The  death  of  the  body.  4.  The  death  of  the  soul. 
{Thomas  Wood.) 

Ver.  20.  Such  as  are  upright  in  their  way  are  Hie  deligrht. — The  upright,  God"* 
delight : — I.  Who  abe  the  tjprioht  ?  Those  whom  God  makes  upright,  the 
workmanship  of  His  own  Spirit,  His  new  creation.  This  does  not  deny  that 
there  is  in  a  sense  an  uprightness  in  the  natural  man.  Aa  long  as  man  is 
a  responsible  being  he  is  answerable  to  God  for  the  use  of  the  means  given 
him,  and  it  is  a  certain  truth  that  there  is  not  a  natural  man  in  the  world 
who  acts  up  to  the  light  that  he  has.  Great  numbers  claim  the  character  of  being 
upright  and  sincere.  So  the  apostle  Paul  thought  of  himself  when  in  his  uncon- 
verted state.  Natural  sincerity  never  comes  to  the  testing  of  God's  holy  light.  It 
can  deal  with  man,  but  there  is  never  that  in  natural  sincerity  which  comes  before 
Gk)d.  For  the  upright  see  the  publican  smiting  on  his  breast ;  the  prodigal 
returning  home  ;  the  woman  a  sinner  dropping  tears  of  penitence  on  Jesus's  feet ; 
Matthew,  Zaccheus,  Nicodemus.  The  weakest,  the  feeblest  believer,  is  upright. 
He  often,  indeed,  thinks  himself  otherwise.  He  will  even  regard  himself  as  a  seK- 
deceiver.  The  upright  man  mourns  over  inbred  corruptions.  Sometimes  he  has 
seasons  of  doubt.  He  is  brought  into  circumstances  of  trial.  Amidst  all,  in  the 
grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  he  holds  fast  his  integrity.  II.  The  ttpbight  abe  God's 
delight.  It  is  not  their  way,  but  themselves,  that  are  His  delight.  He  loved  them 
before  all  worlds;  He  loved  them  before  they  loved  Him  in  eternity.  But  the 
characters  of  the  upright  are  His  delight.  He  delights  in  the  fruits  of  His  own 
Son's  mediation,  in  the  workmanship  of  His  own  Spirit,  and  in  the  reflection  of  His 
own  image.  But  especially  He  delights  in  their  being  upright.  He  looks  to  the 
humiliation  of  the  upright,  their  broken  hearts,  their  falling  tears.  So  precious  i3 
this  uprightness  before  God,  that  it  seems  as  if  He  overlooked  all  faults  where  it  is. 
What  a  word  of  encouragement  this  ought  to  be  to  those  who  are  honestly  seeking 
Him  I  If  you  are  indeed  upright  God  knows  it,  and  "  your  inheritance  shall  be  for 
ever."     {J.  Harrington  Evans.) 

Ver.  21.  Thougli  hand  Join  in  hand,  the  wicked  shall  not  be  unpimlshed.  (Taken 
with  Luke  xxiii.  51.) — The  laws  of  responsibility  in  combinations  and  partnerships : — 
We  are  surrounded  by  numberless  combinations  devised  by  men  for  all  manner  of 
purposes — religious,  political,  judicial,  social,  commercial,  scientific,  industrial, 
artistic,  educational,  &c.  Men  widely  abandon  endeavours  after  striking  indi- 
viduality in  thought  or  conduct,  and  throw  themselves  blindfold  into  the  stream 
of  fashion  which  carries  the  multitude  away.  Men  seek  to  recover  their  lost  sense 
of  power  by  combination  with  others  in  doctrine,  in  capital,  indeed  in  all  depart- 
ments. The  will  of  each  individual  becomes,  as  it  were,  a  single  minute  cog  in  a 
mighty  wheel-work  of  engineering,  which  carries  everything  before  it.  All  this  ia 
not  favourable  to  the  sense  of  responsibility  for  conduct  here  or  hereafter.  There 
is  a  special  delusion  which  attends  the  combinations  in  which  men  seek  to  recover 
the  sense  of  power,  and  to  unite  their  forces  in  order  to  accomplish  their  ends. 
This  delusion  consists  in  mistaking  joint  responsibility  for  divided  responsibility. 
The  persuasion  is  extended  widely  that  union  is  not  only  strength  in  administration 
and  enterprise,  but  that  it  distributes  the  oppressive  burden  of  responsibility  in  equal 
or  nearly  equal  and  insignificant  shares  between  all  the  persons  who  are  joined 
together  in  any  undertaking;  so  that  although  the  practical  result  of  their  united 
action  may  be  morally  indefensible,  or  even  utterly  wicked  and  injurious,  no  single 
person  can  be  justly  blamed,  or  rendered  accountable  for  the  whole  criminality  of 
the  result — since  the  wickedness  has  been  effected  by  an  organisation  or  adminis- 
tration consisting  of  numbers  of  agents  who  have  assisted  or  consented  in  the  work. 
A  characteristic  proverb  has  descended  to  us  from  the  last  century  to  this  effect : 
'•  A  cathedral  chapter  would  divide  even  a  murder  between  them  " — a  proverb 
unfairly  singling  out  one  particular  kind  of  Christian  combination  for  censure. 


CSAJ.  H.]  PROVEBBS.  873 

yet  embodying  two  truths  applicable  to  every  association,  oivil  and  religious. 
1.  That  even  well-disposed  men  will  sometimes  agree  to  do  in  company  what  they 
would  not  dare  to  do  as  individuals.  2.  That  no  man's  personal  accountablenesa 
to  God  can  ever  be  swallowed  up  and  lost  in  an  impersonal  organisation.  The 
relation  of  the  individual  to  the  moral  government  of  God  is  primary,  dominant, 
and  inalienable ;  it  cannot  be  diminished  by  the  concurrence  of  others.  Before 
God  the  combination  of  men  in  counsel  and  action  results  always  not  in  divided 
responsibility  but  in  joint  responsibility.  Each  member  is  responsible  for  the  whole 
result  of  what  he  consents  to,  or  carries  into  action.  There  can  be  no  divided 
liability  for  a  conjoint  iniquity.  If  this  were  not  so,  it  would  require  men  only  to 
join  hand  in  hand  to  go  unpunished.  But  how  should  God  judge  the  world  unless 
in  all  such  cases  the  responsibility  is  joint,  not  distributive?  This  is  also  the 
principle  of  human  legislation  and  administration.  It  is  not,  therefore,  good  to 
undertake,  as  if  merely  nominal,  any  real  responsibilities.  This  truth,  that  a  man 
is  responsible  for  whatever  he  consents  to,  ought — 1.  To  be  proclaimed  in  relation 
to  ecclesiastical  organisations  and  missionary  societies.  2.  The  principle  may  be 
seen  in  the  working  of  political  party.  Educated  men  are  guilty,  in  a  free  country, 
of  aU  the  national  iniquity  against  which  they  do  not  protest  with  determination. 
3.  The  principle  of  personal  liability  needs  application  to  commercial  affairs  and 
civil  life.  The  Almighty  God  stands  behind  every  creditor  and  every  customer,  in 
readiness  to  assert  and  enforce  every  just  claim  to  the  uttermost.  The  Infinite 
Defender  of  Eight  is  behind  every  person  who  is  wronged.  The  highest  Law  Court 
is  omnipresent  and  sleepless.  We  cannot  put  an  end  to  the  great  battle  between 
selfish  interests,  but  we  can  do  much  by  public  spirit  and  sound  legislation  to 
alleviate  its  woes.  On  the  whole  I  must  express  my  conviction,  however,  that  the 
commercial  world  will  bear  an  honourable  comparison  with  the  political  and 
ecclesiastical,  when  tried  by  this  principle  of  the  responsibility  of  each  member  in 
every  combination.  (Edicard  White.)  Combinatum : — Men,  like  sheep,  are 
gregarious.  The  combination  is— I.  Natobal.  The  wicked,  in  the  text,  are 
supposed  to  be  in  danger,  and  nothing  is  more  natural  than  for  men  to  crowd 
together  in  common  danger.  Fear  as  well  as  love  brings  men  together ;  the  one 
drives,  the  other  draws.  II.  Useless.  No  combination  of  men,  however  great  in 
number,  vast  in  wisdom,  mighty  in  strength,  aflauent  in  resources,  can  prevent 
punishment  from  befalling  the  wicked.  It  must  come.  1.  The  moral  constitution 
of  the  soul.  2.  The  justice  of  the  universe.  3.  The  almightiness  of  God,  render 
all  human  efforts  to  avoid  it  futile.  {Homilist.)  Opposing  God  useless:— The 
uselessness  of  opposing  God  must  be  manifest  from  every  point  of  view.  God  is 
omniscient,  and  knows  all  things ;  is  almighty,  and  can  do  all  things ;  is  omni- 
present, and  is  everywhere:  so  that  no  device  or  counsel  or  plot  can  succeed  against 
Him.  The  image  of  the  text  is  that  of  conspiracy,  wicked  men  combining,  saying 
to  one  another  in  effect,  "  If  each  of  us  cannot  succeed  singly,  we  may  by  combination 
succeed  as  a  unity."  The  possibility  of  such  a  conspiracy  was  foreseen,  and  the  issue 
of  it  is  fforetold  in  these  plain  terms.  Let  men  add  money  to  money,  genius  to 
genius,  influence  to  influence,  counsel  to  counsel,  stQl  it  is  but  like  the'addition  of 
so  many  ciphers— the  number  being  very  great  but  the  value  being  absolutely 
nothing.  What  one  man  cannot  do  in  this  direction  a  thousand  men  are  unable  to 
do.  Fool,  then,  is  he  who  supposes  that  because  he  has  followed  a  multitude  to  do 
evil,  therefore  no  harm  will  come  to  him.  Every  man  in  the  multitude  will  be 
judged  as  if  he  were  alone  responsible  for  the  whole  mischief.  Hands  that  are 
joined  together  in  wickedness  may  be  dissevered  on  any  occasion  and  for  the 
flimsiest  reasons.  It  is  folly  for  any  wicked  man  to  trust  in  a  man  as  wicked  as 
himself,  for  the  very  fact  that  wickedness  renders  security  impossible,  and  turns  all 
manner  of  association  into  a  mere  matter  of  temporary  convenience,  which  may  be 
varied  or  destroyed  according  to  a  thousand  contingencies.  AU  evil  partnerships  in 
business  are  doomed  to  failure.  All  irregular  alliances  in  the  household  must 
come  to  confusion  and  disappointment,  and  may  end  fatally.  The  same  law  holds 
good  in  the  State,  and  indeed  in  every  department  of  life.  There  can  be  no  security 
but  in  righteousness,  in  high  wisdom,  in  unselfish  enthusiasm  ;  where  these  abound 
the  security  is  as  complete  as  it  is  possible  for  man  to  make  it.  Men  cannot  be 
joined  wisely  and  permanently  together  unless  they  are  first  joined  to  the  living 
God.  Men  can  only  be  joined  to  the  living  God  through  the  living  Christ ;  He  ia 
the  vine,  men  are  the  branches,  and  unless  the  branch  abides  in  the  vine  it  cannot 
lear  fruit,  but  is  doomed  to  be  burned.  True  union,  therefore,  must  be  religious  or 
epiritual  bc-fore  it  can  be  humiiu  and  aocial.     lx-j^-I^>ct  of  this  great  law  has  ended  in 

19 


274  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.tx. 

inexpressible  disappointment  and  mortification  on  the  part  of  statesmen,  reformers, 
and  propagandists  of  every  kind.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  But  the  seed  of  the 
righteous  shall  be  delivered. — The  sanctions  of  obedience : — The  text  is  a  twofold 
proposition — that  combinations  against  God  and  godliness  only  incur  failure  and 
penalty ;  and  that  the  triumph  of  righteousness  is  equally  sure.  There  are  among 
men's  habits  three  general  kinds  of  "wickedness,"  or  disobedience  to  God's  laws, 
entailing  upon  them  three  several  orders  and  degrees  of  retribution  or  punishment : 
violations  of  the  laws  which  govern  the  spiritual  or  moral  man,  the  animal  man, 
and  the  social  man,  1.  If  the  mind-laws,  which  include  the  intellectual  and  moral 
aspects  of  man,  be  disobeyed,  that  is  if  the  process  of  education  be  not  contem- 
poraneous with  the  progress  of  years,  the  mental  faculty  languishes  in  the 
stagnation  of  its  undeveloped  powers,  the  mental  man  grows  and  abides  an 
ignoramus,  a  stereotyped  boor ;  and  if  the  means  of  grace  be  in  like  manner 
neglected,  the  spiritual  man  rises  not  into  the  dignity  which  the  love  of  God 
designed  for  him,  2.  If  the  body-laws,  or  the  principles  which  regulate  the  health, 
be  disregarded  by  habits  of  excess  or  even  ordinary  indulgence  or  neglect  of  exercise, 
the  penalty  is  a  diseased  body,  and  personal  infirmity.  3.  If  the  estate  laws  be 
disregarded,  which  make  industry  essential  to  getting,  and  frugality  essential  to 
saving  what  is  got,  and  forethought  essential  in  the  way  of  insurance  upon  life  or 
property,  the  punishment  meets  the  man  in  his  estate,  in  his  condition  of  life,  that 
is,  in  the  form  in  which  he  has  sinned.  When  we  pray  for  a  sound  and  enlightened 
mind,  do  we  turn  to  the  Word  "  whose  entrance  giveth  light "  ?  Do  we  seek  to 
inform  our  minds,  correct  our  judgments,  and  enrich  our  memories  ?  When  we 
pray  for  health  and  strength  to  labour  and  enjoy,  do  we  avoid  those  varieties, 
artifices,  and  excesses  in  food  and  drink,  and  those  sluggish  habits  of  inactivity 
and  sloth,  which  make  health  physically  impossible  ?  When  we  pray  for  prosperity 
in  our  worldly  affairs,  do  we  still,  on  conscientious  principles,  "  labour,  working 
with  our  hands  the  thing  that  is  meet"  ?  Do  we  glorify  God  in  our  attention  to 
our  business  ?  Where  can  there  be  a  more  cogent,  impressive,  animating  motive 
than  the  sterling  fact,  "  Ye  are  not  your  own ;  ye  are  bought  with  a  price  ;  therefore 
glorify  God  in  your  bodies  and  spirits,  which  are  His  "?  Man  can  no  more  do 
without  God,  or  act  independently  of  God  and  His  laws,  than  the  rays  of  light  can 
dispense  with  the  sun.  All  the  errors  of  individual  character,  all  the  failures  in 
educational  theories,  all  the  mistakes  of  experimental  legislation,  originate  in  the 
fundamental  fatal  effect  of  reckoning  without  God,  setting  aside  the  great  elemental 
fact  that  He  is  at  the  root,  progress,  and  issue  of  all  things,  and  that  to  put  Him 
out  of  our  calculations,  to  supersede  His  constitution,  is  to  start  upon  false  premises, 
to  provoke  and  compel  a  failure,  to  reason  and  range  in  a  vicious  circle,  for  ever 
retracing  its  impracticable,  unprogressive  steps.  "  The  wicked  shall  not  go 
unpunished."  "  The  seed  of  the  righteous  shall  be  delivered."  {Joseph  B.  Owen, 
M.A.) 

Yer.  22.  As  a  Jewel  of  gold  in  a  swine's  snout,  so  is  a  fair  woman  which  Is 
without  discretion. — A  good  thing  in  a  had  place: — The  Jews  regarded  the  pig  as 
an  unclean  animal.  The  heathen  around  worshipped  the  pig,  and  they  ate  it 
afterwards  as  an  act  of  worship.  The  Egyptians,  when  they  wished  to  draw  a 
picture  of  a  very  foolish  person,  always  represented  him  as  a  pig.  How  unlovely 
is  the  idea  of  a  jewel  that  might  have  been  worn  by  a  queen  being  placed  in  the 
nose  of  a  pig  !  But  there  are  some  things  that  we  see  every  day  which  are  quite  as 
bad.  For  instance — 1.  A  pretty  face  and  a  very  ugly  soul.  It  is  nice  to  be  beautiful, 
but  it  is  far  better  to  be  good.  When  you  feel  tempted  to  be  proud  because  you  are 
good-looking,  ask  yourself,  "  Is  my  soul  good-looking  and  beautiful  to  God?  "  2.  A 
good  head  and  a  bad  heart.  King  John,  one  of  England's  worst  kings,  was  a  very 
clever  man.  It  is  not  enough  to  be  learned,  or  to  have  great  talents ;  we  want  to  be 
holy,  and  then  shall  we  be  able  to  use  our  abilities  well.  3.  Wise  words  and  foolish 
deeds.  It  was  said  of  a  certain  king,  that  "  he  never  said  a  foolish  thing  and  never 
did  a  wise  one."  A  jewel  treated  as  described  in  this  text  would  be  a  jewel  mis- 
applied. It  was  never  intended  for  such  a  use.  And  God  did  not  intend  that  we 
should  ever  waste  our  minds  and  our  time  in  the  service  of  sin.  The  Jews  had  a 
saying  that  the  nose  of  a  pig  is  walking  dirt.  If  a  jewel  were  placed  in  it,  it  would 
be  spoiled.  Sin  mars  a  beautiful  face ;  it  will  even  make  a  clever  man  foolish ; 
it  will  ruin  us  if  it  be  not  taken  away  from  us.  (J.  J.  Ellis.)  Bedizened 
wickedness. — A  fair  woman  is  one  of  personal  attractions.  Discretion  means  virtue 
or  moral  worth.      A  woman   of   external   attractions   who   is   devoid    of    mind 


CHAP.  XI.]  PROVERBS.  275 

excellences  is  a  most  unsightly  object.  I.  Hebe  is  a  vert  incongkuous  con- 
junction IN  one  person.  Physical  beauty  and  moral  deformity  united.  Do  not 
despise  natural,  or  personal,  or  artistic  beauty.  II.  Here  is  a  very  revolting 
CONJUNCTION  IN  ONE  PERSON.  Incongruity  is  not  always  disgusting,  it  is  sometimes 
ridiculous.  But  this  incongruity  is  disgusting  when  it  is  seen  aright  with  healthy 
moral  sentiments.  We  do  not  always  see  how  revolting  it  is,  because  our  eye  rests 
upon  the  personal  attraction,  and  peers  not  into  the  moral  heart.  We  are  taken 
up  more  with  the  "  jewel  "  than  with  the  "  swine."  III.  Here  is  a  vert  common 
CONJUNCTION  IN  ONE  PERSON.  1.  Wickeduess  is  prompted  by  personal  attraction. 
2.  Wickedness  is  fond  of  personal  attractions.  Vulgarity  always  likes  finery,  and 
Bin  is  always  fond  of  making  a  grand  appearance.  Do  not,  in  forming  your  fellow- 
ships, be  carried  away  with  one  side  of  life.  Do  not  follow  the  swine  for  the  sake 
of  the  jewel.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  24.  There  is  that  scattereth,  and  yet  increaseth. — The  tendency  of  liberality 
to  riches,  and  of  covetousness  to  poverty  : — The  words  of  this  text  carry  an  air  of 
improbable  and  surprising  paradoxes  to  the  covetous  and  worldly-minded,  who 
naturally  imagine  that  scattering  tends  to  poverty,  and  withholding  to  increase. 
But  if  we  take  them  to  be  allusive  to  the  management  of  a  husbandman  in  sowing 
his  seed,  the  sense  will  stand  as  easy  as  the  thought  will  appear  to  be  beautiful 
and  just  (compare  2  Cor.  ix.  6).  I.  The  description  of  persons  of  vert  opposite 
CHARACTERS.  "  Scatter  "  is  the  same  word  as  "  disperse  "  (Psa.  cxii.  9).  He  that 
scatters  is  the  liberal  soul ;  the  man  who,  with  a  free  and  generous  spirit,  labours 
to  spread  the  most  useful  and  extensive  influence,  by  all  manner  of  means  ;  the 
man  who  is  ready  to  distribute  of  his  temporal  substance  for  promoting  religious 
and  civil  liberties  and  interests,  for  doing  good  to  the  souls  and  bodies  of  men,  and, 
particularly,  for  relieving  the  necessitous  and  the  distressed.  We  should  manage 
our  religious  and  charitable  distributions,  not  with  contrivance  how  to  shift  off  our 
obligations  and  opportunities  for  them,  but  with  devising  how  in  the  best  manner 
to  improve  them  ;  not  with  a  grudging,  but  with  a  free  and  cheerful  heart.  On  the 
contrary,  he  that  withholds,  keeps  back,  or  spares,  more  than  is  meet  or  right,  is 
the  covetous  man,  whose  narrow,  selfish  spirit  will  not  suffer  him  cheerfully  to  pay 
his  personal  or  his  public  debts,  much  less  to  practise  beneficence  at  an  expense  that 
cannot  be  demanded  by  human  laws.  No  arguments  derived  from  humanity  or 
Christianity  can  work  his  heart  up  to  bear  his  proper  proportion  in  generous  and 
beneficent  acts.  II.  What  is  affirmed  of  these  persons  respectively.  We  might 
consider  this  increase  and  want  with  respect  to  our  best  interests,  that  relate  to  the 
enrichment  of  the  soul  in  goodness.  Distributing  enlarges  the  heart,  and  makes  it 
open,  free,  and  generous,  with  growing  propensions  to  every  good  work.  The  man 
who  withholds  is  poor-spirited ;  he  has  a  contracted  soul ;  he  is  destitute  of  those 
amiable  graces  by  which  our  God  and  Saviour  are  most  conspicuously  imitated 
and  glorified.  We  may  also  consider  this  increase  and  want  with  respect  to  our 
worldly  substance.  That  is  not  lessened  but  improved  by  distributions  on  all  proper 
occasions.  Withholdings,  more  than  is  meet,  ever  tend  to  poverty  and  want. 
God's  blessing  on  the  generous  comes  either  as  a  visible  increase  of  their  outward 
estates,  or  as  a  secret  increase  of  the  inward  contentment  of  their  own  minds. 
Those  who  are  of  a  covetous  temper,  do  not  enjoy  what  they  possess.  According 
to  a  just  estimation  of  things,  they  are  no  richer  by  all  their  silver  and  gold  than 
if  it  still  lay  in  the  ore  of  the  Indian  mines.  III.  Account  for  the  truth  of  both 
these  propositions.  Every  virtuous,  spiritual,  and  holy  disposition  of  the  soul 
increases  by  frequent  and  proper  exercise ;  and  loses  its  force  and  vigour,  and 
aptness  for  action,  by  disuse  and  neglect.  This  is  common  to  all  principles  and 
habits  of  the  moral  or  religious  and  supernatural  kind.  1.  The  blessing  of  God  is 
upon  them  that  scatter,  and  His  blast  is  upon  them  that  withhold  more  than  is 
meet.  2.  The  friendship  of  men  is  toward  them  that  scatter,  and  their  disaffection 
toward  those  who  withhold  more  than  is  meet.  (J.  Guyse,  D.D.)  Wise  philan- 
thropy : — To  distribute  portions  of  our  wealth  in  schemes  and  acts  of  wise 
philanthropy  is  like  casting  into  the  ground  as  seed  a  proportion  of  the  last 
year's  harvest.  It  goes  out  of  your  sight  for  the  moment,  but  it  will  spring  in 
secret,  and  come  back  to  your  own  bosom,  like  manna  from  heaven.  An  unwise 
man  may  indeed  scatter  his  corn  on  barren  rocks,  or  on  equally  barren  sands,  and 
though  he  sow  bountifully  he  will  reap  sparingly  there.  So,  in  the  moral  region, 
the  increase  is  not  absolutely  in  proportion  to  the  profusion  of  the  scattering. 
When  a  man  lays  out  large  sums  on  unworthy  objects,  to  feed  his  own  vanity  or 


276  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOIt.  [amr.rt. 


gratify  his  own  whim,  he  neither  does  nor  gets  good.  The  outlay  is  in  its  own 
nature  and  necessarily  profitable.  In  educating  the  young,  in  reclaiming  the 
vicious,  in  supporting  the  aged  poor,  in  healing  the  sick,  and  in  making  known  the 
gospel  to  all,  we  hare  ample  fields  to  cultivate,  and  the  prospect  of  large  returns  to 
cheer  us  in  the  toil.  {W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  The  profit  of  liberality : — The  Bible  gives  ua 
plain  view  of  the  character  and  mind  of  God ;  and  that  view  seta  Him  before  us  as 
a  Being  interested  in  promoting  the  happiness  of  His  creatures.  It  presents  Him 
as  establishing,  by  His  wise  decree,  that  order  of  things  which  places  men  in 
different  classes  and  circumstances  of  life ;  it  shows  ua  that  high  and  low  station, 
wealth  and  poverty,  affluence  and  dependence,  are  the  result  of  Divine  arrangement, 
and  so  far  it  discourages  pride  and  envy,  and  teaches  thankfulness,  contentment, 
and  resignation,  in  the  several  conditions  of  human  life.  God,  in  His  care  of  all 
His  creatures,  has  made  it  binding  on  the  rich,  by  an  express  enactment,  that  they 
should  see  to,  and  provide  for,  the  wants  of  the  poor.  There  is  nothing  more 
frequently,  nor  more  strongly  spoken  of  in  the  Word  of  God,  than  that  assistance, 
arising  out  of  the  fact  of  their  brotherhood,  which  man  should  render  man.  The 
text  sets  before  us  two  different  modes  of  dealing  with  our  property,  in  reference  to 
our  fellow-creatures.  I.  The  libebal  man,  and  what  he  gets  from  his  liberalitt. 
The  man  here  is  living  in  the  midst  of  dependent  fellow-creatures,  and  uses  hia 
property  in  relieving  them.  Here  seems  to  be  the  idea  of  a  husbandman  throwing 
his  seed  in  every  direction  where  it  may  be  profitable.  The  liberal  man  looks 
abroad,  and  where  his  money  is  wanted,  and  where  it  is  likely  to  do  good,  there  he 
gives  it  with  the  greatest  cheerfulness  of  mind.  This  is  what  ought  to  be.  We 
are  not  required  to  give  away  when  we  have  not  in  reality  the  power  to  do  so ; 
but  when  we  possess  the  power  the  duty  is  incumbent.  We  must  "  scatter  "  for  the 
blessing  of  others.  A  notion  prevails  that  if  we  give  liberally  to  others,  we  hurt 
ourselves.  We  are,  indeed,  told  to  "  do  good,  hoping  for  nothing  again,"  yet  we 
may  urge  as  an  encouragement  that,  in  sowing  the  seeds  of  kindness,  we  are  sure 
to  reap  a  personal  benefit.  The  men  who  have  been  most  liberal  have,  in  a 
general  way,  prospered  most  in  their  worldly  undertakings ;  and  certainly  they 
have  been  rewarded  with  growth  in  grace,  and  a  large  measure  of  peace,  confidence, 
and  joy  in  their  own  souls.  II.  The  mean  man,  and  the  result  which  follows 
his  meanness.  To  withhold  is  not  always  wrong.  It  may  be  a  right  thing,  a 
positive  duty.  But  some  men  are  wretchedly  mean ;  they  have  not  a  spark  of 
kind  sympathy  or  of  generous  sensibility  in  their  souls.  They  are  over-full  of  their 
own  things.  These  the  text  speaks  about.  There  is  a  measure  in  the  amount  of 
almsgiving  which  is  to  be  determined  by  a  person's  circumstances.  To  whom 
much  is  given,  from  the  same  will  much  be  required.  If  you  give  God  less  than 
God  requires  of  you,  then  instead  of  a  blessing  there  will  rest  on  you  a  curse.  God 
has  often  taken  away  from  a  man  the  riches  which  he  would  not  use  rightly  when 
he  had  them.  Poverty  of  pocket  is  not  the  worst  kind  of  poverty.  It  is  poverty  of 
soul  that  is  so  deplorable.  (William  Curling,  M.A.)  The  use  and  abuse  of 
poverty  : — Nothing  is  wanting  to  the  right  direction  of  human  conduct,  but  a  clear 
perception  of  man's  own  interest,  and  a  correct  estimate  of  man's  own  responsibility. 
In  the  text  a  contrast  of  two  characters  and  of  two  consequences.  I.  Two  opposing 
characters.  One  is  said  to  "  scatter."  Of  the  blessed  man  it  is  said,  "  He  hath 
dispersed,  he  hath  given  to  the  poor  "  (Psa.  cxii.  9).  The  apostle  says,  "  He  which 
soweth  sparingly  shall  reap  also  sparingly,  and  he  which  soweth  bountifully  shall 
reap  also  bountifully."  Faithfulness  implies  two  things:  first,  a  clear  perception, 
a  just  apprehension  of  the  purposes  for  which  we  are  put  in  trust;  and  secondly,  a 
conscientious  employment  of  those  means  by  which  the  purposes  are  to  be  accom- 
plished, according  to  the  dictates  and  directions  of  the  supreme  Lord  of  all.  Neither 
indiscriminate  almsgiving  nor  improvident  expenditure  derive  any  countenance 
from  the  rule  of  Christian  practice,  as  finally  and  unalterably  settled  in  the  epistlea 
to  the  infant  Churches.  The  man  who  "  scattereth  "  is  the  man  who  gives,  whether 
to  the  service  of  his  God,  or  to  the  succour  of  his  fellow-men,  on  principle ;  the 
man  whose  charities,  as  they  are  called  (though  the  term  religious  obligations  would 
be  far  more  applicable),  bear  some  definite  and  assignable  proportion,  not  only  to 
his  present  expenses  and  indulgences,  but  to  the  provision  for  the  family ;  the 
man,  who  devotes  to  purposes  of  philanthropy  and  piety  such  a  proportion  of  hia 
worldly  increase,  as  his  own  conscience,  enlightened  and  directed  by  God's  Word, 
accounts  an  offering  expressive  of  his  gratitude  to  the  Giver  of  every  good  and 
perfect  gift.  The  contrary  character  to  this  is  he  who  "  withholdeth  more  than  ia 
meat";  he  who  is  actuated,  alike  in  what  he  saves,  and  in  what  he  spends,  by 


CHAP.  XX.]  PROVERBS.  877 

considerations  purely  selfish;  who  professes,  indeed,  that  he  accumulates  upon 
principle,  but  whose  principle  will  not  endure  the  application  of  the  standard  of 
the  Word  of  God,  his  object  being  to  found  or  to  aggrandise  a  family,  while  in 
prosecuting  this  object  he  overlooks  or  undervalues  the  salvation  of  the  soul. 
Many  are  the  subterfuges  and  evasions  by  which  men  endeavour  to  justify,  or  at 
least  to  palliate,  their  own  conduct  in  "  withholding  more  than  is  meet,"  e.g., 
difl&culty  of  detecting  imposture ;  perversion  of  benevolent  funds  ;  and  the  excuse 
that  whatever  is  spent  is  a  contingent  evil,  while  whatever  is  hoarded  is  a  certain 
good.  II.  Two  OPPOSING  CONSEQUENCES.  True  wisdom  involves  the  consideration 
of  our  latter  end.  If  the  habits  and  actions  of  the  "  life  that  now  is  "  can  exert 
any  influence  upon  the  destinies  of  "  that  which  is  to  come,"  the  counsel  given  by 
our  Lord  would  be  the  dictate  of  policy,  as  well  as  the  command  of  authority: 
♦'  Walk  whUe  ye  have  the  light."  Temporal  blessings  do  usually  wait  upon  the 
discreet  and  conscientious  dispensation  of  God's  bounty.  He  that  scattereth 
increaseth  even  in  this  world's  goods.  But  Christian  benevolence  for  Christ's 
sake  must  not  be  taken  for  the  whole  of  the  system  of  Christian  practice,  of 
which  it  only  constitutes  a  part.  Towards  poverty  of  soul  tendeth  that  mistaken 
and  short-sighted  policy,  which  men  are  wont  to  term  prudence  and  forecast.  But  to 
have  made  no  use  of  God's  property  for  God's  purposes  will  be  a  ground  of  judgment 
and  condemnation,  as  much  as  to  have  abused  it  for  our  own.  (Thomas  Dale,  M. A.) 
How  to  gain  by  spending  : — The  text  is  generally  true,  if  we  confine  its  application 
to  money.  In  a  moral  and  spiritual  sense  the  proverb  is  universally  true.  The 
man  who  gives  bountifully  loses  nothing  by  his  gifts,  but  gains  much.  The  first 
thing  that  strikes  us  when  we  consider  the  nature  of  property  is  its  exclusive 
character.  Every  pound  we  call  our  own,  and  every  shilling  we  reserve  for  our  own 
use,  is  so  much  less  for  other  people.  The  higher  wealth  of  the  intellect  is  not  so 
exclusive  in  its  nature.  You  do  not  lose  your  gift  as  an  artist  if  you  teach  a  class 
to  paint.  Only  in  a  limited  degree  do  you  increase  your  mental  endowments  by 
imparting  them  to  others.  But  we  actually  increase  our  spiritual  riches  by 
spending  them.  The  more  of  the  bread  of  life  you  give  away,  the  more  you  will 
find  in  your  store.  Spiritual  wealth  is  like  money  wealth  in  this  respect,  that  we 
must  invest  it  if  it  is  to  increase.  Hoarding  money  never  adds  to  the  heap.  Two 
practical  lessons.  1.  We  see  the  absolute  necessity  of  some  form  of  spiritual 
activity  to  the  increase  of  the  Christian  life.  2.  The  course  of  thought  we  have 
been  pursuing  suggests  to  us  the  spiritual  nature  of  the  Divine  rewards.  We  need, 
badly  need,  a  revision  of  the  vocabulary  of  the  Divine  rewards.  Too  often  those 
rewards  are  spoken  of  in  terms  which  degrade  rather  than  honour  the  high  service 
of  God.  The  reward  and  the  service  are  one.  The  rewards  of  Christ  are  not  less 
service,  but  more  service  and  higher  toil.  (G.  S.  Barrett,  D.D.)  Discreet 
liberality: — Of  all  the  rich  men  that  have  come  to  poverty,  I  never  heard  of 
any  that  was  ruined  by  a  discreet  liberality.     (G.  Lawson.)  Generosity: — 

1.  Generosity  exemplified.  1.  In  nature.  Clouds  give  rain,  sun  gives  light, 
earth  gives  fruit.  "  The  heart  does  not  receive  the  blood  to  store  it  up,  but  while 
it  pumps  it  in  at  one  valve,  it  sends  it  forth  at  another."  2.  In  the  example  of 
Christ  (Gal.  i.  4).  3.  In  the  early  Church  (Acts  ii.  44,  45).  4.  In  modern  times. 
Peabody,  Morley,  Ac.    II.  Geneeositt  extolled.     1.  It  is  unstinted  (Isa.  xxxii.  8). 

2.  It  is  profitable.  One  who  has  had  experience  in  giving  systematically,  says,  •'  It 
pays  as  an  investment,  and  is  a  fortune  in  business."  Mr.  Haig  Miller  teUs  of  a 
gentleman  who,  on  starting  in  life,  said,  "  I  determined  that  for  every  £10,000 
I  made  £1,000  should  be  given  back  to  God  and  works  of  charity,  and  I  have  had 
ten  times  to  fulfil  my  vow."  If  temporal  gain  is  the  motive  which  inspires  giving, 
the  act  will  be  spoiled  by  the  motive ;  but  giving  from  right  motives  is  often 
honoured  by  a  present  and  a  bountiful  return.  The  converse  of  this  is  true. 
Withholding  "  tendeth  to  poverty."  If  not  poverty  of  purse,  as  is  often  the  case, 
there  will  be  poverty  of  soul.  8.  It  is  hearty.  "  God  never  sent  us  into  this  world 
to  do  anything  into  which  we  cannot  put  our  hearts."  4.  It  is  healthy.  "If  a 
man  is  growing  large  in  wealth,  nothing  but  constant  and  generous  giving  can  save 
him  from  growing  small  in  soul."  5.  It  is  refreshing.  6.  It  wins  the  heart. 
Edward  Payson  said,  when  dying,  "  I  long  to  give  a  full  cup  of  happiness  to  every 
human  being."  The  benedictions  of  his  people  were  a  chief  part  of  his  rich  reward 
(compare  Job  xxix.  13).  7.  It  is  painstaking.  The  true  friend  of  the  r,^  Jy  does  not 
wait  till  misery  presses  its  claim  at  his  door ;  he  goes  and  looks  first  (compare 
Luke  xix.  10).  (H.  Thome.)  Profitable  scattering : — Every  year  George  Moore 
wrote  these  words  in  his  pocket-book.     They  became  engraved  on  his  soul,  and  to 


278  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cbit.  n. 

an  extent  formed  his  creed :  "  What  I  spent  I  had  :  What  I  sayed  I  lost :  What  I 
gave  I  have."  Benevolent  activity  : — One  would  say  that  to  scatter  anything  is  to 
part  with  it  without  advantage ;  and  that  to  withhold,  to  keep  back,  is  undoubtedly 
to  save  and  to  retain.  The  text  teaches  that  this  may  be  quite  a  mistake  on  our  part. 
There  is  reckless  scattering  and  there  is  wise  withholding.  The  text  is  not  to 
be  taken  in  its  literalness ;  it  is  to  be  examined  in  its  spirit.  Happily  we  have  no 
need  to  go  further  in  search  of  illustration  of  the  truth  of  the  text ;  we  find  it  oa 
every  farm,  in  every  business,  in  every  school.  The  text  calls  to  benevolent 
activity  founded  on  religious  faith.  The  doctrine  enlarges  and  glorifies  life  by 
calling  into  life  elements  and  considerations  which  lie  beyond  the  present  and  the 
visible.  The  very  exercise  of  scattering  carries  blessing  with  it,  breaks  up  the 
mastery  of  selfishness,  and  enlarges  the  circle  of  kindly  interests.  Beneficence  ia 
its  own  compensation.  Charity  empties  the  heart  of  one  gift  that  it  may  make 
room  for  a  larger.  But  if  any  man  think  to  give  God  something  with  the  idea  of 
having  it  back  again,  that  man  will  be  disappointed  and  humiliated,  and  justly  so. 
The  other  side  of  this  text  is  as  emphatic  and  as  often  illustrated  in  practical  life 
as  the  first.  Selfishness  is  suicidal ;  selfishness  lives  in  gloom  ;  selfishness  injects 
poison  into  every  stream  of  life.  Selfishness  is  most  intensely  selfish  when  it 
assumes  the  name  of  prudence.  When  selfishness  chatters  proverbs,  it  has  reached 
the  depth  beyond  which  there  is  no  death.  God  can  turn  the  wicked  man's  very 
success  into  failure,  and  out  of  selfish  ambition  He  can  bring  the  scorpion  whose 
sting  is  death.  Though  this  text  is  found  in  the  Old  Testament,  the  principle  ia 
distinctly  held  by  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  a  moral  principle,  universal  and  unchangeable 
in  its  force  and  application,  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Liberality : — This  is  one 
eminent  branch  of  the  character  of  the  righteous,  but  because  there  are  many 
objections  in  the  heart  of  man  against  the  practice  of  it,  urgent  motives  are  here 
addressed  to  us.  The  instructions  delivered  in  this  and  the  four  following  verses, 
will,  if  they  are  but  believed,  be  a  sufficient  answer  to  every  objection.  There  is 
that  scattereth  his  substance  by  profusion  and  luxury.  That  man  diminishes  hia 
substance  till  it  comes  to  nothing.  But  he  that  disperses  by  giving  to  the  poor,  by 
liberal  distributions  for  the  support  of  the  commonwealth  in  times  of  danger,  or  for 
the  service  of  religion,  shall  increase  his  substance.  He  is  like  the  husbandman, 
who  sows  with  good- will  and  unsparing  hand  that  precious  seed  which  is  to  produce 
a  joyful  harvest.  It  is  God  who  gives  all  that  we  enjoy,  and  by  His  secret  blessing, 
or  by  remarkable  interpositions  of  providence,  the  liberal  man  is  often  made  to 
abound  in  riches,  and  enabled  more  and  more  abundantly  to  serve  his  fellow-men. 
Abraham  sat  at  his  tent  door  to  watch  for  passengers,  and  those  who  came  he 
urged  to  partake  of  his  bounty,  with  more  earnestness  than  other  men  beg  an 
alms.     (G.  Lawson.) 

Ver.  25.  The  liberal  soul  shall  be  made  fat :  and  he  that  watereth  shall  be 
watered  also  himself. — The  waterer  tvatered : — The  general  principle  is,  that 
in  living  for  the  good  of  others,  we  shall  be  profited  also  ourselves.  This  teaching 
is  sustained  by  the  analogy  of  nature,  for  in  nature  there  is  a  law  that  no  one  thing 
can  be  independent  of  the  rest  of  creation,  but  there  is  a  mutual  action  and  reaction 
of  all  upon  all.  God  has  so  constituted  this  universe,  that  selfishness  is  the  greatest 
possible  offence  against  His  law,  and  living  for  others,  and  ministering  to  others,  ia 
the  strictest  obedience  to  His  will.  Our  surest  road  to  our  own  happiness  is  to 
seek  the  good  of  our  fellows.  We  store  up  in  God's  own  bank  what  we  generously 
expend  on  the  behalf  of  our  race.  To  get  we  must  give ;  to  accumulate  we  must 
scatter ;  to  make  ourselves  happy,  to  get  good  and  become  spiritually  vigorous,  we 
must  do  good,  and  seek  the  spiritual  good  of  others.  I.  Apply  this  principle,  in 
ITS  NARROW  SENSE,  AS  BELONGING  TO  OURSELVES  PERSONALLY.  There  are  some 
works  in  which  we  cannot  all  engage.  Peculiar  men  have  special  work ;  but 
watering  is  work  for  persons  of  all  grades  and  all  sorts.  1.  All  God's  plants,  more 
or  less,  want  watering.  2.  The  Lord's  people  usually  get  this  watering  through 
instrumentality.  The  Holy  Spirit  waters  us  by  the  admonitions  of  parents,  by 
the  kind  suggestions  of  friends,  by  the  teaching  of  His  ministers,  by  the 
example  of  all  His  saints.  3.  Some  plants  need  special  watering,  and  should  be 
the  objects  of  unusual  care — partly  because  of  temperament  or  of  ignorance,  and 
partly  because  of  circumstances,  maybe  of  trial,  maybe  of  soul-withering.  4.  All 
believers  have  some  power  to  water  others.  In  so  watering  others  we  shall  be 
watered  ourselves.  This  is  the  main  point.  (1)  You  will  waken  up  your  own 
powers.    (2)  Yoa  will  yourself  gain  instruction.     (3)  You  will  get  comfort  in  your 


CHAP.  XI.]  PROVERBS.  279 

•work.    (4)  Watering  others  will  make  you  humble.    (5)  You  will  win  many  prayers. 

(6)  You  will  even  get  honour  to  yourselves,  that  will  stimulate  you  to  new  exertions. 

(7)  While  watering  others  you  will  be  manifesting  and  showing  your  love  to  Christ, 
and  that  will  make  you  more  like  Him.  II.  The  peinciple,  in  a  widkb  sense,  as 
IT  MAT  BETEE  TO  US  AS  A  Chuech.  We,  as  a  Church,  have  enjoyed  singular  pros- 
perity ;  but  we  have  endeavoured  to  water  others.  We  have  undertaken  a  good 
many  enterprises  for  Christ,  and  we  hope  to  undertake  a  great  many  more.  We 
must  keep  our  watering  work  up.  III.  The  peinciple,  in  the  widest  sense,  as  it 
MAT  BE  eefeebed  TO  THE  ENTiBE  BOOT  OP  Chbist.  Out  missionary  operations 
are  an  infinite  blessing  to  the  Churches  at  home.  Rehnquishing  them,  giving  them 
up,  staying  them,  would  bring  such  a  curse  that  we  had  need  to  go  down  on  our 
knees  and  pray,  "  God  send  the  missionary  work  back  again."  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Scriptural  liherality  illustrated  and  enforced  : — All  the  appearances  of  virtue  and 
piety  do  not  partake  of  their  real  nature.  See  the  case  of  the  Pharisees.  None  of 
our  good  works  can  be  viewed  with  approbation  by  God  unless  they  spring  from  a 
right  principle,  are  guided  by  a  right  rule,  and  are  directed  to  a  right  end.  God 
looks  at  the  motive  in  which  they  originate.  I.  The  chaeactee  of  tbue  belioious 
OB  Chbistian  LiBEBAiiiTT.  1.  Its  principle.  The  spirit  which  is  in  man  must  be 
the  seat  of  this  virtue,  or  the  liberal  hand,  so  far  as  it  respects  God,  is  of  no  worth. 
There  is  much  beneficence  apart  from  religion.  But  it  is  the  grateful  heart  God 
requires.  2.  Its  objects.  First  our  kindred  according  to  the  flesh.  Then  the 
poor  and  distressed  in  society.  3.  The  modes  in  which  this  liberality  should 
express  itself.  It  should  be  honest  in  its  administration.  It  should  be  pro- 
portionate in  degree.  It  should  be  affectionate  in  its  communication.  It  should 
be  expansive  in  its  embrace.  It  should  be  habitual  in  its  exercise.  II.  Thb 
becompense  to  encoueage  us  to  its  exeecise  and  displat.  1.  As  respects  the 
life  that  now  is.  Inward  pleasure,  pleasure  in  looking  at  the  good  effected ; 
enlarged  powers  of  usefulness.  2.  As  respects  the  life  to  come.  Apply  to  those 
who  give  nothing  to  the  cause  of  the  poor.  To  those  who  give  Uttle.  To  those  who 
are  in  the  habit  of  giving  much.  (John  Clayton,  jun.)  The  blessedness  of 
blessing  : — It  must  be  admitted  that  the  natural  tendency  of  things  in  this  present 
fallen  world  is  by  no  means  such  as  to  secure  a  prosperous  result  to  rectitude  of 
conduct,  and  failure  to  that  of  a  contrary  character.  We  often  witness  the  inversion 
of  this  order.  It  is  necessary  to  consider  the  character  of  the  dispensation  under 
which  the  book  was  written.  The  Jews  were  ostensibly,  as  well  as  really,  under  the 
immediate  government  of  God  ;  a  government  sanctioned  by  temporal  rewards  and 
punishments.  This  gave  to  the  government  of  God  over  them  what  we  may  term 
a  visible  character.  There  was  an  ostensible  Moral  Governor.  The  Jew,  apart 
from  all  consideration  of  a  future  state,  was  entitled  to  look,  even  in  this  life,  for  a 
providential  sanction  to  his  conduct,  when  his  ways  were  such  as  pleased  the  Lord. 
In  God's  dealings  with  that  people  He  affords  an  emblem,  a  visible  emblem,  of  Hia 
dealings  with  others.  The  great  distinction  between  the  Jewish  and  the  Christian 
dispensations  is,  that  the  one  was  addressed  to  sense,  the  other  to  faith  ;  the  one 
deals  with  visible  things,  the  other  with  spiritual.  It  is  but  consistent  with  this 
distinction,  that  whUe  God's  providential  government  over  His  people  is  not  less 
real  under  the  Christian  dispensation,  it  should  be  less  manifest.  Those  things 
which  would  be  perplexing  to  us  if  we  attempt  to  judge  the  ways  of  God  by  sense, 
become  reconcilable  with  His  character  and  with  His  promises  when  regarded  in 
the  judgment  of  faith.  Objection  might  be  raised  on  the  ground  that  the  assertion 
of  the  text  is  contradicted  by  absolute  matter  of  fact.  The  words,  translated  out  of 
their  figurative  language,  obviously  assert,  that  he  who  liberally  dispenses  to  others 
of  those  bounties,  whether  in  grace  or  in  providence,  which  God  has  conferred  upon 
him,  shall  be  himself  more  abundantly  enriched.  To  the  eye  of  sense  this  assertion 
is  far  from  being  universally  verified  among  us  as  a  matter  of  fact.  In  a  worldly 
point  of  view  it  is  not  always  the  most  virtuous  who  are  the  most  prosperous,  nor 
the  most  liberal  who  are  the  most  successful.  But  faith  will  see  every  promise  to 
us  fulfilled  in  a  higher  and  better  sense.  The  highest  exemplification  of  this 
passage  is  found  in  the  person  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He  spent  His  life  in 
blessing ;  therefore  it  was  He  was  so  greatly  blessed.  The  recompense  of  the 
reward  is  a  motive  sanctioned  by  the  highest  example,  that  of  Christ  Himself. 
Some  think  it  savours  too  much  of  legality,  to  hold  out  a  future  recompense  as  a 
stimulus  to  the  active  employment  of  all  our  talents  in  the  service  of  God.  Yet 
Burely  this  is  to  confound  things  that  are  perfectly  distinct  in  themselves.  It  is  not 
inconsistent  with  the  doctrines  of  grace  to  propose  a  proportionable  increase  of 


280  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

future  joy  as  a  motive  to  present  sacrifice,  and  to  hold  it  up  before  Christians  as  a 
matter  of  certainty,  that  every  sacrifice  which  they  make  for  the  Lord's  sake  shall 
be  repaid  from  the  hand  of  the  Lord.     The  liberal  distribution  of  our  worldly 
substance  is  attended  with  a  blessing  from  the  Lord,  at  least  to  the  man  himself. 
But  the  text  is  the  exposition  of  an  established  law  in  the  universal  government 
of   God's   providence.      Our  progress  depends  on  our  readiness  to  communicate 
of  the  stores  already  conferred  upon  us.     The  Christian's  rule  of  spiritual  ad- 
vancement is  not  so  much  in  proportion  to  the  acquisitions  which  he  makes  of 
knowledge,   as  to  the   use  that  he  makes  of   it.      As  we  feed  others   our  own 
Bouls  are  fed  by  God.    It  is  in  the  nature  of   things,  or  rather,  I  should  say, 
it  is  in  the  appointment  of  God,  that  it  should  be  so.     {W.  Dodsworth,  M.A.) 
He  that  watereth  ihall  be  watered : — "  If  we  give  so  much  we  shall  exhaust  our 
resources,"  is  a  common  remark.     Don't  be  afraid  of  that,  my  friend.     See  that 
little  fountain  yonder — away  yonder  in  the  distant  mountain,  shining  like  a  thread 
of  silver  through  the  thick  copse,  and  sparkling  like  a  diamond  in  its  healthful 
activity.    It  is  hurrying  on  with  tinkling  feet  to  bear  its  tribute  to  the  river.     See, 
it  passes  a  stagnant  pool,  and  the  pool  hails  it.     "  Whither  away,  master  streamlet  ?" 
"  I  am  going  to  the  river  to  bear  this  cup  of  water  God  has  given  me."     "Ah!  you 
are  very  foolish  for  that ;  you'll  need  it  before  the  summer  is  over.     It  has  been  a 
backward  spring,  and  we  shall  have  a  hot  summer  to  pay  for  it — you  will  dry  up 
then."     "  Well,"  says  the  streamlet,  "  if  I  am  to  die  so  soon,  I  had  better  work 
while  the  day  lasts.    If  I  am  likely  to  lose  this  treasure  from  the  heat,  I  had 
better  do  good  with  it  while  I  have  it."     So  on  it  went,  blessing  and  rejoicing  in  its 
course.     The  pool  smiled  complacently  at  its  own  superior  foresight,  and  husbanded 
all  its  resources,  letting  not  a  drop  steal  away.     Soon  the  midsummer  heat  came 
down,  and  it  fell  upon  the  little  stream.    But  the  trees  crowded  to  its  brink,  and 
threw  out  their  sheltering  branches  over  it  in  the  day  of  adversity,  for  it  brought 
refreshment  and  life  to  them ;  and  the  sun  peeped  through  the  branches,  and 
smiled  complacently  upon  its  dimpled  face,  and  seemed  to  say,  "  It  is  not  in  my 
heart  to  harm  you  "  ;  and  the  birds  sipped  its  silver  tide,  and  sang  its  praises ;  the 
flowers  breathed  their  perfume  upon  its  bosom ;  the  beasts  of  the  field  loved  to 
linger  by  its  banks ;  the  husbandman's  eye  sparkled  with  joy  as  he  looked  upon  the 
line  of  verdant  beauty  that  marked  its  course  through  his  fields  and  meadows— and 
BO  on  it  went,  blessing  and  blessed  of  all.     God  saw  that  the  little  stream  never 
exhausted  itself.     It  emptied  its  f uU  cup  into  the  river,  and  the  river  bore  it  on  to 
the  sea,  and  the  sea  welcomed  it,  and  the  sun  smiled  upon  the  sea,  and  the  sea  sent 
up  its  incense  to  greet  the  sun,  and  the  clouds  caught,  in  their  capacious  bosoms, 
the  incense  from  the  sea,  and  the  winds,  like  waiting  steeds,   caught  the  chariots 
of  the  clouds  and  bore  them  away — away  to  the  very  mountain  that  gave  the  little 
fountain  birth  ;  and  there  they  tipped  the  brimming  cup,  and  poured  the  grateful 
baptism  down.    And  so  God  saw  to  it,  that  the  little  fountain,  though  it  gave  so 
fully  and  so  freely,  never  ran  dry.     And  where  was  the  prudent  pool  ?    Alas !  in 
its  inglorious  inactivity  it  grew  sickly  and  pestilential.     The  beasts  of  the  field  put 
their  lips  to  it,  but  turned  away  without  drinking.     The  breeze  stooped  and  kissed 
it  by  mistake,  but  caught  the  malaria  in  the  contact,  and  carried  the  ague  through 
the  region.     {R.  F.  Horton.)        Soul  fatness : — If  I  desire  to  flourish  in  soul,  I 
must  not  hoard  up  my  stores,  but  must  distribute  to  the  poor.     To  be  close  and 
niggardly  is  the  world's  way  to  prosperity,  but  not  God's  (see  ver.  24) .     Faith's 
way  of  gaining  is  giving.     I  must  try  this  again  and  again ;  and  I  may  expect 
that  as  much  of  prosperity  as  will  be  good  for  me  will  come  to  me  as  a  gracious 
reward  for  a  liberal  course  of  action.     Of  course,  I  may  not  be  sure  of  growing 
rich.     I  shall  be  fat,  but  not  too  fat.     Too  great  riches  might  make  me  as  unwieldy 
as  corpulent  persons  usually  are,  and  cause  me  the  dyspepsia  of  worldliness,  and 
perhaps  bring  on  a  fatty  degeneration  of  the  heart.    No,  if  I  am  fat  enough  to  be 
healthy,  I  may  well  be  satisfied ;  and  if  the  Lord  grants  me  a  competence,  I  may 
be  thoroughly  content.    But  there  is  a  mental  and  spiritual  fatness  which  I  would 
greatly  covet ;  and  these  come  as  the  result  of  generous  thoughts  towards  my  God, 
His  Church,  and  my  fellow-men.     Let  me  not  stint,  lest  I  starve  my  heart.    Let 
me  be  bountiful  and  liberal ;  for  so  shall  I  be  like  my  Lord.     He  gave  Himself  for 
me :  shall  I  grudge  Him  anything  ?     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)       God's  law  of  recompente : — 
If  I  carefully  consider  others,  God  will  consider  me ;  and  in  some  way  or  other 
He  will  recompense  me.     Let  me  consider  the  poor,  and  the  Lord  wiU  consider  me. 
Let  me  look  after  little  children,  and  the  Lord  will  treat  me  as  His  child.     Let  me 
feed  His  flock,  and  He  will  feed  me.    Let  me  water  His  garden,  and  He  will  make 


CHIP.  XI.]  PROVERBS.  281 

a  watered  garden  of  my  soul.  This  is  the  Lord's  own  promise  ;  be  it  naine  to  fulfil 
the  condition,  and  thfn  to  expect  its  fulfilment.  I  may  care  about  myself  till  I 
grow  morbid ;  I  may  watch  over  my  own  feelings  till  I  feel  nothing ;  and  I  may 
lament  my  own  weakness  till  I  grow  almost  too  weak  to  lament.  It  will  be  far  more 
profitable  for  me  to  become  unselfish,  and  out  of  love  to  my  Lord  Jesus  begin  to 
care  for  the  souls  of  those  around  me.  My  tank  is  getting  very  low ;  no  fresh  rain 
comes  to  fill  it ;  what  shall  I  do  ?  I  will  pull  up  the  plug,  and  let  its  contents  run 
out  to  water  the  withering  plants  around  me.  What  do  I  see  ?  My  cistern  seems 
to  fill  as  it  flows.  A  secret  spring  is  at  work.  While  all  was  stagnant,  the  fresh 
spring  was  sealed  ;  but  as  my  stock  flows  oat  to  water  others,  the  Lord  thinketh 
upon  me.     Hallelujah  1     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  26.  He  that  withholdeth  com,  the  people  shall  curse  him. — Withholding 
com : — The  text  has  to  do  with  owners  of  corn  and  dealers  in  it.  In  Solomon's 
day  famines  were  frequent,  and  were  serious  because  trade  communications 
between  different  countries  were  so  uncertain.  Then  persons  would  buy  up  all  the 
com  they  could,  so  as  to  unduly  raise  the  market-price.  In  relation  to  this  greed 
in  trade,  there  is  a  wonderful  reserve  of  Holy  Scripture.  Mr.  Amot  says,  "  In  this 
brief  maxim  no  arbitrary  rule  is  laid  down  to  the  possessor  of  corn,  that  he  must 
sell  at  a  certain  period  and  at  a  certain  price :  and  yet  the  hungry  are  not  left 
without  a  protecting  law.  The  protection  of  the  weak  is  entrusted  not  to  small 
police  regulations,  but  to  great  self-acting  providential  arrangements.  The  double 
fact  is  recorded  in  terms  of  peculiar  distinctness,  that  he  who  in  times  of  scarcity 
keeps  up  his  corn  in  order  to  enrich  himself  is  loathed  by  the  people,  and  he  who 
sells  it  freely  is  loved.  This  is  all.  There  is  no  further  legislation  on  the  subject." 
Laws  which  interfere  between  buyer  and  seller,  master  and  workman,  are  blunders 
and  nuisances.  The  market  goes  best  when  it  is  left  alone,  and  so  in  our  text 
there  is  no  law  enacted  and  no  penalty  threatened,  except  that  which  the  nature  of 
things  makes  inevitable.  A  man  may  do  as  he  pleases  about  selling  or  not,  but  he 
cannot  escape  from  the  curse  of  the  people  if  he  chooses  to  lock  up  his  grain.  But 
if  it  bring  a  curse  upon  a  man  to  withhold  the  bread  that  perisheth,  what  a  weight 
of  curse  will  light  upon  the  man  who  withholds  the  bread  of  eternal  life.  I,  How 
CAN  THIS  BE  DONE  ?  1.  By  lockiug  up  the  Word  of  God  in  an  unknown  language, 
or  by  delivering  and  preaching  it  in  such  a  style  that  the  people  shall  not 
comprehend  it.  Illustrate  by  the  practice  of  the  Roman  Church.  But  the  terms 
of  theology,  the  phrases  of  art,  the  definitions  of  philosophy,  the  jargon  of  science, 
are  an  unknown  tongue  to  the  young  godly  ploughmen,  or  praying  shopkeepers. 
Simplicity  is  the  authorised  style  of  true  gospel  ministry.  2.  By  keeping  back  the 
most  important  and  vital  truths  of  revelation,  and  giving  a  prominence  to  other 
things,  which  are  but  secondary.  Morality  brings  no  food  to  hungry  souls, 
although  it  is  good  enough  in  its  place.  Dissuasives  from  vice  are  not  the  bread  of 
heaven,  though  well  enough  in  their  way.  We  need  to  have  the  great  doctrines  of 
grace  brought  forward,  for  the  Word  of  God  is  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  and  it  is  by 
preaching  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  that  souls  are  won  to  Him.  3.  By  want  of 
loving  zeal  in  our  labour.  That  which  God  blesses  to  the  saving  of  sinners  is 
truth  attended  by  the  earnestness  of  the  speaker.  Think  of  the  preaching  of 
Baxter.  We  are  guilty  of  withholding  corn  unless  we  preach  with  a  sympathising, 
loving,  tender,  aiJectionate,  earnest,  anxious  soul.  4.  By  refusing  to  labour 
zealously  for  the  spread  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ  and  the  conversion  of  sinners. 
5.  By  refusing  to  help  those  who  are  working  for  Christ.  I  cannot  understand  how 
a  man  can  love  God  when  he  only  lives  to  heap  up  riches.  H.  The  blessedness 
WHICH  THOSE  POSSESS  WHO  BREAK  THE  BREAD  OF  LEFE.  To  dcscribc  it  is  altogether 
beyond  my  power.  You  must  know,  and  taste,  and  feel  it.  There  are  many 
blessednesses  in  doing  good  to  others.  1.  An  easy  conscience.  2.  Comfort  in 
doing  something  for  Jesus.  3.  Watching  the  first  buddings  of  conviction  in  a 
young  soul.  4.  The  joy  of  success.  5.  The  final  and  gracious  reward.  HI.  Now 
I  have  to  open  the  granary  myself.  Hungry  sinners,  wanting  a  Saviour,  wo 
cannot  withhold  the  bread  from  you  !  We  tell  you  the  way  of  salvation.  1.  It  is 
a  satisfying  salvation.  2.  It  is  an  all-sufficient  salvation.  3.  It  is  a  complete 
salvation.  4.  It  is  a  present  salvation.  5.  It  is  an  available  salvation. 
(Ibid.)  The  right  to  withhold : — The  text  may  be  regarded  as  suggestive  of 
a  still  higher  thought  than  the  one  to  which  it  is  limited.  If  men  have  no  right  to 
withhold  com,  what  right  can  they  have  to  withhold  knowledge?  If  it  is  an  evil 
thing  to  injure  the  body  or  expose  it  to  danger,  what  is  it  to  injure  the  soul  or  to 


382  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

expose  it  to  the  peril  of  eternal  loss  ?  If  it  is  wrong  to  keep  back  bread  from  the 
body,  what  must  it  be  to  keep  back  bread  from  the  soul  ?  An  important  doctrine  is 
involved  in  the  whole  text;  there  are  some  things  which  a  man  may  possess,  as  it 
were,  for  himself,  and  enjoy  without  sharing  his  delight  with  others ;  a  man  may 
have  many  precious  stones,  and  may  conceal  them,  and  permit  no  eye  but  his  own 
to  look  upon  them,  or  hand  to  touch  them  but  his  own  :  so  be  it ;  the  pleasure  is  a 
narrow  and  selfish  ono,  and  no  great  social  consequences  attend  its  enjoyment. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  would  seem  as  if  no  man  could  have  private  property  in  corn 
or  in  bread,  in  the  sense  of  saying  to  the  people,  "  I  have  it,  but  you  shall  not 
possess  it ;  though  you  offer  double  its  price  I  will  not  allow  you  to  take  it  from 
me  unless  you  multiply  the  price  fivefold."  A  man  may  talk  thus  about  diamonds 
and  rubies,  but  he  is  not  at  liberty  to  talk  thus  about  bread.  A  man  may  have 
great  property  in  pictures,  but  it  is  questionable  whether  he  should  have  any 
property  in  land  in  any  sense  that  makes  the  people  dependent  upon  his  caprice  as 
to  whether  it  shall  be  cultivated  and  turned  to  the  highest  uses.  It  would  seem  as 
if  light  and  air  and  land  were  universal  possessions,  and  that  aU  men  were  equally 
welcome  to  them.  In  the  case  of  the  land,  it  may  be  necessary  that  there  should 
be  temporary  proprietorship,  or  some  regulated  relation  to  it  so  as  to  prevent 
robbery ;  but  with  such  regulated  relation  proprietorship  might  well  terminate. 
All  this  issue,  however,  can  only  be  realised  as  the  result  of  the  largest  spiritual 
education.  It  is  diflScult  to  persuade  any  great  landed  proprietor  that  he  ought  to 
surrender  his  rights  for  the  good  of  the  commonwealth.  This  can  only  come  after 
years,  it  may  be  even  centuries,  of  education  of  the  most  spiritual  kind ;  or  if  it 
come  earlier  by  statesmanship,  it  must  also  come  justly,  for  even  good  rights  may 
be  created  by  faulty  processes,  and  by  mere  lapse  of  time  ownerships  may  be  set  up 
which  have  no  original  force.  We  shall  never  have  a  commonwealth  founded 
upon  righteousness  and  inspired  by  the  spirit  of  patriotism  until  we  are  just 
to  every  interest  which  stands  in  the  way  of  its  realisation.     [J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  28.  He  that  trusteth  in  his  riches  shall  fall, — Trusting  in  riches  : — I.  Herk 
IS  A  COMMON  TENDENCY.     Trusting  in   wealth   is — 1.    Spiritually  unsatisfactory. 

2.  Necessarily  evanescent.  II.  Hebe  is  a  terrible  catastrophe.  "  Fall." 
1.  Whence  ?    From  all  his  hopes.     2.  Whither  ?     To  disappointment  and  despair. 

3.  When?  Whenever  moral  conviction  seizes  the  soul,  whether  before  or  after 
death.  4.  Why?  Because  wealth  was  never  a  fit  foundation  for  the  soul. 
{Homilixt.)  But  the  righteous  shaU  flourish  as  a  branch. — The  secret  of  spiritual 
life  : — The  righteous — and  some  such  there  have  been  even  in  the  darkest  periods 
of  the  world's  history— the  righteous  "  flourish  as  a  branch."  They  lean  not  on 
their  own  stem  and  live  not  on  their  own  root.  From  the  beginning  the  same 
Jesus  to  whom  we  look  was  made  known  to  faith.  The  manner  and  measure  of 
making  known  truth  to  the  understanding  were  in  those  days  widely  different ;  but 
the  nature  and  the  source  of  spiritual  life  were  the  same.  But  though  all  the  real 
branches  live,  all  do  not  equally  flourish.  Whatever  girds  the  branch  too  tightly 
round  impedes  the  flow  of  sap  from  the  stem  and  leaves  the  extremities  to  wither. 
Many  cares  and  vanities  and  passions  wrap  themselves  round  a  soul  and  cause  the 
life  even  of  the  living  to  pine  away.  When  the  world  in  any  of  its  forms  lays  its 
grasp  round  the  life,  the  stricture  chokes  the  secret  channels  between  the  disciple 
and  his  Lord,  and  the  fruit  of  unrighteousness  drops  unripe.  It  is  only  as  a  branch 
that  Christians  can  flourish  in  this  wilderness  ;  they  have  no  independent  source  of 
life  and  growth.     {W.  Arnot,  D.D.) 

Ver.  29.  He  that  tronbleth  his  own  house  shall  inherit  the  wind. — Family 
life ; — I.  Peace  should  be  the  grand  aim  of  all  the  members  of  the  domestic 
CIRCLE.  To  trouble  the  house  is  an  evil.  II.  There  are  some  members  who  break 
the  peace  of  their  domestic  circle.  They  are  the  ill-natured,  impulsive,  false, 
selfish.  III.  Those  who  break  the  peace  of  their  domestic  circle  are  fools. 
Their  folly  is  seen  in  this — 1.  They  get  no  good  by  it.  2.  They  get  degradation  by 
it.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Troubling  one's  oicn  house : — There  are  many  ways  in 
which  this  may  be  done.  A  man  may,  by  the  violence  and  irritability,  the 
peevishness,  fretfulness,  and  selfishness  of  his  temper;  he  may  by  his  avarice  on  the 
one  hand,  or  by  his  reckless  prodigality  on  the  other — involving  his  family  in 
starvation  and  suffering  by  opposite  means  ;  he  may  by  intemperance,  with  all  its 
horrid  attendants ;  he  may  by  sloth,  and  idleness,  and  indisposition  to  work, 
trouble  his  own  house.     "  ITe  shall  inherit  the  wind."    The  expression  is  a  very 


CHAP,  n.]  PROVERBS. 


strong  one.  Could  any  words  more  impressirelj  convey  the  idea  of  loss,  dis- 
appointment, and  ultimate  destitution  and  beggary?  The  result  ihe  man  deserves. 
A  man's  family  is  his  first  charge  from  heaven,  and  ought  to  be  his  chief  and 
constant  solicitude.  The  only  evil  to  be  lamented  is  that  he  brings  the  destitution 
upon  them  as  well  as  himself.     {R.  Wardlaw.) 

Ver.  30.  The  fruit  of  the  righteous  is  a  tree  of  life. — The  fruit  of  the  righteous  : — 
By  this  is  meant  his  prayers,  his  charities,  his  good  example,  the  virtues  which 
compose  his  character  and  adorn  his  life,  and  all  the  efforts  and  influences  by 
which  he  shows  forth  his  wisdom  in  winning  souls.  To  win  souls  in  the  best 
sense  is  to  bring  them  to  the  saving  knowledge  of  Jesus  and  subjugate  tbem  to  Hia 
gracious  dominion.  An  illustrious  ancient  philosopher  said,  "  There  is  nothing 
great  on  earth  but  man,  and  nothing  great  in  man  but  his  soul."  How  will  you 
compute  the  worth  of  a  soul,  or  by  what  standard  measure  its  greatness  ?  Will 
you  estimate  it  by  its  nature  and  origin,  or  by  its  power  and  capacities,  or  by  the 
duration  of  its  being,  or  by  the  cost  of  its  redemption,  or  by  the  struggle  for  its 
possession  and  control,  or  by  comparison  with  the  splendid  and  precious  ?  And  if 
such  is  the  value  of  the  soul  that  worlds  acquired  could  not  compensate  its  loss, 
nor  a  material  universe  redeem  its  forfeiture,  how  excellent,  beyond  all  power  of 
language  or  of  thought,  the  work  of  saving  the  priceless  thing  from  destruction, 
and  placing  it  among  the  crown-jewels  of  the  King  of  kings  !  Look  at  the  matter 
in  another  light.  The  soul  is  fallen,  guilty,  perishing ;  and  he  who  rescues  and 
restores  it  confers  an  incalculable  and  inconceivable  benefit.  Who  shall  limit  the 
effect  of  your  labour  in  saving  a  soul,  or  trace  the  blessed  influence  to  an  end  ? 
The  beneficent  effect  of  faithful  Christian  labour  is  an  ever-swelling  stream  and  an 
ever-enlarging  growth.  All  heaven  unites  with  all  that  is  heavenly  on  earth  in 
witnessing  to  the  precious  fruit  of  righteousness  and  the  transcendent  wisdom  of 
winning  souls.  These  considerations  appeal  to  your  charity,  others  appeal  with 
equal  force  to  your  piety,  your  gratitude,  your  interest,  your  ambition.  The 
Church  was  ordained  for  mutual  help  and  the  recovery  of  the  lost.  The  saints  live 
for  others.  God  has  blessed  them,  that  they  may  be  blessings  to  their  race. 
{J.  Cross,  D.D.,  LL.D.)  He  that  winneth   souls  is  wise. — Soul-winning  : — 

I.  The  object  of  xhe  Christian  worker.  It  is  a  good  thing  in  any  work  to  have 
a  clear  perception  of  the  object  to  be  sought  after.  This  brings  our  efforts  into 
order  and  gives  them  consistency.  If  a  man  lose  sight  of  a  clear  purpose  he 
becomes  listless,  or  at  best  mechanical.  This  is  true  pre-eminently  in  Christian 
work.  They  who  undertake  it  purpose  the  gathering  of  immortal  souls  out  of 
darkness  into  God's  marvellous  light.  Ours  is  an  apostolic  mission.  We  are  to 
catch  men — souls.  Their  salvation  is  the  centre  of  the  target — the  bull's-eye  which 
we  are  to  hit.  We  should  be  thankful  for  every  token  of  success.  If  we  can 
instruct  the  mind  or  store  the  memory  with  the  things  of  God,  ours  is  not  lost 
work,  but  we  are  not  to  be  content  with  these  things ;  they  may  be  means  to  the 
end,  they  are  not  the  end  itself.  Our  purpose  is  to  bring  the  young  to  Christ,  and 
Christ  to  them.  The  very  magnitude  of  the  purpose  will  give  us  encouragement  if 
we  look  at  it  rightly.  II.  The  manner  in  which  this  work  is  to  be  done. 
*'  Winneth."  No  force  is  to  be  employed.  We  cannot  drive  even  little  children 
into  the  fold  of  safety  with  dogs  and  stones.  We  want  to  lay  hold  of  the  heart,  to 
gain  the  affections,  and  to  do  that  we  are  to  use  the  persuasive  aspect  of  the 
gospel.  A  forced  religion,  if  you  can  conceive  it,  is  nothing  worth.  It  is  a  sham 
flower.  The  examples  of  winning  are  found  in  the  way  in  which  the  first  disciples 
of  the  Saviour,  and  above  all,  tihe  Saviour  Himself,  did  their  work.  We  are  to  live 
the  truth,  letting  our  whole  life  tell  of  what  is  right,  and  that  beyond  mistake ;  and 
yet  over  all  love  is  to  preside,  softening  our  asperities,  and  making  our  wisdom 
peaceable  as  well  as  pure.  Where  there  is  a  tender,  winning  spirit,  then  plain 
home-thrusts  can  be  made  that  would  be  resented  if  they  were  mingled  with  the 
wrath  of  rum.  The  attractive  power  lies  even  more  in  tlio  evident  tone  of  our 
teaching  than  in  the  sort  of  language  we  use.  The  root  of  persuasion  lies  in  love 
to  God  and  love  to  man,  cherished  by  prayer,  kindled  and  sustained  by  the  Holy 
Ghost.  III.  The  charactkr  requisite  for  this  great  work.  "  Wise."  There  is 
needed  a  high  style  of  Christian  character.  We  are  to  be  good.  The  successful 
winner  of  souls  must  himself  be  already  won  for  Christ.  Our  work  is  intimately 
bound  up  with  our  characters.  Other  things  being  equal,  he  will  be  most  likely  to 
bring  others  to  Christ  v/ho  himself  is  nearest  to  Christ.  The  influence  of  personal 
holiness  steals  in  where  nothing  else  can  find  a  place.     Our  power  with  man  will 


S84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  xi. 

be  jnat  in  proportion  to  our  power  with  God.  Every  devout  effort  to  reach  a  holier 
life  is  a  way  of  increasing  our  eflBciency  as  winners  of  souls.  We  have  also  to  be 
wise  in  the  knowledge  of  God's  truth.  A  man  may  know  enough  for  his  own 
Balvation  and  yet  not  know  so  as  to  be  able  to  impart  effectively  to  others.  Mighty 
in  the  Scripture,  we  shall  be  mighty  for  our  work.  And  we  are  to  be  wise  in  the 
knowledge  of  the  human  heart.  In  their  inmost  nature  the  heart  of  a  chUd  and 
of  a  man  are  very  much  alike.  Any  one  may  gain  this  knowledge  who,  with  a 
prayerful,  sympathising  nature,  goes  out  into  the  world  and  keeps  his  eyes  open. 
The  teacher  who  knows  his  children  can  give  to  each  his  portion  of  meat  in  due 
season  as  none  other  can.  Think  of  the  encouragements  to  this  work.  Ours  is 
everlasting  work,  its  monuments  are  to  abide  for  ever.  We  are  working  for 
eternity,  polishing  stones  for  the  heavenly  temple,  searching  for  gems  with  which 
to  deck  the  Saviour's  crown.  Think  of  the  joy  of  the  heavenly  greeting,  and  the 
approval  of  the  Lord,  an  approval  not  bestowed  according  to  success,  but  according 
to  fidelity.  Upon  no  better  purpose  can  you  spend  your  life.  Work  for  Christ  that 
shall  stand.  (Edward  Medley,  B.A.)  Soul-winning: — He  must  be  a  wise  man 
in  even  ordinary  respects  who  can  by  grace  achieve  so  Divine  a  marvel  as  win  a 
soul.  He  that  winneth  souls  is  usually  a  man  who  could  have  done  anything  else 
if  God  had  called  him  to  it.     He  is  wise — 1.  Because  he  has  selected  a  wise  object. 

2.  Because  to  win  a  soul  requires  infinite  wisdom.  3.  He  will  prove  to  have  been 
a  wise  man  in  the  judgment  of  those  who  see  the  end  as  well  as  the  beginning. 
I.  The  metaphor  used  im  the  text.  We  use  the  word  *'  win  "  in  many  ways,  e.g., 
game  of  chance,  juggling  tricks,  &c.  It  is  used  in  warfare.  Warriors  win  cities 
and  provinces.  The  word  was  used  to  signify  success  in  a  wrestling  match. 
There  are  secret  and  mysterious  ways  in  which  those  who  love  win  the  object  of 
their  affections.  Love  is  the  true  way  of  soul-winning.  The  Hebrew  is,  "  He  that 
taketh  souls  is  wise,"  and  the  word  refers  to  fishing,  or  bird-catching.  We  must 
have  our  lures  for  souls  adapted  to  attract,  to  fascinate,  to  grasp.  II.  Some  of  the 
WATS  BY  WHICH  SOULS  ARE  TO  BE  WON.  1.  A  preachcr  wins  souls  best  when  he 
believes  in  the  reality  of  his  work.     2.  When  he  keeps  closest  to  saving  truth. 

3.  Souls  are  won  by  bringing  others  to  hear  the  Word.  4.  By  trying  after  sermon 
to  talk  to  strangers.  5.  By  button-holing  acquaintances  and  relations.  6.  By 
writing  letters.  7.  The  soul-winner  must  be  a  master  of  the  art  of  prayer.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Winning  $ouls  : — Our  Lord's  estimate  of  the  soul's  value  was  ex- 
ceeding high.  His  mind  saw  its  spiritual  nature  as  an  object  of  supreme  worth. 
In  proportion  as  we  are  Christ-like  will  our  views  correspond,  and  our  efforts  also. 

1.  A  GREAT  WORK  CONTEMPLATED.  The  definite  business  of  all  Christian  workers. 
Great  because — 1.  Of  the  value  of  the  object.  2.  Of  the  soul's  capacities — for  evil 
if  not  won,  and  for  good  if  won.  3.  Because  the  soul  is  the  mainspring  of  life  and 
action.  II.  An  effectual  method  suooested.  Winning.  1.  Christian  work  is  a 
magnetic  force.  The  centre  of  electric  magnetism  is  the  Cross.  2.  The  possibility 
here  embodied.  A  work  which  all  may  undertake  and  accomplish.  III.  A  cha- 
BACTER  HERE  DEFINED.  "Iswisc."  Bccause  he  benefits  othcrs.  Because  he  gains 
a  star  for  his  own  crown.  Because  he  is  laying  up  treasure  in  heaven.  For  he 
wins  the  approval  of  his  God  and  the  plaudits  of  the  angels.  The  highest  form  of 
wisdom  is  to  devote  life's  strength  to  gather  pearls  whose  salvation  will  enrich  with 
eternal  wealth.  (J.  F.  Pridgeon.)  The  life  of  the  good  : — Note — 1.  The  involun- 
tary INFLUENCE  OF  A  GOOD  man's  LIFE.  The  fruit  of  a  life  is  the  involuntary  and 
regular  expression  of  what  the  man  is  in  heart  and  soul.  All  actions  are  not  the 
fruit  of  life,  inasmuch  as  man  in  the  exercise  of  his  freedom  and,  indeed,  even  by 
accident,  performs  actions  that,  instead  of  fully  expressing,  misrepresent  his  life. 
The  regular  flow  of  a  man's  general  activity  is  the  fruit,  and  this,  in  the  case  of  a 
good  man,  is  a  "  tree  of  life."    It  is  so  for  three  reasons.    1.  It  expresses  real  life. 

2.  It  communicates  real  life.  3.  It  nourishes  real  life.  11.  The  highest  purpose 
OF  A  good  man's  lifb.  "  He  that  winneth  souls  is  wise."  This  implies — 1.  That 
Bouls  are  lost.     2.  That  souls  may  be  saved.     3.  That  souls  may  be  saved  by  man. 

4.  That  the  man  who  succeeds  in  saving  souls  is  wise.  IH.  The  inevitable 
BETRiBUTioN  OF  A  GOOD  man'b  LIFE.  The  recompense  here  is  supposed  to  refer 
rather  to  the  suffering  he  experiences  in  consequence  of  his  remaining  imperfec- 
tions than  of  the  blessings  he  enjoys  as  a  reward  for  the  good  that  is  in  him. 
The  sins  of  good  men  are  punished  on  this  earth.  The  argument  here  is  d  fortiori 
— if  God  visits  the  sins  of  His  people  with  punishment,  much  more  will  He  visit  the 
Bins  of  the  wicked.  {D.  Thomas,  D.D,)  The  soul-voinner : — Most  men  are  aiming 
and  endeavouring  to  win  something  to  which  they  attach  great  value.     It  may  be 


CHA».  xi.]  PROVERBS,  S85 

secular  wealth,  or  earthly  honour,  or  sensual  pleasure.  But  there  ean  be  no 
wisdom  in  spending  one's  life  in  the  endeavour  to  win  any  one  of  these  things. 
The  aim  of  Paul  was  to  win  Christ,  and  that  should  be  our  first  aim  too.  Having 
won  Christ  for  ourselves,  our  aim  should  be  to  win  bouIs  for  Christ.  I.  He  who 
WOULD  SUCCEED  IN  wrNNiNO  SOULS  NEEDS  TO  BK  WISE.  It  needs  wisdom  to  succeed 
in  the  business  of  life.  It  needs  a  far  higher  and  nobler  wisdom  to  win  souls.  It 
is  an  exceedingly  difficult  thing  to  win  men  over  from  the  ranks  of  sin  and  Satan 
to  the  ranks  of  God  and  His  Christ.  1.  The  would-be  soul-winner  needs  to  be 
theoretically  wise.  He  needs  to  be  well  informed.  He  cannot  know  too  much 
and  must  be  well  informed  on  some  very  important  matters,  e.g.,  the  sacred 
Scriptures,  human  nature,  &c.  2.  He  needs  to  be  practically  wise — wise  in 
action  as  well  as  in  thought.  He  should  deal  largely  in  the  most  attractive  and 
pathetic  truths.  He  should  carefully  choose  the  most  appropriate  seasons.  He 
should  cultivate  the  most  loving  spirit  and  the  most  kindly  manner.  He  should  be 
much  in  communion  with  God.  II.  He  who  does  succeed  in  winning  soiniS  proves 
EiMSELE  to  be  WISE.  This  is  true  looked  at  from  several  points  of  view.  1.  Think 
of  this  work  in  relation  to  God.  It  is  co-operation  with  God.  2.  In  its  relation 
to  those  who  are  won.  3.  In  its  relation  to  society.  4.  In  its  relation  to  those 
who  are  engaged  in  it.  In  this  world  it  brings  them  honour,  pleasure,  and 
culture.  The  blessings  follow  them  into  the  future  world.  (John  Morgan.) 
SouUwinning  : — I.  What  is  a  soul  ?  We  know  little  about  a  soul  apart  from  the 
Bible.  It  teaches — 1.  That  man  is  a  compound  being.  2.  That  the  soul  is 
indestructible.  3.  Because  indestructible,  its  value  is  infinite.  II.  What  is 
MEANT  BT  wnrniNO  SOULS?  1.  The  word  "win"  is  used  both  in  a  good  and  bad 
sense.  There  are  no  mean  tricks  in  winning  souls.  2.  "  Win  "  is  a  warlike  word : 
what  powers  are  there  striving  for  the  soul  ?  3.  Margin  has,  "  he  who  taketh  souls," 
implying  the  use  of  various  allurements,  in.  How  may  souls  be  won?  There 
must  be — 1.  Adaptation.  2.  The  soul-winner  must  be  careful  not  to  offend  the 
prejudices  of  those  he  seeks  to  win.  3.  There  must  be  method.  The  soul-winner 
must  first  have  the  love  of  Christ  in  his  own  heart.  Then  he  must  proclaim  it 
patiently,  lovingly,  prayerfully,  earnestly.  This  can  be  done  in  various  ways. 
rV.  In  WHAT  SENSE  IS  THE  MAN  WHO  WINS  SOULS  WISE  ?  1.  In  the  Ordinary  sense. 
The  man  of  business  who  has  adaptation,  method,  diligence,  &c.,  you  say  is 
a  wise  man.  2.  Because  he  is  preparing  for  the  future.  3.  Because  he  builds 
lasting  monuments.  4.  Because  he  pleases  God.  (A,  F.  Barjield.)  A  wise 
icork: — The  Book  of  Proverbs  may  be  compared  to  a  basket  of  pearls.  Each 
▼erse  is  complete  in  itself ;  the  truth  contained  within  it  is  of  independent  worth. 
I.  Wisdom  is  seen  in  the  attempt  to  win.  The  very  effort  itself  is  a  proof  of 
true  wisdom.  1.  The  soul's  position  proves  it.  It  is  a  perishing  one.  2.  Soul- 
winning  is  a  noble  work.  A  soul-winner  need  envy  no  one.  His  work  surpasses  all 
in  true  nobility.  3.  Soul-winning  is  a  lasting  work,  and  therefore  he  who  attempts 
it  is  wise.  4.  It  is  a  soul-profiting  work.  The  man  who  imparts  a  blessing  by  the 
very  act  receives  one.  The  way  to  be  a  joyful  Christian  is  to  be  a  working  one  at 
the  winning  of  souls.  5.  Winning  souls  is  a  work  that  tells  on  eternity. 
6,  Winning  souls  is  a  work  which  wiU  influence  you  in  heaven.  11.  Wisdom  is 
eequibed  in  the  woek  of  winning.  1.  The  nature  of  the  work  as  suggested  in  the 
text  shows  it.  The  word  for  "  winneth  "  has  three  references.  It  refers  to  the 
snaring  of  birds,  the  catching  of  fish,  the  taking  of  a  city.  To  the  accomplishment 
of  each  of  these  wisdom  is  required.  2.  The  variety  of  disposition  seen  in  souls 
requires  it.  III.  Hints  as  to  how  to  set  about  winning  souls.  1.  They  must  be 
alarmed.  2.  They  must  be  allured.  3.  They  must  be  taken  by  the  hand.  4.  They 
who  would  win  others  must  show  that  they  themselves  are  won.  {Archibald 
G.  Brown.)  The  wisdom  of  winning  souls  : — This  text  may  refer  to  two  things  : 
wisdom  in  winning  souls,  or  the  wisdom  of  winning  souls.  He  who  assumes,  as 
the  errand  and  purpose  of  his  life,  the  conversion  of  his  fellow-men  to  Christ,  has 
given  the  highest  proof  within  his  reach  that  he  himself  is  a  wise  man.    I.  He 

HAS  SELECTED  THE  NATURAL  FIELD  FOR  SUCCESSFUL  HUMAN  EFFORT.       It  iS  time   to  drop 

our  suspicion  in  reference  to  honest  work.  Butler's  definition  says,  "  Happiness 
consists  in  a  faculty  having  its  proper  object."  That  is,  let  any  one  of  our  powers 
fasten  itself  upon  a  legitimate  end,  and  proceed  at  once  unto  vigour,  and  a  feeling 
of  true  continuous  joy  will  spring  up  from  the  mere  exercise.  Our  reason  is  the 
happiest  in  reasoning ;  our  judgment  in  deciding ;  our  imagination  in  the  poetic 
drawing  of  pictures ;  our  affections  in  lavishing  their  love  on  chosen  friends. 
There  needs  only  to  be  added  the  element  of  success.    That  is,  we  must  be  able  to 


286  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tl. 

gain  the  ends  we  aim  at.  If  we  are  banlked,  we  are  disappointed  and  discontented. 
Hence  it  is  important  for  each  man  to  understand  his  own  adaptations  and 
possibilities,  so  that  he  may  seek  right  ends.  Winning  souls  is  the  true  work  for 
human  souls  to  do.  For  it  flings  into  successful  action  the  whole  Christian  man, 
body,  mind,  and  spirit.  There  is  intelligence  in  it ;  there  is  faith  in  it ;  there  is 
hope  in  it ;  there  is  activity  in  it ;  there  is  excitement  and  exhilaration  in  it.  And 
success  is  sure  to  follow  fidelity.  The  old  fable  was  that  one  who  always  carried 
a  myrtle-wand  in  his  hand  would  never  grow  weary  in  the  way.  But  here  is  no 
fable.  The  love  of  Christ  in  the  heart,  and  the  zeal  of  Christ  in  the  life,  are  what 
evermore  satisfy,  exercise,  and  rest  the  soul.  II.  The  specific  end  to  be  beached 
IN  WINNING  SOULS  EVIDENCES  WISDOM  IN  THE  CHOICE.  Evcu  a  ministry  of  destruction 
has  something  grand  about  it,  fearful  as  it  seems  to  gaze  upon,  awful  as  it  must  be 
to  exercise.  But  a  ministry  of  relief  is  better  than  any  of  retribution.  It  has  in  it 
aU  the  sublimity  of  power,  and  then  the  additional  grace  and  glory  of  help,  the 
beauty  of  being  serviceable.  A  ministry  of  salvation  is  simply  transcendent.  It 
deals  with  a  man's  highest  nature,  and  touches  upon  the  destinies  of  eternity. 
Everywhere  God  seems  to  look  upon  human  beings  as  just  so  many  souls.  To  save 
a  man  is  to  deliver  a  fellow-man  from  sin  and  hell,  and  bring  him  to  holiness  and 
heaven.  To  save  a  soul  is  to  incorporate  with  the  eternal  destiny  of  a  sentient  and 
reasoning  being  a  new  spring  and  force  of  exultant  and  exhilarant  life ;  to  quicken 
all  its  susceptibilities ;  to  renew  the  will  into  a  profitable  obedience  to  God ;  to 
nnfold  all  the  capacities  of  intellect  and  affection.  In  a  word,  to  save  the  soul  is 
more  than  to  create  the  soul.  III.  The  proprietoeship  we  gain  in  the  souls  we 
iNSTBUMENTAiLY  WIN.  We  love  what  we  work  for  more  than  what  costs  U3 
nothing.  Value  to  you  is  measured  by  this  sum  of  yourself  you  have  put  in  a 
possession.  A  soul  we  help  to  save  possesses  a  value  to  us  unlike  that  of  any 
other  soul.  For  we  gain  a  kind  of  proprietary  right  in  it.  God  lets  us  feel  so. 
1.  Present  companionship.  The  soul  we  lead  into  the  joys  of  this  new  life 
becomes  our  helper,  and  returns  the  benefit.  If  we  put  into  active,  beneficent, 
useful,  attractive  life  any  human  soul,  may  we  not  share  all  the  benedictions  its 
sweet,  gentle.  Christlike  career  is  scattering  around  it?  2.  Eternal  communion. 
Those  who  are  with  us  here  will  go  with  us  to  be  in  our  company  hereafter. 
rV.  The  grand  awards  of  the  gospel  tor  this  work  show  the  wisdom  of  winning 
BOULS.  1.  The  growth  of  personal  graces.  He  who  watereth  others  shall  be 
watered  himself.  He  who  carries  a  lantern  for  darkened  men  finds  his  own  path 
lit  the  clearest.  2.  The  day  of  approval.  Every  soul  which  saves  a  soul  shares  in 
the  satisfaction  his  work  gives  to  the  Master.  Oh,  the  exquisite  joy  of  that 
supreme  moment  when  a  Christian  labourer  presents  a  new  prince  or  princess  to 
Christ,  the  King  of  Glory,  in  the  midst  of  heaven !  (C.  S.  Robinson.)  The 
wisdom  of  winning  souls  : — The  estimate  which  men  form  of  spiritual  things  is 
very  different  from  that  which  they  form  of  temporal  things.  An  individual  who 
is  the  victim  of  temporal  evil  excites  our  pity,  and  kindles  our  compassion,  but  an 
individual  perishing  in  ignorance,  and  dying  in  sin,  excites  no  compassion. 
I.  The  object  here  proposed  to  our  benevolent  sympathy  and  regard — the  soul 
OF  MAN.  The  soul  of  man — who  of  us  understands  it  ?  Fix  attention  on  the 
nature  and  frame  of  the  human  soul.  In  nature  it  is  not  material,  it  is  spiritual 
and  immaterial.  The  body  is  divisible,  the  soul  is  a  homogeneous  substance — it  is 
indivisible,  insoluble,  inseparable.  The  soul  is  not  matter.  We  know  of  only  two 
substances,  matter  and  spirit,  flesh  and  mind,  body  and  soul — these  make  up  the 
whole  of  what  we  know  to  have  any  existence  in  the  universe  of  God.  Philosophers 
have  speculated  much  about  the  locality  of  the  soul  in  the  body.  All  that  we  know 
is,  that  although  the  soul  dwells  in  matter,  it  is  perfectly  and  entirely  distinct  from 
it.  1.  We  may  endeavour  to  form  some  estimate  of  the  soul  by  noticing  its  Maker, 
its  origin.  Think  of  it  as  formed  for  eternity  ;  as  occupying  all  the  attributes  of 
Jehovah  in  its  formation ;  as  made  in  the  true  image  of  God ;  as  made  next  in 
rank  and  degree,  though  equal  in  blessedness,  to  the  angelic  multitude.  Though 
the  soul  is  not  in  the  condition  it  was  in  when  it  came  from  the  hands  of  its 
Maker,  still  there  is  that  about  it  that  tells  us  something  of  what  it  was  ;  there  are 
traces  of  primeval  glory  and  dignity.  Such  is  the  faculty  of  reason,  and  the 
power  of  conscience.  2.  Form  a  notion  of  the  soul's  capacities,  and  faculties,  and 
properties.  Think  of  its  power  of  thought ;  of  the  recording  pen  of  memory ;  of 
the  tablet  of  the  heart ;  of  the  creations  of  genius ;  the  glow  of  enterprise ;  the 
light  of  reason ;  all  proving  to  us  that  the  soul  of  man  is  spiritual,  intellectual, 
immaterial,  immortal.    Think,  too,  of  its  power  of  knowledge.     The  soul  of  man 


OSAT.  XI,]  PROVERBS,  «87 

wanders  on  and  on,  exploring  invisible  and  distant  objects.  3.  Think  of  the  power 
of  pleasing.  How  it  can  charm  by  description,  dazzle  by  comparison,  enliven  by 
wit,  convince  by  argument,  thrill,  captivate,  and  carry  away  by  eloquence.  Think 
of  its  power  of  acting  on  matter,  in  the  glow  of  painting,  in  the  symmetry  of 
architecture,  in  the  beauty  of  sculpture,  in  the  enchanting  intonations  of  the 
human  voice.  4.  The  soul  must  be  of  inestimable  value,  for  its  redemption  has 
been  effected  by  Jesus  Christ.  5.  Think,  too,  on  the  endless  duration  of  the  soul's 
existence.  Only  one  word  can  be  applied  to  the  duration  of  the  human  soul — it  is 
the  word  Eternity.     The  soul  never  dies.    II.  The  conduct  described  in  the  text, 

IN    REFERENCE    TO    THIS   OBJECT,  AND   RECOMMENDED    TO    OUR    ADOPTION.       We   CaU  Only 

win  souls  as  instruments  and  accessories.  Christ  is  the  ransomer  of  the  soul. 
The  French  commentator  paraphrases  the  text  thus :  "  He  that  sweetly  draweth 
souls  to  God,  maketh  a  holy  conquest  of  them "  (Diodoret).  1.  We  are  to 
endeavour  to  win  souls  by  instruction.  Knowledge  is  wanted,  is  agreeable. 
Knowledge  is  to  be  communicated,  now,  from  mind  to  mind,  from  one  to  another. 
The  man  who  has  knowledge  is  bound  to  communicate  it  to  the  man  who  has  not. 

2.  We  must  do  it  by  persuasion.  For  the  soul  is  not  only  ignorant,  but  perverse. 
Its  ignorance  calls  for  illumination,  and  its  perverseness  and  obstinacy  call  for 
entreaty  and  persuasion.  Seriousness  of  manner,  combined  with  affectionateness 
of  spirit,  are  the  charms  we  are  to  employ,  the  artillery  we  are  to  command.  We 
are  to  clothe  our  words  with  plainness,  seriousness,  and  affection.  3.  It  is  our 
duty  to  endeavour  to  win  souls  by  admonition.  It  is  necessary,  sometimes,  to 
rebuke  with  all  authority  and  all  earnestness.  HI.  The  eulogium  which  the  text 
PRONOUNCES  ON  THE  CONDUCT  OP  THOSE  WHO  WIN  SOULS.  He  is  "  wisc."  1.  Scripturcs 
say  that  man  is  wise  who  saves  his  own  soul.  2.  The  text  pronounces  that  man 
wise  who  is  instrumental  in  winning  the  souls  of  his  fellow-creatures.  Such  a  man, 
in  his  conduct,  is  promoting  the  honour,  and  glory  of  God.  Such  a  man  connects 
himself  with  the  coming  in  of  the  mediatorial  reign  of  our  Immanuel.  Such 
a  man  is  the  Best  friend  of  the  human  race,  and  most  effectually  promotes  the 
welfare  of  mankind  around  him*  (J.  Beaumont.)  The  work  and  responsibility 
of  the  ministry : — The  work  of  the  ministry  is  an  awful  thing.  What  shall  we 
say  of  the  responsibility  which  belongs  to  him  who,  at  an  age  when  he  could 
neither  deceive  himself  nor  be  deceived,  chooses  an  office  to  which  he  professes  to 
be  divinely  called,  even  the  cure  of  souls?  I.  The  worth  of  souls.  The  very 
word  "  souls  "  is  startling.  The  soul  is  a  direct  emananation  from  God — a  breath 
of  God,  a  spark,  so  to  call  it,  of  Deity.  It  is  a  living  soul.  It  has  infinite 
capacities.  See  the  estimation  in  which  God  holds  it ;  especially  in  giving  His  Son 
for  its  redemption.  See  not  the  original  redemption  only,  but  also  all  the  subsequent 
acts  of  grace.  Then  most  guilty  must  he  be  who  despises  his  own  soul,  and  in 
spite  of  all  this  array  of  mercy,  chooses  death  rather  than  life.  H.  The  winning 
OF  SOULS.  1.  The  agency  which  the  Divine  wisdom  has  seen  fit  to  employ  in  this 
business.  2.  The  means  which  this  agency  is  commissioned  to  use.  In  preaching 
the  doctrine  of  Christ,  we  are  wielding  a  weapon  of  omnipotent  might.  3.  While 
with  fidelity  we  preach  Christ,  we  must  do  it  with  the  earnestness  which  its 
importance  demands,  and  the  affection  which  its  subject  warrants.  4.  And  we 
must  also  labour  to  the  utmost  to  give  no  offence,  that  the  ministry  be  not  blamed. 
But  this  line  of  conduct  is  strictly  within  the  limit  of  the  faithful  preaching  of  the 
Word.  What  are  the  noble  and  glorious  results  of  a  ministry  so  conducted? 
Such  a  pastor  both  saves  himself  and  them  that  hearken.  {Joseph  Haslegrave,  M.A.) 
The  mission  work  of  winning  souls  : — 1.  Missionary  associations  and  enterprises 
take  their  rise  out  of  the  most  enlightened  and  comprehensive  views  of  human 
nature.  2.  Missionary  Societies  employ  the  only  expedient  which  has  ever  been 
known  to  act  on  human  nature  with  the  power  of  effecting  a  moral  transformation. 

3.  Missionary  enterprises  proceed  on  the  most  enlightened  views  of  the  harmony 
between  the  instrumentality  of  man  and  the  agency  of  God  in  the  work  of  winning 
and  saving  souls.  4.  The  instrumentality  employed  secures  the  most  glorious  of 
bU  results  to  the  instruments  themselves.  5.  Missionary  operations  are  conducive, 
In  a  high  degree,  to  the  prevalence  of  the  spirit  of  Christian  union.  (H.  F.  Burder, 
M.A.)  Winning  first  your  own  soul,  then  other  souls: — The  charity  that  wins 
a  soul  begins  at  home ;  and  if  it  do  not  begin  there  it  will  never  begin.  The  order 
of  nature  in  this  work  is,  "  save  yourselves  and  them  that  hear  you."  But  though 
this  charity  begins  at  home,  it  does  not  end  there.  From  its  centre  outward,  and 
onward  all  around,  like  the  ripple  on  the  surface  of  the  lake,  compassion  for 
the  lost  will  run,  nor  stop  until  it  touch  the  shore  of  time.    Winning  immortal 


388  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cmt.  xx. 

sools  is  work  for  wise  men,  and  we  lack  wisdom.  On  this  point  there  Is 
a  special  promise  from  God.  Those  who  need  wisdom  and  desire  to  use 
it  in  this  work  will  get  it  for  the  asking.  The  wisdom  needed  is  different 
from  the  wisdom  of  men.  It  is  very  closely  allied  to  the  simplicity  of  a 
little  child.  Much  of  it  lies  in  plainness  and  promptness.  (W.  Arnot,  D.D.) 
Two  wayt  of  wUdom : — I.  In  the  choice  of  the  object  of  ptjbsuit.  When  men 
fix  on  that  which  is  of  real  and  unquestionable  value  to  the  exclusion  of  other 
things.  There  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  preference  due  to  the  soul's  interests,  even 
on  the  low  standard  of  calculated  good.  Common  sense  must  admit  the  wisdom 
shown  in  making  the  soul  of  man  the  object  of  the  pursuit  of  men.  If  true  of 
man's  own  soul,  equally  true  of  the  souls  of  others.  He  who  makes  the  soul  the 
object  of  his  pursuit,  and  aims  at  doing  good  to  men  through  those  means  that  are 
spiritual,  finds  that  his  benevolence  is  exercised  under  circumstances  very 
favourable.  H.  In  determining  the  manner  in  which  that  object  shaijj  be 
PURSUED.  In  selecting,  out  of  many  plans,  that  which  is  the  most  likely  to  succeed. 
Of  these  plans  for  winning  souls  some  are  of  men's  devising,  and  bear  the  marks 
of  their  original.  There  is  one,  and  one  alone,  of  God's  ordaining.  Of  men's 
schemes  there  is — 1.  The  religion  of  morality,  which  aims  at  men's  reformation, 
by  addressing  the  reason  in  the  form  of  arguments  and  conviction.  2.  The 
religion  of  sentiment,  which  addresses  itself  to  the  feelings,  and  endeavours  to 
win  the  affections  by  exhibitions  calculated  to  melt  and  touch  and  soften  the 
sensibilities  of  men's  natures.  And  there  is  the  Divine  religion  of  the  gospel, 
which  aims  at  the  conversion  of  the  soul  through  faith.  This  system  speaks  to  the 
heart  and  to  the  conscience ;  and  this  is  the  way  of  wisdom  in  winning  souls. 
{Henry  Raiket,  M.A.)         The  winner  of   souU:  —  I.  What   is  here  mPLiED? 

I.  That  these  souls  might  be  lost,  else  they  could  never  be  won — would  never 
need  to  be  won.  2.  That  these  souls,  though  lost,  are  not  irrecoverably 
lost ;  they  may  yet  be  won.  3.  That  human  instrumentality  is  to  be 
employed   for    the    accomplishment    of    these  ends ;    the    work    is  the  Lord's. 

II.  The  winner  of  souls  has  a  twofold  aim.  The  immediate  aim  is 
the  salvation  of  souls;  the  ultimate  aim  is  the  glory  of  God.  III.  Th» 
GAIN  is  perpetual.  Thcsc  souls  once  won  are  won  for  ever.  Leave  it  to  other 
men  to  build  palaces  and  rear  memorial  pillars,  to  add  house  to  house,  and  call 
their  lands  by  their  own  names ;  be  yours  the  God-like  task  of  contributing  to  rear 
the  palace  of  the  Great  King — of  adding  another  and  another  stone  to  that  goodly 
structure — of  setting  up  pillars  in  the  eternal  temple  that  shall  stand  when  all 
others  have  fallen — of  brightening  the  diadem  of  Jesus  with  gems  rescued  from 
ruin — with  stars  that  shall  shine  for  ever  and  ever.  Be  it  yours  to  win  souls ; 
for  the  price  of  them  is  far  above  rubies,  more  precious  than  the  gold  of  Ophir — 
to  rear  plants  that  shall  flourish  and  bloom  for  ever  in  the  paradise  of  God. 
{Thos.  Main,  D.D.)  A  word  to  winners  of  souls  : — I.  He  is  wise  who  wins  souls, 
FOB  he  has  a  blessing  IN  THE  WINNING.  1.  The  best  way  to  keep  our  own  souls 
in  health  is  to  seek  those  of  others.  2.  The  best  way  to  benefit  our  brethren  is  to 
seek  souls.     II.  He  has  a  blessing  in  the  won.     Every  soul  we  win  for  Christ — 

1.  Is  a  token  of  His  favour.     It  proves  we  have  used  the  means  in  the  right  way. 

2.  Causes,  or  should  cause,  more  watchfulness.  We  are  examples  to  them.  3.  Is 
an  additional  helper  for  us.  What  sweet  communion  have  we  with  our  spiritual 
fathers  and  spiritual  children!  III.  He  has  a  blessing  stored  up  in  heaven. 
1.  Exalted  position.  "  Shine  as  stars."  2.  Perpetual  preferment.  "  For  ever  and 
ever."  3.  Unbounded  delight.  {R.  A.  Griffin.)  The  winning  of  $oul8  : — To 
win  souls  is  a  proof  of  wisdom,  and  it  is  also  an  exercise  of  wisdom.  There  is  the 
wisdom  of  winning  souls  to  be  considered,  and  also  the  wisdom  in  winning  souls. 
I.  The  wisdom  of  winning  souls.  1.  Human  souls  require  to  be  won.  They  are  at 
first  in  a  lost  state.  They  are  lost  as  being  without  knowledge,  without  righteous- 
ness, without  happiness,  and  without  hope.  2.  But  the  souls  of  men  may  b« 
recovered.  The  method  of  their  salvation  is  arranged  and  completed  in  the  gospel. 
8.  See  the  wisdom  of  this  work  in  its  innate  grandeur  and  excellence.  In  a 
shipwreck  or  a  fire  what  strenuous  efforts  are  made  to  save  property,  or  to  save 
life :  how  much  more  to  pluck  these  brands  from  the  burning.  4.  See  what 
an  enduring  work  it  is.  Other  things,  saved,  may  perish  again  ;  but  a  soul  saved 
will  be  secure  for  ever.  5.  See  the  reward  it  brings  to  the  happy  agent  himself. 
It  gratifies  his  benevolence,  and  his  piety — it  secures  him  affection  and  love— it 
will  ensure  immortal  honour  (Dan.  xii.  8).  6.  It  is  an  essential  part  of  our  duty 
aa  Christians.    The  task  of  winning  souls  is  committed  to  us.    A  dispensation  of 


OBAP.  XL]  PROVERBS.  969 

the  gospel  is  entrusted  to  ns.  We  are  bound  by  the  pledges  of  oar  allegiance  and 
gratitnde  to  Christ  to  employ  ourselves  in  this  work.  n.  Thb  wisdom  im 
wnnnNQ  som.s.  1.  There  are  difficulties  peculiar  to  the  work.  (1)  In  the 
perversity  and  prejudices  of  those  whom  we  seek  to  save.  (2)  In  the  snares 
and  oppositions  of  the  world,  skilfully  managed  by  the  great  adversary  of 
our  souls.  (3)  In  the  ignorances,  jealousies,  and  inconsistencies  of  the  agents 
themselves.  2.  The  required  wisdom  consists  of  several  important  consti- 
tuents. {The  Congregational  Pulpit.)  The  supreme  wisdom : — The  literal  meaning 
of  these  words  is  "  He  that  catcheth  souls  is  wise."  The  figure  is  taken  from  the 
manner  in  which  the  fowler  catches  the  birds.  He  that  goeth  into  the  wilds  of 
nature,  where  the  spirits  of  men  are  rude  and  untamed,  and  employs  his  skill  in 
attracting  and  winning  them  to  cultivation  and  righteousness,  is  wise.  The  enter- 
prise of  capturing  a  soul  for  this  end  is  replete  with  honour,  and  brings  such 
distinction  that  rank  and  talent  have  been  proud  to  consecrate  themselves  to  the 
work.  The  ostensible  end  of  all  enlightened  government  is  to  win  souls,  and  that 
administration  is  the  wisest  whose  measures  are  fitted  to  win  the  largest  number  to 
civilisation  and  from  vice  to  morality.  The  legislature  that  does  not  apprehend 
the  moral  as  weU  as  the  social  and  civil  wants  of  a  people  is  either  barbarous  or 
wicked — as  it  may  happen  to  rest  on  ignorance  or  selfishness.  Let  us  select  any 
form  of  philanthropy — the  genius  of  that  form  really  is  the  recovery  of  the  soul. 
You  never  give  a  beggar  alms  without  some  reference  to  his  mind.  Whether  you 
would  or  not,  you  must  include  the  relief  of  his  mind  when  you  are  moved  to  lighten 
his  bodily  distress.  The  true  philanthropist  gives  scope  to  this  mental  sympathy. 
Why  does  he  seek  to  alleviate  the  mental  and  physical  disorders  of  his  fellow-men  ? 
Because  they  stand  in  the  way  of  their  moral  nature.  He  does  not  stop  when  he 
has  rescued  a  family  from  starvation.  "  He  that  winneth  souls  is  wise."  He 
makes  the  world  better  and  increases  the  resources  of  his  country's  greatness.  In 
treading  a  low  neighbourhood  of  the  East-end  of  London,  you  find  a  family  bearing 
every  mark  of  extreme  distress.  You  enter  what  more  resembles  a  den  than  a 
room.  But  in  that  foul  and  wretched  hovel  there  would  be  a  lot  more  than  meets 
the  eye.  Amid  that  squalor,  and  in  such  a  home,  there  would  be  scenes  of  the 
greatest  crime  and  ruin,  and  if  the  children  were  turned  out  on  society  they  would 
be  like  so  many  prowling  wolves.  But  suppose  you  are  the  instrument  of  checking 
this  current  of  evil  and  wickedness.  What  have  you  done?  In  rescuing  these 
poor  creatures  from  poverty  you  dispel  one  of  the  chief  incentives  to  crime  by 
waking  up  energies  laid  asleep  by  destitution  or  wickedness.  You  have,  by  sending 
the  children  to  school,  closed  one  door  of  ignorance  and  vice,  and  opened  another 
of  intelligence  and  virtue.  You  have  won  souls  to  knowledge  and  integrity.  But 
here  I  ask,  Have  we  done  aU  when  we  have  reached  this  step  ?  Have  governments 
arrived  at  the  limit  of  their  possibilities  when  they  have  made  men  free  and 
prosperous  ?  Has  philanthropy  executed  her  mission  when  she  has  supplied  the 
needy  with  bread  and  gathered  about  them  conditions  of  health  ?  As  if  a  man  had 
drawn  up  a  careful  design  for  a  mansion,  had  laid  the  foundation,  carried  up  the 
walls,  and  then  had  neglected  to  cover  the  building,  the  result  being  that  when  the 
winds  and  rain  came  the  splendid  fragment,  wanting  the  coherence  and  support  of 
a  roof,  falls  away  and  collapses.  Long  experience  has  convinced  me  that  unless 
education  be  roofed  and  crowned  with  religion,  the  principles  of  human  character, 
however  wisely  laid,  however  right  in  themselves,  will  not  prevent  the  character 
from  collapsing.  The  principles  of  human  character  will  go  down,  and  the  soul  is 
not  won,  but  lost.  The  doctrines  Christ  came  to  reveal  or  enforce,  and  the  great 
atoning  work  which  it  was  the  business  of  His  life  to  finish  were  illustrated  upon  a 
miniature  scale  in  order  that  we  might  be  ready  and  able  at  once  to  study  their 
operation.  The  truths  He  proclaimed  were  for  all  time  and  for  the  world,  but  the 
application  was  first  directed  by  Himself  to  a  small  district  of  Palestine.  He  taught 
us  how  to  win  souls.  He  addressed  Himself  to  every  human  want.  Unlike  all 
other  benefactors  I  have  ever  seen  or  heard  of,  He  did  not  give  Himself  to  one 
department  of  charity.  He  raised  the  whole  man.  And  the  dispensation  of  His 
goodness  was  as  practical  as  it  was  beneficial.  He  satisfied  the  hungry,  but  He 
never  pauperised  indolence.  Why  do  I  mention  these  particulars  ?  In  order  to 
show  that  our  heavenly  Lord  took  care  of  the  earthly  life — its  animal  and  social 
wants ;  and  in  His  daily  teachings  He  included  those  earthly  virtues  of  truth, 
purity,  industry,  loyalty,  and  love.  But  the  basis  of  His  superstructure  of  philan- 
thropy was  the  salvation  of  the  soul.  It  must  be  the  aim  of  all  power  professing 
beneficence  to  take  the  soul  to  the  arms  of  God.      The  soul  not  only  belongs  to 

20 


290  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAP,  r- 

God,  everything  belongs  to  Him ;  but  the  soul  has  a  future  of  immortality,  and 
the  brief  life  of  a  few  years  here  must  train  it  for  the  life  of  ages.  To  win  a  soul 
is  not  to  bring  it  into  bondage,  it  is  to  take  it  and  keep  it  for  God.  The  Saviour 
was  ever  removing  obstacles  in  the  way  to  heaven,  and  the  supreme  obstruction — 
sin — He  laid  down  His  life  to  remove.  All  His  earthly  lessons,  all  His  parables 
and  teachings,  lead  up  to  heaven  like  the  steps  of  a  ladder.  And  I  think  you 
cannot  begin  this  winning  process  too  soon.  The  perceptions  of  a  child  are  far  in 
advance  of  its  tongue,  although  that  begins  early.  Its  temper  and  will  are  apt 
scholars  before  its  tongue  can  frame  a  syllable.  It  will  learn  more  in  the  first  three 
years  than  you  can  teach  it  in  the  next  ten.  {E.  E.  Jenkins,  M.A.)  The  wise 
man  wins  souls : — It  is  supposed  that  a  man  is  wise  because  he  wins  souls.  That 
is  not  the  teaching  of  the  text.  He  wins  souls  because  he  is  wise.  Let  us  look  at 
the  matter  in  this  way :  there  is  a  necessity  in  wisdom  that  it  shall  win  souls. 
Wisdom  always  wins.  The  wise  man  may  never  speak  to  a  soul,  and  yet  he  may 
win  it.  This  is  not  the  picture  of  an  ardent  evangelist  running  to  and  fro  in  the 
earth  upon  the  vague  and  general  mission  of  winning  souls.  That  is  the  popular 
misunderstanding  of  the  text.  The  real  interpretation  is  that  if  a  man  is  wise  he 
will  by  the  very  necessity  of  wisdom  win  souls,  draw  them  to  him,  excite  their 
attention,  compel  their  confidence,  constrain  their  honour.  There  is  a  silent  con- 
quest ;  there  is  a  preaching  that  never  speaks — a  most  eloquent  preaching  which 
simply  does  the  law,  obeys  the  gospel,  exemplifies  the  spirit  of  Christ,  works  that 
spirit  out  in  all  the  detail  of  life,  so  swiftly,  patiently,  sympathetically,  completely, 
that  souls  are  won,  drawn,  saying.  Behold,  what  virtue  is  this!  what  pureness, 
what  charity,  what  simplicity,  what  real  goodness  and  beneficence  !  This  must  be 
the  right  doctrine,  because  it  comes  out  in  the  right  line.  So  then  the  scope  of  the 
text  is  enlarged.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Souls  to  he  won,  not  driven  .- — This  wise 
man  does  not  drive  souls — he  wins  them.  Souls  cannot  be  driven.  We  may 
attempt  to  drive  them,  and  therein  show  our  folly,  but  it  is  of  the  nature  of  the  soul 
that  it  be  charmed,  lured  by  angel-like  beauty,  by  heavenly  eloquence,  by  mighty 
persuasion  of  reason.  The  soul  that  is  driven  offers  no  true  worship  ;  nay,  as  we 
have  just  said,  the  soul  can  defy  the  driver.  The  body  can  be  driven  to  church, 
but  not  the  soul.  It  does  not  follow  because  a  man  is  sitting  in  church  that  he 
himself  is  there.  A  child  forced  to  church  is  not  at  church.  The  house  of  God, 
therefore,  should  be  filled  with  fascination,  attraction,  charm,  so  that  little  children 
should  long  to  go  to  it,  and  it  should  be  a  deprivation  not  to  go  there.  The 
wise  man  would  not  drive  men  to  any  form  of  goodness,  though  he  is  bound  to 
prohibit  them  under  penalty  from  certain  forms  of  social  evil,  because  those  forms 
involve  the  health,  the  prosperity,  and  the  best  advantage  of  others.  (Ibid.) 
How  to  win  others  to  Christ : — Soul-winning  is  a  blessed  possibility  to  all  who 
are  "  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God."  1.  Be  prayerful.  Have  regular  hours  for 
secret  communion  with  God.  2.  Study  the  Scriptures.  3.  Be  gentle.  Lead 
rather  than  drive.  Speak  the  truth  in  love.  Never  argue.  4.  Be  polite.  Haste 
or  brusqueness  will  repel.  A  courteous,  affable  manner  is  well-nigh  irresistible. 
5.  Be  courageous.  Trusting  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit,  never  be  afraid  to  speak 
to  any  soul.  6.  Leave  the  result  with  God.  It  is  unwise  ever  to  waste  time  in 
regrets.  A  rebuff  may  mean  a  soul  under  strong  conviction.  Some  seeds  take 
longer  to  sprout  than  others.  Remember  you  are  not  working  for  yourself,  but  for 
God ;  that  without  Him  you  could  do  nothing ;  and  to  Him  belongs  all  the  glory. 
(G.  F.  Pentecost.)  How  to  win: — In  Chicago,  a  few  years  ago,  there  was  a  little 
boy  who  went  to  one  of  the  mission  Sunday-schools.  His  father  moved  to  another 
part  of  the  city,  about  five  miles  away,  and  every  Sunday  that  boy  came  past  thirty 
or  forty  Sunday-schools  to  the  one  he  attended.  One  day  a  lady  who  was  out 
collecting  scholars  for  a  Sunday-school  met  him  and  asked  him  why  he  went  so  far, 
past  so  many  schools.  "  There  are  plenty  of  others  just  as  good,"  said  she. 
•'  They  may  be  as  good,  but  they  are  not  so  good  for  me,"  he  said.  "  Why  not?" 
she  asked.  "  Because  they  love  a  fellow  over  there,"  he  answered.  Ah  !  love  won 
him.  "  Because  they  love  a  fellow  over  there !  "  How  easy  it  is  to  reach  people 
through  love !  (D.  L.  Moody.)  Soul-winning  : — Some  preachers  think  only 
of  their  sermon ;  others  think  only  of  themselves :  the  man  who  wins  the  soul  is 
the  man  who  aims  at  it.  (Dean  Hook.)  Success  in  toul-icinning  : — Success  in 
soul-winning  is  only  given  to  skill,  earnestness,  sympathy,  perseverance.  Men  are 
saved  not  in  masses,  but  by  careful  study  and  well-directed  effort.  It  is  said  that 
such  is  the  eccentric  flight  of  the  snipe  when  they  rise  from  the  earth,  that  it 
completely  puzzles  the  sportsman,  and  some  who  are  capital  shots  at  other  birds 


CHAi".  XL]  PROVERBS.  291 

are  utterly  baffled  here.  Eccentricity  seems  to  be  their  special  quality,  and  this  can 
only  be  mastered  by  incessant  practice  with  the  gun.  But  the  eccentricity  of  souls 
is  beyond  this,  and  he  had  need  be  a  very  spiritual  Nimrod,  a  "  mighty  hunter 
before  the  Lord,"  who  would  capture  them  for  Christ.  The  best  news: — When 
Chalmers  was  in  the  very  zenith  of  his  popularity  in  Glasgow,  and  crowds 
were  gathering  every  Sabbath  round  his  pulpit,  he  was  walking  home  one 
evening  with  a  friend,  who  told  him  of  a  soul  who  had  been  converted  through 
the  instrumentality  of  a  sermon  which  he  had  preached.  Immediately  the 
tear-drop  glittered  in  the  good  man's  eye,  and  his  voice  faltered  as  he  said, 
"  That  is  the  best  news  I  have  heard  for  a  long  time.  I  was  beginning  to  think 
that  I  had  mistaken  the  leadings  of  providence  in  coming  to  your  city ;  but  this 
will  keep  me  up."  The  joy  of  winning  smds  : — Bishop   Harold  Browne    of 

Winchester  once  said  that  among  all  the  joys  which  had  been  given  Ijim  in 
the  course  of  a  long  and  busy  life,  none  had  come  with  a  deeper  thrill,  or  had 
remained  so  freshly  in  his  heart,  as  the  joy  he  had  felt  when,  as  a  young 
curate,  he  had  been  for  the  first  time  the  means,  through  God,  of  leading  a 
soul  to  peace  and  trust  in  Christ.  This  is  a  joy  which  all  can  have,  if  they  ask  for 
guidance  in  the  work  of  influencing  others  for  God.  {F.  E.  Toyne.)  The  winner 
of  souls  is  wise : — A  learned  divine  was  asked,  on  his  death-bed,  what  he  considered 
the  greatest  of  all  things.  His  answer  was,  "  It  is  not  theology,  nor  controversy ;  it 
is  to  save  souls."  Doddridge  wrote,  "  I  long  for  the  conversion  of  souls,  more 
sensibly  than  for  anything  besides."  Matthew  Henry  says,  "I  would  think  it  a 
greater  happiness  to  gain  one  soul  to  Christ  than  mountains  of  gold  and  silver  for 
myself."  Brainerd  said,  "  I  cared  not  where  nor  how  I  lived,  or  what  hardship  I 
went  through,  so  that  I  could  but  gain  souls  to  Christ."  Ward  Beecher  says,  "  As 
the  pilot  boats  cruise  far  out,  watching  for  every  whitening  sail,  and  hover  through 
day  and  night  all  about  the  harbour,  vigilant  to  board  every  ship  that  they  may 
bring  safely  through  the  Narrows  all  the  wanderers  of  the  ocean,  so  should  we 
watch  off  the  gate  of  salvation  for  all  the  souls,  tempest-tossed,  beating  in  from  the 
sea  of  sin,  and  guide  them  through  the  perilous  straits,  that  at  last,  in  still  waters, 
they  may  cast  the  anchor  of  their  hope."  The  Christian  is  to  do  good,  not  by  force 
or  hardness,  but  by  gentle  persuasion  and  persevering  kindness.  To  win,  as  in  a 
game,  implies  skill  in  adapting  the  means  to  the  end.  1.  He  who  would  be 
successful  in  winning  souls  to  Christ  must  be  considerate  and  thoughtful. 
2.  Another  qualification  is  courage.  3.  Another  is  tender,  unaffected  sympathy. 
It  is  said  that  if  a  piano  is  struck  in  a  room  where  another  stands  unopened,  one 
who  should  place  his  ear  near  it  would  hear  a  responsive  note  within,  as  though 
touched  by  the  hand  of  an  unseen  spirit.  Such  is  the  power  of  sympathy.  {John 
N.  Norton.)  A  motto  for  a  neio  year : — Our  first  object  should  be  to  win  Christ. 
That  being  attained,  we  cannot  adopt  a  better  motto  for  life  than  this,  "  He  that 
winneth  souls  is  wise."  1.  He  is  a  wise  man  who  sets  this  before  him  as  the  object 
for  which  to  Uve.  No  pursuit  is  more  worthy  of  our  energies.  No  pursuit  yields  a 
better  return.  2,  He  who  would  be  successful  in  this  work  must  go  about  it  wisely. 
He  must  himself  be  wise  unto  salvation.  He  must  have  the  tact  to  discern  his  oppor- 
tunities, and  rightly  direct  his  appeals.  The  word  "  winneth"  (margin,  "taketh") 
is  an  allusion  to  the  hunter's  craft.  3.  A  wise  adaptation  to  the  circumstances  and 
temperaments  of  those  we  seek  to  bless  is  needed  in  this  work.  It  will  not  answer 
to  deal  with  all  alike.  Men  are  not  to  be  taken  in  the  lump  and  treated  after  some 
patent  method  of  moral  mechanics.  Every  human  being  is  an  individual,  and 
must  be  so  reckoned  and  laboured  for.  No  labour  or  self-denial  will  be  misspent 
in  this  holy  cause.     (C.  A.  Davis.) 

Ver.  31.  Behold,  the  righteous  shall  be  recompensed  in  the  earth. — Judgment 
Jiere : — Two  ways  of  explaining  this  text.  1.  Of  the  happiness  which  God  has 
appointed  for  goodness,  it  has  pleased  Him  that  some  portion  should  accrue  in  this 
world ;  and  of  the  misery  which  is  the  wages  of  sin,  a  much  more  abundant 
portion.  2.  Even  the  righteous  shall  be  recompensed  (that  is,  punished)  for  their 
sins,  in  the  earth,  much  more  the  wicked,  with  a  sorer  punishment.  The  argu- 
ment is,  if  the  good  and  pious  often  suffer  for  the  faults  they  fall  into,  for  the 
•wicked  to  expect  an  exemption  from  suffering  is  a  most  vain  and  absurd  expecta- 
tion. The  first  is  the  more  natural  and  obvious  sense  of  the  passage.  This  world 
is  not  a  place  of  retribution.  It  is  a  place  where  men  may  suffer  for  their  virtues 
and  escape  for  their  wickedness ;  and  this  so  frequently  as  even  to  afford  some 
ground  and  pretence  for  questioning  which  course  a  man  had  best  take  if  this  life 


292  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  xn. 


■were  his  all.  A  man  might  say,  "  Let  us  live  to  ourselTes,  and  seize  all  the  good 
wiUiin  onr  reach,  whatever  be  the  consequences  to  others."  Such  a  plan  the  wise 
king  pronounced  to  be  foolish  and  shortsighted,  even  on  the  principles  of  worldly 
prudence,  and  without  taking  another  life  into  the  accoont.  After  all  the  arga- 
ments  from  suffering  virtue  and  successful  wickedness  have  been  urged  and 
admitted,  the  balance  of  good  will  be  found  to  be  with  the  good,  and  evU  unknown 
to  them,  to  beset  the  path  and  track  the  steps  of  the  wicked.  The  words  imply 
that  any  one  may  see  this  who  will  attend  carefully  to  what  passes  around  him. 
It  is  in  every  one's  mouth  that  "  honesty  is  the  best  policy."  The  upright  and 
regular  part  of  the  community  is  too  sagacious  and  too  strong  for  the  schemer  at 
last.  The  honest  and  good  gain  upon  them  and  pass  them,  even  in  the  career  of 
worldly  success.  There  is  a  reward  in  this  life  for  a  strict  adherence  to  tempe- 
rance and  all  the  other  branches  and  laws  of  self-government.  But  this  doctrine 
is  apparently  opposed  to  such  teachings  as  are  found  in  Eccles.  ix.  11.  But  it  may 
be  noticed  that  in  Proverbs  the  rule  is  dealt  with,  and  in  Ecclesiastes  the  exceptions 
to  the  rule.  Such  exceptions  there  will  always  be.  Part  of  the  text  declares  that 
the  punishment  of  sin  in  this  world  is  more  certain  than  the  reward  of  virtue. 
And  the  fact  is  so.  The  recompense  of  the  wicked  does  not  tarry.  Their  course  is 
soon  interrupted  by  evil  and  suffering.  We  can  generally  predict  the  end  of  the 
wicked  in  this  world.  Licentiousness  and  debauchery  lead  to  disease  and  embar- 
rassment. Of  dishonesty  it  may  be  said,  its  resources  are  soon  dried  op,  and 
the  plenty  it  procures  is  but  for  a  moment.  From  the  laws  of  nature  and  the 
appointments  of  Divine  providence  there  is  no  escape.  The  true  end  and  design 
of  all  the  Divine  afflictions  and  all  earthly  sufferings  is  our  improvement.  He 
adapts  His  methods  to  our  wants,  and  appoints  us  such  trials  as  we  can  bear.  But 
the  promise  of  recompense  in  the  earth  is  perceived  to  belong  to  them  ;  is  fulfilled 
in  them  in  many  respects.    {A.  Gibton,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  xn. 


VsB.  1.  Whoso  loveth  Instruction  loveth  knowledge :  but  he  that  hateth 
reproof  is  brutish. — Worthlets  and  attentive  hearers  : — Attention  to  the  precepts 
and  wise  counsels  of  this  book  is  urged  by — 1.  The  advantage  which  such  precepts 
are  of,  to  improve  a  man's  carriage  and  conversation.  2.  The  fact  that  they  are  a 
safeguard  against  the  mischiefs  of  evil  company.  3.  That  they  are  the  best 
preservatives  of  health  and  long  life.  4.  In  the  ways  of  wisdom  is  to  be  found 
peace  with  God,  with  man,  and  with  our  own  conscience.  But  Solomon  tells  us 
there  are  several  sorts  of  men  who  will  be  never  the  wiser  nor  better  for  what  he 
says.  (1)  Such  as  are  stupid,  and  have  no  palate  to  relish  anything  but  sensual, 
earthly  pleasures.  (2)  The  froward  man,  who  is  under  the  dominion  of  his  lusta 
and  passions.  (3)  The  proud  man.  For  he  is  wiser  in  his  own  conceit  than  seven 
men  that  can  render  a  reason.  This  conceit  is  commonly  the  child  of  prosperity. 
(4)  The  negligent  and  slothful  man.  He  wiU  not  be  at  the  pains  to  cultivate  his 
mind  with  the  instructions  of  wisdom.  (5)  Men  of  a  vain  and  frothy  spirit,  who 
love  to  turn  serious  things  into  ridicule;  jesters  and  scorners.  The  qualifications 
our  divine  philosopher  calls  for  are  diligence  and  attention.  He  would  have  his 
hearers  apply  their  hearts  and  incline  their  ears  to  the  words  of  his  mouth. 
Where  were,  and  where  are  now,  these  schools  of  wisdom,  where  diligent  hearers 
may  be  instructed  in  the  laws  of  God  and  a  good  life  ?  They  are  found  in  our 
schools  of  Mterature  and  in  our  churches.  {W.  Reading,  M.A.\  The  love  of 
instruction  : — It  is  by  instruction  that  knowledge  comes.  He  who  fancies  he  has 
all  in  himself  will  never  learn.  In  proportion  to  the  love  of  instruction  will  be  the 
acquisition  of  knowledge.  The  love  of  instruction  implies  humility.  It  argues  a 
sense  of  ignorance  and  need  of  information.  It  is  a  common  thing  for  men  to 
allow  pride  to  cheat  them  of  much  valuable  knowledge.  That  the  knowledge  of 
duty  as  well  as  of  truth  is  here  to  be  included  may  be  inferred  from  the  latter  part 
of  the  verse.  "  Refusing  reproof  "  is  "  brutish,"  as  irrational,  senseless,  unworthy 
of  a  creature  endowed  with  intellect ;  distinguished  by  reason  from  the  beasts  of 
the  field,  and  distinguished  from  them  too  by  his  immorality.  There  may  also  be 
comprehended  in  the  expression  the  absence  of  what  every  rational  creature  ought 


CHAP,  xn.]  PROVERBS.  89S 

to  have — spiritual  discernment  and  taste;  the  destitution  of  all  right  sentiment 
and  feeling  in  reference  to  God  and  Divine  things.  This  is  the  character  of  him 
whom  Paul  denominates  "the  natural"  or  animal  man,  who  "  receiveth  not  the 
things  of  the  Spirit  of  God."  (jR.  Wardlaw.)  Instriiction  implies  discipline  : — 
Instruction,  as  the  contrast  teaches,  chiefly  implies  discipline — that  most  needful 
e«urse  for  acquiring  spiritual  knowledge.  The  submission  of  the  will  is  the  only 
road  to  Christian  attainment.  The  irritable  pride  that  hates  reproof,  as  if  it  were 
an  affront  to  be  told  of  our  faults,  argues  not  only  want  of  grace  but  also  want  of 
understanding.  (C.  Bridges.)  Reproof: — The  knowledge  and  the  wisdom  which 
this  book  recommends  is  a  practical  and  devout  thing,  having  for  its  foundation 
the  fear  of  God,  and  then  obedience  will  come  out  as  the  result.  If  a  man  loves 
the  end  he  will  love  that  which  leads  to  the  end.  Reproof  is  instruction  under 
another  form.  It  is  instruction  with  an  unpleasant  face ;  but  not  the  less  necessary 
and  salutary.  Some  men  can  hardly  be  managed  in  any  other  way  than  by  just 
having  the  rein  kept  tight  upon  them.  The  Bible  never  permits  us  to  lose  sight  of 
our  immediate  connection  with  God.  The  world  and  human  society  is  not  a  mere 
machine.  It  is  a  great  thing  to  get  the  idea  of  law,  and  that  law  is  working  out  its 
results ;  but  it  is  a  greater  thing  to  get  before  the  mind  the  idea  of  the  personal 
superintendence  of  the  Lawgiver.  Under  His  superintendence  "  virtue  wiU  be  its 
own  reward,"  and  vice  and  wickedness  will  bring  their  own  condemnation  and 
punishment.  The  good  or  benevolent  man  does  not  think  about  the  results  to 
himself  and  his  actions  towards  others  ;  he  does  the  thing  out  of  those  impulses, 
those  Divine  and  holy  instincts,  which  inhabit  that  religious  nature  of  his :  and 
God  has  His  eyes  upon  the  good,  and  the  result  is  the  favour  of  God  comes  upon  him 
and  overshadows  him.  A  man  may  get  on  by  wickedness  for  a  while  wonderfully ; 
but  in  general  the  triumph  of  the  wicked  is  short.  When  he  seems  to  be  established 
he  is  always  in  fear.  (T.  Binney.)  Hating  reproof: — A  story  is  told  of  a 
Scotch  minister,  who,  for  a  month  or  two  after  his  appointment  to  a  country 
parish,  used  to  treat  his  hearers  to  sermons  of  a  very  flowery  description.  Find- 
ing, however,  that  continual  preaching  of  this  kind  is  fruitful  of  little  benefit,  he 
changed  his  style  to  something  less  catching  but  more  practical,  and  also,  with  the 
view  of  adding  weight  to  his  exhortations,  inaugurated  the  "  schedule  system  "  of 
making  collections.  On  one  occasion  a  young  lady  collector  called  on  an  erstwhile 
benevolent  old  spinster  belonging  to  the  congregation,  and  began  the  attack  with 
the  insinuating  schedule  ;  but  no  sooner  was  her  mission  comprehended  than  the 
countenance  of  the  spinster  hardened.  *'Na,  na!"she  exclaimed.  "  Wha  wud 
gie  a  ha'penny  to  yon  man  ?  I  likit  um  weel  eneuch  whan  he  used  to  tell  us  aboot 
the  works  o'  nature,  an'  the  bonnie  flo'ers,  an'  a'  that ;  but  whan  he  begoon  to 
speak  till  us  like  yon  aboot  oor  fau'ts,  I  couldna  dae  wi'  tmi."  Reproof  in 
preaching : — One  thing  I  have  against  the  clergy,  both  of  the  country  and  in  the 
town ;  I  think  they  are  not  severe  enough  on  their  congregations.  They  do  not 
sufficiently  lay  upon  the  souls  and  consciences  of  their  hearers  their  moral 
obligations,  and  probe  their  hearts  and  bring  up  their  whole  lives  and  action  to  the 
bar  of  conscience.  The  class  of  sermons  which  I  think  are  most  needed  are  of  the 
class  which  offended  Lord  Melbourne  long  ago.  Lord  Melbourne  was  seen  one  day 
coming  from  a  church  in  the  country  in  a  mighty  fume.  Finding  a  friend,  he 
exclaimed,  "It's  too  bad!  I  have  always  been  a  supporter  of  the  Church,  and  I 
have  always  upheld  the  clergy.  But  it  is  really  too  bad  to  have  to  listen  to  a 
sermon  like  that  we  have  had  this  morning.  Why,  the  preacher  actually  insisted 
upon  applying  religion  to  a  man's  private  life !  "  But  this  is  the  kind  of  preaching 
which  I  like  best,  the  kind  of  preaching  which  men  need  most ;  but  it  is  also  the 
kind  which  they  get  the  least.     (W.  E.  Gladstone. ) 

Ver.  2.  A  good  man  obtaineth  favour  of  the  Lord. — The  blessing  of  the  righteout 
and  misery  of  the  Moieked : — There  is  a  marked  difference  between  the  righteous 
and  the  wicked  both  in  their  characteristics  and  in  their  condition.    I.  The 

TEACHIKO    OF   THE    PASSAGE    BEOABDIMQ    THE    BLESSING    OF    THE   BIQHTEOITS.       1.    The 

righteous  has  the  favour  of  the  Lord  (ver.  2).  In  the  Divine  favour  is  the  guarantee 
of  all  good.  2.  The  righteous  is  firmly  fixed  (ver.  3).  3.  He  is  wiser  in  his 
speech  (ver.  6).  4,  His  blessings  are  continued  to  his  children  (ver.  7).  5.  He 
wins  the  confidence  of  his  fellow-men.  In  spiritual  privileges,  at  least,  the  good 
man  gains  advantages  of  inestimable  worth.  Some  of  the  advantages  of  the 
righteous  man  are  specified.  Because  he  is  industrious,  he — (1)  Shall  have  plenty  of 
bread.     (2)  His  labour  shall  not  be  without  results.     (3)  He  shall  somehow  come 


294  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

out  of  trouble  triumphant.  (4)  He  shall  be  satisfied  with  good  (vers.  11-14),  The 
longings  of  the  child  of  God  are  so  controlled  and  directed  that  in  time  they  are 
fully  met.  They  keep  themselves  within  the  channels  of  the  Divine  will,  and  so 
are  never  stranded  and  wrecked  by  their  self-will.  II.  The  passaoe  pictubeb  the 
HissBT  of  the  wicked.  This  consists,  first  of  all,  in  the  disapproval  of  God  ;  then 
in  the  disapproval  of  his  fellow-men.  By  their  misdeeds  the  wicked  forfeit  the 
esteem  of  the  public,  and  this  is  a  blow  they  find  hard  to  bear.  A  wrong  course  of 
conduct  is  also  sure  to  ensnare  one  in  difficulties.  Each  sin  is  a  misstep  which 
brings  one  into  new  entanglements.  One  lie  necessitates  another  to  bolster  it. 
The  immediate  results  of  sin  may  not  be  seen  to  be  evil.  But  the  end  is  sure  to 
come.  Sin  persisted  in  brings  ruin.  The  end  of  unrepented  wrong  is  sure.  The 
law  of  moral  turpitude  cannot  be  broken.  III.  The  characteristics  of  both  these 
classes.  The  wicked  are  marked  by  a  dislike  for  reproof.  Their  very  sinfulness 
is  an  indication  that  they  are  void  of  understanding.  They  are  self-conceited.  An 
indifference  to  the  opinions  of  others,  a  certain  self-assurance,  an  unwillingness  to 
learn,  these  are  some  of  the  characteristics  of  the  wicked.  Another  almost 
certain  indication  of  wrong-doing  is  the  keeping  of  bad  company.  The  wrong-doer 
"  foUoweth  after  vain  persons."  He  naturally  seeks  those  of  his  own  kind.  Hia 
conduct  is  all  in  the  line  of  injury  to  others.  Selfishness  has  in  it  the  seeds  of 
cruelty.  Self  is  steadily  seeking  its  own  gratification,  and  does  not  stop  at  any 
injury  to  others  who  chance  to  stand  in  its  way.  The  characteristics  of  tha 
righteous  are — 1.  He  loveth  knowledge.  He  is  honestly  seeking  to  find  out  what  it 
is  best  to  do.  Hence  he  gladly  welcomes  correction.  He  does  not  shrink  from 
reproof.  2.  His  thoughts  are  just.  He  desires  to  treat  all  rightly  and  to  give 
every  man  his  just  dues.  His  thoughts  even  are  under  control  in  this  matter- 
Not  only  does  he  not  do  others  wrong,  but  he  has  no  wish  to  ;  nor  even  does  the 
thought  of  evil  rise  up  in  his  mind.     {A.  P.  Foster.)         The  man  of  wisdom  : — 

1.  The  relation  of  the  man  of  wisdom  to  God.  He  is  in  favour  with  God, 
whereas  the  man  of  unwisdom  is  condemned  of  God  (ver.  2).  The  ethics  of 
Proverbs  is  most  deeply  religious.  All  moral  obligations  derive  from  the  Creator, 
and  the  foundation  of  wisdom  is  over  and  over  again  stated  to  be  in  the  fear  of  the 
Lord.  Many  a  moral  teacher  fails  because  he  tries  to  induce  men  to  act  right 
without  first  setting  their  hearts  right.  II.  The  traits  of  character  BELONOiNa 
TO  the  wise  man  are  set  forth  partially  here.  1.  He  is  truthful.  2.  He  is 
receptive.  3.  He  has  good  practical  judgment.  4.  He  is  industrious.  5.  He  is 
kind-hearted.  III.  The  wise  man  in  his  relations  with  other  men  is  here  set 
forth.  1.  He  has  honour  from  others.  That  man  only  has  true  honour  whose 
name  is  honestly  revered.  Such  reverence  comes  only  to  that  nobility  of  character 
whose  spring  is  in  that  heart-wisdom  which  consists  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord. 

2.  Such  a  character  brings  honour  to  others.  3.  Such  a  man  is  safe  from  embroil- 
ments with  others.  A  man  without  principle  is  always  getting  into  troubles  from 
which  the  righteous  escape.  IV.  The  results  to  himself  of  the  wisdom  of  the 
GOOD  MAN.  1.  The  wise  man  has  a  return  for  his  devotion  to  that  which  is  good. 
Satisfaction  is  dealt  out  to  him.  2.  In  this  passage  the  character  of  the  result  is 
described.  3.  Stability  is  specially  noted  as  one  of  the  rewards  of  the  good. 
{D.J.  Burrell.)  The  good  vian: — By  a  good  man  we  are  to  understand  a 
benevolent  man  ;  that  is,  a  man  who  always  wills  happiness  to  others  and  carries 
forward  his  benevolence  into  the  active  form  of  beneficence.  The  good  man  is  not 
an  intellectual  fop,  or  a  moral  phenomenon,  but  is  well  disciplined,  thoroughly 
chastened,  adjusted  in  all  his  faculties,  and  sometimes  concealing  exceptional 
excellences  under  a  general  average  of  fine  nature  ;  that  is  to  say,  instead  of  living 
in  his  eccentricities  and  making  a  reputation  out  of  his  occasional  excellences  he 
brings  down  these  mountains  and  irregularities  and  smooths  them  so  as  to  con- 
solidate a  general  average  of  true  worth.  Whoever  does  good  is  an  ally  of  God  ;  he 
is  in  immediate  co-operation  with  Him.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  A  virtuous  woman  is  a  crown  to  her  husband :  but  she  that  maketh 
ashamed  is  as  rottenness  in  his  bones. — False  affection  : — Delilah's  character, 
though  but  briefly  drawn,  is  not  without  terrible  significance.  In  her  we  see  a 
violation  of  the  ties  of  life  and  properly-poised  aiiection  which  makes  us  start ; 
and  yet  by  many  among  us  this  fault  is  committed  and  scarcely  considered  to  be  a 
fault.  We  hardly  know  a  case  of  more  affecting  and  heartless  treachery  than  that 
of  Delilah.  Under  the  guise  of  love  and  in  the  apparently  trusting  confidence  of 
affection  a  man  is  induced  to   tell  a  secret.     There  is  a  mixture  of   treachery, 


CSAP.  xil]  proverbs.  298 

hypocrisy,  cruelty,  and  perseverance  about  the  whole  which  is  remarkable.     Yet  is 
the  case  so  uncommon  after  all  ?     Delilah's  conduct  has  few  parallels  in  Scripture. 
It  is  a  fearful  contradiction — treachery  and  hypocrisy  stand  among  its  foremosV 
features ;  conspiring  with  others,  and  those  cruel  and  vindictive  foes,  against  one 
who  trusted  her,  is  a  strong  aggravation  of  the  evil.     It  would  be  scarcely  worth 
while  to  dwell  on  a  character  like  Delilah's  were  it  not  that  it  bears  on  a  certain 
condition  of  things  among  ourselves  which  we  continually  have  brought  under 
notice,  especially  among  our  poor — the  determination  to  defend  and  protect  at  all 
hazards,  through  evil  report  and  good  report,  the  husband  and  near  relative  from 
the  mere  fact  of  his  close  relationship.     It  is  often  difficult  to  know  how  to  treat 
persons  whose  prominent  features  are  so  beautiful  and  attractive,  when  the  deeper 
lines  of  the  character  may  perplex  us  by  an  indifference  to  truth,  the  glory  of  God  and 
the  zeal  needful  for  His  service,  which  deviation  from  such  a  line  of  uncompromising 
affection  and  defence  necessitates.    Illustrate  the  devotion  of  a  woman  who  has  a 
drunken  husband,  of  a  woman  who  has  been  wronged,  or  whose  husband  is  a 
criminal.     These  are  cases  of  heroism.    What  is  the  history  of  these  feelings,  these 
sad  perversions  of  rectitude,  and  what  are  the  remedies  which  we  may  apply  to 
them  ?    What  is  the  object  of  these  intense  natural  affections?    Are  they  intended 
to  blind  the  eyes  to  the  faults  of  those  we  love  ?     No.     And  yet  the  moral  sense  of 
mankind  condemns  Delilah,  and  honours  these  other  women.   They  may  be  partially 
in  error ;  no  doubt  they  are,  but  the  question  is,  Which  tendency  is  right  ?     The 
very  object  of  strong  natural  affections  is  to  give  a  tendency  or  prejudice  which 
may,  to  a  certain  degree,  supersede  the  mere  dictum  of  justice.    We  are  too  weak, 
too  frail,  to  endure  the  latter  only.     If  we  cannot  stand  at  God's  tribunal  neither 
can  we  endure  man's  ignorant  and  partial  judgment,  when  there  is  no  counter 
impulse  given  by  some  other  prejudicing  principle.    I  say  it  with  reverence ;  the 
justice  of  God  is  tempered  by  the  love  of  the  Incarnation,  and  the  stern  decree  of 
bare  judgment  is  toned  down  or  reversed  by  the  examination   of  motives  and 
impulses,  circumstances  and  temptations,  which  He  alone  can  do  who  "  knoweth 
our  frame  and  remembereth  that  we  are  dust."     The  office  of  natural  affection  in 
us  gives  a  strong  impulse  in  favour  of,  not  adverse  to,  the  dependent.    And  when 
justice  decides  that  the  extenuating  circumstance  is  not  enough  to  acquit,  it  forces 
itself  on  the  forlorn  and  forsaken,  goes  out  of  court  with  the  condemned  criminal, 
sits  by  his  side  in  mournful  attitude  in  the  cell,  sings  sweet  words  of  sympathy 
through  the  dreary  hours  of  punishment,  "  weeps  with  him  who  weeps,"  and  makes 
his  sorrows  its  own.     We  can  so  little  trust  the  keen  eye  of  the  most  impartial 
justice.     We  need  to  see  with  some  other  eye.     None  looks  so  deeply  as  that  of 
affection.    It  lets  nothing  escape  which  can  defend,  justify,  save.     Its  object  and 
aim — its  interest  is  to  defend  from  false  blame  ;  to  detect  palliating  circumstances ; 
to  discover  motives  which  may  extenuate.     And  do  we  not  need  that  protective 
power?    Are  any  of  us  sufficiently  fair  judges  of  one  another  to  allow  of  our 
demanding  a  state  of  society  without  the  protecting  influence  of  this  strong  and 
mighty  advocate  ?    Evidently  v^e  should  value,   not  despise,   the    existence  and 
exercise  of  natural  affections.     And  more  than  this,  they  are  to  be  brought  into 
practical  account.    We  should  in  every  way  encourage  those  who  are  pursuing  that 
line  of  self-devotion  and  unselfish  affection  by  showing  them  how  beautiful  we 
esteem  their  conduct,  and  how  well  it  may  be  the  stepping-stone  to  higher  self- 
sacrifice  to  Him  who  j'earns  for  their  heart's  devotion.     (E.  Monro.)         The  queen 
of  the  household  : — Here  a  virtuous  woman  is  spoken  of,  and  a  virtuous  woman  is  a 
true  woman,  chaste,  prudent,  modest,  loving,  faithful,  patient  in  suffering,  and 
brave  in  duty,  keeping  within  the  orbit  of  her  sex,  and  lighting  it  with  all  the 
graces  of  womanhood.     The  language  of  the  text  implies  two  things.     I.  That  she 
EXEKciSES  A  CONTROL  OVER  HEB  HUSBAND.     A  "  CTOwu "  is  the  insignia  of  rule.    A 
virtuous  woman  rules  by  the  power  of  her  love  and  the  graces  of  her  life.    Beauty, 
tenderness,  love,  purity,  are  the  imperial  forces  of  life,  and  these  woman  wields. 
II.    That   she    confers    a   dignity  upon  him.     A  crown   is   a  dignity.     1.  Her 
excellence  justifies    his    choice.     2.  Her    management    enriches    his    exchequer. 
3.  Her  influence  exalts  his  character.     Her  gentle  spirit  and  manners  smooth  the 
roughnesses  of  his  character,  refine  his  tastes,  elevate  his  aims,  and  round  the 
angles  of  his  life.     (Homilist.)      A  husband's  crown : — Woman's  place  is  important. 
God  has  made  it  so,  and  made  her  fit  for  filling  it.    Woman  became  the  completion 
oi  man's  capacity  and  title — she  became  his  crown.     Let  woman  be  content  with 
the  place  that  God  has  given  her.     The  adaptation  of  the  feminine  character  to  be 
the  companion  and  complement  of  man  is  one  of  the  best  defined  examples  of  that 


296  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.m. 

deEigning  wisdom  which  pervades  creation.  When  the  relations  of  the  sexes  move 
in  fittings  of  trath  and  love,  the  working  of  the  complicated  machinery  of  life  is  a 
wonder  to  an  observing  man,  and  a  glory  to  the  Creator  God.  (R.  F.  Horton,  D.D.) 
Virtuout  woman  : — The  moral  element  is  not  excluded  from  this  term  "  virtnous," 
but  it  is  latent  and  assumed  rather  than  active  and  pronounced.  It  must  be 
understood  that  the  moral  element  is  indeed  essential  ;  yet  that  does  not  impair 
the  true  etymology  of  the  term.  By  "  virtuous  "  we  are  to  understand  a  woman  of 
power — so  to  say,  a  virile  woman ;  a  woman  of  great  capacity  and  faculty,  of 
penetrating  sagacity,  and  of  ability  to  manage  household  and  other  affairs.  She  is 
a  high-minded  woman,  giving  the  very  best  help  to  her  husband  in  all  the  difiBculties 
of  life,  crowning  him  with  grace  and  with  light,  such  a  woman  as  he  can  trust  in 
perplexity  and  exigency  of  every  kind.  She  will  not  be  less  an  intellectual  woman 
or  a  woman  of  strong  mind  because  she  is  morally  pure,  spiritually  sympathetic, 
and  religiously  tender.  She  will  not  be  less  a  philosopher  because  she  is  a  true 
child  of  God.  {J.  Parker,  D.D. )  A  good  wife  a  crown  to  her  husband  : — A  remark- 
able instance  of  helpfulness  in  a  wife  is  presented  in  the  case  of  Huber,  the  Geneva 
naturalist.  Huber  was  blind  from  his  seventeenth  year,  and  yet  he  found  means 
to  study  and  master  a  branch  of  natural  history  demanding  the  closest  observation 
and  the  keenest  eyesight.  It  was  through  the  eyes  of  his  wife  that  his  mind 
worked  as  if  they  had  been  his  own.  She  encouraged  her  husband's  studies  as  a 
means  of  alleviating  his  privation,  which  at  length  he  came  to  forget;  and  his  life 
was  as  prolonged  and  happy  as  is  usual  with  most  naturalists.  He  even  declared 
that  he  should  be  miserable  were  he  to  regain  his  eyesight.  "  I  should  not  know," 
he  said,  "  to  what  extent  a  person  in  my  situation  could  be  beloved ;  besides,  to  me 
my  wife  is  always  young,  fresh,  and  pretty,  which  is  no  light  matter."  Huber's 
great  work  on  "  Bees  "  is  still  regarded  as  a  masterpiece,  embodying  a  vast  amount 
of  original  observation  on  their  habits  and  natural  history.  Indeed,  his  descriptions 
read  rather  like  the  work  of  a  singularly  keen-sighted  man  than  of  one  who  had 
been  entirely  blind  for  twenty-five  years  at  the  time  at  which  he  wrote  them.  The 
married  life  of  Faraday  furnishes  another  example.  In  his  wife  he  found,  at  the 
same  time,  a  true  help-mate  and  soul-mate.  She  supported,  cheered,  and 
strengthened  him  on  his  way  through  life,  giving  him  "  the  clear  contentment  of  a 
heart  at  ease."  In  his  diary  he  speaks  of  his  marriage  as  "  a  source  of  honour  and 
happiness  far  exceeding  all  the  rest."  After  twenty-eight  years'  experience,  he 
spoke  of  it  as  "  an  event  which,  more  than  any  other,  had  contributed  to  his  earthly 
happiness  and  healthy  state  of  mind.  .  .  .  The  union  (he  said)  has  in  no  wise 
changed,  except  only  in  the  depth  and  strength  of  its  character."  And  for  six-and- 
forty  years  did  the  union  continue  unbroken  ;  the  love  of  the  old  man  remaining  as 
fresh,  as  earnest,  as  heart-whole,  aa  in  the  days  of  his  impetuous  youth. 

Yer.  5.  The  thoughts  of  the  lighteoas  are  right :  but  the  counsels  of  the 
wicked  are  deceit. — On  right  thoughts  (see  also  chap,  xxiii.  7) : — We  are  in 
reality  what  we  are  in  our  hearts,  and  not  what  we  may  be  only  in  appearance. 
There  may  be  a  fair  show,  while  many  bad  things  prevail  within.  The  Bible, 
therefore,  teaches  a  religion  for  the  heart,  and  it  is  alike  8uitaT)le  and  necessary  for 
every  heart.  We  are  required  to  keep  our  hearts  with  all  diligence,  but  no  one  can 
be  kept  right  who  is  not  first  set  right.  If  a  person  is  as  he  thinketh  in  his 
heart,  his  very  salvation  must  depend  much  upon  his  thoughts.  A  due  manage- 
ment of  these  must  have  a  bearing  upon  everything  else.  I.  Some  bemarks  on 
HUMAN  thoughts.  What  an  inconceivable  number  of  these  are  continually  rising 
up  in  all  minds  I  Then  what  a  mind  His  must  be  who  knoweth  all  these  thoughts  1 
Our  thoughts  are  weighed  and  judged  by  Him  who  searcheth  all  hearts.  Thoughts 
pertain  to  moral  agents,  and  partake  of  the  moral  qualities  of  the  mind  that  breeds 
them.  Self-scrutiny  and  self-knowledge  are  therefore  important  duties.  Good 
thoughts  are  such  as  God  approves  according  to  His  Word,  and  they  are  productive 
of  good  deeds.  Evil  thoughts  are  sinful  in  His  sight,  polluting  to  the  soul,  and 
productive  of  transgressions.  Human  thoughts  differ  much  in  their  origin  and 
cause,  and  this  not  only  in  different  minds,  but  also  in  the  same  mind.  There  are 
suggested  thoughts,  such  as  are  communicated  by  some  outward  agency.  There 
are  also  voluntary  thoughts,  such  as  are  deliberately  pursued  and  cherished.  And 
there  are  involuntary  thoughts,  such  as  seem  to  come  and  go  at  random.  Some 
are  momentary,  others  are  more  permanent;  others,  again,  grow  into  settled 
designs,  full  determinations  of  the  will.  Evil  minds  ought  to  be  under  right 
i;ovemment  and  control,  so  as  to  furnish  prompt  restraint  and  influence  to  its 


CHAP.  XII.]  PROVERBS.  ^  297 

numerous  and  various  thoughts.  II.  The  assertion  conceenino  the  thoughts  of 
THE  righteous.  Consider  what  it  does  not  mean.  All  the  thoughts  of  the 
righteous  are  not  perfect  and  true.  And  it  is  onlj  thoughts  that  are  properly  the 
righteous  man's  own  for  which  he  is  responsible.  The  text  expresses  what  is  the 
true  and  proper  influence  of  religion  upon  the  mind  that  receives  it.  That  influence 
is  of  the  right  kind.  Hence  the  great  importance  of  being  brought  under  the 
regenerating  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  since  it  is  precisely  this  which  rectifies  the 
mind.  1.  True  religion  hath  a  prevailing  influence  upon  the  thoughts  concerning 
God.  Righteous  men's  thoughts  of  God  are  reverential  and  devout.  2.  True 
rehgion  hath  a  prevailing  influence  upon  the  thoughts  of  the  righteous  concerning 
themselves.  Their  thoughts  awaken  them  to  a  sense  of  their  high  destiny,  quicken 
them  in  the  path  of  duty,  make  them  watchful  against  temptation,  and  lead  to 
prayer  and  communion  with  God.  Because  the  prevailing  bias  of  the  unrighteous 
is  wrong,  they  disregard  these  things.  Each  one  should  therefore  inquire,  What  is 
the  character  and  tenor  of  my  thoughts  ?  (Essex  Remembrancer.)  The  righteous 
and  the  wicked  contrasted : — I.  In  theie  thoughts.  Thoughts  are  the  factors  of 
character,  and  the  primal  forces  of  history.  By  thought  man  builds  up  his  own 
world.  The  righteous  man  is  righteous  in  heart :  therefore  his  thoughts  will  be 
right.  The  heart  is  the  spring  of  the  intellect.  The  thoughts  of  the  wicked  are 
false.  He  lives  in  an  illusory  world.  II.  In  theib  speech.  Words  are  the  incar- 
nations, the  vehicles,  and  the  weapons  of  thought.  The  words  of  the  wicked  are 
mischievous.  The  words  of  the  righteous  are  beneficent.  III.  In  theih  standing. 
"  The  wicked  are  overthrown  and  are  not,  but  the  house  of  the  righteous  shall  stand." 
The  wicked  are  insecure.  The  righteous  are  safe.  IV.  In  theik  reputation.  The 
good  commands  the  respect  of  society.  The  consciences  of  the  worst  men  are 
bound  to  reverence  the  right.  The  evil  awakes  the  contempt  of  society.  Servility 
and  hypocrisy  may  bow  the  knee  and  uncover  the  head  before  the  wicked  man  in 
affluence  and  power,  but  deep  in  the  heart  there  is  contempt.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
The  righteous  man  and  right : — The  verse  has  been  rendered,  "  The  policy  of  the 
just  is  honesty ;  the  wisdom  of  the  wicked  is  cunning."  This  rendering  marks 
more  strikingly  the  intended  distinction.  The  righteous  man,  in  all  his  thoughts, 
keeps  by  what  is  right.  He  deals  in  rectitude,  as  opposed  to  deceit ;  and  from  his 
actions  you  may  know  his  thoughts.  The  wicked  man  thinks  one  way  and  acts 
another.  [R.  IVardlaw.)  The  thoughts  of  the  righteous  : — As  odorous  flowers 
give  out  their  fragrance  so  that  we  may  inhale  it,  so  the  thoughts  and  affections  of 
our  spiritual  nature  go  forth  to  be  inbreathed  again  by  other  souls.  On  this 
ground,  Jesus  taught  that  when  the  Holy  Spirit  dwells  in  man,  streams  of  holy 
influence  flow  forth  from  that  man's  spirit.  If  a  frail  flower  breathes  sweetness  into 
the  general  air,  how  much  more  a  holy  man  ?  If  a  cesspool  emits  a  pestiferous 
influence,  how  much  more  a  bad  man?  {J  Pulsford.)  The  difference  between 
the  thoughts  of  the  righteous  and  the  wicked : — There  is  a  difference  between  good 
thoughts  that  ascend  from  the  frame  of  our  hearts  and  those  that  are  injected  from 
without.  For  instance,  a  gracious  man's  holy  thoughts  ascend  from  the  spiritual 
frame  that  is  within  his  soul ;  but  now  a  wicked  man  may  have  holy  thoughts  cast 
into  him  as  a  flash  of  lightning  in  the  night,  which  doth  not  make  a  day ;  neither 
doth  the  injection  of  some  holy  thoughts  argue  the  frame  of  his  heart  spiritual  and 
holy.  When  he  hath  been  hearing  a  warm  sermon,  then  he  thinks  with  himself, 
heaven  deserves  his  choice,  and  eager  pursuits  ;  this  is  but  from  without,  and, 
therefore  doth  not  argue  that  he  is  spiritual.  (Ibid.)  The  thoughts  of  the 
righteous  are  right : — Take  a  river — let  it  be  dammed  and  stopped  up,  yet,  if  the 
course  of  it  be  natural,  if  the  vent  and  stream  of  it  be  to  go  downward,  at  length  it 
will  overbear,  and  ride  triumphantly  over :  or  let  water  that  is  sweet  be  made 
brackish  by  the  coming  in  of  the  salt  water ;  yet,  if  it  naturally  be  sweet,  at  the 
length  it  will  work  it  out.  So  it  is  with  every  man ;  look  what  the  constant  stream 
of  his  disposition  is,  look  what  the  frame  of  it  is  ;  if  it  is  grace,  that  which  is  now 
natural  and  inward  to  a  man,  though  it  may  be  dammed  up,  and  stopped  in  such 
a  course  for  a  while,  yet  it  will  break  through  aU  at  the  last ;  and  though  there  be 
some  brackish  and  some  sinful  dispositions  that  may  break  in  upon  a  man,  yet  by 
the  grace  of  God  he  wUl  wear  them  out,  because  his  natural  disposition,  the  frame 
of  his  heart,  runs  another  way.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  7.  But  the  house  of  the  righteous  shall  stand. — firtuout  kindred  : — I.  In 
the  first  place,  the  circumstance  of  belonging  to  the  house  of  the  righteous,  is 

A    OEEAT   security    that   THB   BAELY    principles   which    80    COMMONLY    DECIDE    THE 


298  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

CHAKACTER  OF  THE  MAN,  HAVE  BEEN  THE  SUBJECTS  OF  A  JUDICIOUS  AND  ANXI0U3 

ATTENTION.  The  child  of  such  a  house  cannot  have  been  left  to  collect  from  the 
chance  companions  of  after-life  those  important  truths  upon  the  knowledge  of 
which  so  much  depends.  II.  It  is  a  second  advantage  belonging  to  the  house  of  the 
righteous  that  the  companions  and  examples  furnished  by  it  are  likely  to  have 
A  powerful  influence  in  deepening  every  good  impression,  and  recommending 
every  valuable  lesson  received  in  it.  III.  It  is  another  privilege  belonging  to  an 
early  education  in  the  house  of  the  righteous  that  virtue  is  there  seen  from  the 
first  in  its  own  lovely  form,  and  its  influence  felt  to  be  full  of  calm  and 
LASTING  ENJOYMENT.  IV.  Another  of  these  advantages  is  the  additional  motive 
felt  in  such  a  CONNECTION  TO  RESPECTABLE  CONDUCT — to  couduct  which  may 
recommend  us  to  the  continued  regard  of  the  numerous  and  friendly  witnesses 
who,  with  anxious  interest,  are  watching  our  progress.     [J.  G.  Robberds.) 

Ver.  8.  A  man  shall  be  commended  according  to  his  wisdom. — Appreciation 

better  than  praise  : — There  are  persons  in  this  world — and  the  pity  is  that  there 
are  not  more  of  them — who  care  less  for  praise  than  for  appreciation.  They  have 
an  ideal  after  which  they  are  striving,  but  of  which  they  consciously  fall  short,  as 
every  one  who  has  a  lofty  ideal  is  sure  to  do.  When  that  ideal  is  recognised  by 
another,  and  they  are  praised  or  commended  for  something — let  that  something  be 
important  or  not — in  its  direction,  they  are  grateful,  not  for  the  praise,  but  for 
appreciation.  An  element  of  sympathy  enters  into  that  recognition,  and  they  feel 
that  they  have  something  in  common  with  the  observer  who  admires  what  they 
admire,  and  praises  what  they  think  is  most  worthy  of  praise.     {Alliance  News.) 

Ver.  9.  He  that  is  despised,  and  hath  a  servant,  is  better  than  he  that  honoureth 
himself,  and  lacketh  bread. — Domestic  modesty  and  display : — Vanity,  or  love  of 
display,  is  one  of  the  most  contemptible  and  pernicious  passions  that  can  take 
possession  of  the  human  mind.  Its  roots  are  self-ignorance,  its  fruits  are  affectation 
and  falsehood.  The  text  refers  to  this  in  families,  and  when  it  takes  possession  of 
households  it  often  destroys  domestic  comforts.  I.  There  are  domestic  comforts 
WITHOUT  display.  In  many  an  unpretending  cottage  there  is  more  real  domestic 
enjoyment  than  can  be  found  in  the  most  imposing  mansions.  11.  There  is 
DOMESTIC  DISPLAY  WITHOUT  COMFORTS.  Many  saciificc  comforts  for  appearances. 
They  all  but  starve  their  domestics  to  feed  their  vanity.  They  must  be  grand 
though  they  lack  bread.  This  love  of  appearance,  this  desire  for  show,  is  making 
sad  havoc  with  the  homes  of  old  England.  III.  The  condition  of  the  former  is 
preferable  to  THAT  OF  THE  LATTER.  It  is  better  to  have  comforts  without  show 
than  show  without  comforts.  1.  It  is  more  rational.  2.  It  is  more  moral.  3.  It 
is  more  satisfying.  (Homilist.)  Vain  honouring  of  self: — Amid  the  changes  of 
this  world,  I  have  seen  a  man  who,  having  known  better  days,  bad  been  nursed  by 
luxury,  and  reared  in  the  lap  of  fulness,  outlive  his  good-fortune,  and  sink  down 
into  the  baseness  and  meanness  of  the  deepest  poverty — in  such  a  case  it  seems  to 
be  with  men  as  with  plants.  Naturalists  find  it  much  less  easy  to  teach  a  mountain 
flower  to  accommodate  itself  to  a  low  locality  than  to  persuade  one  which  by  birth 
belongs  to  the  valleys  to  live  and  thrive  at  a  lofty  elevation;  so  there  seems 
nothing  more  difiQcult  to  men  than  to  descend  gracefully.  .  .  .  And  thus  I  have 
seen  such  an  one  as  I  have  described,  when  he  had  lost  his  wealth,  retain  his 
vanity,  continuing  proud  in  spirit  when  he  had  become  poor  in  circumstances. 
(T.  Guthrie,  D.D.) 

Ver.  10.  A  righteous  man  regardeth  the  life  of  his  beast. — The  sin  of  cruelty  to 
animnh  : — First  remove  some  prejudices  against  dealing  with  this  subject.  1.  This 
is  a  trifling  subject,  which  is  unworthy  of  being  made  a  matter  of  grave  and 
deliberate  consideration.  But  if  this  subject  constitute  a  matter  of  moral  and 
religious  obligation  at  all,  it  is  not  to  be  thrust  out  of  view  because  it  is  not  of  the 
most  universal  and  commanding  importance.  It  belongs  to  the  great  duty  of  mercy, 
and  pertains  to  the  exercise  of  dominion,  one  of  the  high  and  peculiar  distinctions 
belonging  to  human  nature.  2.  The  outcry  against  cruelty  to  animals  is  a  mere 
piece  of  sentimentalism  or  affectation,  and  that  what  is  so  called  is  little  if  at  all 
felt  by  the  creatures  that  are  pitied.  But  many  of  the  animals  exceed  ourselves  in 
th^ir  susceptibility  of  impressions,  having  acuter  powers  of  hearing,  a  more 
enlarged  and  distinct  vision  and  a  keener  smell.  There  is  a  difference  between  a 
tyrannic  exercise  of  power  and  a  mild   and  gracious  management  of  the  lower 


CHAP.  XII.]  PROVERBS.  299 


creatures.  What  shall  we  say  of  acts  of  gratuitous  cruelty,  of  unmitigated  tyranny, 
and  of  unrighteous  injury  ?  3.  It  is  urged  that  this  subject  cannot  be  treated  from 
the  pulpit  with  the  hope  of  much  good.  It  is  surely  a  part  of  the  benevolent  work 
of  the  pulpit  to  turn  the  kindly  feelings  of  humanity  towards  the  brute  creation,  and 
thereby  to  rescue  them  from  the  tormenting  cruelty  which  would  embitter  their 
existence  and  sport  with  their  lives.  State  some  arguments  to  enforce  the  duty  of 
abstaining  from  the  cruel  treatment  of  the  inferior  animals.  I.  Kindness  to  the 
BRUTE  CBEATiON  IS  A  COMMAND  OF  GoD  (Exod.  xxiii.  5  ;  Deut.  xxii.  6,  XXV.  4).  The 
win  of  God  for  the  treatment  of  His  irrational  creatures  is— 1.  That  labouring  animals 
are  to  be  well  fed  and  cared  for  in  return  for  their  toil  and  work.  2.  That  every 
animal  in  a  situation  of  oppression,  peril,  or  insuperable  difficulty  is  to  be  relieved, 
assisted,  and  delivered;  and  that  without  any  regard  to  whom  it  may  belong,  though 
to  your  worst  enemy.  3.  That  no  animal  is  to  be  tormented  merely  for  our 
pleasure,  or  have  its  rational  instincts  thwarted,  or  its  accustomed  and  long- 
acquired  habits  denied.  Every  one  must  admit  the  equity  and  justice  of  these 
rules,  n.  An  argument  against  cruelty  to  animals  is  presented  by  the  example 
OF  God.  We  are  required  to  be  merciful  as  our  Father  in  heaven  is  merciful.  This 
extends  to  our  treatment  of  the  inferior  animals,  since  God  shows  us  an  example  of 
mercy  in  His  dealing  with  them  (Psa.  cxlvii.  8,  9).  But  ample  as  is  the  evidence 
which  the  brute  creation  furnishes  of  the  goodness  of  God,  we  do  not  see  them 
enjoying  at  present  all  the  happiness  which  God  intended  that  they  should  possess. 
They  are  involved  in  sufferings  consequent  upon  the  fall  of  man,  being  committed] 
as  it  were,  to  the  same  fortune  with  us.  We  ought  to  take  pity  on  them  the  more 
on  this  account  as  our  blameless  fellow-sufferers,  and  diminish,  as  far  as  we  can, 
the  necessary  evils  of  their  lot.  This  is  to  resemble  our  heavenly  Father,' 
III.  Another  argument  may  be  deduced  from  the  tendency  of  such  cruelty  to 

HARDEN     THE     HEART    AND     TO    INJURE     THE     TEMPER    AND     FEELINGS     OF     THOSE     WHO 

HABITUALLY  COMMIT  IT.  A  man  who  is  cruel  in  the  treatment  of  his  animal  cannot 
be  a  good  husband,  a  kind  parent,  a  humane  neighbour,  or  a  gentle  and  tender 
friend.  Men  cannot  change  their  dispositions  like  their  dress ;  whatever  disposition 
they  encourage,  it  will  become  habitual  and  natural.  Cruelty  to  animals  makes 
men  sullen,  rude,  ferocious,  wrathful,  apt  to  strike,  impatient  of  contradiction,  and 
prone  to  every  evil  work.  IV.  Cruelty  to  animals  is  a  mean  and  contemptible 
VICE  to  which  there  is  no  temptation.  Almost  any  sin  can  say  more  for  itself 
than  this  can.  What  but  a  love  of  vulgar  and  low  excitement  gives  zest  to  sports 
in  which  animals  are  baited,  tormented,  mangled,  and  destroyed?  V.  The  crying 
injustice  of  such  cruelty  may  be  urged.  We  have  no  right  to  abuse  the  inferior 
creation,  although  we  have  a  right  to  use  them.  Some  of  the  causes  which  lead  to 
the  commission  of  cruelties  upon  the  brute  creation  are,  mere  thoughtlessness  and 
wantonness ;  avarice  ;  love  of  excitement,  from  which  come  the  strifes  and  conflicts 
of  the  bear-garden,  the  race-course,  the  chase,  the  cock-pit,  &c.  {John  Forbes.) 
Cruelty  to  animals  .-—The  word  "  regard  "  may  either  apply  to  the  moral  or  to  the 
intellectual  part  of  our  nature.  It  is  the  regard  of  attention,  or  the  regard  of 
sympathy.  If  the  regard  of  attention  could  be  fastened  strongly  and  singly  on  the 
pam  of  a  suffering  creature  as  its  object,  no  other  emotion  than  the  regard  of 
sympathy  or  compassion  would  in  any  instance  be  awakened  by  it.  With  the 
inertness  of  our  reflective  faculties,  rather  than  with  the  incapacity  of  our  senses 
the  present  argument  has  to  do.  It  is  on  behalf  of  animals  that  we  plead ;  those 
animals  that  move  on  the  face  of  the  open  perspective  before  us.  The  sufferings  of 
the  lower  animals  may,  when  out  of  sight,  be  out  of  mind.  But  more  than  this 
these  sufferings  may  be  in  sight  and  yet  out  of  mind.  This  is  strikingly  exemplified 
in  the  sport  of  the  field,  in  the  midst  of  whose  varied  and  animating  bustle,  that 
cruelty  which  all  along  is  present  to  the  senses,  may  not  for  one  moment  have  been 
present  to  the  thoughts.  Such  suffering  touches  not  the  sensibilities  of  the  heart, 
just  because  it  is  never  present  to  the  notice  of  the  mind.  We  are  not  even  sure  if,' 
within  the  whole  compass  of  humanity,  fallen  as  it  is,  there  be  such  a  thint^  as 
delight  in  suffering  for  its  own  sake.  Certainly  much,  and  perhaps  the  whole  of 
this  world's  cruelty,  arises  not  from  the  enjoyment  that  is  felt  in  consequence  of 
others'  pain,  but  from  the  enjoyment  that  is  felt  in  spite  of  it.  Without  imputinf^ 
to  the  vivisectionist  aught  so  monstrous  as  the  positive  love  of  suffering,  we  may 
even  admit  for  him  a  hatred  of  suffering,  but  that  the  love  of  science  had  overborne 
it.  This  view  in  no  way  is  designed  to  palliate  the  atrociousness  of  cruelty.  Man 
is  a  direct  agent  of  a  wide  and  continual  distress  to  the  lower  animals,  and  the 
question  is,  Can  any  method  be  devised  for  its  alleviation  ?     The  whole  inferior 


300  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

creation  groaneth  and  travaileth  together  in  pain,  because  of  man.  It  signifies  not 
to  the  substantive  amount  of  the  suffering  whether  this  be  prompted  by  the 
hardness  of  his  heart  or  only  permitted  through  the  heedlessness  of  his  mind. 
These  sufferings  are  really  felt.  The  beasts  of  the  field  are  not  so  many  automata 
■without  sensation,  and  just  so  constructed  as  to  give  forth  all  the  natural  signs  and 
expressions  of  it.  These  poor  animals  just  look  and  tremble  and  give  forth  the  very 
indications  of  suffering  that  we  do.  Theirs  is  unmixed  and  unmitigated  pain. 
1.  Upon  this  question  we  should  hold  no  doubtful  casuistry.  We  should  not  deem 
it  the  right  tactics  for  this  moral  warfare  to  take  up  the  position  of  the  unlawfulness 
of  field  sports  or  public  competitions.  To  obtain  the  regards  of  man's  heart  in  behalf 
of  the  lower  animals,  we  sliould  strive  to  draw  the  regards  of  his  mind  towards 
them.  2.  We  should  avail  ourselves  of  the  close  alliance  that  obtains  between  the 
regards  of  his  attention  and  those  of  his  sympathy.  For  this  purpose  we  should 
importunately  ply  him  with  the  objects  of  suffering,  and  thus  call  up  its  respondent 
emotion  of  sympathy.  This  demands  constant  and  varied  appeals  from  the  pulpit, 
the  press,  and  elsewhere.     (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  The  siji  of  cruelUj  toroards  the 

brute  creation : — What  the  sun  is  to  the  natural,  that  Christianity  is  to  the  moral 
world — its  universal  benefactor.  Christianity  regulates  the  intercourse  between  man 
and  man.  It  forbids  hatred,  malice,  and  revenge.  It  allows  no  one  to  take 
advantage  of  his  height  of  station  to  oppress  or  domineer  over  his  humbler  brethren. 
But  it  also  condescends  to  undertake  the  cause  of  the  brute  tribe  against  the  cruelty 
of  man,  both  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor.  The  tendency  of  the  laws  God  has 
enacted  for  their  treatment  forbids  occasioning  unnecessary  pain  to  the  most 
obnoxious  or  destructive  of  them ;  while  towards  the  positively  useful  we  live  under 
actual  obligations.  We  are  not  merely  forbidden  to  do  these  harm ;  to  do  them 
good  is  a  cheap  return  for  the  services  they  perform  in  our  behalf.  To  treat 
humanely  animals  in  our  possession  constitutes  a  part  of  true  religion,  and  will  be 
viewed  by  God  accordingly.  The  words  of  the  text  imply  that  he  who  "  regardeth 
not  the  life  of  his  beast "  forfeits  all  pretensions  to  the  character  of  a  righteous  man. 
By  this  single  breach  of  morality  he  betrays  a  degree  of  guilt  for  which  the  most 
unexceptionable  conduct  to  those  of  the  same  flesh  and  blood  can  make  no  amends. 
The  common  sources  of  cruelty.  1.  Inattention.  This  must  not  be  confounded  in 
point  of  guilt  with  the  diabolical  spirit  of  cool,  intended  cruelty,  but  the  pain  it 
occasions  may  be  equally  severe.  Children  are  in  peculiar  danger  of  sinning  under 
this  head.  2.  Prejudice.  In  many  families  children  are  taught  to  treat  the  greater 
part  of  reptiles  and  insects  as  if  they  were  highly  dangerous  or  injurious,  and  of 
course  to  be  destroyed,  or  at  least  to  be  avoided  with  horror.  The  young  implicitly 
believe  the  unfair  reports,  and  act  accordingly.  Once  give  a  child  the  liberty  of 
inflicting  death  on  certain  species  of  inferior  beings,  and  you  will  soon  find  he 
indiscriminately  wages  war  on  all ;  what  has  been  a  habit  will  ere  long  become  a 
pleasure.  If  parents  would  preserve  their  children  free  from  the  stain  of  cruelty, 
let  them  beware  how  they  make  them  the  executioners  of  their  vengeance  on  even 
the  most  noxious  or  unsightly  creatures,  the  crushers  of  ants  and  spiders,  or  the 
tramplers  on  the  caterpillar  or  the  earth-worm.  3.  Selfishness.  A  selfish  man 
may  plead  that  he  means  no  harm  to  the  creatures  he  is  maltreating ;  but  to  get  his 
pleasure,  he  cares  not  what  sufferings  he  occasions  them.  Refined  methods  of 
barbarity  are  keeping  certain  creatures  so  as  to  render  them  choicer  food ;  the  wagers 
laid  at  races,  &c.  There  are  those  who,  however  considerate  they  may  be  towards 
their  own  property,  care  little  how  they  treat  the  property  of  others  when  lent  or 
hired  out.  Such  incur  not  only  the  charge  of  cruelty ;  they  are  also  chargeable 
with  ingratitude  or  deceit;  and  under  these  circumstances  their  sin  becomes 
"  exceeding  sinful."  (H.  A.  Herbert,  B.A.)  The  feelings  of  animals  : — This  verse 
might  be  rendered,  "  A  righteous  man  knows  the  feelings  of  beasts."  He  gives  them 
credit  for  feelings ;  he  does  not  look  upon  them  as  merely  so  much  animated  matter, 
but  as  standing  in  some  relation  to  himself,  and  the  more  complete  his  ownership 
the  more  considerate  ought  to  be  his  treatment  even  of  the  beasts  he  owns.  Even 
when  the  wicked  man  supposes  himself  to  be  merciful  there  is  cruelty  in  his 
tenderness.  A  wicked  man  cannot  be  gentle.  Men  should  remember  this,  and 
distrust  all  the  gentleness  which  is  supposed  to  attach  to  men  who  are  without 
conscience.  The  tenderness  of  such  men  is  an  investment,  is  a  political  trick,  is  a 
bait  to  catch  the  unwary,  is  an  element  of  speculation.  Rowland  Hill  used  to  say, 
in  his  quaint  way,  that  he  would  not  value  any  man's  religion  whose  cat  and  dog 
were  not  the  better  for  his  piety.  This  is  the  beauty  of  the  Christian  religion :  it 
flows  throughout  the  whole  life,  it  ramifies  in  every  department  of  the  existence 


CHAP.  XII.]  PROVERBS.  80a 

and  carries  with  it  softness,  purity,  sympathy,  kindness.  The  young  lions  roar,  and 
get  their  meat  from  God.  The  universe  must  be  looked  upon  as  a  great  household 
belonging  to  the  Almighty,  regulated  by  His  power  and  His  wisdom,  and  intended 
to  exemplify  the  beneficence  of  His  providence.  Life  is  a  mystery  which  remains 
unsolved,  bringing  with  it  claims  which  none  can  safely  or  religiously  set  aside. 
{J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  duty  of  mercy  to  animals  : — If  we  look  in  the  final,  total, 
and  eternal  teachings  of  Scripture  for  our  moral  standard,  nothing  is  more  clear 
than  that  mercy  is  one  of  the  chief  duties  of  man,  as  it  is  one  of  the  main  attributes 
of  God.  In  the  deluge  provision  is  made  that  the  animals  should  be  saved  as  well 
as  man  ;  and  in  the  renewed  covenant  we  know  that  God  said  (Gen.  ix.  2).  Thus 
early  is  attention  called  to  the  connection  of  animals  with  man,  the  use  of  animals 
to  man,  and  the  dominion  over  animals  by  man.  God's  care  for  them,  man's  duty 
to  them,  are  constantly  inculcated.  Take,  for  instance,  the  Mosaic  law.  How 
exquisite  is  the  consideration  which  it  shows  for  the  creatures  of  God's  hand  !  "  If 
a  bird's  nest  chance  to  be  before  thee,  thou  shalt  not  take  the  dam  with  the  young, 
that  it  may  be  well  with  thee,  and  that  thou  mayest  prolong  thy  days."  Did  any 
other  lawgiver  like  the  mighty  Moses  thus  care  for  the  curlew  in  the  furrow  and  the 
mother-linnet  in  the  brake?  "  Thou  shalt  not  seethe  the  kid  in  its  mother's  milk, 
I  am  the  Lord."  "Thou  shalt  not  muzzle  the  ox  when  he  treadeth  out  the  corn." 
Why?  Doth  God  care  for  oxen ?  Assuredly  He  does,  for  His  are  "  the  cattle  upon 
a  thousand  hills. "  ' '  Thou  shalt  not  plough  with  an  ox  and  an  ass  together."  Why 
not?  Because  it  is  contrary  to  the  law  of  natural  justice,  since,  if  the  two  animals 
be  yoked  together,  an  unfair  share  of  the  burden  must  fall  upon  the  one  or  upon  the 
other.  Gould  God  have  taught  more  clearly  to  us  than  He  thus  did  by  the  mouth 
of  the  great  leader  of  His  people  that  we  must  be  merciful  because  our  Father  in 
heaven  is  merciful  ?  Turn  again  to  the  fresh,  bright,  vivid  poetry  of  the  Psalmist 
of  Israel.  How  beautiful,  how  tender,  throughout  the  Psalms,  are  the  repeated 
allusions  to  the  world  of  creatures !  Or  turn  again  to  that  magnificent,  dramatic, 
and  philosophic  poem  of  the  Book  of  Job.  The  care  of  God  and  the  love  of  God 
for  the  creatures  He  has  made  convince  Job  of  God's  caie  for  him.  Turn  again  to 
the  calmer  and  graver  wisdom  of  the  wise  King  Solomon.  "  There  be  four  things 
which  are  little  upon  the  earth,  but  they  are  exceeding  wise"  (chap.  xxx.  24-28). 
And  when  we  turn  to  the  New  Testament  we  find,  as  we  should  have  expected,  that 
this  perfect  love  for  all  God's  creatures  appears  most  fully  and  tenderly  in  the  words 
and  teaching  of  the  Lord  Himself.  The  lessons  of  the  wise  earthly  king  are  taught 
us  with  creeping  and  laborious  creatures.  He  made  the  bee  and  the  ant  teach  their 
lessons  to  us  ;  but  the  heavenly  King  taught  us  rather  from  those  birds  of  the  air, 
which  "toil  not,  nor  spin,"  but  are  employed,  like  angels,  in  offices  of  love  and 
praise.  There  is  nothing  in  all  human  language  more  touching  and  more  beautiful 
than  Christ's  illustration  of  God's  tenderness  in  the  works  of  nature,  the  flowers  of 
the  field,  and  the  creatures  of  the  air.  Here  is  a  legend  of  Christ,  which  may  be  no 
legend,  but  a  true  story  :  By  the  hot  roadside,  in  the  blistering  sunlight,  the  vultures 
eyeing  it,  and  ready  in  a  moment  to  sweep  down  upon  it  with  their  foetid  wings, 
lay  a  dead  dog — one  of  the  hated,  despised,  ownerless  dogs  of  an  Eastern  city — a 
dead  pariah  dog,  the  most  worthless  thing,  you  might  think,  that  all  creation 
contained — a  pitiable  and  unlovely  spectacle  ;  and  round  it  were  gathered  a  crowd 
of  the  wretched,  loathing  idlers  of  the  place — coarse,  pitiless,  ready,  like  all  the 
basest  of  mankind,  to  feed  their  eyes  on  misery  and  on  ugliness,  as  flesh-flies  settle 
on  a  wound.  And  one  kicked  it,  and  another  turned  it  over  with  his  foot,  and 
another  pushed  it  with  his  staff,  and  each  had  his  mean,  unpitying  gibe  at  the 
carcase  of  the  dead,  helpless,  miserable  creature  which  God  had  made.  Then, 
suddenly,  there  fell  an  awe-struck  silence  on  these  cruel,  empty  triflers  ;  for  they 
saw  One  approach  them  whom  they  knew,  and  whom,  because  He  was  sinless, 
many  of  them  hated  while  yet  they  feared.  And  He  came  up,  and,  for  a  moment, 
the  sad  kingly  eyes  rested  on  the  dead  creature  in  the  blistering  sunlight  with  the 
vultures  hovering  over  it,  and  then  He  turned  His  eyes  for  a  moment  to  the  pitiless, 
idling  men  who  stood  there  looking  at  it,  and,  breaking  the  silence,  He  said :  "Its 
teeth  are  as  white  as  pearls";  and  so  He  went  His  way.  Where  they  in  their 
meanness  could  gloat  on  what  was  foul,  and  see  nothing  but  its  loathhness,  His 
holy  eye — because  it  was  the  eye  of  loving  mercy — saw  the  one  thing  which  still 
remained  untainted  by  the  deformity  of  death,  and  He  praised  that  one  thing. 
And,  leaving  them  smitten  into  silent  shame  before  His  love  and  His  nobleness.  He 
once  more  went  His  way.  Turn  to  the  most  ancient  Greek  poems,  the  "  lUad  "  and 
the  "  Odyssey  "  of  Homer.    In  the  "  Hiad  "  the  horses  of  the  great  hero  Achilles 


302  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

•weep  human  tears  for  their  great  master's  death.  In  the  "  Odyssey  "  we  have  the 
return  of  Ulysses,  ragged,  unknown,  desolate,  after  his  twenty  years  of  wanderings. 
He  is  in  the  guise  of  a  beggar.  No  one  recognised  him  of  all  whom  his  bounty  fed — 
not  his  servants,  not  his  wife,  not  his  only  son  ;  but  Argus  knows  him — Argus,  the  dog 
with  which  he  has  hunted  as  a  boy — Argus  cannot  forget  him  as  human  beings  can. 
Outstretched,  neglected,  before  the  hall  door  lies  the  poor  old  hound,  and  he  no 
sooner  hears  the  footsteps  of  his  master  whom  he  had  known  as  a  boy  long  years 
before,  than  he  looks  up  and  strives  to  crawl  to  his  feet,  licks  his  hand,  and  dies. 
And  at  the  saddest  moment  of  Athenian  history,  when  the  people  of  Athens  were 
flying  to  Salamis  from  the  mighty  hosts  of  Xerxes,  leaving  their  desolate  homes  to 
be  spoiled  and  burned,  the  one  great  nation  which  raised  an  altar  to  pity  had  time 
to  remember  and  to  record  how  one  poor  dog  swam  all  the  way  across  the  straits  of 
the  salt  sea  after  the  boat  which  carried  his  master  to  the  island  shore.  And  the 
Jews,  too,  had  well  learned  this  lesson  of  their  great  books.  The  historian  of  the 
book  of  Tobit  is'  not  afraid  to  tell  us  that  when  the  Jewish  boy  left  his  father's 
house  for  his  long  and  perilous  journey  his  dog  went  with  him ;  and  how,  when  he 
returned  with  the  friendly  angel,  the  dog  still  followed  the  angel  and  the  youth. 
One  of  the  most  celebrated  of  all  the  rabbis,  the  writer  of  the  earliest  and  most 
sacred  part  of  the  Talmud,  was  Eabbi  Judah  the  Holy.  He  was  afflicted  with 
intermittent  agonies,  and  the  Talmud  tells  us  this  legend  of  him  :  On  one  occasion 
a  calf  destined  for  sacrifice  fled  lowing  to  him,  and  thrust  his  head  upon  the  rabbi's 
knees.  "  Go,"  said  the  rabbi,  pushing  the  animal  from  him  ;  "  for  sacrifice  is  thy 
destiny."  "  Lo  !  "  said  the  angels  of  God,  "  the  rabbi  is  pitiless ;  let  suffering  come 
upon  him."  And  he  was  smitten  with  sickness.  But  on  another  occasion,  when 
his  servant  was  dusting  his  room,  she  disturbed  a  brood  of  young  kittens.  "  Let 
them  alone,"  said  the  rabbi,  kindly  ;  "  disturb  them  not,  because  it  is  written, '  God's 
tender  mercies  are  over  all  His  works.'  "  "  Ah,"  said  the  angels,  "  he  has  learned 
pity  now ;  and,  therefore,  let  his  suiJerings  cease."  All  the  best  Christian  history  is 
full  of  the  spirit  of  mercy ;  all  the  saints  of  God,  without  exception,  have  been  kind 
to  animals,  as  most  bad  men  have  been  unkind.  It  was  observed  in  the  earliest 
centuries  of  Christianity  that  the  hermits  living  in  the  desert  their  pure  and  simple 
and  gentle  lives  had  strange  power  over  the  wild  creatures.  Those  quiet  and  holy 
men  so  controlled  them  that  the  creatures  near  them  lost  their  wildness,  and  the  fawn 
would  come  to  them,  and  the  lion  harmed  them  not.  Some  of  God's  holiest  saints 
in  later  times  had  this  strange,  sweet  gift  of  inspiring  animals  with  the  confidence 
which  they  had  before — to  our  shame — they  had  been  taught  distrust  by  the  cruelties 
and  treacheries  of  fallen  man.  So  it  was  with  St.  Francis  of  Assisi.  He  called  all 
creatures  his  brethren  and  his  sisters.  "  My  little  sisters,"  he  said  to  the  twittering 
swallows  who  disturbed  him  by  chasing  each  other  through  the  blue  Italian  sky,  as 
he  preached  in  the  open  air  in  the  market-place  of  Vercelli — "my  little  sisters,  you 
have  said  your  say ;  now  be  silent,  and  let  me  preach  to  the  people."  We  are  told 
how  on  one  occasion  he  gave  up  his  own  robe  to  save  two  lambs  which  were  being 
led  to  the  slaughter ;  how  a  little  lamb  was  one  of  his  daily  companions,  and  how 
he  sometimes  preached  upon  its  innocence  to  the  people.  At  Gubbio  a  leveret  wag 
brought  to  him,  and  when  he  saw  the  little  creature  his  heart  at  once  was  moved. 
"  Little  brother  leveret,"  he  said,  "  why  hast  thou  let  thyself  be  taken  ?  "  And 
when  the  little  trembler  escaped  from  the  hands  of  the  brother  who  was  holding  it 
and  fled  for  refuge  to  the  folds  of  the  robe  of  St.  Francis,  he  set  it  free.  A  wild 
rabbit  which  he  took,  and  afterwards  set  free,  still  returned  to  his  bosom  as  though 
it  had  some  sense  of  the  pitifulness  of  his  heart.  On  another  occasion  he  put  back 
into  the  water  a  large  tench  which  a  fisherman  had  given  him,  and  he  bade  it  swim 
away;  "but,"  says  the  legend,  "the  fish  lingered  by  the  boat  until  the  prayers  of 
St.  Francis  were  ended,  for  the  saint  obtained  great  honour  from  God  in  the  love 
and  obedience  of  His  creatures."  {Dean  Farrar.)  A  righteous  man  regardeth 
the  life  of  his  ieast : — It  is  said  of  God  that  He  remembered  Noah,  and  every  beast 
(Gen.  viii.  1) ;  yea,  such  is  His  merciful  providence,  that  He  watcheth  not  only  over 
men,  but  beasts ;  and  a  righteous  man  regardeth  the  life  of  his  beast.  Nay, 
Xenocrates,  a  very  heathen,  who  had  no  other  light  but  what  the  dim  spectacles  of 
nature  did  afford,  is  commended  for  his  pitiful  heart,  who  succoured  in  his  bosom 
a  poor  sparrow  that,  being  pursued  by  a  hawk,  fled  unto  him,  and  afterwards  let  her 
go,  saying  that  he  had  not  betrayed  his  poor  suppUant.  And  such  is  the  goodness 
of  every  just  man,  that  he  is  merciful  to  his  very  beast ;  alas,  it  cannot  declare  ils 
wants,  nor  tell  its  grievances,  otherwise  than  by  mourning  in  its  kind  ;  so  that  to  an 
honest  heart  its  dumbness  is  a  loud  language,  crying  out  for  relief.    This  made  David 


CHAP,  xn.]  PROVERBS.  303 

rather  venture  upon  a  lion  than  lose  a  lamb  (1  Sam.  xvii.  34) .  Jacob  will  endure 
heat  by  day,  and  cold  by  night,  rather  than  neglect  his  flocks  fGen.  xxxi.  40). 
Moses  will  fight  with  odds  rather  than  the  cattle  shall  perish  with  tnirst  (Exod.  ii.). 
It  is  only  Balaam  and  Bedlam-Balaamites  that  want  this  mercy  to  their  faultless 
beast ;  and  it  is  ill  falling  into  their  hands  whom  the  very  beasts  find  unmerciful. 
(J.  Spencer.)  Kindness  to  animals  : — Two  ladies  well  known  in  New  York  were 
spending  the  summer  at  Newport.  They  were  in  the  habit  of  ordering  a  carriage 
from  a  livery  stable,  and  were  always  driven  by  the  same  coachman,  a  cab-driver 
whose  name  was  Burns.  One  day  Burns  very  suddenly  pulled  up  his  horses  and 
turned  abruptly  to  one  side  of  the  road.  The  ladies  were  alarmed,  and,  leaning  out, 
inquired  what  was  the  matter.  Burns  replied  that  there  was  a  little  lame  bird  in 
the  road,  which  he  had  very  nearly  run  over.  He  was  just  about  getting  off  the  box 
to  remove  the  little  creature  from  its  dangerous  position,  when  one  of  the  ladies, 
wishing  him  to  remain  in  charge  of  the  horses,  stepped  from  the  carriage,  and 
picking  up  the  bird,  which  was  a  young  one,  discovered  its  leg  was  broken.  Her 
first  thought  was  to  take  it  home  and  keep  it  till  it  was  quite  strong  again,  but 
Burns  advised  her  to  put  it  on  the  other  side  of  the  fence  on  the  grass,  where  the 
mother  bird  could  find  it,  and  nature  would  heal  the  broken  leg.  They  decided  to 
do  this,  so  the  bird  was  left  in  a  safe  place  and  the  driver  resumed  his  journey. 
The  story  of  the  kind-hearted  coachman  was  told  until  it  reached  Mrs.  John  Jacob 
Astor,  who  was  much  touched  by  it,  saying  a  man  who  did  that  little  act  of  mercy 
would  surely  be  kind  to  horses,  and  as  her  husband  was  in  need  of  a  coachman  she 
would  try  to  get  Burns  for  the  position.  The  end  of  the  story  is  that  Burns  was 
duly  installed  as  Mr.  Astor's  coachman.  Consideration  for  animals  : — I  am  sure 
that  if  donkeys  or  goats  could  speak  they  would  say,  "  Be  kind  to  us.  We  will  work 
for  you,  and  go  as  far  and  as  fast  as  we  can,  if  only  you  won't  drive  us  beyond  our 
strength,  and  lay  those  cruel  sticks  across  our  poor  thin  backs  !  Then,  don't  make 
us  stand,  for  hours  perhaps,  in  a  burning  sun  without  a  drop  of  water,  while  you 
are  playing  marbles  with  your  friends.  You  could  not  run  about  as  you  do  now  if 
you  had  no  breakfast  and  no  dinner :  then  how  can  you  expect  us  to  work  hard  and 
carry  heavy  children  one  after  the  other  till  we  are  ready  to  drop,  unless  you  feed  us 
properly  ?  "  (M.  Setvell.)  Cruelty  to  an  animal : — I  always  tremble  when  I  see 
a  cruel  boy.  I  feel  sure  ne  wiU,  if  he  lives,  grow  up  to  be  a  wicked  man.  A  brutal 
boy  once  saw  his  sister's  two  pet  rabbits  running  about  the  garden.  He  took  one  up 
by  the  ears  and  threw  it  into  the  air.  It  came  down  on  a  piece  of  stone  and  lay 
bleeding  on  the  ground  till  it  died.  Years  after  the  sister  visited  that  brother  ia 
prison,  just  before  his  execution  for  murder.  Do  you  remember  the  bleeding  rabbit,. 
Mary  ?  "  he  said,  weeping ;  "  I  have  been  cruel  ever  since."     {xhid.) 

Ver.  11.  He  that  tilleth  his  land  shall  be  satisfied  with  bread. — The  law  of 

labour : — It  is  no  mercy  to  be  freed  from  the  law  of  labour.  Nor  is  it  God  that 
frees  a  man  from  that  law.  Among  the  opulent  there  are  some  who  break  the  law 
of  labour,  and  some  who  keep  it.  They  keep  it  by  working  in  their  own  province 
in  that  state  of  life  into  which  it  has  pleased  God  to  call  them.  There  is  brain-toil 
as  well  as  hand-toil ;  the  wear  and  tear  of  the  mental  energies  tend  more  to  shorten 
life  than  the  ordinary  labourer's  wear  and  tear  of  body.  Some  kind  of  labour  is 
enjoined  upon  all,  by  a  law  of  God's  own  framing.  There  is  division  of  labour, 
but  it  is  a  labour  nevertheless.  Woe  to  him  who  craves  an  idle  life,  who  would 
slumber  existence  away  in  listless  reverie  1  The  truth  of  the  text  is  forcible,  whether 
taken  literally  or  applied  spiritually.  A  contrast  is  drawn  between  the  industrious 
and  the  loiterer.  Solomon  uses  the  words  "wise"  and  "foolish,"  and  their' 
kindred  terms,  in  a  deep  spiritual  sense — moral  as  weU  as  mental,  religious  as  well 
as  intellectual.  The  fool  is  he  who  acts  without  reference  to  the  Divine  above  him, 
and  the  everlasting  before  him.  As  we  dare  not  let  things  take  their  course  in  our 
worldly  business,  so  neither  in  our  spiritual.  Christianity  is  meant  to  hallow  life 
in  all  its  phases — to  hallow  business,  labour,  recreation.  The  Sabbath  of  the 
Christian  is  a  life-long  Sabbath,  an  every-day  Sabbath.  Bishop  Taylor  reminds  us 
that  the  "  life  of  every  man  may  be  so  ordered  that  it  may  be  a  perpetual  serving  of 
God — the  greatest  trouble,  and  most  busy  trade,  and  worldly  encumbrances,  when 
they  are  necessary,  or  charitable,  or  profitable,  being  a-doing  God's  work.  For  God 
provides  the  good  things  of  the  world  to  serve  the  needs  of  nature,  by  the  labours 
of  the  ploughman,  the  skill  and  pains  of  the  artisan,  and  the  dangers  and  traflSo 
of  the  merchant.  Idleness  is  called  the  sin  of  Sodom  and  her  daughters,  and 
indeed  is  the  burial  of  a  living  man."    The  text  suggests  two  pictures.    In  the  one 


304  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

we  have  the  persevering  husbandman,  who  loses  no  time,  who  works  with  a  good 
heart,  and  at  last  enjoys  a  noble  harvest.  In  the  other  we  have  a  slothful  spend- 
thrift, who  whiles  away  life's  sunshine  by  basking  in  it,  leaving  the  evening  to  care 
for  itself,  and  heedless  of  coming  night.  But  it  is  important  to  remember  that  no 
earthly  seed-corn  will  produce  fruit  for  another  world — therefore  the  seed-corn  must 
be  supplied  from  the  heavenly  storehouse  by  the  heavenly  husbandman — it  must 
be  indigenous  to  the  skies,  an  exotic  upon  earth.  If  thou  be  in  earnest  for  God, 
He  will  multiply  thy  seed  sown,  and  increase  the  fruits  of  thy  righteousness. 
{Francis  Jacox,  B.A.)  Manly  industry  and  parasitical  indolence  : — I.  Manly 
INDUSTRY.  1.  He  has  manly  industry  indicated.  Agriculture  is  the  oldest, 
divinest,  healthiest,  and  most  necessary  branch  of  human  industry.  2.  He  has 
manly  industry  rewarded.  Skilled  industry  is  seldom  in  want.  II.  Parasitical 
INDOLENCE.  1.  There  are  those  who  hang  on  others  for  their  support.  2.  Such 
persons  are  fools.  They  sacrifice  self-respect.  They  expose  themselves  to  degrading 
annoyances.  {Homilist.)  There  is  great  moral  value  in  being  icell  employed  : — 
The  idle  classes  are  waiting  to  become  the  vicious  classes.  This  is  vividly 
illustrated  by  the  well-known  story  of  a  friendless  girl  who,  about  three  generations 
ago,  was  thrown  upon  the  world,  uncared  for.  Her  children  and  children's 
children  came  to  number  over  a  hundred,  desperate  and  dangerous  men  and  women 
of  crime.  No  record  of  earth  can  tell  how  many  a  bright  young  man  or  woman 
thrown  out  of  employ  has  become  a  centre  of  equally  dark  and  ever- widening  circles. 
(Washington  Gladden.)  The  fate  of  drones  ;— It  will  be  profitable  to  idle  people 
to  observe  the  arrangement  whereby  nature  condemns  the  drones  to  death  in  the 
bee  community.  No  sooner  is  the  business  of  swarming  ended,  and  the  worker-bees 
satisfied  there  will  be  no  lack  of  fertile  queens,  when  issues  the  terrible  edict  for  the 
massacre  of  the  drones.  Poor  fellows  !  It  is  to  be  hoped  they  comfort  themselves 
with  the  reflection  that  their  fate  is  an  everlasting  homily,  presented  by  nature  in 
dogmatical  but  most  effective  fashion,  of  the  uselessness  of  all  who  labour  not  for 
their  living.  If  one  must  die  for  the  good  of  one's  kind,  by  all  means  let  it  be  as  a 
martyr.  Poor  fellows !  how  they  dart  in  and  out,  and  up  and  down  the  hive,  in  the 
vain  hope  ol~escape !     The  workers  are  inexorable.     {Scientific  Illustrations.) 

Ver.  12.  The  wicked  desireth  the  net  of  evil  men :  but  the  root  of  the  righteous 
yleldeth  fruit. — The  crafty  and  the  honest : — I.  Craftiness.  1.  Craft  is  an  instinct 
of  wickedness.  No  true  Christian  is  a  hypocrite.  The  better  a  man  is,  the  less 
temptation  he  has  to  disguise  himself.  A  wicked  man  must  be  hypocritical  in  pro- 
portion to  his  wickedness.  Sin  is  ever  cunning  ;  wisdom  alone  is  free.  2.  Crafti- 
ness is  no  security  against  ruin.  Lies  are  the  language  of  craftiness.  One  lie 
leads  on  to  another,  until  the  man  is  involved  in  contradictions,  and  falls  and 
founders.  II.  Honesty.  1.  Honesty  is  strong  in  its  own  strength.  It  has  a  root. 
It  lives  by  its  own  natural  force  and  growth.  2.  Honesty  will  extricate  from 
difficulties.  The  just  man  may  get  into  trouble,  but  by  his  upright  principles,  under 
God,  he  shall  come  out  of  them.     "  Honesty  is  the  best  policy."     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  13.  The  wicked  is  snared  by  the  transgression  of  his  lips. — Lies,  the  snare 
that  liars  are  caught  in : — The  Supreme  has  set  many  snares,  in  the  constitution  of 
things,  for  the  detection  and  punishment  of  evil-doers.  The  liar's  own  tongue 
betrays  him.  In  some  of  its  movements,  ere  he  is  aware,  it  touches  the  spring 
which  brings  down  the  avenging  stroke.  It  is  instructive  to  read  with  this  view 
the  detailed  account  of  a  criminal  trial.  In  the  faltering  and  fall  of  a  false  witness 
you  should  see  and  reverence  the  righteousness  of  God.  When  a  man  is  not  true, 
the  great  labour  of  his  life  must  be  to  make  himself  appear  true  ;  but  if  a  man  be 
true,  he  need  not  concern  himself  about  appearances.  He  may  go  forward,  and 
tread  boldly ;  his  footing  is  sure.     {R.  F.  Horton,  D.D.) 

Ver.  14.  A  man  shall  be  satisfied  with  good  by  the  fruit  of  his  mouth  :  and  the 
recompense  of  a  man's  hands  shall  be  rendered  \mto  him. — Obedience  to  God^s  u-ill 
and  its  fruits : — Wheresoever  goodness  is,  whether  it  bridle  our  tongue,  or  guide 
our  hand,  or  regulate  our  fancy,  it  carries  its  satisfaction,  its  recompense,  along 
with  it.  Our  songs  of  praise  echo  back  again  upon  us ;  the  works  of  our  hands 
follow  us,  and  fill  us  with  joy  ;  and  our  thoughts,  if  goodness  raise  them,  are  com- 
forts. Goodness,  whether  in  thought,  word,  or  deed,  will  satisfy  us,  that  is,  fill  us 
with  joy ;  and  nothing  will  satisfy  us  but  goodness.  The  argument  will  hold  h  con- 
trario  :  if  that  which  is  good  satisfy  us,  then  that  which  is  evil  cannot.    I.  Good- 


OHiP.  xn.]  PROVE  BBS,  805 

KESS  DOTH  SATISFY.  1.  This  we  Cannot  doubt,  if  we  know  what  goodness  is,  and 
consider  the  nature  of  it,  and  the  fountain  from  whence  it  springs.  For  it  flows 
from  God.  It  is  a  beam  from  that  Eternal  Light,  an  emanation  from  God  Himself. 
The  nearer  goodness  carrieth  to  the  fountain  of  goodness,  the  more  satisfaction  it 
brings  with  it,  and  the  fuller  is  our  cup.  Without  God  we  cannot  be  happy  in 
heaven  itself,  nay,  without  Him  there  could  be  no  heaven.  2  As  we  draw  an 
argument  from  piety,  so  may  we  draw  another  from  the  love  of  it.  As  Augustine  saith, 
"  We  do  not  only  love  goodness,  but  even  the  love  with  which  we  embrace  it,  and 
delight  in  both."  Joy  and  satisfaction  is  a  resultancy  from  love.  That  which  we 
love  is  also  the  joy  of  our  heart.  3.  If  the  bare  opinions  of  piety,  in  those  who  are 
not  yet  made  perfect,  satisfy,  though  it  be  but  for  a  while,  then  piety  itself  wiU 
satisfy  much  more.  If  the  shadow  hath  this  operation,  what  hath  the  substance, 
the  thing  itself !  If  a  form  of  godliness,  then  much  more  godliness  in  its  full  power, 
wiU  fill  and  satisfy  us.  II.  Nothing  else  can  satisfy  us  but  goodness.  It  is  the 
prerogative  of  goodness  and  piety  to  be  alone  in  this  work.  1.  Satisfaction  is  but  a 
name  on  earth.  2.  Such  is  the  nature  and  quality  of  the  soul,  that  it  is  not 
fashioned  nor  proportioned  to  the  things  of  this  world.  3.  God  hath  imprinted  in 
the  soul  and  in  the  very  nature  of  man  an  "  infinite  and  insatiable  desire,"  which 
cannot  be  satisfied  with  anything  that  the  world  can  present.  The  soul  which  is 
made  capable  of  God,  can  be  satisfied  with  nothing  but  God.  4.  In  wickedness, 
impiety,  the  licentiousness  of  the  tongue,  and  the  wantonness  of  the  hands,  no 
satisfaction  can  possibly  be  found.  5.  To  show  how  unsatisfying  a  thing  sin  is, 
you  may  behold  it  tormenting  the  wicked  man,  and  that  not  only  after  the  act,  but 
also  before  and  in  it,  first  forbidding  itself,  then  perplexing  him  in  the  act,  and  after 
gnawing  the  heart.  Application :  1.  If  the  fruit  of  our  hands  and  lips  be  that  alone 
which  can  satisfy  us,  let  us  then  be  up  and  doing,  buckle  on  the  armour  of  light, 
and  quench  every  fiery  dart  of  Satan,  2.  Let  us  level  our  actions  and  endeavours 
on  this,  and  not  spend  and  waste  ourselves  on  that  which  is  not  bread,  and  will 
never  fill  us.  3.  If  nothing  will  satisfy  us  but  righteousness  and  piety,  we  need  not 
consult  what  we  are  to  choose  here.  4.  If  this  be  the  prerogative  of  goodness, 
godliness,  to  be  alone  in  this  work,  then  let  her  have  prerogative  also  in  our  hearts, 
and  exercise  full  power,  and  authority,  and  dominion  over  our  desires.  (A.  Farin- 
don,  B.B.)  Retributions  of  the  lip  and  life  : — I.  The  ketributions  of  the  lip. 
Speech,  to  be  good,  must  be — 1.  Sincere.  2.  Truthful.  3.  Benevolent.  How  will 
such  speech  satisfy  a  man  ?  (1)  In  its  action  upon  his  own  mind.  (2)  In  the  effect 
he  sees  produced  on  others.  (3)  In  the  conscious  approbation  of  God.  II.  The 
retributions  of  the  life.  The  hand  here  stands  for  the  whole  conduct  of  life.  It 
means  that  man  should  receive  the  reward  of  his  works.  And  this  is  inevitable — 
1.  From  the  law  of  causation.  2.  From  the  law  of  conscience.  3.  From  the  law  of 
righteousness.  There  is  justice  in  the  .universe.  (Homilist.)  Mischievous 
language  : — The  language  of  keen  irritation,  reproach,  invective  and  scorn,  often 
inflicts  wounds  on  the  heart  that  are  deep  and  hard  of  cure — wounds  "  like  the 
piercings  of  a  sword."  This  is  especially  the  case  when  the  words  are  from  the  lips 
of  a  friend,  or  of  one  we  love,  when  heated  by  sudden  passion.  Wit,  too,  when 
not  chastened  and  controlled  by  an  amiable  disposition,  often  wounds  deeply.  Jibes, 
jests,  irony,  raillery,  and  sarcasm,  fly  about.  No  matter  what  the  wounds,  or 
where  they  be  inflicted,  if  the  wit  be  but  shown.  A  happy  hit,  a  clever,  biting 
repartee,  will  not  be  suppressed  for  the  sake  of  the  feelings,  or  even  the  character,  of 
a  neighbour,  or,  as  it  may  happen,  of  a  friend  The  man  of  wit  must  have  his  joke, 
cost  what  it  may.  The  point  may  be  piercing  in  the  extreme  ;  but  if  it  glitters,  it 
is  enough  ;  to  the  heart  it  will  go.  Such  a  man  is  feared,  hated,  avoided.  {R. 
Wardlaw.)  The  fruit  of  the  mouth  : — The  word  which  issues  out  of  the  lips  is 
the  greatest  power  in  human  life.  Words  will  change  the  currents  of  life.  On  the 
use  of  the  tongue  depend  the  issues  of  a  man's  own  life.  Such  fruits  as  a  man's 
tongue  bears,  a  man  must  eat.  If  his  words  have  been  good,  then  he  shall  be 
satisfied  with  good  by  the  fruit  of  his  mouth.  The  fool's  lips  are  always  coming 
into  strife,  and  his  mouth  is  always  calling  for  stripes.  His  lips  are  the  snare  of 
his  soul.  An  old  proverb  says,  "  A  fool's  tongue  is  always  long  enough  to  cut  his 
own  throat."  1.  The  tongue  is  a  fruitful  source  of  quarrelling  and  discord.  A  fool 
cannot  hide  his  vexation,  but  must  immediately  blurt  it  out  with  the  tongue,  and 
make  mischief.  2.  The  tongue  is  the  instrument  of  lying.  It  is  the  tongue  whioh 
by  false  witness  so  often  condemns  the  innocent.  3.  Closely  allied  to  lying  is 
flattery,  which  is  always  a  mistake.  4.  Another  evil  use  of  the  tongue  is  whisper- 
ing and  tale-bearing.    Disclosing  the  secret  of  another  is  a  sure  way  of  incurring 


3CG  THE  BIBLICAL  ILZ.OSTRAT0R.  [chap.  xn. 

repioach  and  lasting  infamy.  5.  The  tongue  is  sometimes  employed  to  plot,  plan, 
and  execute  mischief.  6.  More  pardonable  vices  are  rashness  and  inopportuneness 
of  speech.  Yet  these  are  evil  enough  in  their  way.  7.  We  need  caution  against 
excessive  speech.  There  are  good  and  beautiful  uses  of  the  tongue.  It  is  the 
instrument  of  peace-making,  of  wise  reproof,  of  the  instruction  of  the  innocent,  and 
the  championship  of  the  distressed.     (R.  F.  Horton,  D.D.) 

Ver.  16.  A  fool's  wrath  is  presently  known :  but  a  prudent  man  covereth  shame. — 

Wrath  as  shame  : — The  wise  man  here  uses  a  very  observable  word,  to  express 
wrath.  He  calls  it  shame,  for  it  is  a  shame  for  a  man  to  suffer  his  reason  to  be 
tyrannised  over  by  an  unruly  passion,  which  spreads  deformity  over  his  coun- 
tenance, and  hurries  him  on  to  expressions  and  actions  more  like  those  of  one 
confined  in  bedlam  than  one  who  is  supposed  to  have  the  use  of  his  reason.  A 
fool  disgraces  himself  by  giving  way  to  the  impetuous  sallies  of  passion.  He 
discovers  his  temporary  madness  by  his  pale  countenance,  his  quivering  lips,  and 
his  flashing  eyes.  "  But  a  prudent  man  covereth  shame."  When  he  finds  his 
passions  beginning  to  ferment,  he  does  not  give  them  full  scope,  but  considers 
whether  he  does  well  to  be  angry,  and  how  far  it  is  lawful  and  safe  for  him  to  give 
way  to  this  turbulent  passion.  He  does  not  cover  his  wrath,  that  it  may  have  time 
to  work,  and  draw  the  powers  of  reason  into  its  service,  that  it  may  break  forthwith 
more  eilect  on  another  occasion — but  covers  it,  that  he  may  have  time  to  suppress 
and  destroy  it,  by  considering  its  folly  and  wickedness,  by  meditating  on  the 
example  and  grace  of  Christ,  and  by  fervent  supplications  for  the  support  and 
assistance  of  the  spirit  of  meekness.  By  such  means  as  these  the  prudent  man 
preserves  his  own  honour,  and  covers  the  shame  of  his  neighbour,  who  is  likely  to 
be  gained  by  gentleness  and  meekness.     (G.  Lawson.) 

Ver.  18.  The  tongue  of  the  wise  is  health. — Healthy  and  unhealthy  speech : — 
Some  men  pride  themselves  on  the  pungency  of  their  speech.  They  delight  in  sharp 
answers,  keen  retorts,  quick  repartees,  and  boast  themselves  when  they  cut  their 
opponents  in  two.  There  are  others  who  are  gifted  in  the  expression  of  complaint, 
reproach,  and  criticism  against  the  whole  providence  of  life.  They  can  say  sharp 
and  bitter  things  about  God  and  man,  and  they  can  be  satisfied  because  of  the 
edge  of  their  own  epigram,  no  matter  against  whom  or  against  what  that  edge  is 
directed.  The  tongue  of  the  wise  man  is  slower,  but  healthier ;  the  wise  man 
weighs  his  words  :  he  is  anxious  to  be  associated  only  with  judgments  that  can  be 
confirmed  by  experience  and  illustrated  by  wisdom.  The  wise  man  speaks 
healthily — that  is  to  say,  he  speaks  out  of  the  abundance  of  his  own  health,  and 
he  speaks  in  a  way  that  will  double  and  strengthen  the  health  of  others.  To  come 
near  him  is  to  ascend  a  mountain  and  breathe  the  freshest  air  of  heaven,  or  to  go 
down  by  the  seashore  and  receive  messages  across  the  great  deeps,  full  of  vigour, 
and  truth,  and  strengthening  influence.  Wise  men  keep  society  healthy.  But  for 
their  presence  it  would  stagnate,  and  go  from  one  degree  of  corruption  to  another 
until  it  became  wholly  pestilential.  There  are  two  speakers  in  the  text,  to  the  end 
of  time  there  will  probably  be  two  speakers  in  the  world — the  critical  speaker  and  the 
judicial  speaker  ;  the  man  all  sharpness  and  the  man  all  thankfulness.  The 
business  of  Christian  discipline  is  to  tame  the  tongue,  to  chasten  it,  to  teach  it  the 
speech  of  wisdom,  and  to  instruct  it  as  to  the  right  time  of  utterance  and  the  right 
time  of  silence.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  19.  The  lip  of  truth  shall  he  established  for  ever. — Truthfnlnesg : — I.  The 
RIGHTEOUSNESS  OF  TRUTH  (vcr.  17).  The  highest  and  only  proper  use  of  speech  is  to 
show  the  right.  It  may  be  used  to  set  forth — 1.  Eight  views  of  God  (Psa.  xl.  9; 
John  xvii.  25,  26;  Rom.  iii.  21,  22).  2.  Right  views  of  personal  experience 
(Psa.  Ixvi.  16).  3.  Right  estimates  of  character.  Testimonials  should  be  given  with 
great  caution.  4.  Right  statements  as  to  the  value  of  articles  of  merchandise. 
5.  Right  expositions  of  Scripture.  Some  "wrest"  the  Scriptures  (2  I'o;.  iii.  16); 
others  make  them  void  by  their  traditions  (Mark  vii.  13) ;  others  handle  them 
deceitfully  (2  Cor.  iv.  2) ;  but  the  God-taught  expositor  aims  at  "  the  manifestation 
of  the  truth."  II.  The  wholesomeners  of  truth  (ver.  18).  Foolish  speech  often 
wounds,  but  in  the  word  of  wisdom  is  healing.  Healthy  doctrine  produces  healthy 
living,  and  thus  it  becomes  its  own  advocate.  III.  The  stability  of  truth  (ver.  19). 
"  Truth,  like  cork,  will  be  uppermost  one  time  or  other,  though  an  effort  be  made 
to  keep   it   under   water."      Time   is   on    the   side  of   truth,  and  so  is  eternity. 


CHAP.  XII.]  PROVERBS.  307 

There  has  been  an  abundant  establishment  of — 1.  The  testimony  of  prophets. 
2.  Words  spoken  by  the  opponents  of  error.  Lies  often  die  hard,  but  sooner  or 
later  they  die  surely.  IV.  The  safety  of  truth.  We  may  be  afraid  to  be  wrong, 
but  should  never  be  afraid  to  be  right.  V.  The  reward  of  truth  (ver.  22.)  {H. 
Thome.)  The  lip  of  truth  : — There  was  once  a  little  boy  named  Duncan.  The 
boys  used  to  call  him  "  True  Duncan  "  because  he  would  never  tell  a  lie.  One  day 
he  was  playing  with  an  axe  in  the  schoolyard.  The  axe  was  used  for  cutting  wood 
for  the  schoolroom  fire  in  winter.  While  Duncan  was  chopping  a  stick,  the 
teacher's  cat,  "  Old  Tabby,"  came  and  leaped  on  to  the  log  of  wood  where  Duncan 
was  at  work.  He  had  raised  the  axe  to  cut  the  wood,  but  it  fell  on  the  cat  and 
killed  her.  What  to  do  he  knew  not.  She  was  the  master's  pet  cat,  and  used  to 
sit  on  a  cushion  at  his  side  while  he  was  hearing  the  boys'  lessons.  Duncan 
stood  looking  at  poor  Tabby.  His  face  grew  red  and  the  tears  stood  in  his  eyes. 
All  the  boys  came  running  up,  and  every  one  had  something  to  say.  One  of  them 
was  heard  whispering  to  the  others,  "  Now,  boys,  let  us  see  if  Duncan  can't  make 
up  a  fib  as  well  as  the  rest  of  us."  "  Not  he,"  said  Tom  Brown,  who  was  Duncan's 
friend,  "  not  he,  I'll  warrant.  Duncan  will  be  as  true  as  gold."  John  Jones 
stepped  up  and  said,  "  Come,  boys,  let  us  fling  the  cat  into  the  lane,  and  we  can  tell 
Mr.  Cole  that  the  butcher's  dog  killed  her.  You  know  that  he  worried  her  last 
week."  Some  of  them  thought  that  would  do  very  well.  But  Duncan  looked  quite 
angry  ;  his  cheek  swelled  and  his  face  grew  redder  than  before.  "  No,  no,"  said  he. 
"  Do  you  think  I  would  say  that?  It  would  be  a  lie — a  lie!  "  Each  time  he  used  the 
word  his  voice  grew  louder.  Then  he  took  up  the  poor  thing  and  carried  her  into 
the  master's  room.  The  boys  followed  to  see  what  would  happen.  The  master 
looked  up  and  said,  "  What?  is  this  my  poor  Tabby  killed?  Who  could  have 
done  me  such  an  injury  ?  "  All  were  silent  for  a  little  while.  As  soon  as  Duncan 
could  get  his  voice  he  said,  "  Mr.  Cole,  I  am  very  sorry  I  killed  poor  Tabby.  Indeed, 
sir,  I  am  very  sorry,  I  ought  to  have  been  more  careful,  for  I  saw  her  rubbing 
herself  against  the  log.  I  am  more  sorry  than  I  can  tell,  sir."  Every  one  expected 
to  see  Mr.  Cole  get  very  angry,  take  down  his  cane  and  give  Duncan  a  sound 
thrashing.  But  instead  of  that  he  put  on  a  pleasant  smile  and  said,  "Duncan, you 
are  a  brave  boy.  I  saw  and  heard  all  that  passed  in  the  yard  from  my  window 
above.  I  am  glad  to  see  such  an  example  of  truth  and  honour  in  my  school." 
Duncan  took  out  his  handkerchief  and  wiped  his  eyes.  The  boys  could  not  keep 
silence  any  longer,  and  when  Tom  Brown  cried,  "  Three  cheers  for  True  Duncan! " 
they  all  joined  and  made  the  schoolhouse  ring  with  a  mighty  hurrah.  The  teacher 
then  said,  "  My  boys,  I  am  glad  you  know  what  is  right  and  that  you  approve  it, 
though  I  am  afraid  some  of  you  could  not  have  done  it.  Learn  from  this  time  that 
nothing  can  make  a  he  necessary.  Suppose  Duncan  had  taken  your  evil  advice 
and  come  to  me  with  a  lie,  it  would  have  been  instantly  detected,  and  instead  of 
the  honour  of  truth  he  would  have  had  only  the  shame  of  falsehood."  (Sunday 
School.)  But  a  lying  tongue  is  but  for  a  moment. — The  doomed  life  of  a  lie  : — 
It  is  "  but  for  a  moment."  Dean  Swift  complains  that  the  influence  of  a  lie  is 
often  mischievously  lasting ;  so  often  does  it  happen  that  if  a  lie  be  believed,  only 
for  an  hour,  it  has  done  its  work,  and  there  is  no  further  occasion  for  it.  But  the 
inherent  mortality  of  whatever  is  false  is  recognised  in  other  proverbs  than  those 
of  Solomon,  e.g. ,  the  English  proverb,  "  A  lie  has  no  legs."  "A  lie,  in  that  it  is  a  lie, 
always  carries  within  itself  the  germs  of  its  own  dissolution.  It  is  sure  to  destroy 
itself  at  last."  Carlyle  says,  "  There  is  no  lie  in  the  long  run  successful.  The  hour 
of  all  windbags  does  arrive ;  every  windbag  is  at  length  ripped,  and  collapses." 
" Lies  exist  only  to  be  extinguished;  they  wait  and  cry  earnestly  for  extinction." 
"  Euin  is  the  great  sea  of  darkness  whither  all  falsehoods,  winding  or  direct,  con- 
tinually flow."  "  Nothing,"  aflirms  a  political  philosopher,  of  an  earlier  and  quite 
another  school,  "  can  give  stability  and  durable  uniformity  to  error.  Indolence  or 
ignorance  may  keep  it  floating,  as  it  were,  on  the  surface  of  the  mind,  and  some- 
times hinder  truth  from  penetrating  ;  or  force  may  maintain  it  in  possession,  while 
the  mind  assents  to  it  no  longer.  But  such  opinions,  like  human  bodies,  tend  to 
dissolution  from  their  birth.  .  .  .  Men  are  dragged  into  them,  and  held  down  in 
them,  by  chains  of  circumstances.  Break  but  these  chains,  and  the  mind  returns 
with  a  kind  of  intellectual  elasticity  to  its  proper  object — truth."  (Francis 
Jacox,  B.A.)  Skill  in  telling  lies  : — The  lying  tongue  succeeds  indeed,  but  its 
success  is  momentary ;  it  flashes  and  expires  ;  it  has  a  clear,  straightforward  story 
to  tell,  but  events  come,  and  cross-examine  that  story,  and  set  it  in  proper  distance 
and  perspective;  alliances  to  which  the  story  owed  its  consistency  are  broken  up, 


308  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

and  evil  men  begin  to  divulge  secrets  regarding  one  another ;  piece  by  piece  the 
story  falls  asunder,  and  at  the  end  it  is  found  that  it  was  the  fabrication  of  a 
malignant  genius.  Be  sure  you  are  true  yourselves,  and  have  a  true  purpose  in 
view,  and  all  discrepancies,  inconsistencies,  and  difficulties  will  ultimately  be 
smoothed  down,  and  men  wiU  be  brought  to  acknowledge  the  integrity  of  your 
heart.  Be  as  skilful  as  you  please  in  the  way  of  telling  lies,  arrange  everything 
with  consummate  cunning,  hire  all  your  allies,  bribe  your  spies,  and  make  your  way 
clear  by  abundance  of  gold,  and  yet  in  the  long  run  your  confederates  will  turn 
against  you,  and  they  to  whom  you  have  given  most  money  will  be  glad  to  expose 
your  cupidity  and  falsehood.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Truth  more  enduring  than  false- 
hood : — Truth  wears  well.  Time  tests  it,  but  it  right  well  endures  the  trial.  If, 
then,  I  have  spoken  the  truth,  and  have  for  the  present  to  suffer  for  it,  I  must  be 
content  to  wait.  If  also  I  believe  the  truth  of  God,  and  endeavour  to  declare  it,  I 
may  meet  with  much  opposition,  but  I  need  not  fear,  for  ultimately  the  truth  must 
prevail.  What  a  poor  thing  is  the  temporary  triumph  of  falsehood  !  "  A  lying  lip 
is  but  for  a  moment !  "  It  is  a  mere  gourd,  which  comes  up  in  a  night,  and 
perishes  in  a  night ;  and  the  greater  its  development,  the  more  manifest  its  decay. 
On  the  other  hand,  how  worthy  of  an  immortal  being  is  the  avowal  and  defence  of  that 
truth  which  can  never  change ;  the  everlasting  gospel,  which  is  established  in  the 
immutable  truth  of  an  unchanging  God  !  An  old  proverb  says,  "  He  that  speaks 
truth  shames  the  devil."  Assuredly  he  that  speaks  the  truth  of  God  will  put  to 
shame  all  the  devils  in  hell,  and  confound  all  the  seed  of  the  serpent  which  now 
hiss  out  their  falsehoods.  Oh,  my  heart,  take  care  that  thou  be  in  all  things  on  the 
side  of  truth,  both  in  small  things  and  great ;  but  specially  on  the  side  of  Him  by 
whom  grace  and  truth  have  come  among  men  !     {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  20.  Deceit  is  in  the  heart  of  them  that  imagine  evil — A  denunciation 
of  wicked  men  : — I.  A  description  of  theib  peesons.  1.  They  are  evil-doers, 
but  more  especially,  the  practiser,  the  artificer  in  evil;  one  wholly  bent  upon 
sin ;   the   body  and   mind   occupied   in    executing    and    acting    corrupt   desires. 

2.  Nor  is  every  evil  aimed  at,  but  evil  in  a  high  degree,  evil  against  others — 
mischief.  3.  This  man  is  subtle  in  his  evil.  He  is  a  cunning  workman,  sly, 
subtle,  and  close  devising  and  effecting  his  mischief.  Like  a  witty  handicrafts- 
man, he  is  most  silent  when  he  is  most  upon  his  inventions.  It  is  a  sign  of  an 
extreme  wicked  man,  to  be  an  inventor  of  evil,  a  plotter  and  deviser  of  mischief. 
As  a  coney-catcher  lives  by  his  wits,  so  sin  and  sinners  by  their  wiles.  But  whence 
this?  (1)  Satan  at  first  transformed  himself  into  an  angel  of  light;  then  no 
marvel  if  his  ministers  do  so.  (2)  They  seem  just,  religious,  peaceable,  and 
honest  men,  knowing  that  the  less  they  be  suspected,  the  more  successful  their 
plots  are  likely  to  be.  (3)  Never  was  any  mischief  more  mischievous  than  that 
which  is  veiled  with  good  pretences  of  peace  or  religion.  II.  The  condition  op 
THESE  persons.  Their  deceit  returns  into  the  heart  that  first  hatched  it,  i.e.,  brings 
certain  woe  and  unavoidable  mischief  on  themselves,  to  the  breaking  of  their  own 
hearts.  Whence  note,  that  the  greatest  workers  of  sin  and  mischief  are  greatest 
workers  of  their  own  woe.  1.  There  is  no  small  heaviness  and  unquietness  in  the 
heart  while  it  is  plotting  and  hammering  evil.  2.  Whomsoever  they  deceive,  they 
cannot  deceive  God,  who  will  make  them  the  greatest  deceivers  of  themselves. 

3.  How  just  it  is,  that  what  pleasure  they  conceive  in  inventing  mischief,  they 
should  lose  it  by  the  fruit  of  their  mischievous  inventions.  4.  Sin  is  a  sure  pay- 
master, and  her  wages  are  death.  5.  The  sorrow  of  their  sin  comes  with  much 
and  daily  addition,  and  pierces  the  man's  heart  as  a  sword.  Beware  of  devising 
mischief  against  the  Church  of  God,  His  servants  and  holy  religion.  Consider 
hereunto — (1)  The  power  of  God,  which  all  wicked  men  together  are  not  able  to 
resist.  (2)  The  wisdom  of  God,  who  hath  seven  eyes,  and  all  upon  the  Church  for 
good.  (3)  The  justice  of  God,  with  whom  it  is  righteous  that  wicked  men  in 
devising  mischief  should  provide  their  own  rods.  (4)  Evil  men  lay  all  their  plots 
on  a  sandy  and  slippery  foundation,  which  will  bring  down  all  the  house  and 
frame  on  their  own  heads.  Let  not  good  men  be  disquieted  at  any  such  plots, 
which  shall  all  redound  upon  their  enemies  themselves.  (T.  Taylor.)  Self- 
deceit  : — The  word  rendered  "  deceit "  may  be  understood  as  including  deceit 
practised  on  a  man's  self  as  well  as  on  others,  and  here  it  may  have  the  sense  of 
self-deceit.  Eminent  translators  have  rendered  the  word,  in  its  present  connection, 
disappointment;  frustrated  hope.  Those  who  "imagine  evil"  dare  not  avow 
their  designs.    Dissimulation  and  craft  are  productive  of  incessant  apprehension 


CHAP.  XII.]  PROVERBS.  809 

and  anxiety.  They  necessarily  engender  self-dissatisfaction  and  tremor,  and  that 
from  the  very  dread  of  detection,  frustration,  and  consequent  evil  to  themselves, 
instead  of  to  those  against  whom  they  were  plotting.     {R.  Wardlaw.) 

Ver.  21.  There  shall  no  evil  happen  to  the  just. — The  security  of  the  faithful : — 
The  things  which  distinguish  us  most  try  us  most.  Those  attributes  of  our  nature 
which  serve  to  mark  its  superiority,  serve  also  to  evince  its  liability  to  trouble. 
The  animal  tribes,  as  they  have  no  capacity  for  reviewing  the  past,  so  have  they 
no  power  of  anticipating  the  future.  And  hence  they  have  no  dread,  in  the  strict 
sense,  of  coming  evils.  But  we  can  look  forward.  We  can  busy  ourselves  in 
thought  and  imagination  with  days  to  come.  Yet  the  heavier  half  of  the  cares 
and  anxieties  that  we  have  to  bear  are  connected  with  this  faculty.  The  afflictions 
we  fear  often  distress  us  more  than  the  afflictions  we  lie  under.  But  God,  who 
gave  us  our  being,  knows  this,  and  has  provided  against  it  in  His  Word.  Does  not 
this  text  meet  our  whole  case  ?  Amidst  all  disasters  the  good  may  be  confident  and 
calm.  What  is  the  significance  of  this  assurance  ?  It  cannot  be  taken  literally. 
Evil  in  the  sense  of  earthly  calamity,  sorrow  and  trial  is  the  lot  of  all.  What, 
then,  does  the  text  mean?  Things  which  are  evil  in  themselves  do  not,  as  such, 
fall  upon  the  people  of  God.  For  them  the  curse  is  turned  into  a  blessing.  A 
divine  process  of  transmutation  takes  place  in  the  case  of  every  ill  that  befalls  a 
child  of  God,  and  the  ill  becomes  a  good.  Illustrate  this — 1.  From  cases  of 
personal  affliction  of  mind,  or  of  body,  or  of  both.  2.  Adverse  circumstances. 
3.  Bereavements.  This  subject  teaches  the  goodness  of  Divine  providence ;  and 
it  tranquillizes  us  under  present  trials.  (C  M.  Merry.)  No  evil  to  the  just : — The 
word  "just"  was  a  term  used  anciently  in  connection  with  the  chase,  and  meant 
the  equal  dividing  of  the  prey  procured  by  hunting  among  those  that  took  part  in 
the  pursuit.  It  means  to  do  right,  to  try  to  be  harmless.  Though  the  just  man 
sometimes  come  short  of  the  mark,  his  prevailing  disposition  and  aim  are  to  be 
and  to  do  right.  He  is  studious  to  do  right.  To  such  a  man,  it  is  declared,  no 
evil  shall  happen.  How  are  we  to  understand  this  ?  1.  Whatever  evil  comes  to  a 
just  man  cannot  happen  in  the  sense  of  coming  by  chance.  There  is  a  government 
of  God  over  the  affairs  of  men,  and  therefore  nothing  takes  place  by  accident  or 
chance.  No  evil  can  come  to  the  just  man  that  does  not  come  designedly,  or 
permissively,  in  the  course  of  providence.  2.  To  a  just  man  no  evil  can  come  that 
is  not  controlled  and  overruled  for  his  good.  "  All  things  work  together  for  good  to 
them  that  love  God."  3.  This  is  true  in  relation  to  helping  others,  as  well  as 
himself.  Those  who  have  suffered  themselves  are  the  better  prepared  to  sympa- 
thise with  and  help  their  fellow-creatures  that  suffer.  4.  No  permanent  evil  can 
come  to  a  just  man.  Then — (1)  Let  us  thank  God  for  pains  and  afflictions.  (2)  We 
should  understand  that,  if  we  try  to  be  just,  we  shall  have  our  reward  now  and 
hereafter.     There  can  be  no  failure  or  mistake.     {H.  M.  Gallaher,  D.D.) 

Ver.  22.  Lying  lips  are  abomination  to  the  Lord. — On  lying : — Man  excels  the 
rest  of  the  creatures  in  the  power  of  communicating  thoughts  one  to  another.  The 
creatures  are  taught,  by  nature,  almost  immediately,  how  to  supply  their  wants. 
But  we  are  purposely  formed  to  need  and  to  give  help  in  everything,  through  the 
whole  of  our  days ;  and  therefore  some  ready  and  extensive  method  of  signifying 
mutually  whatever  passes  within  our  minds  was  peculiarly  necessary  for  us. 
Without  this  no  person  would  have  more  knowledge  of  anything  than  he  could 
attain  of  himself.  The  pleasure  and  benefits  of  society  would  be  reduced  to  a 
narrow  compass,  and  life  hang  upon  our  hands  joyless  and  uncomfortable. 
Articulate  speech,  our  more  distinguishing  property,  is  our  chief  medium  of  inter- 
course. As  every  blessing  may  be  fatally  misused,  so  there  is  hardly  any  bad 
purpose  which  language  may  not  be  made  to  serve.  It  can  be  turned  from  its 
original  design  of  giving  right  information  to  those  with  whom  we  converse  to  the 
opposite  one  of  leading  them  wrong.  I.  What  things  ake  to  be  eeputed  lies 
AND  WHAT  NOT.  1.  Sincc  actious  and  gestures,  as  well  as  words,  may  be  employed 
to  express  what  we  think,  they  may  also  be  employed  to  express  what  we  do  not 
think,  which  is  the  essence  of  a  lie.  Some  of  our  actions  are  naturally  significative. 
But  we  have  never  consented  to  make  our  actions  in  general  signs  of  our  intentions, 
as  we  have  our  words.  If  persons  interpret  our  actions  they  may  deceive  them  not. 
Such  actions  as  have  no  determinate  sense  appropriated  to  them  by  agreement, 
explicit  or  implied,  can  be  no  violations  of  sincerity  ;  but  such  as  have  are  subject 
to  just  the  same  rules  with  words;  and  we  may  be  guilty  of  as  gross  falsehoods  in 


810  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  xn. 

the  former  as  in  the  latter.  2.  Words  having  acquired  their  significations  by  the 
mutual  acquiescence  of  mankind  may  change  them  by  the  same  method.  Illustrate  by 
words  "  humble  "  and  "  servant."  The  high-strained  expressions  of  civility  which  are 
BO  common,  however  innocent  now,  proceeded  originally  from  a  mean  and  fawning 
and  fallacious  disposition  in  those  who  began  them,  and  tended  to  nurse  up  vanity 
and  haughtiness  in  those  to  whom  they  were  addressed.  As  for  phrases,  of  which 
custom  hath  changed  or  annihilated  the  signification,  though,  after  this  is  done, 
they  are  no  longer  lies,  yet  they  were  lies  all  the  time  it  was  doing  ;  and  every  new 
step  taken  in  the  same  road  will  be  a  new  lie  till  everybody  finds  it  out  and  learns 
the  fashionable  interpretation  of  it.  Great  care  must  therefore  be  taken  to  prevent 
our  "  language  running  into  a  lie."  3.  As  to  all  figures  of  speech,  fables,  allegories, 
feigned  histories,  and  parables,  those  for  instance  of  our  blessed  Saviour,  and 
others  in  Scripture,  intended  only  to  convey  instruction  more  agreeably  or  effica- 
ciously, there  is  evidently  no  room  to  condemn  these  as  deceits.  But  the  case  is 
widely  different  when  persons,  with  all  the  marks  of  seriousness,  affirm  what  they 
will  afterwards  despise  and  ridicule  others  for  believing.  These  are  plainly 
designed  falsehoods,  and  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  injurious  ones.  This  is 
"  foolish  talking,  and  jesting  not  convenient."  4.  Concerning  ambiguous  phrases, 
which  in  one  acceptation  express  our  meaning  truly,  but  in  another  do  not,  it  must 
be  observed  that  when  we  are  bound,  by  promise  or  otherwise,  to  declare  what  we 
know  or  believe  in  any  case,  we  are  bound  to  declare  it  in  such  terms  as  are  likely 
to  be  well  understood.  And  even  when  we  are  not  thus  bound  we  should  speak  of 
things,  if  we  can  safely,  with  plainness  and  simplicity.  There  may  be  reason  for 
reservedness  towards  some  persons,  even  in  trifles.  When  silence  wiU  not  conceal 
a  thing  which  ought  to  be  concealed,  it  must  be  allowable  to  speak  upon  the  subject 
in  such  a  manner  as  to  leave  that  part  in  obscurity  which  is  not  fit  to  be  revealed. 
When  we  design  only  to  keep  a  man  ignorant  of  a  fact  it  is  his  own  fault  if  he  will 
also  believe  a  fancy.  But  if  we  go  further,  and  lay  snares  for  him ;  if  we  give 
assurances  which,  in  their  obvious  and  universal  acceptation,  are  false,  but  only 
have  a  latent  forced  construction,  in  which,  after  all,  they  just  may  be  true,  this  is 
equivocation,  and  cannot  be  defended.  II.  The  pleas  which  are  urged  to  justify 
SOME  SORTS  of  DIRECT  LYING.  Somc  say  that  speech  was  given  to  mankind  solely 
for  their  common  benefit ;  nor  consequently  is  it  ever  used  amiss  when  it  contributes 
to  that  end.  This  opinion  they  try  to  confirm  by  several  instances  of  falsehoods 
which  good  persons  are  recorded  in  Scripture  to  have  uttered  knowingly.  But  some 
actions  may  be  praised  in  holy  writ  on  the  whole  without  the  least  intention  of 
approving  the  circumstances  of  insincerity,  or  other  imperfections,  with  which  they 
were  accompanied.  Others  say  that  because  of  our  mutual  relation  we  ought  to 
consult  our  mutual  advantage ;  and  where  adhering  to  truth  will  not  promote  this, 
falsehood  may  be  justly  substituted.  But  we  feel  a  natural  reluctance  in  our 
consciences  to  lying  and  deceiving,  as  such,  without  looking  forward  to  conse- 
quences. What  are  those  instances  in  which,  on  balancing  the  two  sides  of  the 
account,  violation  of  truth  is  more  beneficial  than  detrimental  to  mankind  ?  But 
what  can  be  said  in  relation  to  cases  of  peril  to  property  or  life  ?  Is  falsehood  then 
justifiable  ?  The  only  answer  is  that  the  cases  are  rare,  and  extreme,  and  even 
then  doubtfully  wise.  Better  suffer  than  lie.  Take  the  case  of  the  sick,  Prevari- 
cation is  sometimes  even  necessary.  It  must  be  owned  that,  in  many  of  the  above- 
mentioned  cases  there  are  sometimes  difficulties,  with  which  we  have  much  more 
cause  to  pray  God  that  we  may  never  be  tried  than  to  be  confident  that  we  shall 
judge  and  act  rightly  if  we  are.  But  the  arguments,  were  they  ever  so  specious, 
for  the  lawfulness  of  fraud  in  seemingly  harmless  cases,  can  never  prove  it  lawful 
m  others  of  a  nature  quite  contrary.  The  extreme  danger  of  men's  proceeding  in 
falsehood  to  very  pernicious  lengths,  if  once  they  begin,  is  a  most  unanswerable 
objection  against  its  being  permitted  in  any  degree  at  all.  {Abp.  Seeker.)  Lying  :— 
Itis  possible  to  speak  against  truth  and  yet  not  lie,  provided  we  speak  in  good 
faith.  It  is  speaking  in  bad  faith,  with  conscious  purpose  of  deceiving,  that  is  a 
lie.  Take  the  text  on  the  broad  general  ground  that  lying  is  abomination  to  the 
Lord.  Take  the  word  in  its  honest  downright  foiiu  ;  do  not  let  us  shelter  ourselves 
under  smooth  expressions — equivocation,  prevarication,  dissembling,  simulation, 
untruthfulness — longer  words,  by  which  men  try  to  take  the  edge  from  unpleasant 
facts — but  which  all  in  the  end  point  to  the  same  thing,  a  want  of  sincerity. 
Whatever  you  may  do  to  soften  off  the  epithet  and  description,  there  remains  the 
text  in  all  its  decision  and  boldness.  Nor  is  the  verdict  of  man  less  decisive. 
Even  while  they  practise  it  men  condemn  lying.     Perjury  is  a  crime  branded  by  all 


CHAP,  xn.]  PROVERBS.  811 

governments,  heathen  as  well  as  Christian.     We  apply  the  word    "  true "  to  all 
that  is  good  and  worthy.     Is  not  our  instinctive  feeling  that  truth  is  the  object 
most  worthy  of  attaining?     Its  opposite  must  be  proportionally  odious.     Consider 
the  mischief  which  lying  occasions  to  society.     It  is  by  mutual  confidence,  by  faith 
in  the  honesty  and  purity  of  each  other's  motives,  that  we  live  on  together.     No 
peace  can  be  where  there  is  no  trust.     See  some  of  the  sorts  of  lies  which  prevail 
nowadays.     1.  White  lies — lies  glossed  over  and  decorated  by  fashion  ;  specious 
habits  of  talk,  and  conventional  phrases  ;  justified  by  necessity,  expediency,  or  the 
like.     2.  Slander.     This  is  not  peculiar  to  our  age — witness  the  cases  of  Mephibo- 
sheth,  Naboth,  Jeremiah,  the  blessed  Lord  Himself,  all  victims  of  false  accusation — 
but  it  is  not  rare  in  our  age.     3.  Lies  to  screen  our  faults.     These  are  more  natural 
and  intelligible.     To  escape  the  consequences  of  a  sin  by  hiding  it  seems  a  tangible 
advantage ;  but  is  it  ?     Do  we  gain  by  cloking  one  fault  with  another  ?     Every 
right-minded  man  would  have  a  thousand  times  more  pity  for  one  who  owned  his 
fault  and  asked  forgiveness  than  for  one  who  tried  to  elude  detection.     We  are 
disgusted  with  the  man  who  has  no  self-respect,  and  no  respect  for  us,  who  in 
using  a  lie  deems  us  simple  enough  to  be  cajoled,  and  considers  the  doubling  of 
his  sin  preferable  to  owning  himself  in  the  wrong.     This  is  said  of  sins  against  our 
fellow-men  :  how  much  more  forcibly  it  applies  to  sins  against  God.     4.  Two  other 
modes  of  lying  frequently  come  before  the  clergyman.     (1)  In  asking  for  relief 
there  are  those  who  simulate  and  exaggerate  their  poverty  to  move  the  hearts  of 
the  charitable.     (2)  In  the  publication  of  the  banns  of  marriage,  false  addresses 
are  frequently  given,  and  that  with  an  assurance  perfectly  startling.     Then  let  ns 
see  to  the  truthfulness  of  our  hearts  and  lips.     If  we  are  the  children  of  God, 
members  of  Christ,  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  we  must  be  truthful.     If  you  are 
tempted  to  utter  words  of  deceit,  remember  how  abominable  such  things  are  to  the 
Lord,  and  how  they  bar  up  impenetrably  the  gates  of  heaven,  which  fly  open  at 
the  approach   of   truth.     (G.  J*'.  Prescott,  M.A.)         The   nature,  malignity,  and 
pernicious  effects  of  falsehood  and  lying  : — Nothing  in  nature  is   so   universally 
decried,  and  yet  so  universally  practised,  as  falsehood.     A  mighty,  governing  lie 
goes  round  the  world,  and  has  almost  banished  truth  out  of  it.     The  greatest 
annoyance  and  disturbance  of  mankind  has  been  from  one  of  these  two  things, 
force  or  fraud ;  and  force  often  allies  with  fraud.     It  is  the  tongue  that  drives  the 
world  before  it.     It  is  hard  to  assign  any  one  thing  but  lying,  which  God  and  man 
so  unanimously  join  in  the  hatred  of  ;  and  it  is  hard  to  tell  whether  it  does  a 
greater  dishonour  to  God,  or  mischief  to  man.     I.  The  n.^ture  of  a  lie,  and  the 
PROPER  ESSENTIAL  M.vLiGMTY  OF  ALL  FALSEHOOD.    A  lie  is  an  outward  signification 
of  something  contrary  to,  or  at  least  beside  the  inward  sense  of  the  mind.     It  is  a 
false  signification,  knowingly  and  voluntarily  used.     There  are  said  to  be  three 
different  kinds  of  lie.     1.  The  pernicious  lie,  uttered  for  the  hurt  or  disadvantage 
of  our  neighbour.     2.  The  officious  lie,  uttered  for  our  own,  or  our  neighbour's 
advantage.     3.  The  ludicrous  and  jocose  lie,  uttered  by  way  of  jest,  and  only  for 
mirth's  sake,  in  common  converse.     The  unlawfulness  of  lying  is  grounded  upon 
this,  that  a  lie  is  properly  a  sort  of  species  of  injustice,  and  a  violation  of  the  right 
of  that  person  to  whom  the  false  speech  is  directed.     II.  The  pernicious  eitects 
OP  LYING.     1.  It  was  this  introduced  sin  into  the  world  ;  and  by  lying  sin  is  still 
propagated  and  promoted.     2.  To  it  is  due  all  the  misery  and  calamity  that  befalls 
mankind.     That  which  brought  sin  into  the  world  necessarily  brings  with  it  sorrow. 
3.  Lying  tends  utterly  to  dissolve  society.     The  band   that   knits  together  and 
supports  all  compacts  is  truth  and  faithfulness.     Without  mutual  trust  there  could 
not  only  be  no  happiness,  but  indeed  no  Uving  in  this  world.     4.  Deceit  and  false- 
hood most  peculiarly  indispose  the  hearts  of  men  to  the  impressions  of  religion. 
The  very  life  and  soul  of  all  religion  is  sincerity.     III.  The  rewards  or  punish- 
ments that  will  assuredly  attend,  or  at  least  follow,  this  base  practice.     (1)  An  utter 
loss  of  all  credit  and  belief  with  sober  and  discreet  persons.     (2)  The  hatred  of  all 
those  whom  the  liar  either  has,  or  would,  deceive.     (3)  A  final  separation  from 
God,  who  is  truth  itself.     [R.  South,  D.D.)        The  Bible  reaming  against  lying  ;— 
Three  reasons  why  we  ought  to  mind  this  warning.     I.  Because  of  what  God 
THINKS  ABOUT  IT.     There  is  hardly  any  form  of  wickedness  against  which  God  has 
spoken  so  often  and  so  strongly  in  the  Bible  as  He  has  against  lying.     To  know 
what  God  thinks  about  lying  should  lead  us   to  mind  the  warning  against  it. 
n.  Because  of  what  men  think  of  it.     Somebody  asked  Aristotle  what  a  man 
could  gain  by  lying.     His  answer  was  "that  no  one  will  believe  him  when  he 
speaks  the  truth."    III.  Because  of  the  punishment  which  must  follow  lying 


"7 


312  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

APTEE  DEATH.  Whatever  the  effect  of  our  lying  in  this  life  may  be,  it  will  soon  be 
over.  The  consequences  must  follow  us  after  death.  (R.  Newton,  D.D.)  School- 
hoy  honour : — There  can  be  no  question  that  men  and  women  would  be  far  better 
than  they  are  if  they  had  been  better  brought  up.  If  men  and  women  were  them- 
selves better,  they  would  give  their  children  a  higher  moral  training.  I  feel  bound 
to  bring  forward  a  definite  charge  of  neglect  of  parental  and  tutorial  duty  against 
parents  and  teachers  in  general.  The  charge  is  this :  Parents  and  teachers  too 
often  either  connive  at,  or  openly  encourage,  what  is  called,  in  unconscious  irony, 
"  school-boy  honour."  What  can  be  said  in  favour  of  those  sentiments  out  of 
which  "school-boy  honour"  springs?  1.  There  is  something  inexpressibly  petty 
and  mean  in  tale-bearing ;  in  the  habit  of  running  to  a  parent  or  master  with  every 
little  complaint  of  personal  injury  or  wrong  inflicted.  It  is  good  for  the  young  to 
learn  to  bear  small  wrongs  and  pains  from  each  other,  and  to  learn  also  how  to 
settle  their  own  quarrels.  2.  There  is  something  mean  and  cowardly  in  reporting 
on  the  sly  the  offences  committed  by  others.  This  is  bad  for  the  informer,  who 
grows  into  conceit  and  priggishness.  The  sly  informer,  the  whisperer,  is  really  a 
traitor.  He  plays  and  consorts  on  equal  terms  with  the  rest,  who  are  altogether 
unconscious  that  they  have  a  spy  among  them.  Any  one  whose  sense  of  duty  leads 
him  to  "tell"  must  have  the  moral  courage  to  warn  the  offender  previously,  to 
make  his  charge  publicly,  and  to  be  willing  to  bear  all  the  consequences  of  his 
conscientious  act.  3.  School-boy  honour  may  represent  the  noble  sentiments  of 
brotherhood  and  comradeship.'  Under  existing  circumstances,  the  caste,  or  class- 
feeling,  or  clanship  among  boys,  demands  some  principle  of  mutual  loyalty  and 
defence.  Boys  ought,  within  certain  limits,  to  stand  by  each  other.  I  give  all  the 
praise  it  deserves  to  school-boy  honour.  But  in  its  practical  working,  and  in  the 
extremes  to  which  mutual  protection  is  carried,  it  is  full  of  evil,  corrupting  to  the 
morals,  and  tending  to  obliterate  the  fine  sense  of  right  and  wrong  which  is  often 
native  to  the  boy's  mind.  (1)  This  code  of  honour  requires  or  enjoins  deceit  and 
falsehood.  Boys  may  not  lie  to  one  another,  but  it  is  a  recognised  principle  that 
they  may  lie  to  their  masters.  (2)  The  code  as  generally  maintained  is  not  only 
not  favourable  to  morality,  but  directly  and  falsely  subversive  of  it.  Its  main  use 
is  to  shelter  culprits  and  wrong-doers,  and  mainly  for  offences  distinctly  and 
grievously  immoral,  such  as  lying  and  brutality,  and  even  worse  things  than  these. 
When  boys  are  fully  aware  of  an  immoral  and  vicious  habit  prevailing  amongst 
them,  and  when  they  know  it  cannot  be  put  down  by  themselves,  it  should  be  a  real 
point  of  honour  with  them  first  to  protest  against  it  as  unworthy  even  of  boys,  then 
to  threaten  to  report  a  repetition  of  the  offence  openly  and  courageously  to  those 
authorities  who  may  know  how  to  deal  with  it.  There  should  be  no  sly  tale-bearing. 
(C.  Voysey.) 

Ver.  23.  A  prudent  man  concealeth  knowledge. — Concealing  knowledge: — 
I.  When  it  is  opportune  (John  xvi.  12).  II.  When  it  is  above  the  capacity  of 
HIS  heakeks  (1  Cor.  ii.  2).  III.  When  likely  to  be  misapplied  (Mark  xv.  5). 
IV.  When  sure  of  rejection  (Matt.  vii.  6).  V.  When  calculated  to  injurb 
the  brethren  (Lev.  xix.  16).  W^hen  to  utter  it  would  be  only  fob  self- 
display  (chap,  xxvii.  2).     (R.  A.  Griffin.) 

Ver.  24.  The  hand  of  the  diligent  shall  bear  rule. — The  reward  of  the  dili- 
gent : — The  natural  estate  of  man  is  labour.  Toil  was  the  requirement  of  paradise. 
God's  Word  recognises  the  universal  law  of  work.  "  Toil  is  prayer  "  ;  and  the 
Christian  learns  from  the  record  of  God's  will  that  honest,  faithful,  diligent,  God- 
fearing and  God-honouring  work  is  itself  a  worship  acceptable  to  the  great  All- 
worker.  God  enjoins  diligence  upon  us  by  precept  and  by  example.  About  us, 
all  things  perform  their  allotment  of  work,  and  do  it  promptly  and  without  a 
thought  of  delay.  God  teaches  men  by  His  own  ceaseless  workings  through  ten 
thousand  ever-busy  forces,  and  revelation  utters  the  same  bidding  to  unremitting 
toU.  For  labour  is  the  tenure  of  God's  gifts  to  man.  It  is  thus  the  requirement  of 
Christian  duty  that  we  should  not  be  slothful  in  business.  Promises  of  reward 
cluster  around  the  fulfilment  of  this  command.  Diligent  hands  are  speedily  ren- 
dered expert.  The  diligent  hand  teaches  and  trains  the  wary  and  observing  eye. 
God  works  no  miracles  on  behalf  of  the  drones  of  society.  And  the  hand  of  the 
diligent  shall  bear  rule,  as  Joseph  the  faithful  slave-boy  found,  and  Daniel  the 
captive  Hebrew  boy.  Another  reward  of  the  diligent  is  honour  and  renown.  "  He 
shall  stand  before  kings."    lUuBtrate  by  the  cases  of   Benjamin  Franklin  and 


c^' 


CHAP,  xn.]  PROVERBS.  813 

William  Carey.  Learn  that  sloth  and  idleness  are  expressly  forbidden  ;  and  so  is 
that  undue  and  overwrought  exertion  which  marks  the  man  greedy  of  gain. 
Kiches  are  to  be  valued  as  means,  not  as  an  end.  (Bp.  Stevens  Perry.)  The 
hand  of  the  diligent  shall  bear  rule  : — A  young  man  in  a  leather  store  used  to 
feel  very  impatient  with  his  employer  for  keeping  him  year  after  year,  for  three 
years,  "  handling  hides."  But  he  saw  the  use  of  it  in  his  future  career,  when,  in 
an  establishment  of  his  own,  he  was  able  to  tell  by  the  touch  the  exact  quality  of 
the  goods.  It  was  only  by  the  thousands  of  repetitions  that  the  lesson  was  learned ; 
and  so  it  is  with  everything  in  which  we  acquire  skill.  The  half-informed,  half- 
skilled  in  every  business  outnumber  the  others,  dozens  to  one.  Daniel  Webster 
once  replied  to  a  young  man  who  asked  him  if  there  was  "  any  room  in  the  legal 
profession,"  "  There  is  always  room  at  the  top."  The  better  you  know  your 
business  the  more  you  are  likely  to  rise.  You  can  gather  much  information  by 
making  a  wise  use  of  your  eyes  and  ears,  and  perhaps  be  able  to  surprise  your 
employer  in  an  emergency  by  stepping  into  the  "  next  man's  "  place  and  discharging 
his  duties  satisfactorily.  So,  learn  your  business,  and  you  will  find  there  is  "  room 
at  the  top."  (Home  Words.)  Diligence  and  its  reward  : — Mr.  Chauncey  M. 
Depew  teUs  the  story  of  his  visit  to  the  mechanical  department  of  Cornell  Univer- 
sity. He  found  at  the  head  of  it  Professor  Morris,  who  claimed  him  as  a  superior 
officer,  giving  as  a  reason  that  he  was  an  old-time  worker  on  the  New  York  Central 
Eailway.  "  How  did  you  get  here  ?  "  asked  Depew.  "  I  was  stoker  on  the  New 
York  Central.  I  stood  on  the  footboard  as  an  engineer  on  the  Central.  While  a 
locomotive  engineer  I  made  up  my  mind  to  get  an  education.  I  studied  at  night, 
and  fitted  myself  for  Union  College,  running  all  the  time  with  my  locomotive.  I 
procured  books,  and  attended,  as  far  as  possible,  all  lectures  and  recitations.  I 
kept  up  with  my  class,  and  on  the  day  of  graduation  I  left  my  locomotive,  washed 
up,  put  on  the  gown  and  cap,  delivered  my  thesis,  and  received  my  diplomas,  put 
the  gown  and  cap  in  the  closet,  put  on  my  working  shirt,  got  on  my  engine,  and 
made  my  usual  run  that  day."  "Then,"  says  Depew,  "I  knew  how  he  became 
Professor  Morris."  That  spirit  will  cause  a  man  to  rise  anywhere  and  in  any 
calling. 

Ver.  25.  Heaviness  in  the  heart  of  man  maketh  it  stoop :  but  a  good  word 
maketh  it  glad. — The  saddening  and  the  succouring  .- — I.  The  saddening  in  life. 
There  is  a  soul-crushing  sadness  here.  1.  Personal  affliction  that  maketh  the 
heart  stoop.  2.  Social  affliction  that  maketh  the  heart  stoop.  H.  The  sdocodrino 
IN  life.  "A  good  word  maketh  it  glad."  1.  What  are  good  words?  (1)  True- 
words  ;  (2)  kind  words ;  (3)  suitable  words.  2.  Where  are  good  words  ?  The 
gospel  is  that  word.  Words  about  providence,  about  pardon,  about  resurrection. 
Words  to  comfort  us  in  all  our  tribulations.  [TJrijah  R.  Thomas.)  The  sin  of 
brooding : — There  is  a  necessity  that  we  should  be  in  heaviness  through  manifold 
temptations ;  but  we  must  beware  lest  by  giving  free  scope  to  anxious  and 
melancholy  thoughts,  our  hearts  should  sink  in  us  like  a  stone,  and  our  souls 
become  altogether  unfit  to  relish  the  comforts  or  perform  the  services  of  life. 
Sadness  of  the  countenance  makes  the  heart  better,  but  despondency  of  heart  dis- 
qualifies men  for  thanking  and  praising  God,  for  serving  their  generation,  and  for 
bearing  the  burdens  of  life.  Life  itself  becomes  burdensome,  and  is  often  shortened, 
by  excessive  grief.  There  is  nothing  that  claims  our  grief  so  much  as  sin,  and  yet 
there  may  be  an  excess  of  sorrow  for  sin  which  exposes  men  to  the  devil,  and 
drives  them  into  his  arms.  Are  you  grieved  in  your  minds  ?  Kemember  that  it  is. 
sinful  and  dangerous  to  brood  perpetually  over  your  sorrows.  (G.  Lawson.)  A 
cheering  word : — The  celebrated  Dr.  E.  W.  Dale,  of  Birmingham,  used  to  be  fond 
of  relating  how  he  was  cheered  once  by  a  poor  woman's  earnest  words.  He  was 
feeling  dejected  and  as  if  all  his  strength  was  gone,  when,  passing  through  a  street 
in  Birmingham,  he  met  a  decently  dressed  stranger,  laden  with  parcels,  who 
stopped  and  said,  "  God  bless  you.  Dr.  Dale !  "  Her  face  was  unknown  to  him,  and 
he  answered,  "  Thank  you.  What  is  your  name  ?  "  "  Never  mind  my  name," 
was  the  response ;  "  but  if  you  only  knew  how  you  have  made  me  feel  hundreds  of 
times,  and  what  a  happy  home  you  have  given  me  !  God  bless  you  !  "  Then  she- 
was  lost  in  the  crowd,  but  she  had  encouraged  a  man  whose  books  are  in  every 
library,  and  whose  name  is  dear  to  the  universal  Church.     {Smiday  Companion.) 

Ver.  26.  The  righteous  is  more  excellent  than  his  neighbour. — The  reli- 
gious man's  advantages  : — The  sentiments  of  men  concerning  virtue,  and  their  own 


814  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOn.  [chap.  xii. 

particular  practice,  form  a  very  strange  and  striking  contrast.  Philosophers 
have  differed  about  the  origin  of  moral  distinctions,  and  delivered  various  theories 
concerning  virtue ;  but  the  people  who  judge  from  their  feelings  have  no  system 
but  one.  Eeligion  gives  its  powerful  sanction  to  the  maxims  of  morality.  The 
objections  against  a  holy  life  have  proceeded  on  maxims  directly  contrary  to  the 
text.  The  inducements  to  vice,  which  have  been  powerful  in  all  ages,  are  the 
same  that  were  presented  by  the  tempter  to  our  first  parents — the  attractions  of 
ambition  and  the  allurements  of  pleasure.  The  righteous  man  is  wiser  than  his 
neighbour.  There  is  no  part  of  his  nature  in  which  man  is  so  earnest  to  excel, 
and  so  jealous  of  a  defect,  as  his  understanding.  And  no  wonder,  for  it  is  his 
prerogative  and  his  glory.  This  enters  into  the  foundation  of  character ;  for 
without  intellectual  abilities  moral  qualities  cannot  subsist,  and  a  good  heart  will 
go  wrong  without  the  guidance  of  a  good  understanding.  Where,  then,  is  wisdom 
to  be  found  ?  If  you  will  trust  the  dictates  of  religion  and  reason,  to  be  virtuous 
is  to  be  wise.  The  testimony  of  all  who  have  gone  before  you  confirms  the 
decision.  In  opposition,  however,  to  the  voice  of  religion,  of  reason,  and  of  man- 
kind, there  are  multitudes  in  every  age  who  reckon  themselves  more  excellent  than 
their  neighbours,  by  trespassing  against  the  laws  which  all  ages  have  counted 
sacred,  the  younger  by  the  pursuit  of  criminal  gratification,  the  old  by  habits  of 
deceit  and  fraud.  The  early  period  of  life  is  frequently  a  season  of  delusion. 
There  is  no  moderation  nor  government  in  vice.  Guilty  pleasures  become  the 
masters  and  tyrants  of  the  mind  ;  when  these  lords  acquire  dominion,  they  bring 
all  the  thoughts  into  captivity,  and  rule  with  unlimited  and  despotic  sway.  When 
it  is  seen  that  the  righteous  man  is  wiser  and  greater  and  happier  than  his  neigh- 
bour, the  objections  against  religion  are  removed,  the  ways  of  Providence  are 
vindicated,  and  virtue  is  established  upon  an  everlasting  foundation.  (John 
Logan.)  The  prospects  of  the  righteous  : — The  word  rendered  "  excellent  "  is  on 
the  margin  translated  "  abundant."  Although  it  is  a  truth  that  in  regard  to 
•'  character,"  in  all  its  principles  and  their  practical  results,  "  the  righteous  is  more 
excellent  than  his  neighbour,"  yet  such  statement  is  almost  a  truism.  Taking  the 
word  as  referring  to  possessions  and  prospects,  as  meaning  that  the  righteous 
excels  his  neighbour,  or  men  in  general  around  him,  in  his  lot  as  to  happiness  and 
liope — blessings  in  enjoyment  and  blessings  in  anticipation — it  then  becomes  a 
statement  of  great  importance.  It  presents  an  inducement  to  the  godly  to  "hold 
fast  their  profession,"  and  an  inducement  to  others  to  join  their  society.  Even 
the  poorest  of  the  people  of  God  has  a  lot  that  may  well  be  envied  by  the  wealthiest 
and  the  noblest  of  the  sons  of  earth.  [R.  Wardlaw.)  The  advantages  of  virtue 
to  civil  society  : — By  the  "  righteous  "  is  intended  the  religious  man,  one  who  fears 
God  and  eschews  evil.  By  his  "  neighbour"  is  meant  a  man  of  contrary  character, 
one  who  careth  not  for  God,  but  pursues  the  interests  or  pleasures  of  the  world, 
without  any  regard  to  His  authority.  The  "  excellency"  ascribed  may  refer  either 
to  the  personal  happiness  attending  it,  or  its  beneficial  influence  on  society.  A 
man  of  religion  and  virtue  is  a  more  useful,  and  consequently  a  more  valuable 
member  of  a  community  than  his  wicked  neighbour.  I.  The  necessity  of  virtue 
AND  RELIGION  TO  THE  ENDS  OF  CIVIL  SOCIETY.  In  coutradictiou  it  has  been  urged 
that  vice  is  a  thing  highly  beneficial  to  society,  confers  on  it  so  many  advantages, 
that  public  happiness  would  be  imperfect  without  it.  We  may  admit,  in  support 
of  this  paradox,  that  if  there  were  no  vicious  men  in  the  world,  we  should  not  want 
to  be  protected  by  civil  government  from  them.  We  may  also  admit,  that  some 
advantages  arise  to  society  from  the  vices  of  men,  either  as  they  occasion  good 
laws  or  awaken  a  due  execution  of  them,  or  as  the  example  or  nature  of  his 
punishment  may  render  a  criminal  of  some  service  to  the  public.  But  these  are 
the  purely  accidental  consequences  from  vice.  Its  natural  and  proper  effects  are 
all  evil,  the  very  evils  which  government  was  designed  to  redress.  The  advantages 
that  arise  from  it  are  owing  wholly  to  the  wisdom  and  virtue  of  those  in  authority. 
The  experience  of  all  history  affirms  to  us  that  the  peace,  strength,  and  happiness 
of  a  society  depend  on  the  justice  and  fidelity,  the  temperance  and  charity  of  its 
members ;  that  these  virtues  always  render  a  people  flourishing  and  secure,  and 
the  contrary  vices  are  as  constantly  productive  of  misery  and  ruin.  If  these 
virtues  are  acknowledged  necessary  to  social  felicity,  religion  must  be  so  too, 
because  no  other  principle  can  offer  an  equal  inducement  to  the  practice  of  them, 
or  equally  restrain  men  from  the  opposite  vices.  Fear  cannot  effectually  govern 
the  actions  of  men,  nor  the  fantastic  principle  called  honour.  If  by  honour  is 
meant  anything  distinct  from  conscience,  it  is  no  more  than  a  regard  to  the  censure 


CHAP,  xn.]  PROVERBS.  315 

and  esteem  of  the  world.    II.  How  vietue  and  keligion  fit  and  dispose  men  fob 

THE    MOST    USEFUL    DISCHARGE     OF     THE     SEVEEAL    OFFICES     AND    RELATIONS    OF     SOCIAL 

LIFE.  Power,  without  goodness,  is  the  most  terrible  idea  our  imagination  can 
form ;  and  the  more  the  authority  of  any  station  in  society  is  extended,  the  more 
it  concerns  public  happiness  that  it  be  committed  to  men  fearing  God.  Parts, 
knowledge,  and  experience,  are  indeed  excellent  ingredients  in  a  public  character, 
of  equal  use  and  ornament  to  the  seat  of  judgment  and  council,  but  without 
religion  and  virtue,  these  are  only  abilities  to  do  mischief.  All  that  skill  which 
deserves  the  name  of  wisdom,  religion  approves,  recommends,  and  teaches.  More 
true  political  wisdom  can  be  learned  from  the  Holy  Scriptures,  and  even  from  this 
single  book  of  Proverbs,  than  from  a  thousand  such  writers  as  Machiavel. 
Religion  and  virtue  are  proportionally  conducive  to  happiness  in  every  inferior 
relation  of  life.  They  equally  dispose  men  to  be  good  rulers  and  good  subjects, 
good  parents  and  good  children,  good  masters  and  good  servants,  good  neighbours 
and  good  friends.  Wherever  a  religion  is  true  and  sincere,  justice,  meekness,  and 
fidelity,  all  the  virtues  that  can  render  a  government  secure,  and  a  people  happy, 
will  be  the  fruits  of   it.     III.  A  religious  motive  to  value  and  esteem  peesoxs 

OF    THIS    excellent  CHARACTER,  BECAUSE  BY  THEIR  PIETY    AND    PRAYERS    THE    BLESSING 

OF  God  is  derived  on  the  community.  Eighteous  men  ought  to  be  esteemed  a 
strength  and  defence  to  their  country,  and  wicked  men  a  reproach  and  weakness. 
The  declarations  of  God  and  the  histories  of  His  providence,  show  that  the  piety 
of  good  men  more  effectually  prevails  for  His  blessing  upon  a  nation  than  the  sins 
of  wicked  men  provoke  His  resentment.  Since  we  all  pretend  a  concern  for  the 
prosperity  of  our  country,  let  our  zeal  for  it  appear  in  our  endeavours  to  promote 
virtue  and  religion.  Let  us  constantly  distinguish  the  righteous  by  that  honour 
and  respect  which  is  due  to  so  excellent  a  character.  Above  all,  let  our  care  begin 
at  home ;  let  us  each  in  our  stations  govern  our  lives  by  the  rules  of  our  holy 
religion,  and  practise  those  virtues  ourselves  whose  excellence  we  acknowledge  in 
others.  {J.  Rogers,  D.D.)  The  excellency  of  religion  : — Virtue  and  religion  are 
excellent  things  in  themselves,  and  they  improve  and  adorn  and  exalt  our  natures. 
The  last  sentence  of  the  text  suggests  this — that  though  righteousness  and  piety 
and  religion  are  excellent  things,  so  that  men  can  hardly  avoid  seeing  the  beauty 
and  loveliness  of  them,  yet  the  deceitfulness  of  sin  will  be  apt  to  deliver  them,  and 
find  out  some  pretence  or  excuse  to  carry  men  against  their  best  reason,  and  what 
they  know  is  fittest  to  be  done.  The  excellency  of  a  religious  life  above  a  life  of 
sin  and  wickedness,  may  be  made  out  from  the  following  considerations  :  I.  That 
God  Himself  has  put  a  great  many  marks  of  honour  upon  righteousness  and 
GOODNESS.  That  person  or  that  thing  must  be  honourable  which  God  is  pleased 
to  honour,  and  that  must  be  despicable  which  He  despises.  He  who  fears  God, 
and  does  his  duty,  is  the  servant  of  God  and  the  friend  of  God.  Good  men  are  in 
an  especial  manner  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature ;  their  souls  are  honoured  and 
blessed  with  the  communion  of  God,  and  their  bodies  are  the  temples  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  II.  We  have  also  the  judgment  of  all  mankind,  not  only  of  the  good 
and  virtuous,  but  of  the  greatest  part  even  of  wicked  men.  1.  Almost  all 
nations,  in  all  ages  of  the  world,  however  they  may  have  differed  as  to  the 
measures  of  some  virtues  and  vices,  yet  have  agreed  as  to  the  main  and  great  points 
of  duty  ;  which  I  can  impute  to  nothing  else  but  the  natural  beauty  and  excellence 
of  virtue,  and  the  deformity  of  vice.  2.  When  men  will  to  serve  any  interest  or 
appetite,  they  generally  endeavour  to  conceal  it,  are  unwilling  to  have  it  known, 
and  think  it  for  their  honour  to  disguise  the  matter  as  much  as  they  can. 
"  Hypocrisy  is  a  homage  that  vice  pays  to  virtue."  And  vice,  though  disguised 
and  concealed  from  the  world,  is  so  ugly  a  thing,  that  few  people  can  bear  the 
sense  of  it  themselves,  so  they  find  out  some  colour  or  excuse  with  which  to 
deceive  themselves.  3.  When  bad  men  cannot  cover  their  shame  either  from  the 
world  or  themselves,  they  set  about  endeavouring  to  blacken  the  rest  of  the  world ; 
which  is  another  sort  of  homage  men  pay  to  virtue.  4.  Though  men  will  indulge 
their  own  appetites,  they  desire  their  children  and  relations,  and  those  whom  they 
love,  to  be  virtuous  and  good.     III.  Religion  tends  to  make  our  minds  free  and 

EASY,  TO  give  US  CONFIDENCE  TOWARDS  GoD,  AND    PEACE    IN   OUR  OWN  BREASTS.       It  SetS 

our  souls  at  liberty  from  the  tyranny  of  hurtful  lusts  and  passions,  and  it  fills  us 
with  joy  and  good  hope  in  every  condition  of  life.  Religion,  thoroughly  imbibed, 
has  a  direct  natural  tendency  to  procure  aU  these  blessings  for  us  ;  whereas  vice 
and  wickedness  both  corrupt  and  enslave  our  minds.  When  a  man  ventures  to 
break  the  commands  of  God,  he  is  generally  plunged   by  it  into  abundance  of 


816  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

troubles  and  perplexities.     IV.  Piety  and  tiktue  make  everything  else  good,  and 

OF  GOOD  USE,  WHICH  A  MAN  HAS,  OR  THAT  HAPPENS  TO  HIM,  WHEREAS  SIN  AND  WICKED- 
NESS TEND  TO  CORRUPT  AND  SPOIL  EVERYTHING.  There  is.no  Condition  but  what  to  a 
good  man  may  serve  to  very  good  ends  and  purposes,  whether  a  man  be  high  or 
low  in  the  world.  If  he  be  in  affliction,  then  patience,  humility,  and  resignation 
to  the  will  of  God  will  make  him  a  great  man  in  that.  If  God  be  pleased  to  put 
him  in  a  high  station,  integrity,  sobriety,  and  a  public  spirit  will  add  to  the  great- 
ness of  his  condition,  and  make  him  a  public  blessing.     V.  All  sin  is  injustice, 

WHICH    IS    BY    EVERYBODY    LOOKED    UPON    TO    BE  A    JIEAN,  BASE  THING.       It  is  a  COmmOn 

excuse  for  other  defects,  that  they  do  nobody  any  harm,  that  they  are  just  and 
honest  in  their  dealings,  and  therefore  they  hope  that  God  will  overlook  other 
things.  Tally  says,  "  Piety  is  justice  toward  God,"  and  therefore  impiety  and  dis- 
obedience must  be  injustice.    It  is  the  basest  and  worst  sort  of  injustice,  ingratitude. 

VI.  The  HIGHEST  end  that  can  be  pretended  to  by  any  vice  is  0N"LY  THE  PRO- 
CURING   SOME    PLEASURE    OR    CONVENIENCE    FOR    OURSELVES,    IN    OUR   PASSAGE    THROUGH 

THIS  WORLD.  This  is  but  a  poor  thing  if  compared  with  eternity.  It  is  a  great 
advantage  of  the  good  man,  that  he  has  hope  in  his  death.  This  may  well  support 
him,  and  make  him  live  cheerfully  in  any  condition  in  the  meantime.     Inferences : 

1.  Since  religion  is  in  itself  so  excellent  a  thing,  this  should  encourage  good 
men  to  persist  in  doing  their  duty,  and  not  be  ashamed  either  of  the  profession  or 
the  practise  of  religion.  2.  From  these  considerations  of  the  excellency  of  religion, 
all  may  be  urged  to  the  love  and  practice  of  it.  {Richard  WillU,  D.D.)  The 
righteous  and  his  neighbour : — Every  righteous  man  has  a  neighbour  whom  he 
excels.  The  righteous  man  and  his  neighbour  are  here  placed  side  by  side.  The 
righteous  is  more  excellent — I.  In  his  birth  and  parentage.  1.  Now  "  sons  of 
God  " — by  adoption,  by  birth,  by  privilege.  2.  "  Of  your  father  the  devil."  Satan 
nursed  into  strength  the  principles  of  evil,  and  then  planted  them  in  human 
nature  (Gen.  iii.).  II.  In  the  visible  character  that  he  bears.  1.  The  name 
"  righteous  "  is  sufficiently  indicative.  2.  "The  lusts  of  your  father  ye  will  do." 
III.  In  the  principle  on  which  he  acts,  i.e.,  love.  Two  opposite  principles — 
love,  hatred.  The  principles  of  the  righteous  are  better  than  their  outward 
character.  The  principles  of  the  ungodly  are  worse.  IV.  In  the  ends  which  he 
PURSUES.  1.  The  glory  of  God — lasting,  noble.  2.  The  interests  of  self —transient, 
base  (2  Tim.  iii.  2).  V.  In  the  influence  which  he  exerts.  The  world  is  a 
field.  1.  The  righteous  sow  in  it — to  the  spirit.  2.  The  ungodly  sow  in  it — to  the 
flesh.     VI.  In   the   pleasures    which    he    enjoys.     1.  Divine,    holy,    satisfying. 

2.  Earthly,  polluting,  unsatisfying  (Luke  xv.  IC).  Vll.  In  the  destiny  which 
awaits  him.  1.  The  maturity  of  holiness — like  Christ.  2.  The  maturity  of 
ungodliness — like  Satan.  (1)  The  deserts  of  Christ's  obedience  and  atonement — 
the  enjoyment  of  God  for  ever.  (2)  The  deserts  of  sin — "  indignation  and  wrath, 
tribulation  and  anguish."  (Jas.  Steivart.)  The  infullihle  comparison: — The 
term  "  righteous,"  as  used  in  Scripture,  is  not  to  be  limited  to  the  discharge  of 
those  duties  which  man  owes  to  man.  It  is  employed  to  denote  a  just  and  devout 
and  godly  person,  in  distinction  from  the  unrighteous  and  the  wicked.  It  embraces 
all  we  mean  by  being  pious,  religious,  and  good.  By  the  term  "  neighbour,"  is  not 
to  be  understood  the  vicious  and  the  vile  who  may  live  close  to  the  dwelling  of  the 
righteous.  Compared  with  the  ordinarily  praiseworthy  neighbour,  the  devout. 
God-fearing,  decided  Christian  is  at  advantage.  1.  He  is  more  excellent  in  the 
principles  by  which  his  conduct  is  governed.  A  man  may  be  moral,  because  he 
values  his  reputation,  or  because  it  suits  his  taste,  or  his  health,  or  advances  his 
worldly  interest,  and  not  because  God  has  commanded  him  to  do  justly  and  love 
mercy.  The  unrenewed  man  pursues  his  own  private  interest — the  righteous  will 
sacrifice  it  for  a  greater  public  good.  The  man  of  sterling  piety  is  more  worthy  of 
our  confidence  than  the  individual  who  is  governed  by  other  motives  than  those  of 
the  fear  of  God  and  love  to  his  brethren.  2.  More  excellent  in  his  example  and 
influence.  Every  man's  life  will  correspond  to  the  temper  of  his  heart,  and  the 
maxims  and  motives  that  govern  him.  When  the  whole  conduct  is  minutely 
examined,  every  man  is  found  what  he  appears  to  be.  The  grace  of  God  improves 
all  the  principles  of  man's  moral  nature.  To  the  full  extent  of  his  circle,  his 
conduct  has  a  salutary  effect  on  all  around  him.  The  righteous  may  be  of  retired 
habits,  but  a  pattern  will  be  taken  of  his  life,  and  it  will,  like  the  leaven  in  the 
meal,  be  diffused  wherever  he  is  known  with  more  or  less  of  usefulness.  His 
ungodly  neighbour  can  boast  of  nothing  more  than  a  scanty  morality,  whose 
highest  motive  is  self-love  and  self-interest.    3.  More  excellent  in  his  alliances. 


CHAP,  xn.]  PROVERBS.  317 

There  is  a  close  and  endearing  relationship  between  all  the  subjects  of  the  kingdom 
of  grace.  Each  is  united  to  God,  and  to  all  holy  beings,  by  the  tenderest  ties  of 
kindred  affection.  The  righteous  is  entitled  to  whatever  honour  and  dignity  may 
accrue  to  him  from  his  union  to  the  Creator,  the  Eedeemer  and  the  Sanctifier,  and 
to  every  member  of  the  holy  household.  4.  More  excellent  inasmuch  as  he  is  the 
heir  of  a  better  destiny.  Externally,  in  many  points,  they  may  resemble  each 
other  now.  This  may  deceive  for  a  while.  When  the  Christian  receives  his  crown 
of  glory,  the  difference  will  be  seen  to  be  infinite.  On  the  righteous  the  Eedeemer 
will  smile  for  ever  ;  on  the  other  He  will  eternally  frown.  This  subject  teaches  a 
lesson  of  humility  and  gratitude.  If  we  have  any  excellence  of  character,  it  is  the  gift 
of  God.  The  superior  excellence  of  the  righteous  over  the  wicked  shows  us  the  obliga- 
tions they  are  under  to  make  their  high  distinction  obvious  to  the  eye  of  the  world. 
{D  A.  Clark.)  The  superior  excellency  of  the  religious  : — Never  were  the  qualities  of 
a  parent  more  really  derived  unto  their  children  than  the  image  and  similitude  of  the 
Divine  excellences  are  stamped  upon  heaven-born  souls :  some  beams  of  that  eternal 
light  are  darted  in  upon  them,  and  make  them  shine  with  an  eminent  splendour  ; 
and  they  are  always  aspiring  to  a  nearer  conformity  with  Him,  still  breathing  after 
a  further  communication  of  His  Holy  Spirit,  and  daily  finding  the  power  thereof 
correcting  the  ruder  deformities  of  their  natures,  and  superinducing  the  beautiful 
delineations  of  God's  image  upon  them,  that  any  one  who  observes  them  may 
perceive  their  relation  to  God,  by  the  excellency  of  their  deportment  in  the  world. 

1.  Having  regarded  the  righteous  man's  excellency,  in  regard  of  his  birth  and 
extraction,  we  proceed  to  consider  his  qualities  and  endowments,  and  shall  begin 
with  those  of  his  understanding,  his  knowledge,  and  wisdom.  1.  His  knowledge  is 
conversant  about  the  noblest  objects  ;  he  contemplates  that  infinite  Being  whose 
perfections  can  never  enough  be  admired,  but  still  afford  new  matter  to  delight 
him,  to  ravish  his  affections,  to  raise  his  wonder.  And,  if  we  have  a  mind  to  the 
studies  of  nature  and  human  science,  he  is  best  disposed  for  it,  having  his  faculties 
cleared,  and  his  understanding  heightened  by  Divine  contemplations.  But  his 
knowledge  doth  not  rest  in  speculations,  but  directeth  his  practice,  and  deter- 
mineth  his  choice.  And  he  is  the  most  prudent  as  well  as  the  most  knowing  person. 
He  knows  how  to  secure  his  greatest  interest,  to  provide  for  the  longest  life,  to 
prefer  sohd  treasures  to  gilded  trifles,  the  soul  to  the  body,  eternity  to  a  moment. 

2.  We  proceed  to  another  of  his  endowments,  the  greatness  of  his  mind  and  his 
contempt  of  the  world.  To  be  taken  up  with  trifles,  and  concerned  in  little  things, 
is  an  evidence  of  a  weak  and  naughty  mind.  And  so  are  all  wicked  and  irreligious 
persons.  But  the  pious  person  hath  his  thoughts  far  above  these  painted  vanities  ; 
his  felicity  is  not  patched  up  of  so  mean  shreds ;  it  is  simple,  and  comprised  in  one 
chief  good :  his  soul  advanceth  itself  by  rational  passions  towards  the  Author  of  its 
being,  the  fountain  of  goodness  and  pleasure  :  he  hath  none  in  heaven  but  Him ; 
and  there  is  none  upon  earth  whom  he  desires  besides  Him.  The  knowledge  of 
nature  hath  been  reputed  a  good  means  to  enlarge  the  soul  and  breed  in  it  a 
contempt  of  earthly  enjoyments.  He  that  hath  accustomed  himself  to  consider 
the  vastness  of  the  universe,  and  the  final  proportion  which  the  point  we  live  in 
bears  to  the  rest  of  the  world,  may  perhaps  come  to  think  less  of  the  possessions 
of  some  acres,  or  of  that  fame  which  can  at  most  spread  itself  through  a  small 
corner  of  this  earth.  Whatever  be  in  this,  sure  I  am  that  the  knowledge  of  God, 
and  the  frequent  thoughts  of  heaven,  must  needs  prove  far  more  effectual  to  elevate 
and  aggrandise  the  mind.  3.  And  this,  by  the  affinity,  will  lead  us  to  another 
endowment,  wherein  the  excellency  of  the  righteous  man  doth  appear  ;  and  that  is, 
that  heroic  magnanimity  and  courage  wherewith  he  is  inspired,  and  which 
makes  him  confidently  achieve  the  most  difficult  actions,  and  resolutely  undergo 
the  hardest  sufferings  that  he  is  called  to.  Let  heathen  Kome  boast  of  a 
Eegulus,  a  Decius,  or  some  two  or  three  more,  stimulated  by  a  desire  of  glory, 
and  perhaps  animated  by  some  secret  hopes  of  future  reward,  who  have  devoted 
their  life  to  the  service  of  their  country.  But  alas  !  what  is  this  to  an  infinite 
number,  not  only  of  men,  but  even  of  women  and  children,  who  have  died  for  the 
profession  of  their  faith,  neither  seeking  nor  expecting  any  praise  from  men  ?  And 
tell  me  who  among  the  heathen  did  willingly  endure  the  loss  of  reputation  ?  Nay, 
that  was  their  idol,  and  they  could  not  part  with  it.  4.  From  courage  and 
magnanimity,  we  pass  to  that  which  is  the  genuine  issue  and  ordinary  con- 
sequent of  it,  the  liberty  and  freedom  of  the  righteous  person.  Liberty  is  a  privilege 
so  highly  rated  by  all  men  that  many  run  the  greatest  hazards  for  the  very  name 
of   it:  but  there   are  few   that  enjoy   it.     I   shall  not  speak  of   those  fetters   of 


gl8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 


ceremony,  and  chains  of  state,  wherewith  great  men  are  tied ;  which  make  their 
actions  constrained,  and  their  converse  uneasy :  this  is  more  to  be  pitied  than 
blamed.  But  wicked  and  irrehgious  persons  are  under  a  far  more  shameful 
bondage:  they  are  slaves  to  their  own  lusts,  and  suffer  the  violence  and  tyranny 
of  their  irregular  appetites.  But  the  holy  and  religious  person  hath  broken  these 
fetters,  cast  off  the  yoke  of  sin,  and  become  the  freeman  of  the  Lord.  It  is 
religion  that  restores  freedom  to  the  soul,  which  philosophy  did  pretend  to ;  it 
is  that  which  doth  sway  and  moderate  all  those  blind  passions  and  impetuous 
aiiections  which  else  would  hinder  a  man  from  the  possession  and  enjoyment  of 
himself,  and  makes  him  master  of  his  own  thoughts,  motions,  and  desires,  that 
he  may  do  with  freedom  what  he  judgeth  most  honest  and  convenient.  5.  Another 
particular  wherein  the  nobleness  and  excellency  of  religion  doth  appear  is  in  a 
charitable  and  benign  temper.  The  righteous  is  gracious,  and  full  of  compassion  ; 
he  showeth  favour  and  lendeth;  and  makes  it  his  work  to  serve  mankind  as  much 
as  he  is  able.  His  charity  doth  not  express  itself  in  one  particular  instance,  as 
that  of  giving  alms ;  but  is  vented  as  many  ways  as  the  variety  of  occasions  do 
call  for,  and  his  power  can  reach  to.  He  assisteth  the  poor  with  his  money, 
the  ignorant  with  his  counsel,  the  afflicted  with  his  comfort,  the  sick  with  the 
best  of  his  skill,  all  with  his  blessings  and  prayers.  6.  We  shall  name  but  one 
instance  more  wherein  the  righteous  man  excelleth  his  neighbour  ;  and  that  is, 
his  venerable  temperance  and  purity.  He  hath  risen  above  the  vaporous  sphere 
of  sensual  pleasure  which  darkeneth  and  debaseth  the  mind,  which  sullies  its 
lustre,  and  abates  its  native  vigour ;  while  profane  persons,  wallowing  in  impure 
lusts,  do  sink  themselves  below  the  condition  of  men.  H.  Before  we  proceed 
further,  it  will  be  necessary  to  take  off  some  prejudices  and  objections  that 

.ARISE    AGAINST    THE    NOBLENESS    AND    EXCELLENCY    OF    RELIGION.        1.    And    the    first    iS, 

that  it  enjoineth  lowliness  and  humility;  which  men  ordinarily  look  upon  as  an 
abject  and  base  disposition.  But  if  we  ponder  the  matter  we  shall  find  that  arro- 
gancy  and  pride  are  the  issues  of  base  and  silly  minds,  a  giddiness  incident  to  those 
who  are  raised  suddenly  to  unaccustomed  height:  nor  is  there  any  vice  doth 
more  palpably  defeat  its  own  design,  depriving  a  man  of  that  honour  and  reputation 
which  it  makes  him  aim  at.  On  the  other  hand,  we  shall  find  humility  no  silly 
and  sneaking  quality ;  but  the  greatest  height  and  sublimity  of  the  mind,  and 
the  only  way  to  true  honour.  2.  Another  objection  against  the  excellency  of  a 
religious  temper  is,  that  the  love  of  enemies,  and  pardon  of  injuries,  which  it 
includeth,  is  utterly  inconsistent  with  the  principles  of  honour.  But  if  we  have 
any  value  for  the  judgment  of  the  wisest  man  and  a  great  king,  he  will  tell  us  that 
it  is  the  honour  of  a  man  to  cease  from  strife ;  and  he  that  is  slow  to  wrath  is  of 
great  understanding.  So  that  what  is  here  brought  as  an  objection  against 
religion  might  with  reason  enough  have  been  brought  as  an  instance  of  its  noble- 
ness. Having  thus  illustrated  and  confirmed  what  is  asserted  in  the  text,  that  the 
righteous  is  more  excellent  than  his  neighbour,  let  us  improve  it  in  a  check  to  that 
profane  and  atheistical  spirit  of  drollery  and  scoffing  at  religion  [which  hath 
got  abroad  in  the  world.  Alas !  do  men  consider  what  it  is  which  they  make  the 
butt  of  their  scoffs  and  reproaches  ?  Have  they  nothing  else  to  exercise  their  wit 
and  vent  their  jests  upon  but  that  which  is  the  most  noble  and  excellent  thing  in 
the  world  ?  But  let  them  do  what  they  will ;  they  but  kick  against  the  pricks. 
Beiigion  hath  so  much  native  lustre  and  beauty,  that,  notwithstanding  all  the 
dirt  they  study  to  cast  upon  it,  all  the  melancholy  and  deformed  shapes  they  dress 
it  in,  it  will  attract  the  eyes  and  admiration  of  all  sober  and  ingenuous  persons ; 
and  while  these  men  study  to  make  it  ridiculous,  they  shall  but  make  themselves 
so.  There  are  others  who  have  not  yet  arrived  to  this  height  of  profanencss,  to 
laugh  at  all  religion,  but  do  vent  their  malice  at  those  who  are  more  conscientious 
and  severe  than  themselves,  under  presumption  that  they  are  hypocrites  and 
dissemblers.  But  besides  that  in  this  they  may  be  guilty  of  a  great  deal  of 
uncharitableness,  it  is  to  be  suspected  that  they  bear  some  secret  dislike  to  piety 
itself,  and  hate  hypocrisy  more  for  its  resemblance  of  that  than  for  its  owa 
viciousness:  otherwise  whence  comes  it  that  they  do  not  express  the  same 
animosity  against  other  vices?  (H.  Scoiigal,  31. A.)  The  difference  between 
the  religious  and  irreligious  7?i(ni.-— Men  without  religion  will  sometimes  ask,  "Do 
not  all  men  sin— even  the  religious?  And,  if  so,  is  not  the  whole  difference 
between  them  and  ourselves  that  our  offences  are  somewhat  more  numerous  than 
theirs?  "  Now  this  must  unquestionably  be  admitted.  Still,  whatever  may  be  the 
resemblance  upon  this  point,  it   is  nevertheless  true  that  men  with  and  without 


CHAP.  XII.]  PROVEEBS.  319 

religion  differ  in  many  other  most  important  particulars.  1.  The  first  difference 
between  the  sins  of  the  religious  and  the  irreligious  man  is,  that  the  one  does 
not  allow  himself  in  his  sins  and  the  other  does.  The  real  Christian  never  says, 
"  I  know  such  an  action  to  be  wrong,  but  yet  I  will  do  it — I  know  such  an  action 
to  be  right,  but  yet  I  will  neglect  to  do  it."  But  in  the  other  class  of  men  we  shall 
be  often  struck  with  the  contrary  line  of  conduct.  Charge  them  with  their  neglect 
of  God,  and  of  their  souls,  and  they  say,  perhaps,  "  We  confess  it  to  be  wrong." 
Consider  the  case  as  between  man  and  man.  We  may  conceive  the  affectionate 
child  surprised  into  an  act  of  disobedience  or  unkindness  to  the  parent  whom  it 
loves  ;  but  we  cannot  conceive  that  child,  if  truly  affectionate,  setting  itself  deliber- 
ately and  knowingly  to  wound  that  parent  at  the  tenderest  point.  In  the  one  case, 
an  act  of  disobedience  discovers  a  man  in  whom,  though  the  flesh  is  weak,  the 
spirit  may  be  willing — in  whom  a  momentary  temptation  has  prevailed  over  the 
settled  purpose  and  desire  of  his  heart.  In  the  other  you  have  a  man  whose  settled 
purpose  is  to  do  wrong.  The  language  of  a  true  Christian  must  be  that  of  his 
Master  :  "I  come  to  do  Thy  will,  0  God."  2.  A  second  distinction  between  a  real 
Christian  and  one  who  is  not  a  real  Christian  is  this — the  real  Christian  does  not 
seek  or  find  his  happiness  in  sin.  A  man  who  is  not  reaUy  religious,  if  he  wants 
amusement  or  indulgence,  seeks  for  it,  generally,  either  in  the  society  of  men 
without  religion  or  in  practices  which  the  Word  of  God  condemns.  He  sins, 
and  it  gives  him  no  pain.  On  the  contrary,  the  real  Christian  finds  no  happiness 
in  sin.  His  pleasure  is  in  prayer,  in  communion  with  God.  He  seeks  his  happi- 
ness in  the  fields  of  his  duties.  "  O,"  says  he,  "  how  I  love  Thy  law !  It  is  my 
meditation  all  the  day."  The  state  and  character  of  any  person  may  to  a  great 
extent  be  judged  by  the  nature  of  his  pleasures.  Does  he  seek  them  in  trifles  ?  he 
is  a  trifling  man ;  does  he  seek  them  in  worldly  pursuits  ?  he  is  a  worldly  man ; 
does  he  seek  them  in  vice  ?  he  is  a  vicious  man  ;  does  he  seek  them  in  God 
and  Christ?  he  is  a  Christian.  3.  Thirdly,  the  habits  of  a  real  Christian  are 
holy.  Men  are  not  to  be  judged  by  a  few  solitary  actions  of  their  lives.  There 
is  scarcely  any  life  so  dark  as  not  to  be  lighted  up  by  a  few  brighter  actions — 
as  a  single  star  may  glimmer  through  the  most  cloudy  atmosphere ;  and  there 
is  no  life  so  bright  as  not  to  be  darkened  by  many  spots — as  many  small 
clouds  are  apt  to  chequer  even  the  clearest  sky.  But  then  we  determine  the 
real  state  of  the  heavens  not  by  the  single  star,  in  the  one  case,  or  by  the  few 
clouds  in  the  other.  We  ask  what  is  the  general  aspect,  the  prevalent  appearance: 
does  night  or  day,  does  shade  or  sunshine,  prevail  ?  Thus  also  must  we  proceed 
in  estimating  the  character  of  men.  It  is  the  habitual  frame  of  the  mind — it  is 
what  we  may  call  the  work-day  character — it  is  the  general,  habitual,  prevalent 
temper,  conduct,  conversation,  in  the  family  or  the  parish,  in  the  shop  or  the 
farm,  which  are  the  only  true  tests  of  our  condition.  But  let  us  bring  the  two 
classes  to  this  standard,  and  we  shall  find  that  in  the  real  Christian  the  habits 
are  holy — in  the  insincere  Christian  they  are  unholy ;  that  the  one  is  habitually 
right  and  accidentally  wrong,  and  the  other  habitually  wrong  and  accidentally 
right.  Such,  then,  is  another  highly  important  distinction  between  these  classes. 
4.  Fourthly,  every  act  of  sin  in  real  Christians  is  followed  by  sincere  repentance. 
No  feature  is  more  essentially  characteristic  of  a  holy  mind  than  a  feeling  of  deep 
penitence  for  transgression.  "  My  sin,"  said  the  "  man  after  God's  own  heart," 
"is  ever  before  me."  5.  A  fifth  no  less  important  feature  by  which  the  real 
Christian  is  distinguished  is,  that  he  anxiously  seeks  the  pardon  of  his  sins 
through  Jesus  Christ.  Others  too  often  seem  to  imagine  their  sins  cancelled 
immediately  upon  their  bare  and  cold  acknowledgment  of  them.  He,  on  the 
contrary,  knows  that  the  hatred  of  sin  and  indignation  at  the  sinner  must  be 
deeply  lodged  in  a  mind  of  infinite  purity.  And  his  consolation  is  this — not  that 
he  can  save  himself,  but  that  "  he  has  an  Advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ 
the  righteous."  6.  The  sixth  and  last  point  of  distinction  which  I  shall  have 
time  to  notice  between  the  real  Christian  and  every  other  character  is,  that  he 
alone  seeks  diligently  from  God  a  power  to  abstain  from  sin  in  future.  If  others 
even  desire  the  pardon  of  their  past  sins,  they  are  careless  about  future  advancement 
in  holiness.  They,  perhaps,  persist  in  a  course  of  sinning  and  repenting,  through 
the  whole  stage  of  their  Uves.  Heaven  is  every  day  mocked  by  the  language  of  an 
unmeaning  sorrow.  No  real  hatred  for  the  sin  is  felt.  In  the  Christian  a  different 
feeling  prevails.  A  deep  abhorrence  of  sin  mingles  with  his  regret  for  it.  His  are 
tears  of  hatred  as  well  as  grief.  There  is  a  substantial  distinction  between  a  real 
Christian  and  every  other  character :  something  more  than  a  mere  line  or  shadowy 


320  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

difference  here.  If  we  carefully  observe  the  several  points  of  distinction  which  I 
have  noticed,  we  shall  find  that  they  imply  in  the  two  classes  of  characters,  in  each 
particular  instance,  a  different  state  of  heart  or  mind.  Let  us  seek  a  new  and 
more  sanctified  nature :  more  and  more  of  the  influences  of  the  sacred  Spirit.  In 
the  fable  of  old,  when  the  artist  had  made  the  figure  of  a  man,  he  could  not 
animate  it  without  stealing  fire  from  heaven.  That  heavenly  fire  is  offered  to  us. 
Many  has  it  already  quickened  who  were  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  {Christian 
Observer.)  The  way   of   the   wicked  seduceth    them. — On    seduction: — The 

seduction  of  the  lower  class  of  females  is  due  to  the  profligacy  of  men  in  a 
superior  station  in  life.  It  is  the  custom  to  confine  ourselves  to  generalities  in  the 
pulpit.  But  the  reasoning  which  applies  to  all  crimes  acts  languidly  against  each 
individual  crime — it  does  not  paint  the  appropriate  baseness,  or  echo  the  reproaches 
of  the  heart.  1.  The  character  of  a  seducer  is  base  and  dishonourable :  if  deceit 
is  banished  among  equals ;  if  the  conduct  of  every  man,  to  those  of  his  own  station 
in  life,  should  be  marked  by  veracity  and  good  faith ;  why  are  fallacy  and  false- 
hood justified,  because  they  are  exercised  by  talents  against  ignorance,  cunning 
against  simplicity,  power  against  weakness,  opulence  against  poverty?  No  one 
ever  lured  a  wretched  creature  to  her  ruin  without  such  a  complication  of  infamous 
falsehoods  as  would  have  condemned  him  to  everlasting  infamy,  had  they  been 
exercised  to  the  prejudice  of  any  one  in  a  higher  scene  of  life  :  and  what  must  be 
the  depravity  of  that  man  who  has  no  other  criterion  of  what  he  shall  do,  or  from 
what  he  shall  abstain,  than  impunity?  2.  To  the  cruelty  of  seduction  is  generally 
added  the  baseness  of  abandoning  its  object,  of  leaving  to  perish  in  rags  and 
hunger  a  miserable  being  bribed  by  promises  and  oaths  of  eternal  protection  and 
regard.  3.  This  crime  cannot  be  defended  under  any  of  the  ingenious  systems 
by  which  men  are  perpetually  vitiating  their  understandings.  [Sidney  Smith, 
M.A.) 

Ver.  27.  The  slothful  man  roasteth  not  that  which  he  took  in  hunting. — 

Indolence: — Most  hunters  have  the  game  they  shot  or  entrapped  cooked  the  same 
evening  or  the  next  day,  but  not  so  with  this  laggard  of  the  text.  Too  lazy  to  rip 
off  the  hide ;  too  lazy  to  kindle  the  fire,  and  put  the  gridiron  on  the  coals.  What 
are  the  causes  of  laziness,  and  what  are  its  evil  results?  1.  Indolence  often  arises 
from  the  natural  temperament.  I  do  not  know  but  that  there  is  a  constitutional 
tendency  to  this  vice  in  every  man.  Some  are  very  powerfully  handicapped  by 
this  constitutional  tendency.  2.  Indolence  is  often  a  result  of  easy  circumstances. 
Bough  experience  in  earlier  life  seems  to  be  necessary  in  order  to  make  a  man  active 
and  enterprising.  3.  Another  cause  of  indolence  is  severe  discouragement.  There 
are  those  around  us  who  started  life  with  the  most  sanguine  expectation  ;  but  some 
sudden  and  overwhelming  misfortune  met  them,  and  henceforth  they  have  been 
inactive.  Trouble,  instead  of  making  them  more  determined,  has  overthrown 
them.  They  have  lost  all  self-reliance.  They  imagine  that  all  men  and  all  occur- 
rences are  against  them  1  You  cannot  rouse  them  to  action.  Every  great  financial 
panic  produces  a  large  crop  of  such  men.  4.  Keverie  is  a  cause  of  indolence. 
There  are  multitudes  of  men  who  expect  to  achieve  great  success  in  life,  who  are 
entirely  unwilling  to  put  forth  any  physical,  moral,  or  intellectual  effort.  They 
have  a  great  many  eloquent  theories  of  life.  They  pass  their  life  in  dreaming. 
Let  no  young  man  begin  life  with  reverie.  There  is  nothing  accomplished  without 
hard  work.  Do  not  in  idleness  expect  something  to  turn  up.  It  will  turn  down. 
Indolence  and  wickedness  always  make  bad  luck.  5.  Bad  habits  are  a  fruitful 
source  of  indolence.  Sinful  indulgences  shut  a  man's  shop,  and  dull  his  tools,  and 
steal  his  profits.  Dissoluteness  is  generally  the  end  of  industry.  What  are  the 
results  of  indolence  ?  A  marked  consequence  of  this  vice  is  physical  disease.  The 
healthiness  of  the  whole  natural  world  depends  upon  activity.  And  indolence 
endangers  the  soul.  Satan  makes  his  chief  conquests  over  men  who  either  have 
nothing  to  do,  or,  if  they  have,  refuse  to  do  it.  Idleness  not  only  leads  a  man  into 
associations  which  harm  his  morals,  but  often  thrusts  upon  him  the  worst  kind  of 
scepticism.  Loafers  are  almost  always  infidels,  or  fast  getting  to  be  such.  I  never 
knew  a  man  given  up  to  thorough  idleness  that  was  converted.  Let  me  tell  the 
idler  that  there  is  no  hope  for  him  either  in  this  world  or  in  the  world  that 
is  to  come.  [T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  Labour  as  enhancing  the  relative  value  of 
a   man's  possession : — This   applies   to  many  things.      I.    To    material  wealth. 

II.    To     SOCIAL     POSITION.        III.    To    CIVIL    LIBERTY.        IV.    To    RELIGIOUS    PRIVILEGES. 

(Homilist.)         The  castle  of  indolence  : — Thomson  wrote  a  poem  by  this  title.    He 


CHAP,  xn.]  PROVERBS.  821 

locates  the  castle  in  a  dreamy  land,  where  every  sense  is  steeped  in  the  most 
luxurious  though  enervating  delights.  The  lord  of  the  castle  was  a  powerful 
enchanter,  who,  by  his  arts,  enticed  thoughtless  travellers  within  the  gate,  that  he 
might  destroy  their  strength  and  ruin  their  hopes  by  a  ceaseless  round  of  volup- 
tuous pleasures.  The  slothful  man  : — 1.  The  lazy  man  goes  hunting.  Some 
are  full  of  the  most  bustling  activity.  An  old  mathematical  professor  was 
wont  to  define  work  as  "  steadily  overcoming  resistance  occurring  along  a  fixed 
line."  An  intermittent,  changing  activity  manifestly  fails  to  answer  the  require- 
ments of  this  definition.  2.  The  slothful  man  catches  game  when  he  does  go 
hunting.  Not  only  does  he  act,  but  he  does  things.  But  his  slothfulness  is  made 
manifest  in  this :  though  he  be  effective,  he  is  not  efficient ;  for — 3.  He  is  too  lazy 
to  cook  what  he  does  catch.  The  excitement  of  the  chase  is  over,  he  is  weary  with 
dragging  home  his  game,  so  the  gun  goes  into  one  corner  and  th  _•  game  into  another, 
while  the  man  proceeds — with  a  celerity  which  would  be  praiseworthy  were  it 
rightly  applied — to  forget  all  about  it.  He  waits  for  the  next  excitement.  His 
activity  has  procured  no  benefits  to  himself  or  any  one  else.  There  are  many  people 
who  lose  their  labour  through  a  disinclination  to  put  the  finishing  touch  to  their 
work.  Under  excitement  they  secure  certain  results,  which,  if  gathered  up  and 
made  permanent,  would  be  of  immense  value.  But  then  they  get  weary,  indif- 
ferent. They  let  things  slide — to  use  an  expression  of  the  populace.  All  they  have 
<Ione  gradually  undoes  itself.  For  lack  of  but  one  stone— the  keystone — the  arch 
falls.  This  is  the  application  :  When  you  commence  a  thing,  cease  not  until  you 
have  gathered  up  the  results  of  your  labour  in  some  form  of  practical  and  present 
benefit  to  your  fellow-men.     (D.  C.  Gilmore.) 

Ver.  28.  In  the  way  of  righteousness  is  life. — Life  in  the  way  of  righteousness : — 
There  are  many  ways  which  men  are  found  to  pursue  in  order  to  the  attainment  of 
happiness.  One  pursues  the  way  of  worldly  pleasure ;  another  is  fascinated  by  the 
splendour  and  magnificence  and  show  of  the  world ;  another  seeks  happiness  in  the 
business  of  life.  These  ways  are  false  ways  and  disappointing  ways.  There  is  a 
way  which  is  neither  delusive  nor  disappointing.  It  is  the  way  of  holiness,  the 
way  of  conformity  to  God's  mind  and  will.  The  righteous  walk  in  this  way.  But 
who  are  the  righteous  ?  They  who  are  interested  by  faith  in  the  Redeemer's 
righteousness  for  justification  and  acceptance  before  God.  They  are  distinguished 
by  the  integrity  of  their  principles  and  a  conscientious  endeavour  to  discharge 
every  duty  they  owe  their  fellow-men.  They  are  careful  to  avoid  all  known  sin, 
and  desire  to  live  in  the  practice  of  all  known  duty.  They  are  not  satisfied  with 
present  attainments  in  religion,  but  seek  to  grow  in  grace  as  well  as  knowledge. 
They  are  animated  by  the  constraining  love  of  Jesus.  They  live  in  the  exercise  of 
communion  with  God  in  prayer  and  praise.  And  the  text  declares  that  those  who 
walk  in  holy  obedience  to  the  revealed  will  of  God,  and  are  filled  with  the  fruits  of 
righteousness,  have  received  a  new  nature,  and  are  animated  by  a  new  life.  The 
existence  of  the  life  of  grace  in  the  soul  will  be  manifested  by  its  corresponding 
effects  in  the  walk  and  conversation.  In  the  way  of  righteousness  is  the  life  of 
consolation  and  joy.  God's  smile  is  on  the  righteous  in  all  their  goings.  Great 
are  the  privileges  of  the  righteous,  which  must  be  felt,  but  cannot  be  adequately 
described.  The  new  life,  kindled  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  shall  never  be  extinguished. 
It  shall  survive  every  shock  of  opposition  and  trial,  and  shall  triumph  over  the 
combined  rage  of  earth  and  hell.  "In  the  pathway  thereof  there  is  no  death." 
The  righteous  must  die,  as  well  as  the  unrighteous ;  there  is  no  peculiarity  of 
exemption  in  their  case  from  the  stroke  of  the  last  enemy.  But  to  the  believer  in 
Jesus  death  is  unspeakable  gain.  Then  are  we  in  the  number  of  the  righteous  ? 
(C.  Rawlings,   B.A.)  The  icay   of  religion  recommended  as — I.    A  straight, 

PLAIN,  EASY  WAY.  God's  Commands  (the  rule  we  are  to  walk  by)  are  all  holy,  just, 
and  good.  Eeligion  has  right,  reason,  and  equity  on  its  side.  II.  As  A  safe, 
PLEASANT  coMFOETABLE  WAY.  1.  There  is  not  only  life  at  the  end,  but  there  is  life 
in  the  way  ;  all  true  comfort  and  satisfaction.  The  favour  of  God,  which  is  better 
than  life ;  the  Spirit,  who  is  life.  2.  There  is  not  only  life  in  it,  but  so  as  that  in 
it  "  there  is  no  death,"  none  of  that  sorrow  of  the  world  which  works  death,  and  is 
an  allay  to  our  present  joy  and  life.  There  is  no  end  to  that  life  that  is  in  the 
way  of  righteousness.  Here  there  is  life,  but  there  is  death  too.  In  the  way  of 
righteousness  there  is  life  and  no  death — life  and  immortality.     {Matthew  Henry.) 

23 


822  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

Veb.  1.  A  wise  son  heareth  his  father's  instruction :  but  a  scomer  heareth  not 
rebuke. — The  heedless  scomer  : — The  first  part  of  the  sentence  has  been  rendered, 
"is  his  father's  instruction  "  ;  i.e.,  a  wise  son  embodies  his  father's  instruction.  A 
wise  man  may  point  to  his  son  and  say,  "  This  is  the  sum-total  of  my  educational 
efforts."  The  proverb  is  careful  to  define  the  quality  of  the  son  whose  education 
embodies  the  purposes  of  his  father.  He  is  to  be  a  "  wise  son  "  ;  one  who  can  make 
the  most  of  his  opportunities,  who  understands  the  process  through  which  he  is 
passing.  A  scorner  is  profited  by  nothing ;  being  a  satirist  himself,  he  turns  every- 
thing into  satire ;  he  mocks  the  speaker  of  good  things,  he  parodies  the  highest 
poetry,  he  resents  the  most  delicate  and  spiritual  approach.  We  should  not  be 
struck  by  the  mere  ability  of  satire  ;  we  should  remember  its  moral  disadvantages, 
for  it  debases  and  impoverishes  whatever  it  touches  that  is  meant  for  its  good.  We 
speak  of  the  satire  that  takes  the  moral  purpose  out  of  every  appeal,  and  turns  to 
derision  aU  the  efforts  that  are  directed  towards  the  soul's  real  education.  Wisdom 
gathers  everything  ;  scorning  gathers  nothing.  It  is  for  each  man  to  say  that  he 
will  walk  in  the  one  spirit  or  in  the  other,  but  let  him  distinctly  know  what  the 
consequences  of  each  spirit  must  be.  (/.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  teachable  and 
unteachable  son: — I.  The  teachable  son.  "A  wise  son  heareth  his  father's 
instruction."  Solomon,  of  course,  supposes  that  the  father  is  what  a  father  ought 
to  be.  He  who  attends  to  the  instruction  of  a  father,  Solomon  says,  is  wise.  He  is 
wise — 1.  Because  he  attends  to  the  Divine  condition  of  human  improvement.  The 
Creator  has  ordained  that  the  rising  generation  should  get  its  wisdom  from  the 
teachings  of  its  parents.  It  is  by  generations  learning  of  predecessors  that  the 
race  advances.  2.  Because  he  gratifies  the  heart  of  his  best  earthly  friend.  II.  The 
UNTEACHABLE  SON.  "  A  scomcr  hcarcth  not  rebuke."  Some  persons  justly  merit 
derision  ;  some  things  merit  contempt.  A  son  who  scorns  either  the  person  or  the 
counsels  of  his  father  is  not  in  a  state  of  mind  to  hear  rebuke — he  is  unteachable. 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Vers.  2,  3.  A  man  shall  eat  good  by  the  fruit  of  his  mouth. — Natitral  retalia- 
tion:— Although  the  spirit  and  practice  of  retaliation  are  nowhere  vindicated  in 
Scripture,  but  everywhere  explicitly  and  strongly  condemned,  yet  a  treatment 
corresponding  to  their  own  conduct  towards  others  is  what  every  one  may  expect. 
In  the  nature  of  things  it  cannot  be  otherwise.  It  is  not  in  human  nature,  nor  in 
any  nature,  not  even  in  the  Divine  itself,  to  love  with  the  love  of  complacence  that 
which  is  unamiable.  An  amiable  disposition  alone  can  secure  love;  and  amiability 
of  disposition  is  greatly  indicated  by  the  tongue.  The  man  who  is  charitable  in  his 
judgments,  and  disposed  to  speak  well  of  others,  will  be  himself  the  subject  of 
charitable  judgment  and  of  cordial  commendation.  All  will  love  and  honour  and 
bless  the  man  "  in  whose  tongue  is  the  law  of  kindness."  Thus  he  shall  "  eat  good 
by  the  fruit  of  his  mouth."  On  the  contrary,  against  the  man  who  is  a  "  trans- 
gressor "  with  his  lips,  making  them  the  instruments  of  malice  in  the  utterance  of 
slander,  and  the  fomenting  of  alienation  and  strife — against  that  man  are  unavoid- 
ably kindled  all  the  feelings  of  indignation,  all  the  angry  passions,  of  which  the 
result  is  violence — the  violence  of  vindictive  pride  and  sense  of  wrong.  (R.  Wardlatv.) 
Man  speaking  : — Here  are  several  kinds  of  speech.  I.  The  self-profitixo  and 
SELF-RDiNous  IN  SPEECH.  The  spcech  of  a  good  man  which  is  enlightened,  truthful, 
pure,  generous,  is  of  service  to  himself  in  many  ways.  By  it  he  promotes  the 
development  of  his  own  spiritual  being,  he  gratifies  his  own  moral  nature,  and 
produces  in  hearers  results  which  are  delightful  to  his  own  observation.  The 
corrupt  speech  of  the  ungodly  is  a  violence  to  reason,  conscience,  social  propriety. 
The  sinful  tongue  of  the  transgressor  inflicts  the  most  violent  injuries  on  his  own 
nature.  II.  The  self-controlled  and  the  self-reckless  in  speixh.  1.  Controlled 
speech  may  be  useful.  The  tongue  is  a  member  that  requires  controllin;  .  I'assion 
and  impulse  are  constantly  stimulating  it  to  action.  2.  Reckless  speech  may  be 
dangerous.  One  spark  from  a  lawless  tongue  has  often  kindled  conflagrations  in 
families,  churches,  and  nations.  Quarles  says,  "  Give  not  thy  tongue  too  much 
liberty,  lest  it  take  thee  prisoner."  (D,  Thomas,  D.D.)  A  guard  upon  the  lips  is 
a  guard  to  the  soul.  He  that  keeps  a  strong  bridle  on  his  tongue,  and  a  strong 
hand  on  that  bridle,  keeps  his  soul  from  a  great  deal,  both  of  guilt  and  grief,  and 
saves  himself  the  trouble  of  many  bitter  reflections  on  himself,  and  reflections  of 


CHAP,  xm.]  PROVERBS.  S23 

others  upon  him.  There  is  many  a  one  ruined  by  an  ungoverned  tongue.  He  that 
loves  to  bawl  and  bluster  and  make  a  noise,  will  find  it  will  be  the  destruction  of 
his  reputation,  his  interest,  and  his  comfort.    (Matthew  Henry.) 

Ver.  4.  The  soul  of  the  sluggard  desireth,  and  hath  nothing :  but  the  soul  of  the 
diligent  shall  be  made  fat. — The  naturcand  consequences  of  idleness  and  of  industry : — 
This  text  is  true  both  in  a  temporal  and  spiritual  sense.  I.  The  natuee  and  effects 
OF  SLOTH.  The  slothful  man  wants  to  attain  the  end  without  the  use  of  the  proper 
means.  He  would  be  rich  without  labour,  learned  without  study,  and  respected 
without  doing  anything  to  deserve  respect.  This  desire  of  the  slothful  killeth  him ; 
for  his  hands  refuse  to  labour.  Such  persons  waste  their  days  in  forming  idle 
schemes  and  vain  wishes.  The  consequences  are  often  very  terrible.  They  become 
a  plague  and  a  burden  to  all  who  are  connected  with  them.  They  frequently  injure 
their  best  friends,  prey  upon  the  property  of  others,  and  bring  disgrace  and  ruin 
upon  their  dearest  earthly  connections.  Our  land,  all  our  lands,  abound  with  such 
drones.  Slothfulness  also  gives  birth  to  envy,  discontent,  fraud,  lying,  and  almost 
every  other  evil  work.  In  whatever  situation  of  life  a  slothful  person  is  fixed,  he 
will,  from  this  disposition,  fall  into  some  destructive  vice,  and  become  miserable  in 
himself  and  mischievous  to  others.  A  sluggard,  whatever  he  may  profess,  cannot  be 
a  truly  religious  person,  or  possessed  of  those  graces  which  form  the  character  of  a 
member  of  Christ  and  a  child  of  God.  The  sluggard  may  desire  the  good  things  of 
religion,  but  as  he  will  not  use  the  means  for  attaining  them,  he  "  desires,  and  has 
nothing."  God  will  be  found  only  of  them  who  diligently  seek  Him.  A  slothful 
disposition  is  so  pernicious  in  its  nature  and  effects  that  wherever  it  reigns  and  has 
the  dominion,  it  must  debase  a  person's  character  and  pervert  the  end  for  which  he 
was  sent  into  the  world.  II.  The  nature  and  effects  of  industry.  Plenty  and 
comfort  are,  in  general,  the  consequences  of  diligence,  both  in  our  temporal  and 
spiritual  calling.  Whatever  may  be  a  person's  rank  or  circumstances,  the  provi- 
dence of  God  has  given  him  something  to  do.  The  sober  and  industrious  are  the 
glory  and  strength  of  every  nation.  And  the  industrious  disposition  is  a  great 
preservative  against  vice.  Those  who  are  trained  up  to  honest  labour  and  habits  of 
industry  seldom  fall  into  those  criminal  excesses  to  which  the  slothful  are  prone. 
The  most  salutary  effects  of  diligence  are  seen  in  religion.  The  diligent  use  of  all 
appointed  means  of  grace  is  crowned  with  the  Divine  blessing.  These  are  the 
persons  who  have  always  done  the  most  good  in  the  world,  and  whom  God  and  men 
have  delighted  to  honour.  There  may,  of  course,  be  exceptions  to  the  general  rule. 
"Would  you,  then,  provide  things  honest  in  the  sight  of  all  men,  pursue  your  pro- 
fession with  success,  maintain  yourselves  and  your  families,  and  become  easy  in 
your  circumstances,  you  must  be  sober  and  industrious,  diligent  and  laborious. 
And  so  you  must  be  if  you  would  enjoy  the  peace  and  blessing  of  God.  Some  may 
from  this  learn  the  true  reason  of  their  embarrassments.  They  have  spent  them- 
selves in  wishing,  not  in  working.  (IF.  Richardson.)  Idleness  : — Work  is  the 
grand,  all-pervading  feature  in  the  government  of  the  world.  God  works.  The 
universe,  considered  as  an  inert  mass,  moves.  Stagnation  is  the  sign  of  death. 
How  early  in  life  the  human  being  should  begin  regular  employment  is  a  question 
in  which  both  the  moralist  and  the  political  economist  are  interested.  The  burden, 
the  obligation,  the  duty  of  one  man  differs  from  that  of  another.  In  one  sense,  the 
duty  of  labour  is  laid  upon  all.  Idleness  is  to  be  avoided  by  all,  irrespective  of  the 
pressure,  or  the  absence  of  the  pressure,  of  poverty  or  any  personal  needs.  It  is 
curious  to  notice  that,  in  the  estimation  of  many,  no  persons  are  thought  to  be 
engaged  in  labour  save  those  who  are  engaged  in  some  handicraft  for  their  liveli- 
hood. But  idleness,  like  labour,  is  a  relative  term.  Idleness  is  a  sin  against  the 
ordinance  of  God.  Man  has  manifold  needs,  desires,  possibilities.  Were  there  no 
hunger,  there  would  be  no  crops,  no  bread.  Were  there  no  need  of  shelter,  there 
would  be  no  huts,  houses,  palaces.  Were  there  no  sense  of  ignorance,  there  would 
be  no  desire  to  learn  anything.  Were  there  no  religious  feeling,  there  would  be  no 
temples,  nor  desire  to  know  anything  of  what  the  apostle  calls  "the  invisible  things 
of  God."  The  refusal  of  work,  whether  demanded  of  us,  or  opened  to  us  in  the 
way  of  providential  opportunity,  this  is  idleness.  By  this  refusal  one  places  one's 
self  outside  the  life  of  the  community.  It  is  a  sin — a  sin  of  omission  ;  the  sin  of 
neglect,  and  of  lost  opportunity.  The  life  is  barren,  sterile,  nothing.  *'  Only  an 
idler,"  it  may  be  said ;  "  not  as  bad  as  if  he  gave  way  to  stormy,  passionate  excesses." 
And  yet  there  will  be  in  the  brain  of  that  idler  an  indistinguishable  brood  of  vipers, 
all  possible  evil  and  corruption.     God  requires  the  use  of  our  gifts  and  faculties  for 


824  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

our  development,  and  that  we  may  do  our  share  in  the  State,  fill  the  position  and, 
in  a  word,  accomplish  the  purposes  of  our  existence.  The  proofs  of  the  sinfulness 
of  idleness  are  to  be  found  in  its  effects.  It  destroys  our  power  of  usefulness  in  the 
world.  All  real  devotion  to  a  cause  implies  work.  We  cannot  set  ourselves  in 
opposition  to  God's  ordinances,  and  at  the  same  time  entertain  any  belief  seriously 
that  we  shall  succeed  by  circumventing  Him.  If  any  of  you,  who  are  in  your  years 
of  work,  when  the  duty  of  work  is  specially  your  duty,  are  refusing  everything  of  the 
kind,  and  are  bent  upon  trifles  or  mere  amusement,  it  requires  no  large  insight  to 
perceive  that  your  minds  and  characters  are  becoming  weakened ;  the  thews  and 
sinews  are  soft ;  the  gristle  does  not  harden  into  bone.  Let  this  state  of  thinfts 
last,  and  it  is  certain  that  you  will  be  left  behind  in  the  rear.  Wholesome,  not  morbid, 
activity  is  what  is  needed  for  many  whose  hands  hang  idly,  not  through  the  fault 
of  an  idle  disposition.  Work  will  heal  many  a  human  woe  when  all  else  will  seem 
to  fail.  [Edwin  Hartvood,  D.D.)  Christian  diligence,  with  the  blessings  that 
attendit : — The  son  of  diligence,  considered  either  as  a  man  or  a  Christian,  is  in  a 
fair  way  to  obtain  the  good  things  he  seeks.  The  slothful  wretch  shall  be  poor 
indeed.  I.  What  are  the  several  things  which  are  implied  in  true  diligence  ? 
1,  Diligence  includes  the  employment  of  every  part  of  our  time  in  proper  business. 
This  is  opposed  to  sauntering  life  away  ;  to  trifling,  or  doing  what  is  to  no  purpose ; 
and  to  mistiming  the  businesses  which  are  to  be  done.  2.  Diligence  includes  earli- 
ness — in  opposition  to  delay.  The  early  man  shows  that  his  heart  is  in  his  work. 
If  we  begin  betimes  the  service  of  the  day,  we  happily  provide  against  hindrances, 
and  we  are  not  in  danger  of  being  thrown  into  a  hurry  by  accidental  avocations. 
3.  Diligence  implies  activity  and  vigour.  Lazy  wishes  will  neither  perform  work 
nor  obtain  a  blessing.  What  poor  work  doth  a  Christian  make  who  is  cold,  indiiTerent, 
slothful  in  the  things  which  concern  his  soul  and  salvation  !  4.  Diligence  implies 
watchfulness — in  opposition  to  a  drowsy,  heedless  temper,  a  thoughtless  security 
of  soul.  We  must  be  awake  to  seize  all  advantages  for  our  work,  as  well  as  to  guard 
against  surprises  and  dangers.  5.  Diligence  implies  a  constancy  in  our  work — in 
opposition  to  looking  back,  and  perpetual  avocation  by  diversions  and  pleasures. 

6.  Another  thing  implied  in  true  diligence  is,  firmness  and  resolution  in  our  labour — 
in  opposition  to  all  the  difficulties  which  attend  our  work.  If  we  are  frighted  at  every 
shadow  of   difficulty,  we  shall  never  fulfil    our  service,   nor   perfect   our   design. 

7.  There  is  also  implied  perseverance — in  opposition  to  fainting  and  weariness.  It  is 
the  end  that  crowns  all.  II.  The  blessings  which  attend  diligence  in  a  course 
OF  virtue  and  goodness.  1.  Diligence  hath  a  natural  tendency  to  success  and  to 
obtain  the  good  things  we  seek.  2.  Diligence  hath  the  rich  and  special  promises  of 
a  faithful  God  to  encourage  its  hope.  3.  Diligence  and  industry  are  a  happy  guard 
against  snares  and  temptations  of  every  kind.  When  the  devil  finds  you  idle,  he 
hath  a  proper  moment  to  assault  you  with  some  powerful  temptation.  4.  Diligence 
is  always  making  a  progress  towards  its  designed  end,  but  the  slothful  man  is  in 
great  danger  of  going  backward.  The  gardener  who  neglects  his  daily  work  will 
soon  find  the  ground  overrun  with  weeds.  5.  The  diligent  Christian  is  a  most 
useful  person  in  the  world.  He  does  the  most  good  himself,  and  becomes  an  excel- 
lent example  to  all  that  are  round  about  him.  6.  The  diligent  Christian  finishes 
his  work  with  peace,  hope,  and  joy.  He  will  review  his  conduct  and  his  labours  with 
an  inward  satisfaction  and  a  sacred  pleasure  of  soul.  Let  us  dread  the  curse  of  the 
wicked  and  slothful  servant.  {Isaac  Watts,  D.D.)  Soul-craving  : — I.  Soul- 
craving  is  common  to  all.  Souls  have  a  hunger  as  well  as  bodies,  and  the  hunger 
of  the  soul  is  a  much  more  serious  thing.  What  is  the  ennui  that  makes  miserable 
the  rich  but  the  unsatisfied  hunger  of  the  soul  ?  1.  The  hunger  of  the  soul,  as  well 
as  the  hunger  of  the  body,  implies  the  existence  of  food  somewhere.  2.  The 
unsatisfied  hunger  of  the  soul  as  well  as  the  body  is  painful  and  ruinous.  II.  Soul- 
craving  can  be  allated  only  by  labour.  {Ilomilist.)  Diligence  : — A  friend  of 
mine,  says  Mr.  Gurney,  one  day  inquired  of  the  then  Lord  Chancellor,  how  he 
managed  to  get  through  so  much  business  ?  "  Oh,"  said  his  lordship,  "  I  have  three 
rules ;  the  first  is,  I  am  a  whole  man  to  one  thing  at  a  time ;  the  second  is,  I  never 
lose  a  passing  opportunity  of  doing  anything  that  can  be  done  ;  and  the  third  is,  I 
never  entrust  to  other  people  what  I  ought  to  do  myself." 

Ver.  5.  A  righteous  man  hateth  Ijrlng. — Moral  truthfulness  : — I.  An  instinct  to 
THE  riohtf.ous.  "  A  rightcous  man  hateth  lying."  A  soul  that  has  been  made 
right  in  relation  to  the  laws  of  its  own  spiritual  being  to  the  universe  and  to  God 
has  an  instinctive  repugnance  to  falsehood.     A  right-hearted  man  cannot  be  false 


CHAP,  xra.]  PROVERBS.  325 

in  speech  or  life.  The  prayer  of  his  soul  is,  "  Bemove  from  me  the  way  of  lying  : 
and  grant  me  Thy  law  graciously  "  (Psa.  cxlx.  29).  II.  Moral  truthfulness  is  a 
SAFEGUARD  AGAINST  EVIL.  The  evils  Specified  in  these  two  verses  in  connection  with 
the  wicked  must  be  regarded  as  kept  off  from  the  righteous  by  his  moral 
truthfulness.  What  are  the  evils  here  implied  connected  with  falsehood  ? 
1.  Loathsomeness.  "  A  wicked  man  is  loathsome."  A  liar  is  an  unlovely  and  an 
unlovable  object ;  he  is  detestable ;  he  attracts  none ;  he  repels  all.  2.  Shame. 
He  "  cometh  to  shame."  A  liar  either  in  lip,  or  life,  or  both,  must  come  to  shame. 
A  rigorous  destiny  will  strip  off  his  mask,  and  leave  him  exposed,  a  hideous 
hypocrite,  to  the  scorn  of  men  and  angels.  3.  Destruction.  "  Wickedness 
overthroweth  the  sinner."  Inevitable  destruction  is  the  doom  of  the  false.  They 
have  built  their  houses  on  the  sand  of  fiction,  and  the  storms  of  reality  will  lay 
them  in  ruins.  From  aU  these  evils,  moral  truthfulness  guards  the  righteous. 
(Z).  Thomas,  D.D.)  Lying  hateful : — There  is  no  knowing  the  effects  of  a  he 
even  in  this  world.  Said  a  lady,  "  I  told  once  for  all  the  fashionable  lie  of  having 
my  servant  announce  at  the  door  that  I  was  not  at  home.     At  night  my  husband 

said,  '  Mrs.   died  to-day.'    It  went  through  me  like  cold  steel.     She   had 

made  me  promise  that  I  would  be  at  her  bedside  at  the  last  hour,  as  she  had 
something  of  great  importance  to  disclose.  '  And,'  said  my  husband,  '  she  died  in 
great  distress  to  see  you,  having  sent  three  times,  only  to  learn  that  you  were  not 
at  home.'     How  I  loathed  myself !     No  more  lies  for  me !  " 

Ver.  6.  Wickedness  overthroweth  the  sinner. — The  effects  of  sin : — There  is  a 
cause  for  every  effect.  Moral  evil,  as  a  cause,  has  produced  the  most  awful, 
alarming,  and  extensive  consequences.     I.   Give  the  character  of  the  sinner. 

1.  What  is  sin?  The  transgression  of  the  law  (1  John  iii.  4).  No  law,  no 
transgression.     There  is  a  law,  which  is  grounded  in  the  moral  perfections  of  God. 

2.  Sin  is  a  contempt  of  God's  authority.  It  is  a  forfeiture  of  His  favour,  and  an 
exposure  to  His  sore  displeasure.  3.  Sinners  who  refuse  to  submit  to  Christ — the 
Saviour  from  sin — sin  against  the  gospel  law  of  liberty  and  love.  H.  Wickedness 
IS  the  sinner's  ruin.  1.  It  exhausts  his  property.  Sin  is  a  very  expensive  thing. 
The  passions  are  clamorous,  exorbitant,  and  reckless,  tiU  gratified.  2.  It  blasts 
his  reputation.  Sin  can  never  be  deemed  honourable,  on  correct  principles.  3.  It 
destroys  his  health.  Intemperance  has  a  natural  tendency  to  undermine  the  best 
constitution.  4.  It  hastens  the  approach  of  death.  5.  It  effects  the  damnation  of 
the  soul.  Coming  to  sin  beyond  remedy,  he  goes  to  his  own  place.  Improvement: 
1.  How  awfully  destructive  is  the  love  of  sin.  2.  It  is  the  interest  of  every  person 
to  hate  and  shun  sin.  3.  A  sinner,  perishing  in  his  sin,  has  no  one  to  blame  but 
himself.  4.  From  the  whole  subject  we  perceive  the  necessity,  expedience,  and 
advantage  of  securing  true  religion,  by  repentance  toward  God  and  faith  in  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  {Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermons.)  The  consequences  of 
sin: — I.  What  IS  MEANT  BY  the  term  "sinner"?  Bold,  brazen  sinners.  1.  The 
profligate.  2.  The  sceptical.  3.  The  deliberately  worldly-minded.  II.  What  is 
MEANT  BY  THESE  SINNERS  BEING  OVERTHROWN  ?  Wickcduess  works  its  owu  punish- 
ment. 1.  It  overthrows  the  sinner's  health.  2.  It  overthrows  his  character.  3.  It 
overthrows  his  life.  The  sinner  here  is  a  wreck,  floating  about  like  a  derelict  log. 
His  happiness  is  wrecked.     His  future  prospects  are  destroyed.     (Homilist.) 

Ver.   7.    There  Is  that  maketh   himself  rich,  yet  hath  nothing.— T/ie  poor 

rich  and  the  rich  poor : — Two  singularly-contrasted  characters  are  set  in  opposition 
here.  One,  that  of  a  man  who  lives  like  a  millionaire  and  is  a  pauper ;  another, 
that  of  a  man  who  Uves  like  a  pauper  and  is  rich.  Now,  I  do  not  suppose 
that  the  author  of  this  proverb  attached  any  kind  of  moral  to  it,  in  his  own  mind. 
It  is  simply  a  jotting  of  an  observation  drawn  from  a  wide  experience  ;  and  if  he 
meant  to  teach  any  lesson  by  it,  I  suppose  it  was  nothing  more  than  that  in  regard 
to  money,  as  to  other  things,  we  should  avoid  extremes,  and  should  try  to  show 
what  we  are,  and  to  be  what  we  seem.  This  finds  its  highest  application  in 
regard  to  Christianity,  and  our  relation  to  Jesus  Christ.  I.  Our  universal 
POVERTY.  However  a  man  may  estimate  himself  and  conceit  himself,  there 
stand  out  two  salient  facts.  1.  The  fact  of  universal  dependence.  Whatever 
else  may  be  dark  and  difficult  about  the  co-existence  of  these  two,  the  infinite 
God  and  the  finite  universe,  this  at  least  is  sun-clear,  that  the  creature  depends 
absolutely  for  everything  on  that  infinite  Creator.  People  talk  sometimes,  and 
we  are  all  too  apt  to  think,  as  if  God  had  made  the  world  and  left  it.     And  we 


826  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xin. 

are  all  apt  to  think  that,  however  we  may  owe  the  origination  of  our  own  personal 
existence  to  a  Divine  act,  the  act  was  done  when  we  began  to  be,  and  the  life 
was  given  as  a  gift  that  could  be  separated  from  the  Bestower.  If  it  were 
possible  to  cut  a  sunbeam  in  two,  so  that  the  further  half  of  it  should  be 
eeparated  from  its  vital  union  with  the  great  central  fire  from  which  it  rushed 
long,  long  ago,  that  further  half  would  pale  into  darkness.  And  if  you  cut  the 
connection  between  God  and  the  creature,  the  creature  shrivels  into  nothing.  So 
at  the  very  foundation  of  our  being  there  lies  absolute  dependence.  In  like  manner, 
all  that  we  call  faculties,  capacities,  and  the  like,  are,  in  a  far  deeper  sense  than 
the  conventional  use  of  the  word  "  gift "  implies,  bestowments  from  Him.  As  well, 
then,  might  the  pitcher  boast  itself  of  the  sparkling  water  that  it  only  holds,  as 
well  might  the  earthen  jar  plume  itself  on  the  treasure  that  has  been  deposited  in  it,  as 
we  make  ourselves  rich  because  of  the  riches  that  we  have  received.  "  Let  not  the  wise 
man  glory  in  his  wisdom,  neither  let  the  mighty  man  glory  in  his  strength.  Let  not 
the  rich  man  glory  in  his  riches ;  but  he  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory  in  the  Lord." 
2.  Then,  turn  to  the  second  of  the  facts  on  which  this  universal  poverty  depends, 
and  that  is,  the  fact  of  universal  sinfulness.  Ah,  there  is  one  thing  that  is  our  own 
— "  If  any  power  we  have,  it  is  to  will."  Conscience  tells  us,  and  we  all  know  it, 
that  we  are  the  causes  of  our  own  actions,  though  from  Him  come  the  powers  by 
which  we  do  them.  The  electricity  comes  from  the  central  power-station,  but  it 
depends  on  us  what  sort  of  wheels  we  make  it  drive,  and  what  kind  of  work  we  set 
it  to  do.  So,  then,  there  are  these  two  things,  universal  dependence  and  universal 
sinfulness,  and  on  them  is  built  the  declaration  of  universal  poverty.  Duty  is  debt. 
What  we  ought  is  what  we  owe.  We  all  owe  an  obedience  which  none  of  us  has 
rendered.  We  are  all  paupers.  II.  The  poor  kich  man.  "  There  is  that  maketh  him- 
self rich,  and  yet  hath  nothing."  That  describes  accurately  the  type  of  man  who 
ignores  dependence,  and  is  not  conscious  of  sin,  and  so  struts  about  in  self- 
complacent  satisfaction  with  himself,  and  knows  nothing  of  his  true  condition. 
There  is  nothing  more  tragic  than  that  a  man,  laden,  as  we  each  of  us  are,  with  a 
burden  of  evil  that  we  cannot  get  rid  of,  should  yet  conceit  himself  to  possess 
merits,  virtues,  graces,  that  ought  to  secure  for  him  the  admiration  of  his  fellows 
and  the  approbation  of  God.  "The  deceitfulness  of  sin"  is  one  of  its  mightiest 
powers.  You  condemn  in  other  people  the  very  things  you  do  yourself.  Many  of 
you  have  never  ventured  upon  a  careful  examination  and  appraisement  of  your 
own  moral  and  religious  character.  You  durst  not,  for  you  are  afraid  that  it 
would  turn  out  badly.  Then  you  have  far  too  low  a  standard,  and  one  of  the 
main  reasons  why  you  have  so  low  a  standard  is  just  because  the  sins  that  you 
do  have  dulled  your  consciences.  Aye,  and  more  than  that.  The  making  of 
yourself  rich  is  the  sure  way  to  prevent  yourself  from  ever  being  so.  We  see  that 
in  all  other  regions  of  life.  If  a  student  says  to  himself,  "  Oh  !  I  know  all  that 
subject,"  the  chances  are  that  he  will  not  get  it  up  any  more.  And  in  any 
department,  when  a  man  says,  "  Lo  !  I  have  attained,"  then  he  ceases  to  advance. 
If  you  fancy  yourselves  to  be  quite  well,  though  a  mortal  disease  has  gripped  you, 
you  will  take  no  medicine,  nor  have  recourse  to  any  physician.  If  you  think  that 
you  have  enough  good  to  show  for  man's  judgment  and  for  God's,  and  have  not 
been  convinced  of  your  dependence  and  your  sinfulness,  then  Jesus  Christ  will  be 
very  little  to  you.  I  believe  that  this  generation  needs  few  things  more  than  it 
needs  a  deepened  consciousness  of  the  reality  of  sin  and  of  the  depth  and  damnable 
nature  of  it.  III.  The  rich  poor  man.  "  There  is  that  maketh  himself  poor,  and 
yet" — or,  as  varied,  the  expression  is,  "  therefore  hath  great  riches."  "  Blessed  are 
the  poor  in  spirit,  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  Consciousness  of  poverty 
is  the  only  fitting  attitude  for  any  of  us  to  take  up  in  view  of  the  fact  of  our 
dependence  and  the  fact  of  our  sinfulness.  Then  let  me  remind  you  that  this 
wholesome  recognition  of  facts  about  ourselves  as  they  are  is  the  sure  way  to  possess 
the  wealth.  If  you  see  your  poverty,  let  self-distrust  be  the  nadir,  the  lowest  point, 
and  let  faith  be  the  complementary  high  point,  the  zenith.  The  rebound  from 
self-distrust  to  trust  in  Christ  is  that  which  makes  the  consciousness  of  poverty  the 
condition  of  receiving  wealth.  And  what  wealth  it  is!— the  wealth  of  a  peaceful 
conscience,  of  a  quiet  heart,  of  lofty  aims,  of  a  pure  mind,  of  strength  according  to 
our  need,  of  an  immortal  hope,  of  a  treasure  in  the  heavens  that  faileth  not.  Do 
you  estimate  yourself  as  you  are  ?  Have  you  taken  stock  of  your.self  ?  Have  you 
got  away  from  the  hallucination  of  possessing  wealth  ?  Have  you  taken  the  wealth 
which  He  freely  gives  to  all  who  sue  in  forma  pauperis  ?  He  does  not  ask  you 
to  bring  anything  but  debts  and  sins,  emptiness  and  weakness,  and  penitent 


CHAP.  XIII.]  PROVERBS.  327 

faith.  And  then  you  will  be  of  those  blessed  poor  ones  who  are  rich  through 
faith,   and   heirs   of   the  kingdom.      {A.    Maclaren,   D.D.)  The   policy   that 

degrades  and  the  policy  that  ennobles : — This  proverb  denotes  either  a  mean,  social 
fact,  or  a  grand  moral  contrast.  Here  is  the  man  who  makes  himself  out  to  be 
rich,  either  to  gratify  his  vanity  or  to  impose  on  and  defraud  others.  And  here  ia 
the  man  who  makes  himself  out  to  be  poor,  that  he  may  escape  the  reproach  of 
neglecting  his  own  kith  and  kin.  Both  are  essentially  and  execrably  hypocritical. 
In  the  first  is  the  hypocrisy  of  vanity  ;  in  the  second  of  greed.  Both  are  dishonest 
and  demoralising.  A  corrupt  state  of  society  alone  suggests  such  expedients,  and 
only  a  depraved  man  resorts  to  them.  The  Old  and  New  Testaments  distinguish 
between  the  outer  and  the  inner  man.  We  may  make  the  outer  either  nurture  or 
kill  the  inner  man.  The  two  conditions,  poverty  and  wealth,  betoken  no  moral 
difference;  they  do  betoken  great  social  difference.  Spiritually  the  extremes  of 
each  may  be  utterly  reversed.  The  rich  may  spiritually  have  nothing,  and  the 
poor  have  great  riches.  But  poverty  is  not  necessarily  the  concomitant  of  piety. 
(TV.  Wheeler.)  The  danger  of  mistaking  our  spiritual  state  : — I.  There  is  that 
MAKETH  HIMSELF  RICH,  XET  HATH  NOTHING.  1.  Such  are  they  who  are  unacquainted 
with  their  real  character.  Among  these  may  be  reckoned  all  who  are  ignorant 
even  of  fundamental  truths,  or  pervert  them.  2.  Such  are  they  who,  notwith- 
standing, entertain  a  high  opinion  of  their  spiritual  condition.  To  boast  of  what 
we  have  not  is  the  greatest  folly  ;  to  glory  of  what  we  have  is  the  most  intolerable 
vanity.  3.  Such  are  they  who  are  indifferent  to  the  means  of  obtaining  relief,  and 
the  supply  of  their  spiritual  wants.  II.  There  is  that  maketh  huiself  poor,  yet 
HATH  great  riches.  1.  PersoHS  of  this  sort  commonly  complain  much  of  them- 
selves and  their  condition.  2.  The  temper  and  conduct  of  such  persons  serves  to 
discover  the  mistaken  judgment  which  they  have  formed  of  their  spiritual 
condition.  From  whatever  cause  this  error  in  opinion  may  proceed,  there  is  always 
something  in  the  temper  and  conduct  of  people  of  this  sort  that  shows  the  high 
value  which  they  put  upon  the  true  riches,  and  the  humbling  sense  they  entertain 
of  their  apprehended  spiritual  poverty.  This  distinguishes  them  from  those  who 
only  pretend  to  the  character  of  which  I  am  speaking.  3.  Notwithstanding  they 
think  themselves  poor,  they  have  great  riches.  The  Lord,  whose  loving-kindness 
is  better  than  life,  is  their  God,  the  strength  of  their  hearts,  and  their  portion  for 
ever.  (W.  BlcCulloch.)  The  truly  rich  man: — Amongst  great  numbers  of  men 
accounted  rich,  but  few  really  are  so.  I  take  him  to  be  the  only  rich  man  that 
lives  upon  what  he  has,  owes  nothing,  and  is  contented.  For  there  is  no  detei'mi- 
nate  sum  of  money,  nor  quantity  of  estate,  that  can  denote  a  man  rich  ;  since  no 
man  is  truly  rich  that  has  not  so  much  as  perfectly  satiates  his  desire  of  having 
more.    For  the  desire  of  more  is  want,  and  want  is  poverty.     [J.  Howe.) 

Ver.  9.  The  light  of  the  righteous  rejoiceth :  but  the  lamp  of  the  wicked  shall 
be  put  out. — The  light  of  the  righteous  and  the  lamp  of  the  zvicked : — By  this  we 
are  to  understand  that  the  light  of  the  righteous  burns  joyously,  is  a  very  image  of 
gladness  and  rapture :  the  sun  rejoiceth  as  a  giant  to  run  his  course  ;  he  is,  so  to 
say,  conscious  of  his  power  and  of  his  speed ;  travelling  does  not  weary  him  ; 
shining  does  not  exhaust  him :  at  the  end  he  is  as  mighty  as  at  the  beginning.  It 
will  be  observed  that  in  the  one  case  the  word  is  "light"  as  applied  to  the 
righteous,  and  in  the  other  the  word  is  "  lamp  "  as  applied  to  the  wicked.  The 
path  of  the  just  is  as  a  shining  light,  shining  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day ; 
the  hght  of  the  righteous  man  is  above,  it  is  not  of  his  own  making,  it  never  can 
be  exhausted :  the  light  in  which  the  wicked  man  walks  is  a  lamp  of  his  own 
creation,  he  made  it,  he  lighted  it,  he  is  above  and  greater  than  that  light,  and  at 
any  moment  it  may  be  extinguished  ;  he  walks  in  the  fire  and  in  the  sparks  which 
he  himself  has  kindled ;  he  is  full  of  brilliant  fancies,  flashing  and  glaring 
eccentricities ;  he  rejoices  transiently  in  the  rockets  which  he  throws  up  into  the 
air,  but  as  they  expire  and  fall  back  in  de-*d  ashes  at  his  feet  he  sees  how  poor  have 
been  his  resources,  and  how  mean  is  the  issue  of  a  cleverness  that  is  without  moral 
basis  and  moral  inspiration.  God's  blessing  is  always  attached  to  the  true  light. 
God  himself  is  Light.  Jesus  Christ  was  the  Light  of  the  world,  and  Christians  are 
to  be  hghts  of  their  day  and  generation,  reflecting  the  glory  of  their  Master.  The 
wicked  indeed  have  a  kind  of  hght ;  that  should  always  be  amply  acknowledged  : 
but  it  is  a  light  of  their  own  creation,  and  a  light  that  is  doomed  to  extinction — it 
shall  be  put  out ;  a  drop  of  rain  shall  fall  upon  it,  and  the  little  flicker  shall  expire, 
never  to  be  rekindled.     {J.  Parker,  D.D.)        The  lights  of  souls  : — I.  The  joyocs 


828  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

LIGHT  OF  SOUL.  "  The  light  of  the  righteous  rejoiceth."  In  what  does  the  light  of 
the  soul  consist  ?  There  are  at  least  three  elements — faith,  hope,  love.  The  first 
fills  the  soul  with  the  light  of  ideas;  the  second,  with  the  light  of  a  bright  future  ; 
the  third,  with  the  light  of  happy  affections.  Extinguish  these  in  any  soul,  and 
there  is  the  blackness  of  darkness  for  ever.  The  righteous  have  these  as  Divine 
impartations,  as  beams  from  "the  Father  of  lights,"  and  in  their  radiance  they 
live,  walk,  and  rejoice.  They  rejoice  in  their  faith.  Their  faith  connects  them 
with  the  Everlasting  Sun.  They  rejoice  in  their  hope.  Their  hope  bears  them 
into  the  regions  of  the  blest.  They  rejoice  in  their  love.  Their  love  fixes  their 
enrapturing  gaze  on  Him  in  whose  presence  there  is  fulness  of  joy.  II.  The 
TRANSIENT  LIGHT  OF  SOUL.  "  The  lamp  of  the  wicked  shall  be  put  out."  It  is 
implied  that  the  light  of  the  righteous  is  permanent.  It  is  inextinguishable.  Not 
so  the  light  of  the  wicked.  Their  light,  too,  is  in  their  faith,  their  hope,  their  love. 
But  their  faith  is  in  the  false,  and  it  must  give  way.  The  temple  of  their  hope  is 
built  on  sand,  and  the  storm  of  destiny  will  destroy  it.  Their  love  is  on  corrupt 
things,  and  all  that  is  corrupt  must  be  burnt  by  the  all-consuming  fire  of  eternal 
justice.     Thus  the  lamp  of  the  wicked  must  be  put  out.     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  10.  Only  by  pride  cometh  contention,  but  with  the  well-advised  is  wisdom. 

— Pride  and  humility  : — By  a  proud  man  we  mean  one  who  esteems  himself  better 
than  others ;  by  a  humble  man,  one  who  esteems  others  better  than  himself. 
What  are  the  evil  effects  of  pride  ?  1.  It  cuts  off  a  man  from  all  th«  salutary 
effects  of  reproof,  rebuke,  criticism,  and  counsel,  without  which  it  is  not  possible 
for  any  of  us  to  become  wise.  2.  By  pride  comes  nothing  but  strife,  and  he  loveth 
transgression  that  loveth  strife.  It  is  the  pride  of  monarchs  and  nations  that  pro- 
duces war.  In  the  affairs  of  private  life  our  pride,  rather  than  our  sense  of  right, 
usually  creates,  fosters,  and  embitters  divisions,  alienations,  and  quarrels.  All  the 
foolish  extravagances  of  social  competition  are  to  be  traced  to  the  same  source. 
From  first  to  last  the  haughty  spirit  is  a  curse  and  a  torment  to  every  one,  and  not 
least  to  itself.  It  is  like  a  cold  and  biting  wind.  It  breaks  the  heart  of  the  humble, 
it  excites  the  passions  of  the  wrathful,  it  corrupts  the  conduct  of  the  weak.  3.  Pride 
is  hateful  to  God.  The  proud  man,  whether  he  knows  it  or  not,  comes  into  direct 
conflict  with  God ;  he  is  pitting  himself  against  the  Omnipotent.  If  God  is  to 
dwell  in  a  human  heart  at  all,  it  must  be  in  one  which  has  been  emptied  of  all 
pride,  one  which  has,  as  it  were,  thrown  down  all  the  barriers  of  self-importance, 
and  laid  itself  open  to  the  incoming  Spirit.  (R.  F.  Horton,  D.D.)  Pride  and 
contention : — When  pride  and  passion  meet  on  both  sides,  it  cannot  but  be  that  a 
fire  will  be  kindled;  when  hard  flints  strike  together,  the  sparks  will  fly  about; 
but  a  soft,  mild  spirit  is  a  great  preserver  of  its  own  peace,  kills  the  power  of 
contests,  as  woolpacks,  or  such-like  soft  matter,  most  deaden  the  force  of  bullets. 
{T.  Leighton.) 

Ver.  11.  Wealth  gotten  by  vanity  shall  be  diminished  :  but  he  that  gatherethby 
labour  shall  increase. — Right  methods  of  obtaining  wealth  : — The  text  implies 
three  things.  I.  That  wealth  in  itself  is  a  good  thing.  1.  All  men  strive  for 
it,  in  obedience  to  the  original  command  to  possess  the  earth  and  subdue  it.  2.  The 
services  it  can  render  are  evidences  of  its  value.  3.  The  Word  of  God  approves  it. 
Not  money,  but  the  "  love  "  of  it,  is  "  a  root  of  evil."  II.  Wealth  mat  be  obtained 
in  different  ways.  The  two  ways  mentioned  in  the  text.  1.  The  way  of  vanity, 
which  may  represent  fraud,  gambling,  reckless  speculation,  &c.  2.  The  way  of 
labour,  in  all  which  there  is  profit  (chap.  xiv.  23).  See  frequent  commendations  of 
diligence  in  the  Scriptures.  III.  The  increase  or  decrease  of  wealth  is  affected 
BY  the  mode  of  its  ACQUISITION.  "  Gotten  by  vanity,"  it  diminishes  ;  procured  by 
labour,  it  "shall  increase."  Two  considerations  as  to  the  constitution  of  human 
nature  help  us  to  understand  how  this  comes  about.  1.  What  a  man  does  not 
work  for  he  seldom  appreciates.  Difficulty  of  attaining  augments  value.  "  Easy 
got,  soon  spent,"  has  passed  into  a  proverb.  2.  What  one  does  not  value  he  is  apt 
to  squander.  Spendthrifts  are  those  who  value  money  slightly.  (F.  Wagstaff.) 
Ill-gotten  national  wealth  : — What  is  true  of  private  is  no  less  true  of  public  posses- 
sions. When  such  possessions  are  obtained,  on  the  part  of  any  country,  by  self- 
aggrandising  and  unprovoked  aggression,  extermination  and  conquest,  what  are 
such  means  but  injustice,  oppression,  and  murder,  on  an  extended  scale  ?  Gather- 
ing possessions  by  a  violation  of  the  rights  of  others,  of  the  principles  of  equity  and 
honour  and  good  faith,  or,  in  one  word,  of  the  royal  law,  is  turning  a  country's 


CHAP.xni.]  PROVERBS.  329 

glory  into  shame,  and  under  the  righteous  and  retributive  administration  of  Heaven 
the  extension  of  dominion  is  but  an  extension  of  danger.  [R.  Wardlaw.)  Wealth 
gotten  by  vanity  : — When  the  famous  M.  Blanc,  who  founded  the  Monte  Carlo 
Casino,  was  proprietor  of  a  gambling  establishment  at  Homburg,  it  was  his  custom 
to  bring  down  300,000  francs  every  morning  to  meet  the  bank's  losses.  When  this 
sum  was  exhausted  the  bank  was  said  to  be  "  broke,"  and  the  doors  were  closed  for 
the  day,  and  it  is  recorded  that  the  unique  feat  of  "breaking  the  bank"  was 
accomplished  three  days  in  succession  by  the  notorious  South  American  Spaniard, 
Garcia.  After  this  his  luck  began  to  turn,  and  six  weeks  later  he  was  obliged  to 
ask  M.  Blanc  for  a  few  louis  with  which  to  return  to  Paris.     {Daily  3Iail.) 

Yet.  12.  Hope  deferred  maketh  the  beart  sick :  but  when  the  desire  cometh,  it 
is  a  tree  of  life. — Hope  deferred  : — Hope  deferred  maketh  the  heart  sick,  whether 
the  person  hoping,  or  the  thing  hoped  for,  be  good  or  evU.  The  second  member  of 
the  text  is  a  dividing  word.  "  Tree  of  life  "  belongs  only  to  the  hope  of  the  holy. 
Many,  after  waiting  long,  and  expecting  eagerly,  discover,  when  at  last  they  reach 
their  object,  that  it  is  a  withered  branch  and  not  a  living  tree.  There  is  no  peace 
to  the  wicked.  They  are  always  either  desiring  or  possessing ;  but  to  desire  and  to 
possess  a  perishable  portion  are  only  two  different  kinds  of  misery  to  men.  If  the 
desire  is  pure,  the  attainment  of  it  is  a  tree  of  life  ;  it  is  living,  satisfying,  enduring. 
It  has  a  living  root  in  the  ground  and  satisfying  fruit  upon  the  branches.  Where  a 
hungering  for  righteousness  secretly  rises  in  a  human  heart  the  blessing  is  already 
sure,  but  it  is  not  enjoyed  yet.  The  hungerer  "shall  be  filled,"  but  in  the  mean- 
time his  only  experience  is  an  uneasy  sensation  of  want.  In  God's  good  time  that 
desire  will  be  satisfied.  That  longing  soul  will  taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is 
gracious.     {W.  Arnot,  D.D.) 

Ver.  13.  Whoso  despiseth  the  Word  shall  be  destroyed. — Man^s  destruction : — 
The  more  literal  rendering  would  be,  "  He  that  despiseth  the  Word  shall  bring  ruin 
on  himself."  This  is  a  great  law  of  the  Biblical  revelation — namely,  that  destruc- 
tion is  not  a  merely  arbitrary  act  on  the  part  of  God,  a  mere  penalty,  but  that 
it  involves  the  idea  of  suicide  or  self-ruin.  The  law  of  reward  and  also  the  law  of 
punishment  are  to  be  found  within  ourselves.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  14.  The  law  of  the  wise  is  a  fountain  of  life. — The  law  of  the  good  : — 
I.  The  good  aee  ruled  by  law — "  The  law  of  the  wise."  What  is  law  ?  The 
clearest  and  most  general  idea  I  have  of  it  is — rule  of  motion.  In  this  sense  all 
things  are  under  law,  for  all  things  are  in  motion.  The  material  universe  is  in 
motion,  and  there  is  the  law  that  regulates  it.  The  spiritual  universe  is  in  motion, 
and  law  presides  over  it.  "  Of  law,"  says  Hooker,  "  there  can  be  no  less  acknowledged 
than  that  her  seat  is  the  bosom  of  God,  her  voice  the  harmony  of  the  world.  All 
things  do  her  homage,  the  verj'^  least  as  feeling  her  care,  and  the  greatest  as  not 
exempted  from  her  power ;  both  angels  and  men,  and  creatures  of  what  condition 
soever,  though  each  in  different  sort  and  manner,  yet  all  with  uniform  consent, 
admiring  her  as  the  mother  of  their  peace  and  joy."  But  what  is  the  law  of  the 
good — that  which  rules  them  in  all  their  activities  ?  Supreme  love  to  the  supremely 
good.  II.  The  law  that  rules  the  good  is  beneficent.  "  The  law  of  the  wise 
is  a  fountain  of  life  to  depart  from  the  snares  of  death."  1.  This  law  delivers  from 
death.  The  word  death  here  must  not  be  regarded  as  the  separation  of  body  from 
soul,  but  as  the  separation  of  the  soul  from  God.  This  is  the  awfuUest  death,  and 
supreme  love  to  God  is  a  guarantee  against  this.  2.  This  law  secures  an  abundance 
of  life.  "The  law  of  the  wise  is  a  fountain  of  life "  ;  a  fountain  gives  the  idea  of 
activity,  plenitude,  perennialness.  The  law  of  the  good  is  happiness.  The  happi- 
ness of  the  true  soul  is  not  something  then  and  yonder,  but  it  is  something  in  the 
law  that  controls  him.  In  the  midst  of  his  privations  and  dangers  John  Howard, 
England's  illustrious  philanthropist,  wrote  from  Kiga  these  words — "  I  hope  I  have 
sources  of  enjoyment  that  depend  not  on  the  particular  spot  I  inhabit.  A  rightly 
cultivated  mind,  under  the  power  of  religion,  and  the  exercise  of  beneficent  dis- 
positions, affords  a  'ground  of  satisfaction  little  affected  by  '  heres  '  and  '  theres.'  '* 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  15.  Good  understanding  giTeth  favour. — A  sound  intellect : — I.  The  nature 
OF  A  SOUND  INTELLEOT.  A  good  Understanding  must  include  four  things. 
1.  Enlightenmeni     The  soul  without  knowledge  is  not  good.    A  good  under. 


330  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xin. 

standing  is  that  which  is  well  informed,  not  merely  in  general  knowledge,  but  in 
the  science  of  duty  and  of  God.     2.  Impartiality.     A  good  intellect  should  hold 
the  balance  of  thought  with  a  steady  hand.     3.  Eeligiousness.     It  must  be  inspired 
with  a  deep  sense  of  its  allegiance  to  heaven.     4.  Practicalness.     It  should  be 
strong   and  bold   enough   to   carry  all  its   decisions   into  actual  life.     "  A  good 
understanding  have   all  they  that   do   His   commandments."      Thus  it  appears 
a  good  understanding  is  tantamount  to  practical  godliness.     U.  The  usefulness 
OF   A   SOUND   INTELLECT.     The  greatest  benefactor  is   the  man  of  a  good  under- 
standing.    The  thoughts  of  such  men  as  these  are  the  seeds  of  the  world's  best 
institutions,  and  most  useful  arts  and  inventions.     The  man  of  good  understanding 
is  the  most  useful  in  the  family,  in  the  neighbourhood,  in  the  market,  in  the  press, 
in  the  senate,   in  the  pulpit,  everywhere.     1.  No  favours  so  valuable  as  mental 
favours.     He  who  really  helps  the  mind  to  think  with  accuracy,  freedom,  and  force, 
to  love  with  purity,  and  to  hope  with  reason,  helps  the  man  in  the  entirety  of  his 
being.     2.  No  one  can  confer  mental  favours  who  has  not  a  good  understanding. 
An  ignorant  man  has  no  favour  to  bestow  on  souls.     "  Ignorance  is  the  curse  of 
God;  knowledge  the  wing  with  which  we  fly  to  heaven"  (Shakespeare).    Let  us, 
therefore,  cultivate  a  sound  intellect.     "  I  make  not  my  head  a  grave,"  says  Sir  T. 
Browne,  in  his  quaint  way,  "  but  a  treasury  of  knowledge ;  I  intend  no  monopoly, 
but  a  community  in  learning ;  I  study  not  for  my  own  sake  only,  but  for  theirs 
that  study  not  for  themselves ;  I  envy  no  man  that  knows  more  than  myself,  but 
pity  them  that  know  less.     I  instruct  no  man  as  an  exercise  of  my  knowledge,  or 
with  an  intent  rather  to  nourish  and  keep  it  alive  in  mine  own  head  than  beget 
and  propagate  it  in  his ;  and,  in  the  midst  of  all  my  endeavours,  there  is  but  one 
thought  that  dejects  me — that  my  acquired  parts  must  perish  with  myself,  nor  can 
be  legacied  among  my  honoured  friends."     {Homilist.)        But  the  way  of  trans- 
gressors is  hard. — The  course,  act,  and  immshment  of  sin: — I.  The  couf.se  of  sin. 
1.  A  disposition  to  regard  life  as  a  matter  of  circumstances.     Personal  freedom  is, 
however,  never  nullified,  personal  responsibility  never  suspended.     The  track  and 
trend  of  a  man's  life  is  largely  within  his  own  determination.     2.  The  text  speaks 
of  "  a  way,"  i.e.,  a    trodden   path.    It  refers  to   a  course  that  is  chosen,  and 
persisted  in.     It  is  the  habit  of  the  sinner's  life — a  much-frequented  track.     3.  Sin 
indulged  in  soon  becomes  sin  confirmed.     How  soon  a  track  is  made  across  the 
soft  earth.     The  "  dearest  idol "  was  once  a  plaything,  a  diversion.     4.  This  is  the 
sure  and  certain  tendency  of  sin.     "  Wild  oats"  mean  a  harvest  of  thorns.     It  is 
a  cruel  thing  that  is  done,  when  men  speak  lightly  of  what  is  wrong.     II.  The  act 
OF  SIN.     1.  Sin  is  one  :  a  great,  awful   unit.     But  sin  is  viewed  under  various 
aspects.     Here  the  idea  is  that  of  one  who  deals  treacherously,  one  who  deceives, 
or  deceives  himself.     2.  This  is  the  quality  of  sin  committed  in  Christian  lands. 
Sin  "  against  light  and  love."     This  is  sin  which  makes  pity  impossible,  save  with 
God,  and  with  such  as   the   Godlike.    III.  The  punishment  of  sin.     All  sin  is 
visited  with  punishment.     The  "  pleasures  of  sin  "  are  but  "  for  a  season."     The 
punishment  comes.     The  present  punishment  of  sin  is  here  emphasised ;  if  that  is 
not  enough  to  drive  you  from  the  way  of  the  transgressor,  what  of  the  death-bed, 
of  the  judgment-seat,  of   the   never-dying  worm  ?     Where,   then,   is   salvation  ? 
Look  at  what  is  suggested  by  one  and  another.     1.  Eetirement ;  a  life  of  seclusion 
and  penitence.     2.  A  firm  stand  against  the  encroaching  sin.     3.  Altered  asso- 
ciations.    These   are   the  proposals    of    policy,   or    human   calculations.     God's 
proposal  for  salvation  is  an  absolute  and  unconditional  forsaking.     {George Letter.) 
The  hardship  of  sin  .-—But  who  believes  this  ?     None  who  set  their  opinion  against 
the  testimony  of   revelation.     I.  What   is   to   be   understood   by   the   way   of 
TEANSGBESSOBS  ?    Trausgrcssor  is  but  another  name  for   sinner.     Transgression 
supposeth  either  something  done  that  was  forbidden  or  something  omitted  that 
was  commanded.     II.  The   docteine   of  the  text   respecting  this  way.     It  is 
not  rendered  harder  than  it  ought  to  be,  through  undue  severity  in  God.     1.  The 
kindness  of  God  renders  it  difficult  either  to  shun  or  to  resist  the  light.     2.  It  is 
sometimes  necessary  for  the  Divine  Being  to  carry  Himself  with  some  severity 
against  daring  and  obdurate  sinners,  for  a  warning  to  others.     3.  Jehovah's  efforts 
to  save  render  those  who  finally  abuse  His  goodnoss  singularly  criminal.    Improve- 
ments :  (1)  How  much  sinners  are  deceived  in  this  "  way  of  the  transgressors  "  I 
(2)  What  madness  will  it  be  for  any  to  continue  in  it  I     (3)  It  will  be  impossible 
for  any  to  be  saved  who  will  not  quit  it.     (4)  What  a  mercy  that  we  may  yet  do 
so  !     (o)  While  we  are  in  the  way  with  the  Lord,  let  us  humble  ourselves  before 
Him,  let  us  return  to  Him,  and  sue  for  His  salvation.     {Sketches  of  Four  Hundred 


CHAP,  xra.]  PROVERBS.  331 

Sermons.)  The  way  of  transgressors  hard: — In  regard  to  a  large  class  of  sins, 
retribution  follows  in  the  present  life.  Sin  never  pays.  It  means  sorrow,  distress, 
pain,  whether  that  pain  follows  immediately  or  after  a  while.  The  point  of  the 
text  is,  that  retribution  follows  now,  in  this  present  world.  The  earliest  steps  of 
vice  sc^m  pleasant ;  if  it  were  not  so,  it  would  offer  no  temptation.  To  yield  to 
lower  appetites  and  passions  is  so  easy,  so  natural,  so  inviting.  But  the  wilful  do 
not  go  far  without  being  brought  to  a  very  different  conclusion.  "  The  way  of 
transgressors  "  turns  out  to  be  rough  and  hard.  I  might  endeavour  to  deter  you 
from  evil  courses  by  telling  you  of  the  judgment  to  come  ;  but  what  I  wish  to 
impress  is  that  there  is  a  day  of  reckoning  even  here.  Look  at  the  misery  which 
intemperance  brings  ;  which  licentiousness  brings  ;  which  gambling  brings ;  which 
fraudulent  dealing  brings.  Then  let  this  be  the  hour  of  your  final,  and  ever-to-be- 
remembered  decision  for  God  and  righteousness.  (J.  T.  Davidson,  D.D.) 
Warning  against  transgressors'  ivays  : — Four  losses,  caused  by  transgression,  which 
help  to  make  the  way  hard.  1.  The  loss  of  a  good  conscience.  2.  The  loss  of 
character.  3.  The  loss  of  usefulness.  4.  The  loss  of  the  soul.  When  we  go  into 
the  way  of  transgressors,  we  do  not  know  that  we  shall  ever  have  an  oi:)portunity 
of  repenting  and  believing  in  Jesus.  And  no  matter  what  part  of  the  trans- 
gressors' ways  we  may  have  walked  in,  we  shall  find  it  a  hard  way,  because  it  will 
be  sure  to  bring  the  loss  of  heaven  to  us.  (R.  Newton,  D.D.)  The  hard  way  of 
sin  : — I.  The  way  of  the  sinner  is  a  hard  way,  because  it  is  unprofitable — hard 
work  and  poor  pay — the  devil  is  a  hard  lord  and  a  mean  paymaster.  II.  It  is  a 
hard  way,  because  in  the  end  it  is  usually  a  failure.  Most  men  see  only  the 
present,  and  when  summer  is  here  one  feels  it  must  never  end  ;  but  winter  comes 
on  at  last.  III.  It  is  a  hard  way,  because  opposed  to  all  the  stronger  prin- 
ciples THAT  prevail  IN  LIFE  AND  DESTINY.  The  tiansgressor  braves  the  mighty 
current  of  that  eternal  river  which  has  swept  on  its  bosom  every  being  borne  down 
to  the  shoreless  sea  of  the  judgment  of  God.  Examples  :  Absalom,  Judas,  Pharaoh. 
No  use  fighting  against  God.  IV.  It  is  a  hard  way,  because  it  is  an  unhappy 
WAY.  Conscience  and  all  the  better  self  rebel — opposed  to  all  one's  highest  asso- 
ciates and  surroundings.  V.  A  hard  way,  because  it  ends  in  eternal  ruin — no 
opportunity  to  repair  the  damage.  A  hard  life  here,  and  hereafter  eternal  ruin ! 
VI.  The  only  easy  way  is  the  way  of  obedience — the  life  that  now  is  and  the 
life  that  is  to  come.  Turn  from  your  hard  master  and  serve  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
whose  yoke  is  easy  and  whose  burden  is  light.  (C.  G.  Weight.)  The  rough 
road : — I.  What  do  we  mean  by  a  transgressor  ?  One  who  breaks  a  law  or 
violates  a  command.  11.  The  painful  path.  The  B.V.  says,  "  But  the  way  of 
the  treacherous  is  rugged."  The  way  of  wickedness  is  difficult  and  dangerous 
to  travel  as  a  rugged  road.  How  true ;  young  people  may  not  think  so  ;  but  old 
men  will  tell  you  the  prophet  knew  what  he  was  saying  when  he  uttered  the  words, 
"  They  weary  themselves  to  commit  iniquity."  Chrysostom  says,  "  Virtue  is  easier 
than  vice."  Mr.  H.  W.  Beecher  used  to  tell  of  a  man  in  America  "  who  had  the 
habit  of  stealing  all  his  firewood.  He  would  get  up  on  cold  nights  and  go  and  take 
it  from  his  neighbours'  woodpiles.  It  was  ascertained  that  he  spent  more  time 
and  worked  harder  to  get  his  fuel  than  he  would  have  been  obliged  to  if  he  had 
earned  it  in  an  honest  way,  and  at  ordinary  wages."  And  this  is  a  type  of 
thousands  of  men  who  work  a  great  deal  harder  to  please  the  devil  than  they  would 
have  to  work  to  please  God.  It  is  easier  to  be  sober  than  intemperate,  honest 
than  dishonest,  &c.  JH.  The  way  is  hard;  for  it  is  frequently  a  path  op 
SORROW  AND  SUFFERING.  "  As  Certain  serpents  before  they  strike  their  prey  fix 
their  eyes  upon  it  and  fascinate  it,  and  then  at  last  devour  it,  so  does  sin  fascinate 
the  foolish  sons  of  Adam — they  are  charmed  with  it,  and  perish  for  it."  "Woe  unto 
their  souls,  for  they  have  rewarded  evil  to  themselves."  IV.  The  way  is  hard; 
FOR  IT  IS  the  way  OF  BITTER  RECOLLECTIONS.  (J.  E.  WhydaU.)  Personal 
responsibility : — I.  Man  is  constituted  to  avoid  transgression.  This  is  taught 
by — 1.  Physical  science.  2.  Moral  consciousness.  3.  Common  experience. 
II.  Man  is  punished  for  each  transgression.  1.  Each  sinful  act  increases 
sinful  desire.  2.  Each  sinful  act  weakens  spiritual  strength.  As  the  sinful  desire 
weakens,  the  power  of  resistance  diminishes.  A  reed  that  has  been  overcome  by 
the  rushing  torrent  finds  it  more  difficult  to  stand  erect  before  the  next.  3.  Each 
single  act  is  living  in  the  memory.  III.  Man  is  punished  by  an  eternal  law 
which  condemns  transgression.  1.  This  is  a  law  additional  to,  but  in  harmony 
with,  his  constitution.  2.  This  is  a  law  to  be  satisfied  only  by  atonement.  {The 
Congregational  Pulpit.)         The  way  of  transgressors  w  hard  : — A  murderer's  last 


332  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xin. 

words  are  seldom  very  edifying,  as  it  often  happens  that  they  are  merely  the 
expression  of  conviction  that  the  speaker,  in  spite  of  his  crimes,  is  going  straight 
from  the  scaffold  to  heaven.  The  dying  words  of  James  Tracy,  executed  in 
Chicago,  are,  however,  an  exception  to  the  rule.  They  deserve  the  careful  attention 
of  young  people  who  think  that  it  is  a  fine  thing  "to  see  life,"  by  which  they 
generally  mean  vicious  life.  Tracy  said,  "  I  do  not  believe  any  man  who  has  known 
a  life  of  virtue  can  ever  be  contented  with  a  life  of  vice.  The  farmer  who  has 
spent  his  life  on  his  farm,  never  seeing  more  of  the  world  than  the  road  to  market, 
or  more  of  society  than  the  village  congregation,  is  happier  than  the  '  sporting 
man '  who  gets  his  money  easily  but  questionably,  and  sees  society  in  its  wildest 
dissipation.  I  hope  that  my  fate  may  prove  a  warning  to  young  men  who  are 
cheating  themselves  with  the  idea  that  there  can  be  any  peace,  happiness,  or 
prosperity  in  a  crooked  life."  Perhaps  the  readers  of  immoral  novels  and  young 
people  attracted  by  the  pleasures  of  vice  will  heed  the  solemn  statement  of  a  man 
who  was  qualified  to  speak  with  authority,  even  though  they  despise  the  same 
warning  given  in  the  Bible. 

Ver.  16.  Every  prudent  man  dealeth  with  knowledge :  but  a  fool  layeth  open 
his  folly. — I'lie  loise  and  the  foolish  : — I.  The  wise  m.\n.  "  He  dealeth  with  know- 
ledge." This  implies — 1.  That  he  has  knowledge.  Knowledge  is  essential  to  a 
wise  man.  All  true  knowledge  has  its  foundation  in  God.  There  is  no  knowledge 
that  includes  Him  not.  It  implies — 2.  That  a  wise  man  treats  his  knowledge 
wisely.  "  He  dealeth  with  knowledge."  A  man  may  have  a  great  deal  of  know- 
ledge, and  no  wisdom.  Wisdom  consists  in  the  right  application  of  knowledge. 
The  wise  man  so  deals  with  his  knowledge  as  to  culture  his  own  nature  and 
promote  the  real  progress  of  his  race.  "  Perfect  freedom,"  says  Plato,  "  hath  four 
parts — viz.,  wisdom,  the  principle  of  doing  things  aright;  justice,  the  principle  of 
doing  things  equally  in  public  and  private ;  fortitude,  the  principle  of  not  flying 
danger,  but  meeting  it ;  and  temperance,  the  principle  of  subduing  desires,  and 
living  moderately."  H.  The  foolish  man.  Foolish  men  show  their  folly  in  at 
least  two  ways.  1.  By  talking  about  things  of  which  they  know  little  or  nothing. 
There  are  two  notable  facts  in  human  nature.  Empty-minded  persons  ar§  generally 
talkative.  The  thinker,  discerning  diiEculties  in  every  turn,  moves  cautiously, 
reverently,  and  even  with  hesitation.  2.  By  attempting  things  which  they  are 
incapable  of  achieving.  The  foolish  man  knows  not  his  aptitudes  and  inaptitudes. 
Hence  he  is  seen  everywhere,  striving  to  be  what  he  never  can  be ;  to  do  that 
which  he  never  can  accomplish.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Yer.  17.  A  wicked  messenger  falleth  into  mischief :  but  a  faithful  ambassador 
is  health. — Ministers  are  ambassadors : — I.  Justify  the  compakison  of  the 
AMBASSADOR  AND  THE  MINISTER  OF  THE  GOSPEL.  Obscrvc — 1.  The  high  commission 
under  which  they  act.  The  ambassador  is  invested  with  authority  to  perform 
business  of  the  utmost  importance  to  the  well-being  of  both  countries  with  which 
he  is  concerned.  Is  not  this  true  of  those  servants  of  the  Most  High  God  who 
show  to  men  the  way  of  salvation  ?  The  office  of  the  ministry  is  not  of  human, 
but  of  Divine  origin.  2.  Their  required  qualifications.  An  ambassador  must  be 
particularly  instructed  for  his  work  ;  he  must  accurately  know  the  mind  and  will 
of  his  employer,  and  the  claims  of  the  respective  parties  in  reference  to  whom  he 
treats.  And  a  minister  should  be  a  man  whose  mind  has  been  thoroughly 
enlightened  by  the  truths  of  the  gospel.  He  is  set  for  the  defence  of  the  gospel,  so 
he  must  show  himself  a  scribe  well  instructed  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  —one  able 
rightly  to  divide  the  Word  of  truth.  3.  The  peculiar  character  of  their  transactions. 
The  ambassador  is  often  sent  to  arrange  terms  of  peace.  And  in  this  sense, 
ministers  are  '•  ambassadors  for  Christ."  4.  The  issue  of  their  negotiations.  "A 
faithful  ambassador  is  health."  This  refers  to  three  things— the  healing  of  those 
breaches  and  contentions  which  had  previously  broken  forth  and  prevailed  ;  the 
excellency  of  the  benefits  which  accrue  to  the  reconciled  party  ;  and  the  promotion 
to  honour  and  prosperity  of  the  successful  ambassador.  Each  of  these  ideas  is 
applicable  to  the  higher  exercises  of  the  holy  ambassadorship.  II.  Considerations 
TO  URGE  YOU  TO  ACCEDE  TO  THE  PROPOSALS  WE  ADVANCE.  1.  It  is  derived  from  the 
expensive  preparation  made  by  the  offended  party  to  effect  the  desired  conciliation. 
2.  The  second  consideration  is  drawn  from  the  imminent  peril  of  rejecting  the 
proposals  which  we  advance.  3.  Think  of  the  countless  advantages  of  conciliation. 
4.  Keflect  on  the  transitoriness  of  the  period  during  which  these  negotiators  must 


CHAP,  xin.]  PROVERBS.  333 

fulfil  all  the  important  ends  of  their  embassy.     Happy,  thrice  happy,  are  they  who 
have  been  brought  into  a  state  of  reconciliation  with  God.     {John  Clayton,  jun.) 

Ver.  18.  But  he  that  regardeth  reproof  shall  be  honoured. — Accepting  reproof : — 
One  of  the  weakest  traits  of  any  person  is  to  be  unwilling  to  accept  honest  criticism 
and  correction.  From  the  foolish  child  who  will  never  listen  to  parental  authority, 
on  to  the  foolish  man  who  will  never  listen  to  rebuke  or  reason,  pride  always  goeth 
before  a  fall.  Honest  criticism  is  often  a  bitter  dose  to  swallow,  but  most  tonics 
are  bitter,  and  we  are  the  stronger  for  taking  them  down  bravely.  "If  I  am 
censured,"  said  that  godly  man.  Bishop  Griswold,  "  then  let  me  correct,  but  never 
justify,  my  faults."  A  minister  with  more  zeal  than  discretion  once  called  on  the 
bishop  and  belaboured  him  with  rather  a  harsh  denunciation.  Instead  of  showing 
the  man  out  of  the  door,  the  bishop  calmly  replied,  "  My  dear  friend,  I  do  not 
wonder  that  they  who  witness  the  inconsistencies  in  my  dpaly  conduct  should  think 
that  I  have  no  religion.  I  often  fear  this  myself,  and  I  feel  very  grateful  to  you 
for  giving  me  this  warning."  This  reply  was  made  in  such  unaffected  meekness 
and  sincerity  that  the  visitor  at  once  begged  the  bishop's  pardon,  and  always 
regarded  him  afterwards  as  one  of  the  most  Christlike  Christians  he  had  ever 
known.  He  is  doubly  the  fool  who  not  only  flings  himself  into  a  pit,  but  resents 
the  friendly  hand  that  tries  to  help  him  out  of  it.     [T.  C,  Cuyler.) 

Ver.  19.  The  desire  accomplished  is  sweet  to  the  soul. — Soul  pleasure  and  soul 
pain  : — I.  Soul  pleasure.  What  is  it  ?  1.  An  accomplished  desire.  Desire  is  the 
spring  power  of  our  activities.  Locke  defines  it  "as  the  uneasiness  which  a  man 
feels  within  him  on  the  absence  of  anything  whose  present  enjoyment  carries  the 
delight  with  it."  The  desires  of  the  soul,  which  are  very  varied,  are  very  significant 
of  our  destiny.  "  Our  desires,"  says  Goethe,  "  are  the  presentiments  of  the 
faculties  which  lie  within  us,  the  precursors  of  those  things  which  we  are  capable 
of  performing.  That  which  we  would  be  and  that  which  we  desire  present  them- 
selves to  our  imagination,  about  us  and  in  the  future.  We  prove  our  aspiration 
after  an  object  which  we  already  secretly  possess.  It  is  thus  that  an  intense 
anticipation  transforms  a  real  possibility  into  an  imaginary  reality.  When  such  a 
tendency  is  decided  in  us,  at  each  stage  of  our  development  a  portion  of  our 
primitive  desire  accomplishes  itself  under  favourable  circumstances  by  direct 
means,  and  in  unfavourable  circumstances  by  some  more  circuitous  route,  from 
which,  however,  we  never  fail  to  reach  the  straight  road  again."  Indeed,  pleasure 
consists  in  the  gratification  of  desires.  2.  The  quality  and  permanency  of  the 
pleasure  must  ever  depend  on  the  object  of  the  desire.  If  the  thing  desired  is 
immoral,  its  attainment  will  be  "  sweet  to  the  soul "  for  a  little  while,  but  afterwards 
it  will  become  bitter  as  wormwood  and  gall.  The  triumph  of  truth,  the  progress 
of  virtue,  the  diffusion  of  happiness,  the  honour  of  God,  these  are  objects  of 
desire  that  should  give  a  holy  and  everlasting  sweetness  to  the  soul.  God  Himself 
should  be  the  grand  object  of  desire.  "As  for  me,  I  will  behold  Thy  face  in 
righteousness.  I  shall  be  satisfied  when  I  awake  with  Thy  likeness."  II.  Soul 
PAIN.  "It  is  an  abomination  to  fools  to  depart  from  evil."  1.  There  is  soul  pain 
in  being  connected  with  evil.  Conscience  is  always  tormenting  the  sinner  ;  from 
its  nature  it  can  never  be  reconciled  to  an  alliance  with  evil.  2.  There  is  soul  pain 
in  the  dissolution  of  that  connection.  There  is  a  fierce  conflict,  a  tremendous 
battle  in  the  effort.     {Homilist.) 

Ver.  20.  He  that  walketh  with  wise  men  shall  be  wise :  but  a  companion  of 
fools  shall  be  destroyed. — Walking  with  wise  men  a  means  of  attaining  wisdom: — 
I.  What  is  it  to  walk  with  wise  men  ?  It  is  to  choose  persons  of  that  character 
for  our  intimate  friends,  and  voluntarily  join  in  their  company  and  conversation. 
Walking  is  the  motion  which  one  chooseth.  Walking  with  a  person  denoteth  a 
friendly  communication  and  dehghtful  society,  taking  him  into  our  councils, 
intimating  our  difficulties  to  him,  seeking  his  advice  and  depending  on  his  aid. 
The  mere  involuntary  presence  with  the  vicious,  or  being  unwillingly  deprived  of 
the  society  of  the  good,  is  not  a  trespass  against  the  rule  here  recommended.  It 
may  be  necessary  for  good  men  to  converse  familiarly  with  the  wicked,  yet  this  may 
be  without  a  participation  in  their  crimes.  Our  Saviour  conversed  with  publicans 
and  sinners.  The  present  state  of  human  affairs  requireth  that  we  associate  with 
men  of  all  characters.  And,  in  nearer  relations,  scarce  is  there  any  so  happy  as  to 
be  free  from  the  company  of  fools.     On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  to  be  supposed 


334  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

that  the  mere  advantage  of  any  man's  providential  situation  will  entitle  him  to  the 
benefit  of  walking  with  wise  men.  The  necessary  thing  is  voluntarily  to  associate, 
and  of  choice  enter  into  intimacies  of  friendship  with  the  wise.  Men  of  all 
capacities  and  conditions  show  a  desire  for  conversation  and  society.  Everybody 
wants  company.  Agreeableness  of  character  and  disposition  directeth  men's  choice 
of  company.  Walking  with  wise  men  imports  the  improvement  of  conversation 
for  the  purposes  of  wisdom.  Our  choice  should  be  determined  with  regard  to 
virtue.  11.  The  influence  and  efficacy  of  walking  with  wise  men  as  a  means  of 
ATTAINING  WISDOM.  Company  has  a  great  share  in  forming  the  tempers  and 
manners  of  men.  The  influence  is  explained  by — 1.  A  desire  to  be  agreeable 
to  those  we  converse  with.  This  is  powerful  in  human  nature.  The  desire  of 
approbation  is  strong.  2.  The  force  of  example.  Mankind  is  prone  to  imitation. 
To  represent  religion  in  precepts  does  not  so  powerfully  move  the  affections  as 
when  we  see  it  delineated  in  life.  The  rules  of  religious  virtue  are  reduced  to 
practice  in  men  of  like  passions  with  us,  who  also  were  "compassed"  about  with 
infirmities.  Though  their  example  is  but  imperfect,  yet  it  is  very  worthy  of  our 
imitation,  and  most  sensibly  reproaches  our  failures.  The  nearer  the  example  is 
the  greater  force  it  has.  We  are  specially  influenced,  not  by  the  example  of  saints 
and  martyrs,  but  by  the  less  celebrated  instances  of  piety  and  virtue  in  our  own 
familiar  acquaintance.  Practical  reflections :  1.  Wise,  that  is,  virtuous  and  good 
men,  are  a  great  blessing  to  the  world,  though  they  are  frequently  despised  in  it. 
Good  lives  are  the  most  effectual  preachers  of  righteousness,  and  continually 
solicit  men  to  reform.  2.  Bad  men  are  not  only  useless  to  the  greatest  purposes 
of  life,  but  mischievous  in  society.  3.  We  ought  to  be  very  careful  in  the  choice 
of  our  friends  and  intimate  companions.  It  is  not  every  kind  of  familiarity  among 
men  that  is  worthy  the  sacred  name  of  friendship.  When  founded  on  selfish, 
corrupt  affections  and  passions,  it  is  not  only  vicious,  but  humoursome,  precarious, 
and  inconstant,  yielding  no  solid  and  abiding  pleasure.  {J.  Abernethy,  M.A.) 
The  influence  of  conversation,  with  the  regulation  thereof : — Conversation  has  ever 
had  a  mighty  influence  on  the  conduct  of  human  life.  The  regulation  of  it  has, 
in  all  ages,  demanded  the  utmost  prudence  and  caution.  I.  Men  generally 
BECOME  SUCH  AS  THE  COMPANY  THEY  KEEP.  All  men  are  naturally  lovers  of  them- 
selves, and  therefore  the  most  effectual  way  of  endearing  and  obliging  one  another 
is  by  mutual  respects  and  compliances :  no  man  can  make  his  court  more  effectually 
to  another  than  by  falUng  in  with  him  in  opinion  and  practice,  approving  his 
judgment,  and  observing  his  inclinations  :  this  is  that  which  flatters  our  self-love, 
the  predominant  principle  in  our  natures  ;  this  is  that  which  renders  society 
agreeable  and  friendship  lasting.  Ere  we  can  be  pleased  ourselves,  or  please 
others,  we  must  be  mutually  fashioned  and  moulded  into  an  agreement  and 
conformity  of  principles  and  morals,  we  must  be  acted  and  governed  by  the  same 
affections  and  inclinations,  and  moved  and  led  by  the  same  desires  and  passions. 
Hence  the  proposition  that  men  generally  are  such  as  their  companions  are.  Two 
things  in  wise  men  never  fail  to  work   upon   their  friends  and   acquaintances. 

1.  Good  discourse.  What  light,  what  strength,  what  pleasure  does  it  minister  I 
How  it  awakens  the  conscience  and  purifies  the  heart !  "  The  lips  of  the  wise 
disperse    knowledge."      Such    discourse    "  ministers    grace    unto    the    hearers." 

2.  Good  example.  Virtue  never  appears  so  beautiful  and  lovely  as  in  action. 
It  is  represented  with  much  more  life  in  the  practice  of  a  wise  and  good  man  than 
it  can  be  in  rules  and  precepts.  The  excellences  and  perfections  of  a  friend  are 
very  strong  incitements  to  emulation  and  very  sensible  reproofs  of  our  remissness. 
A  good  life  in  a  companion  is  certainly  a  mighty  motive  and  encouragement  for  us. 
We  see  in  him  not  only  what  we  ought  to  do,  but  what  we  may  do.  Whatever  is 
possible  to  him  is  possible  to  us.  As  to  the  influence  of  bad  company,  it  is  clear 
that  sin  is  catching  and  infectious ;  ill  principles  and  practices  are  soon  propagated. 
1.  Sin  is  the  cement  of  the  friendships  and  intimacies  of  sinners.  2.  Ill  company 
naturally  instils  and  propagates  vicious  principles,  worldly  maxims,  sensual  carnal 
improvements.  3.  Ill  company  creates  confidence  in  sin.  II.  Happiness  is  the 
FRUIT  OF  WISDOM,  AND  MISERY  OF  FOLLY.  Both  leasou  and  rcvclation  and  experience 
tell  us  that  sin  is  fruitless  and  dishonourable.  Eighteousness  fills  the  mind  with 
peace  and  joy  ;  sin  tortures  it  with  contradictions  and  unreasonable  passions,  with 
the  guilt  and  the  terrors  of  the  Lord.  III.  Advice  as  to  keeping  company.  1.  We 
must  be  very  cautious  what  company  we  keep.  2.  We  must  endeavour  to  make 
the  best  use  of  it.  3.  We  must  be  fully  persuaded  that  the  due  government  of 
ourselves  in  this  point  is  a  matter  of  the  highest  moment.     (J.  Lucas.)         The 


CHAP,  xin.]  PBOVEEBS.  335 

attainment  of  wisdom : — I.  What  is  meant  by  walking  with  the  wise  ?  1.  It 
means,  to  converse  with  the  writings  of  the  wise.  2.  To  choose  wise  persons  for 
our  companions  and  to  lose  no  opportunity  of  receiving  their  advice  and  instruction. 
Providence  may  appoint  a  good  man's  station  amongst  sinners,  either  for  a  trial  of 
his  integrity,  or  to  give  him  opportunity  to  use  his  best  endeavours  to  reclaim  them. 
Civil  communities,  so  absolutely  necessary  for  mankind,  are  composed  of  good  and 
bad  in  such  a  variety  of  degrees  that  there  are  few  good  without  some  bad  qualities, 
and  few  bad  without  some  good  ones.  Men  are  disposed  to  seek  society  and  to 
form  acquaintances,  larger  or  lesser,  for  their  worldly  concerns  and  for  their  mutual 
satisfaction  and  entertainment.  This  general  inclination,  or  instinct,  operates 
freely  and  variously,  and  for  the  most  part  it  induces  men  to  seek  those  who  are  of 
a  like  character  and  disposition  with  themselves.  11.  The  influence  and  efficacy 
WHICH  such  conduct  HATH  TOWARDS  THE  ATTAINMENT  OF  WISDOM.  Conversation 
hath  a  considerable  share  in  forming  the  tempers  and  manners  of  men.  Their 
behaviour  and  their  moral  and  religious  dispositions  depend  much  on  the 
company  they  keep.  The  influence  which  the  behaviour  and  discourse  of 
others  hath  upon  us  may  be  ascribed  to  two  causes.  1.  A  desire  of  being 
agreeable  to  those  with  whom  we  are  familiar.  2.  To  the  force  of  example. 
And  the  nearer  the  example  is  the  more  force  it  acquires.  {John  Jortin,  D.D.) 
Walking  with  wise  men : — I.  The  import  of  the  character  commended.  "  Wise 
man."  1.  Wisdom  is  that  rectitude  of  mind  which  enables  a  man  to  judge  what  are 
the  best  ends,  and  what  are  the  best  means  to  obtain  those  ends.  They  are  wise  in 
the  highest  sense  who  possess  a  knowledge  of  God,  and  of  spiritual  truth. 
2.  Wisdom  includes  a  reverent  obedience  to  the  Divine  commands,  and  an  earnest 
concern  for  personal  salvation.  II.  The  method  of  the  association  advised. 
That  we  walk  with  wise  men;  hold  mental  intercourse  and  fellowship  with  them. 
Two  modes  by  which  this  association  may  be  formed.  1.  By  studying  their 
writings.  2.  By  cultivating  their  personal  friendship.  III.  The  value  of  the 
rKOMiSE  SECURED.  "  Shall  be  wise."  He  shall  rise,  by  association,  to  the  attainment 
of  the  same  character  as  that  with  which  he  has  been  connected.  If  we  be 
rendered  wise,  we  have — 1.  The  possession  of  dignity.  2.  The  capacity  of 
usefulness.  3.  The  certainty  of  happiness.  [James  Parsons.)  Influence  of  good 
associates  : — This  subject  is  illustrated  by  the  Persian  moralist  Saadi:  "A  friend  of 
mine  put  into  my  hands  a  piece  of  scented  clay ;  I  took  it,  and  said  to  it,  '  Art  thou 
musk  or  ambergris,  for  I  am  charmed  with  thy  perfume  ?  '  It  answered,  '  I  was 
a  despicable  piece  of  clay,  but  I  was  some  time  in  the  company  of  the  rose ;  the 
sweet  quality  of  my  companion  was  communicated  to  me,  otherwise  I  should  only 
be  a  bit  of  clay,  as  I  appear  to  be.'"  Character  affected  by  intercourse: — By 
"  wisdom "  is  meant  "  religion."  I.  He  that  walks  with  religious  men  will 
BECOME  religious.  The  term  "walk"  signifies  a  continued  course  of  conduct,  or 
a  manner  of  living,  in  which  men  persevere  tUl  it  becomes  habitual.  The  place  to 
which  every  religious  person  is  travelling  is  heaven.  All  who  would  walk  with 
them  must  make  heaven  the  object  of  their  pursuit.  The  only  way  to  heaven  is 
Jesus  Christ.  All  who  walk  with  religious  persons  must  agree  in  assenting  to  this 
truth.  1.  The  fact  that  a  person  chooses  to  associate  with  religious  characters,  in 
religious  pursuits,  proves  that  he  is  already  the  subject  of  serious  impressions. 
2.  He  who  walks  with  religious  persons,  will  see  and  hear  many  things  which 
powerfully  tend  to  increase  and  perpetuate  those  serious  impressions.  3.  One  who 
walks  with  religious  men  must  be  the  subject  of  serious  impressions  for  many  years 
successively.  He  who  continues  to  walk  with  religious  men  to  the  end  of  his  life 
will  become  religious.  U.  A  companion  of  sinners  shall  be  destroyed.  That  is,  one 
who  chooses  for  his  associates  persons  who  are  regardless  of  rehgion.  1.  Such  an 
one  is  the  subject  of  no  religious  impressions  ;  he  has  few,  if  any,  serious  thoughts. 
2.  Such  an  one  takes  the  most  effectual  way  to  prevent  any  serious  impressions  ever 
being  made  on  his  mind.  3.  Such  an  one  takes  the  most  effectual  way  to  banish  those 
serious  thoughts  that  do  come.  4.  Such  an  one  gets  confirmed  in  habits  and 
feelings  opposed  to  his  ever  becoming  religious.  (E.  Fayson,  D.D.)  The  power 
of  association : — Every  one  exerts  an  influence  on  some  others,  and  in  turn  is  acted 
on  by  them.  It  is  vain  to  endeavour  to  escape,  or  destroy,  this  mutual  influence. 
There  is  a  strong  tendency  in  human  character  to  the  assimOating  itself  to  that  of 
those  with  whom  it  is  in  contact.  The  text  represents  the  acquisition  of  wisdom  as 
a  direct  consequence  of  the  associating,  or  walking  with,  the  wise.  The  association 
must  be  both  intimate  and  voluntary.  There  is  in  all  of  us  the  desire  of  being 
esteemed  or  approved.    This  desire  of  approval  is  nearly    .  - 


learly  aJiiwk-if"njJt-Ji«^ 
k.V    .  -♦ — 


♦^ 


V^ 


336  *TnE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

■with,  that  dislike  of  heing  singular  which  has  so  mighty  an  operation  on  all  classes 
of  mind.  It  is  almost  a  necessary  consequence  on  this,  that  we  shall  gradually, 
though  perhaps  imperceptibly,  assimilate  ourselves  to  the  tastes  and  tendencies 
of  our  companions.  Illustrate  a  man,  not  of  vicious  habits  himself,  thrown 
continually  into  association  with  the  dissolute.  Unless  he  has  great  moral  courage, 
he  will  inevitably  assimilate  to  the  vicious.  His  virtuous  principles  get  secretly 
undermined.  We  cannot  argue,  with  equal  probability,  that  if  the  case  were  that 
of  a  vicious  man  associated  with  virtuous  the  result  would  be  a  conformity  of 
character.  There  is  a  tendency  in  our  nature  to  the  imitation  of  what  is  wrong, 
but  not — at  least  not  in  the  same  degree — to  the  imitation  of  what  is  right.  There 
is,  however,  a  strong  probability  that,  through  association  with  virtuous  men,  the 
vicious  will  in  a  degree  be  shamed  out  of  his  viciousness.  If  you  add  the  force  of 
example  to  the  desire  of  approval,  the  probability  will  be  heightened.  Known  facts 
of  experience  bear  out  our  text.  Then  walk  with  the  wi.^e  that  are  dead — be 
specially  careful  what  authors,  what  books  you  make  your  companions.  And  walk 
•with  the  wise  of  the  living,  with  the  virtuous,  with  the  righteous.  Nay,  walk  with 
God.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Ruinous  company  : — Sin  is  catching,  is  infectious,  is 
epidemic.  Not  appreciating  the  truth  of  my  text,  many  a  young  man  has  been 
destroyed.  1.  Shun  the  sceptic.  2.  Shtm  the  companionship  of  idlers.  3.  Shun 
the  perpetual  pleasure-seeker.  Eather  than  enter  the  companionship  of  such, 
accept  the  invitation  to  a  better  feast.  The  promises  of  God  are  the  fruits.  The 
harps  of  heaven  are  the  music.  Clusters  from  the  vineyards  of  God  have  been 
pressed  into  the  tankards.  Her  name  is  religion.  Her  ways  are  ways  of  pleasant- 
ness, and  all  her  paths  are  peace.  {T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  The  grand  felloicsJiip 
and  assimilation  in  life's  path  : — I.  The  grand  fellowship  in  life's  path.  Though 
fools  crowd  the  path  of  life,  there  are  many  "  wise  men  "  here  and  there.  Who 
are  the  wise  men?  1.  The  men  who  aim  at  the  highest  end  of  existence.  What 
is  the  highest  end?  Not  wealth,  pleasure,  fame,  &o.  The  highest  end  of  man,  the 
only  worthy  end,  is  eternal  perfection  of  character,  spiritual  assimilation  to  God's 
perfection.  Who  are  the  wise  men  ?  2.  The  men  who  employ  the  best  means  to 
reach  that  end.  Who  are  the  wise  men  ?  3.  The  men  who  devote  the  best  time  in 
the  employment  of  those  means.  II.  The  glorious  assimilation  in  life's  path. 
"  Shall  be  wise."  1.  There  is  a  transforming  power  in  the  ideas  of  the  truly  wise. 
The  ideas  of  "  wise  men  "  are  like  the  rays  of  the  sun — warm,  bright,  touching  all 
into  life.  In  the  Bible  you  have  these  ideas  in  their  mightiest  form.  2.  There  is 
a  transforming  power  in  the  sympathies  of  the  truly  wise.  Sympathy  is  a  mighty 
power.  Even  a  touch  of  it  in  the  dropping  tear,  the  faltering  voice,  the  quivering 
lip,  will  often  move  a  soul  to  its  centre.  The  sympathies  of  the  wise  man  are  deep, 
spiritual,  genuine.  Christlike.  They  are  morally  electric.  3.  There  is  a  trans- 
forming power  in  the  example  of  the  truly  wise.  All  moral  character  is  formed  on 
the  principle  of  imitation.  But  we  imitate  only  what  we  love  and  admire ;  and  the 
character  of  the  wise  man  has  in  it  what  alone  can  command  the  highest  love  and 
admiration  of  the  soul.  It  has  moral  beauty — the  beauty  of  the  Lord.  From  this 
subject  we  learn — 1.  That  the  choice  of  companions  is  the  most  important  step  in 
life.  2.  That  godly  literature  has  an  inestimable  value.  3.  That  the  Church 
institution  is  a  most  beneficent  appointment.  (Homilist.)  Companionship  of  the 
young : — The  subject  of  companionship  and  its  consequences  is  one  of  deep 
interest  and  constant  application  to  all  stages  of  life ;  but  it  concerns  especially  the 
young.  There  are  few  matters  about  which  the  young  should  be  more  careful,  and 
there  are  few  about  which  many  of  the  young  are  more  careless.  Companionship 
is  a  human  necessity.  Man  seeks  for  it  by  an  instinct  of  his  nature,  as  certainly 
and  irrepressibly  as  whales  go  in  schools,  fish  in  shoals,  cattle  in  herds,  birds  in 
flocks,  and  bees  in  hives.  Companionship,  in  itself,  is  not  an  evil  thing,  but  a  good. 
But  it  may  be  sadly  perverted,  and  thus  become  bad,  and  the  source  and  spring  of 
untold  badness.  Men  can  turn  good  to  evil.  The  very  best  of  God's  things  may 
be  perverted.  And  men,  young  and  old,  have  perverted  companionship.  We  are 
made  or  marred  according  to  our  choice  of  companions.  In  Solomon's  thought 
was  only  the  companionship  of  living  men.  There  is  now  also  a  companionship  in 
books,  and  thus  mind  with  mind.  The  character  of  book  companionship  resembles 
closely  that  of  living  men.  In  forming  human  companionships  some  seem  scarcely 
to  exercise  any  choice  at  all.  They  allow  themselves  to  drift.  As  a  rule  such 
persons  gravitate  towards  the  bad.  Many  choose  those  who,  at  first  meeting,  make 
an  agreeable  impression  on  them.  The  only  real  basis  of  true  love  is  the  knowledge 
of  personal  qualities  which  command  love.    You  should  never  make  a  companion 


CHAP,  xm.]  PROVERBS.  337 

of  one  you  do  not  know.  The  text  speaks  of  possible  companionships  under  two 
classes — the  wise  and  the  foolish.  By  the  "wise  "  is  not  meant  the  "learned  "  ;  nor 
the  cute,  the  clever,  the  capable  man  of  business.  By  the  "wise"  is  meant  the 
good,  the  man  who  places  the  spiritual  above  the  material,  God  over  and  above 
self;  the  man  who  would  rather  be  right  than  what  is  called  successful.  By 
"  fools  "  is  not  meant  the  intellectually  weak  and  silly  ;  nor  the  merely  thoughtless, 
the  giddy,  the  frivolous.  By  "  fools  "  is  meant  all  who  are  morally  and  spiritually 
without  God,  and  thus,  openly  or  secretly,  wicked.  We  are  left  free  to  choose  our 
companions  from  among  the  wise  and  the  fools  But  we  are  not  without  guidance. 
We  have  reason,  and  conscience,  and  the  Word  and  Spirit  of  God.  The  results  we 
reap  from  our  companionships  will  correspond  with  the  choice  we  make.  The 
reaping  mentioned  here  is  the  result  of  the  principle  of  assimilation.  The 
associate  of  the  wise  will  be  assimilated  to  them.  The  very  choice  of  the 
spiritually  right  and  good  is  an  evidence  of  wisdom  at  the  start.  In  such  fellowship 
a  right  and  God-pleasing  character  is  built  up.  The  companion  of  the  frivolous 
and  the  wicked  soon  learn  their  ways,  and  become  conformed  to  their  character. 
Surely  moral  contamination  is  more  to  be  dreaded  than  physical.  You  must  have 
a  companion.  Eeceive,  I  beseech  you,  the  best  of  all — our  Lord  and  Saviour, 
Jesus  Christ.     {Alexander  Davidson.)  The   in  parlance  of   avoidiiig   bad  and 

choosing  good  company : — I.  What  mat  be  sieant  by  wise  men  and  fools.  Not 
learned  men  and  illiterate  men.  A  wise  man  is  one  who  proposes  to  himseU  the 
most  valuable  ends,  and  pursues  them  by  the  best  means,  A  fool  is  one  who  either 
has  no  worthy  ends  in  view,  or  does  not  pursue  them  by  proper  means.  The 
prudent  is  the  wise  man.  The  inconsiderate  is  the  fool.  The  wise  man  is  the  true 
believer  and  holy  soul ;  and  the  fool  is  the  impenitent  sinner,  who  rejects  Christ  and 
His  salvation.  11.  What  is  it  to  walk  with  wise  men  ok  fools?  1.  It  is  to  love 
and  choose  their  company.  2.  To  seek  and  frequent  their  company.  3.  To  make 
them  our  intimate  friends,  and  to  fall  in  with  them.     III.  The  advantages  ob 

DISADVANTAGES  OF  WALKING  WITH  WISE  MEN  OB  FOOLS.   As  to  Walking  with  wise  men 

1.  It  is  a  great  part  of  wisdom  to  choose  such.     2.  It  is  a  means  of  growing  wiser. 
3.  He  who  really  is  the  companion  of  the  wise  will  certainly  himself  be  wise.    Aa 
to  walking  with  fools — 1.  The  companions  of  fools  walk  in  the  way  which  leads  to 
destruction.     2.  They  are  continually  in  the  utmost  danger  of  destruction.     3.  If 
they  continue  they  shall   certainly  be  destroyed,  with  them,  for  ever  and  ever. 
(John  Guyse,  D.D.)         Wise  companionship  : — Society  is  in  itself  so  necessary  to 
human  life.    Adam,  in  the  state  of  innocence,  could  not  be  happy,  though  in 
paradise,  without  a  companion.     The  chief  scope  of  the  text  may  be  summed  up 
in  this  observation :  that  every  man's  present  and  future  welfare  doth  very  much 
depend  upon  the  right  choice  and  improvement  of  those  friends  or  companions 
with  whom  he  doth  most  familiarly  converse.    For  the  clearing  of  this  observation, 
it  may  be  made  very  evident  from  divers  Scriptures.     Upon  this  account  it  is  that 
we  have  such  frequent  cautions  and  threats  against  conversing  with  bad  company. 
This  was  the  meaning   of   all   those   severe  prohibitions  in  the  ceremonial  law 
against  touching  any   unclean  thing.    It  is   observable,  that  he  who  touched  a 
dead   beast  was  unclean  but  till  the  evening  (Lev.  xi.  24),  but  he  who  touched 
a  dead  man  was  unclean  for  seven  days  (Num.  xix.  11),  signifying  a  bad  man  to  be 
the  most  dangerous  of  all  other  creatures.     The  apostle  styles  wicked  men  to  be 
such    as    are    dead  in  trespasses    and    sins   (Eph.  ii.  1)  even  whilst  they  live 
(1  Tim.  V.  6.)     There  are  four  things  wherein  most  men  place  their  welfare,  some 
or  all  of  which  every  rational  man  doth  propose  to  himself  in  the  choice  of  his 
friends.    These    are    reputation,   safety,   comfort,   profit.     1.  For   reputation    or 
honour.    Wicked  men  are  fools  in  the  phrase  of  the  text ;  and  what  credit  can 
a  wise  man  expect  by  conversing  with  fools  ?     On  the  other  side,  good  men  are  the 
excellent  of    the  earth.     Such   alone  are  truly  noble   and  magnanimous.     And 
therefore  whoever  would  propose  to  himself  honour  and  reputation  in  his  society 
must  make  choice  only  of   such  companions.     2.  For  safety.     The  text  tells  us 
that  a  companion  of  fools  shall  be  destroyed.     If  any  one  shall  persuade  himself 
that  he  can  enjoy  their  company,  and  yet  escape  their  contagion,  he  may  as  well 
think  to  suspend  the  natural  operation  of  fire ;  whereas  on  the  other  side,  every 
one  fares  the  better  for  the  company  of  those  that  are  good.     They  are  the  lights  of 
the  world,  the  salt  of  the  earth,  the  pillars  of  a  nation,  those  that  stand  in  the  gap 
to  prevent  an  inundation  of  judgment.    Potiphar's  house  was  blessed  for  Joseph's 
sake  (Gen.  xxxix.  5),  and  all  the  passengers  in  the  ship  were  saved  from  drowning 
for  St.  Paul's  sake  (Acts  xxvii.  24).    3.  For  comfort.    This  is  one  of  the  principal 

23 


338  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  xra. 

ends  of  friendship,  to  ease  and  refresh  a  man  amidst  the  anxieties  of  life;   and 
there  is  nothing   of  greater  efficacy  to  this  purpose.     But  now  this   cannot  be 
expected  from  any  wicked  person  ;  whereas,  on  the  other  side,  those  that  are  wise 
in  the  phrase   of  the   text  are  the  most   delightful   company  that  are.     4.  And 
lastly,  for  profit.     There   is   nothing  to  be  expected  from  such  friends  but   the 
increase  of  our  sins  and  of  our  punishments;   whereas  in  conversing  with  those 
that   are   good  there   are  these   advantages — (1)  Their  example  will  by  degrees 
insinuate  into  the  mind,  and  obtain  the  force  of  precepts,  exciting  us  to  a  holy 
emulation.     (2)  Their  very  presence  will  affect  us  with  some  kind  of  awe  against 
evil.     (3)   Their  conference,  wholesome  and  savoury,  administering  grace  to  the 
hearers.     (4)  Their   counsel,  faithful,   and  wise,  and  hearty.     (5)  Their  prayers 
powerful,  ready.     And  it  is  not  easily  imaginable  what  an  advantage  that  is,  to 
have  a  praying  friend  or  companion.     There  are  three  lessons  I  would  briefly  insist 
upon  in  the  application  of  it.     1.  That  we  would  take  notice  of  the  great  benefit  to 
be   obtained  by  the  right  improvement  of   society  and  mutual  converse  with  one 
another.     2.  That  we  of  this  place  would  be  careful,  both  for  ourselves  and  those 
committed  to  our  charge,  in  the  right  choice  of  our  friends  and  company.     3.  That 
we  would  labour  for  those  proper  qualifications  and  abilities  which  may  render  us 
acceptable  and  useful  in  our  conversing  with  others.     There  are  four  conditions, 
amongst    many    others,    that    are    more    especially  suitable    to    this    purpose — 
(1)   A  readiness  to  communicate,   according  to  the  gifts  we  have   received,   so 
ministering  the  same  one  to  another  as  good  stewards  of  the  manifold  grace  of 
God.     (2)  Humility.     That  is  a  sociable  grace,  lovely  in  itself,  and  acceptable  to 
all.     (3)  Prudence,  in  distinguishing  of  men's  tempers,  prejudices,  infirmities ;  in 
discerning   of    the  right   seasons  and   advantages    to    do    good    amongst    them. 
(4)  Ingenuity  and  candour  of  disposition,  in  owning  of  our  own  weaknesses  or  faults, 
another's  gifts  or  pre-eminences.     (John  Wilkins.)         The  evils  of  had  company : — 
"A  man  is  known  by  the  company  that  he  keeps."     The  proverb  is  illustrated  by 
the  experience  of  all  ages.     I.  Of  necessary  intekcoubse  with  the  wicked.     1.  In 
society  and  trade.     Conversation  is  permitted  in  buying,  selling,  and  following  out 
ordinary  commercial  transactions.     2.  We  may  have  intercourse  with  others  for 
their    good.     Christ    Jesus    conversed    with    sinners    to    gain    them.     II.  Avoid 
UNNECESSARY  FAMTLiABiTY.    Avoid  the  sius  of  the  uugodly.    If  impelled  by  position, 
connection,  or   business  to  associate,  beware  of  compliance  in  sin.     The  nearest 
tie   cannot  sanction  participation   in   sin.     Many  reasons  dissuade  from   undue 
familiarity.     You  cannot  be  familiar  and  escape  contagion.     The  conversation  of 
the  wicked  has  more  power  to  corrupt   than  the  conversation  of  the  good  to 
ameliorate.     These  observations  are  peculiarly  addressed  to  the  young  whose  habits 
are  forming,   whose  character  is  moulding.      III.    Some   classes   of  dangerous 
CHARACTERS  TO  BE  AVOIDED  BY  THE  YOUNG  MAN.     1.  Bcware  of  the  idle.     Idlencss 
exposes  to   all  forms   of    temptation.     2.   Beware   of    the   selfish   and  covetous. 
There  is  grave  danger  that  you  be  affected  with  this  spirit,  and  your  sole  determina- 
tion be  by  all  means  to  get  wealth.     Covetousness  is  a  deceitful  sin.     It  leads  to 
innumerable  evils.      3.    Beware   of    the  loose   and   erroneous.     Those  who    are 
neglecting    religion.     The  Sabbath-breaker.     Those  naturally  disposed  to  error. 
4.   Beware  of   those   who  frequent  suspicious  places.     Choose    for  companions 
persons  of  moral  worth,  those  who  fear  the  Lord.     (Samuel  Spence.)        Companion- 
ship with  the  highest  icisdom : — It  is  as  we  contemplate  the  Divine  perfections  that 
our  souls  are  lifted  toward  the  same  perfection.     The  man  who  moves  in  cultivated 
society  acquires  refined  tastes — a  high   ideal.     The  eye  is  educated  by  the  most 
perfect  specimens  of  art ;  the  ear  is  educated  by  the  most  graceful  forms  of  speech  ; 
the  manners  are  formed  upon  the  most  elegant  models  of  deportment.     Walking 
in  the  light,  he  becomes  a  child  of  the  light.     So  with  the  believer.     The  coteries 
of  human  society   may  be   closed  to  him.     From   its   select  circles  he  may  be 
hopelessly  excluded.     But  the  highest  culture  of  all  is  open  to  him  in  the  society  of 
God.     He  may  walk  in  the  supernal  light,  and  form  his  character  upon  a  Divine 
model.     Communion   in  the   spiritual   sphere,  as  well  as   in   the   social,  implies 
assimilation.     We  become  like  those  we  walk  with.     (J.  Halscy.)        Godly  society 
improving  :   When  General  Nicholson  lay  wounded  on  his  death-bed  before  Delhi, 
he  dictated  this  last  message  to  his  equally  noble  and  gallant  friend.  Sir  Herbert 
Edwardes:   "  Tell  him  I  should  have  been  a  better  man  if  I  had  continued  to  live 
with  him,  and  our  heavy  public  duties  had  not  prevented  my  seeing  more  of  him 
privately.     I  was  always  the  better  for  a  residence  with  him  and  his  wife,  however 
ehort.     Give  my  love  to  them  both  I  "     (Christiaii  Weekly.)        Society  operates  for 


CHAP.  XIII.]  PROVERBS.  839 

good  or  ill : — If  we  desire  to  be  preserved  from  sin,  let  us  avoid  engaging  company  ; 
many  persons  would  resist  the  force  of  natural  inclination,  but  when  that  is  excited 
by  the  example  of  others,  they  are  easily  vanquished.  A  pure  stream  passing 
through  a  sink  will  run  thick  and  muddy.  And  the  "  evil  communication  "  will 
leave  some  of  its  corrupting  influence  to  pollute  the  purest  morals.  On  the 
contrary,  society  with  the  saints  is  a  happy  advantage  to  make  us  like 
them.  As  waters  that  pass  through  medicinal  minerals  do  not  come  out  the 
same  waters,  but,  being  impregnated  with  their  properties,  they  derive  a  healing 
tincture  from  them,  so  it  is  impossible  to  be  much  with  the  Lord's  people  without 
imbibing  something  of  their  motives  and  principles,  and  a  desire  to  be  influenced  by 
their  spirit.  No  society  can  be  to  us  a  matter  of  indifference,  but  must  operate  for 
good  or  ill.  The  present  world  is  a  continual  temptation.  We  are  in  a  state  of 
warfare  ;  though  not  always  in  fight,  yet  always  in  the  field,  exposed  to  our  spiritual 
enemies  that  war  against  our  souls  :  and  our  vigilance  and  care  should  be  accord- 
ingly.    (G.  H.  Salter.) 

Ver.  21.  Evil  piirsueth  sinners :  but  to  the  righteous  good  shall  be  repaid.— 

The  practice  of  wickedness  generally  attended  with  great  evil : — The  practice  of 
righteousness  is  men's  true  interest,  even  in  this  present  life.  Wickedness  is 
generally  attended  with  great  misery,  even  here  as  well  as  hereafter.  Exceptions 
must,  of  course,  be  made  in  cases  of  persecution  for  truth  and  righteousness'  sake. 
1.  Consider  mankind  in  general,  under  the  notion  of  one  universal  community. 
Then  the  only  thing  which  distinguishes  men  from  wild  beasts,  with  regard  to  any 
true  happiness  of  life,  is  religion,  or  a  sense  of  the  just  and  right,  and  of  the  differ- 
ence between  moral  good  and  evil.  Reason,  dissociated  from  moral  obhgation, 
only  makes  men  more  effectually  destroy  one  another,  Eeason  implying  a  sense 
of  moral  obligation  is  the  secret  of  happiness  in  human  life.  2.  Take  a  less  general 
view  of  mankind,  in  their  more  restrained  political  capacity,  as  formed  into  par- 
ticular distinct  nations  and  governments.  In  this  view  the  only  true  and  lasting 
happiness  depends  on  the  practice  of  righteousness  and  true  virtue.  In  proportion 
as  justice,  and  order,  and  truth,  and  fidelity  prevail,  the  happiness  of  society  is 
secured.  3.  Consider  men  singly,  every  one  in  his  mere  private  and  personal 
capacity.  Still  the  only  possibility  of  lasting  happiness  is  the  practice  of  righteous- 
ness, charity,  temperance,  and  universal  virtue.  Illustrate  in  relation  to  health  ; 
riches,  honour,  and  reputation ;  inward  peace  and  satisfaction  in  a  man's  own 
mind.  Here  virtue  triumphs  absolutely  without  control,  and  has  no  competitor. 
(S.  Clarke.)  Sin  and  its  punishment : — The  pursuit  is  a  successful  pursuit.  The 
evil  not  only  follows  the  transgressor,  but  it  lays  hold  of  him  at  last,  and  wrings  out 
its  penalties.  Much  sin  is  committed  in  spite  of  the  remonstrance  of  conscience, 
and  with  the  secret  acknowledgments,  on  the  part  of  the  perpetrator,  that  he 
is  doing  wrong,  and  exposing  himself  to  punishment.  These  men  must  have  some 
specific  with  which  they  quiet  their  apprehensions,  and  procure  for  themselves  an 
ease  in  the  doing  of  what  they  know  to  be  wrong.  Direct  attention  to  one  form  of 
deceit — the  expectation  of  concealment,  and  therefore  of  impunity.  It  is  unques- 
tionably thus  in  regard  of  those  offences  of  which  human  laws  take  cognisance. 
And  much  sin  is  committed  with  the  secret  hope  that  God  will  not  observe  it,  or 
that  He  wiU  not  be  extreme  to  take  vengeance.  It  is  false  to  suppose  that  any  sin 
will  pass  without  recompense  just  because  Christianity  is  a  system  which  provides 
in  full  measure  for  its  forgiveness.  Our  redemption  through  Christ  does  not  at  aU 
exempt  from  the  temporal  penalties  of  sin.  It  so  makes  future  happiness  dependent 
on  present  holiness  that  every  pardoned  sin  may  be  punished  with  the  loss  of 
something  glorious  in  eternity.  It  is  a  mistaken  objection  to  Christianity  that  the 
arrangements  of  the  Christian  system  secure  a  certain  class  of  men  against  the 
being  pursued  and  overtaken  in  their  sins,  because  it  takes  for  granted  that  forgiven 
sin  must  go  wholly  unpunished.  Evil  "pursueth  "  ;  that  is,  hunts  the  sinner  with 
the  greatest  pertinacity,  tracking  him  through  the  various  scenes  of  life,  and  then, 
when  the  man  fancies  he  is  safe,  suddenly  darting  upon  him,  and  exacting  all  the 
punishment.  Illustrate  by  the  vices  and  follies  of  youth-time,  or  by  the  mere  idling 
away  of  the  early  years  of  life.  No  sin  can  ever  be  committed  which  is  not,  in  one 
way  or  another,  punished  by  God.  This  is  true  of  sins  committed  after  conversion, 
as  well  as  before  conversion.  Then  let  no  man  depart  and  think  that  he  may 
Bin  yet  one  more  sin  and  not  eventually  be  a  sufferer.  {Henry  Melvill,  B.D.) 
Destiny  following  character : — That  retributory  justice  tracks  our  footsteps,  is  a 
doctrine  as  old  as  the  race.    It  grows  out  of  the  conscience,  and  is  confirmed  by  the 


340  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xin. 

experience  of  mankind.  The  Nemesis  of  the  heathen,  which  was  a  mysterious 
pursuer  of  character,  was  only  a  personification  of  the  doctrine.  Misery  grows  out 
of  sin,  and  happiness  out  of  goodness.  I.  The  law  of  mokal  causation  shows 
THIS.  Man's  character  is  not  the  creation  of  a  day  or  an  hour,  it  is  the  result  of 
past  actions.  When  no  change  has  taken  place,  like  that  of  regeneration,  the 
man's  character  to-day  is  the  result  of  the  whole  of  his  past  life,  and  will  be, 
without  such  a  renovation,  the  cause  of  the  whole  of  his  future.  Character  is 
a  fruitful  tree,  it  never  ceases  bearing,  every  branch  is  clustered,  but  the  fruit 
is  either  misery  or  happiness,  according  to  its  own  vital  essence.  II.  The  consti- 
tution OF  MORAL  MIND  SHOWS  THIS.  Moial  miud  has  at  least  two  faculties.  1.  One 
to  recall  the  past.  The  law  of  memory  compels  us  to  re-Uve  our  past  lives.  2.  One 
to  feel  the  past.  The  past  does  not  flit  before  us  as  shadows  on  the  wall,  as  images 
on  the  glass,  making  no  impression ;  it  falls  on  conscience,  it  stirs  it  into  feeling. 
The  soul  is  compelled  to  shudder  at  a  wicked  past,  whilst  a  virtuous  past  fills  it 
with  a  quiet  and  ineffable  delight.  III.  The  teaching  of  holt  wbit  shows  this. 
The  Bible  assures  us  that  God  will  render  to  every  man  according  to  his  deeds 
(Josh.  vii.  20-26  ;  Matt.  xxxv. ;  Bom.  ii.  6-10).     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  22.  A  good  man  leaveth  an  inheritance  to  his  children's  children. — The 

inheritance  of  a  good  mari's  children  : — The  happiness  of  men  depends  less  on  their 
external  conditions  than  on  their  personal  virtues.  "  A  good  man  is  satisfied  from 
himself."  The  effects  of  a  man's  habits  are  transmitted  to  his  children,  and  even  to 
their  descendants.  They  derive  from  his  character  a  sufficient  and  a  permanent 
inheritance.  I.  The  instruction  of  a  good  man  is  an  inheritance  to  his  chil- 
dren. The  habits  which  a  young  man  acquires  under  his  father's  eye  are  the 
foundations  of  his  character.  Even  talents  are  subordinate  to  virtues,  and  good 
affections  are  of  more  importance  in  human  life  than  the  most  splendid  ornaments 
of  an  unprincipled  mind.  He  who  adds  to  good  paternal  character  the  principles  of 
liberal  knowledge  and  the  views  of  a  liberal  mind  sends  his  children  into  the  world 
with  those  precious  endowments  without  which  the  wealth  of  the  rich  serves  only 
to  render  them  more  conspicuously  contemptible  or  unhappy.  Men  of  the  same 
worth  are  not  equally  qualified  for  the  duties  of  parental  tuition,  and  their  children 
have  not  the  same  advantages.  But  there  is  a  minuteness  and  an  affection  in  the 
paternal  care  of  a  good  man  which  supplies  the  lack  of  many  talents.  His  children 
venerate  his  intentions,  even  where  his  judgment  has  failed  him.  II.  The  example 
or  A  GOOD  MAN  IS  AN  INHERITANCE  TO  HIS  CHILDREN.  The  character  of  a  father 
lies  at  the  foundation  of  his  influence,  and  the  effect  of  his  paternal  solicitude 
depends  on  it.  His  habits  are  his  most  successful  admonitions,  and  the  examples 
of  religion  and  probity  which  his  children  receive  from  the  general  tenor  of  his 
temper  and  conduct  are  his  most  permanent  instructions.  If  he  has  convinced  his 
children  that  he  derives  his  motives  and  his  consolations  from  the  sincerity  of  his 
faith,  and  that  he  allows  no  competition  to  be  in  his  mind  betwixt  the  praise  of 
men  and  the  approbation  of  God,  his  example  does  more  to  determine  their  habits 
than  his  best  instructions.  There  are  certainly  defects  in  all  human  characters 
which  render  our  best  examples  to  our  children  very  imperfect.  But  even  habitual 
errors  in  a  good  man  are  not  vices,  and  defects  and  infirmities  do  not  prevent  the 
influence  of  substantial  virtues.  III.  The  care  and  protection  of  Providence  are 
AN  inheritance  TO  A  GOOD  man's  CHILDREN.  A  good  man  will  use  his  best  endeavour 
to  qualify  his  children  for  the  business  and  duties  of  life  ;  but  his  chief  dependence 
is  on  Providence.  He  commits  his  children  to  God.  His  paternal  labours  are 
sanctified  by  prayer.  It  is  an  ever-working  law  that  God  "  shows  mercy  unto 
thousands  of  them  that  love  Him,"  and  to  their  children  after  them.  The  testi- 
mony of  ages  shows  that  this  law  has  its  full  effect,  and  warrants  the  confidence 
with  which  devout  men  commit  their  children  to  God.  The  influence  of  God  on 
the  circumstances  which  regulate  our  lot  is  real  and  perpetual,  amidst  all  the 
irreligion  and  incredulity  of  the  world.  The  plan  of  Providence  is  not  so  uniform 
as  to  render  it  certain  that  the  children  of  good  men  will  be  always  prosperous. 
Their  own  misconduct  often  determines  their  conditions ;  so  may  errors  in  their 
early  education ;  so  may  the  moral  discipline  which  they  require.  IV.  The  kind- 
ness   OF   FAITHFUL     MEN    IS     AN     INHERITANCE    TO     A     GOOD     MAN'S     CHILDREN.        Their 

success  in  life  must  in  part  depend  on  the  assistance  and  the  friendship  of  other 
men,  and  the  purposes  of  Providence  in  their  favour  are  accomplished  by  means  of 
those  whom  God  raises  up  to  assist,  or  to  guide  them.  God  selects  the  instruments 
of  His  purpose  from  all  the  variety  of  human  characters.    Kindness  done  to  the 


CHAP,  xm.]  PROVERBS.  841 

child  of  a  good  man  may  become  the  means  of  transmitting  virtue  and  prosperity 
through  successive  generations.  Practical  conclusions  :  1.  The  indispensable 
obligation  of  every  father  to  give  to  his  children  the  inheritance  of  the  faithful. 
2.  The  children  of  good  men  ought  anxiously  to  preserve  the  moral  and  religious 
advantages  which  they  have  received  from  their  fathers.  3.  Every  conscientious 
man  should  feel  a  personal  obligation  to  help  in  ensuring  to  the  children  of  good 
men  the  inheritance  bequeathed  to  them  by  their  fathers.  {Sir  H.  M.  Wellwood.) 
The  advantage  of  having  godly  parenti : — What  so  interesting  as  children  ?  Children 
are  pledges  of  mutual  and  hallowed  affection.  Love  to  children  is  the  source  of 
numberless  and  unutterable  hopes  and  fears,  and  pains  and  pleasures.  It  is  the 
emblem  of  Divine  compassion.  "  As  a  father  pitieth  his  children."  If  parents  are 
affected  by  the  condition  of  children,  children  are  affected  by  the  conduct  of  parents. 
We  constantly  see  children,  in  ways  innumerable,  suffering  for  the  vices  of  their 
ancestors.  The  fact  is  undeniable  ;  and  deism  has  to  encounter  the  same  difficulty 
v,'ith  revelation.  Eehgion  is  no  more  chargeable  with  it  than  the  course  of  nature. 
On  the  other  hand,  goodness  operates  powerfully  and  beneficially  in  descent.  In 
the  text  we  have  a  godly  father  entailing  blessings  on  his  family.  I.  The  cha- 
BACTER  IN  QUESTION  IS  A  GOOD  MAN.  Noue  are  good  perfectly ;  none  are  good 
naturally ;  some  are  saved,  and  God  has  begun  a  good  work  on  them.  This  is  the 
origin  of  the  character ;  but  what  are  the  features  of  it  ?  1.  In  a  good  man  we 
must  have  piety.  2.  We  must  have  sincerity.  3.  We  must  have  uniformity. 
4.  We  must  have  benevolence  and  beneficence,  II.  Such  a  good  man  mat  be 
FOUND  IN  CONNECTED  LIFE.  His  religion  wiU  improve  all  those  views  and  feelings 
that  tend  to  make  him  social  and  useful.  The  Scripture  knows  nothing  of  any  pre- 
eminence attaching  to  celibacy.  Though  the  subject  is  spoken  of  in  reference  to 
the  man,  the  woman  is  by  no  means  excluded.  To  a  family,  a  good  mother,  no 
less  than  a  good  father,  is  an  invaluable  blessing.  III.  Examine  what  the  inheri- 
tance IS  which  a  good  man  leaves  to  his  offspring.  1.  It  comprehends  religious 
instructions.  2.  Pious  example.  3.  It  takes  in  believing  prayers.  4.  It  consists 
of  sanctified  substance.  5.  The  death  of  a  good  man  is  another  part  of  this  inheri- 
tance. 6.  God  bears  a  regard  to  the  descendants  of  His  followers.  {William  Jay.) 
The  wealth  of  the  sinner  is  laid  up  for  the  just. — Material  wealth : — I.  As  entailed 
BY  THE  GOOD  AND  ALIENATED  BY  THE  EVIL.  Here  we  havc  it — 1.  Entailed  by  the 
good.  "A  good  man  leaveth  an  inheritance  to  his  children's  chUdren."  It  is 
a  characteristic  in  man  that  he  feels  an  interest  in  posterity.  This  is  an  indication 
of  the  greatness  of  man's  nature.  It  is  here  intimated  by  Solomon  that  the  good 
have  some  special  security  by  which  their  property  shall  descend  to  their  children's 
children.  And  truly  they  have  ;  and  what  is  it  ?  The  probable  goodness  of  their  chil- 
dren's children.  2.  Alienated  by  the  evU.  Wickedness,  from  its  very  nature,  cannot 
hold  property  through  many  generations :  the  fortunes  it  inherits  must  crumble  away. 

n.    As    GAINED    BY   INDUSTRY   AND    SQUANDERED   BY   IMPRUDENCE.       EvCry  acre    of   land 

is  fuU  of  potential  wealth.  Skilled  industry  can  make  more  of  one  rood  of  earth 
than  some  men  can  an  acre.  But  it  requires  even  more  sense  to  retain  and  rightly 
use  property  than_to  get  it.  {Homilist.)  An  inheritance  that  will  wear : — When 
the  renowned  Admiral  Haddock  was  dying  he  begged  to  see  his  son,  to  whom  he 
thus  delivered  himself — "  Notwithstanding  my  rank  in  life  and  pubUc  services  for 
so  many  years,  I  shall  leave  you  only  a  small  fortune  ;  but,  my  dear  boy,  it  is 
honestly  got,  and  wiU  wear  well ;  there  are  no  seamen's  wages  or  provisions  in  it, 
nor  is  there  one  single  penny  of  dirty  money." 

Ver.  23.  Much  food  is  in  the  tillage  of  the  poor  :  but  there  is  that  is  destroyed 
for  want  of  judgment. — The  responsibility,  cultivation,  and  harvest  of  small  gifts : — 
Palestine  was  a  land  of  small  peasant  proprietors,  and  the  institution  of  the  Jubilee 
was  intended  to  prevent  the  acquisition  of  large  estates  by  any  Israelite.  The  con- 
sequence, as  intended,  was  a  level  of  modest  prosperity.  It  was  "  the  tillage  of  the 
poor,"  the  careful,  diligent  husbandry  of  the  man  who  had  only  a  httle  patch 
of  land  to  look  after,  that  filled  the  storehouses  of  the  Holy  Land.  Hence  the 
proverb  of  our  text  arose.  In  all  work  it  is  true  that  the  bulk  of  the  harvested 
results  are  due,  not  to  the  large  labours  of  the  few,  but  to  the  minute,  unnoticed 
toils  of  the  many.  Small  service  is  true  service,  and  the  aggregate  of  such  produces 
large  crops.  Spade  husbandry  gets  most  out  of  the  ground.  Much  may  be  made  of 
slender  gifts,  small  resources,  and  limited  opportunities  if  carefully  calculated.  This 
text  is  a  message  to  ordinary,  mediocre  people,  without  much  ability  or  influence.  L  It 
teaches  the  responsibility  of  small  gifts.    It  is  no  mere  accident  that  in  our  Lord's 


342  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xin. 

great  parable  He  represents  the  man  with  the  one  talent  as  the  hider  of  his  gift.   There 
is  a  certain  pleasure  in  the  exercise  of  any  kind  of  gift,  be  it  of  body  or  mind ;  but 
when  we  know  that  we  are  but  very  slightly  gifted  by  Him,  there  is  a  temptation  to 
Bay,  "  Oh,  it  does  not  matter  much  whether  I  contribute  my  share  to  this,  that,  or 
the  other  work  or  no.     I  am  but  a  poor  man.    My  half-crown  will  make  but  a  smaU 
difference  in  the  total.     I  am  possessed  of  very  little  leisure.     The  few  minutes 
that  I  can  spare  for  individual  cultivation,  or  for  benevolent  work,  will  not  matter 
at  all.     I  am  only  an  insignificant  unit ;  nobody  pays  any  attention  to  my  opinion. 
It  does  not  in  the  least  signify  whether  I  make  my  influence  felt  in  regard  of  social, 
religious,  or  political  questions,  and  the  like.     I  can  leave  all  that  to  the  more 
influential  men.     It  is  a  good  deal  easier  for  me  to  wrap  up  this  talent — which, 
after   all,  is  only  a  threepenny-bit,   and  not  a  talent — and  put  it  away  and  do 
nothing."    Yes,  but  then  you  forget  that  there  is  a  great  responsibility  for  the  use 
of  the  smallest,  as  there  is  for  the  use  of  the  largest,  and  that  although  it  did  not 
matter  very  much  what  you  do  to  anybody  but  yourself,  it  matters  all  the  world  to 
you.     But  then,  beside  that,  my  text  tells  you  that  it  does  matter  whether  the  poor 
man  sets  himself  to  make  the  most  of  his  little  patch  of  ground  or  not.     "  There  is 
much  food  in  the  tillage  of  the  poor."     The  slenderly  endowed  are  the  immense 
majority.     The  great  men  and  wise  men  and  mighty  men  and  wealthy  men  may 
be  counted  by  units,  but  the  men  that  are  not  very  much  of  anything  are  to  be 
counted  by  millions.     And  unless  we  can  find  some  stringent  law  of  responsibility 
that  applies  to  them,  the  bulk  of  the  human  race  will  be  under  no  obligation  to  do 
anything  either  for  God  or  for  their  fellows,  or  for  themselves.     Let  me  remind 
you,  too,  how  the  same  virtues  and  excellences  can  be  practised  in  the  adminis- 
tering of  the  smallest,  as  in  that  of  the  greatest  gifts.     "  He  that  is  faithful  in  that 
which  is  least  is  faithful  also  in  much."   If  you  do  not  utilise  the  capacity  possessed 
you  increase  the  crop  of  weeds  from  its  uncultivated  clods.     We  never  palm  off  a 
greater  deception  on  ourselves  than  when  we  try  to  hoodwink  conscience  by  pleading 
narrow  gifts  as  an  excuse  for  boundless  indolence,  and  to  persuade  ourselves  that  if 
■we  could  do  more  we  should  be  less  inclined  to  do  nothing.    AH  service  coming 
from  the  same  motive  and  tending  to  the  same  end  is  the  same  with  God.    11.  But 
now,  note  again  how  there  must  be  diligent  cultivation  of   the  small  gifts. 
The  inventor  of  this  proverb  had  looked  carefully  and  sympathetically  at  the  way  in 
which  the  little  peasant  proprietors  worked ;  and  he  saw  in  that  a  pattern  for  all 
life.     There  will  usually  be  little  waste  time,  and  few  neglected  opportunities  of 
working  in  the  case  of  the  peasant  whose  subsistence,  with  that  of  his  family, 
depends  on  the  dihgent  and  wise  cropping  of  the  little  patch  that  does  belong  to 
him.     And  so  if  you  and  I  have  to  take  our  place  in  the  ranks  of  the  two-talented 
men,  the  commonplace  run  of  ordinary  people,  the  more  reason  for  us  to  enlarge 
our  gifts  by  a  sedulous  diligence,  by  a  keen  look-out  for  all  opportunities  of  service, 
and  above  all  by  a  prayerful  dependence  upon  Him  from  whom  alone  comes  the 
power  to  toil,  and  who  alone  gives  the  increase.     The  less  we  are  conscious  of  large 
gifts  the  more  we  should  be  bowed  in  dependence  on  Him  from  whom  cometh 
every  good  and  perfect  gift,  and  the  more  earnestly  should  we  use  that  slender 
possession   which  God  may  have  given  us.     Industry  applied  to  small  natural 
capacity  will  do  far  more  than  larger  power  rusted  away  by  sloth.     Who  are  they 
who  have  done  the  most  in  this  world  for  God  and  for  men  ?     The  largely  endowed 
men?     "Not  many  wise,  not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble  are  called."    The 
coral  insect  is  microscopic,  but  it  will  build  up  from  the  profoundest  depth  of  the 
ocean  a  reef  against  which  the  whole  Pacific  may  dash  in  vain.     It  is  the  small 
gifts  that,  after  all,  are  the  important  ones.     So  let  us  cultivate  them  the  more 
earnestly,  the  more  humbly  we  think  of  our  own  capacity.     "  Play  well  thy  part ; 
there  all  the  honour  lies."     God,  who  has  builded  up  some  of  the  towering  Alps  out 
of  mica  flakes,   builds  up   His   Church   out  of  infinitesimally  small   particles — 
Blenderly  endowed  men  touched  by  the  consecration  of  His  love.     III.  Lastly,  let 
me  remind  you   of  the  hakvest  eeaped  fkom  these  slender  gifts  when  sedu- 
lously tilled.     Two  great  results  of  such  conscientious  cultivation  and  use  of 
small  resources  and  opportunities  may  be  suggested  as  included  in  that  abundant 
•'  food  "  of  which  the  text  speaks.     The  faithfully  used  faculty  increases.     To  him 
that  "hath  shall  be  given."     "  Oh,  if  I  had  a  wider  sphere  how  I  would  flame  in 
it,  and  fill  it."    Then  twinkle  your  best  in  your  little  sphere,  and  that  will  bring  a 
wider  one  some  time  or  other.    Fill  your  place ;  and  if  you,  like  Paul,  have  borne 
witness  for  the  Master  in  little  Jerusalem,  He  will  not  keep  you  there,  but  carry  yoa 
to  bear  witness  for  Him  in  imperial  Bome  itself.     {A.  Madaren,  D.D.) 


CHAP,  xm.]  PROVERBS.  343 

Ver.  24.  He  that  spareth  his  rod  hateth  his  son :  but  he  that  loveth  him 
chasteneth  him  betimes. — The  child  uisely  chastened : — Under  this  apparent 
severity  is  to  be  found  the  spirit  of  true  kindness.  It  would  seem  as  if  the  last 
word  in  the  text  were  an  emphatic  word.  There  is  a  good  deal  of  chastening,  but 
it  is  not  timely ;  the  will  has  grown  strong,  the  passions  have  acquired  tenacious 
hold  upon  the  mind,  the  chastening  comes  too  late  in  life.  It  is  the  easiest  of  all 
things  to  spare  the  rod ;  it  enables  family  life  to  proceed  with  fluency  ;  it  avoids  all 
controversy  and  all  painful  collision  as  between  the  elder  and  the  younger.  For  a 
time  this  is  beautiful,  so  much  so  that  people  commend  the  family  as  one  character- 
ised by  great  harmony  and  union ;  on  the  contrary,  it  ought  to  be  reprobated.  The 
child  that  is  wisely  chastened  comes  to  love  the  very  hand  that  used  the  rod. 
Children  must  be  taught  that  all  things  are  not  theirs,  that  the  world  is  a  place  for 
discipline,  and  that  all  life  is  valuable  only  in  proportion  as  it  has  been  refined  and 
strengthened  by  patient  endurance.  Let  no  merely  cruel  man  take  encouragement 
from  these  words  to  use  the  rod  without  measure,  and  to  use  it  merely  for  the  sake 
of  showing  his  animal  strength.  That  is  not  the  teaching  of  the  passage.  The 
chastening  is  to  be  with  measure,  is  to  be  timely,  is  to  have  some  proportion  to  the 
offence  that  is  visited,  and  is  to  give  more  pain  to  the  inflicter  of  the  punishment 
than  to  its  receiver.  Great  wisdom  is  required  in  the  use  of  the  rod.  The  rod  has 
to  be  used  upon  every  man  sooner  or  later  ;  we  cannot  escape  chastisement :  we 
must  be  made  to  feel  that  the  world  is  not  aU  ours,  that  there  are  rights  and 
interests  to  be  respected  besides  those  which  we  ourselves  claim :  the  sooner  that 
lesson  can  be  instilled  into  the  mind  the  better ;  if  it  can  be  wrought  into  the 
heart  and  memory  of  childhood  it  will  save  innumerable  anxieties  and  disappoint- 
ments in  all  after-life.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  ivise  use  of  the  rod  : — The  rod 
is  to  be  taken  for  correction  or  punishment  in  general,  not  specifically  for  corporal 
punishment.  1.  The  rod  should  be  the  last  resource.  The  cases  in  which  it  is 
necessary  to  appeal  to  the  rod  are  very  rare.  2.  When  the  rod  is  used,  be  quite 
sure  that  a  fault  has  been  committed.  Children  are  sometimes  severely  chastened 
when  they  have  committed  no  fault,  and  this  produces  a  sense  of  injury  and  a  loss 
of  confidence,  which  cannot  fail  to  exert  evil  influences.  3.  Let  there  be  a  due 
proportion  between  the  fault  and  the  correction.  4.  Never  chastise  in  a  passion. 
5.  Let  chastisement  be  preceded  by,  or  accompanied  with,  earnest  efforts  to 
convince  the  offender  of  his  fault.  6.  Accompany  the  correction  with  a  system  of 
encouragement.  {R.  Wardlaiv.)  The  use  of  the  rod  : — Properly  treated  and 
fully  expanded,  this  subject  of  "  the  stick  "  would  cover  all  the  races  of  man  in  all 
regions  and  all  ages ;  indeed,  it  would  hide  every  member  of  the  human  family. 
Attention  could  be  drawn  to  the  respect  accorded  in  every  chapter  of  the  world's 
history,  sacred  and  profane,  to  the  rabdos — to  the  fasces  of  the  Eoman  lictors, 
which  every  schoolboy  honours  (often  unconsciously)  with  an  allusion  when  he 
says  he  will  lick,  or  vows  he  won't  be  licked — to  the  herald's  staff  of  Hermes, 
the  caduceus  of  Mercury,  the  wand  of  .^sculapius,  the  rods  of  Moses,  and  the 
contending  sorceress — to  the  mystic  bundle  of  nine  twigs,  in  honour  of  the  nine 
muses,  that  Dr.  Bushby  loved  to  wield,  and  which  many  a  simple  English  parent 
believes  Solomon,  in  all  his  glory,  recommended  as  an  element  in  domestic 
jurisdiction — to  the  sacred  wands  of  savage  tribes,  the  staffs  of  our  constables 
and  sheriffs,  the  highly-polished  gold  sticks  and  black  rods  that  hover  about  the 
ante-rooms  of  courts  at  St.  James  or  Portsoken.  The  rule  of  thumb  has  been 
said  to  be  the  government  of  this  world.  And  what  is  this  thumb  but  a  short 
stick,  a  sceptre  emblematic  of  a  sovereign  authority  which  none  dares  to  dispute  ? 
••  The  stick,"  says  the  Egyptian  proverb  "  came  down  from  heaven."  (J.  Cordy 
Jeaffreson.) 

Ver.  25.  The  righteous  eateth  to  the  satisfying  of  his  soul. — The  satisfaction 
of  the  body  deter7nined  by  the  condition  of  the  soul : — Bodily  satisfaction  is  au 
essential  element  in  our  happiness  so  long  as  we  are  in  this  world.  The  text 
implies  that  the  satisfaction  of  the  body  depends  upon  the  condition  of  the 
soul ;  and  this  is  a  great  truth  greatly  neglected.  Consider  what  bodily  satis- 
faction requires.  I.  Bodily  health.  No  food  can  satisfy  a  diseased  body,  a  body 
whose  organs  and  functions  are  out  of  order.  But  the  condition  of  the  soul 
has  much  to  do  with  physical  health.  The  anxieties,  ill-tempers,  recriminations, 
impure  passions  of  a  wicked  heart,  will  soon  reduce  the  body  to  disease,  feebleness, 
and  ruin.  On  the  other  hand,  a  true,  virtuous,  and  happy  soul  tends  to  physical 
health.      "A  merry  heart  doeth  good  like   medicine."      One  thought   can  dis- 


344  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  dv. 

organise  a  healthy  body  and  do  much  to  restore  a  diseased  one.  II.  Bodily 
B0PPLIES.  The  supplies  necessary  to  satisfy  the  body  should  be — 1.  Of  a  right  kind. 
A  body  restless  with  hunger  would  scarcely  be  satisfied  with  confectionery.  Now, 
the  condition  of  the  soul  has  much  to  do  with  the  kind  of  food.  The  soul  not  only 
modifies  our  natural  appetites,  but  creates  artificial  ones,  and  hence  supplies 
provisions  for  the  body  which  are  unnatural  and  unhealthy.  The  soul,  by  its 
working  on  the  body's  appetites,  has  brought  to  the  body's  table  compounds 
unsatisfying  and  deleterious.  2.  A  right  amount.  An  insufficient  amount,  even  of 
right  provisions,  would  leave  the  body  unsatisfied.  But  the  question  of  sufficiency 
also  depends  greatly  on  the  soul.  Indolence,  extravagance,  intemperance,  bad 
management,  often  so  reduce  men's  material  resources  that  they  are  left  utterly 
destitute  of  the  necessary  food.  These  thoughts,  we  think,  give  an  important 
meaning  to  the  text,  "The  righteous  eateth  to  the  satisfying  of  his  soul:  but  the 
belly  of  the  wicked  shall  want."  A  corrupt  soul  will  evermore  have  a  dis- 
satisfied body.    {Homilist.) 


CHAPTEK  XIV. 


Veb.  1.  Every  wise  woman  buildeth  her  hoase :  but  the  foolish  plucketh  It 
down  with  her  hands. — The  wise  builder : — The  Scriptures  have  adapted  their 
instructions  to  every  character  and  condition  in  human  life.  I.  Describe  the  wise 
WOMAN.  1.  She  must  know  how  to  manage  with  prudence  and  care  the  concerns 
of  a  family.  It  is  woman's  work  to  "  guide  the  house."  How  many,  on  marrying, 
find  they  need  to  learn  the  first  principles  of  domestic  economy.  If  a  man  can  be 
more  happy  in  any  other  house  than  his  own,  he  is  a  lost  man.  2.  A  wise  woman 
will  improve  her  taste  and  her  manners.  This  in  no  way  involves  her  becoming 
proud.  3.  A  wise  woman  will  aim  to  improve  her  mind.  The  mind  is  enlarged 
by  receiving  ideas,  and  by  using  them  as  materials  of  thought  and  reasoning. 
4.  A  wise  woman  will  endeavour  to  enlighten  and  improve  her  conscience.  This 
is  the  faculty  of  the  soul  by  which  we  weigh  the  morality  of  an  action.  To  improve 
the  conscience  we  must  give  it  light,  and  let  it  guide  us.  Well  enlightened,  it 
guides  to  happiness  and  heaven.  5.  A  wise  woman  will  be  particularly  careful  to 
cultivate  the  heart.  The  instinctive  aiiections  are  capable  of  improvement  by  other 
means  than  grace.  But  the  female  character  is  essentially  defective  in  the  absence 
of  piety.  Eeligion  has  a  pecuhar  sweetness  when  it  mingles  with  the  modest  soft- 
ness of  the  female  character.  By  reason  of  their  peculiar  trials,  females  need  the 
comforts,  hopes,  and  prospects  of  religion  more,  if  possible,  than  the  other  sex. 
II.  A  WISE  WOMAN  BUILDETH  HEB  HOUSE.  To  build  her  house  is  to  promote  the 
best  good  of  her  husband  and  her  offspring.  1.  How  will  such  a  woman  affect 
their  estate  ?  Her  wisdom  will  save  more  than  her  hands  could  earn.  2.  She  will 
render  her  family  respectable.  3.  She  will  render  her  family  happy.  She  will  so 
manage  as  not  to  irritate  their  passions.  Her  example  will  breathe  through  the 
house  a  mild  and  soft  atmosphere.  There  is  no  resisting  the  combined  influence 
of  so  many  virtues.  What  she  cannot  do  by  her  precepts  and  examples,  she  effects 
by  her  prayers.  Her  influence  surely  extends  beyond  her  own  family.  Eeflections : 
1.  Females  see  how  they  are  to  rise  in  the  scale  of  being.  2.  See  the  importance 
of  supporting  good  schools.  3.  See  the  importance  of  the  gospel.  4.  Females 
should  make  the  Scriptures  their  daily  study.  From  the  mother,  rather  than  the 
father,  the  members  of  the  family  will  take  their  [[character.  (D.  C.  Clark.) 
Wise  and  foolish  wives : — The  foolish  woman  does  not  know  that  she  is  plucking 
down  her  house  ;  she  thinks  she  is  building  it  up.  By  unwise  energy,  by  self-asser- 
tion, by  thoughtless  speeches,  by  words  flung  like  firebrands,  she  is  doing  unutterable 
mischief,  not  only  to  herself,  but  to  her  husband  and  family.  There  are,  on  the 
other  hand,  wise  women  who  are  quietly  and  solidly  building  the  house  night  and 
day  :  they  make  no  demonstration ;  the  last  characteristic  that  could  be  supposed 
to  attach  to  them  would  be  that  of  ostentation  ;  they  measure  the  whole  day,  they 
number  its  hours,  they  apportion  its  worth  ;  every  effort  they  make  is  an  effort 
which  has  been  reasoned  out  before  it  was  begun ;  every  word  is  looked  at  before  it 
is  uttered  ;  every  company  is  estimated  before  it  is  entrusted  with  confidence.  In 
this  way  the  wise  woman  consolidates  her  house.    (J.  Parker,  D.D.)        House 


CHAP.  XIV.]  PROVERBS.  345 

wifery  : — I.  Its  great  poweb.  1.  It  can  build  up.  "  Every  wise  woman  buildeth 
her  house."  (1)  Materially.  By  her  economy,  industry,  and  wise  management 
she  increases  its  material  resources.  A  good  wife  builds  up  her  house — (2)  Spiritually. 
A  good  wife  by  her  example,  her  spirit,  her  admonitions,  her  reproofs,  her  prayers, 
rears  in  her  house  a  very  temple  of  industry,  intelligence,  and  worship.  2.  It  cart 
pull  down.  "  The  foolish  plucketh  it  down  with  her  hands."  There  are  women 
who  by  their  miserable  tempers  and  degrading  habits  ruin  their  hosbands  and. 
children.  II.  Its  necessaut  qualification.  What  is  the  necessary  qualification 
for  a  good  housewife?  "Wisdom."  {Homilist.)  Homemade  happy  by  a  good 
wife  : — A  plain  marble  stone,  in  a  churchyard,  bears  this  brief  inscription  :  "  She 
always  made  home  happy."  This  epitaph  was  penned  by  a  bereaved  husband,  after 
sixty  years  of  wedded  life.  He  might  have  said  of  his  departed  wife,  she  was 
beautiful,  and  accomplished,  and  an  ornament  to  society,  and  yet  not  have  said  she 
made  home  happy.  Alas,  he  might  have  added,  she  was  a  Christian,  and  not  have 
been  able  to  say,  "  She  always  made  home  happy."  What  a  rare  combination  of 
virtues  and  graces  this  wife  and  mother  must  have  possessed !  How  wisely  she 
must  have  ordered  her  house  1  In  what  patience  she  must  have  possessed  her 
Boul !  How  self-denying  she  must  have  been !  How  tender  and  loving  1  How 
thoughtful  for  the  comfort  of  all  about  her  1     {Christian  Treasury.) 

Ver.  2.  He  that  walketh  in  his  uprightness  feareth  the  Lord.  —  Human 
conduct: — I.  Men  differ  widely  in  their  daily  conduct.  1.  Some  men  walk 
uprightly.  Walking  uprightly  implies — (1)  Moral  strength.  The  man  is  not  bent 
and  crooked  by  the  infirmities  of  sin  or  the  weight  of  depravity.  (2)  Conscious 
rectitude.  He  does  not  bow  down  his  head,  as  if  ashamed  to  look  his  neighbour 
in  the  face.  He  is  as  open  as  the  day,  and  as  fearless  as  the  sun.  2.  Some  walk 
perversely.  "They  are  perverse  in  their  ways."  They  are  crooked  in  their 
purposes,  policies,  and  performances.  II.  Men  reveal  their  heart  towards  God 
IN  their  daily  walk.  1.  Eight  conduct  springs  from  a  right  feeling  towards  God. 
The  man  that  walketh  uprightly  feareth  the  Lord.  There  is  no  true  morality 
without  religion.  Piety  is  the  first  principle  of  all  rectitude.  All  good  living  must 
have  respect  to  God.  2.  Wrong  conduct  springs  from  wrong  feeling  towards  God. 
"  He  that  is  perverse  in  his  ways,  despiseth  Him."  The  wrong  doer  has  no  feeling 
of  respect  for  God.  He  ignores  Him  as  much  as  he  can.  You  may  know  how 
men  feel  inwardly  toward  their  Maker  by  observing  how  they  deal  outwardly  with 
each  other.    (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  Where  no  oxen  are,  the  crib  is  clean :  but  much  increase  is  by  the 
strength  of  the  ox. — The  law  of  increase : — The  illustration  is  drawn  from 
husbandry,  and  in  a  country  like  Palestine,  where  the  ox  had  such  an  important 
place  in  agricultural  operations,  it  was  peculiarly  intelligible  and  peculiarly  fit. 
"  Where  is  the  farmer,"  says  the  wise  man,  "  who,  in  order  to  preserve  tidiness  in 
his  stalls,  would  forego  the  assistance  of  oxen  in  his  fields  ?  "  Something  he  might 
secure,  no  doubt ;  a  rack  unsoiled  by  the  oxen's  fodder,  a  floor  unmarked  by  the 
oxen's  hoofs,  the  absence  of  disorder  that  offends  the  eye,  the  freedom  from  task- 
work that  tires  the  arm,  with  whatsoever  satisfaction  such  immunity  affords.  Yes, 
but  what  does  he  lose  ?  Almost  all  that  makes  his  property  profitable,  almost  all 
that  makes  his  stackyard  full.  What  of  the  ploughing  of  the  land  ?  What  of  the 
carrying  home  of  the  sheaves  ?  What  of  the  treading  out  of  the  corn  ?  "  Where 
no  cattle  are,  the  crib  is  clean."  True.  But  what  of  that  ?  Is  the  cleanness  worth 
considering,  in  comparison  with  the  increase  that  comes  by  the  strength  of  the  ox  ? 
And  now,  I  think,  we  have  hold  of  the  principle.  There  is  no  good  to  be  got 
without  its  accompanying  drawbacks ;  let  the  drawbacks  and  the  good  be  weighed 
carefully  together,  and  if  the  good  outbalance  the  drawbacks,  then  let  the  good  be 
chosen  and  the  drawbacks  faced  with  resolution,  intelUgence,  and  cheerfulness. 
Sentiment  is  right  in  its  place,  fastidiousness  is  proper  in  its  season ;  but  senti- 
ment is  worse  than  idle,  fastidiousness  is  worse  than  false,  when  we  permit  them 
to  stand  between  us  and  a  substantial  good,  the  good  that  Providence  intends 
us  to  get  or  the  good  that  Providence  commands  us  to  do.  I.  We  might  begin 
with  an  illustration  from  the  industbiaij  sphere,  the  relation,  namely,  between 
manufacture  and  natural  scenery.  Where  no  manufacture  is,  the  scenery  is 
intact ;  but  much  increase  comes  by  the  processes  of  manufacture.  Take, 
for  example,  the  midland  counties  of  England,  and  especially  those  parts  of 
them  we  know  as  the  Black  Country.    No  region  of  England  is  more  picturesque 


346  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

in  itself,  marked  by  the  outlines  and  stored  with  the  elements  of  natural  and 
original  beauty.  Yet  how  man  has  overlaid  and  defaced  things  I  Look  at  the 
country  as  it  is  now,  ploughed  with  railway  tracks,  torn  with  excavations,  encum- 
bered with  heaps  of  rubbish.  And  those  to  whom  beauty  is  all  may  object  to  this. 
"  What  barbarism,"  they  say,  "  what  vandalism,  what  wanton  and  wilful  dese- 
cration of  the  sanctities  of  nature!  Better,  surely,  was  the  country  in  its  virgin 
luxuriance,  when  the  slopes  were  clothed  with  woodland."  Well,  the  change  means 
loss,  no  doubt,  loss  from  the  standpoint  of  the  beauty-lover.  But  it  means  gain 
from  the  standpoint  of  the  utilitarian,  and  gain,  too,  in  the  eye  of  those  who  look 
higher  than  what  is  merely  utilitarian.  For  not  only  does  black  smoke,  according 
to  the  proverb,  make  white  silver,  but  it  is  a  witness  to  facts,  a  testimony  to 
realities,  of  which  silver  is  only  a  single  embodiment,  and  that,  too,  by  no  means 
the  highest.  The  sight  was  a  symbol  of  several  things,  all  noble  and  honourable  in 
their  way.  It  is  a  symbol  of  man's  power  over  nature,  his  diligence  in  extracting 
and  his  ingenuity  in  moulding  the  substance  which  nature  conceals  in  her  heart. 
It  is  a  symbol  of  the  clothing  that  covers  shivering  forms,  a  symbol  of  the  bread 
that  feeds  hungry  mouths.  It  is  a  symbol  of  England's  greatness,  industry,  and 
world-wide  trade.  II.  Passing  from  the  industrial  to  the  domestic  sphere,  we  might 
select  an  illustration  of  a  different  character,  which  a  poet-preacher  of  the  time  has 
happily  associated  with  this  text,  and  speak  of  the  relation  between  children  and 
home.  We  remark,  then,  that  where  there  are  no  children,  the  house  may  be 
trim  ;  but  much  profit  comes  through  the  presence  and  companionship  of  children. 
Neatness  in  a  house  may  be  good.  But  there  is  a  neatness  that  tells  of  emptiness. 
There  is  a  neatness  that  betokens  loneliness.  There  is  a  neatness  that  is  not  half 
so  attractive  as  the  wear  and  tear,  the  disturbance  and  disorder,  that  denote  the 
presence  of  busy  httle  inmates,  with  their  restless  hands  and  roving  feet.  The  loss 
is  a  small  one  compared  with  the  gain.  Children  are  God's  heritage.  How  much 
they  teach !  How  much  they  bestow  !  Not  only  does  the  parent  train  and  develop 
the  child,  but  the  child  may  train  and  develop  the  parent.  Our  children  should 
be  leaders  to  all  of  us,  leaders  from  faithlessness  into  faith,  from  restlessness  into 
rest,  from  selfishness  into  sacrifice,  from  frivolity  into  earnestness,  thoughtfulness, 
and  the  sense  of  responsibility.  Does  not  the  pure  eye  of  an  innocent  child 
restrain  the  foul  or  the  cruel  act  ?  Are  not  its  needs  a  discipline  in  sympathy,  its 
questionings  a  training  in  reflection  ?  Where  the  children  are  absent,  the  home 
may  be  neat,  the  mind  unperplexed ;  but  much  increase — increase  of  happiness, 
increase  of  affection,  increase  of  prosperity — comes  through  association  with  Uttle 
children.  III.  Or  we  might  pass  to  the  ecclesiastical  sphere,  and  select  as  an 
instance  of  the  same  principle  the  relation  between  controversy  and  the  Church. 
We  note,  then,  at  this  point,  that  where  no  discussion  is,  the  Church  may  be  at 
rest ;  but  much  benefit  comes  through  freedom  of  discussion,  in  the  case  of  the 
Church  as  well  as  of  the  State.  Some  people  are  all  for  peace.  But  there 
is  a  peace  of  stagnation.  There  is  a  peace  of  indifference.  There  is  a  peace 
that  is  based  upon  lack  of  conviction.  Do  not  judge  of  Church  enterprises 
nor  of  Church  proceedings,  as  some  do,  and  condemn  them  simply  because  they 
create  dispeace.  Peace  may  be  bought  too  dearly.  Purity  is  better.  Truth  is 
better.  Undoubtedly  in  discussion  the  crib  may  be  soiled.  Controversy  often 
awakens  temper,  evokes  party  spirit,  causes  hard  words  to  be  said,  unkind  acts 
to  be  done,  selfish  rivalries  to  spring  up  Yet  these  may  be  a  blessing  in  the 
end,  in  comparison  of  which  the  temporary  soiling  of  the  crib  is  a  matter 
of  smaller  importance  after  all.  There  is  the  down-breaking  of  prejudice.  There 
is  the  removing  of  misunderstandings.  There  is  the  formulating  of  principle. 
There  is  the  discovering  of  character.  It  will  be  best  for  the  spread  of  righteous- 
ness; it  will  be  safest  in  the  interests  of  belief.  IV.  Pass  next  to  the  sphere  of 
PRACTICAL  BENEFICENCE,  and  apply  the  principle  of  the  text  to  the  relation 
between  philanthropy  and  experience.  We  remark,  then,  that  where  no  philan- 
thropy is,  the  experience  may  be  easy,  free  from  much  that  is  unpleasant  to  look 
at,  unpleasant  to  think  of,  and  unpleasant  to  do ;  but  much  increase  comes 
through  the  exercise  of  philanthropy.  What  have  we  here  but  'the  plain,  simple 
lesson,  which  has  to  be  learnt  by  every  social  benefactor,  every  Christian  worker, 
that  they  who  will  live  helpfully,  as  the  saviours  and  the  succourers  of  their  fellow- 
men,  must  be  prepared  to  forego  fastidiousness.  To  do  any  real  good  amidst  the 
poor,  the  sunken,  and  the  vicious,  men  must  come  into  contact  with  many  things 
that  are  neither  pleasant  nor  pure.  Now,  take  any  such  labourer  as  these,  in  the 
great  unselfishness,  the  overflowing  charity,  the  fearlessness  of  mind  and  of  heart, 


CHAP.  XIV.]  PROVERBS,  347 

which  the  labour  engaged  in  always  demands.  And  take  another,  to  whom  labour 
of  the  time  is  unknown,  one  who,  with  the  same  possibilities  and  the  same  call, 
says,  "  No,  the  task  you  propose  is  distasteful,  the  experiences  you  prescribe  are 
rough ;  I  prefer  to  have  my  sight  unoffended,  my  feelings  unharrowed,  my  imagina- 
tion unhaunted.  Let  me  see  to  myself — the  purity  of  my  own  character,  the  health 
and  prosperity  of  my  own  soul,  in  the  circle  of  my  personal  friendships,  the 
seclusion  of  my  private  home."  Put  the  two  side  by  side.  Which  leads  the  richer 
existence  ?  Each  has  its  own  reward.  How  shall  we  best  explain  these  rewards, 
their  distinctive  nature,  their  relative  value  ?  Just  in  the  terms  of  the  text.  For 
the  one,  the  "  clean  crib  " — a  certain  ignorance,  a  certain  immunity,  certain 
security ;  not  only  a  sensibihty  unwrung  by  the  spectacles  of  sorrow,  but  a  mind 
kept  closed  to  the  pictures  of  sin :  that,  and  perhaps  httle  more  than  that.  For 
the  other,  the  "much  increase,"  in  the  enriching  of  his  personal  character,  the 
widening  of  his  personal  sympathies,  together  with  the  privilege  of  ministering  to 
his  brethren's  welfare  and  the  joy  of  being  blessed  to  his  brethren's  souls.  Clean 
garments,  clean  hands,  who  set  a  value  upon  these,  as  the  continuous,  the  indis- 
pensable prerequisite  of  life  ?  I  will  tell  you  who  do  not.  Not  the  surgeon,  as  he 
walks  the  battlefield  with  the  sponge  that  wipes  the  blood  and  the  linen  that  binds 
the  wounds.  Not  the  rescue  party,  as  they  enter  the  mine,  amidst  the  heat,  the 
soot,  and  the  smoke  of  a  recent  explosion,  with  which  the  caverns  still  echo,  and 
the  earth  still  smokes.  Not  the  sailor,  as  he  pulls  to  the  wreck,  through  a  troubled 
sea  that  casts  up  mire  and  dirt,  till  his  arms  are  twined  with  the  seaweed  and  his 
coat  is  drenched  with  the  ooze.  Clean  hands  and  clean  garments,  you  must  be 
content  now  and  then  to  forego  them,  if  the  world  you  live  in  is  to  be  cleansed. 
V.  Akin  to  the  last  thought  is  another  one,  drawn  this  time  from  the  mextal 
sphere.  Take  the  relation  between  force  of  character  and  hfe.  We  remark,  then, 
in  the  last  place,  that  where  there  is  no  force  of  character,  the  life  may  be  inoffen- 
sive, harmless  in  itself,  pleasing  to  others ;  but  much  increase,  increase  to  the 
world  and  the  Church,  comes  through  force  of  character.  Most  men  have  the 
defects  of  their  qualities.  This  is  especially  true  of  those  whose  distinguishing 
quality  is  vigour,  a  certain  superabounding  energy  and  strength.  The  vigour  is 
apt  to  be  domineering,  the  energy  rude,  the  strength  unaccompanied  with  suavity, 
fine  feeling,  good  taste.  If  you  are  to  reap  the  advantage  of  such  characters,  you 
take  them  as  you  find  them,  and  pardon  and  tolerate  their  coarseness  that  you  may 
be  helped  and  benefited  by  their  zeal.  Luther  was  earnest  but  rough.  But  we 
remember  the  work.  We  remember  the  time.  Neither  the  period  nor  the  task 
admitted  of  treatment  by  rosewater.  What  though  the  crib  was  untidy?  Be 
thankful  for  the  well-ploughed  field;  be  thankful  for  the  gathered  sheaves  of 
religious  truth  and  religious  liberty,  which  still  remain  in  our  storehouses,  to  give 
seed  to  the  Christian  sower  and  bread  to  the  Christian  eater,  as  the  outcome  of 
Luther's  labours,  the  memorial  of  Luther's  name.  Take  God's  blessing  asit  comes 
to  you,  and  be  very  tolerant  towards  the  instruments.  Polish  is  a  less  thing  than 
enthusiasm,  courtliness  than  sincerity.  It  may  be  well  to  have  both  things  com- 
bined. But  if  we  are  shut  up  to  the  alternative,  and  feel  tempted  to  pronounce  for 
the  softer  qualities,  as  less  likely  to  irritate,  less  apt  to  excite,  let  us  fall  back  on  the 
principle  of  the  text,  and  while  remembering  that  where  no  force  of  character  is 
the  life  may  be  inoffensive,  much  increase  comes  by  the  vigour  we  fear.  (IT.  A.  Gray.) 
Where  no  oxen  are,  the  crib  is  clean : — I.  Taken  in  its  primary  sense,  it  conveys  a 

LESSON    op     no    small   IMPOBTANCE   TO   THE    MERE    CULTrVATOB   OF    LAND.      YoU    pride 

yourself  upon  the  exquisite  neatness  and  order  of  your  farm.  The  spade,  the 
plough,  the  fork,  the  cart,  are  almost  as  pure  and  delicate  as  when  they  came  from 
the  hands  of  the  maker.  But  if  the  work  is  left  undone,  and  you  purchase 
neatness  and  order  at  the  expense  of  having  no  sheep  in  the  fold,  then  you  pay  too 
dear  for  your  nicety ;  you  have  the  clean  crib,  but  you  will  have  also  an  empty 
barn.  II.  The  same  maxim  applies  to  the  management  of  a  house.  You  pride 
yourself  on  the  exquisite  neatness  of  every  corner  in  your  dwelling-place.  Not  a 
cobweb  is  on  the  ceiling,  and  not  a  grain  of  dust  on  the  staircase.  The  delighted 
mistress  has  the  daily  satisfaction  of  seeing  her  own  fair  face  reflected  in  the 
polished  table  below  her.  The  crib  is  clean ;  but  you  may  here  also  buy  the 
cleanliness  at  too  high  a  price.  Perhaps  cleanliness  is  not  merely  your  taste  but 
your  idol.  You  forget  that  usefulness  is  the  true  object  of  household  economy, 
and  that  neatness  is  a  mere  means  to  this  end.  You,  like  Mr.  Burke's  man  of 
honour,  "feel  a  stain  like  a  wound,"  and  esteem  a  hole  in  a  carpet  as  tanta- 
mount to  a  hole  in  your  character.    You  forget  that  your  house  was  not  designed 


343  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xrv. 

by  the  great  Giver  for  yourself  alone,  but  for  your  neighbours  and  friends,  for 
brothers  and  sisters,  and  nephews  and  nieces,  who  want  a  Uttle  country  air  or 
London  shopping,  and  who  naturally  look  to  you,  as  to  a  richer  relation  and  friend, 
to  give  them  the  convenience  they  need.  Surely  you  had  better  have  a  soiled 
"  crib  "  than  a  narrow  heart ;  and  spotted  tables  than  not  a  single  loving,  grateful, 
happy  guest  to  sit  at  a  clean  one.  III.  This  rule  is  also  applicable,  I  think,  to 
LiTEPvATURE.  The  correctness  of  some  writers  is  perfectly  unimpeachable.  The 
grammarian  searches  in  vain  for  a  false  concord  or  quantity,  or  the  rhetorician  for 
a  false  ornament.  There  is  no  confusion  of  metaphor  ;  no  redundancy  of  expres- 
sion which  disfigures  the  pages  of  less  cautious  writers.  Now  here  the  "  crib  "  is 
clean  ;  but  then,  in  such  cases,  it  is  often  equally  true  that  there  are  no  "  oxen." 
The  style  is  as  "  dull,  cold,  flat,  and  unprofitable,"  as  it  is  pure  and  correct.  It  is 
the  judgment  of  a  no  less  critic  than  Quintilian,  that  the  writer  who,  in  his  youth, 
is  never  redundant,  will  usually  in  his  old  age  be  poverty  stricken.  Where  the 
heart,  the  imagination,  and  the  passions  have  free  play,  the  critic  may  find 
something  to  correct ;  but  very  often  also  consciences  will  be  touched  and  hearts  be 
edified.  IV.  But  I  now  turn  to  some  higher  topics,  to  which  the  rule  appears  to 
ME  equally  to  apply.  Lenis  is  a  most  unexceptionable  person  ;  of  the  very  calmest 
temper  and  the  most  placid  manners.  He  is  always  to  be  found  in  the  right  place 
at  the  very  right  moment.  He  speaks  little,  and  never  offensively ;  he  belongs  to 
no  party,  and  is  a  determined  enemy  to  all  excess.  He  is  perhaps  constant  at 
church,  though  a  little  drowsy  there ;  has  a  decided  preference  for  vague,  calm, 
general  sermons.  He  gives  decently  to  all  popular  or  uncriticised  charities.  And  the 
result  of  all  this  is,  that  he  gets  into  no  scrapes,  incurs  no  reproach,  is  claimed  as  a 
friend  by  men  of  all  opinions,  simply  because  he  was  never  known  to  express  an 
opinion  of  his  own.  Now  here  "  the  crib  "  is  unusually  "  clean."  But  at  what 
expense  is  it  purchased  ?  I  should  say  at  the  cost  of  most  of  the  feelings,  tastes, 
principles,  rules,  habits,  and  sympathies  which  constitute  the  substance  and  essence 
of  the  Christian  character.  The  "crib  is  clean"  because  there  are  "no  oxen." 
Lenis  is  as  much  like  a  statue  as  a  man.  All  the  higher  and  nobler  passions  of  our 
nature  have  no  place  in  him.  His  life  is,  possibly,  harmless,  but  it  is  altogether 
unprofitable.  And  this  because  the  one  essential  quality  is  wanting,  the  love  of 
God,  and  the  love  of  His  family  upon  earth.  He  might  be  nearly  all  he  is  if  there 
were  no  such  Being  as  the  Kedeemer  of  the  world,  who  had  felt  for  him,  and 
expected  him  to  feel  for  others.  The  same  thought  may  be  extended  to  different 
classes  of  the  ministers  of  religion.    I  remember  to  have  seen,  some  years  since,  in 

a  review  of  high  authority,  a  comparison  drawn  between  Bishop as  a  parochial 

minister,  and  Thomas  Scott  as  the  minister  of  Olney.  The  bishop,  on  quitting  his 
parish  for  another  sphere  of  duty,  finds  little  but  subjects  of  self-complacency, 
commendation,  and  thankfulness.  The  whole  population  might  seem  to  have 
received  the  whole  word  of  truth  into  their  souls.  Every  plan  had  prospered. 
"The  crib  is  clean."  Mr.  Scott,  on  the  contrary,  in  quitting  his  parish,  speaks 
strongly  of  the  immorality  of  one  part  of  the  population,  of  the  stubbornness  and 
self-will  of  another,  and  of  the  abuse  of  the  doctrines  of  grace  in  a  third  party. 
And  whilst  he  dwells  strongly,  and  gratefully,  on  the  zeal,  love,  and  fidelity  of 
some,  his  language  is  certainly,  on  the  whole,  such  as  might  be  expected  from  the 
mourning  prophet,  when  "rivers  of  water  ran  down  his  eyes  because  men  kept  not 
the  word"  of  the  Lord.  Here,  therefore,  "the  crib"  was,  to  appearance,  not 
equally  "  clean."  But  then  I  am  disposed  to  think  that  the  "  oxen  "  were  far  more 
diligently  at  work  in  the  one  case  than  in  the  other.  The  object  of  the  one 
minister  was  mainly  to  secure  order,  regularity,  decency,  harmony,  with  a  decent 
regard  for  morals  and  religion.  The  object  of  the  other  was  to  "  lay  the  axe  to  the 
root  of  the  tree  " — to  convince,  to  alarm,  to  convert,  to  sanctify,  to  lead  his  hearers 
as  contrite  sinners  to  the  foot  of  the  Gross,  and  to  qualify  them  under  God 
for  the  highest  seats  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  And  the  result  was  that,  in  the 
one  case,  few  consciences  were  touched,  few  fears  were  awakened,  few  hearts 
were  moved.  In  the  other  case,  if  there  were  some  who  were  offended  at  plain 
truths  announced  in  the  somewhat  homely  language  of  the  minister,  there 
were  also  many  awakened  consciences.  V.  The  last  case  to  which  I 
shall  refer  the  proverb  is  that  of  controversy.  Eirenos  is  a  man  of  peace.  He 
can  quote  to  you  maxims  without  number  from  the  Scriptures  and  from  the 
writings  of  great  theologians  on  the  duty  of  gentleness,  forbearance,  charity.  If 
you  wish  to  enhst  him  on  the  side  of  those  who  are  doing  battle  for  some  vital 
truth,  he  comes  down   upon  you  with  a  deluge  of  authorities  which  it  is  almost 


CHAP.  XIV.]  PROVERBS,  349 

impossible  to  resist ;  tells  you  that  Pension  wrote  a  whole  treatise  npon  "  Charity  "  ; 
that  Bishop  Hall  was  the  author  of  a  treatise  expressly  denominated  "The  Olive 
Branch  "  ;  that  Hooker  said  the  time  would  come  when  "  a  few  words  written  in 
charity  "  would  be  worth  all  the  angry  disputation  in  the  world.  Now  all  this  ia 
true  ;  and  is,  indeed,  never  to  be  forgotten  by  the  disciples  of  a  compassionate 
Saviour.  A  higher  authority  than  any  of  these  uninspired  writers  says  :  "  If  I  give 
my  body  to  be  burned  and  have  not  charity,  it  profiteth  me  nothing."  But  it  may 
be  well  to  remind  Eirenos  that,  notwithstanding  the  peaceful  spirit  and  language  of 
all  these  authorities,  Fenelon  barely  escaped  burning  for  the  honesty  and  explicit- 
ness  with  which  he  spoke  his  mind  ;  Bishop  Hall  was  for  the  same  offence  driven 
out  of  his  diocese ;  Hooker  was  charged  with  all  sorts  of  enormities  before  the 
Privy  Council ;  and  St.  Paul  himself  was  hunted  down  like  a  wild  beast  by  all 
classes  of  the  community.  But  Eirenos  has  no  taste  for  such  extravagances. 
Now  here  is  the  "  clean  crib,"  but  where  are  the  "  oxen"  ?  Here  is  Erasmus  ;  but 
where  is  Luther,  or  Cranmer,  or  Eidley,  or  Latimer  ?  Where  are  the  zeal,  the 
"  indignation  "  at  error,  the  "  vehemence"  of  holy  love,  the  devotion  to  God  and 
to  truth,  which  consumed  the  soul  of  the  meek  and  lowly  Saviour ;  which  exiled 
St.  John  to  Patmos  ;  and  which  has  lighted  up  the  funeral  pile  of  the  whole  army 
of  saints  and  martyrs?     {Christian  Observer.) 

Ver.  5.  A  faithful  witness  will  not  lie. — A  true  witness  : — Truth  is  beautiful,  as 
well  as  safe  and  mighty.  Li  the  incident  related  below  a  boy  twelve  years  old,  with 
only  truth  as  a  weapon,  conquered  a  smart  and  shrewd  lawyer,  who  was  fighting  for 
a  bad  cause.  "  Truth  is  the  highest  thing  that  man  may  keep,"  and  the  noblest  child 
or  man  is  he  that  keeps  the  truth  ever  between  his  lips.  Walter  was  the  important 
witness  in  a  lawsuit.  One  of  the  lawyers,  after  cross-questioning  him  severely, 
said,  "Your  father  has  been  talking  to  you  and  telling  you  how  to  testify,  hasn't 
he  ?  "  "  Yes,"  said  the  boy.  "  Now,"  said  the  lawyer,  "  just  tell  us  how  your  father 
told  you  to  testify."  "  Well,"  said  the  boy  modestly,  "  father  told  me  that  the  lawyers 
would  try  and  tangle  me  in  my  testimony;  but  if  I  would  just  be  careful  and  tell 
the  truth,  I  could  tell  the  same  thing  every  time."  The  lawyer  didn't  try  to  tangle 
that  boy  any  more.  (The  Fireside  News.)  Falsehood  and  flaio  : — What  a  flaw  is 
in  steel,  what  a  foreign  substance  is  in  any  texture,  that  a  falsehood  is  to  the 
character,  a  source  of  weakness,  a  point  where  under  strain  it  may  break. 
{Newman  Smyth.) 

Ver.  6.  A  scomer  seeketh  wisdom,  and  findeth  it  not. — Secularism  : — It  is  the  con- 
stant profession  of  those  who  reject  the  Bible  that  they  are  seeking  truth.  They 
seek  wisdom  and  do  not  find  it.  They  want  the  first  qualification  of  a  philosopher, 
a  humble  and  teachable  spirit.  There  is  a  race  of  men  amongst  us  at  the  present 
day  who  scorn  bitterly  faith's  meek  submission  to  God's  revealed  will.  They 
desire  to  be  free  from  authority.  The  divinity,  as  they  phrase  it,  is  in  every  man. 
If  men  really  were  independent  beings,  it  would  be  right  to  assert  and  proclaim 
their  independence.  But  the  problem  for  man  is,  not  to  reject  all  masters,  but  to 
accept  the  rightful  one.  Those  who  scorn  the  wisdom  from  above  seek  laboriously 
for  the  wisdom  that  is  beneath.  The  name  "secularist  "  is  adopted  to  indicate  that 
they  appreciate  and  study  the  knowledge  that  concerns  the  present  world,  and 
repudiate  as  unattainable  or  useless  all  knowledge  that  pertains  to  another. 
"  Secularism  "  is  Latin  for  "  this-world-ism. "  Before  we  adopt  this  philosophy  we 
must  be  sure  that  there  is  immortality  for  man.  If  there  is  another  world,  our 
course  here  will  affect  our  condition  there.  It  is  by  faith  in  the  unseen  that  men 
steer  through  the  shifting  sea  of  time.  Cut  us  off  from  the  future,  and  you  have 
left  the  ship  without  a  chart,  and  without  a  store  ;  without  a  compass  to  steer  by, 
and  without  a  harbour  to  steer  for ;  you  have  left  the  ship  an  aimless,  meaningless, 
log  lying  on  the  water,  to  be  tossed  up  and  down  by  the  waves,  and  driven  hither 
and  thither  by  the  winds,  until  it  fall  asunder  or  sink  unseen.  {W.  Amot,  D.D.) 
The  proud  and  scornful  incapable  of  attaining  wisdom  : — I.  The  chaeacter  of  a 
BCORNEE.  The  following  ingredients  in  it :  1.  Pride.  An  undue  desire  of  honour, 
or  an  overvaluing  one's  self,  and  undervaluing  of  others.  It  is  the  source  of 
undutiful  behaviour  towards  God.  It  is  discovered  by  affecting  a  pre-eminence 
above  their  fellows.  Some  claim  honour  on  account  of  their  actual  knowledge 
or  their  capacity  of  investigating  and  discerning  truth.  To  some  religion  is  itself 
the  subject  of  glorying  and  vain  elation  of  mind.  2.  Contempt  of  religion  and 
virtue  (2  Pet.  Ui.  3,  4).    II.  The  obstruction  which  arisbs  fbom  scobnino  to  mhn's 


350  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xit. 

BECOiriNG  ■WISE.  1.  Pride  is  a  gi'eat  hindrance  both  to  the  attainment  of  knowledge 
and  virtue.  Especially  is  the  man  who  is  proud  of  his  wisdom  and  his  religion  the 
farthest  off  from  becoming  truly  wise  and  religious.  2.  This  perverse  disposition 
rendereth  men  obnoxious  to  the  displeasure  of  God,  and  entirely  disqualified  for 
receiving  favour  from  Him.  Only  apphcation  is  to  exhort  you  to  humility,  as  a  most 
necessary  qualification  for  your  increase  in  useful  knowledge,  and  in  every  Chris- 
tian virtue.  There  may  be  mistaken  notions  of  humility.  It  is  far  from  consisting 
in  any  such  sentiments  as  disparage  human  nature,  or  any  such  temper  and 
behaviour  as  are  unworthy  its  dignity.  We  must  not  degrade  ourselves  into  a 
lower  species  that  we  may  be  humble  men.  With  respect  to  God,  it  consists  in  a 
just  sense  of  our  own  subjection  and  dependence,  of  our  own  weakness  and  guilt. 
This  disposition  will  entitle  us  to  the  favour  of  God  and  the  approbation  of  all 
good  men.  {J.  Aherncthy ,  M.A)  A  scorner  incapable  of  true  wisdom  :  — I.  Who 
IS  KEPRESENTED  HERE  uxDER  THE  CHARACTER  OF  scoRXER  ?  Scomers  Were  men  who, 
•with  much  ado,  had  made  a  shift  to  get  rid  of  good  principles,  and  such  stiff 
opinions  as  they  found  inconsistent  with  a  loose  practice.  As  they  had  not  any 
religion  themselves,  so  their  way  was  to  despise  those  who  had.  The  scorner  ig 
said  to  "  seek  wisdom  "  and  "  not  to  find  it."  He  pretends  to  know  more,  to  have 
made  freer  inquiries  after  truth,  and  to  have  shaken  off  the  prejudices  of  education 
more  thoroughly  than  other  people.  II.  In  what  sense  he  cannot  find  wisdom. 
Four  things  unfit  such  a  man  for  impartial  inquiries  after  Divine  truth — a  very 
proud,  or  a  very  suspicious  temper,  false  wit,  or  sensuality.  The  two  last  generally 
belong  to  him ;  but  the  two  first  are  essential  to  him,  and  inseparable  from  him. 
There  is  no  quality  that  sticks  more  closely  to  a  scorner  than  pride,  and  nothing 
more  evidently  obstructs  right  reasoning.  Suspicion  makes  him  doubt  everything 
be  hears  and  distrust  every  man  he  converses  with.  An  extremity  of  suspicion  in 
an  inquirer  after  truth  is  like  a  raging  jealousy  in  a  husband  or  a  friend  ;  it  leads  a 
man  to  turn  all  his  thoughts  towards  the  ill-natured  side,  and  to  put  the  worst  con- 
struction upon  everything.  False  wit  is  a  way  of  exposing  things  sacred  and 
serious,  by  passing  a  bold  jest  upon  them  and  ridiculing  arguments  instead  of 
comforting  them.  The  sensual  man  is,  of  all  men  living,  the  most  improper  for 
inquiries  after  truth  and  the  legist  at  leisure  for  it.  He  is  never  sedate  and  cool, 
disinterested  and  impartial.     {Bp.  Atterbury.) 

Ver.  7.  Go  from  the  presence  of  a  foolisli  man. — The  society  to  he  shunned  : — Man 
is  a  social  being.  The  text  holds  up  the  society  which  we  should  avoid — the  society 
of  the  foolish.  I.  It  is  unprofitable.  What  you  want  in  society  is  knowledge. 
True  knowledge  shall — 1.  Rightly  guide.  2.  Truly  comfort.  3.  Eeligiously  inspire 
the  soul.  But  such  knowledge  is  not  to  be  got  from  the  foolish  man.  He  has  no  power 
to  help  you,  and  therefore  time  spent  in  his  society  is  waste.  II.  It  is  snsLE.iDiNO. 
"  The  folly  of  fools  is  deceit."  1.  They  cheat  themselves.  They  fancy  they  have 
the  true  ideas,  and  the  true  pleasures,  but  it  is  a  miserable  delusion.  2.  They 
cheat  others.  They  mislead  by  the  falsehood  of  their  speech  and  the  craftiness  of 
their  policy.  3.  It  is  wicked.  They  "make  a  mock  at  sin."  "  Go,"  then,  "  from 
the  presence  of  a  foolish  man."  Seek  the  society  of  the  wise.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
Safety  inflight : — It  is  the  intention  of  their  Maker  that  some  creatures  should 
seek  safety,  not  in  fighting,  but  in  fleeing.  In  the  moral  conflict  of  human  life  it 
is  of  great  importance  to  judge  rightly  when  we  should  fight  and  when  we  should 
flee.  The  weak  might  escape  if  they  knew  their  own  weakness,  and  kept  out  of 
harm's  way.  That  courage  is  not  a  virtue  which  carries  the  feeble  into  the  lion's 
jaws.  To  go  in  among  the  foolish  for  the  rescue  of  the  sinking  may  be  necessary, 
but  it  is  dangerous  work,  and  demands  robust  workmen.  Your  first  duty  is  your 
own  safety.  But  on  some  persons  at  some  times  there  lies  the  obligation  to 
encounter  danger  for  the  safety  of  a  neighbour.     (JT.  Arnot,  D.D.) 

Ver.  9.  Fools  make  a  mock  at  sin. — Thinking  lightly  of  sin: — ^Breathing  an 
atmosphere  tainted  with  moral  evil,  seeing  and  hearing  sin  in  our  daily  walks,  we 
are  in  no  small  danger  of  overlooking  its  malignity.  The  word  "sin"  is  to  many 
obscure.  It  is  seldom  used  in  common  life.  It  belongs  to  theology  and  the  pulpit. 
According  to  Scripture  there  is  nothing  so  evil,  so  deformed,  so  ruinous,  as  sin. 
To  do  wrong  is  more  pernicious  than  to  incur  all  the  calamities  which  nature  or 
human  malice  can  heap  upon  us.  Sin,  violated  duty,  the  evil  of  the  heart,  this  is 
the  only  evil  of  which  Scripture  takes  account.  It  was  from  this  that  Christ  came 
to  redeem  us.    Scripture  leads  as  to  connect  with  sin  or  wrong-doing  the  ideas  of 


CHAP.  XIV.]  PROVERBS.  351 

evil,  wretchedness,  and  debasement,  more  strongly  than  with  anything  else.  I.  Oub 
NATURES  TESTHTc  THAT  SIN  IS  THE  CHIEF  OF  EVILS.  Evil  has  various  forms,  these  set 
in  two  divisions,  natural  and  moral ;  pain  or  suffering  springing  from  outward 
conduct  and  events,  independent  of  our  will :  and  evil  related  to  character  and 
conduct,  and  inspired  by  the  will.  Vice  is  manifestly  more  to  be  dreaded  than 
pain.  AU  will  agree  that  excellence  of  character  is  the  supreme  good,  and  that 
baseness  of  soul  and  of  action  involves  something  worse  than  suffering.  Our  very 
nature  teaches  the  doctrine  of  Christianity,  that  sin  or  moral  evil  ought  of  aU  evils 
to  inspire  most  abhorrence  and  fear.  II.  Experience  testifies  that  sin  is  the 
CHIEF  OF  evils.  Though  sin  sometimes  prospers,  and  never  meets  its  full  retribution 
on  earth,  yet,  on  the  whole,  it  produces  more  present  suffering  than  all  things  else ; 
so  that  experience  warns  us  against  sin  or  wrong-doing  as  the  chief  evil  we  can 
incur.     To  do  wrong  is  to  inflict  the  surest  injury  on  our  own  peace.     III.  The 

MISERIES  OF  DISOBEDIENCE  TO  CONSCIENCE  AND  GoD  ARE  NOT  EXHAUSTED   IN    THIS   LIFE. 

Sin  deserves,  calls  for,  and  will  bring  down,  future,  greater  misery.  This  Chris- 
tianity, and  this  nature,  teaches.  Some,  indeed,  assert  that  punishment  is  confined 
to  the  present  state  ;  that  in  changing  worlds  we  shall  change  our  characters,  and 
that  moral  evil  is  to  be  buried  with  the  body  in  the  grave.  But  to  suppose  no 
connection  to  exist  between  the  present  and  the  future  character  is  to  take  away 
the  use  of  the  present  state.  It  is  even  plainly  implied  in  Scripture,  that  we  shall 
suffer  much  more  from  sin,  evil  tempers,  irreligion,  in  the  future  world,  than  we 
Buffer  here.  I  have  spoken  of  the  pains  and  penalties  of  moral  evil  or  of  wrong- 
doing, in  the  world  to  come.  How  long  they  wiU  endure  I  know  not.  (W.  E. 
Channing,  D.D.)  The  danger  of  making  light  of  sin : — I.  The  foolishness  in 
ITSELF.  Sin  is  really  a  very  terrible  thing  :  nothing  is  so  terrible.  Ask  its  slave 
and  its  victim.  If  you  look  from  its  work  within  you  to  its  work  around  you,  is 
the  foolishness  much  less  manifest  ?  What  but  sin  is  the  cause  of  all  the  misery 
around  us?  II.  The  consequences  of  mocking  at  sin.  1.  The  effects  of  this 
mocking  on  the  mocker  himself.  Nothing  can  be  so  deadening  to  the  soul. 
Because  laughingat  sin  relieves  us  of  fear  of  it.  Such  mocking  is  altogether  alien 
from,  and  contrary  to,  the  mind  of  Christ,  Moreover,  it  must  quench  the  Spirit. 
It  must  kiU  the  first  beginnings  of  repentance.  2.  Consequences  upon  others. 
There  is  nothing  more  corrupting  of  others  than  this  mocking  at  sin.  Such  men 
may  be  found  doing  their  deadly  work  everywhere,  and  in  every  rank  of  society. 
The  young  are  their  peculiar  victims.  The  mocker's  work  is  often  irretrievable. 
No  one  who  has  led  another  to  laugh  at  sin  can  ever  calculate  or  undo  the  work  he 
may  have  done.  Learn — 1.  To  fly  from  the  very  first  beginnings  of  this  sin,  whether 
in  yourself  or  in  others.  2.  Understand  the  real  value  of  that  in  which  you  are 
tempted  to  join.  3.  If  you  are  tempted  to  envy  sinners  their  laugh,  or  to  shrink 
from  their  mockeries,  seek  the  defence,  relief,  and  strengthening  of  prayer.  {Bishop 
S.  Wilberforce.)  Mockers  at  sin  : — Of  two  kinds.  Those  who  ridicule  all  fear  of 
offending  God.  Those  who  will  not  go  this  length,  but  make  sins  matters  of  jest 
rather  than  of  conscience.  I.  What  sin  is.  The  transgression  of  a  reasonable, 
holy,  and  righteous  law.  11.  The  consequences  op  making  a  mock  at  sin.  The 
general  consequence  of  this  practice  must  be  the  prevailing  of  sin  and  unrighteous- 
ness in  the  world.  The  passions  of  mankind  lead  them  by  a  strong  propensity  to 
what  is  forbidden,  and  all  the  fences  and  guards  of  religion  are  found  httle 
enough  to  restrain  our  compliance.  Whatever  weakens  these  restraints  must,  in 
the  same  proportion,  occasion  the  increase  of  all  ungodliness.  What  can  more 
effectually  contribute  to  this  evil  than  making  a  mock  at  sin  ?  The  natural  reluc- 
tances of  reason  and  conscience  will  generally  guard  men  against  open  scoffers, 
who  ridicule  aU  fear  of  God,  aU  restraints  of  virtue  and  religion.  But  there  are 
other  mockers,  whose  influence  is  more  to  be  feared.  Men  who  wiU  permit  you  to 
keep  a  reserve  of  religion,  will  pretend  to  agree  with  you  in  detesting  some  crimes, 
but  persuade  you  to  think  others  only  ludicrous  amusements,  which  it  is  weakness 
and  superstition  to  abstain  from  yourselves,  and  a  morose,  unconversable  severity 
to  censure  in  your  neighbours.  This  is  a  temptation  to  which  we  are  exceedingly 
open.  How  much  we  are  obliged  in  duty,  and  concerned  in  interest,  to  correct  and 
oppose  this  vain,  irreligious  humour  of  mocking  at  sin !  To  check  this  growing 
evU,  let  us  reflect  on  that  holy  and  dreadful  presence  before  whom  we  stand.  The 
eyes  of  our  Judge  are  always  over  us.  {J.  Rogers,  D.D.)  Mocking  at  sin  : — Sin 
may  briefly  be  described  as  the  wilful  violation  of  the  moral  law  of  God,  made 
known  to  us  in  conscience  and  in  revelation.  Describe  some  of  the  forms  under 
which  men  evidence  their  mocking  contempt  of  the  power  and  design  of  sin.    To 


352  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiT. 

the  grossest  phases  of  this  sin  we  need  scarcely  do  more  than  allude.  Against  the 
more  specious  forms  of  this  sin  there  is  need  of  warning.  1.  A  man  may, 
without  directly  denying  the  evil  of  sin,  yet  treat  it  with  most  unseemly  levity.' 
2.  Some  men  are  in  the  habit  of  speaking  of  sin,  that  is,  of  the  popular  and  lesa 
flagrant  kinds  of  sin,  as  being  indeed,  in  a  modified  sense,  an  evil ;  but  as  one 
which  is  inherent  in,  and  inseparable  from,  humanity,  which  must  therefore  be 
submitted  to  in  part,  as  a  man  would  endure  the  enforced  society  of  a  disagreeable 
companion,  whom  circumstances  would  not  permit  him  to  discard.  3.  Men  mock 
at  sin  when  they  bear  false  witness  concerning  the  fruits  and  effects  of  sin  in  them- 
selves and  others.  If  sin  be  a  man's  worst  enemy,  and  a  very  powerful  and 
malignant  enemy,  he  who  should  mock  at  it,  and  deride  it,  must  be  acting  the  part 
of  a  vain,  senseless,  and  presumptuous  braggart.  No  man  can  really  believe  sin  to 
be  a  matter  for  laughter.  From  all  irreverence,  and  all  unholy  mirth  in  relation 
to  sin,  may  God  deliver  us  !  (G.  W.  Brameld,  M.A.)  The  folly  of  mocking  at 
sin : — I.  What  is  it  to  mock  at  sin  ?  Sin  is  the  transgression  of  the  law  ;  doing 
what  God  forbids,  or  omitting  to  do  what  He  commands.  The  term  "  mock,"  as 
applied  to  the  law  of  God,  may  include  ridiculing,  trifling  with  its  authority  and 
sanctions,  or  palliating  and  excusing  the  breach  of  it.  1.  There  are  some  who  scoff, 
openly  profane,  and  set  at  defiance  the  law  of  God.  Of  these  there  are  two  classes, 
the  one  urged  by  their  sensual  appetites,  the  other  by  their  intellectual  pride. 
There  are  others  who  see  the  necessity  of  a  certain  attention  to  moral  conduct,  but 
look  with  a  sullen,  contemptuous,  sceptical  eye  upon  revelation.  2.  There  are 
some  who  mock  at  sin  by  "  trifling"  with  it.  They  suffer  almost  anything  to  set 
aside  obedience  to  God  ;  they  expose  themselves  unnecessarily  to  temptation  ;  they 
frequent  companies  and  places,  involve  themselves  in  employments,  which  are 
likely  to  lead  them  to  sin,  and  yet  mock  at  the  idea  of  danger  from  them.  They 
do  not  give  the  law  of  God,  in  reference  to  the  regulation  of  their  daily  conduct,  a 
thought  either  one  way  or  the  other.  3.  There  are  others  who  may  be  said  to  mock 
at  sin  by  "  excusing  and  palliating  it."  They  contend  that  there  is  more  good 
than  evil  in  the  world.  They  think  the  gospel  dispensation  has  lowered  the 
requirements  of  the  law.  II.  The  folly  of  such  mockeks.  What  justifies  ridicule, 
trifling,  and  palliation,  and  does  this  apply  to  sin  ?  1.  We  ridicule  what  it  is 
beneath  argument  to  confute.  Kidicule  is,  at  all  times,  a  dangerous  weapon, 
seldom  befitting  the  spirit  of  a  real  Christian.  Absurdity  is  the  object  of  ridicule. 
But  what  is  there  of  absurdity  connected  with  the  law  of  God,  that  we  should  laugh 
at  the  breach  of  it  ?  There  is  something  more  specious  in  the  mockery  of  intel- 
lectual pride  at  the  transgression  of  God's  law ;  because  we  are,  from  the  depravity 
of  our  nature,  less  susceptible  of  the  enormity  of  spiritual  sins  than  of  sins  of  the 
flesh.  Ambition  and  pride,  for  instance,  with  the  world  give  a  dignity  to  the 
character,  where  drunkenness  would  excite  disgust.  2.  Where  is  the  sense,  or 
wisdom,  of  trifling  with  sin  ?  Has  the  breach,  or  observance,  of  God's  law  so  little 
to  do  with  our  happiness  or  misery,  as  really  to  be  scarcely  worth  our  serious 
attention  ?  Are  the  consequences  of  sin  unimportant  ?  3.  The  folly  of  excusing 
or  palliating  sin  is  no  less  manifest.  It  lessens  the  abhorrence  of  sin  in  our  mind. 
By  having  low  views  of  sin,  we  adopt  low  standards  of  duty,  low  aims  at  usefulness, 
low  views  of  the  holiness  of  God.  To  palliate  sin  is  to  destroy  the  harmony  of  the 
Divine  attributes,  to  rob  Christ  of  His  glory,  Christianity  of  its  motives,  and  to 
beguile  us  into  a  fatal  neglect,  or  even  denial  of  its  fundamental  doctrines.  By 
palliating  sin  we  also  encourage  the  commission  of  sin  in  others  ;  as  many  a  parent 
has  found  by  bitter  experience,  in  screening  children  from  proper  correction,  from 
a  foolish  regard  to  the  feelings  of  the  moment  When  shall  we  learn  that  every 
deviation  from  the  will  of  God  is  a  loss  of  happiness?  (B.  E.  Nicholli,  M.A.) 
The  fool  and  his  sport: — A  man  may  be  a  fool  in  two  ways  :  by  knowing  too  little, 
or  too  much.  I.  The  fool.  Every  wicked  man  is  a  fool.  See  this  by  comparing 
their  properties.  1.  It  is  a  fool's  property  to  have  no  foresight  of  future  things. 
2.  To  affect  things  hurtful  to  himself.  3.  To  prefer  trifles  and  toys  before  matters 
of  worth  and  weight.  The  fool  will  not  give  his  bauble  for  the  king's  exchequer. 
Illustrate  by  the  prodigal  son.  4.  To  run  on  his  course  with  precipitation.  As 
these  fools  are  many,  so  they  are  of  many  kinds.  There  is  the  sad  fool  and  the 
glad  fool,  the  haughty  fool  and  the  naughty  fool.  II.  The  sport  of  the  fool. 
The  fathers  call  "making  a  mock  at  sin,"  the  lowest  degree  of  sin,  and  the  very 
threshold  of  hell.  Consider  the  object  of  the  fool's  sport — sin.  1.  Sin,  which  is 
contrary  to  goodness,  and  though  to  man's  corrupt  nature  pleasing,  yet  even 
abhorred  of  those  sparks  and  cinders  which  the  rust  of  sin  hath  not  quite  eaten 


OHAT-xiv.]  PROVERBS.  353 

out  of  onr  nature  as  the  creation  left  it.  It  is  a  contra-natural  thing  to  "  make  a 
mock  at  sin."  2.  Sin,  which  sensibly  brings  on  present  judgments.  3.  Sin,  which, 
if  it  bring  not  present  judgments,  is  the  more  fearful.  The  less  punishment 
wickedness  receives  here,  the  more  is  behind.  4.  Sin,  that  shall  at  last  be  laid 
heavy  on  the  conscience.  5.  Sin,  which  provokes  God  to  anger.  6.  Sin,  which 
God  so  loathed  that  He  could  not  serve  His  own  elect  because  of  it,  but  by  killing 
His  own  Son.  7.  Sin,  that  shall  be  punished  by  death — the  second  death.  But 
I  cease  urging  this  terror,  and  would  rather  persuade  you  by  the  love  of  God. 
(T.  Adams^  The  folly  of  mocking  at  sin  : — I.  What  is  meant  by  making  a  mock 
AT  sm.  There  are  three  sorts  of  sinners  who,  in  their  several  degrees,  may  justly 
be  charged  with  this  guilt.  1.  Those  who  esteem  it  a  piece  of  courage  to  despise 
all  religion,  and  a  greatness  of  mind  to  deride  all  the  obligations  of  virtue.  2.  Those 
who  do  not  in  words,  but  do  in  deeds,  bring  contempt  upon  religion.  This  practical 
insult  upon  religion ;  this  contempt  of  virtue  and  goodness  in  men's  lives  and 
actions  is  really,  in  the  sight  of  God,  a  making  a  mock  at  sin.  3.  Entertaining  so 
slight  an  opinion  of  the  evil  and  danger  of  sin,  as  makes  men  who  are  not  entirely 
profligate,  yet  content  themselves  with  distant  resolutions  of  future  repentance,  and 
in  the  meantime  speak  peace  to  themselves  in  the  practice  of  unrighteousness,  or 
in  the  enjoyment  of  unlawful  pleasures     H.  Upon  what  gbounds  oe  reasons  men 

AEE    TEMPTED    TO   BE    GUILTY   OE   THE    SEVERAL    DEGREES  OP  THIS  VICE.       1.    As  to  those 

profane  spirits  who  esteem  it  a  mark  of  courage  to  despise  all  religion,  the  only 
ground  these  have  to  go  upon  is  atheism  and  infidelity.  The  only  foundation  this 
kind  of  mockers  build  upon  is  the  hope  that  there  will  be  no  future  state,  no 
judgment  to  come.  2.  Those  who  pretend  to  believe  a  God,  and  yet  live  viciously, 
flatter  themselves  with  a  notion  that  sin  is  not  of  so  dangerous  a  nature  as  the 
preachers  of  the  gospel  represent  it  to  be.  3.  Those  who  are  really  sensible  of  the 
necessity  of  true  repentance  and  amendment,  and  yet  at  the  present  speak  peace  to 
themselves  in  the  practice  of  unrighteousness,  can  only  find  a  foundation  in  an 
artificial  design  of  securing  to  themselves  both  worlds,  and  of  ingrossing  more 
happiness  than  either  God  or  Nature  designed  them.  This  is  a  mocking  of  God, 
but  more  truly  a  mocking  or  deceiving  of  themselves.     III.  How  weak  all  those 

GROUNDS  really  AEE,  AND  HOW  GREAT  IS    THE   FOLLY   OF   ACTING    ON    THEM.       As    tO    the 

first  kind  of  profane  mockers,  what  is  the  state  of  such  persons  when  God  takes 
away  their  soul  ?  Can  they  be  sure  there  is  no  God,  and  no  future  state  ?  The 
hardiest  unbeliever  never  yet  pretended  to  have  demonstration  in  this  case.  As  to 
the  second  kind,  those  who  make  profession,  but  live  viciously,  on  a  general 
expectation  that  sin  is  less  dangerous,  and  God  more  merciful  than  is  usually 
represented.  God  is  not  in  the  least  likely  to  be  imposed  upon  by  an  outward 
profession  of  service,  which  even  an  earthly  superior  would  with  indignation  reject. 
As  to  the  third  kind,  those  who  indulge  at  present,  with  promise  to  themselves  of 
amendment  by  and  by  ;  it  may  be  said  that  this  foUy  is  playing  with  death  and 
sporting  with  destruction.  It  is  the  folly  of  letting  slip  opportunities  which  may 
never  be  retrieved.  It  is  the  folly  of  provoking  God  to  cut  us  off  in  His  wrath. 
It  is  the  folly  of  incapacitating  a  man's  self  more  and  more  for  the  doing  of 
that  which  yet  is  of  absolute  necessity  not  to  be  left  undone.  The  longer 
any  man  continues  in  sin,  the  more  difficult  it  becomes  for  him  to  leave  it 
off.  He  grows  hardened  through  the  deceitfulness  of  sin.  (S.  Clarke,  D.D.) 
The  evil  of  sin  : — I.  In  its  nature.  Its  evil  is  most  strikingly  represented  by  con- 
trasting it  with  the  character  of  God,  against  whom  it  is  committed  ;  and  with  the 
law  of  God,  of  which  it  is  the  transgression.  1.  God  is  a  Being  of  the  most  perfect 
excellence,  possessed  of  every  attribute  that  can  excite  the  admiration,  love,  and 
esteem  of  His  intelligent  creatures.  Holiness  is  the  chief  and  brightest  attribute  of 
the  Godhead.  Sin  aims  at  the  destruction  of  all  the  perfections  of  God.  2.  The 
law  of  God  is  a  transcript  of  His  perfections.  It  is  not  only  holy  and  just,  but  like- 
wise good,  calculated  to  promote  the  happiness  of  those  who  are  subject  to  its 
authority.  Sin  is  the  transgression  of  the  law,  and  therefore  must  contain  in  it  a 
malignity  and  vileness  proportioned  to  the  purity  and  excellence  of  the  law  of  God. 
Sin  is  the  greatest  of  evils  because  it  is  opposite  to  the  greatest  good.  II.  In  its 
EFFECTS.  Within  us  and  around  us  we  contemplate  the  baneful  consequences  of 
this  mortal  evil.  No  sorrow  or  misery  of  any  kind  can  be  named  that  does  not 
spring  from  this  root  of  bitterness.  1.  See  mischief  done  to  the  angels  who  kept 
not  their  first  estate.  2.  Man,  formed  after  his  Maker's  image,  is  likewise  become  a 
fallen  and  sinful  creature.  The  calamities  of  earth  bear  marks  of  man's  fatal 
apostasy  from  God.     The  whole  creation  groaneth.     3.  The  effects  of  sin  are  even 

24 


354  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xit. 

yet  more  serious  in  a  future  and  eternal  state.  III.  The  views  which  peesons  in 
piFFEEENT  SITUATIONS  ENTEETAiN  coNCEENiNG  SIN.  Thcsc  differ  accordlng  to  their 
different  moral  characters.  The  more  profligate  a  man  becomes,  the  less  evil  he 
perceives  in  sin.  The  purer  a  man  is  the  clearer  and  deeper  are  his  convictions  of 
the  guilt  and  danger  of  transgressing  the  law  of  God.  {David  Black.)  The  folly  of 
finners  in  making  a  mock  at  sin  .-—I.  The  charactek  of  wicked  and  ungodly  men. 
The  phrase  "  making  a  mock  "  sometimes  signifies  an  abusing  of  others  by  violent 
and  lewd  actions  ;  sometimes  an  exposing  of  men  to  shame  and  dishonour  ;  some- 
times an  imposing  upon  the  credulity  of  others,  things  that  seem  incredible  and 
impossible  ;  sometimes  it  is  taken  for  a  failing  in  our  promises.  Two  other  accepta- 
tions that  are  more  to  the  present  purpose.  1.  The  word  "mock"  is  taken  for 
scoffing,  or  bitter  taunting  at  others  (Luke  xxiii.  11  ;  Heb.  xi.  36).  2.  Mocking 
may  be  taken  for  slighting,  and  making  no  account  of  ;  looking  upon  things  or 
persons  as  trivial  and  inconsiderable.  II.  The  censure  passed  upon  them.  They  are 
' '  fools  "  who  make  a  mock  at  sin.  1.  They  are  fools  who  make  a  mock  at  other  men's 
sins,  so  as  to  turn  them  into  matter  of  jest  and  raillery.  Consider  what  an  accursed, 
horrid  thing  it  is  to  tempt  others  to  sin  only  that  thou  mayest  afterwards  make 
sport  with  them,  and  raise  a  scene  of  mirth  out  of  the  ruin  of  their  souls.  How 
desperately  impious,  wicked  wretches  they  are  who  sin  only  to  make  others  sport. 
2.  They  are  fools  who  make  a  mock  at  their  own  sins,  so  as  to  think  the  com- 
mission of  them  but  a  slight,  inconsiderable  matter.  This  will  appear  from  three 
things.  Slight  provocations  and  easy  temptations  are  sufficient  to  make  them  rush 
boldly  into  the  commission  of  sin.  It  is  very  hard  to  work  these  men  into  any  true 
sorrow  or  compunction  for  their  sins.  If  they  are  moved  at  all  with  these  things  ; 
yet  they  think  that  a  slight  and  formal  repentance  will  suffice  to  make  amends  for 
all.  What  is  it  that  induceth  and  persuadeth  wicked  men  to  make  so  light  of 
their  sins?  Two  answers:  1.  Because  they  see  so  few  instances  of  God's  dread 
wrath  and  vengeance  executed  on  sinners  in  this  life ;  and  those  rare  ones,  that  are 
extant  and  visible,  they  impute  rather  to  chance  than  to  the  retribution  of  Divine 
justice.  2.  And  because  it  is  assumed  that  God  cannot  be  affected  with  any  real 
injury,  for,  as  He  is  not  benefited  by  our  service,  so  He  is  not  wronged  by  our 
iniquities.  The  great  and  inexcusable  folly  of  making  light  of  sin  cannot  be  sur- 
passed. (E.  Hopkins,  D.D.)  The  conduct  of  the  mocker : — 1.  It  involves  impiety. 
To  mock  at  sin  is  to  despise  God's  hoUness,  to  set  at  nought  His  authority,  to  abuse 
God's  goodness,  to  disregard  and  slight  God's  glory,  to  make  light  of  God's  curse 
and  threatened  vengeance ;  which  implies  a  denial  of  God's  truth,  and  a  scornful 
defiance  of  God's  power.  2.  It  involves  cruelty.  There  breathes  not  on  earth  a 
more  inhuman,  a  more  iron-hearted  monster,  than  the  man  who  "  makes  a  mock  at 
sin."  3.  And  such  mockery  is  most  infatuated.  Sin  is  the  evil  that  is  ruining  the 
poor  sinner  himself— hurrying  him  to  perdition.  [R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  The  folly 
of  mocking  at  religion : — I.  Prove  that  the  name  of  fools  is  due  to  those  who 
MOCK  AT  sin.  There  are  three  ways  whereby  wicked  men  seek  to  justify  them- 
selves. By  laying  the  blame  of  all  their  evil  actions,  either  upon  the  fatal  necessity 
of  all  events,  the  unavoidable  frailty  of  human  nature,  or  the  impossibility  of 
keeping  the  laws  of  heaven.  These  plausible  pretences  are  worthless,  and  those 
who  plead  them  are  thus  declared  to  be  "  fools."  II.  Make  particular  impeach- 
ment OF  THEIR  FOLLY,  BECAUSE  THEY  MAKE  A  MOCK  AT  SIN.       Tllls  is  prOVcd  beCaUSC 1. 

This  mocking  argues  the  highest  degree  of  wickedness ;  and — 2.  Betrays  the  greatest 
weakness  of  judgment,  and  want  of  consideration.  If  to  sin  be  folly,  to  make  a 
mock  of  it  is  little  short  of  madness.  The  folly  is  seen  in  view  of — 1.  Whom  they 
provoke,  even  the  Governor  of  the  world.  2.  Whom  the  injury  redounds  to. 
3.  There  can  be  no  imaginable  consideration  thought  on  which  might  look  like  a 
plausible  temptation  to  it.  What  is  it  which  the  persons  who  despise  religion,  and 
laugh  at  everything  serious,  propose  to  themselves  as  the  reasons  for  what  they  do? 
[Bp.  Stillingfieet.)  Fools  : — I.  Who  are  those  who  m.uce  a  mock  at  sin  ?  1.  The 
man  who  openly  glories  in  his  own  wickedness.  2.  The  man  who  winks  at,  or 
smiles  graciously  on,  the  evil  deeds  of  other  men,  in  business,  politics,  or  social 
life.  3.  Those  who  mock  at  the  reprovers  of  sin.  4.  He  who  leads  others  into  sin, 
or  encourages  others  to  abide  in  it.  Every  man  makes  a  mock  at  sin  who,  either 
in  his  religions  creed,  or  by  his  daily  conduct,  shows  that  he  regards  sin  as  a  trifle. 
If  you  would  understand  why  God  denounces  sin  as  something  terrible  and 
monstrous,  you  must  observe  its  awful  consequences,  inquiring  not  merely  what  sin 
is,  but  what  sin  has  done  and  will  do.  Sin  is  a  disease  of  the  soul ;  a  paralysis  that 
weakens    a  leprosy  that  pollutes,  a  plague  that  tortures,  a  pestilence  that  destroys 


CHAP,  xrv.]  PROVERBS.  855 

the  whole  spirit  within  us.  II.  Why  aee  such  mockers  fools  ?  To  make  a  mock 
at  a  thing  is,  in  a  way,  either  to  treat  it  or  regard  it  as  of  little  moment.  And  if  the 
thing  is  very  mighty  or  great,  either  in  itself  or  in  its  influences,  such  mockery  must 
be  foolish.  (C.  Wad.nvorth,  D.D.)  The  folly  of  viodcing  at  sin: — I.  They  abb 
FOOLS  WHO  MAKE  A  MOCK  AT  OTHER  men's  SINS.  Sius  which  are  open  and  going 
beforehand  unto  judgment,  are  but  too  often  made  the  occasion  of  mirth  and 
scoffing.  Wine  is  a  mocker,  and  the  man  overtaken  with  it  is  the  butt  of  his  com- 
panion's ridicule.  Violation  of  chastity  is  the  chosen  theme  of  many  thoughtless 
persons'  merriment.  The  monstrous  liar  finds  many  ready  to  draw  hiia  out,  that 
they  may  laugh  at  his  folly  in  supposing  they  will  believe  his  incredible  fictions. 
God  looks  on  all,  and  says  the  mockers  are  fools,  for  that  which  they  laugh  at  is  no 
jesting  matter,  either  in  its  nature  or  in  its  consequences  ;  and  let  those  who  have 
been  accustomed  even  to  smile  at  the  sins  of  others,  ponder — 1.  What  every  sin  is  ; 
2.  What  every  sin  deserves.  II,  They  are  fools  who  make  a  mock  at  sin  vx 
THEMSELVES,  SO  as  to  think  lightly  of  it,  and  treat  its  commission  as  an  inconsider- 
able matter.  1.  He  is  a  fool  who  mocks  at  his  sin,  taking  up  a  certain  guilt  on  the 
hope  of  an  uncertain  repentance.  2.  Supposing  you  were  infallibly  certain  that 
repentance  would  be  given,  you  would  still  be  a  fool  in  mocking  at  your  sin,  and 
going  on  in  it  in  hope  of  repentance.  For  what  is  repentance  ?  Not  an  easy,  soft 
balm  to  the  conscience,  but  the  sword  of  the  Spirit  cutting  into  the  heart,  and 
piercing  even  to  the  dividing  asunder  of  joints  and  marrow.  3.  They  are  fools 
who  make  light  of  their  sins,  hoping  they  will  be  pardoned,  for  in  so  doing  they 
mock  at  Christ's  sufferings.     {G.  Iiuies,  M.A.) 

Ver.  10.  The  heart  knoweth  Ms  own  bitterness  ;  and  a  stranger  doth  not  inter- 
meddle with  his  joy. — Man  unknown  to  man  : — You  cannot  completely  know  your 
fellow-man.  Every  man  is,  in  a  measure,  self-contained.  Alone  are  we  born,  one 
by  one ;  alone  do  we  die,  one  by  one.  It  is  not  surprising  that  we  must  be,  in  a 
measure,  unknown  to  others,  since  we  do  not  even  fully  know  ourselves.  There  are 
points  of  individuality  in  each  man  which  render  him  distinct  from  every  other. 
Men  in  their  highest  and  deepest  conditions  are  remarkably  secretive.  The  extreme 
heights  and  depths  lie  in  darkness.  Learn,  then,  that  we  may  not  judge  our 
brethren  as  though  we  understood  them,  and  were  competent  to  give  a  verdict  upon 
them.  If  we  desire  to  show  sympathy  to  our  brethren,  let  us  not  dream  that  this  is 
an  easy  task.  Study  the  art  of  sympathy.  We  all  need  sympathy,  and  there  is 
but  One  who  can  fuUy  give  it  to  us.  I.  The  heart  knows  a  bitterness  peculiar 
TO  ITSELF.  This  is  true  in  a  natural,  common,  and  moral  sense.  Concerning  any 
man  this  is  true.  The  shoe  pinches  on  every  foot,  and  that  foot  alone  knows  where 
the  pinch  is  felt.  Do  not  intrude  into  the  hidden  sorrows  of  any.  Most  solemnly 
this  is  true  concerning  the  godless  man  and  concerning  the  awakened  man.  When 
the  Holy  Spirit  begins  to  convince  the  man  of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of  judg- 
ment, then  "the  heart  knoweth  its  own  bitterness."  And  concerning  the  back- 
slider. And  concerning  the  tried  believer.  But  the  singularity  of  his  suffering  is 
the  dream  of  the  sufferer.  Others  have  seen  affliction  too.  Know  thy  sorrow  well. 
And  remember  that  the  cure  for  bitterness  of  heart  is  to  take  it  to  your  Lord  at 
once.  II.  The  heart  knows  a  sweetness  which  is  all  its  own.  1.  The  joy  of 
pardoned  sin.  2.  The  bliss  of  vanquished  evil.  3.  The  joy  of  perfect  reconcilia- 
tion with  God.  4.  The  joy  of  accepted  service.  5.  The  joy  of  answered  prayer. 
6.  The  joy  of  peace  in  the  time  of  trouble.  7.  The  joy  of  communion  with  God.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  On  the  joy  and  the  bitterness  of  the  heart : — The  sources  of  the  joy  or 
bitterness  of  the  heart  are  two.  1.  A  man's  own  mind  of  temper — a  man's  personal 
character.  Every  man  is  more  connected  with  himself  than  with  any  external 
object.  He  is  constantly  a  companion  to  himself  in  his  own  thoughts ;  and  what 
he  meets  with  there  must,  of  all  things,  contribute  most  to  his  happiness  or  his  dis- 
quiet. A  good  conscience,  and  good  temper,  prepare,  even  in  the  midst  of  poverty, 
a  continual  feast.  How  sadly  the  scene  is  reversed  if  a  man's  temper,  instead  of 
calmness  and  self-enjoyment,  shall  yield  him  nothing  but  disquiet  and  painful 
agitation.  The  wounds  which  the  spirit  suffers  are  owing  chiefly  to  three  causes : 
to  folly,  to  passion,  or  to  guilt.  The  external  misfortunes  of  life,  disappointments, 
poverty,  and  sickness  are  nothing  in  comparison  of  those  inward  distresses  of  mind 
occasioned  by  folly,  by  passion,  and  by  guilt.  2.  The  connection  in  which  a  man 
stands  with  some  of  his  fellow-creatures — a  man's  social  feelings.  Such  causes  of 
sorrow  or  joy  are  of  an  external  nature.  Having  cormected  us  in  society  by 
many  ties,  it  is  the  decree  of  the  Creator  that  these  ties  should  prove,  both  during 


356  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

their  subsistence  and  in  their  dissolution,  causes  of  pleasure  or  pain  immediately, 
and  often  deeply  affecting  the  human  heart.  The  most  material  circumstances  of 
trouble  or  felicity,  next  to  the  state  of  our  own  mind  and  temper,  are  the  sensations 
and  affections  which  arise  from  the  connections  we  have  from  others.  The  practical 
improvement  to  which  this  doctrine  leads  :  1.  Let  it  serve  to  moderate  our  passion 
for  riches  and  high  situations  in  the  world.  It  is  well  known  that  the  eager  pursuit 
of  these  is  the  chief  incentive  to  the  crimes  that  fill  the  world.  Then  contemplate 
these  things  with  an  impartial  eye.  2.  Let  these  observations  correct  our  mistakes, 
and  check  our  complaints,  concerning  a  supposed  promiscuous  distribution  of  happi- 
ness in  this  world.  The  charge  of  injustice  brought  against  Providence  rests 
entirely  on  this  ground,  that  the  happiness  and  misery  of  men  may  be  estimated  by 
the  degree  of  their  external  prosperity.  This  is  the  delusion  under  which  the 
multitude  have  always  laboured,  but  which  a  just  consideration  of  the  invisible 
springs  of  happiness  that  affect  the  heart  is  sufficient  to  correct.  Judge  not  of  the 
real  condition  of  men  from  what  floats  merely  on  the  surface  of  their  state.  3.  Let 
us  turn  our  attention  to  those  internal  sources  of  happiness  or  misery  on  which  so 
much  depends.  What  is  amiss  or  disordered  within,  in  consequence  of  folly, 
passion,  or  guilt,  may  be  rectified  by  due  care  under  the  assistance  of  Divine  grace. 
4.  Let  us  frequently  look  up  to  Him  who  made  the  human  heart,  and  implore  His 
assistance  in  the  regulation  and  government  of  it.  The  employments  of  devotion 
themselves  form  one  of  the  most  powerful  means  of  composing  and  tranquillising 
the  heart.  Devotion  opens  a  sanctuary  to  which  they  whose  hearts  have  been  most 
deeply  wounded  can  always  fly.  {Hugh  Blair,  D.D.)  The  secret  sorroivs  and 
joys  of  the  heart  known  to  God : — Each  man's  heart  is  to  himself  a  solitude,  into 
which  he  can  retire  and  be  alone,  indulging  his  own  thoughts  without  an  associate 
and  without  a  witness.  There  is  a  world  within  which  must  lie  undiscovered  by  the 
acutest  observer.  And  we  could  not  make  the  discovery  to  others  even  if  we  would. 
It  would  not  be  possible  to  communicate  to  another  all  that  is  within  us.  It  is  one 
of  the  delights  and  benefits  of  friendship  that  it  helps  men,  in  a  measure,  to  open 
their  minds  to  one  another.  But  this  can  only  be  done  in  part.  Every  one  has  his 
reserve.  This  is  especially  true  respecting  the  sorrows  and  joys  of  religion.  No 
Christian  can  find  a  spirit  so  perfectly  kindred  to  his  own  as  to  be  able  to  compre- 
hend all  the  sources  of  his  grief  or  of  his  gladness.  In  many  a  sorrow,  and  in 
many  a  joy,  he  must  be  solitary.  He  could  not  make  a  full  revelation  of  himself  if 
he  would  ;  he  would  not  if  he  could.  God  hath  so  ordered  it  that  no  man  can 
fully  reveal  to  another  the  secrets  of  his  soul.  This  truth  is  of  the  utmost  import- 
ance when  set  beside  the  other  truth,  that  God"knoweth  us  altogether."  Two 
practical  lessons:  1.  If  God  is  thus  near  to  us,  nearer  than  the  closest  and  most 
intimate  friend  can  be,  we  ought  to  feel  His  nearness,  and  bear  about  with  us  the 
constant  sense  of  it.  2.  If  our  hearts  are  in  a  great  measure  shut  out  fi'om  our 
fellow-man,  and  open  only  to  God,  it  is  in  His  sympathy  that  we  should  seek  our 
happiness.     (G.  Bellett.)         Cases  of  bitterness  of  heart  :—I.  Of  useeveaied  and 

NEGLECTED  SORROWS,  A  LARGE  PROPORTION  ARISES  FROM  A  STRONG,  NATURAL  PRO- 
PENSITY TO  DEJECTION  AND  MELANCHOLY.  As  wouuds  which  are  occasioned  by 
external  violence  are  more  conspicuous,  but  less  dangerous,  than  the  hidden  disease 
which  preys  upon  the  vital  parts.  Some  whose  circumstances  are  prosperous  are 
always  in  the  glooms,  their  feeble  mind  spreads  its  malignant  tincture  over  every 
surrounding  prospect.  Spectators  form  their  opinions  from  exterior  circumstances, 
hence  they  cannot  give  their  sympathy  where  they  cannot  observe  sufficient  cause 
of  misery.  Were  they  ever  so  much  disposed  to  give  it  this  miserable  man  would 
have  none  of   their  comfort.      II.  There  is  a  class  of  men  who  might  succeed 

BETTER  IN  PROCURING  THE  SYMPATHY  OF  THE  WORLD  COULD  THEY  BUT  TELL  THE 

CAUSE  OF  THEIR  SORROW.  Disappointments  in  a  long  train  have  fallen  upon  the 
man's  head,  and  the  manliness  of  his  spirit  is  subdued,  and  he  surrenders  himself  a 
willing  subject  to  peevishness  and  despair.  Ambition  defeated  may  fret  and 
chagrin  the  aspiring  mind.  Affection  slighted  gives  a  deep  and  incurable  wound  to 
the  man  of  a  feeling  heart.    III.  The  man  who  secretly  grieves  for  the  treachery 

OF   A    friend   has   EVEN    A    MORE    SERIOUS    CLAIM    UPON    OUR    SYMPATHY.        Such    a    man 

is  sure  to  say,  "  My  bitterness  shall  be  known  only  to  my  own  heart."  IV.  Domestic 
SOURCES  OF  DISQUIETUDE.  Thesc,  from  motives  of  delicacy,  are  secreted  from  the 
notice   and   sympathy  of  the  world.     V.  Cases   of   persons  who  have   changed 

THEIR  STATION  IN  LIFE,  AND  CANNOT  FIT  TO  THEIR  NEW  CONDITIONS.  As  in  imper- 
fectly assorted  marriages.  What  misery  is  experienced  which  must  be  kept  in 
reserve.     VI.  Thb  man  who  carries  grief  in  his  bosom  on  account  of  conscious 


CHAP.  XIV.]  PROVERBS.  357 

uiPEKFECTioN  AND  INCONSISTENCY  OF  cHAKACTEB.  He  has  often  rcsolved  upon 
reformation,  made  strenuous  efforts  against  temptations,  but  has  failed  and 
relapsed  again  under  the  bondage  of  sin.  This  has  occasioned  miserable  agitation 
and  perplexity  of  soul.  He  mourns  in  secret  that  he  is  not  such  as  his  own  resolu- 
tions prescribe,  and  the  world  around  him  believes  him  to  be.  To  all  earnest  persons 
it  is  a  matter  of  deep  concern  to  find  that  a  great  proportion  of  secret  sorrow  falls  to 
the  share  of  those  who  are  most  useful,  and  deserve  best  from  society.  (T.  Somer- 
vUle,  D.D.)  The  hearVs  hidden  depths  : — Though  men  live  in  towns  and  cities, 
and  in  social  gatherings,  each  man  is  a  world  to  himself.  He  is  as  distinct,  even 
from  him  who  is  in  closest  material  or  mental  contact  with  him,  as  one  orb  of  heaven 
is  from  another.  I.  The  heakt  has  hidden  depths  of  soeeow.  There  is  bitter- 
ness in  every  heart.  1.  There  is  the  bitterness  of  disappointed  love.  2.  There  is 
the  bitterness  of  social  bereavement — Eachels  weeping  for  their  lost  children,  and 
Davids  for  their  Absaloms.  3.  There  is  the  bitterness  of  moral  remorse.  AU  this 
is  hidden  where  it  is  the  most  deep.  The  deepest  sorrow  in  the  human  heart  is 
hidden  from  others  from  three  causes.  1.  The  insulating  tendency  of  deep  grief. 
Deep  sorrow  withdraws  from  society  and  seeks  some  Gethsemane  of  solitude. 
2.  The  concealing  instinct  of  deep  grief.  Men  parade  little  sorrows,  but  conceal 
great  ones.  Deep  sorrows  are  mute.  3.  The  incapacity  of  one  soul  to  sound  the 
depths  of  another.  There  is  such  a  peculiarity  in  the  constitution  and  circum- 
stances of  each  soul  that  one  can  never  fully  understand  another.  II.  The  heaet 
HAS  hidden  depths  OF  JOY.  "A  straugcr  doth  not  intermeddle  with  his  joy." 
Though  joy  is  less  self-concealing  than  sorrow,  yet  it  has  depths  unknown  to  any 
but  its  possessor  and  its  God.  The  joy  that  rushed  into  Abraham's  heart  when 
Isaac  descended  with  him  from  the  altar  on  Moriah  ;  the  joy  of  the  father  when  he 
pressed  his  prodigal  son  to  his  bosom ;  the  joy  of  the  widow  of  Nain  when  her  only 
Bon  raised  himself  from  the  bier,  and  returned  to  gladden  her  lowly  home  ;  the  joy 
of  the  broken-hearted  woman  when  she  heard  Christ  say,  "  Thy  sins  are  all  for- 
given thee  "  ;  such  joy  has  depths  that  no  outward  eye  could  penetrate.  The  joy  of 
the  true  Christian  is  indeed  a  joy  "  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory."  This  subject 
furnishes  an  argument— 1.  For  candour  amongst  men.  2.  For  piety  towards  God. 
Though  men  know  us  not,  God  does.  (Homiiist.)  Bitterness  of  heart : — While 
the  Christian  has  no  promise  of  exemption  from  the  general  sufferings  of  humanity, 
he  has  trials  peculiar  to  the  life  of  faith.  I.  The  nature  of  the  Cheistian's 
bitteeness  of  heaet.  It  is  hazardous  to  represent  the  Christian  life  as  a  scene  of 
constant  sunshine  and  unaltered  joy.  This  has  occasioned  much  uneasiness  and 
disappointment.  The  heart  that  is  right  with  God  has  much  anxiety,  disquiet,  and 
sorrow.  These  are  dependent  on  disposition  and  temperament.  II.  The  soueces 
of  such  inwaed  soeeow  and  disteess.  1.  The  secret  consciousness  of  guilt. 
2.  The  general  infirmity  of  our  intellectual  and  moral  constitution.  For  instance, 
that  depression  of  animal  spirits  to  which  some  of  the  most  regularly  constituted 
minds  are  often  most  subject,  and  which  no  intellectual  energy  is  at  times  able  to 
dissipate  or  surmount.  3.  Fears  of  shortcoming  are  sometimes  the  result  of  that 
increased  spirituality  of  mind  which  marks  the  progress  of  the  Divine  life.  What- 
ever be  the  attainments  of  the  Christian,  he  has  often  hours  of  heaviness  and  alarm, 
and  is  troubled  with  distressing  apprehensions  respecting  the  safety  of  his  state 
before  God.  This  feeling  must,  of  course,  be  greatly  modified  by  the  temper  and 
circumstances  of  the  believer,  and  in  different  individuals  may  arise  from  different 
causes.  {John  Johnston.)  The  bitterness  and  joy  of  the  heart : — 1.  There  is  a 
bitterness  and  a  joy  of  the  heart  which  may  be  caUed  more  peculiarly  its  own, 
because  it  arises  from  the  temper  of  the  mind,  which  gives  its  own  tone  to  circum- 
stances and  things  in  themselves  indifferent.  There  is  a  marked  contrast  between 
the  minds  of  different  individuals.  Every  day  is  fuU  of  events  which  receive  the 
character  of  good  or  evil  from  the  mind  of  the  individual  related  to  them.  Then, 
since  so  much  depends  on  the  cultivation  of  the  mind  and  heart,  let  this  be  your 
chief  concern.  2.  The  heart  alone  is  conscious  of  its  own  feelings.  Happiness 
and  misery  have  no  existence  but  in  the  conscious  breast,  and  they  are  in  a  great 
measure  confined  to  it.  There  are  some  sensations  which  the  heart  never  attempts 
to  express.  There  are  some  which  it  is  our  wish  and  endeavour  to  express.  But 
how  faint  is  the  impression  which  we  can  convey  to  other  minds  of  what  is  passing 
in  our  own.  There  is  but  one  Being  beside  ourselves  who  knows  our  heart  in  the 
joys  and  sorrows  of  life.  There  is  but  one  Being  who  can  enter  into  our  feelings 
amid  the  bitterness  and  joy  of  death.  There  is  but  one  Being  who  can  be  all  in  all 
to  our  souls,  in  the  changes  and  chances  of  this  mortal  life,  and  amid  the  unchang- 


358  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xiv. 

ing  glories  of  eternity:  "Acquaint  thyself  with  Him;  and  be  at  peace."  {George 
Cole.)  A  private  apartment  of  the  mind  : — Each  mind  possesses  in  its  interior 
mansions  a  solemn  retired  apartment  peculiarly  its  own,  into  which  none  but  him- 
self and  the  Deity  can  enter.  (John  Foster.)  The  heart's  refusal  of  the  world's 
interference  in  its  bitterness  and  joy  ; — "  If  you  would  seek  for  God,"  said  a  pious 
man  of  old,  "  descend  into  your  own  heart."  I.  The  imperfect  estimate  which  vte 
FORM  OF  THE  REAL  STATE  OF  THE  WORLD.  One  half  the  world  kuows  not  how  the 
other  half  lives,  and  certainly  one  half  has  no  idea  of  what  the  other  half  feels.  All 
have  their  calamities  and  sorrows,  so  that  no  man  has  any  real  occasion  for  envy- 
ing his  brother.  Our  afflictions  may  be  divided  into  those  which  we  suffer  from 
the  cruelty  of  others,  those  which  arise  from  our  own  guilt,  and  those  with  which 
Providence,  in  the  general  course  of  His  dealings,  visits  all  of  us  in  our  turn. 
II.  The  sin  of  those  who  trifle  with  the  feelings  of  an  afflicted  he.uit. 
Illustrate  from  the  child  who  has  brought  distress  on  loving  parents  ;  the  seducer 
of  innocence ;  the  slanderer  and  tale-bearer.  III.  Those  sorrows  which  arise 
FROM  A  SENSE  OF  ouE  STATE  TOWARDS  GOD.  We  Uvc,  it  is  truc,  in  a  world  of  much 
infidelity  and  sin,  but  there  are  many  who  have  accepted  the  everlasting  gospel  as 
the  power  of  God  unto  salvation.  It  must  have  opened  on  them  a  very  awful  view 
of  the  things  of  this  life ;  and  when  conscience,  awakening  them  to  think  upon  their 
duty,  points  to  that  holy  book  from  which  we  shall  be  judged,  they  can  scarcely 
fail  of  looking  on  their  life  with  terror  and  dismay.  IV.  The  sorrow  arising 
FROM  THE  ORDINARY  VISITATIONS  OP  Pbovidence.  But  our  religion  carries  consola- 
tion with  its  sorrows.  This  comes  from  the  belief  in  the  Omniscience  of  God  ;  in 
the  grace  of  God ;  in  the  promise  of  remission  of  sins  ;  in  the  assurance  of  a  general 
resurrection.  {G.  Matheio,  M.A.)  On  the  secret  bitterness  of  the  heart : — Nothing 
is  to  be  estimated  by  its  effects  upon  common  eyes  and  common  ears.  1.  Among 
the  mental  dispositions  which  prevail  with  the  sufferer  to  smother  his  secret  pangs 
and  bitternesses  from  public  inspection,  the  first  is  pride,  whether  of  a  pardonable 
or  an  improper  description.  Timidity  is  not  less  solicitous  than  pride  to  wi'ap  up 
its  griefs  from  general  observation.  Prudence  and  a  sense  of  duty  exert  a  similar 
influence.  2.  When  the  circumstances  of  a  sufferer  are  outward  and  visible,  his 
perception  of  his  calamity  may  be  far  more  acute  than  the  common  observer  sur- 
mises. And  the  heart  of  a  man  may  be  wrung  with  an  unusual  bitterness  in  conse- 
quence of  its  unusually  delicate  sense  of  religious  and  moral  obligation.  Practical 
improvements  :  1.  The  survey  delivers  a  lecture  on  resignation  and  contentment* 
and  disproves  the  notion  that  there  is  actually  any  large  inequality  in  the  Divine 
distribution  of  good  and  evil  among  mankind.  2.  The  subject  suggests  an  instruc- 
tive lesson  of  mutual  sympathy  and  kindness  in  all  the  varieties  of  outward 
condition.  There  never  has  breathed  yet  one  individual  in  the  full  enjoyment  of 
pure,  unalloyed  happiness.  3.  Take  care  that  the  common  and  unavoidable  uneasi- 
ness shall  not  be  aggravated  by  that  self-dissatisfaction  which  arises  from  wilful 
disobedience.  4.  Remember  that  we  are  passing  on  to  a  fairer  and  more  faultless 
condition  of  being,  where  the  souls  of  the  pious  and  penitent  shall  have  their 
capacity  for  enjoyment  filled  up  to  the  brim.  (J.  Grntit,  3I.A.)  The  believer's 
sorrows  and  joys : — I.  The  believer's  borrows.  There  are  sorrows  common  to 
believers  and  to  unbelievers.  There  are  some  peculiar  to  the  renewed  man.  Those 
are  the  most  alive  to  sin  who  are  most  free  from  sin.  A  strong  sense  of  sin  is  one 
of  the  characteristics  of  the  real  man  of  God.  Believers  are  also  at  times  unable  to 
receive  the  promises.  When  comfort  is  offered  they  cannot  avail  themselves  of  it. 
Sometimes  there  is  great  spiritual  depression  under  a  sense  of  the  withdrawal  of 
God's  favour.  But  there  is  nothing  more  dangerous  than  to  leave  the  soul  in  this 
state  of  bitterness  of  heart.  II.  The  believer's  jovs.  What  is  it  in  which  he 
finds  joy?  1.  From  the  joyful  sound  of  the  everlasting  gospel.  2.  The  joy  of 
pardoning  grace  applied  to  the  soul.  3.  The  fulness  of  Divine  grace.  4.  Com- 
munion with  God.  (if.  M.  Villiers,  M.A.)  The  imvard  unapproachahlc  life  : — 
We  know  each  other's  appearance,  but  there  for  the  most  part  our  mutual  know- 
ledge ceases.  It  is  possible  to  live  on  terms  of  even  close  intimacy  with  a  person 
for  many  years,  and  yet  to  find,  by  some  chance  uplifting  of  a  curtain  in  his  life, 
that  he  cherished  feelings  which  you  never  even  suspected,  suffered  pains  of  which 
you  had  seen  no  trace,  or  enjoyed  pleasures  which  never  came  to  any  outward 
expression.  The  bitterness  which  surges  in  our  brother's  heart  would  probably  be 
unintelligible  to  us  if  he  revealed  it,  but  he  will  not  reveal  it,  he  cannot.  And  yet 
we  all  hunger  for  sympathy.  No  human  being  needs  to  be  misunderstood,  or  to 
Buffer  under  the  sense  of  misunderstanding.    Let  him  turn  at  once  to  God.     If  he 


CHAP,  rtv.]  PROVERBS.  359 

cannot  tell  his  bitterness  to  his  fellows,  he  can  tell  it  to  God.  No  human  being  need 
imagine  that  he  is  unappreciated  ;  his  fellow-men  may  not  want  him,  but  God  does. 
No  human  being  need  be  without  a  sharer  of  his  joy.  And  that  is  a  great  considera- 
tion, for  joy  unshared  quickly  dies,  and  is  from  the  beginning  haunted  by  a  vague 
sense  of  a  shadow  that  is  falling  upon  it.  In  the  heart  of  the  Eternal  dwells  eternal 
joy.  All  loveliness,  aU  sweetness,  all  goodness,  all  truth,  are  the  objects  of  His 
happy  contemplation ;  therefore  every  really  joyful  heart  has  an  immediate 
sympathiser  in  God,  and  prayer  is  quite  as  much  the  means  by  which  we  share 
our  gladness  as  the  vehicle  by  which  we  convey  our  sorrows  to  the  Divine  heart. 
(B.  F.  Horton,  D.D.) 

Ver.  12.  There  is  a  way  whicli  seemeth  right  unto  a  man,  but  the  end  thereof 
are  the  ways  of  death. — Forelookings  : — It  seems  strange  that  all  the  dangers  of 
this  mortal  state  should  be  concentrated  upon  man.  The  dangers  in  all  the  realms 
below  man  are  very  few,  and  very  simple,  and  very  brief  in  their  scope.  Man,  who 
is  called  the  noblest  of  God's  creatures,  is  perpetually  stumbling;  is  perpetually 
warped,  biassed,  perverted,  tangled  ;  is  perpetually  threatened  with  sudden  destruc- 
tions of  every  kind.  He  is  the  sublimest  spectacle  in  his  integrity  and  greatness, 
and  the  most  wretched  in  his  wreck  and  ruin.  Man  is  more  complex  than  the 
animals.  He  lives  in  a  higher  sphere.  He  is  equipped  accordingly.  He  varies 
most  because  he  has  the  most  power  of  variation,  and  because  the  combinations 
possible  to  one  so  richly  endowed  are  almost  infinite.  All  men  alike  are  brought 
into  life  in  a  state  of  helplessness  and  ignorance.  It  is  not  true  that  all  men  are 
born  equal  or  alike.  There  are  unquestionable  hereditary  tendencies.  All  are  born 
aUke  in  this :  that  they  have  to  begin  and  find  out  the  ways  of  life.  It  is  not 
possible  for  any  parent  to  transmit  the  whole  of  his  experience  to  his  children. 
So,  in  the  beginning  of  life,  God's  voice  sounds  to  every  one,  as  in  the  text, 
"Beware,  all  ways  are  not  alike  safe."  But  how  should  ways  seem  right  and  yet 
be  wrong  ?  There  are  many  things  whose  nature  does  not  disclose  itself  at  once. 
Illustrate  cubs  of  tigers.  A  large  part  of  evil  lies  in  excess  in  things  good.  If  you 
trace  one  and  another  of  the  great  mature  powers  of  men,  you  will  find  that,  if 
they  act  thus  far,  and  under  certain  dominant  influences,  they  are  beneficial ;  but 
that  otherwise  they  are  vicious.  So  men  are  often  deceived  in  the  ways  of  life,  as 
they  look  upon  them  at  first,  because  the  point  where  good  breaks  off,  and  evil 
begins  to  be  developed,  is  not  easily  discerned.  There  are  ways  that  seem  right 
to  men,  but  are  very  dangerous.  In  general,  it  is  true  that  pleasure  is  the  fruit 
of  obedience.  Punishment  (speaking  generally)  is  an  indication  of  transgression, 
and  pleasure  is  a  sign  of  obedience.  Nevertheless,  it  is  also  true  that  pain  some- 
times indicates  the  highest  degree  of  virtue.  To  suffer  is  to  be  a  man.  But  there 
is  much  evil  which  is  known  for  evil  as  soon  as  it  is  seen,  but  which,  before 
manifesting  itself  openly,  runs  through  what  may  be  called  an  incubation. 
Illustrate  infectious  disease.  The  most  inconsequential  elements  of  life  are  those 
that  report  themselves  quickest,  with  superficial  results ;  the  most  fundamental 
and  radical  elements  do  not  report  themselves  until  they  have  had  a  long  period 
of  development.  It  is  a  fact  that  men  are  busy  with  their  fellow-men  to  beguile 
them.  In  this  life  we  act  on  each  other,  far  more  than  we  are  acted  on  by  great 
natural  agents.  It  is  a  great  danger  to  any  young  man  to  be  conceited  in  his  own 
wisdom  and  in  his  own  strength.  Those  who  think  they  have  a  strength  and  a 
wisdom  which  others  have  not,  and  act  accordingly,  perish  because  they  are  fools. 
No  man  is  safe  who  does  not  give  heed  to  the  Word  of  God  and  to  the  presence  of 
the  Lord.  You  are  perfectly  safe  so  long  as  you  live  with  a  consciousness  that 
God  looks  upon  you.  {H.  Ward  Beecher.)  The'  way  lohich  seemeth  right : — In 
consequence  of  the  paralysis  of  the  natural  conscience,  the  phenomenon  indicated 
in  the  text  is  of  constant  occurrence.  Eeference  is  not  to  the  course  of  the  open 
sinner,  but  to  that  of  the  mistaken  and  self -deceiving  man.  There  are  persons 
whose  course  lies  just  short  of  that  degree  of  divergence  from  right,  where  the 
conscience  begins  to  protect,  and  yet  is  sure,  as  every  divergence  must,  if  followed, 
to  lead  very  far  from  it  at  last.  Observe  that  the  text  does  not  say  that  these 
apparently  right  ways  are  themselves  the  ways  of  death,  but  that  they  end  in 
the  ways  of  death.  The  ways  of  which  we  are  to  speak  are  mainly  of  two  kinds ; 
errors  in  practice  and  errors  in  doctrine.  1.  A  life  not  led  under  the  direct 
influence  of  religion.  The  man  who,  however  many  virtues  he  may  possess, 
however  upright  he  may  be  in  the  duties  of  life,  however  carefully  he  may  attend 
to  the  duties  of  religion,  does  not  receive  it  into  his  heart,  nor  act  on  its  con- 


860  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  xiv. 

Biderations  as  a  motive.     This  is  a  way  of  life  which  usually  seems  right  to  a  man. 

It  describes  the  ordinary,  unexceptionable  citizen  of  a  peaceful  and  religious  age. 

But  this  way  must  end  in  the  ways  of  death.     One  day  they  must  come  into  the 

presence  of  God,  and  stand  before  Hi:n.     Wherewith  shall  they  come?     They  have 

left  God  out  of  their  calculation.     That  neglect  is  a  way  of  death.     2.  Those  who, 

believing  from   the  heart,   and  living   in   the  main  as  in   God's   sight,  are  yet 

notoriously    and  confessedly  wanting  in  some  important  requisite  of  the  gospel. 

This  case  is  found  even  in  the  very  strongholds  of  the  profession  of  religion.     It 

may  be  illustrated  by  all  the  violent  partisanship  which  is  so  characteristic  of  our 

day.     The  case  is  found  again  in  the  class  of  persons  who,  while  professing  zeal 

for  religion  in  general,  nourish  unscrupulously  some  one  known  sin,  or  prohibited 

indulgence.     But  He  whom  we  serve  will  not  have  a  reserved  life,  but  a  whole  one. 

3.  There  is  a  class  of  persons  who  deal  with  erroneous  doctrine  as  the  other  class 

with  deficient  practice.     These  plead  that  each  should  conscientiously  arrive  at  his 

own  conclusion,  and  respect  that  conclusion  as  sacred.     But  this  involves  much 

more  than  is  suspected  at  first  sight.     The  issue  of  what  has  been  said  is  this,  and 

it  is  a  lesson  by  no  means  unneeded  in  the  present  day,  that  whether  we  consider 

practice  or  belief,  each  man's  deeming  is  not  each  man's  law  ;  every  man's  deeming 

may   be  wrong,  and  we  can  only  find  that  which   is   right  by  each  one  of  us 

believing  and  serving  God,  as  He  has  revealed  himself   to   us  in  Christ.     There 

is  but  one  way  that  is  true ;   but  one,  and  that  is  the  way  everlasting.     {Dean 

Alford.)        Wrong  ways  followed  in  spite  of  warning  : — And  yet  the  man  who  takes 

what  seems  to  him  a  right  way  (but  is  wrong)  will  be  punished  if  he  follows  it,  for 

his  perverted  conscience  may  arise  from  his  desertion  of  God,  and  his  refusal  of 

the  light  He  offered.     (J  W.  Nutt,  M.A.)        Deceitful  ways : — Unconcern,  which  is 

charming  in  the  child,  is  ridiculous  and  guilty  in  the  man  whose  decisions  are 

likely  to  involve  fearful  consequences  for  himself  and  for  others  ;  want  of  foresight 

is  a  crime  for  the  man  who  holds  in  his  hands  the  fortunes  of   others  or  the 

destinies  of  a  state.     There  are  ways  that  lead  to  death.     Each  of  us  has  come 

into  contact  with  beings  whose  excesses  have  led  to  a  premature  end  ;  others  still 

occupy  a  place  in  the  world,  but  their  ruined  health,  their  weakened  faculties, 

show  that  they  are  dead  while  they  live.     But  there  are  beings  who  are  attacked 

neither  in  their  life  nor  in  their  strength,  nor  in  their  apparent  dignity,  and  who 

are  none  the  better  for  all  this.     The  artful,  the  selfish,  who  think  only  of  self,  may 

possess  all  kinds  of  earthly  blessings ;  their  life  may  be  rich,  brilliant,  full  of 

enjoyment,  admired  of  men.     Does  this  mean  that  they  have  not  entered  upon  a 

wrong  path  ?    Worldly  morality  is  a  loose  net  which  retains  certain  sinners,  but 

allows  the  most  guilty  to  escape.     Many  a  way  that  leads  to  perdition  may  seem  to 

us  right.     Men  argue  that  the  way  a  man  follows  must  seem  to  him  right,  and  so 

they  persuade  themselves  that  they  wiU  be  accepted  of  God.     In  this  there  is  a 

mingling  of  truth  and  error.    But  sincerity  in  ignorance  or  error  has  never  saved 

any  one  from  the  often  terrible  consequences  which  such  ignorance  or  error  may 

entail.     Societies  are  based  upon  this  axiom,  "  No  one  is  supposed  to  be  ignorant  of 

the  law."     {E.  Bersicr.)         tfnsafe  ways  : — The  wise  man  is  not  here  speaking  of 

gross  wickedness.     It  is  of  the  deceitful  path.     Is  there  only  one  such  way  ?    I. 

The  way  of  wilful  ignoeance.     This  is  very  commonly  thought  a  safe  way,  but  its 

end  is  death.     How  constantly  ignorance  is  pleaded  as  an  excuse  for  neglecting 

religion.     Ignorance  that  is  voluntary  is  sinful.     II.  The  way  of  formality.     An 

outward  form  and  imitation  of  godliness,  without  any  inward  spiritual  feeling. . 

But  professions  can  never  deceive  God,  and  the  way  of  formal  religion  offends  Him. 

in.  The  way  of  doing  one's  best.     This  is  often  thought  to  be  the  right  way  ;  yet 

it  is  equally  ruinous.  What  do  men  mean  by  ' '  doing  their  best "  ?   Alas !  it  commonly 

means  doing  something  less  than  God  requires.     In  numberless  instances,  doing 

the  best  means  "  doing  nothing  at  all."     IV.  The  way  of  uncovenanted  mercy. 

Men  own  that  they  are  sinners,  and  deserving  of  punishment,  but  they  speak  peace 

to  themselves,  saying,  "  God  is  merciful."    It  is  true  that  God  is  merciful,  but 

there  is  a  particular  way  in  which  alone  that  mercy  is  offered  to  sinners.     God  has 

never  said  that  He  will  spare  the  unconverted,  the  impenitent,  the  unbelieving,  the 

ungodly.     V.  The  way  of  good  intentions.     A  man  resolves  to  seek  God ;  and 

that,  too,  in  God's  own  way,  by  true  repentance,  faith  in  Christ,  and  by  a  life  of 

holy  obedience.     But  he  stops  with  the  resolves.     That  way  is  a  way  of  death. 

[J.  Jowett,  M.A.)        The  way  and  the  end  : — We  are  all  travellers.     Our  journey 

occupies  our  lifetime.     Its  end  depends  upon  the  way  we  take.     The  endings  are 

but  two.     Yet  many  go  heedlessly  on.     They  love  the  way,  and  they  are  pleased  to 


CHAP.  XIV.]  PROVERBS.  861 

think  well  of  it,  1.  It  is  the  way  in  which  they  were  born.  2.  They  see  many 
walking  in  this  way.  3.  It  is  a  way  which  is  most  pleasing  to  them.  4.  It  is  an 
easy  way  to  walk  in.  5.  It  is  a  way  which  is  profitable  to  self.  How  shall  we  know 
this  way  of  death  ?  It  is  the  way  of  sin.  It  is  the  course  of  this  world.  It  is  the 
way  of  indifference  to  the  things  of  eternity.  {The  Christian  Treasury.)  A 
temper  of  caution : — The  text  holds  good  in  commerce,  in  theological  thought,  la 
moral  conduct,  in  social  relationships  ;  indeed,  it  holds  good  along  the  whole  circle 
of  human  relation  and  experience.  What  is  the  lesson  which  such  a  state  of 
affairs  conveys  to  the  wise  and  understanding  heart  ?  It  is  that  life  should  be  spent 
in  a  temper  of  caution ;  when  we  seem  most  secure  we  may  be  most  exposed  to 
danger ;  not  only  is  our  enemy  a  roaring  lion,  whose  voice  can  be  heard  from  afar, 
he  is  also  a  cunning  and  silent  serpent,  drawing  himself  towards  us  without  making 
any  demonstration,  and  not  revealing  himself  until  he  is  within  striking  distance. 
(J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  seeming  right  often  ruinous: — Many  of  the  ways  which 
men  pursue  cannot  even  "seem  right."  The  way  of  the  habitual  blasphemer, 
Sabbath-breaker,  debauchee,  <fec.,  can  scarcely  appear  right  to  any  man.  What  are 
the  ways  that  often  seem  right  tp  men,  but  are  ruinous  ?    I.  The  coNVENTioNAiiLi: 

MORAL    WAT   SEEMS    EIGHT,    BUT   IS   NEVERTHELESS   RUINOUS.       Civilised    SOCiety  haS  itg 

recognised  rules  of  life.  These  rules  recognise  only  the  external  life  of  man.  They 
take  no  cognisance  of  thought,  feeling,  desire,  and  the  unexpressed  things  of  the 
Boul.  Industry,  sobriety,  veracaty,  honesty,  these  are  the  extent  of  its  demands, 
and  if  these  are  conformed  to,  society  approves  and  applauds.  Without  dis- 
paraging in  the  least  this  social  morality,  we  are  bound  to  say  that  what  is 
conventionally  moral  may  be  essentially  wrong.  It  may  spring  from  wrong 
motives,  and  be  governed  by  wrong  reaMns.  The  Scribes  and  Pharisees  of  old 
were  conventionally  right.  Albeit  they  were  rotten  to  the  core.  The  end  of  such  a 
way  is  death.     Death  to  all  the  elements  of  well-being.     II.  The  formalisticallt 

RELIGIOUS  way  SEEMS  RIGHT,  BUT  IS  NEVERTHELESS  RUINOUS.       Ecligion  haS  itS  formS, 

it  has  its  places,  and  its  times  of  worship,  its  order  of  service,  its  benevolent 
institutions.  A  correct  and  constant  attendance  to  such  forms  are  considered  by 
thousands  as  religion  itself.  It  is  mechanism,  nothing  more.  The  motions  of 
machinery,  not  the  actions  of  the  soul.  There  is  no  life  in  it,  and  it  cannot  lead  to 
life,  but  to  death.  III.  The  way  of  the  selfishly  evangelical  seems  right,  but 
13  nevertheless  ruinous.  There  is  no  true  reUgion  apart  from  a  living  faith  in 
Christ.  But  the  thing  that  is  come  to  be  called  evangelical  is  to  a  fearful  extent 
intensely  selfish.  Its  appeals  are  all  to  the  hopes  and  fears  of  men.  Its  preaching 
makes  men  feel,  but  their  feelings  are  all  concerned  for  their  own  interest ;  makes 
men  pray,  but  their  prayer  is  a  selfish  entreaty  for  the  deliverance  from  misery, 
and  the  attainment  of  happiness.  "  He  that  seeketh  his  life  shall  lose  it." 
Conclusion :  Eight  and  wrong  are  independent  of  men's  opinions,  what  seems 
right  to  men  is  often  wrong,  and  the  reverse.  Men  are  held  responsible  for  their 
beliefs.  A  wrong  belief,  however  sincere,  wiU  lead  to  ruin.  {D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
Moral  colour-blindness,  or  the  seeiiig  things  truly  : — Not  a  few  persons  have  received 
a  genuine  surprise  on  being  told,  after  an  examination,  that  they  were  affected  with 
colour-blindness.  A  much  larger  number  might  experience  a  far  greater  shock  on 
learning  that  they  are  suffering  from  moral  colour-blindness.  The  eye  that  fails  to 
distinguish  colours  may  be  exceptionally  good  in  judging  of  form,  and  unusually 
keen  in  detecting  objects  at  a  distance.  The  victim  of  colour-blindness  may  even 
name  colours  so  correctly  that  for  a  long  time  his  defect  escapes  notice.  So  the 
person  that  is  morally  colour-blind  is  frequently  one  distinguished  for  remarkable 
shrewdness  and  foresight ;  he  is  quite  an  oracle  as  to  what  is  prudent  in  business 
and  in  good  taste  in  social  life.  He  names  the  virtues  and  vices  as  other  people  do, 
and  his  verdicts  on  conduct  seem  so  generally  to  tally  with  the  truth  that  his 
weakness  is  not  suspected  by  others,  and  is  entirely  hidden  from  himself.  Yet  the 
moral  colour-blindness  goes  to  much  greater  length  than  does  the  ordinary  trouble. 
Its  radical  evil  is  in  a  failure  to  distinguish  black  and  white,  a  defect  exceedingly 
rare  in  the  physical  eye.  When  the  fault  is  betrayed,  even  in  the  slightest  degree, 
in  judgments  on  nice  points,  it  is  a  sign  of  something  deep-seated  and  serious, 
which  will  lead  one  to  pronounce  a  lie  white,  and  to  call  evil  good  and  good  evil. 
The  revelation  of  its  true  nature  may  come,  as  the  revelation  of  the  other  colour- 
blindness has  sometimes  come,  in  some  terrible  wreck  that  means  ruin  to  many 
others  as  well  as  to  the  one  at  fault.  Too  much  care  in  this  matter  cannot  be 
exercised  in  regard  to  any  one,  whether  in  his  own  behalf  or  in  behalf  of  those 
whose  safety  depends  in  large  measure  on  his  seeing  things  truly.     There  is  a 


8^  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

terrible  danger  in  following  a  colour-blind  leader.  There  is  one  advantage  and 
encouragement  for  the  morally  colour-blind.  The  defect  is  not,  in  their  case, 
organic  ;  and,  while  it  may  develop  with  startling  rapidity  if  neglected,  it  is  possible 
to  overcome  it.  Its  detection,  as  well  as  its  cure,  depends  on  the  most  careful  and 
constant  testing  by  the  truest  standards  and  on  hourly  aid  from  the  great  Physician. 
(Christian  Age.)  The  icay  seems  right,  hut  is  ivrong : — A  sailor  remarks, 
"  Sailing  from  Cuba,  we  thought  we  had  gained  sixty  miles  one  day  in  our  course, 
but  at  the  next  observation  we  found  we  had  lost  more  than  thirty.  It  was  an 
under-current.  The  ship  had  been  going  forward  by  the  wind,  but  going  hack  by  a 
current."  So  a  man's  course  may  often  seem  to  be  right,  but  the  stream  beneath  is 
driving  him  the  very  contrary  way  to  what  he  thinks.  Beliefs  important ;  or 
sincerity  no  safeguard  : — Two  men  were  talking  together  of  their  beliefs,  when  one 
of  them  petulantly  remarked  to  his  Christian  brother :  "  I  don't  care  what  your 
creed  is.  I  am  an  agnostic.  It  makes  no  difference  what  a  man  believes  if  he  is 
sincere."  Oh,  yes,  it  does.  Let  us  see.  A  family  was  poisoned  recently  by  eating 
toadstools  which  they  sincerely  believed  to  be  mushrooms.  Three  of  them  died. 
Did  it  make  no  difference  ?  A  man  endorsed  a  note  for  a  friend  whom  he  sincerely 
believed  to  be  an  honest  man.  He  was  a  scoundrel,  and  left  him  to  pay  the  debt. 
Did  it  make  no  difference  ?  A  traveller  took  the  wrong  train,  and  went  to  Scotland 
instead  of  to  Brighton.  Did  it  make  no  difference  ?  If  a  man  is  sincere  he  will 
take  pains  to  know  the  truth.  For  where  facts  are  concerned  all  the  thinking  in  the 
world  will  not  change  them.  A  toadstool  remains  a  toadstool,  whatever  we  may 
think  about  it.     {Sunday  Companion.) 

Ver.  13.  Even  in  laughter  the  heart  is  sorrowful ;  and  the  end  of  that  mirth  is 
heaviness. — On  a  life  of  dissipation  and  pleasure  : — We  have  much  reason  to  beware 
lest  a  rash  and  unwary  pursuit  of  pleasure  defeat  its  end,  lest  the  attempt  to  carry 
pleasure  too  far  tend,  in  the  issue,  to  sink  us  into  misery.  It  would  be  unjust  to 
infer,  from  the  serious  admonition  of  Scripture,  that  religion  is  an  enemy  to  all 
mirth'and  gaiety.  It  circumscribes  our  enjoyment,  indeed,  within  the  bounds  of 
temperance ;  but  as  far  as  the  sacred  limit  permits,  it  gives  free  scope  to  the  gratifi- 
cations of  life.  It  even  heightens  their  relish  to  a  virtuous  man.  The  text  is 
applicable  only  to  that  set  of  men  to  whom  temperance  is  no  restraint.  A 
mediocrity  of  enjoyment  only  is  allowed  man  for  his  portion  on  earth.  Whatever 
a  man's  rank  or  station  may  be,  there  are  certain  duties  required  of  him,  there  are 
serious  cares  which  must  employ  his  mind.  1.  The  obvious  consequences  of  a  life 
of  pleasure  and  dissipation  to  health,  fortune,  and  character.  To  each  of  these  it 
is  an  enemy,  precisely  in  the  same  degree  to  which  it  is  carried.  A  temporary 
satisfaction  is  admitted.  But  no  sensual  pleasure,  except  what  is  regulated  by 
temperance,  can  be  lasting.  2.  The  ruin  which  a  life  of  pleasure  and  dissipation 
brings  upon  the  moral  state  and  character  of  men,  as  well  as  on  their  external 
condition.  As  the  love  of  pleasure  gains  ground,  with  what  insidious  steps  does  it 
advance  towards  the  abolition  of  all  virtuous  principles !  Without  the  assistance 
of  reflection  and  of  serious  thought,  virtue  cannot  long  subsist  in  the  human  mind. 
But  to  reflection  and  serious  thought  the  men  of  dissipation  are  strangers.  Men 
become  assimilated  to  the  manners  of  their  loose  associates ;  and,  without 
perceiving  it  themselves,  their  whole  character  by  degrees  is  changed.  From  a 
character  originally  stamped  only  with  giddiness  and  levity  shoots  forth  a  character 
compounded  of  dishonesty,  injustice,  oppression,  and  cruelty.  3.  The  disquieting 
sensations  which  are  apt  to  intrude  upon  the  men  of  pleasure,  even  in  the  midst  of 
their  enjoyments.  Often  a  show  of  mirth  is  put  on  to  cover  some  secret  disquiet. 
At  the  bottom  of  the  hearts  of  most  men,  even  amidst  an  irregular  life,  there  lies 
a  secret  feeling  of  propriety,  a  sense  of  right  and  wrong  in  conduct.  Though 
conscience  be  not  strong  enough  to  guide,  it  still  has  strength  to  dart  a  sting.  Can 
that  be  reckoned  sincere  joy  which  is  liable  to  be  interrupted  and  mingled  with 
so  many  sensations  of  the  most  disagreeable  nature?  4.  How  unsuitable  a  life  of 
dissipation  and  pleasure  is  to  the  condition  of  man  in  this  world,  and  how  injurious 
to  the  interests  of  society.  Amid  the  sorrows  that  surround  us,  and  in  view  of  the 
brevity  of  life,  should  we  be  pursuing  giddy  amusement  and  perpetual  pleasure? 
Such  persons  scatter  poison  in  society  around  them.  They  are  corrupting  the 
public  manners  by  the  life  they  live.  They  ci-eate  discontent  and  indignation  in 
the  poorer  classes  of  men,  who  see  them  indulging  in  wastefulness  and  thoughtless 
profusion,  when  they  and  their  families  are  not  able  to  earn  their  bread.  To  serve 
God,  to  attend  to  the  serious  cares  of  life,  and  to  discharge  faithfully  the  duties  of 


CHAP.  XIV.]  PROVERBS.  863 

our  station,  ought  to  be  the  first  concern  of  every  man  who  wishes  to  be  wise  and 
happy.  Amusement  and  pleasure  are  the  relaxation,  not  the  business,  of  life. 
(Hugh  Blair,  D.D.)  Sorrow  amid  laughter: — A  description  of  Mr.  Opie  Kead, 
the  American  humorist,  reveals  heart-sorrow  where  the  reader  has  seen  nothing 
but  mirth.  "  Sometimes,"  says  the  writer,  "  his  work  is  marked  by  the  deepest 
pathos.  He  had  lost  two  of  his  children,  to  whom  he  was  devotedly  attached,  and 
these  melancholy  events  made  very  marked  impressions  on  the  man  and  his  work. 
'  When  one  of  my  babies  died,'  said  he,  in  talking  of  the  matter  to  me,  '  I  was 
working  for  a  magazine,  and  I  was  required  to  do  just  so  much  work  every  day. 
I  was  compelled  to  do  it — it  was  my  only  means  of  support.  During  that  awful 
time  I  would  frequently  rock  the  cradle  of  my  dying  babe  for  hours  at  the  time. 
With  one  hand  I  rocked  that  cradle  of  death,  and  with  the  other  I  was  writing  stuff 
to  make  people  laugh.  I  sobbed  and  wept,  and  watched  that  angel  and  wrote  that 
stuff,  and  I  felt  every  minute  as  if  my  heart  would  burst.  And  yet  some  people 
think  this  funny  business  is  all  sunshine.  Sometimes  even  now  I  see  articles 
floating  around  that  I  wrote  while  under  the  shadow  of  death,  and  occasionally 
some  editor  will  preface  these  very  things  with  some  such  remark  as,  "  The  genial 
and  sunny-souled  Opie  Bead  says  so  and  so," — yes,  about  these  same  things  that  I 
penned  when  my  babe  was  dying  and  my  heart  was  bursting.'  "   (J.  F.  B.  Txnling.) 

Ver.  14.  The  backslider  in  heart  shall  be  filled  with  his  own  ways. — The  hack- 
slider  in  heart : — I.  The  genekal  nature,  symptoms,  and  progress  of  backsliding. 
The  idea  of  backsliding  is  that  of  gradually  receding  from  an  object  full  in  view. 
It  is  not  the  turning  back  as  in  the  case  of  those  who  forsook  the  Saviour,  it  is 
rather  like  those  who,  moving  against  the  stream,  rest  upon  their  oars.  The  back- 
slider is  one  who  has  had  some  views  and  some  experience,  whether  real  or 
supposed,  of  true  religion :  there  may  even  have  been  some  enjoyment  in  the 
things  of  religion  ;  but  after  some  progress  there  is  a  gradual  declension,  a  loss  of 
taste  and  enjoyment,  a  dechne  in  ardour  and  zeal.  Particular  symptoms  of 
backsliding  may  be  seen — 1.  In  the  manner  in  which  the  secret  duties  of 
religion  are  attended  to.  2.  In  attendance  at  public  worship.  3.  In  the  conduct, 
temper,  and  conversation.  The  progress  of  backsliding  is  from  bad  to  worse. 
There  is  a  gradual  relinquishment  of  principle,  an  increasing  laxity  of  practice, 
and  an  abuse  of  Christian  privileges  into  an  excuse  for  sin.  II.  The  awful 
consequences  of  backsliding.  "Shall  be  filled  with  his  own  ways."  View  the 
backslider.  He  has  lost  his  delight,  his  enjoyment  in  religion.  It  is  now  an 
irksome  task.  He  has  gone  down  on  the  world's  ground ;  does  he  find  comfort 
there?  No,  he  is  still  dissatisfied,  still  perplexed.  He  becomes  impatient,  irritable; 
a  burden  to  himself,  a  burden  to  others.  How  tremendously  will  the  text  be  found 
true  when  the  finally  impenitent  is  in  that  place  where  hope  never  comes  !  (T. 
Webster,  B.D.)  Backslider  in  heart : — Only  case  in  English  Bible  where  the 
word  "  backslider  "  occurs.  I.  Describe  what  backsliding  in  heart  is.  To  some 
the  experience  which  we  call  "  conversion  "  is  more  consciously  definite  than  to 
others.  Recall  the  experience.  If  the  love  then  felt  has  not  continued,  there  is 
backsliding  in  heart.  The  experience  is  compatible  with  great  zeal  and  activity, 
with  the  maintenance  of  sound  discipline,  and  with  decided  orthodoxy.  The 
backslider  in  heart  is  thus  described  in  the  Word  of  God  :  he  has  lost  his  first 
love ;  he  is  lukewarm  in  spirit ;  mixed  up  with  the  world ;  double-minded  and 
faint-hearted.  11.  Some  of  the  things  that  conduce  to  backsliding  of  heart. 
1.  Neglect  of  the  Word  of  God.  Most,  if  not  all,  such  backsliding  may  be  traced 
to  this  neglect.  2.  Neglect  of  private  prayer.  3.  Suffering  sin  to  remain 
unconfessed.  4.  Want  of  Christian  activity.  5.  Not  making  public  profession  of 
our  love  to  Christ.  III.  How  to  deal  with  the  backslider  in  heart.  "  Ho 
is  filled  with  his  own  ways."  It  is  not  easy  to  awaken  his  interest.  It  is  always 
difiicult  to  roach  his  conscience.  Argument  does  not  succeed.  The  only  thing  to 
do  is  to  bring  them  back  to  their  first  experience.  They  must  come  to  Jesus  afresh. 
(W.  P.  Lockhart.)  Progressive  backsliding  : — Backsliding  in  heart  necessarily 
supposes  an  antecedent  rectitude  of  principle.  A  man  may  be  a  backslider  ia 
heart  even  when  he  cannot  be  charged  with  an  open  notorious  sin.  A  man  may, 
through  the  violence  of  temptation,  be  led  into  evil  without  commencing  back- 
sliding in  h'^art.  The  case  of  the  text  is  illustrated  in  Ephraim.  In  him  we  may  trace 
the  believer  in  the  warmth  of  espousal  love ;  in  all  the  stages  of  heart-backsliding, 
till  even  surfeited  with  his  own  ways  ;  as  well  as  in  the  humbled  state  of  re^oration 
to  his  God  and  Saviour.    The  first  stage  of  backsliding  is  a  divided  heart,    figures 


364  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

are  changed,  and  the  divided  heart  dwindles  into  an  empty  vine.  A  person  may 
have  made  great  advances  in  heart-baclisliding,  yet  keep  up  a  profession  of  religion. 
Let  a  professor  once  dwindle  into  an  empty  vine,  it  is  much  if  he  makes  no  further 
advances  in  heart-bftcksliding.  The  next  stage  is  self-conceit.  Then,  with 
Ephraim,  the  backslider  makes  altars  to  sin.  Then  he  becomes  like  a  wild  ass's 
colt  in  the  wilderness,  snuffing  up  the  wind  and  following  the  east  wind.  And  a 
final  aggravation  is  dealing  deceitfully  with  God.  Heart-backslidings  may  be 
long  hid  from  the  view  of  man,  and  may  be  of  such  a  nature  that  they  cannot 
become  matters  of  Church  examination.  God  is  represented  as  commiserating 
Ephraim's  wretched  case.  God  will  give  no  countenance  to  his  iniquity,  nor  in  any 
way  connive  at  his  sin.  God  will  at  last  withdraw  from  him.  What  can  now  be 
expected  but  Ephraim's  final  ruin  and  everlasting  overthrow  ?  (John  Macgowan. ) 
On  backsliding : — I.  Is  it,  then,  inquired.  In  what  does  this  backsliding 
CONSIST?  1.  Let  it  be  remarked,  that  it  may  be  dated  from  becoming  stationary 
in  religious  attainments.  If  the  believer  be  making  no  progress  in  his  course,  nor 
attaining  to  greater  proficiency  in  Christian  experience,  there  exists  some  radical 
and  internal  defect.  Already  in  heart  he  is  deviating  from  God.  Is  he  not  growing 
in  knowledge?  Is  his  relish  for  Divine  objects  not  becoming  stronger  ?  Does  he 
experience  no  increasing  keenness  of  appetite  for  spiritual  provision  ?  He  must 
then  be  denominated  a  backslider,  as  the  deficiency  of  requisite  augmentation  in 
these  respects  manifests  that  the  present  state  of  his  heart  is  not  altogether  right 
with  God.  2.  Again,  it  consists  in  the  real  decline  of  those  holy  dispositions 
implanted  in  the  soul  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  highest  state  of  backsliding  into 
which  the  genuine  believer  may  fall  is  the  indulgence  in  any  flagrant  or  atrocious 
sin.  Witness  the  egregious  faults  of  Noah  and  Lot,  of  David  and  Peter.  II.  Let 
us  now  attend  to  the  causes  and  symptoms  of  this  spibitual  disease.  1.  Let  it 
be  recollected  in  general,  that  the  primary  cause  of  this  grievous  disorder  is  the 
corruption,  depravity,  and  deceitfulness  of  the  human  heart.  From  this  con- 
taminated source  all  deviation  from  God  originates.  2.  One  particular  cause  and 
symptom  of  backsliding  is  the  intermission  of  religious  duties,  the  appointed  means  of 
increase.  It  is  well  known  that  exercise  and  employment  are  necessary  to  preserve  and 
promote  health.  Similar  is  the  case  with  the  Christian.  Religious  exercises  and 
engagements  are  indispensably  requisite  for  the  advancement  of  gracious  habits. 
The  neglect  of  these  will  invariably  induce  declension.  Let  it  suffice  to  mention 
two  secret  duties,  inattention  to  which  is  particularly  productive  of  declension. 
These  are  prayer  and  self-examination.  The  former  is  absolutely  requisite  for 
supporting  the  vital  principle  of  grace,  in  a  lively  and  prosperous  condition. 
According  to  the  comparisons  of  some  worthy  old  divines,  it  is  to  the  soul  what  the 
lungs  are  to  the  body.  The  other  closet-duty  specified  as  so  needful  for  the 
prosperity  of  the  soul  is  self-examination.  "  They,"  says  a  certain  writer,  "  who 
in  a  crazy  vessel  navigate  a  sea  wherein  are  shoals  and  currents  innumerable,  if 
they  would  keep  their  course  or  reach  their  port  in  safety,  must  carefully  repair  the 
smallest  injuries,  often  throw  out  their  line,  and  take  their  observations.  In  the 
voyage  of  life,  also,  the  Christian  who  would  not  make  shipwreck  of  his  faith,  while 
he  is  habitually  watchful  and  provident,  must  make  it  his  express  business  to  look 
into  his  state,  and  ascertain  his  progress."  Did  we  observe  an  extensive  trader 
entirely  neglect  his  books,  and  extremely  averse  to  have  them  examined,  a  consider- 
able suspicion  and  strong  presumption  would  be  instantly  excited,  that  according 
to  the  vulgar  phrase,  he  is  going  back  in  the  world.  {The  Christian  Magazine.) 
Backsliders  in  heart: — The  bell-buoy  must  ring  out  over  the  rock  all  the  time 
because  the  rock  is  there  all  the  time.  The  reason  the  Bible  warns  so  much 
about  backsliding  is  because  we  are  always  in  danger  of  backsliding.  A  disease 
may  be  eating  our  life  away ;  our  ship  in  the  fog  may  be  drifting  upon  a  rocky 
coast.  We  are  only  in  the  greater  danger  if  not  aware  of  it.  Backsliding  begins 
unexpectedly:  like  a  dangerous  disease,  it  steals  into  our  system  so  secretly  that 
the  utmost  vigilance  is  necessary  lest  we  be  taken  unawares.  I.  Let  us  know,  first, 
THAT  BACKSLIDING  BEGINS  IN  THE  HEAET.  The  leavcs  of  E  fruit-treo  begin  to 
fade,  curl  up,  and  wither ;  no  fulness  of  life,  no  fruit.  You  suspect  a  worm — 
something  gnawing  at  the  seat  of  life — the  heart.  Men  fall  as  trees  do — after 
gradual  decay  at  the  heart  (chap.  iv.  23 ;  Hosea  x.  2).    II.  Well  to  rememb«r,  also, 

THAT  A  BACKSLIDER  IN   HEABT   IS   NOT   ALWAYS   A   BACKSLIDER   IN   LIFE.       Ir^dcfed,  he  is 

often  a  zealous  worker  in  external  things ;  shows  honest  pride  in  all  Church  success. 
Also  keeps  up  the  forms  of  personal  and  public  Christian  duty  faithfully,  &c. 
But   the   form   without   the   power    (2  Tim.    iii.  6).      Rich— poor  (Rev.  iii.   17). 


CHAP.  xiT.]  PROVERBS,  866 

III.  Note,  also,  some  of  the  signs  ob  indications  of  having  backslidden.  1.  Loss 
of  relish  for  private  devotions.  He  may  keep  them  up,  but  does  not  enjoy  them 
as  formerly  (John  xv.  9).  2.  Loss  of  interest  in  God's  Word.  He  may  continue 
to  read,  but  not  to  love  as  before  (Psa.  cxix.  11,  97).  3.  Thinking  lightly  of  sin 
(Sol.  Song  ii,  5  ;  Gen.  xix.  20).  4.  Loss  of  zeal  in  spiritual  work.  He  does  no 
soul-winning  work  (2  Tim.  iv.  2).  IV.  Again,  consider  what  aee  some  of  the 
causes  of  backsliding.  1.  Getting  off  guard.  Unwatched  avenues  of  approach 
(Mark  xiv.  38).  2.  Love  of  the  world.  When  the  world  is  in,  Christ  is  out 
(1  John  ii.  15).  3.  The  habitual  neglect  of  a  single  known  duty  (Jonah  i.  1-3). 
4.  The  habitual  indulgence  of  a  single  known  sin.  Compromising ;  sparing 
the  little  one,  &c.  (2  Sam.  xii.  7).  V.  Lastly,  bear  in  mind  some  of  the 
results  of  backsliding  in  heart.  "  Shall  be  filled  with  his  own  ways."  Not 
God's  ways  for  His  followers.  1.  With  ways  of  doubt.  Backsliding  in  heart,  how 
of  ten  doubt  begins !  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  11).  2,  Ways  of  fault-finding.  Everything  looks 
weary  because  the  heart  is  wrong  (Exod.  xvi.  2,  3).  3.  Ways  of  alienation.  For- 
Baking  the  Saviour  and  His  service  (Mai.  iii.  13-15).  4.  Ways  of  despair.  Saddest 
Jiuman  condition  (1  Sam.  xxviii.  6,  15).  Are  you  conscious  of  having  backslidden 
even  the  least?  (Evangelist.)  Is  goodness  advancing  or  receding  1 — The  heart 
is  obedient  to  some  law  of  heaven  ;  the  waters  fail  to  flow  by  the  attraction  of  sun 
and  moon.  In  some  parts  of  the  globe  the  sea  is  gradually  gaining  on  the  land  ; 
in  others  it  is  gradually  receding  and  leaving  the  land  dry  and  bare.  Are  the  full 
and  cleansing  waters  of  eternal  life  gaining  on  our  coasts  or  no  ?  (Christian  Age.) 
Spiritual  decline  : — I  suppose  it  would  be  difficult  to  describe  the  causes  and 
workings  of  consumption  and  decline.  The  same  kind  of  disease  is  common 
among  Christians.  It  is  not  that  many  Christians  fall  into  outward  sin,  and  so 
on,  but  throughout  our  Churches  we  have  scores  who  are  in  a  spiritual  con- 
sumption— their  powers  are  all  feeble  and  decaying.  They  have  an  unusually 
bright  eye — can  see  other  people's  faults  exceedingly  well — and  sometimes  they 
have  a  flush  on  their  cheeks,  which  looks  very  hke  burning  zeal  and  eminent 
spiritual  life,  but  it  is  occasional  and  superficial.  Vital  energy  is  at  a  low  ebb : 
they  do  not  work  for  God  like  genuinely  healthy  workmen  ;  they  do  not  run  in 
the  race  of  His  commandments  like  athletic  racers,  determined  to  win  the  prize ; 
the  heart  does  not  beat  with  a  throb  moving  the  entire  man,  as  a  huge  engine  sends 
the  throbbings  of  its  force  throughout  the  whole  of  the  machinery  ;  they  go 
slumbering  on,  in  the  right  road  it  is  true,  but  loitering  in  it.  They  do  serve  God, 
but  it  is  by  the  day,  as  we  say,  and  not  by  the  piece ;  they  do  not  labour  to  bring 
forth  much  fruit — they  are  content  with  here  and  there  a  little  shrivelled  cluster 
upon  the  topmost  bough.  That  is  the  state  of  mind  I  want  to  describe,  and  it  is 
produced  in  ninety-nine  out  of  every  hundred  of  believers  by  a  long  course  of 
prosperity  and  absence  of  spiritual  trouble.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  A  good  man 
shall  be  satisfied  from  himself. — The  world's  wonder,  a  contented  mind : — No 
search  is  more  vain  than  the  search  for  a  contented  man.  We  have  made  happiness 
and  contentment  to  be  something  outside  of  ourselves.  In  the  text  are  three 
paradoxes.  I.  A  good  man.  Goodness  is  an  internal  quality.  The  good  man  is 
whole  within,  sound  within.  Hence  his  satisfaction  ;  all  health  is  within.  Piety 
has  its  own  internal  resources  and  powers.  There  is  a  pretty  story  told  of  a  king, 
Shah  Abbas,  who  in  his  travels  met  with  a  shepherd.  He  found  him  to  be  so  wise 
that  he  elevated  him  to  great  power  :  he  became  a  great  statesman.  But  it  was  dis- 
covered, many  years  after,  that  he  frequently  went  to  a  lonely  house,  of  which  he 
kept  the  key ;  there  it  was  supposed  he  kept  his  treasure  ;  nay,  it  was  supposed  that 
there  he  hatched  schemes  against  his  royal  master ;  thither,  it  was  thought,  traitors 
might  resort.  The  whispering  courtiers  persuaded  the  king  to  break  open  the  door, 
in  order  that  all  the  viUainy  may  be  laid  bare,  and  there  was  found  an  empty  room, 
save  that  his  shepherd's  wallet  and  staff,  and  crook,  and  old  coat  were  there. 
"Hither,"  said  he,  "I  come,  in  order  that  if  I  ever  am  tempted  to  think  more 
highly  of  myself  than  I  ought  to  think,  I  may  be  rebuked  by  remembering  my 
origin,  and  what  my  rise  has  done  for  me."  Contentment  is  containment ;  the 
idea  in  it  is  that  of  having  learned  the  lesson  of  self-sufficing  and  self-sustaining. 
Contentment  is  a  sense  of  possession;  a  sense  of  satisfied  want.  II.  A  man 
satisfied.  The  lives  of  most  men  are  passed  in  fretfulness.  To  fret  is  to  fray 
out ;  fretfulness  wears  life  threadbare.  Contentment  is  the  science  of  thankful- 
ness. The  causes  of  discontent  are  idleness,  living  to  no  purpose.  It  is  only  in 
self-occupation  that  we  have  self-possession.  III.  The  source  of  the  satisfaction. 
"  From  himself."     1.  The  holy  man  is  satisfied  with  the  object  and  foundation  of 


366  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap. xrv. 

his  faith.  2.  In  the  evidence  of  his  rehgion.  3.  In  the  ordinances  of  the  sanctuary. 
4.  In  the  law  of  life.  5.  In  the  apportionment  and  destiny  of  the  world.  There 
may  be  four  replies  to  the  question,  Are  you  satisfied?  (1)  I  am.  Not  with 
myself,  but  from  myself.  I  find  my  happiness  within.  (2)  I  am  not.  Religion  is 
to  me  not  rest,  but  unrest ;  it  is  described  to  me  now  principally  by  unsatisfied 
appetites.  (3)  I  try  to  persuade  myself  that  I  am,  but  I  am  not ;  it  is  all  so  fading, 
so  fleeting.  I  could  be  satisfied,  could  we  continue  here.  (4)  I  am.  Extremes 
meet — I  am.  I  see  no  reason  for  anxiety,  and  my  business  and  my  pleasures, 
they  suffice  for  me.  But  what  you  call  satisfaction  I  call  death.  There  is  not 
one  ray  of  happiness,  properly,  from  yourselves;  all  is  borrowed,  and  all  is 
illusion.  If  you  do  not  find  the  true  contentment  on  the  earth,  you  will  find  it 
nowhere.  {E.  Paxton  Hood.)  A  good  man,  or  moral  excellence : — What  is  a 
good  man  ?  What  is  goodness  in  man  ?  A  thing  is  good  in  the  sense  of  being 
adapted  for  a  certain  end,  which  may  be  supposed  to  be  the  object  of  its  existence. 
Good  is  the  right  direction  of  power  and  capacity  in  anything  and  everything. 
Evil  is  the  wrong  direction,  or  the  abuse  of  power  and  capacity.  Evil  is  possible 
through  the  liberty  of  the  creature,  wherein  any  and  every  power  can  be  used  or 
abused — rightly  or  wrongly  directed.  Evil  is  possible  only  through  the  freedom  of 
the  creature ;  it  extends  just  as  far  as  that  freedom  extends ;  and  it  consists  in  a 
misdirection  and  abuse  of  the  powers  that  are  essentially  good,  as  given  by  God. 
A  good  man  is  simply  a  man  who  so  uses  all  the  powers  God  has  put  within 
his  reach  that  they  shall  most  perfectly  answer  the  end  God  designed.  We  have, 
to  guide  us  towards  and  in  the  right  direction  of  all  powers,  these  three  principles  : 
1.  That  everything  be  done  for  the  highest  good  of  mankind  generally,  or  of  other 
men,  not  for  self.  2.  That  it  be  done  in  the  best,  most  perfect  manner  possible  to 
the  doer.  3.  That  in  doing  it,  we  recognise  that  universal  design  of  a  Father's 
love  under  which  the  well-being  of  any  creature,  and  of  the  whole  universe,  is 
possible.  He  -whose  life  embodies  these  principles  is  a  good  man.  Good  and 
bad  men  are  not  born  such,  nor  made  such  by  external  power.  They  become  such 
freely.  How  universal  is  the  application  of  this  principle  I  Every  single  thing  that 
a  man  does  involves  either  the  use  or  abuse  of  some  power  that  he  possesses.  The 
great  good  of  man  is  ever  inward,  intellectual,  spiritual.  The  main  element  of 
power  will  be,  that  the  good  man  is  seeking  to  reach  some  ideal  of  life,  the 
source  of  his  inspiration,  and  the  object  of  his  most  ambitious  hopes.  {S.  Eager, 
B.A.)  The  good  man  satisfied  from  himself: — This  sentiment  sounds  more  akin 
to  the  proud  spirit  of  the  stoical  philosophy  than  the  humble  spirit  of  revealed 
religion.  That  philosophy  taught  its  disciples  to  aspire  after  an  absolute  and 
universal  independence.  It  insisted  that  the  "wise  man"  should  not  look  abroad 
for  happiness  in  any  direction,  but  find  it  in  himself  absolutely.  Scripture  seeks 
to  make  men  independent  in  a  way  that  is  possible,  and  by  means  that  are 
good.  Man,  as  a  finite  creature,  must  always  be  dependent.  He  cannot  revolve 
upon  his  own  centre,  and  look  abroad  for  nothing.  God  only  is  self-existent  and 
self-sufficing.  Who  needs  to  be  told  that  mankind  generally  do  not  find 
happiness  by  searching  for  it  in  their  own  bosoms?  This  text  does  not  teach 
that  a  good  man's  happiness  is  enjoyed  in  absolute  independence  of  all  created 
things,  much  less  of  the  one  Uncreated.  Nor  does  it  teach  that  he  is  called  on 
to  deny  himself  the  moderate  use  of  such  things  as  Providence  may  put  within 
his  reach,  and  to  which  his  nature  is  adapted.  It  simply  teaches  that  the  good 
man  is  satisfied  from  himself,  in  opposition  to  outward,  temporal  blessings  as 
chief,  indispensable,  and  absolute  grounds  of  support.  The  souls  of  God's  real 
servants  are  made  His  habitation  through  the  Spirit,  and  this  indwelling  is  attended 
with  a  peace  which  the  world  can  neither  give  nor  take  away.  The  witness  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  to  the  spirit  of  man  essentially  involves  happiness — a  happiness 
■which  is  independent  of  all  things  else,  and  which  is  enjoyed,  both  spontaneously 
and  on  reflection.  Those  dispositions  and  habits  which  are  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit 
make  the  human  soul  a  treasure-house  of  happiness,  and  render  their  possessor  to 
a  great  degree  independent  of  all  created  things ;  but  this  same  happiness  may  be 
made  a  subject  of  reflection,  and  be  heightened  by  it.  The  gift  of  the  Spirit  in  a 
man,  the  testimony  of  the  Spirit  to  a  man,  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  upon  a  man, 
these  things  are  internal  and  exhaustless.  A  man  so  favoured  and  endowed  is 
satisfied  from  himself,  for  various  reasons — because  he  is  not  tormented  with 
apprehensions  of  God's  wealth  ;  because  he  is  more  or  less  delivered  from  the 
dominion  of  the  passions  which  embitter  human  life;  because  he  has  acquired  tastes 
and  tempers  which  essentially  and  spontaneously  produce  peace  and  joy  ;  because 


CHAP.  HT.]  PROVERBS.  86! 

reflection  on  what  has  been  done  for  him  and  in  him  is  a  further  source  of  comfort ; 
and  because  he  has  a  positive  hope  full  of  immortality,  which  cheers  him  in  everj 
trial,  and  burns  brighter   and  brighter  as  the   darkness  of   outward   tribulation 
thickens  around  him.     What  is  thus  set  forth  as  doctrine  has  been  thousands  of 
times  realised  in  human  experience.     God's  people  have  often  been  found  main- 
taining a  marvellous  independence  by  simply  depending  upon  God,  and  to  have 
been  satisfied  with  themselves  because  God  was  in  them.     Enoch,  Abraham,  Jacob, 
Joseph,  Daniel,  Paul,  and  John.     At  the  best,  human  life  is  a  chequered  thing.  . 
With  the  good,  evil  is  everywhere  mingled — largely  mingled.     Every  heart  knows 
its  own  bitterness,  and  every  heart  has  its  own.      It  is  clear  that  if  happiness 
and  satisfaction  are  to  be  found  at  all,  they  must  be  found  within.     {W.  Sparrow, 
D.D.)        The  good  man's  self-satisfaction: — The   paralleUsm   of  this  verse  is  an 
illustration  of  the  great  law  of  sowing  and  reaping.    Now  we  take  the  good  man 
and  the  satisfaction  flowing  from  himself.      There   must  be  some  people  in  the 
world  whom  we  rightly  call  good  men.      The   phrase  is  a  frequent    one   in   the 
Scriptures.     In  our  Lord's  teachings  we  are  directed  both  to  the  origin  and  end, 
the  source  and  manifestation,  of  goodness.     He  says,  "Purify  the  inward  life  ;  put 
the  heart  right,  for  '  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh.' " 
Observe  the  difference  between  the  good  man  of  the  Bible  and  the  good  man  of 
society.     The  good  man  of  the  Bible  is  a  man  of  religious  faith  and  devotion,  of 
communion  with  God,  and  sanctity  of  heart ;  and  this  Divine  element  flowing 
downwards,    and    working    outwardly,  produces    the    manifestations    of    equity, 
benevolence,  industry,  prudence,  and  all  "  holy  conversation  and  godliness."     The 
good  man  of  the  world  builds  uphill  from  the  earth.     He  attends  to  the  personal 
virtues  from  a  consideration  of  their  tendency  to  benefit  him ;  from  self-respect, 
from  contempt  of  vice,  or  dread  of  its  evil  consequences.     He  cultivates  the  social 
virtues  from  calculation,  or  from  amiable  sentiment  and  disposition.     But  in  all 
this  he  builds  upward — he  stands  upon  the  earth,  and  never  gets  into  that  higher 
region  in  which  the  goodness  of  the  good  men  of  the  Bible  begins.     Virtue  is  not 
holiness.      They  differ  from  each  other  in  nature,  origin,  and  end.      1.  The  satis- 
faction of  the  good  man  arises  from  the  circumstance  that  he  is  regulated  in  his 
character  and  conduct  by  a  fixed  and  stable  thing — by  principle.     The  question 
with  him  is,  What  is  duty  ?    What  is  due  to  God  ?    He  does  not  live  by  impulse  ; 
he  is  not  moved  by  passion  ;  he  is  not  ruled  by  circumstances  ;  he  does  not  act  to 
secure  any  temporary  object.     These  things  would  make  any  man  miserable,  if  his 
satisfaction  were  to  arise  from  them.     In  the  midst  of  his  activity  the  good  man's 
satisfaction  arises  from  himself — from  the  consciousness  that  he  acts  upon  principle 
and  in  the  sight  of  God.     2.  The  sentiment  may  be  illustrated  by  the  contrast 
which  is  often  exhibited  between  the  good  man  and  the  wicked,  when  the  latter  is 
called  upon  to  eat  the  fruit  of  his  own  ways.     We  frequently  find  that  a  man  has 
brought  himself  by  his  folly  and  sin — by  extravagance,  imprudence,  and  passion — 
into  a  condition   of  perfect  thraldom,  and  perhaps  of    peril,  from  which  it  is 
impossible  to  liberate  himself.     The  man  has  brought  such  wretchedness  into  his 
heart,  such  poverty  and  distress  upon  his  family,  is  so  tied  and  bound  by  the 
consequences  of  his  own  conduct,  that  he  has  no  power  to  help  himself,  and  if 
relieved  at  all,  it  must  be  by  the  interference  of   others,  and  at  the  expense   of 
his  own  character.      Now,  in  a  case  like  that,  the  man  so  relieved  is  satisfied ; 
but  he  is  not  "  satisfied  from  himself."     The  good  man,  on  the  contrary,  is  not 
only  preserved  from  such  pain  and  wretchedness,  but  is  placed  in  circumstances, 
the  result   of   a  wise  and  holy  course  of  conduct,  as  to  be  able  to  help  others. 
3.  The   satisfaction   of    a   good   man    arises  from  his  being  preserved  from  the 
sting   and   reproach   of   an    evil   conscience.     This   is   somewhat   of    a  negative 
expression,  but  it  is  a  great  and  positive  blessing.     It   is   something  a  man  has 
not — that  is,  he  has  not  a  disturbed,  pained,  and  lacerated  conscience.     4.  Con- 
sider also  the  positive  and  increasing  pleasure,  the  growing  delight,  of  the  good 
man's  soul.     It  is  not  wrong  for   a  man  to  reflect  with  grateful   complacency 
upon  actions  that  are  good.     A  man  who  has  lived  a  life  of  active  goodness,  and 
can  reflect  on  a  long  series  of  deeds  that  will  bear  reflection,   has   a   source   of 
essentially  high,  and  pure,  and  profound  satisfaction  within  him.    Lessons  from 
this    theme :    1.   The    subject,  properly  understood,   is  in  exact  harmony  with 
evangelical    truth.      2.    It    is    important    to    examine    our    condition,   and   the 
relationship    we    sustain    to    God   and  goodness.      3.    If    by  God's  grace    men 
have  been  brought  into  a  state  of  harmony  with  God  and  all  that  is  good,  and  if 
their    hfe,   inward    and   outward,   is   in   such   hr.rmony  that    it   is  ministering, 


868  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xir, 

as  it  were,  to  their  souls  a  secret  blessed  satisfaction,  they  should  be  very  carefu 
not  to  put  the  harp  out  of  tune.  Good  men,  Christian  men,  by  giving  way 
to  temptation,  by  committing  sin,  have  interfered  with  the  harmonious  move- 
ments of  their  hfe,  and  got  out  of  health.  4.  Learn  to  have  a  noble  and  manly 
view  of  life.  Live  for  duty,  not  for  pleasure ;  for  principle,  not  for  expediency ; 
for  the  approbation  of  God,  not  for  the  praise  of  men.  Let  us  think  not  about 
immediate  and  temporal,  but  ultimate  and  external  results.  (T.  Binney.) 
The  self-sufficient  life  (with  John  iv.  14) : — Why  put  these  clauses  together  ? 
Surely  you  will  say,  "  To  illustrate  a  truth  by  way  of  contrast " :  for  does  the  one  not 
point  to  a  man  who  is  satisfied  from  the  fountain  of  a  human  morality,  while  the 
other  views  an  indwelling  Christ  as  the  spring  of  ceaseless  satisfaction?  The 
words  of  Christ  are  an  exegesis  of  Solomon's  words.  Both  proclaim  the  self- 
sufficiency  of  the  spiritual  life.  Our  subject  is  the  self-sufficient  life.  I.  It  arises 
FROM  ITS  INWARDNESS.  Solomou  says  a  good  man  is  satisfied  from  "  himself  " ; 
Christ  that  the  water  He  gives  is  "  in  him."  But  what  is  the  living  water  which 
Christ  gives?  Christ  tells  us  it  is  eternal  life.  The  fountain  itself  is  Jesua 
"  glorified  in  the  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  Note  the  inwardness  of  the  "  Well  " — 
"  from  himself  "  says  Solomon,  "  in  him  "  says  Christ.  But  where?  In  what  part 
of  man  does  Christ  dwell?  At  the  moment  of  regeneration  Christ  enters  the 
deepest  being  of  man — enters  that  which  underlies  all  faculties — changes  it ;  makes 
it  His  Holy  of  Holies,  and  from  it  works  through  the  whole  range  of  man's  nature. 
Christ  dwells  in  man — in  that  mysterious  something  which  transcends  conscious- 
ness— which  thinks,  loves,  imagines,  wills.  This  seat  of  Christ  in  the  regenerate, 
underneath  the  faculties  of  the  man,  explains  how  he  possesses  ceaseless  happi- 
ness, undisturbed  peace,  unbroken  tranquillities.  II.  It  arises  from  its  self-activitt. 
Look  at  the  "  Well."  This  is  Christ  Himself,  in  whom  dwells  all  the  fulness 
of  the  Godhead  bodily — i.e.,  the  unlimited  attributes  and  life  of  the  Godhead — all 
grace,  all  glory,  all  power.  This  Divine  Well  is  not  like  the  pool  of  Bethesda, 
whose  stagnant  waters  had  to  be  stirred  by  an  angel's  hand  before  they  could  live 
with  virtue  and  healing  power.  The  fulness  of  Jesus  Christ  in  a  man  is  a  hving 
fulness.  It  is  eternally  alive.  The  water  springs  up.  This  suggests  two  ideas.  1.  It 
brings  this  life  before  us  not  as  mere  water  that  springs  up,  but  as  life,  a  living 
thing,  which,  like  all  other  kinds  of  life,  takes  to  itself  an  organism,  and  builds  itself 
up  by  the  law  of  evolution  and  development,  until  it  reaches  the  maturity  of 
its  being.  2.  Note  the  goal  of  its  movement — the  point  toward  which  it  unfolds 
itself — springs  up,  not  to  the  world,  but  up  into  everlasting  life.  Still  the  water, 
its  satisfying  element,  is  independent  of  the  world.  All  along  it  has  been  so. 
Christ,  the  fountain,  is  eternally  active.  The  water  springs  up  in  itself,  and  its 
final  point  is  eternal  life.  We  must  not,  however,  suppose  with  some  that  this  life 
becomes  eternal,  as  if  at  first  it  was  mortal,  might  die  ;  but  at  some  point  became 
eternal.  No.  It  is  eternal  in  its  germ,  eternal  in  its  initial  developments.  The 
idea  of  our  text  is  quite  different.  It  is  a  life  which,  not  having  its  source  on  earth, 
obeys  a  law  of  nature,  and  seeks  its  original  source  in  heaven.  Man,  originally 
formed  in  the  image  of  God,  seeks  reunion  with  Him.  III.  It  arises  from  its 
power  to  satisfy  man.  This  is  a  fact  of  life — felt  according  to  the  spirituality  of 
the  man,  the  depth  and  riches  of  his  Christ-experience.  This  lone  widow,  stripped 
of  all,  so  utterly  destitute  that  she  has  nothing  to  compete  with  Christ  in  her,  has 
a  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  This  sweet,  saintly  spirit,  who  for  long  has 
lain  upon  a  bed  of  pain  and  sickness,  who  for  years  has  seen  neither  grass  grow  nor 
flower  bloom,  who  lives  in  that  garret  amid  the  dust  and  noise  of  the  great  city,  has 
Christ  in  her  heart,  a  well  of  water — a  satisfaction,  a  perfect  joy.  The  salt 
waters  of  trial  and  sorrow,  and  toil  and  loss  may  overflow  us,  but  down  in  the 
regenerate  part  of  man  is  a  well  of  water — fresh,  sweet,  living,  always  springing 
up.  This  is  the  joy  and  peace  that  lie  beyond  the  touch  of  time.  {Hugh  MairA 
Hapjnness  not  dependeyit  upon  our  external  circtmistances  : — The  text  is  not  intended 
to  deny  that  external  circumstances  have  considerable  influence  over  our  happi- 
ness. The  sentiment  is  not  to  be  taken  as  describing  the  actual  condition  of 
society.  The  happiness  of  the  great  mass  of  mankind  is  dependent  upon  external 
circumstances.  The  question  before  us  does  not  lie  between  the  influence  of 
outward  circumstances  on  the  one  hand  and  Divine  control  on  the  other.  The 
text  does  not  assert  the  good  man's  independence  of  God.  I.  Two  great  principles 
of  happiness,  or  ingredients  of  which  it  is  composed.  1.  Peace  of  mind. 
Unless  the  mind  is  in  a  state  of  quietude  and  peace  there  cannot  be  happiness. 
And  peace  is  communicated  to  the  spirit  in  a  direct  and  glorious  manner  through 


CHAP,  xrr.]  PROVERBS.  869 

Divine  influence.  2.  Expectation.  Looking  forward  to  something  that  we  possess 
not.  n.  The  supekioeitt  of  these  pkinciples  to  outward  cmcuMSTANCES.  1.  God 
has  not  chosen  outward  circumstances  as  the  medium  through  which  He  imparts 
these  elements  of  happiness  to  the  mind.  2.  God  has  so  ordered  it  in  the  economy 
of  grace  that  man  is  the  intelligent  and  voluntary  agent  in  the  application  of  these 
elements  of  happiness  to  his  own  case.  3.  Whenever  our  minds  are  under  the 
influence  of  the  highest  principles  of  happiness  they  are  not  only  independent  of 
cu'cumstances,  but  actually  exercise  a  control  over  them.  {A.  G.  Fuller.)  How 
a  mayi's  conduct  comes  home  to  him  : — Men  are  affected  by  the  course  they  pursue  ; 
for  good  or  bad  their  conduct  comes  home  to  them.  The  fulness  of  the  back- 
slider's misery  will  come  out  of  his  own  ways,  and  the  fulness  of  the  good  man'8 
content  will  spring  out  of  the  love  of  God  which  is  shed  abroad  in  his  heart. 
I.  The  b.*c];slidhr.  This  class  includes — 1.  Apostates.  Those  who  unite  them- 
selves with  the  Church  of  Christ  and  for  a  time  act  as  if  they  were  subjects  of  a 
real  change  of  heart.  Then  they  break  away  and  return  back  to  their  worldliness. 
Such  was  Judas.  2.  Those  who  go  into  open  sin.  Men  who  descend  from  purity 
to  careless  living,  and  from  careless  living  to  indulgence  of  the  flesh.  3.  Those 
who,  in  any  measure  or  degree,  even  for  a  very  little  time,  decline  from  the  point 
which  they  have  reached.  Note  the  word  "  backslider."  He  is  not  a  back-runner, 
nor  a  back-leaper,  but  a  back-slider ;  he  slides  back  with  an  easy,  effortless 
motion,  softly,  quietly,  perhaps  unsuspected  by  himself  or  anybody  else.  Nobody 
ever  slides  up.  The  Christian  life  is  a  climbing.  If  you  would  know  how  to  back- 
slide, the  answer  is,  "  Leave  off  going  forward  and  you  will  slide  backward."  Note 
that  this  is  a  backslider  in  heart.  All  backsliding  begins  within,  begins  with  the 
heart's  growing  lukewarm.  What  is  the  backslider's  history  ?  "  He  shall  be  filled 
with  his  own  ways."  The  first  kind  of  fulness  is  absorption  in  his  carnal  pursuits. 
Then  they  begin  to  pride  themselves  upon  their  condition  and  to  glory  in  their 
shame.  Presently  the  backslider  encounters  chastisement,  and  that  from  a  rod  of 
his  own  making.  A  fourth  stage  is  at  last  reached  by  gracious  men  and  women. 
They  become  satiated  and  dissatisfied,  miserable  and  discontented.  II.  The 
GOOD  MAN.  His  name  and  history.  The  text  does  not  say  he  is  satisfied  with 
himself.  No  truly  good  man  is  ever  self-satisfied.  The  good  man  is  satisfied  from 
himself.  A  good  man  is  on  the  side  of  good.  He  who  truly  loves  that  which  is 
good  must  be  in  measure  good  himself.  A  good  man  is  "  satisfied  from  himself " 
because  he  is  independent  of  outward  circumstances,  and  of  the  praise  of  others. 
The  Christian  man  is  content  with  the  well  of  upspringing  water  of  life  which  the 
Lord  has  placed  within  him.  Faith  is  in  the  good  man's  heart,  and  he  is  satisfied 
with  what  faith  brings  him.  Pardon,  adoption,  conquest  over  temptation,  every- 
thing he  requires.  Hope  and  love  are  in  the  good  man's  heart.  When  the  good 
man  is  enabled  by  Divine  grace  to  live  in  obedience  to  God,  he  must,  as  a 
necessary  consequence,  enjoy  peace  of  mind.  He  who  takes  the  yoke  of  Christ 
upon  him,  and  learns  of  Him,  finds  rest  unto  his  soul.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  A 
good  man  satisfied  from  himself: — That  virtue  is  its  own  reward,  and  alone 
sufficient  to  a  happy  life,  was  an  opinion  in  great  esteem  among  ancient  philo- 
sophers. Scripture  confirms  the  position  that  a  virtuous  life  is  the  best  course  we 
can  take  to  secure  our  happiness.  But  the  philosophers  went  much  farther  in  their 
commendations  of  virtue.  They  made  their  virtuous  man,  not  only  regardless, 
but  even  insensible  of  everything  that  concerned  the  body  and  this  life.  This  was 
talking  beyond  the  reach  of  human  nature.  Religion,  which  is  our  reasonable 
service,  and  treats  us  like  men,  does  not  require  unreasonable  things  of  us.  It 
does  not  pretend  to  make  us  insensible  of  evils,  nor  prohibit  the  use  of  all  lawful 
means  to  prevent  or  remove  them.  Religion  lays  the  best  foundation  for  our 
happiness  in  this  world  by  prescribing  such  rules  as,  if  we  observe  them,  will 
enable  us  either  to  avoid  these  temporal  evils,  or  wUl  support  us  under  them.  The 
good  man  will  have  more  pleasure  in  the  good  things  of  this  life  and  less  of  the 
evils  than  the  wicked.  Besides  which,  he  has  enjoyments  peculiar  to  himself 
which  the  sinner  is  a  perfect  stranger  to.  1.  A  good  man  is  most  likely  to  escape 
the  evils  and  calamities  of  life  and  to  pass  through  this  world  the  freest  from 
troubles  and  vexations.  His  virtues  will  be  a  natural  defence  and  security  to  him 
against  many  evils  and  miseries  which  would  otherwise  befall  him.  Most  of  the 
things  which  embitter  human  Ufe  arise  from  their  faults  and  follies,  their 
unreasonable  lusts,  and  unruly  passions.  The  good  man  places  his  happiness  in 
the  favour  of  God  and  the  sense  of  his  own  integrity.  He  desires  no  more  than 
he  wants ;  and  he  wants  no  more  than  he  can  use  and  enjoy  ;  and  this  reduces  his 

25 


370  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  sir. 

necessities  to  a  narrow  compass.  He  bears  an  universal  good-will  to  aU  mankind 
p.,nd  is  always  ready  to  do  all  the  good  he  can  to  others.  He  is  sober  and  tempe- 
rate in  all  his  pleasures  and  enjoyments  ;  and  this  upon  a  principle  of  religion  and 
virtue.  2.  Whatever  calamities  or  afflictions  befall  a  good  man  he  will  bear  them 
much  better  than  other  people.  Disappointments  are  not  so  great  to  him  who 
talies  an  estimate  of  things,  not  from  fancy  or  opinion,  but  from  truth  and  reality, 
and  the  just  weight  and  moment  of  them.  Though  his  virtues  are  not  fuU  proof 
against  the  strokes  of  fortune,  and  cannot  ward  off  every  blow,  yet  they  will  blunt 
the  edge  of  afflictions  and  greatly  abate  their  smart.  It  is  weU  to  consider  the 
uncertainty  of  all  external  enjoyments,  not  to  overvalue  them,  or  set  our  hearts 
upon  them,  or  place  our  happiness  in  them.  3.  The  good  man  has  pleasures  and 
enjoyments  peculiar  to  himself  which  will,  in  a  great  measure,  supply  the  want  of 
external  blessings.  Every  good  and  virtuous  action  we  do  affords  us  a  double 
pleasure.  It  first  strikes  our  minds  with  a  direct  pleasure  by  its  suitableness  to 
our  nature  ;  and  then  our  minds  entertain  themselves  with  pleasant  reflections 
upon  it.  Learn — (1)  It  is  an  unjust  reproach  to  cast  upon  religion  and  virtue  that 
they  deprive  us  of  joy  and  comfort  and  satisfaction.  (2)  What  is  the  true  cause 
of  the  trouble  and  uneasiness  which  are  to  be  found  under  the  sun.  (L.  Abbot.) 
A  ChrUtian  man  of  science  : — The  happiness  of  a  good  man  does  not  depend  on  the 
mere  surroundings  of  his  life,  or  the  possessions  which  he  can  call  his  own,  but  on 
something  more  vital — on  that  which  is  more  really  his  own,  and  of  which  no 
change  of  circumstances  can  ever  deprive  him.  The  uneducated  man  cannot  find 
company  in  himself.  He  has  to  look  outside  himself  for  enjoyment  and  satis- 
faction. The  man  whose  nature  has  been  cultured,  especially  by  self-discipline,  is 
often  least  alone  when  most  alone,  so  that  when  the  voices  of  men  are  not  heard 
he  hears  a  still,  small  voice  within  his  heart.  Now,  goodness  is  the  highest 
culture,  for  it  is  the  culture  of  that  which  is  most  spiritual  in  the  nature.  Good- 
ness is  an  inward  harmony.  Goodness  is  the  most  economical  thing  in  the  world, 
for  with  it  men  have  an  inward  treasure  that  renders  them,  to  a  large  extent, 
independent  of  that  which  is  without.  Religion  is  a  possession  which  makes  men 
rich  in  any  position.  There  need  be  no  commendation  of  an  ascetic  order  of  life, 
or  contempt  of  the  world.  But  if  we  are  to  enjoy  even  this  world,  the  power 
to  enjoy  must  be  found  within,  there  must  be  internal  harmony,  or  the  world  will 
be  a  great  discord  to  us.  The  kingdom  of  God,  that  kingdom  which  Christ 
declared  is  "  within,"  is  the  great  condition  of  blessedness  ;  aye,  it  is  the  condition 
for  enjoying  even  the  kingdom  which  is  temporal  and  visible.  These  points 
illustrated  from  the  life  of  G.  B.  Sowerby,  F.L.S,,  author  of  "The  Saurus 
Conchyliorum."      (IF.  Garrett  Horder.) 

Ver.  15.  The  simple  toelieveth  every  word  :  but  the  prudent  man  looketh  well 
to  Ms  going. — Simplicity  and  prudence : — Such  belief  is  not  to  the  discredit  of 
the  simple  man,  but  to  the  disgrace  of  the  man  who  misleads  him.  No  character 
is  more  admirable  than  that  which  is  marked  by  simplicity  and  consequent  trust- 
fulness ;  it  is  only  because  the  heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things  and  desperately 
wicked,  and  the  courses  of  this  woi'ld  are  so  much  out  of  line,  that  simplicity  is 
not  only  undervalued,  but  sometimes  contemned.  The  prudent  man  is  put  in 
apposition  to  indicate  that  he  is  a  man  of  affairs,  who  understands  a  good  deal  of 
the  ways  of  the  world,  and  who  looks  below  the  surface  to  find  real  meanings  ; 
this  kind  of  prudence  is  itself  an  affirmation  of  the  wickedness  of  the  world : 
prudence  in  itself  may  or  may  not  be  a  virtue  ;  everything  depends  upon  its  origin 
and  its  purpose:  when  a  man  is  so  prudent  as  to  suspect  everybody,  to  regard 
every  word  as  a  trap,  and  every  proposition  as  a  lure  to  destruction,  his  prudence 
simply  signifies  that  he  has  found  out  that  he  is  in  a  bad  world,  and  that  everything 
is  to  be  examined  with  a  view  to  detecting  in  it  the  spirit  of  selfishness  and  all  evil. 
Whether  simplicity  or  prudence  would  in  the  long  run  the  more  prevail  cannot  now 
be  told,  because  no  fair  test  can  be  applied.  Certainly  Jesus  Christ  would  seem  to 
teach  that  simplicity  is  better  than  wariness,  and  that  trustfulness  is  neai;:r  to  the 
Spirit  of  God  than  is  suspicion.  It  is  right  to  understand  the  men  by  whom  we  are 
surrounded,  and  to  obtain  some  notion  of  their  spirit  and  purpose,  in  order  that  we 
may  conduct  ourselves  aright  towards  them.  This  is  what  God  Himself  does  :  to 
the  froward  He  shows  Himself  f roward ;  to  the  meek  He  is  all  gentleness;  to  the 
trustful  He  is  all  grace.  There  are  men  who  pride  themselves  upon  their  prudence, 
not  knowing  that  their  prudence  may  have  been  gained  through  an  experience 
which  has  cost  them  dearly,  and  which  has  revealed  in  many  instances  their  folly 


OHU.  xrr.]  PROVERBS.  871 


and  their  incompetence.  The  prudence  of  the  wise  man  will  be  placed  at  the 
disposal  of  the  simple,  and  will  not  be  wholly  devoted  to  the  confounding  of  those 
whose  intentions  are  evil.  Wherever  one  man  is  wiser  than  another  he  is  a  debtor 
to  the  man  who  is  not  so  wise,  and  is  bound  to  pay  him  of  the  gold  of  wisdom,  that 
the  man  may  be  able  to  manage  his  affairs  in  the  world  with  discretion  and  success. 
{J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  credulous  and  the  cautious  .-—I.  The  hastily  credulous. 
"  The  simple  believeth  every  word."  1.  One  of  the  strongest  tendencies  in  man's 
mental  nature  is  his  propensity  to  believe.  It  is  one  of  the  most  voracious  appetites 
of  the  soul.  The  child  opens  its  mental  mouth,  hungering  for  tales  from  the 
nurse's  lips,  and  will  eagerly  swallow  up  everything  that  is  said.  (1)  This 
propensity  to  believe  impUes  a  state  of  society  that  does  not  exist.  Were  men 
born  into  heaven,  were  society  free  from  all  error  and  deception,  it  would  be  not 
only  right,  but  a  beneficial  thing  to  believe  every  word,  and  to  confide  in  every 
character.  This  is  the  state  of  society  for  which  man  was  created,  but  he  has  lost 
it._  He  comes  into  a  world  of  lies.  (2)  This  propensity  to  believe  explains  the 
reign  of  priesthood.  (3)  This  propensity  to  believe  shows  the  easiness  of  the 
condition  on  which  God  has  made  the  salvation  of  man  to  depend.  "He  that 
beheveth  shall  be  saved."  2.  The  thoughtless  yielding  to  this  tendency  is  an 
immense  loss.  "The  fool  rageth,  and  is  confident."  The  fool  sees  no  danger, 
dreads  no  harm.  He  rushes  recklessly  forward  into  mischief .  (1)  He  is  passionate. 
"  He  rageth."  Counsels  and  warnings  only  irritate  him.  (2)  He  is  stubborn.  He 
"is  confident."  What  does  he  care  about  your  warnings?  Nothing.  (3)  He  is 
foohsh.  "  He  that  is  soon  angry  dealeth  foolishly,  and  he  inherits  folly."  (4)  He 
is  despised.  A  man  of  wicked  devices  is  hated.  The  man  who  has  given  way  to 
his  credulity  becomes  all  this.  He  is  passionate,  ignorant  of  the  grounds  of  his 
belief,  he  cannot  brook  contradiction,  his  opinions  being  prejudices,  he  is  stubborn 
in  holding  them,  and  in  all  this  he  is  "  foolish  "  and  "hated."  H.  The  cautiously 
BELIEVING.  "  The  prudent  man  looketh  well  to  his  going."  True  prudence  is 
indicated  by  two  things.  1.  A  dread  of  evil.  "  A  wise  man  feareth."  True  dread 
of  evil  is  consistent  with  true  courage.  Few,  if  any,  displayed  more  heroism  than 
Noah,  yet,  being  moved  by  fear,  he  prepared  an  ark.  Evil,  both  physical  and 
moral,  is  a  bad  thing  in  the  universe,  and  it  is  right  to  dread  it,  as  we  dread 
poisonous  serpents  and  ravenous  beasts.  True  prudence  is  indicated — 2.  By  a 
departure  from  evil.  "  He  departeth  from  evil."  Moral  evil  is  the  heart  of  all  evil, 
and  this  he  forsakes.  He  shuns  it  as  an  enemy  to  God  and  the  universe.  The 
prudence  is  indicated— 3.  By  mental  greatness.  He  is  dignified  with  knowledge. 
He  is  "crowned  with  knowledge."  Caution  in  believing  is  necessary  for  three 
reasons.  (1)  The  strength  of  man's  tendency  to  believe.  (2)  The  prevalence  of 
error  in  society.  (3)  The  damaging  influence  of  falsehood  on  the  soul.  (Homilist.) 
Prudent  going: — "  Why  are  you  treading  so  carefully?"  said  a  donkey  to  a  heavily 
laden  horse.  "  You'U  never  get  home  at  that  rate."  "Do  you  want  to  know?  " 
was  the  answer;  "it  is  because  I  remember  there's  a  stone  on  the  road  somewhere 
about  here.  I  stumbled  over  it  this  morning  on  my  way  to  work,  and  I  don't  mean 
to  have  another  fall  this  evening."     (Mrs.  Prosser.) 

Ver.  17.  He  that  is  soon  angry  dealeth  foolishly. — Anger  restrained : — In  speaking 
recently  of  the  power  of  God's  grace  to  queU  our  passions,  Mr.  Aitken  told  the  story 
of  a  gentleman  he  knew  in  Liverpool,  who,  although  a  follower  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
was  cursed  with  a  hasty  and  violent  temper.  It  was  a  source  of  great  grief  to  him, 
and  in  his  helplessness  he  threw  himself  on  the  Lord's  hands  to  rid  him  of  this 
demon  which  was  marring  his  Christian  happiness.  He  occupied  a  position  of 
trust  in  the  Custom  House,  and  it  was  his  duty  each  night  to  see  that  every  door  in 
the  building  was  locked.  One  evening  he  had  just  gone  through  his  work  as  usual 
and  was  well  on  his  way  homewards,  when  a  boy  came  rushing  after  him  and  told 
him  a  man  was  locked  up  in  one  of  the  inner  rooms  of  the  Custom  House.  At  the 
moment  he  felt  anger  rising  in  his  throat,  but,  lifting  up  his  heart  to  God,  he 
returned  with  the  boy.  After  unlocking  room  after  room  he  came  to  the  place 
where  the  man  was,  and  found  the  poor  fellow  standing  trembling,  no  doubt 
expecting  an  outburst  of  that  temper  which  they  all  knew  so  well.  The  Customs 
ofl&cer  approached  the  man  smiliiig,  and,  stretching  out  his  hand,  told  him  not  to 
mind  the  trouble  he  had  given  him.  Thus  does  God's  grace  enable  us  to  quell  our 
worst  passions. 

Ver.  20.  But  the  rich  hath  many  ftlenda — Friends  in  prosperity : — Ah !  do  not 


378  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xir. 

be  puffed  up  by  any  of  the  successes  of  this  life,  do  not  be  spoiled  by  the  number  of 
liveried  coachmen  that  may  stop  at  your  door,  or  the  sweep  of  the  long  trail  across 
the  imported  tapestry.  Many  of  those  who  come  to  your  house  are  fawning 
parasites.  They  are  not  so  much  in  love  with  you  as  they  are  in  love  with  your  house 
and  your  successes.  You  move  down  to  320,  Low  Water  Mark  Street,  and  see  how 
many  of  their  carriages  will  halt  at  your  door.  Now  you  can  hardly  count  those 
brilliant  carriages  on  your  ten  fingers,  but  you  move  next  year  down  to  320  in  Low 
Water  Mark  Street,  and  yoa  can  count  them  all  on  your  nose  I  Timon  of  Athens 
was  a  wealthy  lord,  and  all  the  mighty  men  and  women  of  the  land  came  and  sat 
at  his  banquet,  proud  to  sit  there,  and  they  drank  deep  to  his  health.  They  sent 
him  costly  presents.  He  sent  costlier  presents  back  again,  and  there  was  no  man 
in  all  the  land  so  admired  as  Timon  of  Athens,  the  wealthy  lord.  But  after  a 
while,  through  lavish  hospitality  or  through  betrayal,  he  lost  everything.  Then  he 
sent  for  help  to  those  lords  whom  he  had  banqueted  and  to  whom  he  had  given 
large  sums  of  money — Lucullus,  Lucius,  Sempronius,  and  Ventidias.  Did  those 
lords  send  any  help  to  him?  Oh,  no.  Lucullus  said  when  he  was  applied  to, 
"  Well,  I  thought  that  Timon  would  come  down  ;  he  was  too  lavish  ;  let  him  suffer 
for  his  recklessness."  Lucius  said,  "  I  would  be  very  glad  to  help  Timon,  but  I 
have  made  large  purchases  and  my  means  are  all  absorbed."  And  one  lord  sent 
one  excuse,  and  another  lord  sent  another  excuse.  But  to  the  astonishment  of 
everybody,  after  awhile  Timon  proclaimed  another  feast.  These  lords  said  to 
themselves,  "Why,  either  Timon  has  had  a  good  turn  of  fortune  or  he  has  been 
deceiving  us — testing  our  love."  And  so  they  all  flocked  to  the  banquet,  apologetic 
for  seeming  lukewarmness.  The  guests  were  all  seated  at  the  table,  and  Timon 
ordered  the  covers  to  be  lifted.  The  covers  lifted,  there  was  nothing  under  them 
but  smoking  hot  water.  Then  Timon  said  to  the  guests, ' '  Dogs,  lap  !  Lap,  dogs  !  " 
And  under  the  terrible  irony  they  fled  the  room,  while  Timon  pursued  them  with 
his  anathema,  calling  them  fools  of  fortune,  destroyers  of  happiness  under  a  mask, 
hurling  at  the  same  time  the  pictures  and  the  chalices  after  them.  Oh,  I  would 
not  want  to  make  you  over-suspicious  in  the  days  of  your  success ;  but  I  want  you 
to  understand  right  well  there  is  a  vast  difference  between  the  popularity  of  Timon 
the  prosperous  and  Timon  the  unfortunate.  I  want  you  to  know  there  is  a  vast 
difference  in  the  number  of  people  who  admire  a  man  when  he  is  going  up  and  the 
number  of  people  who  admire  him  when  he  is  going  down.  (T.  De  Witt 
Talmage.) 

Ver.  21.  He  that  hath  mercy  on  the  poor,  happy  is  he. — London  poverty  : — The 
problems  presented  by  poverty  are  recurrent.  Wisdom  as  well  as  courage  is  required 
by  those  who  would  confront  them  successfully.  Civilisation  tends  to  the  separa- 
tion of  men,  but  Christianity  can  bring  them  together  till  they  constitute  a  true 
brotherhood,  in  which  the  strong  shall  help  to  bear  the  burdens  which  are  crushing 
the  weak.  It  is  a  wholesome  sign  that  such  questions  as  this  are  being  more 
closely  considered,  and  more  boldly  treated  than  they  formerly  were,  especially  by 
Christian  people.  If  dogmatic  Christianity  seems  weaker,  practical  Christianity  is 
stronger.  There  is,  undoubtedly,  much  to  discourage  pity  when  we  attempt  to  know 
the  condition  of  the  poor,  and  to  do  them  service  for  Christ's  sake.  We  meet  with 
improvidence,  drink,  and  imposture.  We  do  not  palliate  such  wickedness  and 
folly,  but  would  use  it  rather  as  an  argument  for  "  considering"  the  poor,  for 
discriminating  between  things  that  differ,  so  that  pity  and  generosity  may  flow  in 
the  right  direction.  Scripture  lays  down  the  principles  which  should  guide  us. 
Under  Judaism  the  enactments  which  tended  to  prevent  or  relieve  poverty  are  very 
prominent.  The  privileges  of  gleaners,  the  precepts  which  forbade  the  withholding 
of  wages,  and  the  laws  against  usury,  are  specimens.  The  Year  of  Jubilee  was  a  re- 
markable social  institution.  That  year  poverty  was  suffered  to  put  forth  its  claims  in 
God's  name,  and  was  sure  of  a  fair  hearing.  Judaism  did  but  foreshadow  the  work 
of  Jesus,  who  came  to  establish  righteousness,  and  to  proclaim  brotherhood  between 
men  and  between  nations.  He  was  listened  to  most  eagerly  by  the  poor.  He  was 
born  among  them,  was  all  through  His  life  one  of  them — understood  their  habits 
and  feelings,  was  at  home  in  their  houses,  and  taught  truth  in  a  way  that  they 
could  comprehend.  We  admit  that  we  cannot  reach  an  ideal  state  of  society  in 
the  world  so  long  as  sin  exists.  But  we  are  not  to  fold  our  hands — waiting  for  a 
coming  millennium — thinking  that  of  necessity  things  must  be  as  they  are.  Christ 
our  Saviour  is  the  world's  rightful  king,  and  He  means  to  conquer  it  for  Himself, 
through  the  righteousness  and  mercifulness  of  His  people.     Still,  the  law  of  love 


CHAP.  XIV.] 


PROVERBS.  373 

holds  good,  and  if  we  follow  our  Lord,  we  shall  go  forth  to  seek  and  to  save  those 
that  are  lost.  And  they  need  saving— from  misery,  from  degradation,  and  from 
despair.  Consideration  of  the  moral  effects  of  poverty  will  lead  us  to  deeper  pity 
of  the  poor.  A  poor  man  has  not  the  gracious  home  influence  that  most  of  us 
enjoy.  The  temptation  to  envy  must  come  with  tremendous  power  to  a  poor  man. 
What  can  be  done  to  alter  for  the  better  a  state  of  things  which  every  Christian 
ought  to  think  of  pitifully  and  prayerfully  ?  We  have  something  to  do  in  forming 
public  opinion  on  this  question,  so  that  anything  which  is  within  the  sphere  of 
legislation  may  be  done.  Charity  also  has  its  claims  upon  our  thoughts  and 
generosity.  And  above  all,  the  good  news  of  the  Kingdom  is  needed  of  these  our 
brethren.     {A.  Rowland,  LL.B.,  B.A.) 

Ver.  22.  Do  they  not  err  that  devise  evil  ^—The  grievous  error  of  devising 
evil ;— How  difficult  is  the  task  to  convince  any  human  being  that  he  has  mistaken 
the  road  to  happiness  !  He  would  say,  "  No  man  can  judge  for  another  what  is 
best  suited  to  his  nature  and  temperament  in  the  way  of  enjoymg  hfe."  And  if 
man  had  no  other  law  to  follow  in  the  pursuit  of  happiness  than  the  dictates  of  his 
own  will,  this  reasoning  would  be  just  ;  and  upon  indifferent  points  of  minor 
importance,  it  still  remains  unanswerable.  But  in  connection  with  the  moral 
course  and  conduct  of  a  man's  life,  the  way  has  been  laid  down  for  him  :  now  he 
must  walk,  and  where.  The  wicked  would  deny  that  they  do  "  err  "  at  all.  1.  The 
wicked  "  err  "  egregiously  in  imagining  for  a  moment  that  any  man  is  placed  here 
to  be  independent  of  God,  and  of  His  commandments.  2.  In  taking  it  for  granted 
that  they  know  best  what  is  good  for  them  ;  that  they  can  tell  what  will  mduce  to 
their  own  comfort  and  happiness,  better  than  the  revealed  law  of  their  lives  in  the 
Word  of  God.  3.  In  conceiving  that  sin  has  any  real  good  to  confer.  4.  The 
wicked  "  err"  in  being  intent  only  on  the  present.  5.  They  admit  and  cherish  in 
the'r  hearts,  in  opposition  to  all  reason,  as  well  as  Scripture,  an  idea  that  there 
will  be,  after  all,  a  means  of  escape  for  them.  They  thus  prove,  by  their  conduct, 
that  they  do  not  use  their  reason  and  common  sense  in  this  supremely  important 
concern.     {A.  B.  Evans,  D.D.) 

Ver.  23.  In  aU  labour  there  is  profit.— TT^or A;  .-—The  doctrine  of  the  Proverbs  is, 
that  what  is  good  for  the  next  world  is  good  for  this.  He  who  wishes  to  go  out  of 
this  world  happUy  must  first  go  through  this  world  wisely.  Men  do,  to  a  very 
great  extent,  earn  for  themselves  their  good  or  evQ  fortunes,  and  are  filled  with  the 
fruit  of  then-  own  devices.  True  reUgion  is  a  thing  which  mixes  itself  up  wi'^  ^" 
the  cares  and  business  of  this  mortal  life,  this  work-day  world.  "In  all  labour 
there  is  profit."  Whatsoever  is  worth  doing,  is  worth  doing  well.  It  is  always 
■worth  while  to  take  pains.  It  is  a  short-sighted  mistake  to  avoid  taking  trouble, 
for  God  has  so  weU  ordered  this  world  that  industry  always  repays  itself.  God  has 
set  thee  thy  work ;  then  fulfil  it.  Fill  it  full.  Throw  thy  whole  heart  and  soul 
into  it.  Do  it  carefully,  accurately,  completely.  All  neglect,  carelessness,  slurring 
over  work  is  a  sin  ;  a  sin  against  God,  who  has  called  us  to  our  work  ;  a  sm  against 
our  country  and  our  neighbours,  who  ought  to  profit  by  our  work ;  and  a  sm  against 
ourselves  also,  for  we  ought  to  be  made  wiser  and  better  men  by  our  work.  Then 
take  pains.  Whatever  you  do,  do  thoroughly.  Whatever  you  begin,  finish.  Look 
upon  your  work  as  an  honourable  calling,  and  as  a  blessing  to  yourselves,  not 
merely  as  a  hard  necessity,  a  burden  which  must  be  done.  Be  sure  it  wiU  bring 
its  reward  with  it.  Work,  hard  work,  is  a  blessing  to  the  soul  and  character  of  the 
man  who  works.  Idleness  makes  a  man  restless,  discontented,  greedy,  the  slave  of 
his  own  lusts  and  passions.  Being  forced  to  work,  and  forced  to  do  your  best,  will 
breed  in  you  temperance  and  self-control,  dihgence  and  strength  of  will  cheerful- 
ness and  content,  and  a  hundred  virtues  which  the  idle  man  will  never  know.  If 
you  wish  to  see  how  noble  a  calling  work  is,  consider  God  Himself,  who,  although  He 
is  perfect,  and  does  not  need,  as  we  do,  the  training  which  comes  by  work,  yet  works 
for  ever  with  and  through  His  Son  Jesus  Christ,  who  said,  "  My  Father  worketh 
hitherto,  and  I  work."  Think  of  God  as  a  King  working  for  ever  for  the  good  of 
His  subjects,  a  Father  working  for  ever  for  the  good  of  His  children,  for  ever  send- 
ing forth  light,  and  life,  and  happiness  to  all  created  things,  ana  ordermg  all  things 
in  heaven  and  earth  by  a  providence  so  perfect  that  not  a  sparrow  falls  to  the 
ground  without  His  knowledge,  and  the  very  hairs  of  your  head  are  all  numbered. 
And  then  think  of  yourselves,  called  to  copy  God,  each  in  his  station,  and  to  be 
fellow-workers  with  God  for  the  good  of  each  other  and  of  ourselves.     Called  to 


874  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xrv. 

work  because  you  are  made  in  God's  image,  and  redeemed  to  be  the  children  of 
God.  (C.  Kingsley,  M.A.)  Labour  better  than  talk  :—Sometiiaes  it  is  diflScult 
to  see  where  the  profit  is.  We  speak  of  having  spent  our  strength  for  nought,  of 
having  run  in  vain,  of  having  brought  the  day  to  a  close  without  having  filled  our 
arms  with  sheaves.  There  is,  however,  a  sense  in  which  all  labour  ends  in 
advantage  :  it  is  so  in  learning,  in  study,  in  the  prosecution  of  art,  in  devotion  to 
business,  in  the  study  of  character,  indeed,  throughout  the  whole  circle  of  human 
thought  and  occupation.  A  man  may  wi-ite  much,  and  may  throw  his  writing 
away  because  it  does  not  fulfil  his  expectation  or  purpose,  yet  the  very  act  of  having 
written  it  has  been  as  a  discipline  to  the  writer,  has  stirred  his  faculties,  and  by 
even  revealing  weakness  has  prepared  the  way  for  the  cultivation  of  strength. 
Every  time  the  arm  is  lifted  the  muscles  are  improved.  Every  time  the  fresh  air 
is  breathed  a  blessing  of  healthfulness  is  left  behind.  Labour  means  industry, 
devotion,  conscientious  attention  to  affairs  that  demand  our  interest :  it  is  set  in 
apposition  to  the  talk  of  the  lips — mere  breathing,  mere  foaming,  mere  boasting, 
wordy  declarations  of  great  programmes  which  are  never  brought  to  realisation. 
The  teaching  of  the  text  would  seem  to  be  that  labour  brings  wealth,  and  mere  talk 
brings  penury.  If  this  is  so  the  law  is  obviously  just  and  good.  Society  would  no 
longer  be  consolidated  and  secure  if  mere  talk  brought  men  to  honour  and  wealth 
and  solidity  of  position.  In  all  society  the  labourers  must  be  more  in  number  than 
the  talkers.  Understand  that  nothing  is  here  said  against  talk  ;  society  cannot  do 
without  speech  ;  eloquence  has  a  great  part  to  play  in  the  education  of  the  world ; 
what  is  spoken  against  is  the  talk  of  the  lips — that  is,  mere  talk,  talking  for  talking's 
sake,  love  of  hearing  one's  self  speak,  talking  with  the  lips  when  the  heart  is  taking 
no  part  in  the  communication  :  when  a  man  truly  talks  his  intellect,  his  heart,  his 
conscience,  his  judgment,  his  whole  being  speaks ;  every  word  is  marked  by  sacred- 
ness  of  purpose,  every  promise  is  a  vow,  every  declaration  binds  the  soul.  It  must 
not  be  understood  that  anything  whatever  is  said  in  disparagement  of  talk,  speech, 
eloquence  ;  we  must  again  and  again  remind  ourselves  that  the  talk  that  is  con- 
demned is  formal,  mechanical,  labial,  taking  nothing  of  virtue  out  of  the  speaker, 
and  communicating  nothing  of  sftength  to  the  hearer.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Labour, 
talk,  wealth  : — I.  Peofitable  labotjk.  "  In  all  labour  there  is  profit."  The  word 
•'  all "  here  of  course  must  be  taken  with  limitation.  Ill-directed  labour  is  not 
profitable.  1.  Labour  is  profitable  to  our  physical  health.  2.  Labour  is  profitable 
to  our  character.  It  conduces  to  force  of  thought,  energy  of  will,  power  of 
endurance,  capacity  of  application.  3.  Labour  is  profitable  to  our  social  comforts. 
By  labour,  honest,  well-directed  labour,  man  gets  not  only  the  necessities,  but  the 
comforts,  the  luxuries,  the  elegances,  and  the  elevated  positions  of  life.  There  is 
no  true  labour  that  is  vain.  II.  Impoverishing  talk.  "  The  talk  of  the  lips 
tendeth  only  to  penury."  All  talk  does  not  tend  to  penury.  There  is  a  talk  that 
is  profitable.  The  talk  of  the  preacher,  the  lecturer,  the  statesman,  the  barrister, 
more  often  tend  to  affluence  than  to  penury.  Sir  Walter  Ealeigh  says,  "  He  that 
is  lavish  in  words  is  a  niggard  indeed.  The  shuttle,  the  needle,  the  spade,  the 
brush,  the  chisel,  all  are  still  but  the  tongue."  III.  DiGNrFTiNO  wealth.  "The 
crown  of  the  wise  is  their  riches."  The  idea  is,  that  a  wise  man  would  so  use  his 
wealth  that  it  will  become  a  crown  to  him.  By  using  it  to  promote  his  own  mental 
and  spiritual  cultivation,  and  to  ameliorate  the  woes  and  to  augment  the  happiness 
of  the  world,  his  wealth  gives  him  a  diadem  more  lustrous  far  than  all  the  diamond 
crowns  of  kings.  But  the  foolishness  of  fools  is  folly.  This  looked  at  antithetically 
means  that  the  wealth  of  a  fool  adds  no  dignity  to  his  character.  (D.  Thomas, 
D.D.)  Industry  in  religion  : — I.  The  uselessness  of  a  religion  which  is 
MERELY  VERBAL.  1.  Do  Hot  misundcrstaud  this.  Gift  of  speech  is  from  God.  He 
is  to  be  obeyed  and  honoured  by  it.  Religion  is  to  be  verbal.  Confess  Christ. 
Exhort  one  another.  Eebuke  sin.  Sing  psalms  and  hymns.  By  our  words  we 
shall  be  justified  or  condemned.  2.  But  a  merely  verbal  religion  is  useless.  We 
may  call  Christ,  Master  and  Lord,  and  disobey  Him.  We  m.ny  dispute  on  religious 
subjects,  and  be  without  religion  itself.  II.  The  necessity  and  advantage  of 
practical  INDUSTRY  IN  religion.  1.  The  Bible  often  speaks  of  spiritual  "labour." 
2.  "  In  all "  such  "  labour  there  is  profit."  The  kingdom  of  heaven  suffereth 
violence,  and  the  violent  take  it  by  force.  Eesist  the  devil,  and  he  shall  flee  from 
yotf.  God  is  not  unrighteous  to  forget  your  work  of  faith  and  labour  of  love. 
1.  Your  present  interest  calls  you  to  it.  There  is  a  gathering  before  the  final 
harvest ;  and  they  who  sow  plenteously  shall  gather  plenteously.  2.  Can  you  be 
too  active  in  His  service  who  has  done  so  great  things  for  you?     3.  Nor  forget  the 


CHAP.  XIV.]  PROVERBS.  375 


punishment  threatened  to  apostasy.  4.  Keep  in  mind  the  reward  promised.  5.  Be 
Bolemnly  impressed  with  the  greatness  of  the  work,  and  the  brevity  and  uncertainty 
of  time.  ((?.  Cubitt.)  Restful  work  :—l.  Am  I  wrong  in  thinking  that  most  of  us 
take  our  religion  much  too  easily?  Where  is  the  "  labour"?  Where  is  the  difficult 
part  ?  And  yet  a  reUgious  life  is  always  set  before  us  as  a  very  difficult  thing — 
Work.  "Work  while  it  is  day."  "Go  work  in  My  vineyard."  "  Strive  to  enter 
in."  "  We  labour  to  enter  into  the  rest."  We  get  up  in  the  morning,  and  we  say 
a  prayer,  and  perhaps  read  a  few  verses  in  the  Bible,  or  some  religious  book,  before 
we  leave  our  room.  During  the  day,  we  have  one  or  two  religious  thoughts. 
Perhaps  we  do  some  act  of  kindness  which  costs  us  very  little,  and  which  we  do 
with  a  very  mixed  motive.  Am  I  understating  the  religion  of  your  day  ?  or  am 
I  overstating  it  ?  But  does  it  correspond  with  the  description  which  the  Bible 
gives  of  a  religious  life?  Does  this  satisfy  the  requirements  of  God?  Is  your 
conscience  satisfied  ?  Where  is  the  self-denial  ?  Where  is  the  "  labour  "  ?  Was 
this  Christ's  life  ?  2.  Why  do  you  find  your  religion  such  a  tame  thing  ?  Why  do 
you  make  such  a  Uttle  progress  ?  Why  have  not  you  the  enthusiasm  which  some 
have?  Why  is  your  religion  unattractive  to  other  people?  It  wants  "labour." 
Nothing  will  restore  that  neglected  field  but  hard  work.  Digging,  tilling,  watering, 
fencing,  weeding,  burning,  that  restores  a  field !  True,  it  is  aU  of  grace.  God 
must  give  the  sunshine,  and  you  must  spread  the  seed  to  receive  it.  Let  any  farmer 
say  what  is  the  secret  of  fertilising  his  land.  "  Labour."  Let  every  man  of 
great  learning  and  high  intellectual  power  say  where  is  the  secret  of  his  great 
knowledge  and  mental  power.  He  would  say,  "Fag."  Let  every  experienced 
Christian  say  what  has  made  him  what  he  is.  He  will  say,  "  Labour  ;  hard  work." 
"  In  all  labour  there  is  profit."  3.  The  "  labour  "  may  differ  in  different  persons. 
A  woman's  work  is  very  different  to  a  man's.  The  work  of  one  class  of  society 
may  be  chiefly  manual ;  but  God  makes  His  unity  out  of  man's  diversity.  I  would 
that  you  would  invest  in  "labour."  If  you  wish  to  lead  a  happy  life,  you  will 
never  find  it  in  what  you  are  to  get,  but  you  will  find  it  in  what  you  are  to  give. 
Get  out  of  this  pointless,  easy-going,  unsatisfying,  useless  life.  Let  me  go  with  you 
a  step  or  two.  In  the  morning  do  not  waste  your  time  in  bed,  but  wake  early  to 
the  reahties  of  life.  Try  to  begin  with  a  good  thought.  Discipline  yourself,  even 
in  dressing.  Take  pains  with  your  morning  prayer.  Have  some  arrangement. 
Stop  the  first  wandering  thought.  And  when  you  read  your  Bible,  go  deep.  Look 
for  inner  meanings.  All  the  day  long,  remember  your  own  particular  danger,  and 
be  on  your  guard  about  it.  Try  to  raise  your  own  and  others'  conversation  to  a 
higher  level.  Set  to  yourself  in  life  some  special  work  which  you  believe  God  calls 
you  to  do.  It  may  be  for  the  poor,  for  the  suffering,  for  the  school,  for  the  sick, 
for  the  heathen,  for  the  Church,  for  Christ.  And  remember,  whatever  is  worth 
doing  at  all  is  worth  doing  well.  [J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Work  lives  wheii  we  are 
gone  .-—Lord  Shaftesbury,  in  one  of  his  speeches,  gave  an  admirable  concluding 
piece  of  advice  to  all  Christian  workers— I  trust  that  you  will  persevere,  and  by 
God's  blessing  double  and  redouble  your  efforts.  You  cannot  do  better  than  take 
the  saying  that  appears  in  one  of  Sir  Walter  Scott's  tales.  An  old  _  Scotchman 
sends  for  his  son,  and  says  to  him,  "Be  aye  stickin'  in  a  tree,  John  ;  it'll  be  dein 
guid  to  the  world  when  you  and  I  are  gane."  Labour  a  panacea  for  trouble  :— 
Life  is  full  of  trouble,  and  we  must  shoulder  our  share  with  the  best  grace  we  can. 
We  may  only  seek  to  hghten  it,  for  to  avoid  it  is  impossible.  There  is  one  sovereign 
panacea,  however— work.  Brooding  over  trouble  is  hke  surrounding  oneself  with 
a  fog,  it  magnifies  all  objects  seen  through  it.  Occupation  of  the  mind  prevents 
this  ;  any  hard  work,  manual  work  even,  gives  the  mind  other  matters  of  concern, 
and  also  tires  the  body  so  as  to  ensure  sleep.  He  who  knows  that  power  is  inborn, 
that  people  are  weak  because  they  look  for  good  out  of  circumstances  instead  of 
themselves,  throws  himself  upon  his  own  personality,  and  stands  in  an  erect 
position,  commands  his  limbs,  and  succeeds  in  achievements,  because  he  perceives 
it  lies  with  himself  to  strengthen  and  develop  his  faculties.  Profit  in  all 
labour  .-—In  an  article  on  "  The  lady  who  does  her  own  work,"  Mrs.  Harriet 
Beecher  Stowe  dwells  on  the  value  of  housework  in  giving  the  very  healthiest  form 
of  exercise,  and  for  the  average  woman  shows  it  to  be  far  preferable  to  the  work  of 
the  masseurs,  who,  even  in  those  days,  more  than  thirty  years  ago,  seem  to  have 
found  plenty  of  patients.  "  Would  it  not  be  quite  as  cheerful  and  less  expensive  a 
process,"  she  asks,  "  if  young  girls  from  early  life  developed  the  muscles  in  sv.eep- 
ing,  dusting,  ironing,  rubbing  furniture,  and  all  the  multiplied  domestic  processes 
wiiicli  our  grandmothers  knew  of?"  and  ll'Cn  iiuls:  "  I  will  venture  to  say  that 


876  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiT. 

our  grandmothers  in  a  week  went  over  every  movement  that  any  gymnast  has 
invented,  and  went  over  them  to  some  productive  purpose,  too."  Here  is  a  hint 
that  women  with  thin  arms  would  do  well  to  take.  It  is  said  to  be  really  a  fact 
that  Clara  Louise  Kellogg,  the  singer,  when  a  young  girl,  was  much  annoyed  by 
the  attenuated  appearance  of  her  arms  when  she  began  to  don  evening  dress  at  her 
crowded  concerts.  Some  one  recommended  a  brisk  use  of  the  broom,  which  advice 
she  followed,  and  soon  had  a  round,  plump  member  as  the  reward  of  her  labour. 
If  a  thin,  listless  girl,  with  a  dull  eye  and  stare,  can  by  any  means  be  persuaded  to 
try  the  "  broom  cure,"  she  will  be  astonished  to  find  what  a  beautifier  it  really  is. 

Ver.  26.  In  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  strong  confidence :  and  His  children  shall  have 
a  place  of  refuge. — Godly  fear  and  its  goodly  consequence  : — Has  it  never  surprised 
you  that  there  should  be  such  sentences  as  these  in  the  Book  of  inspiration — 
secular  proverbs  interspersed  with  spiritual  proverbs — the  secular  and  the  spiritual 
all  put  together  without  any  division  or  classification.  The  hard  and  fast  line 
which  is  made  to  divide  the  secular  from  the  religious  is  fraught  with  innumerable 
injuries.  I.  What  is  this  fear  of  the  Lobd  ?  Fear  stands  for  true  godliness.  It 
is  a  short  way  of  expressing  real  faith,  hope,  love,  holiness  of  living,  and  every 
grace.  There  is  a  something  more  tender,  more  touching,  more  real  about  fear 
than  there  is  about  some  people's  faith,  which  faith  may  very  readily  verge  upon 
presumption.  But  in  speaking  of  fear  we  must  always  discriminate.  There  is  a 
fear  with  which  a  Christian  has  nothing  to  do.  What  is  the  fear  that  a  well- 
ordered,  well-disciplined,  beloved  child  has  of  his  own  father  ?  1.  He  has  an  awe 
of  him  which  arises  out  of  admiration  of  his  character.  2.  He  is  sure  to  be  very 
deferential  in  his  father's  presence.  3.  He  fears  at  any  time  to  intrude  upon  his 
father's  prerogative.  4.  He  dreads  everything  which  might  cause  his  father's  dis- 
pleasure. II.  Whekein  is  the  confidence  of  godly  fear  seen  ?  The  history  of 
men  that  have  feared  God  may  enlighten  us  on  this  matter,  e.g.,  Job,  Habakkuk. 
The  confidence  will  not  only  appear  in  time  of  trouble,  it  will  appear  also  in  acts 
of  obedience.  The  same  confidence  will  develop  itself  when  persecution  is  involved, 
and  when  we  have  to  bear  witness  to  the  truth.  III.  Whereupon  is  this  confidence 
BUILT  ?  They  that  fear  God  know  God  to  be  infinitely  loving  to  them,  to  be  im- 
mutable and  unchangeable,  to  be  unsearchingly  wise  and  omnipotently  strong  on 
their  behalf  ;  they  know  that  an  atonement  has  been  made  for  their  sins,  and  that 
the  Spirit  of  God  dwells  in  them.  IV.  How  this  confidence  and  this  fear  are 
FAVOURED  OF  GoD.  The  promise  is,  "  His  children  shall  have  a  place  of  refuge." 
Those  who  fear  God  and  have  confidence  in  Him  are  His  children.  There  is  a 
heaven  lying  asleep  within  those  words,  "His  children."  For  the  "place  of 
refuge  "  finds  illustration  in  Noah,  Lot,  Israel,  Kuth,  Elijah,  Christians  at  Pella, 
Ac.  Moses  Stuart  says  the  text  means  that  the  children  of  those  who  fear  God 
shall  have  a  place  of  refuge.  And  there  are  many  precious  texts  that  speak  thus 
of  our  children.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Godliness,  safety,  and  life  : — I.  That  godli- 
ness is  safety.  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  strong  confidence."  The  godly  are  safe. 
God  is  their  Eefuge  and  Strength.  They  will  not  fear  though  the  earth  be  removed. 
We  make  three  remarks  about  this  refuge.  1.  It  is  a  provision  against  immense 
dangers.  2.  It  admits  of  the  greatest  freedom  of  action.  A  prison  is  a  refuge  as 
well  as  a  fortress.  But  all  in  this  refuge  have  ample  scope  for  action.  The  sphere 
is  as  infinite  as  God.  3.  It  is  accessible  at  all  times  and  for  all  persons.  Its  gates 
are  open  day  and  night.  II.  That  godliness  is  life.  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  a 
fountain  of  life.  Godliness  is  a  fountain  of  happiness — salubrious,  abundant, 
perennial.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Strong  confidence  : — Fear  prevents  confidence, 
and  sometimes  destroys  confidence ;  but  the  "  fear  of  the  Lord  "  produces  con- 
fidence. The  text  does  not  say  that  all  godly  persons  have  confidence ;  some  have 
not,  because  the  body  is  weak  or  there  is  some  morbid  feeling  ruling  the  heart 
which  should  not  control  the  emotions  and  the  affections.  Godliness,  where  it  has 
fuU  play  and  free  scope,  will  invariably  produce  confidence.  All  the  confidence  of 
godly  persons  is  not  a  direct  fruit  of  piety.  Some  confidence  comes  from  consti- 
tutional conditions.  It  is  a  matter  of  temperament.  I.  Beal  godliness  involves 
confidence  towards  God.  Because  in  such  a  case  as  this  reconciliation  with  God 
is  complete.  Not  necessarily  the  realisation  of  reconciliation  and  the  fruits  and 
effects  of  it.  If  reconciliation  in  the  case  of  those  who  fear  the  Lord  be  complete, 
confidence  cannot  but  be  restored  by  such  reconciliation.  There  springs  up  between 
them  that  "  fear  the  Lord  and  God,"  the.t  which  may  be  called  filial  friendship  ; 
and  in  this  there  is  strong  confidence.    Further,  the  intercourse  of  the  godly  with 


CHAP.  XIV.]  PROVERBS.  377 

heaven  is  perfectly  unfettered.  And  there  is,  in  the  case  of  those  who  "  fear  the 
Lord,"  happy  dependence ;  such  as  that  of  the  babe  upon  its  mother.  We  are  not 
always  to  be  asking  God  for  an  explanation  of  His  doings,  we  are  to  trust  Him. 
There  is  motherhood  as  truly  as  fatherhood  in  God.  II.  Beal  godliness  pboduces 
CONFIDENCE  TOWARDS  MEN.  Not  impudeuce ;  not  boldness  of  the  evil  kind ;  but  that 
confidence  which  is  perfectly  consistent  with  deep  humility,  and  which  works 
together  with  that  spirit  which  is  ever  ready  to  put  honour  on  another.  Do  not 
mistake  this  confidence  towards  men.  This  confidence  is  the  confidence  of  conscious 
uprightness.  As  in  the  case  of  Job.  But  it  is  not  the  self-conceit  which  says, 
"  Stand  by,  I  am  holier  than  thou."  III.  The  confidence  which  keai  godliness 
AWAKENS  IS  adapted  TO  ALL  CIRCUMSTANCES.  In  danger  it  becomes  boldness.  In 
duty  and  work  it  becomes  conscious  power.  The  godly  man  is  not  a  fatalist. 
IV.  A  CONFIDENCE  WHICH  ABIDES  TO  THE  END.  It  goes  with  a  man  to  the  uttermost, 
it  carries  him  right  through.  It  endures  because  the  principles  out  of  which  it  is 
established  endure.  Faith  endures.  Hope  endures.  This  confidence  will  be 
strong  enough  to  do  all  the  work  which  you,  in  this  world  of  sin  and  sorrow,  may 
require  from  it.  Then  do  not  be  content  without  strong  confidence.  And  endeavour 
to  promote  this  confidence,  especially  among  weak  and  timid  Christians.  (S. 
Martin,   M.A.)  Fear  a   confidence  : — Fear  is  confidence  ;   the   words   sound 

strangely.  They  are  strange  indeed,  but  true.  To  fear  God  aright  is  to  be 
delivered  from  all  fear.  "  His  salvation  is  nigh  them  that  fear  Him."  To  have 
Buch  a  neighbour  is  strong  consolation  to  a  human  spirit  in  this  howling  wilderness. 
The  fear  which  brings  a  sinner  submissive  and  trustful  to  the  sacrifice  and 
righteousness  of  the  Substitute  is  itself  a  confidence.  The  great  and  terrible  God 
becomes  the  "  dwelling-rock  "  of  the  fugitive.  {W.  Arnot.)  The  fear  of  the  Lord 
and  its  advantages : — Eeligion,  in  the  life  of  a  man  who  regularly  lives  to  God, 
always  appears  in  an  aspect  uninteresting  and  unlovely  to  the  irreligious.  And  so 
they  speak  of  it.  It  is  needful,  therefore,  that  religion  should  be  honoured. 
I.  The  habit  which  the  text  exhibits.  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord."  Fear,  in  its 
most  comprehensive  and  general  definition,  is  that  emotion  arising  from  the 
prospect  of  danger,  either  real  or  imaginary.  In  spiritual  things  it  has  a  twofold 
character.  1.  Slavish  fear,  or  mere  dread  of  Jehovah  in  His  character  as  Judge. 
This  fear  must  not  be  put  in  the  place  of  religion.  2.  Filial  fear.  Analogous  to  the 
emotion  properly  exercised  by  children  towards  parents ;  it  is  exercised  by  all  those 
who  have  undergone  a  redemption  from  slavish  fear  and  a  renovation  of  heart  by 
the  influence  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  It  arises  from  a  deep  and  humble  reverence  of 
the  Divine  perfections  and  from  a  practical  desire  to  walk  in  obedience  to  the 
Divine  commandments.  It  is  principally  included  in  the  direction  of  all  the 
affections  towards  Jehovah  and  the  exhibition  of  practical  religion  in  the  life  and 
conversation.  The  filial  fear  of  the  Lord  is  by  no  means  inconsistent  with  the  love 
of  the  Lord.  II.  The  advantages  which  this  mental  habit  always  and  invariably 
BECUEES.  The  fear  of  God  excludes  all  other  fear,  and  he  who  has  it  has  a  sanctuary 
in  which  his  soul  shall  abide  in  security,  and  safety,  and  peace,  while  looking 
beyond  the  scenes  of  this  present  life  for  the  perfect  enjoyment  of  interminable  and 
imperishable  felicity.  Notice  three  facts  embodied  in  the  principle.  1.  The  fear 
of  the  Lord  removes  the  terrors  of  conscience.  Conscience  is  the  judge  of  a  man's 
mind  with  regard  to  a  man's  own  actions.  An  accusing  conscience  is  one  that  sets 
before  the  spirit  of  a  man  the  array  of  his  crimes.  The  fear  of  the  Lord  prevents 
the  accusations  of  conscience  and  brings  the  soul  into  a  state  of  peace.  2.  The 
fear  of  the  Lord  removes  also  the  terrors  of  temporal  chastisement.  But  the 
chastening  of  God  is  always  for  our  profit ;  and  in  connection  with  the  profit 
arising  from  chastisement  there  are  peculiar  comforts.  3.  The  fear  of  the  Lord 
removes  the  terrors  of  death  and  of  futurity.  He  who  has  God  for  his  friend  must 
look,  not  only  without  fear,  but  with  hope  and  joy,  to  the  last  moment  of  dissolution, 
and  his  entrance  into  the  mysteries  of  the  awful  world  of  futurity.  (James  Parsons.) 
The  advantages  of  religious  principle  : — The  "  fear  of  the  Lord  "  is  here  put  for  all 
gracious  principles,  producing  gracious  practices.  1.  Where  this  reigns  it  produces 
a  holy  security  and  serenity  of  mind.  2.  It  entails  a  blessing  on  posterity. 
3.  It  is  an  overflowing  and  everflowing  spring  of  comfort  and  joy.  It  is  a 
"  fountain  of  life,"  yielding  constant  pleasure  and  satisfaction  to  the  soul.  4.  It  is 
a  Bovereign  antidote  against  sin  and  temptation.  Those  that  have  a  true  relish  of 
the  pleasures  of  serious  godliness  will  not  be  allured  by  the  baits  of  sin  to  swallow 
its  hook ;  they  know  where  they  can  obtain  better  things  than  any  it  can  pretend 
to  offer.    (Matthew  Henry.)        The  children's  place  of  refuge  (to  children) : — What 


878  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

is  a  place  of  refuge  ?  In  the  Isle  of  Man  there  is  a  tower  in  the  sea  which  is  known 
as  "  the  Tower  of  Refuge."  Just  under  the  waters  is  a  cruel  rock,  and  many  a 
boat  has  been  struck  upon  it  and  lost,  so  the  wife  of  one  of  the  governors  has  had 
this  tower  built,  and  sailors  and  fishermen,  instead  of  a  dangerous  rock,  find 
shelter,  a  dry  room,  and  something  to  eat  and  drink.  Who  is  it  in  the  text  who 
are  to  have  a  place  of  refuge?  Not  the  fathers,  not  the  mothers,  but  "His 
children."  But  who  are  God's  children?  Every  child  that  comes  into  the 
world  is  God's  child.  But  it  is  possible  for  a  little  boy  or  girl  to  be  one 
of  God's  children  and  not  know  it.  If  you  will  give  your  heart  to  the  Lord 
God,  if  you  will  love  Him,  you  will  find  out  that  you  are  one  of  God's  children. 
God  is  often  grieved  because  His  boys  and  girls  do  not  know  Him.  God  is  your 
Father,  and  He  likes  to  know  that  you  know  Him.  Now,  boys  and  girls  have  their 
troubles.  We  big  people  sometimes  forget  that  when  little  people  have  little  cares 
they  are  just  as  hard  for  them  to  bear.  If  you  have  troubles  you  want  a  place  of 
refuge  into  which  you  can  escape.  The  place  of  refuge  for  you  is  the  heart  of  Jesus. 
If  you  ask  Jesus  to  let  you  come  He  will  let  you  come,  and  you  will  know  Jesus  if 
you  get  into  His  heart.  The  heart  of  Jesus  is  a  great  heart — it  is  large  enough  to 
take  us  all  in,  boys  and  girls  and  men  and  women.  And  now  is  the  very  best  time 
for  you  k»  come  and  find  your  place  of  refuge  in  the  heart  of  Jesus.  Eemember 
that  your  place  of  refuge  is  always  close  to  you.  Jesus  is  always  willing  to  hear 
and  willing  to  answer  you.     {W.  J.  Woods,  B.A.) 

Ver.  27.  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  a  fountain  of  life.— The  fountain  of  life : — 
I.  SoMKTHiNG  THAT  NEEDS  BEPLENisHiNG.  Life  is  a  fire — it  must  be  kept  alight ; 
a  lamp — it  needs  oil ;  energy — it  demands  a  nervous  sustentation.  So  with  spiritual 
life — it  cannot  continue  without  food.  II.  Something  to  replenish  man's  life. 
"  The  fear  of  the  Lord."  Here  is  rich  provender  called  a  "  fountain  " — continuous, 
inexhaustible,  pure — the  source,  not  the  stream.  How  is  it  a  fountain  of  life? 
1.  Because  it  enables  us  to  assimilate  Divine  food.  2.  Because  it  is  the  key  which 
unlocks  the  tap.     {Homilist. ) 

Ver.  29.  He  that  is  slow  to  -wratli  is  of  great  understanding. — Sinful  anger  : — 
The  scope  of  these  words  is  to  beat  down  sinful  anger,  a  common  evil,  producing 
much  mischief.  In  them  there  is — 1.  The  excellency  of  meekness,  and — 2.  The 
mischief  of  passionateness,  and  the  evil  thereof.      I.  The  man  that  is  slow  of 

WRATH    OR    ANGER    SHOWS     GREAT    WISDOM    AND    UNDERSTANDING    IN    HIS     MEEK      AND 

PEACEABLE  DISPOSITION  AND  DEPORTMENT.  1.  The  uaturc  of  Wrath  or  anger  in 
general.  Anger  or  wrath  is  a  passion  which  is  not  of  itself  sinful,  but  is  either 
good  or  ill,  as  it  is  regulated  ;  and  so  it  differs  from  fretting,  murmuring,  and  envy, 
which  can  never  be  good  or  allowable  in  any  case.  Anger  is  a  servant  to  the  meek, 
but  a  master  to  the  passionate.  The  passion  of  anger  is  like  wind  to  a  ship.  If 
there  be  a  dead  calm,  and  the  winds  blow  not  at  all,  or  very  weakly,  the  ship  does 
not  make  way.  And  if  men  be  so  stupid,  indolent,  and  unconcerned,  that  their 
spirits  will  not  stir  in  them,  whatever  dishonour  they  see  done  to  God,  these  are 
standing  still  in  the  way  to  heaven.  If  the  wind  is  brisk  enough,  but  yet  is  contrary, 
the  ship  will  at  best  have  much  ado  with  it,  and  may  be  driven  into  a  shore  which 
the  crew  desired  not  to  see.  So  if  men's  anger  be  in  itself  sinful,  it  cannot  fail  of 
an  unhappy  event,  driving  the  soul  into  much  sin.  Though  the  wind  be  not 
contrary,  yet  if  it  be  too  impetuous  and  violent,  it  may  dash  the  ship  on  rocks  and 
split  it.  Though  a  man's  anger  may  have  a  just  ground,  yet  if  it  prove  excessive 
and  boisterous  it  may  run  men  headlong  into  great  mischiefs.  The  ingredients  of 
anger  are,  a  commotion  or  trouble  of  the  spirit,  which  ariseth  from  an  apprehen- 
sion of  an  injury.  Hatred,  which  is  bent  against  the  injury  apprehended.  Grief, 
on  account  of  the  part}'  or  parties  injured.  A  desire  for  the  vindication  of  the 
right  and  honour  of  the  injured.  Anger  is  a  passion  uneasy  to  one's  self, 
compounded  of  bitter  ingredients  and  uneasy  passions  ;  in  which  one  walks  on 
slippery  ground,  where  he  is  apt  to  fall  headlong.  2.  What  is  it  to  be  slow  of 
wrath?  Being  slow  to  take  up  anger  in  one's  own  cause.  Managing  it  warily, 
when  it  is  taken  up,  being  guided  by  the  light  of  reason,  and  not  by  the  fire  of 
passion,  and  being  easy  to  lay  it  down.  The  more  slow  that  anger  burns  the 
easier  it  is  to  quench.  3.  He  who  is  slow  of  wrath  is  of  great  understanding.  Such 
an  one  thereby  shows  his  duty  to  God,  his  sovereign  lord,  and  to  himself.  He 
shows  that  he  understands  Satan's  diligence  and  malice  against  him,  his  real 
interest,  and  human  nature.    Be  slow  to  wrath.  It  is  a  heaven-like  disposition.  The 


CHAP.  XIV.]  PEOVERBS.  879 

comfort  of  society  depends  on  it.  It  is  necessary  for  a  man's  own  comfort.  It 
telps  to  keep  ourselves  and  others  from  the  snare  of  sin.  But  there  is  such  a  thing 
as  sinful  slackness  to  anger,  -which  may  make  us  omit  duties  of  justice  and  charity. 
II.  The  passionate  man  proclaims  his  folly  and  naughtiness  in  his  unbridled 
PASSION  AND  siNTUL  ANGER.  1.  The  naturs  of  sinful  anger.  Anger  is  sinful  when 
it  riseth  without  a  just  ground,  having  no  cause  for  it  assigned  by  grace  or  right 
reason  as  just.  It  may  rise  without  any  cause  at  all ;  or  vainly,  upon  some  slight 
or  trifling  occasion  unworthy  of  such  notice.  When  it  keeps  no  due  proportion 
with  the  offence.  When  it  is  not  directed  to  the  honour  of  God,  and  the  destruction 
of  sin.  When  it  makes  no  due  difference  between  the  offender  and  the  offence. 
When  the  effects  of  it  are  sinful.  When  it  is  kept  up  and  continued  beyond  due 
time.  2.  The  kinds  of  sinful  anger.  Sinful  in  itself ;  where  there  is  no  just 
ground.  Accidentally  sinful ;  when  ill-managed.  There  is  an  open  and  impetuous 
anger  called  wrath.  A  pursuing,  implacable  wrath,  called  anger,  which  is  set  upon 
revenge.  3.  The  effects  of  sinful  anger.  Mischievous  to  the  body.  Fires  the 
tongue  in  a  particular  manner.  Disturbs  society.  Overclouds  reason.  Unfits  a 
man  for  duty.  The  passionate  man  proclaims  his  folly.  He  shows  himself  to  be 
a  proud  man,  a  weak  man,  incapable  of  ruling  himself  ;  an  unmortified  man  ;  a 
rash  and  precipitant  man ;  an  unwatchful  man.  Practical  improvement  of  this 
subject — Use  of  humiliation  and  conviction ;  of  exhortation.  Desire  of  provoking 
and  stirring  up  others  to  passion ;  for  God's  sake,  and  for  your  neighbour's  sake, 
as  well  as  for  your  own  sake.  "  Watch  and  pray,  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation." 
And  if  at  any  time  you  are  caught,  hasten  out  of  the  snare.  Dallying  with  temp- 
tation is  the  fair  way  to  entangle  you  further  ;  therefore  fly  from  it  as  from  a 
serpent,  lest  ye  be  stung  to  death  thereby.  (T.  Boston,  D.D.)  Religion  the 
restraint  of  impetuous  passion  : — Death  is  at  all  times  appalling  to  nature  ;  but 
never  so  frightful  as  when  it  comes  by  the  hands  of  the  public  executioner.  To  this 
the  text  provides  an  antidote.  The  man  who  lives  in  the  "  fear  of  the  Lord  "  is  not 
likely  to  die  an  untimely,  much  less  an  ignominious  death.  The  case  of  martyrs 
is  excepted.  I.  Explain  the  nature  of  true  religion.  What  is  the  principle,  its 
rule,  and  its  object.  1.  Its  principle  is  the  love  of  God.  This  love  to  God  must  be 
supreme.  And  wherever  love  is  present,  it  will  be  evidenced  by  a  desire  to  comply 
with  the  wishes,  and  obey  the  commands  of  the  person  loved.  2.  That  the  rule  of 
true  religion  is  the  revealed  will  of  God,  as  found  in  the  Scriptures.  3.  The  object 
of  true  religion  is  the  glory  of  God.  Religion  in  the  heart  can  never  be  satisfied 
with  anything  short  of  the  Divine  glory  as  the  great  object  of  life.  II.  While 
destitute  of  the  influence  of  religion,  men  are  perpetually  in  danger  of  being 
OVERCOME  BY  THE  IMPETUOSITY  OF  THEIR  PASSIONS.  1.  Principles  dircctly  opposite  to 
those  of  true  religion  exist  in  the  human  heart.  2.  Circumstances  are  continually 
arising  which  may  call  these  unholy  principles  into  active  operation.  3.  There  is 
grave  danger,  in  the  absence  of  true  religion,  that  excited  passion  will  prevail. 
Impetuosity  can  be  effectually  restrained  and  subdued  only  by  the  power  of  religious 
principle.      (Essex    Remembrancer.)  Slow    to    ivrath  : — Lord    Macaulay    has 

remarked  that  there  are  some  unhappy  men  constitutionally  prone  to  the  darker 
passions,  men  to  whom  bitter  words  are  as  natural  as  snarling  and  biting  to  a 
ferocious  dog  ;  and  he  asserts  that  to  come  into  the  world  with  this  wretched 
mental  disease  is  a  greater  calamity  than  to  be  born  blind  or  deaf.  A  man,  he 
proceeds  to  say,  who,  having  such  a  temper,  keeps  it  in  subjection,  and  constrains 
himself  to  behave  habitually  with  justice  and  humanity  towards  those  who  are  in 
his  power,  seems  worthy  of  the  highest  admiration.  "  There  have  been  instances 
of  this  self  command  ;  and  they  are  among  the  most  signal  triumphs  of  philosophy 
and  religion."  In  eulogies  of  the  Emperor  Justinian  this  characteristic  is  not  to  be 
slighted,  that  he  was  "  a  master  of  the  angry  passions,  which  rage  with  such 
destructive  violence  in  the  breast  of  a  despot."  Of  Mohammed  we  are  told  that  he 
was  naturally  irritable,  but  had  brought  his  temper  under  great  control,  so  that  even 
in +^e  self-indulgent  intercourse  of  domestic  liie  he  was  kind  and  tolerant.  "  I 
served  him  from  the  time  I  was  eight  years  old,"  said  his  servant  Anas,  "  and  he 
never  scolded  me  for  anything,  though  things  were  spoilt  by  me."  Adam  Smith 
traces  from  school  and  playground  the  progress  and,  so  to  speak,  natural  history  of 
self-control,  and  shows  on  what  grounds,  and  in  what  way,  the  child  advances 
in  self-command,  studies  to  be  more  and  more  master  of  itself,  and  tries  to 
exercise  over  its  own  feelings  '« a  discipline  which  the  practice  of  the  longest 
life  is  very  seldom  sufficient  to  bring  to  complete  perfection."  (W.  Arnot, 
D.D.) 


380  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

Ver.  30.  A  sound  beart  is  the  life  of  tlie  flesh. — Heart  and  health  : — A  "  sound 
heart "  is  a  heart  that  gives  its  supreme  aiJection  to  the  supremely  good.  All  other 
hearts  are  more  or  less  rotten.  Such  a  heart,  the  text  informs  us,  is  the  condition 
of  physical  health ;  it  is  the  very  "  life  of  the  flesh."  True,  science  can  demonstrate 
this  fact  in  many  ways.  Physical  health  requires  attention  to  certain  laws ;  these 
laws  to  be  attended  to  must  be  understood  ;  the  understanding  of  these  laws  requires 
study  ;  the  proper  study  of  them  is  only  insured  by  a  supreme  sympathy  of  heart 
with  the  law-giver.  Every  man's  experience,  as  well  as  science,  attests  this  fact. 
The  influence  of  the  emotions  of  the  heart  upon  the  state  of  the  body  even  the 
dullest  recognises.  The  passions  of  grief,  disappointment,  anger,  jealousy  and 
revenge,  in  proportion  to  their  strength  derange  the  bodily  system.  On  the  other 
hand,  pleasurable  emotions  give  buoyancy  and  vigour  to  the  body.     I.  Th.^t  a  man's 

BODILY  HEALTH,  WHEEE  THE  OEGANISATION  IS  NORMALLY  GOOD,  IS  VEKY  MUCH  IN  HIS  OWN 

HANDS.  Heaven  has  given  us  the  means  and  the  motives  to  cultivate  happy  condi- 
tions of  the  heart.  "  Keep  thy  heart  with  all  diligence."  We  infer  from  this  fact — 
II.  That  Christianity  is  an  indispensable  agent  in  removing  man's  physical 
DISEASES.  III.  That  medical  science  will  always  be  ineffective  until  it 
practically  concerns  itself  with  the  moral  diseases  and  cures  of  the  mind. 
The  medical  practitioner  should  know —  (1)  That  it  is  unscientific  to  ignore  the  fact 
that  moral  evil  is  the  source  of  all  physical  evil,  and — (2)  That  it  is  unscientific  to 
ignore  the  fact  that  there  is  no  agent  to  remove  moral  evil  but  Christianity.  We 
infer — IV.  That  as  the  true  morality  of  the  world  advances,  the  physical 
health  of  the  world  will  improve,  a  drainage  to  carry  away  all  the  foul  passions 
of  the  heart  is  the  desideratum.  The  man  who  is  most  successful  in  his  efforts, 
through  Christianity,  to  promote  a  moral  renovation  of  hearts  is  the  greatest 
philanthropist.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  But  envy  is  the  rottenness  of  the  bones. — 
The  nature  and  character  of  envy : — All  the  laws  of  nature,  as  far  as  they  compre- 
hend the  duties  we  owe  to  one  another,  may  be  reduced  to  this  one  great  principle 
of  universal  benevolence,  viz.,  that  we  lay  it  down  as  the  fixed  and  fundamental 
rule  of  all  our  actions,  to  do  all  manner  of  good,  and  to  abstain  from  all  manner  of 
evil.  The  motives  to  this  conduct,  besides  the  beauty  and  agreeableness  of  it,  are 
these — 1.  That  all  mankind  in  reality  consult  their  own  interest  best,  when  they 
contribute  to  the  good  of  the  whole.  2.  That  there  is  an  intrinsic  pleasure  result- 
ing from  the  practice  of  virtue.  3.  That  it  recommends  us  to  the  love  and  esteem 
of  all  mankind.  Anguish  of  heart,  hatred,  disesteem,  and  insecurity,  are  the 
natural  rewards  of  iniquity,  even  in  this  world.  This  is  nowhere  more  conspicuous 
than  in  the  passion  of  vice  and  envy.  A  "sound  heart,"  is  literally  a  heart  of  lenity 
or  medicine.  "  Envy  "  is  a  leaven  that  sours  and  corrupts,  sets  all  the  humours 
upon  the  fret,  and  is  the  bane  of  all  that  is  good  and  beautiful  and  desirable  in 
life.  I.  The  nature  and  origin  of  envy;  and  who  are  they  that  are  most 
subject  to  it.  Envy  is  a  pain  or  uneasiness,  arising  from  an  apprehension  of  the 
prosperity  and  good  fortune  of  others ;  not  because  we  suffer  for  their  welfare,  but 
merely  because  their  condition  is  bettered.  There  is  a  strong  jealousy  of  pre- 
eminence and  superiority  implanted  in  our  nature  by  Almighty  God,  for  wise  and 
noble  purposes.  When  this  principle  takes  root  in  a  good  mind,  it  is  called 
emulation.  But  when  this  principle  meets  with  an  evil,  corrupt  disposition,  it 
degenerates  into  envy,  the  most  malignant  and  hateful  passion  in  human  nature, 
the  worst  weed  of  the  worst  soil.  This  passion  affects  us  chiefly  in  relation  to  our 
equals.  If  we  find  we  have  equalled  or  exceeded  those  of  like  birth,  the  natural 
consequence  is  joy  and  complacency ;  but  if  we  are  exceeded  by  them,  emulation 
or  envy.  The  persons  most  subject  to  envy  are  the  covetous  ;  men  of  little  or 
mean  spirits  ;  men  of  extraordinary  endowments  and  abilities,  who  cannot  bear  a 
rival ;  proud  men  ;  and  old  men.     II.  The  symptoms  by  which  envy  may  be  known. 

1.  When  we  find  ourselves  averse  from  doing  a  person  good  offices.  2.  When  we 
are  pleased  with  the  evil  of  others.  3.  When  we  manifest  a  censorious  disposition  ; 
silencing  the  good  actions  of  others,  or  exposing  the  bad.  4.  When  we  have  a 
discontented,  querulous,  and  quarrelsome  disposition.  III.  The  ill  effects  of 
ENVY.  1.  To  the  envious  person  it  is  "  rottenness  in  his  bones."  It  wastes  the 
body,  and  keeps  the  mind  in  a  ferment.     It  kills  our  quiet  and  our  virtue  also. 

2.  It  exposes  a  man  to  the  just  hatred  and  aversion  of  all  mankind ;  and  spreads 
its  malignant  influence  wherever  it  comes.  IV.  The  best  remedies  fob  the  cure 
of  this  pernicious  passion.  1.  Settle  our  opinion  of  things,  and  endeavour  to  take 
a  right  estimate  of  them,  according  to  the  law  of  God.  2.  Make  a  right  judgment 
of  our  own  worth  and  abilities.    3.  Beflect  seriously  upon  the  vanity  and  iusignifi- 


CHAP,  xrv.]  PROVERBS.  881 

cancy  of  all  worldly  advantages.      4.  Think  of  God,  who  takes  pleasure  in  the 
happiness  of  aU  His  creatures.     (J.  Delany.) 

Ver  31.  He  that  oppresseth  the  poor  reproacheth  his  Maker. — Oppression  of 
the  poor  a  reproach  to  their  Maker : — Every  man  acting  his  part  in  his  social 
capacity  is  "  a  spectacle."  Society  is  an  organisation  of  rational  creatures,  acting 
together  for  some  good.  Society  is  a  commonwealth  of  human  nature  in 
close  connection  with  God.  And  so  every  man  becomes  his  "brother's  keeper." 
I.  Human  nature,  as  involving  a  ckime — "oppbessing  the  poor."  1.  By  political 
injustice.  When  they  have  no  proper  organ  for  expressing  their  wants,  or  have 
a  voice  in  the  representation  of  their  country,  or  a  free  agency  in  all  the  enact- 
ments of  their  country.  2.  By  social  neglect.  When  the  state,  as  a  body,  allows 
vast  masses  of  accumulating  distress  and  ignorance  and  misery  to  grow  up  around 
it.  3.  By  mental  debasement.  Beal,  true,  solid  Christian  education  consists  in 
three  things — in  giving  the  mind  great  truths,  in  imparting  to  the  mind  great 
motives,  in  the  bestowment  of  great  principles.  II.  The  consequence — thb 
Maker  is  reproached.  The  poor  cannot  but  think  ill  of  God,  when  society,  which 
assumes  to  be  His  arrangement,  presses  so  heavily  upon  them.  (R.  Montgomery, 
M.A.)  Godliness  and  humanity: — Piety  and  philanthropy  are  essentially  one. 
Wherever  there  is  piety  or  godliness,  there  is  philanthropy.  Philanthropy  is  the 
offspring  of  all  true  religion.  The  text  teaches — I.  That  inhumanity  is  ungodli- 
ness. There  is  a  great  deal  of  inhumanity  in  the  world,  the  poor  have  to  endure  a 
great  deal  of  "  oppression."  Superior  force  is  exerted  to  exact  their  labours  for  the 
most  inadequate  remuneration,  and  thus  to  "  grind  their  faces."  AU  this  oppression 
of  the  poor  is  a  reproach  of  God;  he  who  does  it  "reproacheth  his  Maker."  He 
reproaches  his  Maker — 1.  By  disregarding  that  identity  of  nature  with  which  our 
Maker  has  endowed  all  classes.  2.  By  disregarding  those  laws  which  our  Maker 
has  enjoined  concerning  the  poor  (Lev.  xxv.  35,  36  ;  Deut.  xv.  11).  II.  True 
humanity  is  godliness.  "  He  that  hoaoureth  Him,  hath  mercy  on  the  poor." 
He  that  honoureth  God,  by  loving  Him  supremely,  and  serving  Him,  will  have 
mercy  on  the  poor.  There  is,  it  is  true,  a  fickle,  sentimental,  natural  mercifulness 
for  the  poor,  which  has  no  connection  with  godliness,  but  this  is  not  true  humanity. 
True  humanity  is  that  which  sympathises  with  man,  as  the  offspring  of  God,  the 
victim  of  moral  evil,  the  child  of  immortality,  and  which  consecrates  itself  in  the 
Spirit  of  Christ  to  ameliorate  his  woes  and  redeem  his  soul,  and  this  is  godliness 
in  its  practical  development  (Isa.  Iviii.  6,  7).     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  32.  The  wicked  is  driven  away  in  his  wickedness;  but  the  rigfhteous  hath 
hope  In  his  death. — The  wisdom  of  religion  justified  in  the  different  ends  of  good 
and  had  men  : — For  the  most  part,  the  end  of  good  men  is  full  of  peace  and  comfort, 
and  good  hopes  of  their  future  condition ;  but  the  end  of  bad  men  quite  contrary, 
fuU  of  anguish  and  trouble,  without  peace  or  comfort,  or  hope  of  any  good  to  befall 
them  afterwards.  If  this  be  generally  true,  it  is  a  mighty  testimony  on  the  behalf 
of  piety  and  virtue.  It  is  as  good  as  a  demonstration  that  the  religious  man  is 
in  the  right.  I.  This  observation  is  generally  true.  It  is  enough  to  appeal  to 
the  common  and  daily  experience  of  mankind  (Psa.  xxxvii.  37).  When  good  men 
come  to  die,  they  have  commonly  a  great  calm  and  serenity  in  their  minds,  and  are 
full  of  good  hopes  of  God's  mercy  and  favour.  But  there  are  exceptions,  both  to 
the  peace  of  the  righteous  and  to  the  misery  of  the  wicked,  in  death.  Some  good 
men  are  melancholy  and  dispirited.  They  may  be  naturally  of  a  dark  temper. 
The  quiet  death  of  a  bad  man  may  be  explained  by  disease  ;  or  stupidity,  through 
ignorance  or  gross  sensuality ;  or  the  delusion  of  false  principles.  II.  Whence 
DOES  this  difference  PROCEED  ?  It  is  f oundcd  in  the  true  nature  and  reason  of  the 
things  themselves ;  in  the  nature  of  religion  and  virtue,  and  of  impiety  and  vice. 
1.  A  religious  and  virtuous  life  is  a  real  ground  of  peace  and  serenity  of  mind,  of 
comfort  and  joy,  under  all  the  evils  and  calamities  of  life,  and  especially  at  the 
hour  of  death.  2.  Impiety  and  wickedness  is  a  real  foundation  of  guilt  and  fear, 
of  horror  and  despair,  in  the  day  of  adversity  and  affliction,  and  more  especially  in 
the  approaches  of  death.  II.  Ir  this  be  true,  it  is  a  demonstration  on  the 
SIDE  of  religion.  Upou  three  accounts.  1.  Because  the  principles  of  religion, 
and  the  practice  of  them  in  a  virtuous  life,  when  they  come  to  the  last  and  utmost 
trial,  do  hold  out,  and  are  a  firm  and  unshaken  foundation  of  peace  and  comfort 
to  us.  2.  That  they  minister  comfort  to  us  in  the  most  needful  and  desirable  time. 
3.  That  when  men  are   commonly  more   serious  and  sober  and  impartial,  and 


382  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XIV. 


when  their  declarations  and  words  are  thought  to  be  of  greater  weight  and  credit, 
they  give  this  testimony  to  religion  and  virtue,  and  against  impiety  and  vice. 
(/.  Tillotson,  D.D.)  Neither  hope  nor  fear  in  death  : — Mr.  Eobert  Owen  once 
visited  a  gentleman  who  was  a  believer.  In  walking  out  they  came  to  the  gentle- 
man's family  grave.  Owen,  addressing  him,  said,  "  There  is  one  advantage  I  have 
over  Christians ;  I  am  not  afraid  to  die  ;  but  if  some  of  my  business  were  settled,  I 
should  be  perfectly  willing  to  die  at  any  moment."  "  Well,"  said  his  companion, 
"you  say  you  have  no  fear  of  death— have  you  any  hope  in  death ? "  After  a 
solemn  pause,  he  replied,  "  No  !  "  "  Then,"  replied  the  gentleman,  "  you  are  on 
the  level  with  that  brute  ;  he  has  fed  till  he  is  satisfied,  and  stands  in  the  shade, 
whisking  off  the  flies,  and  has  neither  fear  nor  hope."  The  different  end  of  the 
righteous  and  the  loicked  .-—As  to  the  death  of  a  wicked  man,  here  is— 1.  The  manner 
of  his  passing  out  of  the  world.  He  is  "driven  away."  2.  The  state  he  passeth 
away  into.  He  dies  in  a  hopeless  state.  The  righteous  hath  hope  in  his  death. 
He  has  the  grace  of  hope,  and  the  well-founded  expectation  of  better  things  than 
he  ever  had  in  this  world.  I.  How,  and  in  what  sense,  are  the  wicked  "  driven 
AWAY  IN  their  WICKEDNESS  AT  DEATH."  What  is  meant  by  their  being  "driven 
away  "  ?  Three  things ;  they  shall  be  taken  away  suddenly,  violently,  and  irre- 
sistibly. Whence  are  they  driven  and  whither  ?  They  are  driven  out  of  this 
world,  where  they  have  sinned,  into  the  other  world,  where  they  must  be  judged. 
They  are  driven  out  of  the  society  of  the  saints  on  earth,  into  the  society  of  the 
lost  in  hell.  They  are  driven  out  of  time  into  eternity.  They  are  driven  out  of 
their  specious  pretences  to  piety.  They  are  driven  away  from  all  means  of  grace, 
quite  out  of  all  prospect  of  mercy.  In  what  respects  may  they  be  said  to  be  driven 
away  in  their  wickedness  ?  In  respect  of  their  being  driven  away  in  their  sinful, 
unconverted  state.  They  die  sinning,  acting  wickedly  against  God,  loaded  with 
the  guilt  of  their  sins,  and  under  the  absolute  power  of  their  wickedness.    _  II. 

The    HOPELESSNESS   OF    THE    STATE    OF   UNRENEWED   MEN   AT    THEIR    DEATH.       Consider 

four  things.  1.  Death  cuts  off  their  hopes  and  prospects  of  peace  and  pleasure  in 
this  life.  2.  When  death  comes,  they  have  no  solid  ground  to  hope  for  eternal 
happiness.  3.  Death  roots  up  their  delusive  hopes.  4.  Death  makes  their  state 
absolutely  and  for  ever  hopeless.  Exhortation.  (1)  Take  heed  that  you  entertain 
no  hopes  of  heaven  but  what  are  built  on  a  solid  foundation.  Beware  of  hope 
built  upon  ground  that  was  never  cleared.  Beware  of  that  hope  which  looks 
bright  in  the  dark,  but  loses  all  its  lustre  when  it  is  set  in  the  light  of  God's  Word. 
Beware  of  that  hope  which  stands  without  being  supported  by  Scriptural  evidences. 
(2)  Hasten,  O  sinners,  out  of  your  wickedness,  lest  you  die  in  your  sin.  (3)  Be 
concerned  for  others,  lest  they  be  "  driven  away."  III.  The  state  of  the  oodlt 
IN  death  is  a  hopeful  state.  1.  They  have  a  trusty  good  Friend  before  them  in 
the  other  world.  2.  They  shall  have  a  safe  passage  through  to  the  other  world. 
3.  They  shall  have  a  joyful  entrance  into  another  world.  Objection :  How  comes 
it  to  pass  that  many  of  the  godly,  when  dying,  are  full  of  fears,  and  have  little 
hope  ?  Answer  :  The  fears  are  usually  consequences  of  states  of  bodily  health ;  but 
they  may  be  due  to  flagging  spiritual  life.  Improvement :  How  to  prepare  for 
death,  so  that  we  may  die  comfortably.  (1)  Let  it  be  your  constant  care  to  keep  a 
clean  conscience.  (2)  Be  always  watchful,  waiting  for  your  change.  (3)  Employ 
yourselves  much  in  weaning  your  hearts  from  the  world.  (4)  Be  diligent  in 
gathering  and  laying  up  evidences  of  your  title  to  heaven,  for  your  support  and 
comfort  at  the  hour  of  death.  (5)  Despatch  the  work  of  your  day  and 
generation  with  speed  and  diligence.  (T.  Boston,  D.D.)  Hope  in  death  :—l.  The 
chabacter  or  the  righteous.  The  peculiar  distinction  between  the  righteous  and 
the  wicked  lies  in  the  heart,  not  in  the  understanding.  II.  The  truth  asserted 
IN  the  text.  The  assertion  is  true,  though  there  maybe  some  apparent  exceptions. 
There  is  nothing  preceding,  attending,  or  following  death,  which  can  destroy  the 
foundation  of  the  hope  of  the  righteous.  1.  A  clear  and  just  sense  of  their  guilt 
and  ill  desert  in  the  sight  of  God  cannot  destroy  their  hope  in  Christ.  2.  There  is 
nothing  in  the  thoughts  of  leaving  this  world  which  can  destroy  their  hope.  8. 
There  is  nothing  in  the  prospect  of  having  a  more  constant  and  realising  sense 
of  the  Divine  presence  which  can  destroy  their  hope.  4.  The  prospect  of  being 
for  ever  united  with  perfectly  holy  creatures  cannot  destroy  their  hope.  6.  Nor 
in  the  prospect  of  the  holy  employment  of  heaven.  6.  Nor  in  seeing  the 
displays  of  Divine  justice  upon  the  vessels  of  wrath  after  death.  7.  ^Nor  in 
seeing  all  the  Divine  purposes  completely  accomplished  and  unfolded.  *8.  Nor 
the    prospect    of    existing   for   ever.    Improvement  of   the    subject:    (1)   If   the 


CHAP.  XIV.]  PROVERBS.  383 


righteous  have  hope  in  their  death,  then  they  are  essentially  different  from  the 
■wicked.  (2)  If  only  the  righteous  have  hope,  then  multitudes  wUl  be  fatally 
disappointed  in  their  dying  hour.  (3)  The  death  of  the  righteous  may  be 
peculiarly  instructive  and  beneficial  to  the  living.  (N.  Emmons.)  The  hope 
of  the  righteous  : — The  Old  Testament  deals  much  with  the  present  life  ;  the  New 
Testament  much  with  the  future.  But  the  one  does  not  teach  a  different  thing 
from  the  other.  Hope  is  the  grand  element  in  the  religion  of  the  righteous. 
A  righteous  man  is  a  hopeful  man.  1.  There  is  the  hope  of  Divine  support  in 
death  itself.  2.  There  is  the  hope  of  complete  deliverance  from  the  evils  incident 
to  a  physical  existence.  3.  There  is  the  hope  of  introduction  to  unmingled  and 
permanent  good.  (James  Foster,  M.A.)  Hope  in  death  : — 1.  An  enemy  aU  must 
meet.  Death.  2.  A  privilege  aU  must  envy.  Hope  in  death.  3.  A  dispensation 
all  must  approve  of.  The  righteous  hath  hope  in  his  death.  {Sketches  of  Four 
Hundred  Sermons.)  The  death  of  the  wicked: — 1.  What  he  is  driven  from. 
A  large  measure  of  happiness,  and  from  all  sources  of  moral  improvement, 
2.  Where  he  is  driven  to.  Out  of  time  into  eternity,  and  from  the  presence  of 
God.  3.  What  he  carries  with  him.  His  wickedness;  the  accumulated  sins  of 
a  whole  life,  and  a  fixed  character  of  evil.  Learn — (1)  What  a  dreadful 
view  of  life  and  death  for  the  wicked.  (2)  The  greatness  of  Christ's  sal- 
vation from  the  greatness  of  the  ruin  from  which  it  saves.  (3)  The  value 
of  the  gospel  hope  from  the  happiness  it  secures  in  life  and  death.  {Ibid.) 
A  great  contrast : — I.  In  life.  1.  The  difference  is  real,  not  imaginary.  It  is  in 
the  inward  disposition,  as  well  as  in  the  outward  conduct.  2.  The  difference  is 
manifest.  The  ruling  disposition,  which  is  the  life  of  character,  and  which  is 
essentially  different  in  both,  makes  itself  known  by  its  fruit.  3.  The  difference 
is  increasing.  These  two  characters  continue  to  show  forth  their  difference,  and  to 
go  further  from  each  other  for  ever.  II.  In  death.  "  The  wicked  is  driven  away 
in  his  wickedness  " — 1.  As  by  a  storm.  He  has  no  foundation  to  stand  upon.  He 
has  no  hold  upon  anything  real,  lasting.  2.  As  a  culprit  is  led  away  to  hia 
execution.  There  is  no  resignation  on  his  part  to  a  superior  will  than  his  own. 
He  views  the  past  with  remorse,  and  anticipates  the  unknown  future  with  gloom 
and  fear.  "But  the  righteous  hath  hope  in  his  death."  This  is  an  indication  of 
strength,  not  weakness.  He  hath  hope,  even  in  death,  when  all  things  that  are 
seen  vanish  away.  Some  reasons  for  his  hope  :  1.  The  Bible,  as  he  reads  it  and 
believes  it ;  the  Ught  which  came  from  heaven  drives  away  the  gloom  of  the  dark 
valley,  and  reveals  the  land  beyond.  2.  He  is  at  peace  with  God.  God  is  known 
by  him  as  his  Father,  Friend,  and  Saviour.  Love  to  God,  in  his  heart,  has  put 
away  fear.  3.  He  is  confident  that  his  Kedeemer  has  absolute  control  over  all 
things;  that  He  is  Lord  of  the  future.  His  hope,  therefore,  is  such  that,  like 
Fuller,  he  is  not  afraid  to  plunge  into  eternity.  The  text  is  a  proof  of  a  belief  in  a 
future  state  of  rewards  and  punishments  in  the  time  of  Solomon.  {Homiletic 
Monthly.)  The  wise  man's  verdict : — I.  The  punishment  to  be  inflicted  upon 
A  certain  man.  1.  The  name  of  the  offender.  Wicked.  2.  The  nature  of  the 
offence.  Malice.  3.  The  punishment;  in  three  degrees.  As  begun  in  this  life. 
Increased  at  the  time  of  death.  Perfected  at  the  day  of  judgment.  II.  The  con- 
clusion OP  the  eighteous.  1.  What  is  a  righteous  man?  2.  What  is  it  to  have 
hope  in  death  ?  {S.  Hieron.)  Hopeless  and  hopeful  dying : — I.  The  hopeless. 
Whose?  "The  wicked" — the  unconverted.  What?  1.  The  condition  in  which 
he  dies.  "In  his  wickedness."  He  lived  careless  and  indifferent,  encased  in  false 
hope  ;  or  hardened  and  scoffing,  fighting  against  God.  So  he  dies.  Driven  away 
not  from,  but  in  his  wickedness.  Death  makes  no  change  of  character.  "Unjust 
still."  2.  The  compulsion  under  which  he  dies.  "  Driven  away."  Ejected  from 
this  life's  engagements,  enjoyments,  and  means  of  improvement.  Torn  away  from 
possessions,  pursuits,  pleasures,  and  prospects  here.  "  This  night — thy  soul — then 
whose,"  &c.?  Death  takes  no  bribes.  Wishes  and  protests  unheeded.  "Driven  .  .  . 
chased  out,"  &c.  (Job  xviii.  18).  H.  The  hopeful.  Whose,  "  the  righteous  "  in 
moral  position,  principle,  practice.  What? — Hopeful  of — 1.  The  Divine  support  in 
it.  (1)  Needed,  because  of  body's  pains,  affections'  ties,  conscience  failures. 
(2)  Promised.  "As  day  .  .  .  strength."  "  When  thou  passest,"  &c.  (3)  Kealised. 
"  Yea,  though  I  walk,"  &c.  2.  Decisive  victory  over  it.  Prospective — Grave 
robbed.  "  Resurrection  Of  life."  3.  Heavenly  glory  after  it.  (1)  AngeUc  convoy. 
"  Lazarus  carried  by  angels. "  (2)  Immediate  entrance.  "  Absent  from  body  .  .  . 
at  home,"  &c.  (3)  Then  reunion  of  soul  and  body  in  heavenly  glory.  All  must 
die.    Which — yours  ?    A  sheriff's  arrest,  or  a  Saviour's  arrival  ?  (John  xiv.  3). 


884  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

[Homiletic  Review.)         The  objects,  grounds,   and  evidences  of  the   hope  of  ths 

righteous : — Men  will  leave  the  world  according  to  their  condnct  in  it.     I.  The 

OBJECTS.     1.  His  hope  of  support  in  death  ;  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul ;  of  the 

resurrection  of  the  body  ;  and  of  perfect  happiness  in  heaven.   II.  The  grounds  and 

EVIDENCES.     The  foundation  of  the  hope  is  the  free  mercy  of  God,  which  can  be 

communicated  only  through   Jesus  Christ.      Evidence  of  this  hope  is  that  the 

righteous  man  finds,  upon  a  thorough  trial,  that  the  characters  which  God  has 

declared  essentially  necessary  to  salvation  do  belong  to  him.     III.  The  various 

LIMITATIONS  AND  DEGREES  OF  A  GOOD  HOPE  IN  DEATH.     A  good  hope  is  always  Supported 

by  evidence,  and  according  to  the  degree  of  evidence  is  the  degree  of  hope.  Dillerent 

believers,  at  different  times,  have  different  degrees  of  evidence.     Much  depends  on 

weakness  of  body,  mind,  or  heart.     But  every  righteous  man  has  a  substantial 

reason  to  hope,  whether  he  clearly  sees  it  or  not.     Good  men  do,  in  fact,  usually 

enjoy  a  comfortable  hope.      (S.  Davies,  A.3I.)         The  two  departures  : — I.  The 

DOOM  OF  THE  WICKED.     As  smokc  is  driven  by  the  wind,  so  will  the  wicked  perish  in 

the  day  of  wrath.     We  are  not  able  to  form  a  right  conception  of  what  it  is  to  be 

and  abide  in  wickedness.     Because  it  is  so  near  us,  we  do  not  know  it.    II.  Thb 

HOPE  OF  THE  JUST.   Hopo,  always  lovely,  is  then  sweetest  when  it  beams  from  heaven 

through  the  gloom  that  gathers  round  the  grave.       {W.  Arnot.)        Hope  beyond. 

the  grave : — I.  The  character  of  the  righteous.     1.  He  is  one  who  has  been 

convinced  of  his  unrighteousness.     2.  One  who  is  made  the  partaker  of  righteous 

principles.     3.  One  who  is  righteous  and  holy  in  his  life.     II.  The  hope  of  thr 

righteous.     This  hope  has  for  its  object  future  spiritual  and  eternal  blessings. 

It  is  called  a  "  good  hope  through  grace,"  because  we  are  indebted  for  it  to  the  grace 

and  favour  of  God  ;  and  because  it  is  wrought  in  us  by  the  gracious  influences  of  the 

Divine  Spirit.     Eternal  life  includes  the  immortality  of  the  soul — the  everlasting, 

conscious  existence  of  the  rational  mind ;  the  resurrection  of  the  body ;  and  the 

enjoyment  of  eternal  happiness.     {J.  Entwistle.)       An  awful  death  : — Three  things 

implied  in  the  death  of  the  wicked  are  here  set  forth.     I.  A  very  sodeiin  change. 

He  is   "driven   away."      1.  Whence?      (1)  From   all  existing  enjoyments;  the 

beauties  of  nature,   the  circles  of  friendship,   the  pleasures   of  literature,   &c. 

(2)  From  all  secular  engagements.     The  farmer,  lawyer,  statesman,  &c.     (3)  From 

all  means  of  moral  improvement :  churches.  Bibles,  teachers.     2.  Whither  ?     To 

the  grave  as  to  his  body,  to  eternal  retribution  as  to  his  soul.     The  death  of  the 

wicked, implies — II.  A  great  personal  reluctance.     He  does  not  go  away,  he  is 

not  drawn  away  ;  he  is  "  driven  away."     1.  All  the  sympathies  of  his  nature  are 

centred  in  this  life.     They  are  all  twined  around  earthly  objects,  as  the  ivy  around 

the  old  castle.     They  are  all  more  deeply  rooted   in  the  earth  than  the  oak  of 

centuries.     He  is  in  the  world,  and  the  world  is  everything  to  him.     2.  The  future 

world  is  terribly  repulsive  to  him.   Not  a  ray  of  hope  breaks  through  his  tremendous 

gloom  ;  it  is  one  dense  mass  of  starless  thunder-cloud.     This  being  the  case,  with 

what  tenacity  he  clings  to  life  !    He  will  not  go,  he  cannot  go,  he  must  be  "  driven." 

His  death  is  not  like  the  gentle  fall  of  the  ripened  fruit  from  its  old  branch  in 

autumn,  but  like  the  oak,  uprooted,  and  dashed  into  the  air,  by  a  mighty  whirlwind. 

It  is  not  like  a  vessel  gliding  to  its  chosen  haven,  but  like  a  bark  driven  by  a  furious 

wind  to  a  shore  it  shrinks  from  with  horror.     "Driven  away !  "     The  death  of  the 

wicked,  as  here  indicated,  implies — III.  A  terrible  retention  of  character.     He 

is  "  driven  away  "  in  his  wickedness.     He  carries  his  wickedness  with  him.     This 

is  the  worst  part  of  the  whole.     He  carries  his  vile  thoughts,  his  corrupt  passions, 

his  sinful  purposes,  his  depraved  habits,  his  accumulated  guilt,  with  him.     He  will 

leave  everything  else  behind  but  this — this  adheres  to  him.     He  can  no  more  flee 

from  it  than  from  himself.     This  wickedness  will  be  the  millstone  to  press  him 

downward  into  deeper,  darker  depths  for  ever;  the  poison  that  will  rankle  in  the 

veins  for  ever;  the  fuel  that  will  feed  the  flames  for  ever.     O  sinner,  lay  down 

this  wickedness  at  the  foot  of  the  atoning  and  soul-renovating  Cross  !     (Homilist.) 

The  righteous  and  wicked  in  their  death  : — The  text — I.  Describes  the  dreadfud 

TERMINATION  OF  A  COURSE  OF  iRRELiGioN  AND  OF  SIN.     1.  Who  are  the  wicked  ?    The 

term  is  generally  restricted  to  "  sinners  of  the  baser  sort  " — those  whose  lives  are 

grossly  sensual.     But  Scripture  regards  it  as  the  appropriate  designation  of  all  who 

are  in  an  unregenerate  state  ;  all  who  are  destitute  of  the  fear  and  love  of  God,  who 

habitually  transgress  His  law,  and  practically  disregard  His  gospel.     2.  What  will 

be  the  issue  of  their  career?    Note  the  manner  in  which  he  dies.     Reluctantly. 

Unavoidably.     The  condition  in  which  he  dies.     In  his  sins,  with  all  his  guilt  on 

his  head,  and  all  his  depravity  in  his  heart.     II.  Describes  the  blessings  of  thosu 


CHAP.  XIV.]  PROVERBS,  885 

WHO  DIE  IN  THE  LoRD.  1.  Who  is  lighteous  ?  Not  simply  believers,  but  regenerated 
and  converted  sinners.  2.  What  is  the  privilege  of  the  righteous  ?  He  has  hope 
in  his  death.  That  hope  is  glorious  in  its  object.  It  is  sure  in  its  foundation.  It 
is  felicitating  in  its  influence.  {J.  Corney.)  Driven  aioay  out  of  the  world  : — • 
He  cleaves  so  closely  to  the  world  that  he  cannot  find  in  his  heart  to  leave  it,  but 
is  driven  away  out  of  it ;  his  soul  is  required,  is  forced  from  him.  And  sin  cleaves 
so  closely  to  him  that  it  is  inseparable ;  it  goes  with  him  into  another  world ;  he  is 
driven  away  "  in  his  wickedness,"  dies  in  his  sins,  under  the  guilt  and  power  of 
them,  unjustified,  unsanctified.  His  wickedness  is  the  storm  in  which  he  is  hurried 
away,  as  chaff  before  the  wind,  chased  out  of  the  world.  (Matthew  Henry.)  The 
hope  of  the  righteous  .-—I.  There  is  the  hope  of  Divine  support  in  death  itself. 
"As  thy  day,"  &c.  II.  There  is  the  hope  of  complete  deliverance  from  the 
EVILS  incident  TO  A  PHTsiCAL  EXISTENCE.  In  tliis  life  the  soul  is  imprisoned.  Its 
heavenly  and  spiritual  tendency  is  retarded  by  its  companion  of  dust.  Spiritual 
life  has  its  thought,  feeling,  and  expression  limited  and  baffied  by  physical 
boundaries.  A  prolonged  mental  exercise  is  followed  by  fatigue  and  reaction,  so  is 
it  with  spiritual  exercises  and  pleasures.  Death  sets  the  righteous  free  from  all 
these  evils.  It  takes  down  the  decaying,  exposed,  and  inferior  tabernacle,  that  the 
guest  within  may  come  forth  to  light  and  liberty.  It  introduces  the  soul  to  perfection 
of  being,  activity,  and  enjoyment.  III.  There  is  the  hope  of  introduction  to 
unmingled  and  PERMANENT  GOOD.  {Jus.  Foster,  M.A.)  Hope  in  death  : — "  My 
breath  is  short,  and  I  have  little  hopes,  since  my  late  relapse,  of  much  further 
usefulness.  A  few  exertions,  like  the  last  struggles  of  a  dying  man,  or  glimmering 
flashes  of  a  taper  just  burning  out,  is  all  that  can  be  expected  from  me.  But, 
blessed  be  God  !  the  taper  will  be  lighted  up  again  in  heaven."  [G.  Whitefield.) 
Ready  for  death  .-—The  Christian,  at  his  death,  should  not  be  like  the  child,  who 
is  forced  by  the  rod  to  quit  his  play,  but  like  one  who  is  wearied  of  it,  and  willing 
to  go  to  bed.  Neither  ought  he  to  be  like  the  mariner,  whose  vessel  is  drifted  by  the 
violence  of  the  tempest  from  the  shore,  tossed  to  and  fro  upon  the  ocean,  and  at 
last  suffers  wreck  and  destruction ;  but  like  one  who  is  ready  for  the  voyage,  and, 
the  moment  the  wind  is  favourable,  cheerfully  weighs  anchor,  and,  full  of  hope  and 
joy,  launches  forth  into  the  deep.  {R.  Scriver.)  A  Christian^  death  : — I  have  read 
of  a  painter  who  was  painting  "  Death  "  ;  and  he  painted  Death  as  we  generally 
see  Death  painted— a  skeleton  and  a  scythe !  That  is  a  horrid  way  of  painting  it  I 
A  good  man  coming  by  said,  "  That  is  not  the  way  to  paint  Death:  you  should 
paint  him  a  beautiful  bright  angel  with  a  golden  key  in  his  hand  to  open  the  door 
and  let  us  into  heaven."  That  is  Death  to  the  Christian.  When  Bishop  Beveridge 
was  dying,  the  good  man  said,  "  If  this  be  dying,  I  wish  I  could  die  for  ever."  You 
remember  in  the  "  Pilgrim's  Progress,"  when  Christian  and  his  friend  Hopeful 
come  to  die,  it  is  represented  as  if  they  were  crossing  a  river.  Christian  gets 
somewhat  afraid.  "  Cheer  up,  brother  !  "  says  Hopeful,  "  I  feel  the  bottom,  and 
it  is  quite  firm  and  sound.  Cheer  up,  brother  ! "  Then  after  a  little  while 
Christian  said,  "  I  see  Him  again  ;  and  He  tells  me,  '  When  thou  passest  through 
the  waters,  I  will  be  with  thee.'  "  Then  he  also  found  ground  to  stand  upon,  and 
the  rest  of  the  water  was  so  shallow  that  he  could  walk  in  it.  And  after  a  few 
minutes  more  they  both  found  themselves  at  the  gate  of  the  Celestial  City ! 
(J.  Vaughan,  M.A .)  The  death  of  the  wicked  and  of  the  righteous  : — I.  The  wicked 
IS  DRIVEN  away  IN  HIS  WICKEDNESS.  1.  Wickcd  mcH  are  taken  out  of  the  world  against 
their  will,  and  by  a  power  which  they  cannot  withstand.  2.  They  die  with  their 
souls  unrenewed  and  their  characters  unchanged.  3.  They  go  to  receive  the  punish- 
ment of  their  sins,  n.  The  RIGHTEOUS  HATH  HOPE  IN  HIS  DEATH.  Though  they  may 
not  be  able  to  express  themselves  in  the  language  of  assurance  and  exultation,  yet 
will  there  be  a  beheving  dependence  on  the  mercy  and  faithfulness  of  God.  And 
even  though  all  hope  should  seem  gone,  and  the  manifestations  of  the  Divine 
presence  be  withdrawn,  yet  even  then  would  the  declaration  of  our  text  be  true. 
For  as,  on  the  one  hand,  the  real  certainty  of  our  salvation  is  not  augmented  or 
diminished  by  our  present  feelings,  however  the  evidence  of  it  to  ourselves  may  be 
affected,  so,  on  the  other,  the  position — the  righteous  have  hope  in  their  death — is 
not  to  be  limited  merely  to  express  the  feelings  which  the  righteous  may  experience 
at  death,  but  expresses  also  the  security  of  their  state.  The  foundation,  as  well 
as  the  objects  of  hope,  remain  firm  and  immutable.  It  is  in  the  weakness  of  nature 
that  the  supporting  energy  of  grace  is  most  apparent,  and  the  power  of  the  Saviour 
is  most  conspicuously  displayed.  And  how  often  hath  it  happened  that,  in  the 
midst  of  utmost  exhaustion,  when  all  further  utterance  had  ceased,  the  soul  has 

26 


386  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

seemed  to  catch  a  glimpse  of  future  glory,  and,  reanimating  the  almost  lifeless 
body,  hath  proclaimed  its  assurance  of  the  Divine  love  and  mercy  and  protection, 
and  ascended  to  heaven  in  a  song  of  holy  triumph !  (Alex.  Fisher.)  A  tranquil 
Jioijc  : — An  assured  hope  is  not  like  a  mountain  torrent,  but  like  a  stream  flowing 
from  a  living  fountain,  and  often  so  quietly  that  it  is  scarcely  visible  but  for  the 
verdure  of  its  banks.     (W.  Spring) 

Ver.  34.  Righteousness  exalteth  a  nation. — The  advantages  of  religion  to 
societies : — There  cannot  be  a  greater  prejudice  raised  against  anything  than  to 
have  it  represented  as  inconvenient  and  hurtful  to  our  temporal  interests.  On  this 
account  religion  has  suffered  in  the  opinion  of  many  as  being  opposed  to  our 
present  welfare,  and  likely  to  rob  men  of  the  greatest  advantages  and  conveniences 
of  life.  He  who  would  commend  religion  must  reconcile  it  with  the  happiness  of 
mankind.  The  text  declares  religion  and  virtue  to  be  advantageous  to  the  public 
prosperity  of  a  nation.  Satisfy  men's  reason  on  this  point.  I.  Give  an  account 
OF  THIS  TRUTH.  1.  From  the  justice  of  the  Divine  Providence.  Public  bodies,  or 
communities  of  men,  can  only  be  rewarded  and  punished  in  this  world.  St. 
Austin  says  that  the  mighty  success  and  long  prosperity  of  the  Eomans  was  a 
reward  given  them  by  God  for  their  eminent  justice  and  temperance,  and  other 
virtues.  But  the  general  and  crying  sins  of  a  nation  cannot  hope  to  escape  public 
judgments.  Public  judgments  are  the  banks  and  shores  upon  which  God  breaks 
the  insolency  of  sinners,  and  stays  their  proud  waves.  The  experience  of  all  ages 
hath  made  this  good.  2.  From  the  natural  tendency  of  the  thing.  Religion  and 
virtue,  in  their  own  nature,  conduce  to  the  public  interest.  Religion  is  the  greatest 
obligation  upon  conscience  to  all  civil  offices  and  moral  duties.  Chastity,  temper- 
ance, and  industry  do,  in  their  own  nature,  tend  to  health  and  plenty.  Truth  and 
fidelity  do  create  mutual  love  and  goodwill.  And  so  almost  every  vice  has  some 
temporal  inconvenience  annexed  to  it,  and  naturally  following  it.  Religion  and 
virtue  naturally  tend  to  good  order  and  more  easy  government  of  human  society, 
because  they  have  a  good  influence  both  upon  magistrates  and  subjects.  Religion 
makes  the  people  more  obedient  to  government  and  more  peaceable  one  towards 
another.  II.  Vindicate  this  truth.  1.  From  the  assertion  that  government 
may  subsist  well  enough  without  the  belief  of  a  God,  and  a  state  of  rewards  and 
punishments  after  this  life.  2.  From  the  assertion  that  virtue  and  vice  are  arbitrary 
things.  Inference  from  this  discourse.  (1)  If  this  discourse  be  true,  then  those 
who  are  in  places  of  power  and  authority  are  peculiarly  concerned  to  maintain  the 
honour  of  religion.  (2)  It  concerns  every  one  to  live  in  the  practice  of  it.  (J. 
Tillotson,  D.D.)  Politics  and  morals: — Whatever  is  morally  wrong  cannot  be 
politically  right.  {E.  Burke.)  Religion  promotes  civil  welfare : — As  there  is 
nothing  in  religion  to  counteract  the  design  of  a  wise  system  of  civil  polity,  so 
there  is  nothing  in  a  wise  system  of  civU  government  to  counteract  the  design  of 
the  Christian  religion.  The  exaltation  of  the  nation  is  the  end  of  civil  polity. 
Righteousness  is  the  end  of  religion,  or  rather  is  religion  itself.  [J.  Saurin.) 
The  harmony  of  religion  and  civil  polity : — I.  State  the  question  clearly.  By 
religion,  as  exalting  a  nation,  is  not  meant  either  the  religion  of  a  cruel  man,  a 
superstitious  person,  or  an  enthusiast.  Religion  and  righteousness  must  be  taken 
in  the  true  sense  of  the  terms.  It  is  not  affirmed  that  the  true  religion  is  so 
necessary  in  aU  its  doctrines,  and  in  all  the  extent  of  its  precepts,  that  there  are  no 
instances  of  the  flourishing  of  societies  which  have  not  been  wholly  regulated  by 
it.  We  only  affirm  that  the  most  sure  method  that  a  nation  can  take  to  support 
and  exalt  itself,  is  to  follow  the  laws  of  righteousness  and  the  spirit  of  religion. 
It  is  not  affirmed  that  in  every  particular  case  religion  is  more  successful  in 
procuring  some  temporal  advantages  than  violation  of  it.  We  only  affirm 
generally,  that  the  more  a  society  practises  virtue,  the  more  prosperity  will  it 
enjoy.  By  "  exaltation "  is  not  meant  that  sort  of  elevation  to  which  worldly 
heroes  aspire.  If  we  understand  by  "  exalting  a  nation,"  whatever  governs  with 
gentleness,  negotiates  with  success,  attacks  with  courage,  defends  with  r,  olution, 
and  constitutes  the  happiness  of  a  people,  then  a  nation  is  only  exalted  by 
righteousness.  It  is  not  affirmed  that  the  prosperity  of  such  a  nation  would  be 
so  perfect  as  to  exclude  all  untoward  circumstances.  An  argument  against  us  is 
taken  from  the  abuses  which  religion  has  caused  in  society.  This  is  removed  by 
taking  away  false  ideas  of  religion.  Another  objection  is  taken  from  the  ca«e  of 
some  idolatrous  nations,  that  have  arrived  at  a  great  height  of  worldly  glory.  A 
third  from  some  particular  instance  in  which  vice  has  proved  of  more  advantage 


CHAP.  XIV.]  PROVERBS.  387 

to  a  state  than  virtue.  A  fourth  from  extravagant  notions  of  glory.  A  fifth  from 
the  evils  which  the  most  virtuous  societies  suffer.  II.  Show  the  ground  of  the 
MAXIM  of  the  wise  MAN.  Open  six  sources  of  reflections.  1.  The  idea  of  society  in 
general.  2.  The  constitution  of  each  government  in  particular.  3.  The  nature  of 
arts  and  sciences.  4.  The  conduct  of  Providence.  5.  The  promises  of  God 
Himself.  6.  The  history  of  all  ages.  (J.  Saurin.)  Rectitude  uplifting : — 
Bighteousness  exalteth  a  nation.  I.  In  material  wealth.  Truth,  honesty, 
integrity  in  a  people  are  the  best  guarantees  of  commercial  advancement.  The 
more  credit  a  nation  has,  the  more  business  it  can  do ;  and  the  more  business,  if 
rightly  conducted,  the  more  will  be  the  accumulation  of  wealth.  It  exalts — II. 
In  social  enjoyment.  According  as  the  principles  of  veracity,  uprightness,  and 
honour  i-eign  in  society,  will  be  the  freeness,  the  heartiness,  and  the  enjoyment  of 
social  intercourse.  III.  In  moral  power.  The  true  majesty  of  a  kingdom  lies  in 
its  moral  virtue.  The  state  whose  heart  beats  loyally  to  the  eternal  principles  of 
rectitude  gains  an  influence  upon  earth  mightier  than  the  mightiest  armies  or 
battalions  can  impart.  {Homilist.)  National  exaltation: — I.  "Righteousness 
exalteth  a  nation."  These  words  at  once  reveal  to  us  the  great  secret  in  aU  national 
improvement,  national  happiness,  national  peace  and  prosperity.  Let  us  not 
suppose  that  legislative  enactments,  criminal  laws,  courts  of  justice,  and  houses  of 
correction,  ever  can  succeed  in  uprooting  vice  and  implanting  virtue,  in  securing 
peace  and  protecting  property,  in  removing  sin  and  exalting  the  nation.  These 
truly  should  not  be  left  undone  ;  but  never  for  one  moment  imagine  that  in  them- 
selves they  can  remedy  the  evil.  These  never  can  change  the  heart  of  man. 
Think  not  that  a  nation's  true,  substantial,  and  lasting  greatness  consists  in  power, 
wealth,  noble  edifices,  princely  palaces,  extensive  cities,  warlike  achievements,  naval 
victories,  commercial  enterprise,  colonial  possessions.  Be  not  dazzled  with  the 
glitter  and  glare  of  this  mere  external  appearance  of  greatness.  II.  "  But  sin  is 
A  REPROACH  TO  ANY  PEOPLE."  This  is  a  striking  contrast,  a  painful  transition. 
From  gazing  with  rapture  upon  the  exaltation  of  righteousness,  we  are  now  to 
move  on  to  behold  with  sorrow  the  degradation  of  sin.  Bead  the  histories  of  the 
ancients ;  and  what  was  the  blot  which  marred  and  defaced  even  the  most 
enlightened  nations  of  old  ?  Sin,  idolatry,  ungodliness,  spiritual  ignorance :  they 
were  "  without  God  in  the  world."  What  was  it  which  caused  the  Almighty  to 
send  famines,  pestilences,  captivities,  and  finally  destruction,  upon  His  own 
peculiar  people,  even  the  children  of  Israel?  Sin.  They  rebelled  against  the  words  of 
the  Lord,  and  lightly  esteemed  the  counsel  of  the  Most  High.  But,  alas  !  we  do  not 
require  to  search  the  records  of  the  ancients,  traverse  the  wide  ocean,  and  wander 
to  distant  shores,  to  test  the  truth  of  this  Scriptural  declaration.  We  have  ocular 
demonstrations  of  it  amongst  our  own  people,  in  our  villages  and  towns.  For, 
what  is  the  blemish  which  is  so  visible  upon  all  ranks  and  classes  ?  Sin.  What 
is  it  which  blackens,  darkens,  and  deadens  the  noblest  mansions,  alike  with  the 
meanest  habitations,  spreading  misery,  ignominy,  and  wretchedness  amongst  and 
around  us.  (G.  J.  Morehead,  M.A.)  Of  the  importance  of  righteousness  to  civil 
liberty  and  national  prosperity  : — To  many  the  doctrine  of  this  text  appears 
paradoxical;  by  some  it  is  regarded  as  absurd.  The  idea  is  that  industry  and 
economy  conduct  states  to  wealth  and  independence :  while  fleets  and  armies 
render  that  wealth  and  independence  secure  and  permanent.  But  good  morals  are 
the  props  and  bulwarks  of  society.  "  No  man  liveth  unto  himself."  Strong  and 
intimate  ties  link  us  to  those  around  us.  Each  one  has  a  relative  function  to  fulfil, 
and  a  particular  portion  to  contribute  to  the  general  welfare.  Kindness,  protection, 
assistance,  countenance,  must  be  given  and  received.  In  some  points  or  other,  we 
stand  exposed  to  the  good  or  ill-will  of  every  member  of  our  community  or  nation. 
Besides  the  intimate  connection  between  good  morals  and  the  glory  and  happiness 
of  society,  it  may  be  maintained  that  righteousness,  and  righteousness  only, 
secures  to  civil  liberty  and  national  prosperity  their  establishment  and  permanence. 
It  cannot  be  that  the  love  of  liberty,  a  sentiment  in  the  highest  degree  exalted 
and  refined,  can  pervade  the  bosom  which  is  debased  by  immoralities. 
Vices  impair  the  understanding  which  distinguishes  the  solid  objects  of  the 
public  weal.  The  same  train  of  immoralities  that  perverts  the  sentiments  also 
debilitates  the  judgment,  and  enfeebles  its  range.  {W.  Thorburn.)  The 
glory  of  a  nation : — Sin  extends  its  influence  over  all  the  relations  of  life.  To 
the  general  corruption  of  mankind,  the  miseries  of  individuals,  of  families,  and  of 
nations  are  ov.-ing.  The  chief  good,  the  true  interest  of  each  of  these,  is  to  be 
found  only  in  the  victory  of  truth  over  error,  of  holiness  over  sin.    L  An  explana- 


388  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

TION  OF    THE  WORDS  "  RIGHTEOUSNESS,"  AND  "  EXALTATION."       RighteOUSneSS    Signifies, 

according  to  its  primitive  idea,  full  weight  or  measure.  It  is  such  a  conformity  to 
some  law  which  men  are  bound  to  obey  as  answers  all  its  demands.  Exaltation 
means  advancement  or  promotion  to  a  state  of  dignity  and  honour,  usefulness  and 
happiness.  The  exaltation  of  a  nation  consists  in  its  intellectual,  moral,  political, 
social,  and  physical  excellence.  II.  Illustrate  the  manner  in  which  revealed 
RELIGION  EXALTETH  A  NATION.  1.  Rightsousness  exalteth  the  intellectual  state  of  a 
nation.  Righteousness  encourages  the  cultivation  of  the  mind,  and  enlightens  the 
reason.  2.  Righteousness  exalteth  the  moral  state  of  a  nation.  It  unfolds  the 
foundation  of  genuine  morality,  and  affords  the  ability  of  conforming  to  its 
precepts.  Without  the  righteousness  of  faith  there  is  no  obedience  to  the  Divine 
law,  such  as  it  requires.  Sinners,  as  such,  are  immoral  in  a  strict  sense,  because 
unrighteous,  i.e.,  disobedient  to  God's  law.  Righteousness,  by  drawing  forth  into 
proper  exercise  the  faculties,  and  forming  correct  habits,  exalts  the  morals  of 
individuals  and  nations.  3.  Righteousness  exalteth  the  political  state  of  a  nation. 
It  adds  its  sanctions  to  the  authority  of  government.  It  teaches  and  enforces 
subordination.  It  establishes  parental  authority  and  family  discipline,  without 
which  civil  communities  cannot  flourish.  4.  Righteousness  exalts  the  social  state 
of  a  nation.  By  this  is  meant  their  manners.  It  influences  a  people  to  combine 
gravity  with  cheerfulness.  5.  Righteousness  exalteth  a  nation  by  promoting  its 
physical  state.  By  this  is  meant  its  natural  resources,  such  as  its  population, 
wealth,  and  means  of  defence.  III.  Examine  the  proofs  which  history  affords 
OF  THIS  TRUTH.  So  far  as  the  principles  of  righteousness  are  known  among  a 
nation,  so  far  that  nation  is  exalted.  Every  system  of  religion  will  influence  its 
followers  according  to  the  interest  which  it  excites  in  their  feelings.  Illustrate 
especially  from  the  history  of  the  Jewish  nation.  Learn  (1)  The  importance  of  the 
Church  of  Jesus  Christ,  in  this  world.  The  Church  of  God  is  the  sheet-anchor  of 
the  world.  (2)  The  importance  of  a  religious  magistracy.  (J.  B.  Romeyn,  B.D.) 
The  blessings  of  religion  to  a  nation  .-—Righteousness  signifies  justice  and  honest 
deaUng.  It  may  be  enlarged  to  include  mercy  and  charity.  A  more  comprehensive 
meaning  is  universal  obedience  to  the  laws  of  God.  I.  True  religion  and  piety 
EXALTETH  A  NATION.  Religion  is  the  mother  of  justice,  moderation,  mercy,  and  all 
other  virtues.  1.  This  it  does  in  itself ;  being  in  its  own  nature  a  truly  great, 
noble,  and  honourable  thing.  A  nation's  power  without  piety  is  but  an  ability  to  do 
mischief.  2.  By  virtue  of  its  own  natural  fruits  and  consequences,  it  promotes 
industry.  It  disposes  men  to  mind  the  public  good  and  honour  of  the  nation. 
II.  Religion  procures  the  blessing  of  Divine  Providence  upon  the  country. 
True  religion  hinds  men  together,  and  so  makes  them  mighty  and  formidable,  by 
removing  the  causes  of  division,  and  by  making  them  feel  the  happy  effects  of 
peace  and  quietness.  True  religion  increases  a  people  into  a  multitude  by  securing 
chaste  marriages,  and  by  inviting  other  people  to  resort  to  it.  (Bishoj)  Patrick 
Symon.)  The  benefits  of  righteousness  : — I.  The  bkneficial  power  of  righteous- 
ness. Righteousness  being  regarded  as  the  produce  of  Christianity.  If  the  precepts 
of  the  Bible  were  acted  out  by  the  members  of  the  community,  there  would  be 
banished  all  that  tends  to  produce  discord  to  its  security.  The  influence  of  religion 
is  of  supreme  value  on  the  duties,  and  also  on  the  trials  of  life.     II.  An  objection 

DRAWN     FROM    THE    DISCORD    TO     WHICH     CHRISTIANITY    HAS    GIVEN    RISE.       It    mUSt    be 

admitted  that  Christianity  has,  all  along,  been  the  occasion  of  much  disquietude 
and  unhappiness.  But  the  fault  lies,  not  with  Christianity,  but  with  man,  who 
perverts  God's  blessings.  Admitting  the  fact,  we  must  strike  a  balance  between 
the  produced  wretchedness  and  the  produced  happiness.  (H.  Melvill.)  Our 
national  sins  and  penalties  : — When  we  speak  of  a  national  sin  we  cannot  mean 
anything  but  that  either  the  great  bulk  of  the  nation,  or  those  who  have  a  right  to 
act  on  behalf  of  the  nation,  have  joined  in  the  same  wrong-doing.  It  is  often 
necessary  to  consider  sins  as  the  result  of  men's  joint  action,  whether  that  unity 
of  action  be  conscious  or  unconscious.  A  new  character  attaches  to  a  man's  wrong- 
doing, if  he  have  joined  others  in  doing  it.  It  is  sometimes  thought  that  what  is 
unjustifiable  in  the  individual,  is  justified  when  it  is  united  action.  But  God  has 
Burely  attached  evil  issues  to  evil  deeds,  for  the  mass  as  certainly  as  for  the 
individual,  Elustrate  by  the  national  sin  which  now  leavens  our  whole  trade  and 
commerce.  Can  it  be  denied  that  the  want  of  uprightness  which  meets  us  at  every 
turn  has  risen  to  the  proportion  of  a  national  sin  ?  Healthy  business  unquestion- 
ably gains  enormously  by  mutual  trust,  and  if  all  trust  were  abolished,  commerce 
would  move  in  fetters.    And  yet  trust  is  becoming  more  diflScult  every  day.     The 


CHAP.  XIV.]  PROVERBS.  889 

punishment  appointed  for  such  a  sin  is  that  the  lesson  of  guile  ■will  be  learnt,  and 
then  practised  on  yourself  in  turn.  Another  prevalent  sin  is,  a  kind  of  arrogance, 
which  sometimes  goes  so  far  as  to  end  in  a  total  forgetfulness  that  others  have 
rights  as  well  as  we.  All  the  world  over,  the  Englishman  is  known  as  the  sternest 
and  most  resolute  upholder  of  justice.  But  this,  strange  to  say,  has  one  almost 
insurmountable  element — the  Englishman  is  ever  demanding,  tacitly  or  openly,  an 
acknowledgment  of  his  own  superiority.  He  does  not  readily  allow  that  others 
have  rights  as  well  as  he,  rights  to  be  respected  as  much  as  his.  Eights  may  be 
confessed  in  the  abstract,  but  a  practical  assertion  of  the  rights  of  others  is  repug- 
nant to  an  Englishman.  He  inclines  to  exalt,  not  righteousness,  but  strength. 
And  yet  what  is  more  glorious  than  a  name  of  absolute  uprightness  ?  What  nobler 
record  for  any  nation  than  that  of  never  having  put  anything  whatever,  not  even 
her  own  self,  above  the  call  of  what  is  right.  It  is  not  the  first  time  that  the  choice 
for  strength  rather  than  righteousness  has  been  made.  Illustrate  from  the  later 
Kepublic  of  Eome,  and  from  the  course  Spain  took  with  her  colonial  empire. 
{Archbishop  Temple.)  Christian  politics  : — I.  Some  wrong  estimates  of  national 
GREATNESS.  1.  Some  say  a  character  for  shrewdness.  2.  The  estimate  of  a 
diplomatist  would    be   erroneous.     3.   So   would    that  of    the   social  economist. 

4.  And  the  warrior.  5.  The  mere  place-hunter.  6.  And  even  the  historian. 
II.  The  proper  estimate  of  national  greatness.  1.  Righteousness  supposes 
individual  integrity.  The  character  of  a  people  is  determined  by  its  units. 
Individual  integrity  means  an  adherence  to  truth  at  all  hazards.  2.  Eighteousness 
implies  a  respect  for  human  nature.  A  recognition  of  the  value  of  life  and  the 
soul.  3.  Eighteousness  farther  involves  the  disposition  that  concedes  to  our 
fellow-men  the  liberties  we  enjoy.  A  policy  of  monopoly  is  a  policy  of  unrighteous- 
ness.    4.  Eighteousness  requires  that  political  justice  be  rendered  to  other  nations. 

5.  It  necessitates  compliance  with  the  law  of  progress.  And — 6.  That  we  regulate 
our  political  action  by  our  duty  to  God.  All  political  convictions  should  contain 
the  elements  of  godliness — piety  and  patriotism  should  be  joined  in  holy  wedlock. 
(IF.  J.  Acoinh.)  Ministers  of  religion  to  aid  national  righteousness  : — Christian 
men  sustain  a  twofold  relation — a  relation  to  the  gospel  and  a  relation  to  the  state. 
Their  duty  with  respect  to  crime  is  like  the  duty  of  a  good  gardener  with  respect  to 
weeds.  He  will  try  to  crowd  out  the  weeds  by  planting  an  abundance  of  good 
seed ;  but  when  the  weeds  succeed  in  getting  root  and  growing  he  will  go  about 
with  his  hoe  and  dig  them  out.  Now,  there  are  some  well-meaning  people  who 
believe  that  Christian  ministers,  to  say  nothing  of  Christian  laymen,  ought  to  use 
the  first  method  in  combating  crime,  but  not  the  second.  They  hold  that  ministers 
ought  to  preach  and  preach,  whether  they  have  any  listeners  to  profit  by  their 
preaching  or  not,  but  that  they  ought  never  to  exhort  voters  as  to  their  duty  in 
electing  righteous  lawmakers,  or  prod  lazy  or  corrupt  legislators,  or  rebuke 
inefficient  police  officials.  They  would  have  us  believe  that  ministers  of  the  gospel 
ought  to  merely  plant  the  seeds  of  righteousness,  and  if  the  weeds  of  sin  come  to 
poison  the  good  seed  utterly,  well,  never  mind,  it  is  not  the  business  of  the  ministers 
to  try  to  root  them  out.  There  are  good  people  who  hold  that  view;  but  it  la 
untenable.  These  good  people  mean  well,  but  they  are  misguided.  {G.  F.  Greene.) 
Christian  institutions  useful  to  the  nation : — Christian  institutions,  such  as  the 
family  and  the  Sabbath,  tend  to  prolong  life  and  increase  the  population.  Many 
heathen  tribes,  lacking  these,  have  become  all  but  extinct ;  and,  other  things  being 
equal,  civilised  nations  multiply  in  proportion  as  Christ  is  practically  acknowledged 
as  their  Head  and  Lord,  and  as  Christian  institutions  are  embraced.  In  1851  the 
population  of  France  was  about  double  that  of  England  and  Wales ;  in  the  ten 
years  from  1851  to  1861  the  increase  of  population  in  England  and  Wales  was 
more  than  double  that  in  France  ;  so  that  the  proportionate  increase  per  cent,  is 
fully  four  to  one  in  favour  of  the  country  where  the  Sabbath  is  recognised,  and  the 
domestic  virtues  are  upheld.  (Wesleyan  S.  S.  Magazijie.)  Virtue  essential  to 
national  prosperity  : — Trade  is  a  fluctuating  thing ;  it  passed  from  Tyre  to  Alexan- 
dria, from  Alexandria  to  Venice,  from  Venice  to  Antwerp,  from  Antwerp  to 
Amsterdam  and  London,  the  English  rivalling  the  Dutch,  as  the  French  are  now 
rivalling  both.  All  nations  almost  are  wisely  applying  themselves  to  trade,  and  it 
behoves  those  who  are  in  possession  of  it,  to  take  the  greatest  care  that  they  do  not 
lose  it.  It  is  a  plant  of  tender  growth,  it  requires  sun  and  soil  and  fine  seasons  to 
make  it  thrive  and  flourish.  It  will  not  grow  like  the  palm-tree,  which,  with  the 
more  weight  and  pressure,  rises  the  more.  Liberty  is  a  friend  to  that,  as  that  is  a 
friend  to  liberty.    But  the  greatest  enemy  to  both,  is  licentiousness  which  tramples 


___J__ 


390  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

upon  all  law  and  lawful  authority,  encourages  riots  and  tumults,  promotes  drun- 
kenness and  debauchery,  sticks  at  nothing  to  support  its  extravagance,  practises 
every  art  of  illicit  gain,  ruins  credit,  ruins  trade,  and  will  in  the  end  ruin  liberty 
itself.  Neither  kingdoms  nor  commonwealths,  neither  public  companies  nor 
private  persons,  can  long  carry  on  a  beneficial  and  flourishing  trade  without 
virtue,  and  what  virtue  teacheth — sobriety,  industry,  frugality,  modesty,  honesty, 
punctuality,  humanity,  charity,  the  love  of  our  country,  and  the  fear  of  God. 
{Bishop  Newton.)  Sin  is  a  reproach  to  any  people. — The  evil  effects  of  sin  : — 
The  sentence  may  be  read,  "  Sin  is  the  poverty,  depression,  or  sinking  of  any 
people."  1.  It  is  the  nature  of  sin  to  lessen  and  diminish  a  people.  The  most 
populous  nations  have  been  reduced  to  a  handful  by  the  prevalence  of  vice — 
Israel,  Greeks,  Komans.  2.  It  is  the  nature  of  sin  to  sink  and  depress  the  spirits 
of  a  people.  A  people  confirmed  in  the  habits  of  vice,  have  no  heart  to  labour,  to 
think,  to  form,  or  to  execute  any  virtuous  designs.  Their  genius  withers,  their 
exertions  languish,  their  hopes,  their  honours,  their  virtues  perish.  3.  It  is  the 
nature  of  sin  to  destroy  the  wealth  of  a  nation,  and  subject  them  to  all  the  evils 
and  reproaches  of  poverty.  Some  species  of  fraud  may,  for  a  time,  advance  a 
person  or  people  in  wealth  and  grandeur.  Yet  vice,  according  to  its  natural  course, 
wUl  eventually  involve  them  in  poverty  and  shame.  4.  It  is  the  nature  of  sin  to 
deprive  a  people  of  the  blessings  of  freedom,  and  involve  them  in  the  misery  and 
meanness  of  slavery.  Vice  has  the  same  effect  upon  the  body  politic  that  sickness 
has  upon  the  natural  body.  Vice  destroyed  the  liberties  of  Greece.  Vice  subverted 
the  freedom  of  Eome.  5.  It  is  the  nature  of  vice  to  provoke  the  displeasure  of 
God,  and  draw  down  His  judgments,  which  complete  the  ruin  of  a  people. 
(D.  Emmons,  D.D.) 


CHAPTEB  XV. 

Vebs.  1-3.  A  soft  answer  tometh  away  wrath. — Submissive  answers: — There 
are  three  parties  whose  wrath  it  may  concern  us  to  appease  by  mild  and  sub- 
missive language.  I.  The  wrath  of  God.  He  is  provoked  every  day  by  the 
crying  sins  of  an  ungodly  world,  and  would  quickly  break  out  as  a  devouring  fire 
upon  it,  but  that  there  are,  and  always  have  been  in  it,  humble  and  holy  men,  who 
have  been  much  given  to  confession  and  prayer.  Illustrate  by  Moses,  the  prophets, 
and  Daniel  as  intercessors  in  their  day.  See  also  submissive  response  of  Nineveh 
to  the  warning  of  Jonah.  II.  The  fury  of  a  troubled  conscience.  It  is  allayed 
by  a  soft  answer,  i.e.,  by  obviating  the  terrors  of  God's  threatenings  with  a  just 
display  of  His  infinite  mercies.  HI.  The  influence  which  an  offended  servant's 
carriage  hath  upon  his  offended  master.  If  the  offender,  when  reproved,  returns 
a  mild  and  yielding  answer  to  his  master,  he  commonly  assuages  his  wrath  and 
prevents  the  further  progress  of  it.  But  if  he  gives  saucy  and  contemptuous 
language  upon  such  occasions,  he  exasperates  his  master's  passion,  and  renders  his 
own  offence  much  more  provoking  than  it  was  before.  Two  things  are  advised  in 
this  text — 1.  That  an  answer  be  made.  2.  That  it  be  ingenuous.  It  is  not  wise  to 
stand  mute,  nor  to  delay  answer,  but  the  answer  should  be  soft  and  temperate. 
Illustrate  case  of  David  and  Nabal  (1  Sam.  xxv.).  Ingenuous  submission  does  not 
always  succeed,  because  it  does  not  always  meet  with  ingenuous  and  placable 
minds  on  the  other  side.  Sometimes,  too,  the  offender  is  a  mere  reprobate,  who 
does  but  flatter  with  his  tongue.  Some  commentators  interpret  the  text  as  a 
commom  maxim  of  peaceable  conversation,  teaching  us  to  avoid  all  unnecessary 
contentions  which  spring  from  pride,  ambition,  emulation,  and  a  remorse,  wrathful 
and  splenetic  nature.  He  that  is  desirous  to  live  at  peace  in  the  world  must  con- 
sider that  both  himself  and  other  men  have  many  infirmities ;  and  that,  in  matter 
of  right  and  wrong,  other  people  will  take  the  liberty  to  differ  from  his  opinion,  and 
will  sometimes  contradict  and  thwart  him,  even  when  he  has  the  clearest  truth  and 
reason  on  his  side.  He  must  expect  to  meet  with  pride,  self-love,  and  confidence 
in  others ;  and  he  must  not  imagine  that  his  own  conversation  is  always  free  from 
the  influence  of  such  irregular  passions.  Therefore  he  must  resolve  to  bear 
reproof  and  opposition  with  patience,  because  it  is  quite  possible  that  he  may  deserve 
it ;  and  L'  he  does  not,  those  who  converse  with  him  may  think  so.     He  who  would 


CHAP.  XV.]  PROVERBS.  391 

save  himself  and  others  much  trouble  and  contention  must  not  be  too  apt  to 
censure  and  find  fault  with  things  when  they  are  tolerably  well.  The  practice  of 
the  text  is  not  every  man's  talent.  The  weakness  of  our  minds,  or  the  warmth  of 
our  temper,  commonly  making  it  a  difficult  task.  David  was  some  years  in  learning 
the  due  observance  of  this  lesson.  Grievous  words  are  inconsistent  with  good 
policy,  and  contrary  to  true  religion.  The  Lord  Jesus  never  spake  unadvisedly  with 
His  lips,  so  He  calls  upon  all  His  disciples  to  learn  of  Him  this  lesson  of  meekness. 
It  is  almost  always  of  advantage  to  give  soft  answers.  (TF.  Reading,  M.A.)  A 
meek  and  gentle  manner  of  discourse  is  the  most  effectual  means  to  soften  the  fiercest 
disposition,  and  subdue  the  most  outrageous  passion  : — I.  Illustrate  the  tkuth  op 

THIS    PEOPOSITION    BY    SOME    EXAMPLES    FEOM     SCEIPTDEE     HISTOET     (Gen.    xiii.    8,    9, 

xxxii.  3-5;  Judg.  viii.  2,  3 ;   1  Sam.  i.  15,  16,  xxvi.  18-20).    II.  Endeavour  to 

ACCOUNT  FOR  THE  PEEVALENCE  OF  MILDNESS    OVEE   WEATH    FEOM   THE    CONSIDERATION    OP 

THE  PASSIONS  CONCERNED.  Obstinacy  of  temper  is  increased  by  opposition,  as  much  v 
as  it  is  abated  by  yielding.  Thus  says  the  son  of  Sirach,  "  He  that  striveth  with  a  ) 
man  of  tongue  heaps  wood  upon  his  fire."  Though  we  have  truth  on  our  side,' 
though  we  are  able  to  support  that  truth  by  the  most  irrefragable  arguments,  yet  if 
these  are  pressed  with  scorn  and  bitterness  their  reasonableness  will  not  so  much 
enforce  as  their  virulence  disparage  them.  To  conclude  :  1.  Acquiescence  and  sub- 
mission in  our  language  and  manner,  as  far  as  truth  and  generosity  of  spirit  will 
allow,  is  an  argument  of  our  prudence ;  it  is  as  profitable  to  society  as  it  is 
acceptable  to  God,  as  it  captivates  the  hearts  of  men,  and  as  it  consequently  contri- 
butes to  our  own  honour,  quiet,  and  safety.  2.  It  is  an  argument  of  the  politeness 
of  our  education,  for  none  but  spirits  unreclaimed  by  civU  converse  vent  themselves 
in  boisterous  language.  3.  But  it  is  not  only  an  argument  of  prudence  and  pohteness, 
but  of  magnanimity ;  the  greatest  man  is  never  more  triumphant  than  when  he 
overcomes  insolence  with  humility,  and  wrath  with  meekness.  (H.  Usher,  D.D.) 
A  soft  answer  (to  children) : — A  kind,  gentle,  patient,  peaceful  answer  to  an  angry, 
loud,  rude  word,  turns  away  wrath,  sends  it  off  so  that  it  passes  by  you  like  an 
arrow  glancing  off  a  shield.  If  anybody  says  a  rude  or  angry  word  to  you,  and  you 
answer  in  the  same  way,  you  are  adding  fire  to  fire,  you  are  helping  to  make  a  bad 
thing  worse,  you  are  multiplying  one  evil  by  two — the  very  worst  part  of  arithmetic. 
But  "  a  soft  answer"  is  like  water  to  fire  ;  it  helps  to  put  the  flame  out.  This  is 
what  the  firemen  do.  If  you  give  a  soft  answer  to  angry  words  you  wiU  be  one  of 
God's  firemen,  you  wUl  have  helped  to  put  out  a  fire  that  might  have  done  great  harm. 
It  is  very  hard  to  speak  softly  to  people  sometimes,  very  hard  indeed.  But  it  is 
worth  while  learning  to  do  it ;  and  though  hard,  hke  most  other  good  things,  it  is 
not  too  hard.  It  can  be  managed.  How  ?  First  of  all  by  making  up  your  mind 
to  do  it,  and  then  setting  to  work  to  practise  the  art  of  soft  speaking,  and  asking 
God  to  help  you  and  give  you  strength.  It  needs  no  courage  to  be  angry  and  loud 
and  rude.  Bullies  and  cowards  have  always  plenty  of  angi-y  words  at  their  com- 
mand. Brave  boys  do  not  brag  or  threaten,  and  the  bravest  thing  of  all  is 
patience  and  self-mastery.  Illustrate  from  the  patience  of  the  Lord  Jesus  in  the 
judgment  hall  and  on  the  Cross.  The  highest  courage  is  the  Cross  of  Christ.  You 
will  prove  yourselves  truly  brave,  not  when  you  strike  back,  but  when  rising  above 
the  temptation  you  master  yourselves  and  those  around  you.  (J.  M.  Gibbon.) 
Soft  answers: — 1.  "A  soft  answer"  is  a  Christian  answer.  It  exemplifies  the 
Spirit  of  Christ.  "  When  reviled  He  reviled  not  again."  2.  "  A  soft  answer  "  is  a 
fitting  answer.  It  is  a  sensible  thing  to  do.  As  a  matter  of  mere  policy  it  is  the 
•wisest  course  a  man  can  take.  3.  "  A  soft  answer"  is  the  most  effective  answer, 
the  only  effective  answer  in  the  way  of  good  results.  Gentle  words,  a,  forgiving 
spirit  will  do  what  hard  blows  and  angry  epithets  and  a  belligerent  attitude  never 
did  and  never  can  accomplish.  4.  "  A  soft  answer  "  is  the  evidence,  the  test,  of  a 
man's  moral  character.  {J.  M.  Sherwood,  D.D.)  The  utility  of  gentle  forces  : — 
Men  who  manage  men  must  be  self -controlled.  If  liable  to  outbursts  of  passion 
they  cannot  deal  with  the  anger  of  other  men.  Men  who  are  masters  of  them-  j 
selves  may  become  masters  of  mankind.  And  as  in  nature  the  greatest  and  most 
beneficial  forces  are  silent,  so  in  society  the  mightiest  men  are  the  gentle-spirited. 
We  do  not  hear  the  grass  grow ;  the  light  comes  stealing  into  our  room,  we  do  not 
hear  its  footfall.  It  is  the  angry  voices  of  nature  which  tell  of  disaster,  as  in  the 
earthquake,  the  tempest,  the  thunderstorm,  and  the  flood.  It  is  not  the  rain  sweep- 
ing down  the  hillside,  carrying  soil  and  crop  before  it,  but  the  gentle  shower  that 
fructifies  the  land.  And  so  the  meek-hearted  "  shall  inherit  the  earth "  as 
uncrowned  kings.    The  peacemakers  are  the  true  sons  of  God,  full  of  independence 


392  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt. 

and  manly  energy,  yet  speaking  softly  like  a  clear  stream  rippling  through  the 
green,  flowering  meadows.  Speak  gently,  yet  truly,  and  thus  win  the  world  for  God. 
(IF.  Unsicorth.)  Mild  replies  to  angry  speeches  : — Understand  by  "  a  soft  answer," 
not  a  reply  marked  by  intellectual  feebleness,  but  one  inspired  by  the  very  spirit  of 
modesty  and  graciousness.  Such  an  answer  cannot  be  returned  as  a  mere  art, 
because  the  wrath  to  which  it  replies  excites  natural  surprise  and  indignation,  and 
may  be  supposed  to  necessitate  a  communication  in  its  own  key  and  temper.  The 
soft  answer  is  unique  by  contrast.  It  is  so  unexpected,  so  unlike  the  surrounding 
circumstances,  so  much  more  than  what  is  generally  regarded  as  human,  that  the 
man  to  whom  it  is  addressed  is  astounded  as  if  by  a  miracle.  Only  he  can  give  a 
soft  answer  who  has  a  soft  heart — that  is  to  say,  the  answer  is  not  a  mere  art  or 
trick  of  the  vocal  organs,  it  is  the  direct  and  blessed  creation  of  God.  A  soft 
answer  may  appear  to  be  spiritless,  but  in  reality  it  expresses  a  greater  energy  than 
is  possible  to  ill-regulated  and  resentful  wrath.  Light  is  mightier  than  lightning. 
Thunder  is  harmless  ;  it  is  a  mere  collision  and  crashing  together  of  electric  clouds. 
Meekness  endures  longer  than  wrath,  has  greater  staying  power,  feeds  itself  upon 
the  very  grace  of  God,  and  is  sustained  through  long  watching  and  much  suffering. 
Wrath  fumes  and  splutters,  and  brings  upon  itself  swift  destruction.  Wrath  is 
altogether  unprofitable ;  it  convinces  no  one ;  it  is  mere  explosion  ending  in 
impotence  and  humiliation.  Grievous  words  stir  up  anger  as  certainly  as  an  effect 
follows  its  cause.  They  lead  to  recrimination,  resentment,  self-defence,  and  self- 
assertion.  For  the  moment  they  seem  to  be  smart  and  spirited,  betraying  a 
dignified  temper  and  a  haughty  courage,  but  in  reality  they  are  nothing 
more  than  proofs  of  littleness,  spitetulness,  chagrin,  or  other  emotion  lying 
on  the  same  degraded  line.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Tuvjung  aioay  wrath : — We  greatly 
need  an  instrument  capable  of  turning  away  wrath,  for  there  is  much  wrath  in  the 
world  to  be  turned  away.  If  all  our  anger  were  grief  for  sin,  and  grief  for  sin  our 
only  danger,  the  emotion  would  neither  displease  God  nor  disturb  men.  Most  of  the 
anger  that  prevails  is  sinful  and  dangerous.  We  are  on  dangerous  ground  when  we 
are  contending  in  our  own  cause.  A  man  may  indeed,  through  Divine  grace,  rule  his 
spirit  aright  even  there  ;  but  it  is  his  wisdom  to  be  jealous  of  himself.  Self-love  ties 
a  bandage  over  the  eyes  of  the  understanding,  and  then  leads  the  blind  astray.  In 
man  as  he  is,  a  sally  of  wrath  from  another  seems  to  produce  a  similar  sally  in 
return,  as  naturally  as  a  mountain-side  gives  back  an  echo  of  the  sound  that  strikea 
it.  Wrath  generates  grievous  words,  and  grievous  words  aggravate  the  wrath  that 
produced  them.  The  most  important  practical  rule,  for  our  guidance  under  provo- 
cation, is  to  consider,  not  how  hard  a  blow  we  can  deal  in  return,  consistently  with 
a  character  for  Christian  meekness,  but  how  far  can  we  yield  without  being  faithless 
to  truth  and  to  God.  In  view  of  our  own  corruption,  and  the  temptations  that 
abound,  a  leaning  to  this  side  seems  the  safest  for  a  Christian  name.  But  when 
aU  rules  faU  to  meet  the  case,  let  us  have  recourse  to  the  great  Example.  Jesus  is 
God's  answer  to  the  wrath  of  man.  The  answer  is  soft,  and  yet  it  is  the  greatest 
power  that  can  be  applied — the  only  power  that  will  prevail  to  turn  the  wrath  away, 
and  win  the  wrathful  back  to  love.  [W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  Bad  temper  to  be  con- 
trolled : — Bad  temper  causes  more  suffering  than  the  modified  severity  with  which 
we  judge  it  would  imply.  It  is  in  a  home  what  toothache  is  in  the  body :  the  pain 
is  insufferable  and  yet  it  is  not  treated  as  serious.  A  passionate  man  or  woman 
spreads  a  pervading  sense  of  irritation  in  the  house  or  in  the  workshop,  and  all  the 
other  occupants  of  the  place  are  as  if  they  dwelt  in  a  country  subject  to  earth- 
quakes ;  life  for  them  is  divided  between  anxiety  to  avoid  the  explosion  and  a 
painful  effort  to  repair  its  devastations.  We  are  not  severe  enough  on  these  faults 
of  temper  in  ourselves  or  in  others  ;  we  are  too  prone  to  excuse  them  on  the  ground 
of  temperament,  as  if  we  were  no  more  responsible  for  outbreaks  of  passion  than 
for  the  colour  of  our  hair  or  the  tone  of  our  complexion.  Probably  here  the  plea 
will  be  urged  that  we  cannot  help  our  temper,  and  it  may  be  said,  the  suffering 
which  it  brings  upon  us  is  the  best  proof  that  it  is  an  infirmity  rather  than  a  vice. 
Now  this  excuse  cannot  be  allowed  to  pass  ;  a  certain  good  bishop  on  one  occasion 
hearing  it  urged,  in  extenuation  of  a  man's  conduct,  that  he  had  such  an  unfor- 
tunate temper,  exclaimed,  "  Temper,  why  temper  is  nine-tenths  of  Christianity  !  " 
If  we  are  not  to  be  blamed  for  bad  temper,  then  there  is  no  fault  or  defect  or  vice 
which  we  cannot  shift  off  our  own  shoulders  and  lay  to  the  charge  of  our 
constitution.  But  our  constitution  is  no  excuse  for  sin ;  the  most  that  can  be 
urged  is  that  if  we  are  constitutionally  inclined  to  any  particular  sin  we  must 
seek  for  a  special  strength  to  fortify  us  against  it.     In  Christ  Jesus  are  forces, 


CHAP.  XT.]  PROVERBS.  898 

moral  and  spiritual,  strong  enough  to  control  the  most  uncontrollable  rage 
and  to  soothe  the  most  irritable  temper ;  and  as  we  can  point  to  no  other  power 
which  is  sufiScient  for  such  a  change,  so  few  things  manifest  so  strikingly 
the  blessed  presence  of  Christ  in  the  heart  as  the  softened  and  gentle  temper, 
the  removal  of  all  those  explosive  elements  which  before  He  entered  were 
constantly  causing  trouble  and  suffering  and  alarm.  (R.  F.  Horton,  D.D.)  The 
Christian  government  of  the  tongue  : — I.  The  gkacious  power  of  "  a  soft  answer." 
It  is  not  intended  here  to  state  a  bare  philosophical  fact,  the  result  of  observation 
and  experience.  Here  is  a  truth  intimately  connected  with  man's  present  and 
future  peace.  In  our  intercourse  with  men  our  object  is  liable  to  be  misinterpreted, 
and  our  motive  to  be  misconceived.  There  arise  occasions  when  indignation  seems 
to  acquire  the  attribute  of  a  duty,  possibly  of  a  religious  duty.  Beware  of  giving 
way  to  a  hasty  spirit.  A  little  delay  would  have  calmed  your  spirit;  a  little 
inquiry  might  have  produced  an  explanation.  II.  The  grievous  power  op  an 
angry  answer.  It  is  not  a  light  matter  to  be  warned  that  we  bear  about  within  us 
a  fire,  which  needs  only  to  be  quickened  and  blown  up  by  the  breath  of  man's 
mouth  to  produce  in  its  ravages  upon  ourselves  and  others  the  most  cruel  and 
disastrous  issues.  This  is  the  end  at  which  we  must  aim,  and  after  which  we  must 
never  cease  to  strive  and  pray  until  it  has  been  attained,  that  the  law  of  God  may 
reign  supreme  in  all  our  hearts,  enlightening  the  understanding,  inclining  the  will, 
subduing  all  unhallowed  passions,  purifying  and  sanctifying  even  lawful  affections, 
and  "  bringing  into  captivity  every  thought  to  the  obedience  of  Christ."  Forbear- 
ance is  oftentimes  a  diflicult  and  a  painful  duty,  the  incentive  to  retaliation 
quick  and  urgent.  At  such  times  we  need  to  prove  the  power  of  prayer.  {Geo. 
Spence,  D.  C.L.)  Words  : — Few  writers,  ancient  or  modern,  say  so  much  about 
words  as  Solomon.  "  Words,"  says  Kichter,  "  are  often  everywhere  as  the  minute 
hands  of  the  soul,  more  important  than  even  the  hour  hands  of  action."  I.  The 
PACiFTiNG  AND  IRRITATING  POWER  OF  WORDS.  1.  The  pacifying  powcr  of  words. 
"  A  soft  answer  turneth  away  wrath."  Several  things  are  implied  in  this  short 
passage.  (1)  The  existence  of  anger  against  you.  (2)  The  importance  of  turning 
away  this  anger.  (3)  There  is  an  effective  method  of  turning  away  this  wrath. 
That  is  a  "  soft  answer."  A  response  free  from  excitement  and  resentment,  uttered 
in  the  low  tone  of  magnanimous  forbearance.  2.  The  irritating  power  of  words. 
"  Grievous  words  stir  up  anger."    n.  The  right  and  the  wrong  use  of  words., 

1.  The  right  use  of  words.     "The  tongue  of  the  wise  useth  knowledge  aright." 

2.  The  wrong  use  of  words.  The  fool's  heart  is  full  of  foUy,  and  folly  flows  from 
his  hps.  Foolish  words  are  either  words  without  meaning,  empty  jargon,  or  words 
of  bad  meaning,  the  vehicles  of  filth,  insubordination,  and  blasphemy.  (D. 
Thomas,  D.D.)  A  soft  answer  : — It  was  Abigail's  gentle  apology  that  disarmed 
David's  fury;  and  Gideon's  mild  and  modest  answer  stilled  the  hot  and  hasty 
Ephraimites.  Lay  but  a  flint  upon  a  pillow  and  you  break  it  easily,  but  hard  to 
hard  wiU  never  do  the  deed.  It  is  not  the  vieing  one  angry  word  with  another ; 
grievous  words  stir  up  strife — harsh  and  angry  words  cast  oil  upon  the  flame ;  set 
the  passions  afloat,  there  is  no  hope,  not  one  wise  word  to  be  expected.  (J.  Spencer.) 
Try  the  velvet : — There  is  sound  philosophy,  as  weU  as  religion,  in  the  advice  of 
a  cheerful  man  to  his  surly  neighbour,  who  had  just  given  a  cross  answer  to  the 
inquiries  of  some  children  who  had  lost  their  way  : — "  Jim,  a  man's  tongue  is  like 
a  cat's.  It  is  either  a  piece  of  velvet,  or  a  piece  of  sand-paper,  just  as  he 
chooses  to  use  it  and  to  make  it ;  and  I  declare  you  always  seem  to  use  your 
tongue  for  sand-paper.  Try  the  velvet,  man;  try  the  velvet!"  {Blind  Amos.) 
A  soft  answer : — Taking  a  stroll  in  the  country  one  bright  spring  morning,  a 
sudden  turn  in  the  road  brought  me  to  a  clear,  running  stream.  A  Httle  rustic 
bridge  was  thrown  across  it,  and  the  whole  scene  formed  such  a  pretty  picture,  I 
stopped  to  gaze  upon  it.  While  thus  engaged  a  steady-looking  errand-boy  came 
posting  over  the  bridge,  with  a  shallow  basket  full  of  packages  hanging  on  his  arm. 
At  the  same  instant  a  merry  little  lad  appeared  in  the  opposite  direction,  and  care- 
lessly running  past  the  other,  inadvertently  pushed  against  his  basket,  and  knocking 
it  over,  more  than  half  the  contents  were  sent  rolling  in  the  dust.  The  colour 
mounted  to  the  errand-boy's  cheeks  in  a  moment — his  eyes  flashed,  he  threw  down 
the  basket,  and  prepared  to  avenge  the  affront  and  give  battle-royal  to  his  adversary. 
The  innocent  author  of  the  mischief,  however,  looked  up  in  his  face  with  a  pleasant 
smile,  and  exclaimed,  "Now,  reaUy,  I'm  so  sorry;  but  I'U  help  you  to  pick  them 
all  up  again  as  fast  as  I  can,  and  you  see  it  wasn't  as  if  I'd  done  it  on  purpose  ! " 
All  anger  thereupon  vanished  from  the  countenance  of  the  aggrieved  party,  who 


394  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt. 

was  not  one  of  those  implacable  beings  on  whom  "  a  soft  answer  "  is  thrown  away. 
The  two  boys  set  cheerfully  to  work,  and  soon  replaced  the  fallen  goods,  after 
which,  with  light  hearts,  they  went  whistling  on  their  different  roads.  I  pursued 
mine,  musing  on  the  wisdom  of  the  cottage  lad,  and  thinking  how  many  quarrels, 
great  and  small,  might  be  avoided  by  timely  acknowledgment  and  ready  explana- 
tion. There  seemed  something  beyond  mere  good-nature  in  our  little  rustic  ;  was 
not  perhaps  his  simple  reply  an  "  answer  of  the  tongue  from  the  Lord  "  ?  A  soft 
answer: — The  celebrated  Aboo  Yusuph,  who  was  chief  judge  of  Bagdad,  in  the 
reign  of  the  Caliph  Hadee,  was  a  very  remarkable  instance  of  that  humility  which 
distinguishes  true  wisdom.  His  sense  of  his  own  deficiencies  often  led  him  to 
entertain  doubts,  where  men  of  less  knowledge  and  more  presumption  were  decided. 
"  It  is  related  of  this  judge,  that  on  one  occasion,  after  a  very  patient  investigation 
of  facts,  he  declared  that  his  knowledge  was  not  competent  to  decide  upon  the  case 
before  him.  '  Pray,  do  you  expect,'  said  a  pert  courtier,  who  heard  this  declaration, 
'that  the  Caliph  is  to  pay  for  your  ignorance? '  '  I  do  not,'  was  the  mild  reply  :  '  the 
Caliph  pays  me,  and  well,  for  what  I  do  know  ;  if  he  were  to  attempt  to  pay  me  for 
what  I  do  not  know,  the  treasures  of  his  empire  would  not  suffice.'  "  (MalcolnVs 
*•■  Persia.") 

Ver.  3.  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  in  every  place,  beholding'  the  evil  and  the 
good. — Oil  the  omniscience  of  God  .- — I.  Prove  this  doctrine — 1.  Where  a  cause 
or  agent  acts,  there  that  cause  or  agent  must  virtually  be.  The  power  of  the 
-Almighty  Father  is  manifest  in  every  part  of  creation.  The  Divine  agency  is  very 
•different  from  any  laws  of  mechanism,  or  operations  of  chance,  that  we  can  even 
imagine.  These  can  relate  only  to  matter,  while  the  former  comprehends  instincts 
and  passions,  reason  and  imagination ;  the  minds  of  intellectual  creatures  in  their 
origin,  their  endless  diversity,  and  progress  to  perfection.  The  Supreme  Cause, 
therefore,  is  ever  acting,  and  ever  present.  His  presence  governs,  animates,  and 
preserves  the  whole  universe  of  existence.  2.  Another  argument  may  be  derived 
from  the  consciousness  of  the  human  soul  in  the  moment  of  transgression.  This 
consciousness,  and  its  effects,  are  not  originally  produced  by  prejudice  and  supersti- 
tion, but  are  the  great  moral  instinct  of  our  nature.  Given  us  by  our  heavenly 
Father,  it  serves  as  an  additional  sense  to  remind  us  of  His  continual  presence, 
then,  when  we  chiefly  need  it,  in  the  season  of  temptation  and  in  the  hour  of  guilt. 
Further,  the  omnipresence  of  God  follows,  as  a  natural  consequence,  from  His 
wisdom  and  His  power.  And  it  seems  absolutely  necessary  to  that  perfect  justice 
which  we  are  assured  He  will  render  to  every  man  at  the  last  day.     II.  Show  the 

ADVANTAGES  WE     OUGHT    TO     DERIVE    FROM    THIS    TRUTH.      1.    It    is    One    Of    the    highest 

privileges  of  our  nature.  In  the  course  of  nature,  and  in  the  affairs  of  mankind, 
are  found  His  (1)  Sustaining  and  (2)  Directing  power.  That  God  sustains  and 
upholds  all  things  alone  can  account  for  our  bodies  putting  themselves  in  motion  at 
the  command  of  our  wills ;  or  for  the  curious  circulation  of  the  blood  within  our 
veins ;  or  for  the  adhesion  of  matter ;  or  for  the  descent  of  all  bodies  toward  the 
earth,  which  the  philosophers  call  gravitation.  Prophecies  and  miracles  prove  that 
God  directs  and  interposes  in  our  human  affairs.  If  God  sustains  and  upholds  all 
things  here  below  by  His  power,  this  calls  upon  us  reasonable  creatures  to  exert 
ourselves  in  praise  and  thanksgiving,  in  all  the  other  duties  of  gratitude  and  in 
prayer.     (Bp.   Z.   Pearce.)  The  eye  of  God  on  the  sons  of   men  : — The   great 

truths  of  divinity  are  of  great  use  to  enforce  the  precepts  of  morality.  1.  An  eye 
to  discern  all ;  not  only  from  which  nothing  can  be  concealed,  but  by  which  every- 
thing is  actually  inspected,  and  nothing  overlooked  or  looked  slightly  upon.  Secret 
sins,  services,  and  sorrows  are  under  His  eye.  2.  An  eye  to  distinguish  both 
persons  and  actions.  He  is  displeased  with  the  evil,  and  approves  of  the  good,  and 
will  judge  men  according  to  the  sight  of  His  eyes  (Psa.  i.  6;  xi.  4.)  {Matthew 
Henry.)  The  diffusiveness  of  the  Divine  Spirit : — The  Divine  Spirit  penetrates, 
pervades,  and  actuates  the  whole  mass  of  beings,  and  is  intimately  conscious  to 
every  motion  and  operation  throughout  the  whole  extent  of  created  nature.  In  the 
text  God  is  described  as  intimately  present  with  moral  agents  and  with  human 
minds.  I.  The  omnipresence  of  God's  being.  1.  By  way  of  similitude,  consider 
the  operations  of  a  human  soul  in  and  upon  a  human  body.  How  our  spirits 
actuate  our  bodies  is  one  of  those  mysteries  which  we  cannot  penetrate.  But  we 
are  conscious  of  the  power,  though  we  know  not  how  we  came  by  it.  The  fact  is 
undisputed,  that  the  mind  is  present  at  once  to  each  and  every  part  of  our  little 
world,  animates  with  its  constant  influences  every  particle  of  our  vital  clay,  keepa 


CHAP.  XT.]  PROVERBiS.  395 

watchful  guard  upon  all  the  avenues  and  portals  of  our  senses,  at  the  same  time 
presiding  in  the  more  secret  chambers  of  sublimer  thought  and  finer  speculation. 
So  related,  it  is  incapable  of  division  or  diminution,  of  composition  or  separation. 
Imagine  the  Spirit  of  God  thus  acting  through  every  part  and  portion  of  the 
universe,  yet  with  a  fulness  of  power  and  perfection,  neither  limited  by  it,  nor 
passive  in  any  degree  or  manner  from  it — imagine  Him  superintending  the  whole 
with  the  united  efficacy  of  His  wisdom,  goodness,  and  power,  and  you  will  then 
have  as  clear  a  notion  of  His  presence  with  the  whole  system  of  created  nature  as 
you  have  of  that  intercourse  which  your  own  souls  maintain  with  your  bodies. 
But  you  must  be  careful  to  exclude  from  this  comparison  whatever  shall  imply  any 
passiveness  in  God,  or  any  limitation  of  His  infinite  mind.  2.  The  Scriptures 
have  represented  God  as  present  in  some  places  more,  or  rather,  than  in  others, 
and  most  eminently  above  all,  in  the  peculiar  habitation  of  His  holiness  and  glory. 
Explain  this  by  reference  to  the  former  comparison.  While  the  human  soul 
actuates  each  part  and  particle  of  our  human  body,  the  head  is  the  manifest 
laboratory  of  its  finest  and  noblest  operations,  where  it  exerts  the  purest  and 
brightest  and  strongest  acts  of  contrivance  and  invention  of  thought  and  under- 
standing. Now,  what  the  soul  of  man  is  formed  to  do  by  the  skill  and  wisdom  of 
its  heavenly  Architect,  He  may  choose  for  Himself  to  do,  upon  the  reasons  of  state 
and  providence,  which  He  hath  partly  revealed  to  us,  and  partly  concealed  within 
the  veil  of  His  hidden  counsels.  No  reason  can  be  given  why  the  same  uniform, 
simple,  undivided  Essence  must  equally  everywhere  exert  itself,  or  why  it  may  not 
manifest  its  acts  and  operations  more,  and  rather,  in  one  place  than  another. 
3.  As  place  hath  in  strictness  a  near  relation  to  bodies,  and  to  the  order  of  their 
several  positions  and  situations,  the  idea  of  local  presence  is  apt  to  mix  itself  with 
that  relation  when  we  apply  it  to  spirits.  It  is  better  to  speak  of  the  Divine 
presence  as  a  vital  energy,  a  knowing  influence,  a  powerful  activity.  His  presence 
with  all  things  acquaints  Him  with  all  things,  and  makes  all  things  easy  to  Him. 
II.  Consider  the  Divine  Spirit  as  present  with  moral  agents  and  human  minds. 
1.  A  disquisition  of  the  fact.  Of  this  fact  there  will  be  little  question,  if  the 
premisses  are  agreed  to.  Surely  moral  truths,  and  the  eternal  differences  between 
good  and  evil,  will  plead  as  strongly  for  a  close  regard  to  them  as  any  degrees  of 
syminetry  or  beauty,  of  harmony  or  proportion  in  the  natural  world,  shall  engage 
the  attention  of  a  curious  observer.  Much  more  amiable  and  entertaining  must  be 
the  spectacle  of  moral  than  of  any  natural  beauty.  2.  The  uses  we  should  make 
of  this  fact.  The  sinner  may  reasonably  stand  aghast  with  terror  and  confusion 
at  the  deformity  of  his  own  actions.  He  is  breaking  in  upon  the  counsels  of 
eternity,  and  thwarting  the  purposes  of  Divine  wisdom  and  holiness  in  the  sight  of 
his  awful  Governor,  and  the  observation  of  his  all-seeing  Judge.  3.  Let  the  good 
man  consider  the  comforts  he  may  derive  from  a  sense  of  God's  constant  presence 
with  him.  His  Maker  observes  him  in  all  his  pressures  ;  in  all  the  difficulties  and 
conflicts  of  virtue.  4.  Let  us  all  be  persuaded  to  live  and  to  behave  in  every 
circumstance  of  life  like  a  people  sensible  who  is  the  Spectator,  and  who  is  to  be  the 
Judge  of  all  their  actions.  Cicero  advised  that  we  should  habituate  our  imagina- 
tions to  the  view  of  some  person  eminent  for  the  gravity  and  sanctity  of  his 
manners;  should  suppose  ourselves  in  his  presence,  and  carry  ourselves  in  all 
points  as  we  would  before  him.  How  much  more  should  a  sense  of  the  all-seeing 
eye  control  us ;  the  presence  of  Him  who  is  a  lover  of  righteousness  in  others,  au'l 
a  sure  avenger  of  all  ungodliness  and  wrong.  (N.  Marshall,  D.D.)  The  Diuine 
omniscience  : — I.  Consider  the  omniscience  of  God,  as  it  is  an  essential  attribute 
or  His  nature.  1.  That  this  knowledge  is  essentially  inherent  in  the  Divine 
nature  is  evident  from  the  creation  of  the  world.  For  as  the  beautiful  variety  of 
beings  conspicuous  in  the  universe  were  made  by  God,  He  must  necessarily  know 
the  things  He  has  made.  Infinite  power  presupposes,  or  at  least  imphes,  infinite 
knowledge.  Suppose  some  skilful  artist  to  have  framed  a  moving  machine, 
consisting  of  various  parts,  and  capable  of  performing  many  wonderful  operations ; 
it  will  perhaps  puzzle  divers  spectators  to  explain,  or  even  conceive  the  contexture 
of  its  parts,  and  the  secret  springs  by  which  it  moves ;  but  will  any  man  say  the 
artist  himself  who  made  the  machine  is  ignorant  of  the  several  parts  of  which  it  is 
composed,  or  that  he  knows  not  by  what  artful  contrivance  it  is  made  to  move  ?  Is 
man,  then,  acquainted  with  the  operations  of  his  own  hands,  and  can  we  suppose 
the  Supreme  Being  to  be  ignorant  of  His?  2.  Another  argument  to  prove  the 
omn'^cience  of  God  may  be  drawn  from  the  consideration  of  providence.  If  God 
presides  over  the  whole  universe,  and  goveruo  all  things  both  in  heaven  and  earth, 


396  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xv, 

i3  it  possible  for  Him  to  be  ignorant  of  anything  in  the  system  of  humanity  ?  If 
He  be  the  sovereign  disposer  of  human  creatures  and  their  affairs,  must  He  not 
perfectly  understand  their  constitution  and  conduct  ?  3.  Another  argument  to 
confirm  the  truth  of  God's  omniscience  may  be  taken  from  divers  remarkable 
events  that  have  happened  in  the  world  through  the  miraculous  interposition  of 
Providence.  Who  can  reflect  upon  the  various  revolutions  which  happened  to  the 
ancient  Israelites  without  feeling  manifest  traces  of  the  Divine  knowledge  ?  For 
was  it  possible  for  the  Almighty  to  have  interposed  in  delivering  that  oppressed 
people  from  the  cruel  persecutions  of  Egypt  if  He  had  not  previously  known  the 
condition  they  were  in  ?  Or  how  could  He  have  framed  a  scheme  of  government 
so  suitable  to  the  genius  of  that  untractable  people  if  He  had  not  thoroughly 
understood  their  natural  tempers  and  most  hidden  inclinations  ?  4.  To  confirm 
this  truth,  besides  the  arguments  already  alleged  there  is  another,  which  may  be 
drawn  from  the  idea  of  infinite  perfection.  For  if  God  be  a  Being  infinitely 
perfect,  He  must  be  infinitely  knowing.    II.  Consider  this  atteibute  of  the  Deity, 

AS  IT  IS  A  powerful  MOTIVE  TO  DESTROY  US  FROM  SIM,  AND  ENGAGE  US  TO  THE   PRACTICE 

OF  VIRTUE.  It  is  the  advice  of  Seneca  to  his  friend  Lucihus,  that  he  should  bear  in 
his  mind  the  idea  of  Socrates,  or  Cato,  or  some  other  excellent  man,  and  imagine 
him  to  be  a  constant  observer  of  his  actions.  This  the  philosopher  proposes  as 
a  useful  expedient  to  keep  a  man  constantly  virtuous  in  the  whole  conduct  of  his 
life.  Let,  therefore,  the  Searcher  of  all  hearts,  the  Almighty,  let  Him  be  our 
Socrates,  and  our  Cato;  and  if  we  judge  it  a  matter  of  disgrace  to  do  unworthy 
actions  before  a  wife,  friend,  or  philosopher,  think  what  eternal  shame  we  expose 
ourselves  to  when  we  sin  before  the  all-seeing  eyes  of  God.  {N.  Ball.)  The 
omnipresent  eye  of  God : — 1.  When  we  are  alone  this  truth  should  be  ever  with  us 
to  keep  us  from  the  temptation  of  evil  thoughts  and  purposes.  2.  In  our  families 
this  truth  should  make  us  watchful  over  our  tempers,  anxious  to  consult  each 
other's  wishes  and  feelings.  3.  In  society  it  should  make  us  give  great  heed  to  our 
words,  and  be  temperate  in  all  things ;  it  should  make  masters  remember  that  they 
have  a  Master  in  heaven ;  and  servants  should  be  incited  by  it  to  perform  their 
duties  not  with  eye-service  as  men-pleasers,  but  in  singleness  of  heart,  fearing  the 
Lord.  4.  In  sorrow  it  should  lead  us,  as  it  did  Job,  to  be  patient  and  resigned,  and 
to  put  our  trust  in  God.  5.  In  sin,  when  we  are  so  unhappy  as  to  fall  into  sin,  the 
presence  of  the  Lord  should  lead  us,  as  it  did  St.  Peter,  to  repentance.  6.  Lastly, 
and  above  all,  the  recollection  of  this  truth  should  be  with  us  in  church.  For  if 
we  are  assured  that  "  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  in  every  place,"  we  are  also  assured 
that  they  are  specially  in  this  place.  (R.  Ward,  M.A.)  The  eyes  of  the  Lord 
are  everywhere  : — 1.  Scripture  instances  of  God's  beholding  the  various  works  of 
men.  He  beholds  the  evil.  See  cases  of  Cain  and  Abel,  Achan,  &c.  He  beholds 
the  good.  See  cases  of  Noah,  Jacob,  &c.  Each  act,  each  thought,  each  hope  and 
fear  of  a  man,  is  open  to  the  sight  of  his  God.  2.  The  character  of  the  all-seeing 
One.  The  all-seeing  God  is  a  person,  not  a  mere  abstract  name  for  nature.  The 
Lord  is  not  only  a  person,  but  also  one  who  always  remembers.  The  all-seeing  God 
is  not  indifferent  to  the  acts  of  men,  and  their  characters  are  before  Him.  He 
who  sees  the  evil  and  the  good  is  all-powerful  to  punish  and  reward.  {H.  Constable, 
31. A.)  The  eyes  of  the  Lord: — "And  we  do  fearfully  live,  as  it  were,  out  of 
God's  atmosphere.  We  do  not  keep  that  continual  consciousness  of  His  reality 
which,  I  conceive,  we  ought  to  have,  and  which  should  make  Him  more  manifest 
to  our  souls  than  the  Shekinah  was  to  the  minds  of  the  Israelites."  Thus  wrote 
Dr.  Arnold,  of  Rugby ;  and  I  think  no  one  of  us  can  read  the  words  and  not  feel 
they  say  a  truth.  "  Dare  to  be  alone  with  God,"  wrote  the  true-hearted  preacher, 
F.  W.  Robertson,  to  a  friend.  "  Dare  to  be  alone  with  God."  Why  should  not  the 
child  gladly  seek  the  Father's  presence  ?  The  Indians  of  South  America  told  the 
missionaries,  "You  say  the  God  of  the  Christians  knows  everything,  that  nothing 
is  hidden  from  Him ;  that  He  is  everywhere  and  sees  all  that  is  done.  But  we  do 
not  desire  a  God  so  sharp-sighted ;  we  choose  to  live  with  freedom  in  our  woods, 
•without  having  a  perpetual  observer  over  our  heads."  And  the  savages  but  said 
forth  a  feeling  in  which  men  civilised  naturally  share ;  for  from  purity  conscious 
impurity  slinks.  Men  may  quarrel  with  the  doctrine  of  depravity  as  they  choose, 
but  this  instinctive  hiding  themselves  from  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  is  steady  proof  of 
the  doctrine  of  a  universal  moral  lapse.  Consider,  men  are  always  trying  to  put 
out  the  eyes  of  the  Lord.  By  atheism — letting  the  bad,  foolish  heart  tell  the  head 
there  is  no  God.  By  semi-pantheism — denying  personality  to  God,  calling  Him 
••  a  stream  of  tendency,"     Simply  a  vague,  impersonal  "  power  not  ourselves  "  • 


CHAP.  XV.]  PROVEBBS.  397 

by  trying  to  think  of  God  in  the  ancient  epicurean  fashion,  making  Him  but  a  huge 
and  listless  carelessness,  as  Thomas  Carlyle  so  finely  stigmatizes  the  notion,  "  an 
absentee  God,  sitting  on  the  outside  of  His  universe,  and  seeing  it  go  "  ;  by 
identifying  God  with  law,  hiding  the  thought  and  truth  of  God  away  in  the 
mujffiing  folds  of  natural  law,  and  so  imagining  that  they  are  somehow  getting 
themselves  out  of  God's  real  jurisdiction  ;  by  a  sensual  carelessness  of  God,  living 
as  though  there  were  no  God,  though  all  the  time  His  being  and  presence  are 
theoretically  confessed.  But  yet  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  in  every  place,  beholding 
the  evil  and  the  good.  Therefore — 1.  We,  in  our  conscious  sinfulness  before  their 
gaze,  need  atonement  for  our  sin.  2.  And  the  readjustment  with  God  the  Holy 
Spirit  works  in  us  by  regeneration.  3.  And  the  sweet  consciousness  of  forgiveness. 
4.  And  so  the  making  possible  the  noble  bravery  of  welcoming  His  vision  into  our 
hearts  and  lives,  that  we  may  shun  the  evil  and  seize  the  good ;  and  thus  the 
living  the  true  life  only  to  be  lived  in  "  God's  atmosphere."     [Hoiiiiletic  Hevieic.) 

Ver.  4.  A  wholesome  tongue  is  a  tree  of  life. — A  icholesome  tongue  a  tree  of 
life  : — When  the  tongue  is  guided  by  the  Spirit  of  God  and  by  the  words  of  Holy 
Scripture  it  may  impart  truth  and  express  and  elicit  thoughts  which  may  be 
salutary  to  those  who  come  under  their  influence.  Then  it  is  as  if  a  man,  in 
hearing  the  words  spoken,  did  eat  the  fruit  of  the  tree  of  life  in  God's  primitive 
and  undesolated  garden.  I.  What  topics  of  discourse  will  make  oue  tongue  a 
TREE  of  life  ?  1.  It  is  uo  tree  of  life  when  it  lies.  God  is  a  God  of  truth,  and 
if  the  tongue  speaks  falsely  it  is  an  instrument  of  unrighteousness.  2.  It  is  no 
tree  of  life  when  it  defames  and  utters  scandal,  whether  this  proceed  from  the 
thought  of  your  own  mind  or  whether  it  be  taken  from  a  neighbour.  3.  It  is  no 
tree  of  life  when  it  blasphemes.  There  are  irreverent  speeches  respecting  God 
which  are  a  shame  and  dishonour  for  a  man  to  utter,  and  which  are  painful  and 
injurious  to  the  auditors.  4.  It  is  no  tree  of  life  when  it  propagates  error ;  whea 
it  teaches  and  preaches  false  doctrine.  5.  It  is  no  tree  of  life  when  the  words  are 
vicious  or  unholy.  If  conversation  is  false,  defamatory,  foolish,  irreverent,  you 
grieve  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  There  are  four  great  regions  of  truth  in  which  the 
tongue  may  do  its  duty  to  man  and  glorify  God  ;  so  that,  according  to  the 
metaphor  of  the  text,  the  tree  may  open  its  ample  branches,  presenting  fruit  so 
luscious  and  refreshing  that  all  who  pass  by  may  eat  and  regale  themselves. 
(1)  It  has  liberty  when  it  speaks  of  the  works  of  God  in  creation.  (2)  The  second 
great  region  is  the  providence  of  God,  or  the  government  of  God,  in  His  watchful- 
ness over  the  affairs  of  men.  (3)  Then  there  is  the  Word  of  God.  There  is  not 
a  verse  or  sentence  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  which  may  not  be  the  subject 
of  investigation  and  of  discourse.  (4)  A  tongue  may  be  wholesome  when  we  speak 
of  things  that  are  especially  suitable  to  the  circumstances  of  the  people  whom 
we  are  addressing,  such  as  those  who  need  comfort  and  those  who  are  exposed  to 
temptation.  It  may  be  added  that  the  tongue  is  a  tree  of  life  when  it  speaks  of 
the  world  before  us  and  of  the  life  to  come.  H.  The  times  and  seasons  of  thb 
fruitfulness  of  the  tongue  as  a  tree  of  life.  1.  In  the  sanctuary  the  tongue  of 
a  righteous  minister  is  a  tree  of  life.  2.  Our  tongue  may  be  a  tree  of  hfe  in  our 
families,  at  our  morning  and  evening  repast,  and  daily,  as  we  meet  at  table. 
3.  When  we  teach  the  young.  4.  In  our  ordinary  intercourse  with  one  another. 
Every  sentiment  we  advance  is  a  seed  that  will  go  elsewhere.  5.  And  at  the 
bedside  of  the  sick  and  dying.  The  tongue  is  a  small  member,  but  it  boasteth 
great  things.  It  may  be  the  instrument  of  great  evil  or  of  amazing  good.  The 
tongue  of  man  is  the  pivot  on  which  the  whole  system  of  human  society  moves. 
Then  ask  for  wisdom,  that  the  tongue  may  utter  knowledge.  Ask  for  a  renewed 
mind,  that  there  may  be  sanctified  speech.  {James  Straiten.)  Salutary 
discourse: — "A  wholesome  tongue"  may  be  read,  "the  healing  of  the  tongue," 
by  which  is  meant,  "  words  of  healing."  Salutary  discourse  or  conversation  is 
highly  beneficial.  I.  This  is  exemplified  in  Jesus  Christ.  All  His  words  were 
words  of  healing.  It  is  true  that  He  reproved,  and  sometimes  with  pointed 
severity ;  but  it  was  as  a  skilful  surgeon,  who  probes  the  festering  wound  in  order 
to  an  effectual  cure.  II.  This  is  exemplified  in  ministers  of  the  gospel. 
St.  Paul.  III.  This  is  exemplified  in  private  Christians.  Of  what  nature  is 
the  discourse  of  such  persons  ?  It  ought  certainly  to  be  beneficial,  and  in  ord^-r 
to  this  it  must  be  consistent  with  truth,  with  piety,  with  candour,  and  with 
benevolence.  Improvement :  If  a  "  wholesome  tongue  is  a  tree  of  life,"  the  opposite 
is  an  instrument  of   death.     (T.   Kidd.)        The  tamed   tongue : — A    wholesome 


398  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rv. 

tongue  is  one  whose  speech  is  not  corrupting  nor  irritating,  but  full  of  nourishment 

and  helpfulness— sound  and  sweet  and  salutary.     Such  a  tongue  is  a  tree  of  life. 

Wise  words  proceed  from  it  as  naturally  as  the  leaves  grow  upon  the  branches ; 

beautiful  and  fitting  words   adorn  it  as  the  blossoms  adorn  the  tree.     I.  The 

TAMED  TONGUE  IS  TEAiNED  FOE  SEK\T[CE.     All  things  that  are  tamed  are  tamed  for 

the  service  of  man,  and  the  tongue  follows  this  law.     It  is  by  speech  that  many  of 

our  best  gains  are  made.     A  large  part  of  the  good  which  we  receive  comes  to  us 

in  conversation.     Opinions  are  formed  in  this  way :  knowledge  is  acquired,  good 

impulses  are  received,  we  are  stimulated  and  cheered  by  our  conversation.     The 

interchange  of  thought  is  most  valuable  to  us.     When  our  tongue  is  rightly  trained 

it  will  be  a  most  diligent  purveyor  of  knowledge.     II.  The  tongue  will  serve  oub 

OWN  NEEDS  IN  QUITE  ANOTHEB  WAT.     The  rcaction  upon  our  own  minds  of  truth 

which   we   have   expressed,   of    worthy   purposes   or   sentiments   which   we   have 

avowed,   is  most  beneficent.     We  fix  our  thoughts  by  putting  them  into   words 

and  uttering  them.     The  wise  and  temperate  utterance  of  manly  feeling  reacts  in 

the  same  way  upon  ourselves.     III.  The  tongue  is  one  of  the  most  effectr-e 

AGENCIES  in  COMMUNICATING  TRUTH.     The  printed  word  now  plays  a  great  part  in 

the   education   of   mankind,   but   written   instruction   will  never    supersede    oral 

instruction.     The  tongue  will  always  have  a  function,  and  a  large  one,  in  the 

communication  of  truth.     Shades  of  meaning  can  be  conveyed  by  the  lips  which 

the  types  cannot  suggest.     We  learn  truth  through  conversation ;  we  may  teach 

it  in   the   same  way.     IV.  The  moral  invigoration    of    others    mat    be   most 

EFFECTUALLT  PROMOTED  BT  SANCTIFIED  SPEECH.     As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  greater  part 

of  the  moral  and  religious  influence  that  is  exerted  in  the  world  passes  from  one 

soul  to  another  in  the  form  of  familiar  talk.     V.  We  do  people  good  bt  making 

THEM  HAPPT.     And  there  lies  in  kind  winning  words  a  wonderful  power  of  adding 

to  the  happiness  of  our  fellow-men.     There  is  no  little  pleasure  in  listening  to 

beautiful  words  or  graceful  words^as  those  of  artists  in  verse  or  prose.     Oh,  the 

power  there  is  in  kind  words  to  soothe,  to  uplift,  to  cheer,  to  bless  the  souls  of  men ! 

YI.  Sanctified  speech  has  the  power  to  conquer,  to  quell,  to  subdue.     The  soft 

tongue  breaketh  the  bone ;  the  tamed  tongue  subdues  the  adversary.    VII.  And 

SANCTIFIED  SPEECH  FURNISHES  AN  OUTLET    FOR   THE  THANKFULNESS  OF  THE  HEART.      To 

the  praise  of  God  all  that  is  highest  and  noblest  in  man  continually  summons  him. 
Reasons  for  thankfulness  are  not  wanting  now  to  any  of  us.  If  we  are  silent 
it  is  not  because  there  is  no  call  for  praise.  (Washingt07i  Gladden,  D.D.)  The 
speech  of  the  wise  and  of  the  foolish  : — I.  The  speech  of  the  wise.  1.  It  is  a 
healing  speech.  The  wholesome  tongue,  or,  literally,  as  in  the  margin,  a  healing 
tongue,  is  a  tree  of  life.  There  are  wounded  souls  in  society ;  souls  wounded  by 
insults,  slanders,  bereavements,  disappointments,  losses,  moral  conviction.  There 
is  a  speech  that  is  healing  to  those  wounds,  and  that  speech  is  used  by  the  wise. 
There  are  societies,  too,  that  are  wounded  by  divisions,  animosities.  There  is  a 
speech  which  heals  social  divisions,  and  the  wise  employ  it.  2.  It  is  a  living 
speech.  "It  is  a  tree  of  life."  It  is  at  once  the  product  and  producer  of  life. 
The  speech  of  the  wise  is  not  the  vehicle  of  sapless  platitudes,  it  is  the  offspring  of 
living  conviction.  It  is  a  germ  falling  from  the  ever-growing  tree  of  living  thought, 
and  it  produces  life  too.  "  Cast  forth,"  says  Carlyle,  "  thy  act,  thy  word,  into  the 
everlasting,  evergrowing  universe  :  it  is  a  seed-grain  that  cannot  die  unnoticed  to- 
day;  it  will  be  found  flourishing  as  a  banyan  grove— perhaps."  But  the  word  of  the 
wise  is  not  as  a  hemlock  seed  ;  it  is  a  seed  that  falls  from  that  tree  of  life  which  is  to 
be  for  the  healing  of  the  nations.  3.  It  is  an  enlightening  speech.  "  The  lips  of  the 
wise  disperse  knowledge."  The  words  of  the  wise  are  beams  reflected  from  the  great 
Sun  of  Truth,  and  they  break  upon  the  darkness  with  which  error  has  clouded  the 
world.  II.  The  speech  of  the  foolish.  1.  The  speech  of  the  foolish  is  a 
wounding  speech.  "  Perverseness  therein  is  a  breach  in  the  spirit."  2.  The 
speech  of  the  foolish  is  an  empty  speech.  The  heart  is  here  the  antithesis  to  the 
lips.  The  foolish  man  does  not  disperse  knowledge,  but  the  wise  does.  The  fool 
has  no  knowledge  to  disperse.  (Homilist.)  A  wholesome  tongue: — 1.  Not  a 
silent  tongue:  mere  abstinence  from  evil  is  not  good.  The  beasts  that  perish 
speak  no  guile ;  what  do  ye  more  than  they  ?  The  tongue  of  man  is  a  talent. 
2.  Not  a  smooth  tongue :  it  may  be  soft  on  the  surface,  while  the  poison  of  asps 
lies  cherished  underneath.  "  The  mouth  of  a  strange  woman  is  smoother  than 
oil."  A  serpent  licks  his  victim  all  over  before  he  swallows  it.  Smoothness  is 
not  an  equivalent  for  truth.  3.  Not  a  voluble  tongue :  that  active  member  may 
labour  much  to  little  purpose.     It  may  revolve  with  the  rapidity  and  steadiness  of 


CHAP.  XV.]  PROVERBS.  899 

manufacturing  machinery,  throwing  oflf  from  morning  till  night  a  continuous  web 
of  wordage,  and  yet  not  add  one  grain  to  the  stock  of  human  wisdom  by  the 
imposing  bulk  of  its  weightless  product.  4.  Not  a  sharp  tongue  :  some  instru- 
ments are  made  keen-edged  for  the  purpose  of  wounding  (chap.  xii.  18).  5.  Not 
even  a  true  tongue :  truth  is  the  foundation  of  all  good  in  speech,  but  it  is  the 
foundation  only.  Truth  is  necessary,  but  not  enough.  The  true  tongue  must  also 
be  wholesome.  Before  anything  can  be  wholesome  in  its  effects  on  others  it  must 
be  whole  in  itself.  The  tongue  must  be  itself  in  health  before  it  can  diffuse  a 
healthful  influence.  But  our  tongue,  as  an  instrument  of  moral  agency,  is 
diseased.  It  is  in  the  human  constitution  the  chief  outgate  from  the  heart,  and 
the  heart  of  the  fallen  is  not  in  health.     {W.  Arnot,  D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  In  the  house  of  the  righteous  is  much  treasure. — The  wealth  and  blessed- 
ness of  a  pious  family  : — I.  There  is  the  worship  of  God  m  A  pious  rAMiLy,  and, 

CONSEQUENTLY,  "MUCH  TREASURE."  II.  ThERE  IS  THE  BENEDICTION  OF  HEAVEN 
REALISED  BT  A  PIOUS  FAMILT,  AND,  CONSEQUENTLY,  MUCH  TREASURE.  III.  ThERE  IS 
THE  PREVALENCE  OF  LOVE  IN  A  PIOUS  FAMILY,  AND,  CONSEQUENTLY,  MUCH  TREASURE. 

IV.  There  is  tender  and  Christian  sympathy  in  affliction  manifested  by  a  pious 

FAMILY,  AND,  CONSEQUENTLY,  "  IN  THE  HOUSE   OF    THE    RIGHTEOUS   IS   MUCH  TREASURE." 

V.  There  is  an  earnest  and  paramount  desire  to  do  good  cherished  by  a  pious 

FAMILY,  AND,  CONSEQUENTLY,  IN  SUCH  A  HOUSE  THERE  IS  "  MUCH  TREASURE. "  VI.  ThERE 
IS  NOT  ONLY  THE  PROSPECT,  BUT  THE  WELL-GROUNDED  HOPE,  MAINTAINED  BY  A  PIOUS 
FAMILY,  OF  MEETING  BEYOND    THE    GRAVE,    AND,  CONSEQUENTLY,  IN  SUCH  A  HOUSE  THERE 

IS  MUCH  TREASURE.  (T.  Wallace.)  God's  smile  the  best  treasure : — One  smile 
of  God  is  better  than  all  the  treasures  of  the  world.  If  the  sun  be  wanting,  it 
wiU  be  night  for  all  the  stars ;  and  if  the  light  of  God's  countenance  be  wanting,  if 
He  frown  upon  us,  a  man  may  sit  in  the  shadow  of  death  for  aU  the  glisten  of 
worldly  contentments.     (J.  Stoughton,  D.D.) 

Ver.  8.  The  sacrifice  of  the  wicked   is    an   abomination  to  the  Lord. — Two 

worshippers  coniraAed  : — The  opposition  here  implied  is  twofold,  relating,  first  to 
the  character,  and  then  to  the  consequence,  of  two  varieties  or  extremes  of  prayer. 
"  The  sacrifice  of  the  wicked  "  will  be  one  of  two  things  ;  it  will  either  be  what  we 
may  designate  the  sacrifice  of  falsehood,  or  what  Holy  Scripture  has  denounced  as 
"the  sacrifice  of  fools."  The  latter  are  outlined  in  one  brief,  but  most  emphatic 
phrase — "  they  consider  not  that  they  do  evil."  The  evil  lies  in  their  not  consider- 
ing. The  term  applies  to  all  heedless  and  unreflecting  worship ;  that  which  neither 
occupies  the  understanding,  nor  affects  the  heart.  And  the  absence  of  considera- 
tion within  the  house  of  God  is  itself  equivalent  to  rebellion.  Directly  opposed  to 
the  "  sacrifice  of  the  wicked,"  we  have  "  the  prayer  of  the  upright."  This  implies 
sincerity;  then  solemn,  serious,  and  devout  consideration.  "Upright"  here  does 
not  denote  a  perfection  of  moral  integrity  ;  which  is  rarely,  if  ever,  found  in  men. 
A  sacrifice  of  falsehood  is  the  act  of  the  outward  ;  the  sacrifice  of  truth  is  the  act  of 
the  inward  man.  The  "  prayer  of  the  upright  "  is  based  upon  consideration,  and 
reflection.  It  is  first  the  offspring,  and  then  the  companion,  of  thought.  {Thomas 
Dale,  M.A.)  But  the  prayer  of  the  upright  is  His  delight. — Difficulties  and 
ignorance  in  prayer : — Prayer  is  one  of  the  surest  tests  both  of  Christian  con- 
viction and  Christian  character.  The  clear  consciousness  and  firm  conviction  of 
God  compel  frequency  and  gladness  in  prayer.  The  character  of  a  Christian  can 
be  almost  unmistakably  told  by  the  character  of  his  prayers.  Prayer  is  a  crucial 
touchstone  of  the  spiritual  life.  What  is  this  prayer  ?  Words  are  generally,  not 
always,  necessary  to  prayer.  It  is  only  the  insincerity  of  repetitions  that  makes 
them  vain.  There  are  occasions  when  prayer  in  words  is  impossible.  Thinking 
over  our  prayers,  without  actually  saying  them,  is  generally  nothing  better  than  a 
kind  of  spiritual  indolence.  But  not  until  words  are  the  true  expression  of  the 
wishes  of  the  heart,  the  audible  movement  of  the  inmost  soul,  are  they  clothed  with 
the  character  of  prayer.  Prayer  is  often  hard  and  exhausting  work.  It  is  often 
difficult,  because  our  hearts  are  idle  and  errant ;  and  because  prayer  is  essentially 
submission.  Of  all  hard  things  none  is  more  hard  than  the  surrender  of  the  will. 
There  is  peace  and  strength  in  prayer,  but  there  is  also  toil  and  unspeakable 
sacrifice.  God  protects  us,  in  our  prayers,  against  ourselves.  He  will  not  suffer 
our  ignorance  to  be  our  ruin,  and  only  grants  such  prayers  as  are  for  our  own  good. 
Unanswered  prayers  may  be  an  evidence  of  the  love  of  God  and  the  ignorance  of 
man.    Prayers  prompted  by  the  Holy  Spirit  are  never  unanswered  prayers.    (Canon 


400  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xr. 

Diggle.)  God's  delight  in  theprayer  of  the  upright : — God  takes  great  pleasure  in 
the  prayers  of  upright  men  ;  He  even  calls  them  His  delight.  Our  first  concern  is  to 
be  upright.  Neither  bending  this  way  nor  that,  continue  upright ;  not  crooked  with 
policy,  nor  prostrate  by  yielding  to  evil,  be  ye  upright  in  strict  integrity  and 
straightforwardness.  If  we  begin  to  shuffle  and  shift,  we  shall  be  left  to  shift  for 
ourselves.  If  we  try  crooked  ways,  we  shall  find  that  we  cannot  pray,  and  if  we 
pretend  to  do  so,  we  shall  find  our  prayers  shut  out  of  heaven.  Are  we  acting  in  a 
straight  line,  and  thus  following  out  the  Lord's  revealed  will  ?  Then  let  us  pray 
much,  and  pray  in  faith.  If  our  prayer  is  God's  delight,  let  us  not  stint  Him  in  that 
which  gives  Him  pleasure.  He  does  not  consider  the  grammar  of  it,  nor  the  meta- 
physics of  it,  nor  the  rhetoric  of  it ;  in  all  these  men  might  despise  it.  He,  as  a 
Father,  takes  pleasure  in  the  lispings  of  His  own  babes,  the  stammerings  of  His 
newborn  sons  and  daughters.  Should  we  not  delight  in  prayer  since  the  Lord 
delights  in  it  ?  Let  us  make  errands  to  the  throne.  The  Lord  finds  us  enough 
reasons  for  prayer,  and  we  ought  to  thank  Him  that  it  is  so.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Let  us  pray  : — I  have  heard  it  said  that  God  has  no  pleasure  in  the  prayer  of  sinners. 
I  believe  that  that  statement  is  altogether  apart  from  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus. 
It  would  be  an  ill  day  for  us  indeed  if  it  were  even  partially  true,  that  God  has  no 
ready  heart  for  the  cry  of  the  penitent.  Provided  there  be  a  desire  to  have  the  sin 
put  away,  we  can  come  with  our  defilement  fresh  and  hideous  upon  us,  far  the 
fountain  is  opened  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness.  What,  then,  is  the  meaning  of 
these  strong  terms  ?  It  is  the  knell  of  those  who  make  pretence  of  prayer,  who 
come  with  blood-stained  hands,  and  oiler  sacrifice  with  hearts  that  are  neither 
cleansed  nor  wish  for  cleansing.  It  is  the  sacrifice  of  Cain  that  God  abhors,  a 
matter  of  self-glorifying,  rather  than  of  supplication.  It  is  the  offering  of  Korah 
He  rejects,  for  it  is  not  according  to  His  command.  It  is  the  sacrifice  that  Saul 
presents  that  is  a  stench  to  His  nostrils,  for  it  is  not  in  accordance  with  His 
instructions.  Is  not  this  perfectly  understandable  ?  Who  is  willing  to  accept 
feigned  praise,  or  presents  from  his  enemies?  I.  God  delights  to  hear  the 
UPRIGHT  PRAT.  I  think  the  prayer  of  the  upright  is  here  put  in  contradistinction 
to  the  sacrifice  of  the  wicked.  The  wicked  man  may  go  to  great  pains  to  provide 
something  more  than  a  prayer.  It  may  have  even  cost  him  something  considerable. 
But  he  has  not  attended  to  the  main  matter  ;  his  heart  goes  not  with  the  sacrifice. 
On  the  other  hand,  here  is  an  upright  man,  who,  perhaps,  has  no  opportunity  for 
offering  special  gifts.  He  comes  with  a  sigh,  and  ere  it  reaches  heaven  it  is  trans- 
formed into  a  song.  Now,  why  does  the  Lord  take  such  pleasure  in  the  mere 
prayer  of  the  upright?  1.  Because  it  is  a  sign  of  life.  It  may  be  a  feeble  token, 
but  it  is  an  indication  that  there  is  life  to  some  extent  in  that  poor,  distressed  one. 
The  prayer  of  the  upright  is  God's  delight,  for  He  says  within  Himself,  "  My  child 
still  lives  ;  his  spiritual  pulse  is  beating,  his  lungs  are  working,  for  his  prayer 
ascends  into  My  holy  temple."  2.  Moreover,  the  prayer  of  the  upright  is  an 
indication  of  health.  It  does  not  content  us,  that  we  merely  live :  we  want  to  be 
lively  as  well  as  living ;  may  I  say  we  want  to  be  all  alive  ?  Therefore  is  the 
prayer  of  the  upright  God's  delight.  He  sees  that  His  little  ones  are  buoyant, 
hearty,  and  healthful.  This  is  to  Him  as  the  sparkling  eye  and  the  rosy  cheek  of 
health,  and  He  is  glad  within  Himself  when  He  sees  His  offspring  rejoicing  in 
fulness  of  vigour.  3.  Moreover,  prayer  is  a  proof  of  confidence.  We  all  like  to  be 
trusted.  4.  Again,  prayer  is  a  token  of  gratitude.  I  think  I  hear  Him  saying, 
*'  Yonder  needy  suppliant  is  glad  of  the  blessing  that  I  gave  him  yesterday,  for  he 
is  at  My  feet  again.  He  appreciates  My  delivering  power  in  the  past,  for  he  is 
calling  for  mercy  still.  I  will  multiply  to  bless  him."  God  is  glad  thus  to  treat 
all  believing  hearts.  5.  I  think  God  delights  in  our  prayer  because  He  sees 
how  beneficial  it  is  to  us  to  pray.  Apart  from  the  joy  it  gives  His  own  heart. 
He  is  well  aware  that  it  brings  joy  to  our  hearts.  6.  Moreover,  I  must  not  have 
you  suppose  that  I  do  not  believe  that  prayer  moves  the  arm  of  God.  I  am 
persuaded  that  it  touches  His  heart,  stirs  Him  to  action,  and  causes  Him  to  stretch 
forth  His  saving  hand.  If  I  add  to  the  fact  that  prayer  is  a  relief  to  my  own  mind 
the  equally  certain  fact  that  it  gives  God  pleasure  to  hear  me  pray,  I  am  by  no 
means  positive  that  that  would  keep  me  praying  if  I  had  no  other  assurance. 
•'The  prayer  of  the  upright  is  His  delight,"  and  that  should  be  another  stimulus 
to  constant  intercession.  II.  Do  tou  not  think  that  God  DELionrs  ix  the  prateb 
ITSELF  ?  "  The  prayer  of  the  upright  is  His  delight."  There  is  something  about 
theprayer  of  the  upright  that  particularly  rejoices  His  heart.  1.  The  prayer  of 
the  upright  is  a  humble  prayer.    It  is  as  the  snowdrops  of  the  spring-time,  or  as 


CHAP.  XV.]  PROVERBS.  401 

the  violet  of  the  early  summer.  There  is  something  about  it  so  pleasing  that  God 
looks  on  it  with  great  delight.  It  does  not  hold  up  its  head  like  the  glaring  poppy 
of  the  cornfield,  or  as  the  sunflower  that  seems  to  invite  attention.  It  is  like  the 
prayer  of  the  Publican  rather  than  that  of  the  self-admiring  Pharisee.  2.  The 
prayer  of  the  upright  is  earnest.  It  is  pointed  ;  it  does  not  deal  with  generalities, 
but  with  details.  It  is  marked  "Urgent."  3.  Especially  is  it  the  faith  of  the 
prayer  that  pleases  God.  Faith  brings  the  promises  as  so  many  cheques  for  God 
to  cash.  The  prayer  of  faith  seems  to  say,  by  its  very  tone,  "Lord,  do  as  Thou 
hast  said ;  remember  Thy  word  to  Thy  servant,  upon  which  Thou  hast  caused  him 
to  hope."  4.  The  prayers  that  God  delights  in  are  full  of  the  spirit  of  resignation. 
Faith  and  submission  should  go  hand  in  hand.  5.  And  He  is  particularly  glad 
when  He  sees  the  name  of  Jesus  upon  the  prayer.  How  gladly  does  He  recognise 
the  aromfi,  of  Christ's  merit  and  the  fragrance  of  His  death  !  Prn^yeis  presented  by 
you  in  Jesus'  name  and  then  presented  by  Jesus  Christ  Himself  in  your  name  must 
give  our  God  great  joy.  HI.  The  Loed  delights  to  answer  peater.  Even  with 
Him  it  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  it  is  to  receive.  He  delights  in  your  prayer 
even  when  He  keeps  j'ou  waiting,  for  He  will  send  the  answer  just  when  you  most 
require  it.    It  would  not  be  well  to  have  it  earlier.     {Thomas  Simrgeon.) 

Ver.  11.  Hell  and  destruction  are  before  the  Lord:  how  much  more  then  the  hearts 
of  the  children  of  men? — God  the  all-seeing  One: — I.  A  great  fact  declared. 

I.  The  word  translated  "  hell  "  might  just  as  well  be  translated  "  death,"  or  the 
state  of  departed  spirits.  Death,  with  all  its  solemn  consequences,  is  visible  before 
the  Lord.  God  understands  all  the  secrets  of  death.  God  knows  the  burial-places 
of  all  His  people.  He  is  cognisant  of  the  history  of  all  their  bodies  after  sepulture, 
or  after  death.  And  as  the  body,  so  the  soul  when  separated  from  the  body  is  before 
the  Lord.  2.  The  word  "  destruction  "  signifies  "  hell,"  the  place  of  the  damned. 
That  also  is  open  before  the  Lord.     That  land  of  terror  is  to  us  a  land  unknown. 

II.  A  GREAT  FACT  INFERRED.  1.  Why  is  it  SO  clcar  that  if  "hell  and  destruction 
are  before  the  Lord,"  the  hearts  of  men  must  be  very  plainly  viewed  by  Him  ?  We 
answer,  because  the  hearts  of  men  are  not  so  extensive  as  the  realms  of  death  and 
torment.  They  are  far  less  aged  too.  God  may  easily  understand  the  history  of  a 
man,  when  He  knows  the  history  of  the  monarchies  of  death  and  hell.  2.  How 
does  God  know  the  heart  ?  To  what  degree  and  extent  does  He  understand  and 
know  that  which  is  in  man  ?  God  searches  it ;  tries  it ;  ponders,  or  weighs  it. 
3.  What  is  it  that  God  sees  in  man's  heart?  Its  evUs,  imaginations,  devices, 
resolves.     4.  When  does  God  see  us  ?    Always,  and  everywhere.     {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  12.  A  scomer  loveth  not  one  that  reproveth  him.  —  The  scorner : — 
I.  He  BEQurBES  REPROOF.  He  should  be  reproved — 1.  For  his  self-ignorance. 
He  who  arrogates  to  himself  a  superiority  to  Divine  teaching,  is  utterly 
unacquainted  with  his  own  limited  faculties,  moral  relations,  and  spiritual 
needs.  Of  all  ignorance,  self-ignorance  is  the  most  inexcusable,  criminal, 
and  ruinous.  He  should  be  reproved — 2.  For  his  impious  presumption. 
The  scorner  sets  his  mouth  against  the  heavens.  II.  He  shuns  reproof.  "  He 
will  not  go  unto  the  wise."  Why?  Becausethewise  would  reprove  him.  1.  He  will 
not  read  books  that  wUl  deal  seriously  and  honestly  with  his  character.  2.  He  wUl 
not  attend  a  ministry  that  wiU  expose  his  character  in  the  broad  light  of  eternal 
law.  3.  He  will  not  join  the  society  that  will  deal  truthfully  with  its  members. 
in.  He  hates  reproof.  '*  The  scorner  loveth  not  one  that  reproveth  him." 
{D.  Thomas,  DJ).) 

Ver.  13.  A  merry  heart  maketh  a  cheerful  countenance. — Mirth  a  medicine : — 
The  emotions  that  thrill  in  the  heart  mark  themselves  in  legible  lines  on  the 
countenance.  This  is  a  feature  in  the  constitution  of  man,  and  a  useful  feature  it 
is.  The  wisdom  of  our  Maker  may  be  seen  in  the  degree  of  its  development.  Joy 
in  the  heart  can  do  more  than  make  the  aspect  winsome.  Besides  enlivening  a  dull 
countenance,  it  heals  a  diseased  nature.  There  is  nothing  equal  to  cheerful  and 
even  mirthful  conversation  for  restoring  the  tone  of  mind  and  body  when  both  have 
been  overdone.  Mirth,  after  exhaustive  toil,  is  one  of  nature's  instinctive  efforts  to 
heal  the  part  which  has  been  racked  and  bruised.  Even  a  dull  observer  may  see 
wisdom  and  goodness  in  the  habitual  cheerfulness  of  the  young.  To  maintain  a 
patient's  cheerfulness  often  hastens  the  patient's  cure.  A  bright  hope  within  will 
gometimes  do  more  to  restore  the  wasted  strength  than  all  the  prescriptions  of  the 

27 


402  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

phj'sician.  If  Christians  could  get  livLag  hope  lighted  within,  and  let  it  beam  like 
Bunlight  all  the  day  through  an  open  countenance,  their  hves  would  be  more  legible 
as  epistles  of  Christ,  and  more  effectual  to  win  souls.     (IF.  Arnot,  D.D.) 

Ver.  14.  The  heart  of  him  that  hath  understanding  seeketh  knowledge. — Seeking 
knowledge  : — The  desire  of  knowledge  is  in  some  sense  natural  to  us  all ;  and  it  is 
the  duty  of  us  all  to  cherish  that  desire ;  to  direct  it  to  proper  objects ;  and  to  keep 
it  within  due  bounds.  Knowledge  is  necessary.  Conscience  may  dictate  to  us  that 
things  are  right  or  wrong,  but  she  may  be  mistaken  in  her  decisions,  unless  she  call 
in  reason  to  her  assistance ;  for  a  clear  knowledge  of  morality  cannot  be  obtained 
without  serious  consideration  and  the  exercise  of  our  intellectual  faculties  ;  nor 
can  the  revealed  will  of  God  be  understood  without  application  of  mind.  We  at 
first  receive  the  knowledge  of  things  by  perception,  and  then  improve  it  by  reflection. 
The  general  desire  of  knowledge  is  manifested  very  soon ;  but  it  varies  in  strength. 
It  is  meet  that  there  should  be  men  of  smaller  as  well  as  of  larger  capacities,  that 
they  may  be  fitted  for  different  ways  of  life  ;  and  this  also  makes  it  expedient  that 
there  should  be  various  degrees  of  this  propensity  toward  knowledge.  The 
pleasure  of  any  creature  consists  in  having  objects  suitable  to  his  faculties.  In 
Scripture,  ignorance  is  styled  darkness,  which  is  disagreeable  ;  and  truth  is  called 
light,  which  it  is  pleasant  to  behold.  The  enlargement  of  knowledge  will  be  no 
small  part  of  the  satisfaction  which  the  good  will  enjoy  in  a  future  and  better  state. 
Our  natural  desire  of  knowledge  may  be  misused,  as  well  as  the  other  inclinations 
and  passions  of  the  human  mind.  It  may  be  too  little  ;  it  may  be  too  great ;  it  may 
be  applied  to  wrong  objects.  Some  persons  do  not  desire  knowledge  as  much  as 
they  ought.  Some  persons  mind  things  less  considerable  more  than  those  of 
greater  moment.  In  the  Scriptures  themselves,  all  things  are  not  of  the  same 
importance.  Some  things  there  are  which  we  ought  not  to  know ;  and  a  vain 
curiosity  after  them  constitutes  another  abuse  of  our  natural  desire  of  knowledge. 
Sin  should  only  be  known  as  the  rocks  at  sea,  that  it  may  be  avoided.  They  also 
are  inexcusable  who  in  speculative  points  of  religion  rashly  and  proudly  dogmatise 
about  things  which  they  cannot  comprehend.  Our  understanding  is  confined 
within  small  bounds,  and  reason  and  Scripture  tell  us  that  no  man  by  searching 
can  find  out  the  Almighty  to  perfection.  Another  abuse  of  our  love  of  knowledge 
is  an  impetuous  desire  of  extending  it  to  too  many  objects ;  which  is  the  case  of 
some  persons  who  have  had  a  liberal  education.  Most  errors  arise  from  laziness,  or 
rash  judgments,  or  prejudice,  or  worldly  interest,  or  some  favourite  passion. 
Intemperate  desire  of  knowledge,  and  sometimes  of  applause  or  of  profit,  puts 
persons  upon  studies  for  which  they  have  no  genius  or  capacity.     (J.  Jortin,  D.D.) 

Ver.  17.  Better  is  a  dinner  of  herbs  where  love  is,  than  a  stalled  ox  and  hatred 
therewith. — Domestic  love  and  union  recommended  and  enforced  : — It  is  hard  to 
form  a  true  estimate  of  any  man's  happiness  ;  because  happiness  depends  most 
upon  those  things  which  lie  most  out  of  sight.  Our  good  or  ill  breeding  is  chiefly 
seen  abroad ;  our  good  or  ill  nature  at  home.  I.  The  re.\sonableness  and  advan- 
tages OF  DOMESTIC  UNION.  Quietuess  under  one's  own  roof,  and  quietness  in  our 
own  conscience,  are  two  substantial  blessings.  Abroad,  we  must  more  or  less  find 
tribulation ;  yet  as  long  as  our  home  is  a  secure  and  peaceful  retreat  from  all  the 
disappointments  and  cares  of  the  world,  we  may  still  be  tolerably  happy.  There 
cannot  be  a  greater  curse  than  to  have  those  of  one's  own  household  one's  greatest 
foes ;  when  we  neither  can  live  happily  with  them,  nor  must  think  of  living  apart 
from  them.  Love  is  a  tender  plant ;  it  must  be  kept  alive  by  great  delicacy,  it  must 
be  fenced  from  all  inclement  blasts,  or  it  will  soon  drop  its  head  and  die.  To  see 
a  well-regulated  family  acting  as  if  they  were  one  body  informed  by  one  soul  is  a 
beautiful  scene,  and  amiable  even  in  the  sight  of  that  Being  who  maketh  men  to  be 
of  one  mind  in  a  house.  The  greatest  advantage  of  a  friendly  behaviour  to 
domestics  {i.e.,  home  people),  is,  that  thereby  we  contract  and  cultivate  that  habit 
of  benevolence  which  is  a  necessary  qualification  for  everlasting  happiness.  The 
habitual  sweetness  of  our  temper,  or  the  habitual  badness  of  it,  is  not  so  much 
contracted  by  the  great  and  considerable  accidents  of  life,  as  by  our  behaviour  in 
little  lliings  which  befall  us  every  day.  Men  of  a  generous  education  have  a  more 
refined  humanity,  passions  more  softened  and  civilised,  than  those  in  very  low  life, 
where  rudeness,  ill-manners,  and  brutality  too  often  prevail.  By  studying  to  pro- 
mote the  happiness  of  those  in  our  home  circles,  we  mould  ourselves  into  those 
habits  which    are  productive  of  our  own  happiness,  both   here  and  hereafter. 


CHAP.  XV.]  PROVERBS.  408 


n.  Some  rules  for  preserving  domestic  union.  1.  Do  not  delude  yourselves  with 
any  visionary  notions  of  perfection.  Consider  men,  as  they  really  are,  with  all 
their  numerous  imperfections,  and  not  as  you  could  fondly  wish  them  to  be.  There 
are  not  many  who  can  stand  the  test  of  a  close  inspection.  Their  virtues  shine 
upon  us  at  a  distance.  It  is  upon  nearer  approach  that  we  descry  their  faOings. 
Familiarity,  though  it  does  not  beget  contempt,  where  there  is  real  worth,  yet 
always  takes  off  admiration.  2.  Learn  to  make  proper  allowance,  and  to  represent 
failings  with  all  the  softenings  of  humanity.  Other  men's  passions  are  always 
insupportable  to  those  that  are  entirely  devoted  to  their  own.  The  fuller  of 
imperfections  any  man  is,  the  less  able  is  he  to  bear  with  the  imperfections  of  his 
fellow-creatures.  3.  There  is  a  particular  tenderness  due  to  persons  under  any 
recent  affliction,  because  men  are  more  susceptible  of  resentment,  in  proportion  to 
the  greatness  of  their  distress.  4.  Be  sure  to  observe  and  practise  the  rules  of  good 
manners.  By  good  manners  I  mean  an  assemblage  of  moral  virtues  expressed 
in  our  outward  demeanour,  a  combination  of  discretion,  circumspection,  and 
civility,  submission  to  our  superiors,  condescension  to  our  inferiors,  affability  to 
all,  and  a  strict  regard  to  decency  in  all  our  actions.  If  you  have  any  talent  for 
saying  keen  and  satirical  things,  be  superior  to  the  talent  you  possess,  by  showing  how 
little  stress  you  lay  upon  it,  when  it  comes  into  competition  with  your  good-nature. 
5.  Never  make  any  reply  to  a  person  till  his  passion  abates,  and  the  ferment 
subsides.  6.  Avoid  what  fools  call  spirit,  and  men  of  sense  call  haughtiness. 
Persons  of  sense  and  virtue  will  seldom  differ  about  things  that  are  plainly  essential 
to  the  happiness  of  the  family.  Be  not  ashamed  to  confess  that  you  have  been  in 
the  wrong.  It  is  but  owning  that  you  now  have  more  sense  than  you  had  before. 
7.  Religion  is  absolutely  necessary  to  preserve  domestic  union.  Be,  then,  seriously 
and  solidly  good  yourselves.  Reverence  yourself,  if  you  would  have  your  inferiors 
do  so.     (J.  Seed,  M. A.) 

Ver.  19.  The  way  of  the  slothful  man  Is  as  an  hed^e  of  thorns. — The  hedge  of 
thorns  and  the  plain  way : — I.  Take  the  text  in  its  temporal  bearings.  1.  A 
slothful  man  is  the  opposite  of  a  righteous  man.  A  sluggard  misses  a  main  part  of 
righteousness.  He  does  not  render  to  God  according  to  the  strength  lent  to  him, 
nor  to  man  according  to  the  work  assigned  him.  He  is  too  idle  to  be  importunate^ 
too  slothful  to  be  earnest.  He  cannot  be  a  righteous  man,  for  slothfulness  leads  to 
the  neglect  of  duty  in  many  ways.  Every  good  thing  withers  in  the  drought  of 
idleness.  All  kinds  of  vices  are  comprehended  in  the  one  vice  of  sloth.  2.  If  we 
avoid  sloth  we  have  not  done  enough,  we  must  also  be  righteous  ;  we  must  do  that 
which  is  right,  and  kind,  and  holy.  3.  A  slothful  man's  way  is  like  a  hedge  of 
thorns.  The  idler's  way  is  not  a  desirable  way.  It  is  difficult.  It  is  painful. 
Continue  in  it,  and  your  way  will  be  blocked  up  altogether.  On  the  other  hand, 
a  righteous  man's  way  becomes  plain.  When  a  man  walks  in  integrity,  his  way 
is  soon  made  plain  to  him.  In  the  long  run,  if  a  man- keeps  straight,  and  walks  in 
strict  integrity  and  faith,  the  Lord  will  make  darkness  light  before  him,  and 
crooked  things  stright.  II.  The  spiritu.vl  teaching  of  the  text.  The  spiritual 
sluggard's  way  is  the  way  of  unbelief,  because  the  opposite  of  his  way  is  the  way  of 
the  righteous,  which  is  the  way  of  faith.  The  way  of  unbelief  is  full  of  thorns.  It 
is  a  very  hard  way.  It  is  full  of  perplexities.  It  is  full  of  miseries.  One  of  these 
days  the  slothful  man  will  come  to  the  end  of  his  way,  and  he  will  see  that  hedge  of 
thorns  blocking  him  out  of  heaven — blocking  him  out  from  God.  The  way  of  the 
righteous  is  the  way  of  faith,  and  his  way  "  shall  be  made  plain."  Childlike  con- 
fidence in  God  shall  march  on  as  upon  a  raised  causeway,  and  always  find  for  itself 
a  road.  God  is  with  those  who  trust  in  Him ;  and  what  or  whom  shall  we  fear 
when  God  is  with  us  ?  Sometimes  the  way  of  the  righteous  is  mysterious  and 
perplexing.  When  you  do  not  know  your  way,  ask  your  Guide.  Stand  still,  and 
pray.  An  excellent  translation  runs  thus,  "  The  way  of  the  righteous  is  a  high- 
way." It  is  the  open  road,  where  none  may  challenge  the  traveller.  He  that  is  in 
the  King's  highway  is  under  the  King's  protection.  He  that  is  on  the  King's 
highway  will  come  to  a  good  end,  for  the  King  has  completed  that  way  so  that  it 
does  not  fall  short,  but  leads  to  a  city  of  habitations,  whose  builder  and  maker  is 
God.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  21,  22.  Folly  is  Joy  to  him  that  is  destitute  of  wisdom, — The  young  warned 
against  folly  : — I.  What  are  those  follies  in  speculation  and  fancy  which  are  jot 
TO  the  man  without  wisdom  ?    1. 1  may  advert  to  the  absurd  opinions  set  forth  by 


404  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XT. 

extravagant  theorists,  who  have  exulted  in  them  as  solving  difficulties  in  political 
and  moral  science  v^hich  have  perplexed  the  wise  for  ages,  and  as  leading  to  the 
most  valuable  improvements  in  the  condition  and  character  of  man.  2.  Under 
this  head,  romantic  imaginations  may  be  specified,  or  all  those  gay  expectations  of 
prosperity  and  happiness  which  are  suggested  by  a  vain  conceit  of  a  man's  own 
powers,  by  the  dictates  of  a  sanguine  temper,  and  by  false  ideas  of  the  world.  3.  The 
reveries  of  enthusiasm  may  also  be  classed  among  these  follies  of  fancy.  4.  I  shall 
only  mention  further  the  delusions  of  the  self-righteous  man,  who  cherishes  the 
presumptuous  conceit  of  his  own  merit,  and  disregards  the  righteousness  of  Christ. 
This  delusion  deserves  a  worse  name  than  folly,  for  it  rejects  the  noblest  gift  of 
heaven,  and  pours  contempt  on  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus.  II.  I  proceed  now  to 
call  your  attention  to  those  follies  in  conveesation  which  you  ought  to  avoid. 
1.  It  is  not  my  intention  to  speak  of  the  grosser  offences  in  conversation,  since  for 
these  folly  is  too  gentle  a  name.  Nor  do  I  mean  to  comprehend  under  this  epithet 
all  those  sallies  of  humour  which  enliven  social  intercourse  by  their  pleasantry.  I 
wish  to  repress  only  what  the  apostle  calls  "  foolish  talkings  and  jestings  which  are 
not  convenient."  2.  How  much  idle  talking  is  there  about  amusements  and 
fashions,  and  the  family  concerns  of  others.  3.  I  add  that  they  are  chargeable 
with  folly  in  conversation  whose  lips  are  filled  with  vain  boasting.  Such  persons 
are  always  heard  with  disgust.  III.  I  proceed  now  to  specify  some  of  those  follies 
IX  CONDUCT  against  which  you  ought  to  guard.  1.  The  first  that  I  mention  is 
imprudent  connections.  Much  of  our  comfort  and  success  in  life  depends  on  the 
alliances  which  we  form.  2.  Improper  habits  should  be  carefully  avoided. 
Indolence.  Profusion.  Procrastination.  Eashness.  Changeableness.  3.  Per- 
nicious amusements.    IV.  I  shall  now  suggest  some  means  by  which  tou  may  be 

PRESERVED     FROM    THE    FOLLIES     AG.AINST     WHICH    I    HAVE    W.iRNED   YOU.       1.  Meditate 

frequently  on  the  laws  of  God  which  forbid  them  (Psa.  Ixxxv.  8  ;  Prov.  ix.  6  ; 
Eph.  V.  15,  16).  2.  Meditate  frequently  on  the  punishment  which  God  threatens 
to  inflict  on  those  who  indulge  in  folly  (chap.  i.  32;  xix.  29;  iii.  35;  x.  21). 
3.  Cherish  a  taste  for  wisdom.  4.  Implore  the  influences  of  Divine  grace  to  keep 
you  from  foUy,  and  to  guide  you  in  the  ways  of  true  wisdom  (Jas.  1.  5,  6).  5.  Often 
reflect  on  the  shortness  and  uncertainty  of  life.  Have  we  time  for  foUy  ?  What 
if  death  should  find  us  forming  senseless  projects,  instead  of  preparing  for  eternity  ? 
{H.  Bel/rage.) 

Ver.  22.  Without  counsel  purposes  are  disappointed. — Disappointments: — 
1.  Disappointments  are  the  common  lot  of  man.  Prince  and  peasant,  prophet 
and  people,  wise  and  unwise,  rich  and  poor,  young  and  old — all  have  suffered 
disappointment.  Eve  was  disappointed  in  the  good  promised  her  if  she  ate  of  the 
tree  of  knowledge.  The  builders  of  Babel  were  disappointed.  Solomon  sought  to 
find  happiness  in  all  human  inventions,  but  had  to  write  on  them  all,  "  Vanity  I  " 
So  we  might  pass  through  the  whole  range  of  human  history,  from  Alexander  to 
Napoleon,  and  find  disappointment  the  common  lot  of  all.  2.  The  number  of 
disappointments  are  incalculable.  3.  The  variety  of  disappointments  which  men 
suffer  is  very  great.  Men  are  disappointed  in  carrying  out  schemes  of  ambition,  in 
securing  preferment,  in  amassing  and  holding  wealth  ;  yes,  even  in  carrying  out 
plans  of  good,  benevolence  and  charity.  4.  The  bitterness  and  melancholy 
results  of  these  disappointments  are  worthy  of  note.  ]Many  a  bright  and  happy 
life  has  been  for  ever  clouded  and  depressed  by  early  disappointment.  Many  a 
life  has  been  shortened,  and  many  another  tragically  ended,  because  of  some  over- 
powering disappointment.  5.  The  sources  of  disappointments  are  many.  In 
general  terms  we  may  say  they  belong  to  a  sinful  world,  where  all  is  confusion, 
uncertain,  and  deranged.  Disappointments  arise  from  man's  shortsightedness, 
mistakes,  failures,  and  weakness.  The  connection  of  our  text  reads  :  "  Without 
counsel  purposes  are  disappointed."  We  cannot  control  events,  or  foresee  contin- 
gencies that  may  intervene  or  insure  the  capacity,  integrity,  and  fidelity  of  others. 
We  are  constantly  taken  by  surprise  at  things  springing  up  that  we  never  dreamed 
of,  and  made  no  provision  for.  6.  The  use  to  be  made  of  disappointments. 
(1)  They  teach  us  the  uncertainty  of  all  human  expectations  and  our  absolute 
dependence  upon  God  (Jas.  iv.  13-1-5).  (2)  Our  own  impotence.  (3)  We  are  to 
expect  disappointments.  (4)  When  they  come  accept  them  resignedly,  not  stoically 
but  look  at  them  rationally.  (5)  Disappointment  may  sometimes  be  better  than 
success.  (6)  There  is  one  thing  that  can  make  all  disappointments  blessings.  It 
is  said  that  Croesus  had  some  magic  power  about  him  by  which  he  turned  every- 


CHAP,  XV.]  PROVERBS.  405 

thing  he  touched  to  gold.  There  is  more  than  a  magic  power  which  the  believer 
wields  over  the  trying  dispensations  of  life  ;  there  is  a  Divine  power.  "  All  things  " 
— disappointments  included — "work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God." 
(Gf.  Hutchinson  Smyth.) 

Ver.  23.  A  word  spoken  In  Beason,  how  good  it  is ! — A  word  in  season  is  a  word 
spoken  just  when  wanted.  It  is  a  word  spoken  just  in  the  right  way  and  manner. 
Such  a  word,  how  good  it  is!  It  is  good  because — 1.  It  has  often  kept  men  back 
from  a  career  of  vice.  2.  It  has  often  instructed  them  under  doubts  and  difficulties. 
3.  Cheered  them  under  sorrows.  4.  Weaned  them  from  earth  and  pointed  them  to 
heaven.  Who  would  not  say  that  such  a  word  was  good  ?  How  good  it  is — I.  In 
EEPRooF.  II.  In  counsel.  No  one  is  shut  out  from  this  blessed  path  of  usefulness. 
Masters  and  servants,  even  the  humble,  may  use  the  talent.  Naaman  was  healed 
through  the  wisdom  of  his  attendants.  But,  like  rebuke,  counsel  must  be  spoken 
in  season.  III.  In  conversation.  IV.  In  inbtedction.  {The  Lay  Preacher.) 
Useful  speech  : — I.  Useful  speech  is  a  joy-giving  speech.  "  A  man  hath  joy  by 
the  answer  of  his  mouth."     Three  things  guarantee  him  joy  in  such  speaking. 

1.  The  testimony  of  his  own  conscience.  Having  spoken  what  he  believed  to  be 
the  true,  the  generous,  and  the  fitting,  his  conscience  cheers  him  with  its  smiles. 

2.  The  manifestation  of  the  benefit.  When  he  sees  that  the  men  to  whom  he 
speaks  are  evidently  being  improved  in  knowledge,  in  energy,  and  in  true  nobility, 
he  has  an  unspeakable  joy.  3.  The  gratitude  of  his  hearers.  11.  Useful  speech 
IS  A  seasonably-uttered  speech.  "A  word  spoken  in  due  season,  how  good  is  it!  " 
1.  It  should  be  in  season  as  far  as  the  speaker's  own  soul  is  concerned.  Our  souls 
have  their  seasons,  and  words  that  would  be  suitable  in  one  season  to  our  souls 
would  not  be  so  in  another.  There  are  words  suited  to  soul  moods.  2.  It  should 
be  in  season  as  far  as  the  hearer's  soul  is  concerned.     (Hoinilist.) 

Ver.  24.  The  way  of  life  is  above  to  the  -wise— The  suhlimity  of  true  religion : — 
I.  Keligion  is  elevated  in  principle.  The  motive  or  ground  of  action  with  the 
sincere  but  truly  pious  is  far  more  elevated  than  that  which  prompts  the  conduct 
of  the  irreligious  and  the  merely  nominal  Christian.  1.  It  is  elevated  above  the 
maxims  of  worldly  prudence.  Such  prudence  is  really  nothing  more  than  a  selfish 
and  time-serving  poUcy.  2.  It  is  elevated  above  the  standard  of  worldly  morality. 
The  defect  of  that  scheme  of  morality  which  is  current  in  the  world  is  its  utter 
disregard  of  the  character  of  motives.  II.  The  wise  are  elevated  in  taste. 
There  is,  in  Scriptural  religion,  everything  to  purify  and  chasten,  to  elevate  and 
refine  the  faculties  of  the  mind.  It  gives  a  quickness  to  discern  and  a  sensibility 
to  feel  the  beauties  and  deformities  of  objects,  especially  those  of  a  moral  character. 
The  dim  gUtter  of  earthly  splendour  has  no  attraction  for  them.  They  are  elevated 
above  the  craving  desire  of  human  applause.  III.  The  wise  are  elevated  in 
their  pursuits.  The  worldly  occupation  of  good  men  is  much  the  same  as  that 
of  other  men.  The  way  of  life  is  above  to  the  wise,  with  respect  to  religion  itself. 
He  seeks  more  after  holiness  than  happiness.  The  pursuit  of  heaven  is  not  any 
actual  dereliction  of  the  best  good  which  this  world  has  to  afford.  Its  richest 
blessings  are  poured  upon  those  who  keep  the  world  beneath  their  feet.    Learn — 

1.  That  pure  religion  is  vastly  more  elevated  and  holy  than  is  generally  supposed. 

2.  The  religion  of  Scripture  is  above  the  conception  of  worldly  minds.  Its  sublime 
principles  are  too  lofty  for  their  comprehension.  {Charles  Jenkins.)  Walking 
tciscly  : — I.  Certain  characters  here  spoken  of.  "  The  wise."  God's  Word  sets 
two  characters  before  us— the  godly  and  the  ungodly.  But  there  are  various 
grades  of  both.  The  godly,  or  wise,  are  not  so  by  natural  intellect.  They  are  the 
wise  whom  God  esteems  to  be  wise,  and  whom  God  makes  wise.  Though  wise, 
they  have  much  foolishness  at  times  still  in  them ;  but  they  know  the  plague  of 
their  own  heart.  They  know  Christ.  And  they  know  something  of  the  world's 
emptiness.  II.  The  course  that  they  take.  "Depart  from  hell  beneath."  God's 
Word  says  hell  is  a  place,  just  as  heaven  is  a  place.  Then  they  are  wise  who  fear 
that  dreadful  place,  and  seek  to  depart  from  it,  and  avoid  all  peril  of  it.  But  the 
wise  also  take  the  "  way  of  life."  By  this  we  understand  the  place  to  which  they 
go,  the  way  by  which  they  go  to  it,  and  their  mode  of  walking  in  it.  III.  A  descrip- 
tive CHARACTER  GIVEN  OF  THAT  COURSE.  "  Above."  This  is  applicable  as  well  to 
the  end  of  the  way,  which  is  life ;  and  the  way  to  it,  which  is  Christ ;  and  their 
mode  of  walking  in  it,  which  is  by  faith.     {J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.) 


406  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XT. 


Ver.  32.  He  that  refuseth  instruction  despiseth  his  own  soul.— TTie  folly  of 
despising  our  own  souls : — In  this  text  the  writer  gives  such  an  account  of  those 
whom  he  found  he  could  do  no  good  to  as  makes  their  folly  manifest  before  all 
men.  I.  They  refuse  instruction.  He  that  neglects  instruction,  puts  it  far  from 
him,  and  sets  himself  at  a  distance  from  it ;  not  only  because  he  hates  it,  but 
because  he  fears  it.  Or  that  strips  himself  of  instruction  ;  shaking  off  his  educa- 
tion, as  a  garment  he  will  not  be  hampered  with.  The  original  word  has  a  further 
signification,  he  that  will  be  revenged  on  instruction  ;  that  takes  it  for  an  affront, 
and  studies  revenge,  if  he  be  told  of  his  faults.  For  instruction  the  margin  reads 
"  correction."  In  our  fallen  state,  that  which  instructs  us  must  correct  us.  The 
corrections  of  Providence  are  intended  for  instruction.  Many  refuse  discipline. 
They  will  not  hear  instruction,  heed  it,  or  comply  with  it.  II.  Thei  despise  their 
OWN  SOULS,  They  evidence  that  they  have  very  low  and  mean  thoughts  of  their 
souls.  But  the  soul  is  the  man.  He  who  despises  his  soul  despises  himself. 
There  is  a  despising  of  ourselves  which  is  commendable,  and  our  duty — a  gracious 
self-contempt.  There  is  a  despising  of  ourselves  which  is  culpable,  and  of  perni- 
cious consequence.  The  honour  of  the  soul  is,  that  it  is  rational  and  immortal. 
They  who  refuse  Divine  instruction  despise  their  own  souls  under  both  these  con- 
siderations. Take  the  subject  more  generally,  and  show  that  it  is  the  original  error 
of  wilful  sinners,  that  they  undervalue  their  own  souls.  1.  Who  they  are  that 
despise  their  own  souls.  Some  do  so  in  opinion;  who  advance  notions  of  the 
human  soul  that  derogate  from  the  honour  of  it ;  or  deny  their  immortality.  Those 
despise  their  own  souls  who  abuse  them  ;  hazard  them ;  neglect  them  ;  prefer  their 
bodies  before  them.    III.  The   folly  of   those   who   despise  their  ovtn  souls. 

1.  Consider  the  nature  of  the  soul,  which  is  too  noble,  too  excellent,  to  be  despised. 

2.  Consider  the  nearness  of  the  soul.     It  is  his  own  soul  that  the  sinner  despises. 

3.  Consider  the  purchase  of  the  soul,  and  the  price  that  was  paid  for  its  redemp- 
tion. 4.  Consider  the  projects  that  are  laid  about  souls,  and  what  striving  there  is 
for  them,  and  for  their  love  and  service.  5.  Consider  the  perpetual  duration  of 
souls,  and  the  preparations  that  are  made  in  the  other  world  to  receive  them. 
Apply  the  subject :  (1)  Let  us  see  and  bewail  our  folly  in  having  had  such  low 
thoughts  of  our  own  souls,  and  that  we  have  forgotten  their  dignity,  and  put  dishonour 
upon  them.  (2)  Learn  to  put  a  due  value  upon  our  own  souls ;  but  to  take  care 
not  to  magnify  ourselves  above  our  brethren.  (3)  Let  us  make  it  appear  that  we 
do  indeed  value  our  own  souls.  (4)  Let  us  value  other  things  as  they  have  relation 
to  our  souls,  and  fix  our  estimate  of  them  by  the  value  of  our  souls,  and  stand 
affected  to  them  accordingly.  Let  us  value  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  best  friend 
our  souls  ever  had,  who  died  to  redeem  and  save  them.     {Matthew  Henry.) 

Ver.  33.  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  instruction  of  Wisdom. — The  instruction 
of  Wisdom  (to  the  young)  : — "  Instructed  "  comes  from  the  Latin  instruo,  to 
build  up,  just  as  a  house  is  built  up.  Here  Wisdom  is  spoken  of  as  a  person,  and 
in  the  New  Testament  it  is  said,  "  Christ  Jesus  is  made  of  God  unto  us  Wisdom." 
So  it  is  Christ  the  Son  of  God  who  speaks  to  us  in  the  text.  He  teaches  the  fear 
of  the  Lord.  In  the  times  of  the  Koman  empire,  there  were  various  philosophers 
who  had  schools,  but  they  were  for  grown-up  people,  not  for  the  young.  But  these 
schools  have  long  since  been  closed  ;  the  school  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Great  Teacher, 
is  open  to-day,  and  you  may  attend  it.  The  fear  of  the  text  is  not  slavish, 
shrinking  fear,  like  that  which  the  poor  negroes  in  South  America  feel  when  the 
cruel  overseer  comes  to  lash  them  to  their  work.  That  is  the  way  that  devils  fear 
God.  To  fear  God  means  to  have  a  solemn  awe  of  Him,  and  of  His  holy  law.  But 
it  means  also,  having  love  to  Him  reigning  in  our  heart,  whereby  we  fear  to  offend 
our  heavenly  Father.  Slavish  fear  is  a  hindering  thing,  just  as  a  strong  cold  wind 
hinders  one  from  walking  quickly  and  agreeably  along  the  street ;  but  loving  fear 
is  like  the  summer  breezes  mingling  with  summer  sunbeams,  causing  all  sorts  of 
tender  and  beautiful  things  to  spring  up  easily,  and  give  forth  their  delightful 
fragrance.  There  are  two  ways  of  receiving  instruction.  You  may  get  it  from  a 
fellow-creature,  and  yet  be  none  the  better,  because  stopping  or  resting  in  that ;  or 
you  may  get  it  from  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  Wisdom,  and  then  you  may  become  wise 
unto  salvation.  1.  He  will  show  you  that  sin  is  no  trifle.  2.  He  will  strengthen 
you  to  hate  and  avoid  sin.  You  will  surely  find  that  the  loving  fear  of  the  Lord 
is  a  rich,  or  enriching,  thing  ;  and  it  is  also  a  comforting  thing.  {J.  Stirling  Muir.) 
Godly  fear  and  genuine  humility  : — I.  Godly  fear.  This  is  godly  fear,  a  fear  of 
wounding  the  dearest  object  of  the  heart.     Concerning  this  fear,  it  is  here  said 


CHAP.  XVI.]  PROVERBS.  407 

that  it  "is  the  instruction  of  Wisdom."  1.  It  is  the  great  subject  of  Wisdom's 
instruction.  Everywhere  in  nature,  in  the  events  of  life,  and  in  the  holy  book  of 
God,  does  heavenly  Wisdom  inculcate  this  godly  fear.  2.  It  is  the  great  end  of 
Wisdom's  instruction.  Heavenly  Wisdom,  in  all  its  communications,  deals  with 
our  souls  not  merely  to  enlighten  the  intellect  and  refine  the  tastes,  but  to  fill  us 
with  loving  fear  toward  God.  II.  Genuine  humility.  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is 
the  instruction  of  Wisdom  ;  and  before  honour  is  humility."  This  is  a  maxim  of 
very  wide  apphcation.  1.  It  is  sometimes  applicable  to  secular  exaltation.  As  a 
rule,  the  man  who  rises  to  aifluence  and  power  in  the  world  has  had  to  humble 
himself.  He  has  stooped  to  conquer.  He  has  condescended  to  drudgeries  and 
concessions  most  wounding  to  his  pride.  2.  This  always  applies  to  intellectual 
exaltation.  A  most  humbling  sense  of  one's  ignorance  is  the  first  step  to  intel- 
lectual eminence,  and  almost  the  last.  3.  This  invariably  applies  to  moral 
exaltation,    "He  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted."    {Homilist.) 


CHAPTER  XVI. 


Veb.  1.  The  preparations  of  the  heart  in  man,  and  the  answer  of  the  ton^e,  is 
from  the  Lord. — Heart-culture  : — We  must  allow  no  habits  of  mind  to  grow  upon 
us  which  shall  unfit  us  for  making  the  best  opportunities  of  life  when  they  come. 
We  have  power  in  ourselves,  by  the  grace  of  God,  to  quicken  the  perception  which 
shall  see  the  opportunity  when  it  comes,  and  upon  ourselves  rests  the  responsibility 
of  keeping  the  resolution  and  the  will  in  hand,  so  as  to  grasp  the  opportunity  while 
it  is  within  our  reach.  Perception  is  to  a  great  degree  a  matter  of  education.  The 
faculty  of  observation  is  improved  in  a  child  by  its  parent  or  teacher.  Great  study 
elicits  from  the  student  in  riper  years  a  marvellous  quickness  and  acuteness  in 
observing.  Illustrate  cultured  power  of  observation  in  the  painter,  forester,  or 
naturalist.  Same  is  true  in  the  spiritual  life.  If  your  habitual  practice  be  to  refer 
all  things  to  God,  that  devotion,  that  practice  will  give  you  a  presence  of  mind  in 
the  face  of  every  accident.  A  sudden  sorrow  may  come,  but  you  will  not  lose  your 
presence  of  mind  and  readiness  and  accuracy  of  perception.  Conversions  that 
appear  to  be  sudden,  may  not  be  so  sudden  as  they  seem  to  be  ;  there  may  have 
been  foregoing  preparations,  especially  the  habit  of  the  previous  life  to  refer  all 
things  to  God  with  devotion.  A  man  who  has  made  himself  unspiritual  has  duUed 
his  sense  of  perception,  and  the  man  who  has  known  the  will  of  God  and  done  it 
not,  loses  the  power  to  rise  up  and  follow  Christ.  See  some  ways  in  which  the 
preparation  of  our  own  heart  in  former  years  makes  us  ready  or  unready  to  use  the 
opportunities  which  God  offers  us.  Take  a  man's  disciphne  of  temper,  which 
touches  a  man's  character  very  much  indeed.  To  such  a  man  a  time  of  trial,  dis- 
appointment, failure,  comes.  God  thus  affords  the  man  an  opportunity  for  the 
greatest  and  best  of  all  the  graces  that  can  adorn  humanity.  It  is  an  opportunity 
for  true  humility.  The  check  wiU  be  a  blessing  to  him  if  he  has  previously  pre- 
pared himself  by  self-discipline  and  heart-culture.  {Canon  Furse.)  Human 
speech  Divinely  controlled  : — The  sentiment,  according  to  the  A.V.,  is  this — that  it 
belongs  to  God  to  furnish  the  heart  with  all  wisdom  and  grace,  by  which  it  is  pre- 
pared to  dictate  to  the  tongue  the  utterance  of  whatever  is  truly  good  and  profitable. 
Literally,  the  words  are,  "  To  man  the  orderings  of  the  heart;  but  from  Jehovah  is 
the  answer  of  the  tongue."  The  meaning  appears  to  be,  that  whatever  thoughts 
and  purposes  are  in  a  man's  mind — whatever  sentiments  it  may  be  his  intention  to 
utter,  if  they  are  such  as  are  likely  to  have  any  influence,  or  to  produce  effects  of 
any  consequence — they  are  aU  under  supreme  control.  We  have  an  exemplification 
of  the  fact  in  the  case  of  Balaam.  The  preparation  of  his  mind  and  heart  was  his 
own.  He  left  his  country,  on  the  invitation  of  Balak,  with  a  certain  purpose ; 
designing  to  utter  what  was  in  harmony  with  his  "  love  of  the  wages  of  unrighteous- 
ness." But  the  "  Lord  turned  the  curse  into  a  blessing."  He  made  the  infatuated 
false  prophet  to  feel  his  dependence ;  so  that,  bent  as  his  heart  was  to  utter  one 
thing,  his  tongue  was  constrained  to  utter  another.  Thus  it  often  is,  in  ways  for 
which  the  speakers  and  agents  themselves  cannot  at  the  time  account.  One  of 
these  ways  is,  that  by  imperative,  unanticipated  circumstances,  men  are  brought  to 
say  the  very  contrary  of  what  they  intended.     Something  changes  in  a  moment 


408  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

the  current  of  their  thoughts  and  the  tenor  of  their  words.  In  every  case  there  is 
complete  Divine  control.  A  man  may  revolve  in  his  mind  or  heart  thoughts  without 
number,  but  he  cannot  so  much  as  lisp  or  whisper  one  of  them  without  God. 
(Ral])h  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  Man  proposes,  God  disposes  : — Taking  the  words  as 
they  stand  before  us,  they  give  the  idea  that  all  goodness  in  man  is  from  God. 

1.  The  goodness  in  the  heart  is  from  Him.  "  The  preparations  of  the  heart  in 
man."  The  margin  reads  "  disposings."  All  the  right  disposings  of  the  heart 
toward  the  real,  the  holy,  and  the  Divine,  are  from  the  Lord.  How  does  He  dispose 
the  heart  to  goodness?  Not  arbitrarily,  not  miraculously,  not  in  any  way  that 
interferes  with  the  free  agency  of  man.  He  has  avenues  to  the  human  heart  of 
which  we  know  nothing.  (1)  That  He  is  the  author  of  all  goodness  in  the  soul. 
(2)  That  we  are  bound  to  labour  after  this  goodness.  2.  Taking  the  words  of  the 
text  as  in  our  version,  they  teach  that  goodness  in  language  is  from  God.  "  And 
the  answer  of  the  tongue."  The  language  is  but  the  expression  of  the  heart.  But 
the  words  as  they  stand  are  not  true  to  the  original.  A  literal  translation  would  be 
this :  "  To  man  the  orderings  of  the  heart,  but  from  Jehovah  the  answer  of  the 
tongue."  "  Man  proposes,  God  disposes."  I.  This  is  an  undoubted  fact.  A  fact 
sustained — 1.  By  the  character  of  God.  All  the  plans  formed  in  the  human  heart 
must  necessarily  be  under  the  control  of  Him  who  is  all-wise,  and  all-powerful. 
They  cannot  exist  without  His  knowledge,  they  cannot  advance  without  His  per- 
mission. A  fact  sustained — 2.  By  the  history  of  men.  Take  for  examples  the 
purposes  of  Joseph's  brethren,  of  Pharaoh  in  relation  to  Moses;  of  the  Jews  in 
relation  to  Christ,  &c.  A  fact  sustained — 3.  By  our  own  experience.  Who  has 
not  found  the  schemes  of  his  own  heart  taking  a  direction  never  contemplated  by 
the  author?  11.  This  is  a  momentous  fact — 1.  In  its  bearing  on  the  enemies  of 
God.  Sinner,  your  most  cherished  schemes,  whatever  they  may  be,  sensual, 
avaricious,  infidel,  are  under  the  control  of  Him  against  whom  you  rebel ;  He  will 
work  them  for  your  confusion,  and  His  own  glory.  It  is  momentous — 2.  In  ita 
bearing  on  the  friends  of  God.  It  is  all-encouraging  to  them.  He  maketh  the 
wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him  (Psa.  Ixxvi.  10).  Trust  in  Him.  (Homilist.)  A 
prepared  heart  : — There  are  some  of  you  who,  at  some  time  or  other,  made  a  great 
effort  to  be  religious,  and  to  "  prepare  "  your  ovra  heart  to  feel,  to  pray,  to  be  holy, 
to  be  ready  to  die.  You  strove  very  hard.  Did  you  succeed  ?  or  was  it  a  complete 
failure  ?  Lay  it  down  as  a  foundation-principle,  the  great  axiom  of  religion — you 
can  never  "  prepare "  your  own  heart.  No  prayer,  no  effort,  no  strength  of 
character,  no  system  of  theology,  no  quantity  of  good  works  will  do  it.  We  must 
always  be  putting  back  our  heart  into  our  Maker's  hands  with  such  a  prayer  as 
this  :  "  Lord  take  my  heart — for  I  cannot  give  it ;  and  keep  it  for  Thyself — for  I 
cannot  keep  it  for  Thee."  1.  God  will  carry  on  "  the  preparation  of  the  heart  "  by 
discipline.  It  is  all  drill  from  first  to  last.  Life  is  education.  As  soon  as  God  hag 
special  purposes  of  mercy  to  any  soul,  and  takes  it  in  hand,  discipline  begins. 

2.  There  is  great  "preparation"  in  God's  Word.  We  almost  imperceptibly  take 
the  mind  of  the  author.  We  get  an  intuition  into  the  will  of  God.  3.  God's  great 
instrument — if  that  be  an  instrument  which  is  Himself — is  the  Holy  Ghost.  4.  But 
there  is  another,  and,  if  possible,  still  higher  stage  in  the  great  preliminary — union 
with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Real,  sensible,  living  union.  Now,  it  is  a  great  and 
very  pleasing  thought  to  know  that  this  fourfold  "preparation  of  the  heart  "is 
always  going  on.  Now  all  that  you  have  to  do  is  to  let  God  work,  and  He  will 
work.  {J.  Vavghan,  MA.)  The  preparation  of  the  heart  the  Lord's  work  : — The 
word  "  preparations "  is  a  military  term,  signifying  the  marshalling  of  an  army. 
The  doctrine  here  is,  that  all  our  fitness  for  duty,  and  all  our  assistance  in  it,  is 
from  the  Lord.  I.  How  doth  God  peepaee  the  heart  fob  duty  ?  Preparation 
is  twofold — that  which  divines  call  habitual,  and  also  actual  preparation  for 
particular  occasions  of  duty.  That  which  is  habitual  respects  our  state;  that 
which  is  actual  represents  our  frames  God  assists  us — 1.  By  calling  off  our  vain 
and  wandering  thoughts,  and  so  fixing  our  hearts  for  duty.  2.  He  works  in  our  heart 
a  holy  fear  and  reverence  of  His  majesty.  3.  By  giving  us  the  savour  of  past 
experiences,  and  by  giving  us  present  desires,  after  communing  with  Him.  4.  By 
sudden  and  unexpected  enlargement  of  spirit.  We  are  surprised  into  mercy. 
II.  How  DOTH  God  pbepabe  us  in  ouk  speeches  before  Him?  1.  He  reveals  to  us 
our  own  wants,  gives  us  some  special  errand  to  go  with  to  God.  2.  He  gives  us 
arguments  and  pleas  to  use  in  prayer.  3.  He  makes  intercessions  in  us  with 
groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered.  4.  He  guides  and  directs  the  soul  to  ask  but 
for  those  things  which  God  means  to  give.    Use  :  If  men  cannot  prepare  them- 


CHAP.  XVI.]  PROVERBS.  409 

selves  for  duty,  after  grace  is  received,  much  less  can  they  prepare  themselves  for 
grace  while  in  an  unregenerate  state.  Caution  against  three  things.  (1)  Known 
omissions.  (2)  Conscience-wasting  sins.  (3)  Dependence  on  gifts,  in  your 
approach  to  God.     (John  Hill.) 

Ver.  2.  All  the  ways  of  a  man  are  clean  in  Ms  own  eyes. — False  judgments : — 
The  best  causuits  have  decided  the  point  that  a  good  intention  cannot  sanctify  an 
immoral  act ;  but  it  is  certain  that  an  indirect  or  evil  intention  wiU  sully  the  best 
performances.  Here  is  indicated  the  false  judgment  of  man.  All  his  ways  are 
censured  by  intimation :  the  best  of  them  are  not  truly  right  and  genuine,  if  we 
should  refer  them  to  the  judgment  of  God.  One  would  think  he  were  secure,  if 
his  heart  stand  but  right  ;  but  alas  1  by  degrees  it  will  be  corrupted  and  brought 
into  the  deception.  It  often  deceives  the  owner  himself  in  the  estimate  of  his  ways. 
To  walk  wisely,  which  means,  to  walk  virtuously  and  religiously,  we  must  have  a 
truer  measure  than  the  partial  complacence  of  our  own  hearts.  Let  us  examine 
our  ways — 1.  In  respect  to  our  sins.  Sin  hath  been  so  great  a  familiar  in  our 
conversations,  that  in  some  degree  it  hath  got  our  approbation,  or  at  least  our 
favourable  connivance.  We  can,  by  habit,  appease  and  quiet  conscience.  What 
we  tremble  at  in  our  youth,  by  custom  and  usage  we  are  more  hardy  in.  Some 
sins  committed  long  ago  are  forgotten  by  us,  or  have  lessened  in  our  sentiments  of 
their  guilt.  Difference  in  quality,  and  the  several  ways  of  men's  living,  varies 
their  sentiments  of  some  sins.  We  often  bear  a  civility  and  preference  to  some 
sins  above  others,  and  think  ourselves  all  the  while  very  clean.  Our  tempers  and 
constitutions  sometimes  are  of  that  happy  frame  as  to  have  a  natural  aversion  to 
some  sins  ;  but  that  cleanliness  is  not  thankworthy  if  we  can  more  glibly  swallow 
down  those  that  are  more  palatable.  Partiality  towards  our  sins  is  a  most  notorious 
deceitfulness.  To  retain  some  as  favourites  is  a  certain  corruption  in  the  govern- 
ment of  ourselves.  A  sin  that  lies  brooding  in  the  thoughts  and  cannot  come  out 
into  act  for  want  of  opportunity,  or  dare  not  venture  out  for  fear  of  shame  or 
present  punishment,  is  notwithstanding  a  great  uncleanness.  A  habit  or  course  of 
lesser  evils,  or  neglects,  amounts  to  greater  guilt  than  one  single  lapse  or  fall, 
though  into  some  great  transgression.  Yet  we  are  apt  to  pass  over  the  habitual 
nncleanness.  2.  A  more  refined  degree  of  purity  and  cleanliness  we  assume  to 
ourselves,  from  that  little  practice  of  religion  we  carry  on,  and  much  depend  upon. 
Bare  believing  and  professing  goes  a  long  way.  In  our  devotions  we  may  confide 
in  our  addresses  to  God  in  prayer.  We  had  best  be  careful  in  this  matter,  lest  our 
very  prayers  rise  up  in  judgment  against  us.  Searchingly  estimate  our  charity. 
Take  the  duty  of  repentance.  We  deceive  ourselves  when  we  have  only  cast  our- 
selves into  the  figure  of  a  penitent,  and  appeared  so  in  our  face,  our  speech,  our 
gesture.  Or  we  may  lay  great  stress  on  our  frequent  confessions.  Or  may  put  a 
greater  weight  of  humiliation  upon  some  sins  that  have  galled  us  than  upon  others 
that,  though  more  heinous,  have  sat  more  easy  upon  us.  The  dilatory  ways  we 
have  of  putting  off  this  duty  of  repentance  is  a  slighting  negligence.  (<7.  Cooke^ 
M.A.)  What  I  think  of  myself  and  what  God  thinks  of  me  : — "  All  the  ways  of  a 
man  " — then  is  there  no  such  thing  as  being  conscious  of  having  gone  wrong  ?  Of 
course  there  is,  and  equally  of  course  a  broad  statement  such  as  this  of  my  text  is. 
not  to  be  pressed  into  literal  accuracy,  but  is  a  simple  general  assertion  of  what  we 
all  know  to  be  true,  that  we  have  a  strange  power  of  blinding  ourselves  as  to  what 
is  wrong  in  ourselves  and  in  our  actions.  But  what  is  it  that  God  weighs?  " The 
spirits."  We  too  often  content  ourselves  with  looking  at  our  ways  ;  God  looks  at 
ourselves.  He  takes  the  inner  man  into  account,  estimates  actions  by  motives,  and 
BO  very  often  differs  from  our  judgment  of  ourselves,  and  of  one  another.  I.  Our 
STRANGE  POWER  OP  BLINDING  OURSELVES.  "  All  the  ways  of  a  man  are  right  in  his 
own  eyes."  1.  For,  to  begin  with,  we  all  know  that  there  is  nothing  that  we  so 
habitually  neglect  as  the  bringing  of  conscience  to  bear  right  through  all  our  lives. 
Sometimes  it  is  because  there  is  a  temptation  that  appeals  very  strongly  to  some 
strong  inclination  which  has  been  strengthened  by  indulgence.  And  when  the 
craving  arises,  that  is  no  time  to  begin  asking,  "  Is  it  right  or  is  it  wrong  to  yield  ?  " 
That  question  stands  small  chance  of  being  wisely  considered  at  a  moment  when, 
under  the  goading  of  roused  desire,  a  man  is  like  a  mad  bull  when  it  charges.  It 
drops  its  head  and  shuts  its  eyes,  and  goes  right  forward,  and  no  matter  whether  it 
smashes  its  horns  against  an  iron  gate,  and  damages  them  and  itself,  or  not,  on  it 
will  go  But  in  regard  to  the  smaller  commonplace  matters  of  daily  life,  too,  we 
all  know  that  there  are  whole  regions  of  our  hves  which  seem  to  us  to  be  so  smalj 


410  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Xvi. 


that  it  is  hardly  worth  while  summoning  the  august  thought  of  "  right  or  wrong  ?  " 
to  decide  them.     It  is  the  trifles  of  life  that  shape  life,  and  it  is  to  them  that  we  so 
frequently  fail  in  applying,  honestly  and  rigidly,  the  test,  "  Is  this  right  or  wrong  ?  " 
Get  the  habit  of  bringing  conscience  to  bear  on  little  things,  or  you  will  never  be 
able  to  bring  it  to  bear  when  great  temptations  come  and  the  crises  emerge  in  your 
lives.     Thus,  by  reason  of  that  deficiency  in  the  habitual  application  of  conscience 
to  our  lives,  we  slide  through,  and  take  for  granted  that  all  our  ways  are  right  in 
our  eyes.     2.  Then  there  is  another  thing :  we  not  only  neglect  the  rigid  applica- 
tion of  conscience  to  all  our  lives,  but  we  have  a  double  standard,  and  the  notion  of 
right  and  wrong  which  we  apply  to  our  neighbours  is  very  different  from  that 
which  we  apply  to  ourselves.     "  All  the  ways  of  a  man  are  right  in  his  own  eyes," 
but  the  very  same  "ways"  that  you  allow  to  pass  muster  and  condone  in  j'our- 
eelves,  you  visit  with  sharp  and  unfailing  censure  in  others.     3.  Then  there  is 
another  thing  to  be  remembered,  and  that  is — the  enormous    and  the    tragical 
influence  of  habit  in  dulling  the  mirror  of  our  souls,  on  which  our  deeds  are 
reflected  in  their  true  image.    What  we  are  accustomed  to  do  we  scarcely  ever 
recognise  to  be  wrong,  and  it  is  these  things  which  pass  because  they  are  habitual 
that  do  more  to  wreck  lives  than  occasional  outbursts  of  far  worse  evils,  according 
to  the  world's  estimate  of  them.     Habit  dulls  the  eye.     4.  Yes  ;  and  more  than 
that,  the  conscience  needs  educating  just  as  much  as  any  other  faculty.     A  man 
says,  "  My  conscience  acquits  me";  then  the  question  is,  "And  what  sort  of  a 
conscience  have  you  got,  if  it  acquits  you?"     "I  thought  within  myself  that  I 
verily  ought  to  do   many  things  contrary  to  the  name  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth." 
"  They  think  that  they  do  God  service."     Many  things  that  seem  to  us  virtues  are 
vices.    And  as  for  the  individual  so  for  the  community.     The  perception  of  what  is 
right  and  what  is  wrong  needs  long  educatmg.     When  I  was  a  boy  the  whole 
Christian  Church  of  America,  with  one  voice,  declared  that  "slavery  was  a  patri- 
archal institution  appointed  by  God."     II.  The  Divine  estimate.     I  have  already 
pointed  out  the  two  emphatic  thoughts  that  lie  in  that  clause,  "  God  weigheth," 
and  "  weigheth  the  spirits.     "  God  weighs  the  spirits."    He  reads  what  we  do  by 
His  knowledge  of  what  we  are.     We  reveal  to  one  another  what  we  are  by  what  we 
do,  and,  as  is  a  commonplace,  none  of  us  can  penetrate,  except  very  superficially 
and  often  inaccurately,  to  the  motives  that  actuate.     III.  The  practical  issues  op 
THESE  THOUGHTS.     "Commit  thy  works  unto  the  Lord" — that  is  to  say,  do  not  be 
too  sure  that  you  are  right  because  you  do  not  think  you  are  wrong.     We  should 
be  very  distrustful  of  our  own  judgment  of  ourselves,  especially  when  that  judg- 
ment permits  us  to  do  certain  things.     "  Happy  is  he  that  condemneth  not  himself 
in  the  things  which  he  alloweth."    You  may  have  made  the  glove  too  easy  by 
stretching.     Then,  again,  let  us  seek  the  Divine  strengthening  and  illumination. 
Seek  it  by  prayer.     There  is  nothing  so  powerful  in  stripping  oil  from  our  besetting 
sins  their  disguises  and  masks  as  to  go  to  God  with  the  honest  petition  :  "  Search 
me  .   .  .  and  try  me,"  &c.     We  ought  to  keep  ourselves  in  very  close  union  with 
Jesus  Christ,  because  if  we  cling  to  Him  in  simple  faith.  He  will  come  into  our 
hearts,  and  we  shall  be  saved  from  walking  in  darkness,  and  have  the  light  of  life 
shining  down  upon  our  deeds.     Christ  is  the  conscience  of  the  Christian  man's 
conscience.    We  must  punctiliously  obey  every  dictate  that  speaks  in  our  own 
consciences,  especially  when  it  urges  us  to  unwelcome  duties,  or  restrains  us  from 
too  welcome  sins.      "  To  hun  that  hath  shall  be  given."     (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Unsound  sjnritual  trading : — Unrecorded    in    the    journals,    and  unmourned  by 
unregenerate  men,  there  are  failures,  and  frauds,  and  bankruptcies  of  soul.     Specu- 
lation is  a  spiritual  vice  as  well  as  a  commercial  one — trading  without  cnpltal  is 
common  in  the  religious  world,  and  puffery  and  deception  are  every-day  practices. 
The  outer  world  is  always  the  representative  of  the  inner.     I.  The  ways  of  the 
OPENLY  wicked.     Can  it  bc  that  these  people  are  right  in  their  own  eyes?    They 
^s■ho  are  best  acquainted  with  mankind  will  tell  you  that  self-righteousness  is  not 
the  peculiar  sin  of  the  virtuous,  but  that  it  flourishes  best  where  there  appears  to  be 
the  least  soil  for  it.     The  worst  of  men  conceive  that  they  have  some  excellences 
and  virtues  which,  if  they  do  not  quite  atone  for  their  faults,  yet  at  any  rate  greatly 
diminish  the  measure  of  blame  which  should  be  awarded  them.    II.  The  ways  of 
the  Godless  man.    This  man  is  often  exceedingly  upright  and  moral  in  his  outward 
behaviour  to  his  fellow-men.     He  has  no  religion,  but  he  glories  in  a  multitr.rle  of 
virtues  of  another  kind.     Many  who  have  much  that  is  amiable  about  them  are 
nevertheless  unamiable  and  unjust  towards  the  one  Being  who  ought  to  have  the 
most  of  their  love.    m.  Thb  ways  oj  thi  outwakdly  religious.    IV.  The  ways  or 


CHIP.  XVI.]  PROVERBS.  411 

THE    COVETOUS    PROFESSOR.       V.    ThE    WATS    OP   THE   WORLDLY    PROFESSOR.       VI.    ThE 

WATS  OF  SECURE  BACKSLIDERS.  VII.  The  WATS  OF  THE  DECErTED  MAN.  There  are 
many  who  will  never  find  out  that  their  ways,  which  they  thought  to  be  so  clean,  are 
all  foul,  until  they  enter  upon  another  world.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  But  the  Lord 
weigheth  the  spirits. — God's  omniscience : — Weighing  and  pondering  denote 
the  nicest  exactness  we  can  express.  Argue  the  text — I.  From  the  light  of 
NATURAL  reason.  We  caunot  have  any  rational  idea  of  a  God  unless  we  attribute 
to  Him  the  perfection  of  infinite  knowledge.  His  power  cannot  be  almighty  if  none 
be  allowed  Him  to  descend  into  our  minds,  and  inspect  our  thoughts  and  imagina- 
tions. God's  immensity  and  omnipresence  must  admit  Him  into  the  hidden 
corners  of  our  souls.  The  infinity  of  His  justice  and  goodness  will  be  brought  into 
question,  unless  He  be  acknowledged  to  search  the  hearts  of  men.  He  must  be 
able  to  judge  the  aggravations  and  extenuations  of  aU  that  is  evil.  H.  From  the 
LIGHT  OF  revelation.  The  tenor  of  all  the  laws  of  God  through  the  Scriptures  doth 
sufficiently  confirm  the  truth  of  this  doctrine,  because  no  manner  of  obedience  can 
be  accepted  with  Him,  but  what  must  proceed  from  the  integrity  and  sincerity  of 
the  heart,  of  which  He  alone  can  make  the  discovery.  And  there  are  likewise 
many  express  declarations  of  this  high  prerogative  to  rouse  our  consideration,  and 
strike  terror  into  our  souls.  The  wisest  heathen  and  philosophers  have  maintained 
that  the  prime  and  chiefest  intimation  and  communication  the  Deity  hath  with 
men  is  with  their  hearts,  and  that  the  most  acceptable  service  and  devotion  must 
therefore  come  from  thence.   (J.  Cooke,  M.A.)     Self-coinj^lacency  and  omniscience  : — 

1.  The  self-oomplacenct  of  sinners.  "  All  the  ways  of  a  man  are  clean  in  his 
own  eyes."  Saul  of  Tarsus  is  a  striking  example  of  this.  He  once  rejoiced  in 
virtues  which  he  never  had.  Indeed  all  sinners  think  well  of  their  own  conduct. 
Why  is  this  ?  1.  He  views  himself  in  the  light  of  society.  He  judges  himself  by 
the  character  of  others.  2.  He  is  ignorant  of  the  spirituality  of  God's  law.  3.  His 
conscience  is  in  a  state  of  dormancy.  The  eye  of  his  conscience  is  not  open  to  see 
the  enormity  of  his  sin.  H.  The  searching  omniscience  of  God.  "The  Lord 
weigheth  the  spirits."  This  implies — 1.  The  essence  of  the  character  is  in  the 
spirit.     The  sin  of  an  action  is  not  in  the  outward  performance,  but  in  the  motive. 

2.  This  urges  the  duty  of  seK-examination.  "  fi  Thou,  Lord,  shouldest  mark 
iniquities,  0  Lord,  who  shall  stand  ?  "  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Misled  by  false 
principles  of  conscience  : — We  never  do  evil  so  thoroughly  and  cordially  as  when 
we  are  led  to  it  by  a  false  principle  of  conscience.  (J.  Pascal.)  Exact  balances  : — 
In  the  reign  of  King  Charles  I.  the  goldsmiths  of  London  had  a  custom  of  weigh- 
ing several  sorts  of  their  precious  metals  before  the  Privy  Council.  On  this  occasion 
they  made  use  of  scales  poised  with  such  exquisite  nicety  that  the  beam  would 
turn,  the  master  of  the  Company  affirmed,  at  the  two  hundredth  part  of  a 
grain.  Nay,  the  famous  Attorney-General  replied,  "  I  shall  be  loth,  then,  to  have  all 
my  actions  weighed  in  these  scales."  "With  whom  I  heartily  concur,"  says  the 
pious  Hervey,  "  in  relation  to  myself  ;  and  since  the  balances  of  the  sanctuary,  the 
balances  in  God's  hand,  are  infinitely  exact,  oh !  what  need  have  we  of  the  merit 
and  righteousness  of  Christ,  to  make  us  acceptable  in  His  sight,  and  passable  in 
His  esteem ! " 

Ver.  3.  Commit  thy  works  unto  the  Lord,  and  thy  thoughti  shall  toe  established. 

— Doing  our  duty  is  committing  our  way  to  God  : — There  is  no  instrinsic  value  in 
things.  They  only  possess  a  relative  value.  All  things  depend  upon  seasonable- 
ness.  The  Scripture  speaks  of  a  "word  in  season."  If  there  can  be  words  in  season, 
there  can  be  words  out  of  season.  A  word  not  in  season  is  merely  a  right  thing  in 
a  wrong  place.  Therefore  it  is  not  the  value  of  the  thing  in  itself ;  there  is  no  such 
thing ;  values  are  all  from  without.  The  idlest  dream  a  man  has  is  that  a  bit  of 
gold  has  an  intrinsic  value.  But  a  thing  that  is  worthless  to-day  is  not  therefore 
worthless  at  another  time.  The  word  for  to-day,  in  this  text,  is  one  of  rest.  Many 
people  say  that  "  committing  your  ways  to  the  Lord,"  is  to  tell  them  to  Him  when 
you  pray.  But  that  is  only  saying  something.  A  large  part  of  the  piety  of  the 
people  consists  in  saying  feelings  instead  of  doing.  When  we  say  "  Commit  thy 
works  unto  Him,"  it  is  with  a  view  to  put  down  fret,  fever,  and  distress,  and  to 
learn  a  lesson  of  the  holiday  of  the  soul,  rather  than  of  the  work-day  and  mammon. 
Committing  your  burden  unto  the  Lord  is  getting  Him  to  carry  it.  It  does  not 
mean  sit  still  and  do  no  work.  There  is  always  something  left  for  man  to  do,  even 
when  God  takes  the  matters  up.  "  Commit  thy  ways  "  must  mean  something  in 
the  spirit  by  which,  while  a  man  goes  on  in  life,  he  gets  the  fret,  and  the  burden, 


412  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

and  the  gall,  and  the  weariness  off  his  shoulders.  There  are  two  difiScult  and 
painful  businesses.  One  is,  to  fit  your  circumstances  to  yourself  ;  and  the  other  is, 
to  fit  yourself  to  your  circumstances.  Ambition  is  seldom  desirable.  A  profound 
sense  of  duty  will  do  all  that  ambition  can  do,  and  leave  nothing  of  the  bitterness 
behind.  Suit  thyself  to  thy  circumstances ;  do  thy  duty ;  and  so  commit  thy  way 
unto  the  Lord.  Committing  your  ways  is  just  the  absence  of  ambition  :  it  is  to  do 
thy  work,  and  leave  it  to  the  great  laws  of  God.  He  commits  his  ways  unto  the 
Lord  who  does  his  duty  simply  in  the  state  in  which  he  is.  As  to  tlie  results.  The 
text  notes  the  establishment  of  the  thoughts — not  always  the  success  of  the  work — 
but  the  establishment  of  the  man.  Quietness — uprightness — "  Slow  gains  and 
few  shames."  Commit  thyself,  with  all  thy  way,  and  work,  and  soul,  to  Him.  Say 
thy  prayers,  confess  thy  sins,  do  thy  little  piece  of  work,  and  do  it  honestly  ;  God 
will  redeem  thee,  atone  for  thee,  regenerate  thee,  be  the  guardian  of  thy  tomb, 
fashion  for  thee  a  new  body,  weave  for  thee  an  eternal  dress,  and  provide  for  thee 
"  a  house  not  made  with  hands."  Think  of  the  blessed  result.  Be  at  rest  in  the 
Lord,  wait  patiently  for  Him  ;  He  shall  establish  thy  thought ;  He  shall  save  thy 
soul;  He  shall  crown  thee  with  eternal  peace.  (George  Dawson,  M.A.)  Works 
and  thoughts  : — I.  The  precept  or  counsel.  1.  The  object,  or  thing  itself,  which 
is  committed :  "  our  works."  Either  the  works  done  by  us,  or  the  works  done  to, 
or  upon  us.  Our  affairs  and  businesses.  Whatever  action  we  go  about,  we  are  to 
commit  ourselves  to  the  Lord,  and  to  refer  ourselves  still  to  Him  for  the  disposing 
of  it.  We  are  to  commit  our  works  to  the  Lord  in  regard  to  our  performance  of 
them ;  to  the  acceptance  of  them  ;  and  to  their  success.  Our  conditions  ;  those 
things  which  in  any  way  concern  us,  we  are  also  to  commit  unto  the  Lord. 
2.  The  act:  "committing."  In  a  way  of  simple  commendation  :  presenting  them, 
and  laying  them  open  before  Him.  This  is  required  in  order  that  God  may  direct 
and  assist  us  ;  and  also  as  a  piece  of  respect  to  God  Himself.  In  a  way  of  humble 
resignation.  Implying  that  we  have  some  sense  of  the  difficulty  and  burdensome- 
ness  of  those  works  that  are  upon  us.  This  is  necessary,  that  we  may  labour  the 
more  for  strength  and  ability  to  the  discharge  of  them ;  that  we  may  be  the  more 
humbled  for  our  failings  and  neglects  in  it,  as  coming  short  of  that  exactness  and 
perfection  that  was  required  of  us ;  and  in  reference  to  others,  in  a  way  of  com- 
jjassion ;  to  pity  those  in  the  same  condition :  in  a  way  of  assistance,  and 
concurrence  with  them,  for  easing  their  burden;  and  in  a  way  of  thankfulness  and 
acceptance,  by  acknowledging  that  labour  and  pains  which  hath  been  taken  by 
them.  Committing  our  works  to  God  must  not  be  taken  as  allowing  us  to  omit 
the  doing  of  them.  In  a  way  of  faithful  improvement.  Order,  dispose,  and  direct 
all  thine  actions  unto  Him.  Roll  our  works  to  Him  as  we  would  roll  a  bowl  to  the 
mark.  Make  Him  the  scope  and  end  and  aim  of  aU  our  endeavours.  In  a  way  of 
tliankful  acknowledgment.  3.  The  person  to  whom  the  deposition  is  committed. 
Consider  His  wisdom  and  knowledge  ;  His  strength  and  power ;  His  faithfulness 
and  truth ;  His  willingness  to  undertake  our  burden.  We  are  to  commit  our 
burden  to  Him,  and  to  no  one  else :  to  the  Lord,  not  to  self ;  not  to  olher  men ;  not 
to  fortune  or  chance.  II.  The  promise,  or  argument  to  enforce  it.  Something 
implied  in  this  sentence :  "  thy  thoughts  shall  be  established."  Where  there  are 
works  there  will  be  thoughts.  Our  chiefest  business  is  composing  and  settling  our 
minds.  Establishing  of  our  thoughts  is  a  very  great  happiness  and  mercy.  Some- 
thing expressed.  Thou  shalt  have  a  mind  free  from  any  other  trouble  and 
distraction  when  thou  hast  practised  this  counsel  in  the  text.  (T.  Horton,  D.D.) 
Dependence  on  God : — The  counsel  implies — 1.  That  all  our  purposes  and  all  our 
doings  should  be  according  to  God's  will.  2.  That  none  of  our  works  can  prosper 
without  God.  3.  That  it  is  therefore  the  imperative  duty  of  intelligent  creatures 
to  own  their  independence,  and  to  seek,  on  aU  occasions,  the  Divine  countenance 
and  blessing.  4.  That  what  is  our  duty  is,  at  the  same  time,  our  interest.  5,  A 
general  truth  is  expressed,  that  God  will  graciously  smile  on  the  efforts,  and 
accomplish  the  purposes  and  wishes  of  him  who,  in  all  that  he  does,  piously  and 
humbly  acknowledges  Him  and  seeks  His  blessing.     (R.  ]]'ardlaw,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  The  Lord  hath  made  aJI  things  for  Himself:  yea,  even  the  wicked  for 
the  day  of  eviL — Of  God's  disposing  all  things  to  their  proper  ends  .■ — No  JIght  on 
this  passage  comes  from  the  context.  The  words  may  be  taken — I.  In  the  sense 
that  God  created  all  things  merely  tor  His  own  good  pleasure,  without  any 
EXTERNAL  MOTIVE.  Then  the  latter  part  of  the  verse  contains  a  great  difficulty— 
how  can  God  be  said  to  have  made  the  wicked  for  Himself,  for  the  manifesting  of 


CHAP.  XVI.]  PROVERBS.  413 

His  glory  in  the  day  of  punishment  ?  It  is  impossible  that  God  could  have  any 
external  motive,  when  in  the  universe  there  was  nothing  existing  without  Himself. 
The  good  pleasure  of  God  is  the  only  reason  why  things  were  brought  into  being  at 
all.  God  has  declared  Himself  by  a  clear  revelation  to  persons  of  all  capacities  to 
be  the  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth,  and  of  all  things  that  are  therein.  His  good- 
ness moved  Him  to  bring  creatures  into  being  on  which  He  might  display  that 
goodness,  and  to  whom  He  might  communicate  His  happiness.  The  glory  of  God 
is  not  anything  properly  relating  to  Himself,  any  advantage  or  benefit  to  Him ;  it  is 
the  communicating  of  His  goodness,  by  creating  the  world  ;  the  promoting  Hig 
likeness  among  rational  creatures,  by  the  practice  of  righteousness.  But  how  can 
God  be  said  to  have  made  even  the  wicked  for  Himself  ?  Some  have  contended 
that  God  has  on  purpose  made  many  creatures  necessarily  inclined  to  wickedness, 
that  He  might  manifest  His  power  and  authority  in  their  destruction.  But  nothing 
can  be  more  blasphemous  than  to  imagine  that  He  created  any  beings  with  design 
that  they  might  be  wicked  and  miserable.  Nevertheless,  because  it  is  certain  that 
nothing  comes  to  pass  without  His  permission,  nothing  subsists  but  by  His  power 
and  concurrence,  nothing  is  done  but  by  the  use  or  abuse  of  those  faculties  which 
He  has  created,  therefore  in  Scripture  phrase,  and  in  acknowledgment  of  the 
supreme  superintendence  of  providence  over  all  events,  God  is  represented  as  doing 
everything  that  is  done  in  the  world.    II.  Consider  the  text  as  meaning,  the  Lokd 

HAS  MADE  ALL  THINGS    SUITED  TO  EACH  OTHEB  :    TEA,  EVEN  THE  WICKED   TO   THE  DAY  OF 

EVIL,  This  is  the  more  natural  sense.  The  only  question  that  arises  is,  How  can 
God  be  said  to  have  fitted  the  wicked  to  destruction  ?  In  the  Jewish  language  all 
that  is  meant  is,  that  God  causes  wickedness  and  punishment  to  be  proportionable. 
It  is  only  an  instance  of  the  wisdom  and  exact  adjustment  of  the  works  of  God. 
The  adjustment  of  men's  condition  to  their  deserts  is  the  true  greatness  and  glory 
of  a  kingdom.  It  is  the  natural  tendency  of  things  to  get  conditions  fitted  to 
deserts ;  and  God  takes  care,  by  the  positive  interposition  of  His  power  and 
authority  in  the  world,  that  every  evil  work  shall  have  its  proper  recompense  in  the 
day  of  evil.  1.  We  may  justify  God,  and  give  glory  to  Him  in  all  His  proceedings. 
2.  If  we  would  escape  the  day  of  evil,  we  must  avoid  the  wickedness  to  which  it  ia 
annexed.  (S.  Clarke,  D.D.)  Wicked  men,  the  providentialinstruments  of  good : — 
All  things  are  in  God's  hands,  and  He  makes  use  of  all  things  as  He  pleases ;  for 
He  created  them  aU.  However  the  wicked  may  be  set  upon  mischief,  they  can 
proceed  no  further  than  God  permits;  being  instruments  only  in  His  hand,  to 
afflict  others ;  to  exercise  good  men  with  trials,  or  to  punish  the  wicked.  All  kinds 
of  calamities  and  disasters  that  may  befall  mankind  may  therefore  be  ascribed  to 
God  as  the  supreme  arbitrator,  and  disposer  of  all  events.  Mankind  were  very  apt 
to  suspect  that  there  were  two  opposite  powers  in  the  world,  one  the  fountain  of 
good,  and  the  other  the  fountain  of  mischief.  Scripture  teaches  that  both  good 
and  evil,  both  prosperity  and  adversity,  proceed  from  the  same  fountain,  and  are 
both  to  be  ascribed  to  one  and  the  same  God.  God  serves  Himself  of  angels  and 
men  as  His  instruments,  and  permits  them  to  act  no  further  than  He  can  turn  to 
good.  I.  Open  and  illustrate  the  general  doctrine.  The  Lord  orders  and 
disposes  all  things  so  as  one  way  or  other  to  serve  His  own  wise  purposes.  What- 
ever second  causes  there  are,  or  however  they  act,  still  it  is  God,  and  God  alone, 
that  governs  the  world.  Events  that  seem  merely  casual  and  accidental  are  in 
reality  providential.  The  most  mysterious  part  of  God's  government  of  the  moral 
world"  is  His  ordering  even  the  wicked  in  a  way  consistent  with  human  liberty, 
and  so  as  to  serve  the  ends  of  His  providence,  and  to  promote  His  glory.  The  fact 
is  certain,  the  manner  how  is  beyond  our  comprehension.  This  we  can  see,  it  was 
kind  and  gracious  in  God  to  create  men,  though  He  knew  that  many  of  them  would 
prove  wicked.  And  God  makes  use  of  the  wicked  men,  who  are  His  creatures,  to 
serve  the  ends  of  His  providence.  They  mean  nothing  but  evil,  while  God  turns  it 
to  good.  Consider  the  power  of  God  over  the  minds  and  hearts  of  wicked  men. 
But  does  not  God's  making  use  of  the  sins  of  men  look  like  concurring  with,  and 
countenancing  their  iniquities  ?  Men  commit  the  sins,  God  does  but  control,  curb, 
and  regulate.  II.  The  practical  use  and  improvement  of  this  doctrine.  1.  It  is 
both  our  duty  and  interest  to  submit  all  our  concerns  to  Him,  upon  whom  all 
success,  and  every  blessing,  depend.  A  question  may  arise  as  to  the  use  of  means, 
and  the  necessity  or  serviceableness  of  human  care  or  industry.  But  miracles  are 
not  to  be  expected  in  the  ordinary  course  of  affairs.  Success  in  affairs  is  proposed 
by  God  as  the  reward  consequent  upon  proper  care  and  application.  2.  God 
controls  and  bridles  wicked  men  in  all  their  machinations.     Therefore  we  need 


414  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvl. 

never  be  afraid  of  wicked  men,  or  of  devils.  Wicked  men,  however  malicious  or 
mischievous,  are  weak  in  themselves.  They  are  held  in  as  with  bit  and  bridle. 
3.  Eefer  all  the  hard  usage,  all  the  injuries  or  troubles  we  meet  with  from  men,  to 
God,  the  real  author  of  them.  4.  Learn  to  estimate  aright  the  ordinary  stream  of 
affairs,  the  common  course  of  this  world.  It  may  be  very  bad :  it  is  being  over- 
ruled. 5.  Fix  in  the  mind  an  assurance  of  the  constant  working  of  Divine 
Providence.  (D.  Waterland,  D.D.)  God  viade  all  things  for  Himself : — Scholars 
render  this  verse,  "  The  Lord  hath  made  everything  for  its  purpose."  The 
meaning  of  which  is,  that  eventually  the  use  and  condition  of  every  person  and 
thing  in  the  universe  will  be  found  to  correspond  with  its  character.  But  the  form 
given  in  the  authorised  version  sets  forth  a  sublime  and  indubitable  truth.  How 
can  we  gain  right  views  of  the  infinite  majesty  of  God  ?  God  Himself  aids  us, 
inwardly,  by  His  Spirit  quickening  our  moral  powers,  and  outwardly,  by  the  means 
of  light  and  instruction  which  He  has  put  within  our  reach — the  books  of  nature 
and  of  providence,  and  His  inspired  Word.  Duly  considered,  our  text  may  help  us 
to  find  our  proper  place  in  the  great  system  of  things,  and  to  see  and  realise  our 
being's  true  end  and  aim.  What  was  God's  purpose  in  giving  being  to  this 
universe  ?  The  answer  of  Scripture  is  that  God  made  not  only  us  but  all  things 
for  Himself.  Look  at  the  necessity  of  the  case.  How  else  could  it  be  ?  The  whole 
universe  must  have  one  great  object.  All  things  now  existing,  save  God,  once  did 
not  exist.  Everything  was  wrapped  up  in  the  bosom  of  God.  His  purpose 
embraced  the  creation  of  the  universe.  His  purpose  must  have  been  derived  from 
Himself,  and  have  centred  in  Himself.  When  God  spake  the  creative  word,  it  was 
of  and  for  Himself.  There  was  no  other  conceivable  source  or  object.  When  He 
made  all  things  for  Himself,  and  the  promotion  of  His  glory.  He  acted  under  a 
necessity  of  His  nature  as  the  infinitely  perfect  God.  No  doubt  God  willed  the 
happiness  of  the  creatures  whom  He  made;  but  back  of  this.  He  purposed  to 
promote  His  own  glory.  1.  Apprehending  this  is  designed  to  teach  us  a  lesson  in 
self-knowledge.  What  we  are  as  creatures  we  can  never  know  as  we  ought,  save 
by  studying  the  Uncreated.  It  is  in  the  contemplation  of  the  nature,  purposes, 
and  works  of  God,  that  we  can  best  see  the  insignificance  of  man.  We  should  be 
humbled  not  merely  as  beings,  but  much  more  as  moral  beings.  The  greatness  of 
God  fearfully  enhances  the  guilt  of  man.  2.  The  doctrine  we  are  considering 
inculcates  a  lesson  in  active  duty,  as  well  as  self-knowledge  and  humility.  It  urges 
a  plea  for  God's  service,  before  which  every  pretext  for  disobedience  must  be 
hushed.  Did  God  make  all  things  for  Himself  ?  There  can  be  no  higher  reason 
for  obeying  Him,  and  to  disobey  Him  is  made  thereby  infinitely  irrational,  impious, 
and  vain.  The  fact  that  God  seeks  His  own  glory  in  all  things  should  not  only 
determine  the  form  of  our  duty,  but  also  be  its  motive  and  its  end.  To  give  this 
prominence  to  God's  glory  clashes  with  no  real  interest  of  man,  and  does  no 
violence  to  any  original  principle  of  His  nature  ;  on  the  contrary,  in  aiming  at  it, 
man  is  aiming  at  his  greatest  good.  Why  should  not  the  infinite  and  perfect  God 
be  capable  of  engrossing  and  satisfying  the  whole  mind  and  heart  of  His  creature 
man  ?  The  frame  of  mind  is  not  indeed  natural  to  man,  and  it  cannot  be  attained 
in  the  independent  exercise  of  his  natural  powers.  It  is  only  by  God's  Spirit  that 
he  can  be  made  thus  spiritual.  Only  by  looking  to  Jesus  in  a  simple,  earnest, 
exclusive,  and  habitual  faith,  can  any  one  learn  to  make  God  and  His  glory  the 
end  of  his  being.  {W.  Sparrow,  D.D.)  The  universal  sovereigntrj  of  God  : — The 
word  "  made  "  is  not  here  "  created,"  but  it  is  used  in  the  more  general  sense  of  "  do," 
"  work,"  "  perform."  The  Lord  Jehovah  hath  wrought,  performed,  all  things  for 
Himseli.  The  final  end  of  all  Divine  proceeding  is  God's  own  glory.  This  hidden 
and  ultimate  purpose  of  all  the  works  of  God  is  revealed  in  the  text.  1.  The  Lord 
hath  made  all  things  for  Himself  in  creation.  And  man  is  part  of  His  creation. 
2.  The  principle  of  the  text  applies  to  the  work  of  redemption.  It  is  of  God's 
sovereign  will  and  pleasure,  and  for  His  own  eternal  glory,  that  God  hath  been 
pleased  to  choose  a  Church  out  of  this  fallen  world,  to  be  glorified  in  His  Son,  Jesus 
Christ.  This  view  of  redemption  tends  to  humble  the  sinner.  3.  God  hath  made 
all  things  for  Himself  in  providence.  Every  event  or  circumstance  in  this  world's 
history  has  been  arranged  or  ordered  for  the  glory  of  Jehovah.  It  is  impossible 
that  anything  shall  ever  happen  which  shall  not  tend  directly  or  indirectly  to  this 
great  end.  Sin  is  essentially  the  fault  of  the  creature.  God  is  not  the  author  of 
evil.  The  wicked  were  not  created  as  such.  They  are,  however,  appointed  unto 
the  day  of  evil  as  their  fitting  punishment.  (W.  E.  Light,  M. A.]  The  Lord 
hath  made  all  things  for  Himself: — Here  attention  is  directed  to  God,  to  His  general 


CHAP.  XVI.]  PROVERBS.  415 

formation  of  all  things,  and  to  the  arrangements  which,  in  that  creation,  He  has 
unquestionably  made.  God  is  the  universal  Creator.  Yet  philosophers,  ancient 
and  modern,  have  always  been  trying  to  find  another  maker  of  things  than  God. 
Wherever  there  is  existence,  there  the  hand  of  God  has  been  put  forth  in 
conferring  that  existence.  God  has  made  everything  just  as  a  Being  absolutely 
perfect  ought  to  make  it.  Though  God  made  man  upright.  He  did  not  make  man 
a  sinner.  Man  has  made  himself  a  sinner.  God  made  all  things  for  Himself. 
He  is  the  origin,  and  He  is  the  end.  There  are,  indeed,  subordinate  ends,  but  they 
lose  themselves,  as  it  were,  in  God,  the  great  end  of  all.  In  saying  that  the  Lord 
"  made  the  wicked  for  the  day  of  evil,"  we  must  recur  to  His  foresight.  He 
allows  some  sinners  to  go  on  in  their  guilt  till  death  finds  them  ready  for  eternal 
destruction  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord ;  and  therefore,  at  every  stage  in  which 
these  wicked  ones  may  be  contemplated,  they  are  still  to  be  considered  as  the  works 
of  God,  supported  by  Him,  provided  for  by  Him.  The  day  of  evil  looks  to  the  final 
retribution  of  all  things.  We  are  to  ascribe  to  God  the  existence,  the  support,  the 
maintenance,  of  those  individuals  who  are  rising  up  every  moment  in  rebellion 
against  Him.  The  wicked  are  as  much  in  the  hands  of  God  to  be  punished  by 
Him  as  the  good  are  in  His  hands  to  receive  undeserved  kindness.  {James 
Maclean,  D.B.) 

Ver.  5.  Every  one  that  is  proud  in  heart  is  an  abomination  to  the  Lord. — On 

•pride  : — In  the  maladies  which  assault  the  human  body,  a  marked  distinction  pre- 
vails as  to  the  relative  extensiveness  of  their  influence.  A  kindred  analogy 
discriminates  the  distempers  of  the  mind.  Pride  claims  the  denomination  of  an 
universal  passion.  Age,  or  sex,  or  situation  exempts  not  from  its  control.  Body 
and  mind,  virtues  and  vices,  it  presses  into  its  service.  Men  are  proud  in  health, 
proud  in  the  chamber  of  disease  ;  proud  in  public,  proud  in  retirement ;  proud  of 
their  frugality,  proud  of  their  profusion ;  proud  of  their  sobriety,  proud  of  their  in- 
temperance ;  proud  of  their  pride,  proud  of  their  humility.  I.  Some  or  its  modes 
OF  CPEEATION.  1.  National  pride.  Different  regions  are  separated  by  appropriate 
marks  of  moral  discrimination.  One  will  be  described  as  courageous;  one  as 
interested ;  one  as  fickle,  one  as  circumspect.  But  you  will  hear  each  characterised 
as  proud.  Pride  sometimes  wears  the  features  of  emulation ;  sometimes  of  am- 
bition ;  sometimes  of  resentment ;  sometimes  of  policy.  How  generally  in  the 
senate  and  in  the  private  circles,  no  less  than  on  the  parade  and  in  the  camp,  is 
national  pride,  under  various  forms,  addressed,  applauded,  pushed  forward  to 
additional  excesses!  2.  Pride  in  the  walks  of  private  life.  The  man  who  is 
intoxicated  by  pride  of  birth  ;  the  pride  of  authority.  The  exercise  of  power  affords 
to  pride  the  most  solid  gratification.  The  pride  of  wealth.  What  solicitude  is 
devoted  to  the  establishment  of  a  name  for  opulence  1  Besides  the  pride  of  accumu- 
lation and  possession,  there  is  the  pride  of  displaying  riches.  The  pride  of  genius, 
intellect,  and  talents.  Under  how  many  different  shapes  is  it  exhibited  1  Some- 
times in  disdain  of  industry,  as  indicative  of  dulness ;  sometimes  in  the  love  of 
singularity  and  paradox ;  sometimes  in  proneness  to  stigmatise  received  opinions  as 
vulgar  prejudices,  or  in  sceptical  repugnance  to  acquiesce  in  any  truth  not 
completely  circumscribed  within  the  span  of  human  comprehension.  Sometimes  it 
betrays  itself  by  overweening  ideas  which  the  individual  ill  disguises  of  the 
extent  of  his  own  powers,  and  by  his  unbounded  estimation  of  their  importance  ; 
sometimes  by  open  scorn  of  ordinary  men,  and  of  the  sobriety  of  common  sense  ; 
sometimes  by  unwarranted  daringness  of  enterprise,  and  presumptuous  confidence 
of  success ;  sometimes  it  is  displayed  in  impatience  of  contradiction,  in  oracular 
sententiousness,  in  a  dictatorial  delivery  of  opinion.  The  pride  of  literary  and 
professional  attainments.  The  pride  of  fashion.  Above  aU,  the  man  of  spiritual 
pride.  II.  The  ikeeconcilable  contkaeiett  between  pride  and  eeliqious  pein- 
crPLE.  The  corner-stone  of  Christian  virtue  is  humility.  The  most  powerful 
obstacle  to  the  conversion  of  the  Jews  was  pride.  The  primary  source  of  modem 
unbelief  is  pride.  Pride,  which  refuses  to  do  homage  to  the  wisdom  of  revelation, 
and  bow  the  neck  to  the  yoke  of  the  gospel.  The  cold  and  careless  scorner  resists 
the  influence  of  the  gospel  far  more  effectually  than  the  open  sinner.  III.  God's 
BPECiAii  JUDGMENTS  AGAINST  PEEDE.  He  chastiscs  uatious  by  bringing  upon  them 
national  calamities.  In  Scripture  we  find  it  is  this  sin  that  has  drawn  down  the 
most  severe  judgments  on  individuals,  such  as  Nebuchadnezzar,  Uzziah,  Hezekiah, 
Ahithophel,  Herod  (see  also  the  Laodiceans).  is  not  pride  convicted  as  in  every 
shape  utterly  un-Christian,  as  the  primary  cause  of  the  fall  of  man,  as  in  all  ages  the 


416  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

fonndation  of  most  heinous  sins,  of  the  most  tremendous  judgments  ?  Then  leave 
pride  to  the  proud.  Be  not  ye  corrupted  to  call  evil  good,  and  darkness  light. 
Pride  is  ever  setting  itself  up  against  heaven.  When  it  looks  to  God,  it  is  with  a 
desire  of  being  freed  from  dependence  on  Him.  When  it  considers  men,  it  under- 
values His  gifts  to  others ;  and  prompts  us  to  act,  with  respect  to  His  gifts  to  our- 
selves, as  though  they  were  inherent  in  us,  or  were  our  due.  Scrutinise  your  own 
bosom  that  you  may  discover  whether  it  is  under  the  influence  of  pride.  (Thos. 
Qisborne,  M.A.) 

Ver.  6.  By  mercy  and  truth  iniquity  is  purged. — The  mission  of  mercy  and  truth  : — 
Some  plead  for  prevailing  mercy,  and  some  for  prevailing  justice,  in  jurisprudence, 
education,  and  theology.  Some  try  to  blend  the  two,  but  find  the  effort  a  hopeless 
one.  By  a  mercy  and  truth  torn  apart,  and  set  in  opposition  to  each  other,  iniquity 
is  not  purged.  Solomon  was  speaking  in  the  spirit  of  the  Old  Testament ;  yet  he 
has  no  sense  of  contradiction  between  these  two  qualities  :  he  makes  no  endeavour 
to  show  how  they  may  be  adjusted  to  each  other.  He  does  not  say  that  truth  is 
tempered  with  mercy,  or  that  mercy  must  not  be  carried  too  far  lest  it  should  inter- 
fere with  truth.  He  says  simply,  "  By  mercy  and  truth  iniquity  is  purged."  Both 
are  equally  enemies  of  iniquity ;  both  are  equally  interested  in  its  extirpation ; 
both  are  equally  interested  in  the  deliverance  of  the  creature  who  is  tormented  by 
it.  This  view  alone  could  satisfy  the  Jew  who  believed  in  the  God  of  Abraham. 
The  Lord  of  heaven  had  revealed  himself  to  his  fathers  as  the  God  of  righteousness 
and  truth.  The  Jews  were  tempted  to  honour  beings  less  righteous  ;  and  they 
yielded  to  the  temptation.  But  the  Being  whom  they  forgot  was  what  He  had  ever 
been.  His  mercy  and  truth  were  fixed  as  the  hills.  By  and  by  the  recollection  of 
Him  came  back  to  them.  It  was  their  comfort  to  believe  there  was  One  unlike 
themselves,  One  who  was  not  changeable  and  capricious  as  they  were.  He  was 
merciful,  and  forgave  their  transgressions.  This  unfolded  to  them  depths  in  the 
Divine  character  of  which  they  had  known  nothing,  or  only  by  the  hearing  of  the 
ear.  They  felt  that  only  a  perfectly  righteous  Being  could  be  perfectly  merciful. 
The  psalmists  implore  mercy,  but  they  implore  it  of  One  who,  they  believe,  is 
willing  to  bestow  it,  because  He  is  righteous.  That  view  of  mercy,  in  which  it 
takes  the  form  of  indulgence  of  sins,  they  dare  not  cherish.  The  fear  of  God  is 
the  fear  of  the  righteous  and  merciful  Lord  ;  not  the  fear  of  some  false  being,  some 
creature  of  their  own  thoughts,  clothed  with  their  own  evil  qualities.  Such 
creatures  they  were  not  to  fear  ;  they  were  to  fight  continually  against  the  fear  of 
them.  In  the  Son  of  God  did  any  one  see  that  warfare  of  truth  with  mercy  which 
■we  have  so  rashly  dreamed  of  in  the  eternal  mind  ?  His  warfare  was  the  warfare  of 
truth  and  mercy  against  untruth  and  hardness  of  heart.  Jesus  showed  that  mercy 
and  truth  were  divided  only  by  the  evil  which  seeks  to  destroy  both.  It  is  by  their 
perfect  union  that  iniquity  is  purged.  The  sacrifice  of  Christ  purges  iniquity. 
But  we  are  not  taught  in  the  Bible  that  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  was  the  sacrifice  to 
one  attribute,  for  the  sake  of  bringing  it  into  agreement  with  another.  By  the 
mercy  and  truth  of  God  the  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit  is  the  iniquity  of  our  race,  and 
of  each  of  its  members,  purged.  By  the  fear  of  this  great  and  holy  name  do  men 
depart  from  evil.  The  fear  of  an  unbending  Lawgiver  will  not  keep  men  from  evil. 
The  New  Testament  name  for  God  is  the  name  of  absolute  eternal  Truth  and  Love, 
and  this  alone  makes  us  fear  to  sin.  {F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.)  By  the  fear  of  the 
Lord  men  depart  from  evil. — Sins  of  men  ariHiig  from  a  want  of  the  fear  of  God, 
and  the  instigation  of  the  devil : — The  wickedness  of  man  is  referable  to  two 
causes,  a  want  of  due  apprehension  of  the  Almighty,  and  the  instigation  of  the 
devil.  Consider  who  God  is,  and  what  are  His  chief  qualities.  He  is  the  creator 
and  governor  of  the  universe  :  a  Being  of  infinite  power,  present  everywhere,  privy 
to  our  most  secret  transactions.  If  we  had  these  ideas  constantly  before  our  eyes, 
should  we  ever  dare  affront  Him  with  our  iniquities?  There  is  a  particular 
scepticism  in  too  many,  with  regard  to  the  attributes  of  God.  They  doubt  whether 
He  possesses  some  qualities  in  that  extent  in  which  reason  and  Scripture  assure  us 
that  He  doth.  They  persuade  themselves  that  His  presence  is  not  universal ;  that 
He  does  not  regard  human  concerns  minutely  ;  that  He  is  not  too  rigidly  just ;  and 
that  His  goodness  will  tone  His  justice.  But  if  they  did  not  wish  to  deceive  them- 
selves, they  would  never  reason  in  this  manner.  Nor  may  we  impute  our  iniquities 
to  our  natural  frailty,  seeing  we  are  promised  aids  in  overcoming  it.  The  want  of 
the  fear  of  God  is  the  prime  cause  of  unrighteousness.  The  enemy  only  attacks  us 
when  he  perceives  us  defenceless ;  then  he  plies  us  with  suitable  temptationa.     Our 


CHAP,  XTi.]  PROVERBS.  417 

safety  from  him  lies  in  keeping,  continually,  well  within  the  fear  of  the  Lord. 
(G.  Haggitt,  M.A.)  The  fear  of  God  : — The  term  "  fear  "  is  here  used  for  the  prin- 
ciple of  religion.  This  principle  is  the  only  one  which  will  cause  men  to  forsake 
evil.  A  reverent  regard  to  the  Divine  will  is  the  only  security  for  human  virtue. 
Fear,  then,  here  embraces  all  the  feelings  and  motives,  which  tend  to  keep  men 
separate  from  everything  which  God  disapproves.  Dread  of  the  Divine  displeasure 
prepares  the  soul  for  the  operation  of  higher  and  better  feelings.  There  are  those 
who  are  disposed  to  censure  the  text,  as  conveying  an  expression  positively  wi-ong. 
Reason  is  the  power  which  persons  of  this  stamp  profess  to  worship  ;  and  reason, 
as  well  as  religion,  has  in  all  ages,  had  her  bigots  and  fanatics.  The  fear  of  the 
Lord  they  spurn,  as  a  motive  infinitely  beneath  them.  All  fear,  they  tell  us,  is 
sordid  and  slavish.  They  say  that  all  virtue  is  to  be  despaired  of  which  is  not 
built  on  disinterested  feeling,  i.e.,  on  a  complete  independence  either  of  punishment 
or  reward.  But  if  we  take  away  the  fear  of  God,  what  safeguard  have  we  left  for 
the  integrity  of  man  ?  True,  man  has  two  guides,  his  moral  sense,  or  perception  of 
right  and  wrong,  and  his  sense  of  what  is  useful  and  expedient.  But  would  the 
virtue  of  individuals  or  the  peace  of  society  be  long  secured  in  the  custody  of  these 
sages  ?  1.  We  must  not  speak  in  disparagement  of  the  moral  sense.  But  it  is 
the  fact,  that  the  breath  of  a  corrupt  world  has  passed  over  this  breastplate  of 
light  and  perfection,  and  hath  dimmed  its  glory.  This  faculty  has  deeply  partaken 
of  man's  degeneracy.  The  sense  of  moral  fitness  often  degenerates  into  a  mere  taste 
or  impulse.  The  advantages  this  world  has  to  offer  are  not  clearly  on  the  side  of 
virtue.  Were  virtue  to  be  found  at  perpetual  variance  with  pleasure  or  with  safety, 
it  is  absurd  to  imagine  that  she  would  long  retain  her  votaries.  2.  Will  man's 
sense  of  what  is  useful  for  the  general  good  of  mankind  do  any  more  for  him  than 
the  sense  of  moral  propriety.  Suppose  each  member  of  a  commonwealth  were 
under  an  implied  covenant  with  his  fellow-men  to  abstain  from  actions  which  may 
be  at  variance  with  the  general  interest.  What  is  there  to  secure  this  compact 
from  daily  and  hourly  violation,  when  there  is  no  witness  to  report  it,  and  no 
external  power  to  control  it.  Who  but  the  man  himself  is  to  interpret  the  rules  of 
universal  convenience  and  expediency  in  cases  where  doubt  really  exists,  or  where 
selfishness  raises  the  apparition  of  a  doubt  ?  Here,  then,  we  have  a  law  left  to 
execute  itself.  Suppose  human  laws  come  to  aid  the  powers  within  us ;  it  may 
still  be  urged  that  these  are  not  effective  if  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come 
be  removed.  No  law  can  long  maintain  its  authority  without  reference  to  the 
Supreme  Will,  the  fountain  of  all  law  throughout  the  universe.  Equally  rash 
would  it  be  to  rely  on  the  fear  of  infamy  to  prevent  disorder  and  crime.  For  here 
again  the  hope  of  escaping  discovery  would  come  in  to  pacify  the  apprehensions 
of  disgrace.  It  is  public  opinion  that  wields  this  scourge,  and  it  is  the  general 
prevalence  of  high  moral  feeling  that  makes  public  opinion  a  stern  and  formid- 
able executioner.  The  moral  sense,  and  the  rule  of  public  usefulness,  furnish,  no 
doubt,  very  strong  recommendations  to  virtuous  practice,  but  nothing  less  than 
the  fear  of  an  avenging  Deity  can  ever  generally  enforce  it.  (C.  W.  Le  Bas,  3I.A.) 
Mercy  and  truth  evidential  of  salvation : — The  application  might  be  restricted  to 
the  manner  in  which  the  God  of  mercy  and  truth,  the  God  who  Himself 
"  delighteth  in  mercy,"  and  who  "  requireth  truth  in  the  inward  parts," 
manifests  His  regard  to  the  practice  of  these  virtues  in  His  creatures.  There  is 
a  Scriptural  sense,  too,  in  which  mercy  and  truth,  and  the  kindred  graces,  impart 
confidence  towards  God ;  but  it  is  only  as  evidential  of  interest  in  the  salvation 
by  grace  which  the  Divine  Word  reveals ;  it  is  neither  as  meritorious,  nor  as 
expiatory.     {R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.) 

Ver.  7.  When  a  man's  ways  please  the  Lord,  He  maketh  even  his  enemies  to 
be  at  peace  with  him. — Our  ways : — These  words  contain  two  blessed  fruits  of  a 
gracious  conversation.  The  one  more  immediate  and  direct,  acceptance  with  God ; 
the  other  more  remote,  and  by  consequence  from  the  former,  peace  with  men. 
I.  The  subject.  "  A  man's  ways."  His  whole  carriage  in  the  course  of  his  life, 
with  aU  his  thoughts,  speeches,  and  actions,  good  or  bad.  When  a  man  walketh 
in  the  beaten  track  of  the  world,  without  ever  turning  his  feet  unto  God's 
testimonies,  neither  that  man  nor  his  ways  can  please  the  Lord.  When  a  man 
walketh  conscionably  and  constantly  in  the  good  ways  of  God  both  the  man  and 
his  ways  are  well  pleasing  unto  God.  When  a  man  in  the  more  constant  course  of 
his  life  walketh  uprightly,  and  in  a  right  way,  but  yet  in  a  few  particulars  treadeth 
»wry,  the  man  may  be  accepted,  though  his  ways  are  not  altogether  pleasln ' . 

28 


418  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

II.  The  act.  "  Pleasing."  This  hath  reference  to  acceptation :  wherein  the 
endeiivour  is  one  thing,  and  the  event  another.  A  man  may  have  a  full  intention, 
and  make  due  endeavour,  and  yet  fail  of  his  end.  This  is  apparent  when  we  have 
to  deal  with  men.  To  please  signifieth  rather  the  event  in  finding  acceptance  than 
the  endeavour  in  seeking  it.  In  a  moral  sense,  however,  not  so  much  the  event  as 
the  endeavour  and  intention.  But  there  may  be  a  good  assurance  of  the  event 
where  the  desire  of  pleasing  is  unfeigned  and  the  endeavour  faithful.  III.  The 
OBJECT.  All  men  strive  to  please ;  but  some  to  please  themselves ;  some  to  please 
other  men  ;  and  some  to  please  the  Lord.  We  should  endeavour  so  to  walk  as  to 
please  God.  For  He  is  our  Master,  Captain,  Father,  and  King.  There  is  one 
great  benefit  attached  to  pleasing  the  Lord  in  the  text — "He  will  make  our  enemies 
to  be  at  peace  with  us."  We  may  add.  He  will  preserve  us  from  sinful  tempta- 
tions. He  will  answer  our  prayers.  He  will  translate  us  into  His  heavenly 
kingdom.  The  wicked  man,  who  displeases  God,  strengthens  the  hands  of  his 
enemies  ;  exposes  himself  as  a  prey  to  temptations  ;  blocks  up  the  passage  against 
his  own  prayer ;  debars  himself  from  entering  the  kingdom.  How  can  pleasing 
the  Lord  be  done  ?  By  likeness  and  obedience.  The  godly  love  what  God  loveth. 
They  desire  and  endeavour  to  be  holy  as  He  is  holy ;  perfect  as  He  is  perfect, 
merciful  as  the  heavenly  Father  is  merciful.  Obedience  is  the  proof  of  our  willing 
and  cheerful  subjection  to  His  most  righteous  commands.  It  is  vain  to  think  of 
pleasing  God  by  the  mere  outward  performances  of  fasting,  prayer,  almsdeeds, 
hearing  God's  Word,  or  receiving  the  Sacrament.  How  comes  it  about  that  such 
poor  things  as  our  best  endeavours  are  should  please  God  ?  Our  good  works  are 
pleasing  to  God  upon  two  grounds.  1.  Because  He  worketh  them  in  us ;  and — 
2.  Because  He  looketh  upon  us  and  them  in  Christ.  In  the  consequent  of  pleasing 
God  there  are  three  things  observable.  The  persons — a  man's  enemies.  The 
effect — peace.  The  author — the  Lord.  The  scope  of  the  whole  words  is  to 
instruct  us  that  the  fairest  and  likeliest  way  for  us  to  procure  peace  with  man  is  to 
order  our  ways  so  as  to  please  the  Lord.  The  favour  of  God  and  the  favour  of 
men  is  joined  together  in  Holy  Scripture,  as  if  the  one  were  a  consequent  of  the 
other.  {Bp.  Sanderson.)  The  true  way  of  pleasing  God  and  being  at  peace  with 
men  : — I.  The  substance.  "  When  a  man's  ways  please  the  Lord."  All  the 
Lord's  ways  are  concentred  ways,  and  they  concentre  in  Christ  Jesus.  Then, 
in  order  to  please  the  Lord,  we  must  be  found  in  those  ways,  and  as  those  ways  are 
in  Christ,  we  must  also  be  in  union  with  Christ.  1.  In  what  way  has  the  Lord 
fixed  the  love  of  His  heart  upon  man  ?  2.  The  Lord  brings  His  people  to  desire 
eternal  life  in  the  same  way  that  He  has  designed  it.  3.  In  what  way  has  the 
Lord  made  us  holy?  4.  In  what  way  does  the  Lord  regenerate  His  people? 
n.  The  negative  ;  or  what  the  text  does  not  mean.  The  latter  part  of  the  text 
appears  to  be  negatived  by  the  conduct  of  the  enemies  of  the  Lord's  people  in  all 
ages.  ni.  The  positive  ;  or  what  the  text  does  mean.  Befer  to  a  Scripture 
passage,  "  The  wrath  of  man  shall  praise  Thee ;  the  remainder  of  wrath  shalt 
Thou  restrain."  Illustrate  by  circumstances  in  the  stories  of  Abraham,  Jacob, 
Joseph,  David,  Nehemiah,  Jews  when  building  the  second  temple.  IV.  The  impli- 
cation. 1.  That  the  Lord  has  some  specific  purpose  and  end  in  view.  2.  That 
He  is  sure  to  accomplish  that  purpose.  (James  Wells.)  The  charm  of  goodness  : — 
Not  that  the  enemies  are  simply  kept  quiet  through  their  knowledge  that  the 
good  man  is  under  God's  protection,  but  that  goodness  has  power  to  charm  and  win 
them  to  itself.  (Dean  Plumptre.)  God's  control  over  His  people's  enemies  : — 
I  must  see  that  my  ways  please  the  Lord.  Even  then  I  shall  have  enemies  ;  and, 
perhaps,  all  the  more  certainly  because  I  endeavour  to  do  that  which  is  right. 
But  what  a  promise  this  is  1  The  Lord  will  abate  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him, 
and  abate  it  so  that  it  shall  not  distress  me.  He  can  constrain  an  enemy 
to  desist  from  harming  me,  even  though  he  has  a  mind  to  do  so.  This  He 
did  with  Laban,  who  pursued  Jacob,  but  did  not  dare  to  touch  him.  Or  He 
can  subdue  the  wrath  of  Esau,  who  met  Jacob  in  a  brotherly  mannrr,  though 
Jacob  had  dreaded  that  he  would  smite  him  and  his  family  with  ilio  sword. 
The  Lord  can  also  convert  a  furious  adversary  into  a  brother  in  Chri.st,  and  a 
fellow-worker,  as  He  did  with  Saul  of  Tarsus.  Oh,  that  He  would  do  this  in 
every  case  where  a  persecuting  spirit  appears  1  Happy  is  the  man  whose  enemies 
are  made  to  be  to  him  what  the  lions  were  to  Daniel  in  the  den — quiet  and 
companionable  1  When  I  meet  death,  who  is  called  the  last  enemy,  I  pray  that 
I  may  be  at  peace.  Only  let  my  great  care  be  to  please  the  Lord  in  aU  things. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 


CHAP.  XVI.]  PROVERBS.  419 

Ver.  9.  A  man's  heart  deviseth  his  way,  but  the  Lord  directeth  his  steps. — Ore 

the  government  of  human  affairs  by  providence : — The  efforts  of  our  activity,  how 
great  soever  they  may  be,  are  subject  to  the  control  of  a  superior,  invisible  power. 
Higher  counsels  than  ours  are  concerned  in  the  issues  of  human  conduct.  The 
line  is  let  out  to  allow  us  to  run  a  certain  length,  but  by  that  line  we  are  all  the 
while  invisibly  held,  and  are  recalled  and  checked  at  the  pleasure  of  Heaven, 
Among  all  who  admit  the  existence  of  a  Deity  it  has  been  a  general  belief  that  He 
exercises  some  government  over  human  affairs.  In  what  maimer  providence 
interposes  in  human  affairs,  by  what  means  it  influences  the  thoughts  and  counsels 
cf  men,  and,  notwithstanding  the  influence  which  it  exerts,  leaves  to  them  the 
freedom  of  will  and  choice,  are  subjects  of  a  dark  and  mysterious  nature.  The 
secret  power  with  which  God  controls  sun,  moon,  and  stars  is  equally  inexplicable. 
Throughout  the  sacred  writings  God  is  represented  as,  on  every  occasion,  by 
various  dispensations  of  His  providence,  rewarding  the  righteous  or  chastening 
them  according  as  His  wisdom  requires,  and  punishing  the  wicked.  The  experi- 
ence of  every  one  bears  testimony  to  a  particular  providence.  Accident  and 
chance  and  fortune  are  words  without  meaning.  In  God's  universe  nothing  comes 
to  pass  causelessly  or  in  vain.  Every  event  has  its  own  determined  direction. 
But  this  doctrine  of  a  particular  providence  has  no  tendency  to  supersede  counsel, 
("  "gn,  or  a  proper  exertion  of  the  active  powers  of  man.  Man,  "  devising  his  own 
..„j,"  and  carrying  on  his  own  plans,  has  a  place  in  the  order  of  means  which 
providence  employs.  The  doctrine  of  the  text  is  to  be  improved — 1.  For  correcting 
anxious  and  immoderate  care  about  the  future  events  of  our  life.  The  folly  of 
such  anxiety  is  aggravated  by  this  consideration,  that  all  events  are  under  a  much 
better  and  wiser  direction  than  we  could  place  them.  To  the  unavoidable  evils  of 
life  do  not  add  this  evil  of  thine  own  procuring,  a  tormenting  anxiety  about  the 
success  of  thy  designs.  The  great  rule  both  of  religion  and  duty  is — Do  thy  duty 
and  leave  the  issue  to  Heaven.  2.  The  doctrine  of  the  text  is  calculated  to  enforce 
moderation  of  mind  in  every  state;  it  humbles  the  pride  of  prosperity  and 
prevents  that  despair  which  is  incident  to  adversity.  3.  This  doctrine  places  the 
vanity  and  folly  of  all  sinful  plans  in  a  very  strong  light.  All  sin,  in  every  view  of 
it,  must  be  attended  with  danger.  4.  It  concerns  us  to  perform  those  duties  which 
a  proper  regard  to  providence  requires,  and  to  obtain  protection  from  that  power 
which  directeth  and  disposeth  all.  An  interest  in  God's  favour  is  far  more 
important  than  all  the  wisdom  and  ability  of  man.  Without  His  favour  the 
wisest  will  be  disappointed  and  baffled ;  under  His  protection  and  guidance  the 
simple  are  led  in  a  plain  and  sure  path.  (Hvgh  Blair,  D.D.)  The  infallible 
Director  of  man  : — The  doctrine  of  the  text  is  matter  of  uniform  experience.  Little 
indeed  does  any  one  know  what  lies  before  him.  I.  The  guidance  of  God  mat  be 
TEACED  IN  THE  DISPENSATIONS  OF  His  PBOViDENCE.  No  natural  causes  can  explain 
the  wonderful  events  that  occurred  from  the  caU  of  Abraham  to  the  time  of  the 
Eedeemer.  In  every  scene,  not  only  the  miraculous,  but  the  ordinary,  the  hand  of 
the  Deity  is  visible.  We  can  often  see  clearly  the  traces  of  that  hand  when  its 
work  is  done.  H.  The  sentiment  of  the  text  eeceives  its  fullest  exemplifi- 
cation IN  THE  dispensation  OF  GRACE.  In  a  way  the  most  improbable,  and  at  a 
time  the  least  expected,  the  God  of  all  grace  has  laid  hold  upon  the  soul.  Illustrate 
from  the  woman  of  Samaria,  and  from  Zaccheus.  The  means,  no  less  than  the 
time  and  occasion,  are  of  God.  Some  striking  providence,  some  simple  truth 
repeated  for  the  thousandth  time,  some  whispered  admonition  of  a  Christian 
friend,  awakes  attention,  excites  to  immediate  consideration,  and  bows  down  the 
soul  in  true  contrition  and  prayer.  The  teaching  of  the  text  is  also  illustrated  in 
the  removal  of  the  fear  of  death  when  the  death-time  comes.  {W.  E.  Schenck.) 
Man  proposing,  God  disposing  : — We  cherish  hopes,  we  make  plans  ;  but  there  is  a 
higher  power  that  directs  our  steps.  The  ideas  of  fate  and  chance  have  been 
entertained  by  men  in  all  ages  of  the  world  to  account  for  these  experiences. 
Scripture  knows  nothing  of  fate  or  chance.  It  is  the  Lord  who  is  directing  our 
steps.  Look  at  this  directing  work  of  God  overruling  our  purposes — 1.  In  the 
success  or  failure  of  our  daily  business.  Man  uses  what  discretion  and  judgment 
he  has,  but  when  he  has  done  all  much  is  left  to  circumstances  over  which  he  has 
no  control.  Generally  it  may  be  said  that  the  diligent  and  persevering  are  the 
most  successful,  but  there  are  many  cases  in  which  the  rule  will  not  apply. 
Success  will  sometimes  come  to  the  careless.  Failure  wUl  sometimes  come  to  the 
most  diligent.  Perhaps  almost  the  last  place  in  which  we  should  look  to  find  the 
hand  of  God  is  the  business  of  the  world.    2.  In  the  choice  of  oar  occupations  in 


420  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

life.  What  an  amount  of  selecting  and  rejecting  goes  on  in  the  mind  of  many  a 
boy  I  He  little  thinks  his  choice  will  rest  at  last  with  One  who  knows  better  far 
than  he  knows  for  what  he  is  adapted.  There  are  few  who,  in  choosing  their 
occupations  in  life,  have  not  had  wishes  of  their  own,  and  there  are  few  who,  in 
looking  back,  do  not  find  that  those  wishes  have  been  overruled.  God  is  working 
out  some  kind  and  wise  purpose  by  putting  us  where  we  are.  3.  In  the  choice  of 
our  friendships.  An  unexpected  meeting  with  a  person  may  alter  our  whole  career. 
God  is  as  certainly  working  in  the  minor  as  He  is  in  the  greater  events  of  our  lives. 
(S.  G.  Matthews,  B.A.)  The  plan  of  man,  and  the  i^an  of  God,  in  human  life  : — 
I.  Man's  owk  plan.  "A  man's  heart  deviseth  his  way."  Every  man  forms  a 
programme  of  his  daily  life.  When  he  moves  rationally,  he  does  not  move  by  blind 
impulse.  That  man's  history  is  self-originated  and  self-arranged  is  manifested 
from  three  things.  1.  Society  holds  every  man  responsible  for  his  actions.  2.  The 
Bible  appeals  to  every  man  as  having  a  personal  sovereignty.  3.  Every  man's 
conscience  attests  his  freedom  of  action.  If  the  sinner  felt  himself  the  mere 
creature  of  forces  he  could  not  control,  he  could  experience  no  remorse.  Man  feels 
that  his  life  is  fashioned  by  his  own  plan,  that  he  is  the  undisputed  monarch  of  his 
own  inner  world.  II.  God's  own  plan.  "  The  Lord  directeth  his  steps."  God 
has  a  plan  concerning  every  man's  life — a  plan  which,  though  it  compasses  and 
controls  every  activity,  leaves  the  man  in  undisturbed  freedom.  This  is  the  great 
problem  of  the  world's  history,  man's  freedom,  and  God's  control.  "  Experience," 
says  Mr.  Bridges,  "  gives  a  demonstrable  stamp  of  evidence  even  in  all  the  minutiae 
of  circumstances  which  form  the  parts  and  pieces  of  the  Divine  plan.  A  matter  of 
common  business,  the  indulgence  of  curiosity,  the  supply  of  necessary  want,  a 
journey  from  home,  all  are  connected  with  infinitely  important  results.  And  often 
when  our  purpose  seemed  as  clearly  fixed,  and  as  sure  of  accomplishment  as  a 
journey  to  London,  this  way  of  our  own  devising  has  been  blocked  up  by  unex- 
pected difficulties,  and  unexpected  facilities  have  opened  an  opposite  way,  with  the 
ultimate  acknowledgment,  "He  led  me  forth  in  the  right  way"  (Psa.  cxii.  7; 
Isa.  xlii.  16).  After  all,  however,  we  need  much  discipline  to  wean  us  from  our 
own  devices,  that  we  may  seek  the  Lord's  direction  in  the  first  place.  The  fruit  of 
this  discipline  will  be  a  dread  of  being  left  to  our  own  devices,  as  before  we  were 
eager  to  follow  them  (Psa.  cxliii.  10).  So  truly  do  we  find  our  happiness  and  security 
in  yielding  up  our  will  to  our  heavenly  Guide  1  He  knows  the  whole  way,  every 
step  of  the  way:  "  The  end  from  the  beginning."  And  never  shall  we  miss  either 
the  way  or  the  end,  if  only  we  resign  ourselves  with  unreserved  confidence  to  His 
keeping,  and  the  direction  of  our  steps.  (Homilist.)  The  folly  of  self-confidence  : — 
"  A  man's  heart,"  that  is,  his  mind,  his  inward  powers  of  reflection,  anticipa- 
tion, skill,  prudence,  "  deviseth  his  way" — a  term  implying  the  application  of  all 
possible  consideration,  invention,  and  precaution — but  the  "  Lord  directeth  his 
steps."  The  words  express  and  expose  the  folly  and  presumption,  on  man's  part, 
of  self-confidence — of  his  thus  assuring  himself  of  success,  as  if  he  had  the  future 
under  his  eye,  and  at  his  bidding  ;  regardless  of  that  hidden  but  ever-present,  ever- 
busy  superintending  power  that  has  all  under  complete  command ;  that  can  at  once 
arrest  his  progress  in  the  very  midst  and  at  the  very  height  of  his  boasting,  and 
"turn  to  foolishness"  all  his  devices.  The  sacred  oracles  are  full  of  this 
sentiment,  and  of  the  most  striking  exemplifications  of  its  truth.  And  what  is  the 
sentiment  of  revelation  cannot  fail  to  command  the  concurrence  of  enlightened 
reason.  It  must  be  so.  If  there  is  a  God  at  all  it  cannot  be  otherwise.  It  were 
the  height  of  irrationality  as  well  as  impiety  for  a  moment  to  question  it— to 
imagine  the  contrary  possible.  How  otherwise  could  God  govern  the  world? 
Were  not  all  human  schemes  under  supreme  and  irresistible  control,  what  would 
become  of  the  certainty  of  the  Divine  ?  All  must  of  necessity  fulfil  the  plans  of 
Infinite  Wisdom  in  the  administration  of  God's  universal  government.  "  God  will 
work,  and  who  shall  let  it?"  [R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  Orderings  of  providence  : — 
Young  Olive  is  shipped  off,  to  get  rid  of  him,  in  the  East  India  Company,  and  he 
becomes  the  founder  of  England's  empire  in  India.  The  Duke  of  Wellington  seeks 
of  Lord  Camden  in  early  life  a  place  at  the  Treasury  Board,  and  becomes  the 
military  hero  of  Europe.  There  are  many  to-day  occupying  positions  very  different 
to  those  which  they  set  before  themselves  in  early  life.  Some  are  preaching  the 
gospel  who  were  destined  to  practise  at  the  English  bar.  Some  are  lawyers  who 
started  to  be  physicians.  Some  are  business  men  who  started  to  be  artists  or 
musicians.  David  Livingstone  starts  as  a  hand  in  a  Glasgow  factory,  and  he 
becomes  the  pioneer  of  missionary  work  in  Africa.    William  Carey  makes  shoes, 


CHAP.  XVI.]  PROVERBS.  421 

and  he  becomes  the  most  successful  missionary  in  India.  Looking  back  on  life,  we 
say  it  was  this  or  that  event  which  impelled  us  on  another  course.  We  are  apt  to 
forget  that  the  event  was  no  chance  accident,  but  a  distinct  factor  in  God's 
government  of  our  lives. 

Ver.  11.  A  just  weight  and  balance  are  the  Lord's. — A  just  balance : — It  is  a 
part  of  the  Lord's  watchful  activity  and  direct  connection  with  all  the  affairs  of 
human  life  that  He  is  interested  in  our  business  and  trade.  The  Israelite  was 
encouraged  to  think  that  all  the  work  in  which  he  was  engaged  was  ordained  by, 
and  therefore  under  the  observation  of,  his  God.  The  commercial  fraud  of  the 
primitive  times  took  a  comparatively  simple  form.  The  merchant  used  inadequate 
measures,  and  so  nibbled  a  little  from  every  article  which  he  sold  to  a  customer. 
It  requires  many  generations  for  a  civilised  society  to  elaborate  commercial  fraud 
on  the  large  scale.  1.  We  are  all  of  us  tempted  to  think  that  a  considerable 
proportion  of  our  life  is  too  insignificant  to  attract  the  particular  attention  of  God. 
We  think  He  marks  what  business  we  enter,  but  when  we  are  in  it  lets  us  alone. 
Or  He  marks  a  large  business  transaction  in  which  there  is  room  for  a  really 
gigantic  fraud,  but  cannot  pay  any  attention  to  a  minute  sale  over  the  counter, 
the  trivial  adulteration  of  a  common  article,  the  ingenious  subterfuge  for  disposing 
of  a  damaged  or  useless  stock.  But  could  anything  be  more  illogical  ?  Great  and 
small  are  relative  terms,  and  have  no  significance  with  God.  If  He  knows  us  at 
all.  He  knows  all  about  us.  The  whole  life,  with  every  detail  from  birth  to  death, 
is  accurately  photographed  in  the  light  of  His  omniscience.  2.  In  this  exhaustive 
and  detailed  knowledge  of  the  way  in  which  you  are  conducting  your  business  EQs 
warm  approval  follows  everything  that  is  honest  and  just ;  His  vehement  censure 
lights  on  all  that  is  dishonest  and  unjust.  We  have  no  reason  for  thinking  that 
the  unjust  balance  has  become  any  less  abominable  to  the  Lord  because  the  eager 
and  relentless  competition  of  modern  industrial  life  has  multiplied,  while  it  has 
refined  the  methods  of  fraud  and  has  created  a  condition  of  things  in  which,  as  so 
many  people  urge,  questionable  practices  have  become  actually  necessary  for  one 
who  would  keep  his  head  above  water.  Double-dealing,  no  matter  what  may  be 
the  plea,  is  abominable  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.  3.  All  should  order  their  business 
ways  as  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  concern  themselves  chiefly  with  the  thought  how 
they  may  be  in  conformity  with  His  holy  wiU.  '  Do  not  be  content  with  estimating 
your  conduct  by  the  judgment  which  other  men  would  pass  upon  it.  Do  not  be 
content  even  with  estimating  your  conduct  by  the  standard  of  your  own  unaided 
conscience.  Unless  you  realise  that  God  sees  and  knows,  and  unless  you  humbly 
submit  everything  to  His  judgment,  you  are  sure  to  go  wrong ;  your  standard  will 
insensibly  fall,  and  you  will  insensibly  fall  away  even  from  the  fallen  standard. 
You  will  not  alter  His  judgment  of  your  conduct  by  attempting  to  ignore  it.  But 
by  seeking  to  understand  it,  and  by  laying  your  heart  open  to  be  influenced  by  it, 
you  will  find  that  your  conduct  is  perceptibly  altered,  and  apparent  impossibilities 
rre  overcome,  because  "by  the  fear  of  the  Lord  men  depart  from  evil."  {R.  F. 
Ilorton,  D.D.)  Weighed  in  the  balances  : — A  man  once  declared  that  he  wished 
he  had  a  window  in  his  breast,  that  all  men  might  see  his  heart  and  motives. 
How  many  of  us  would  like  to  look  into  our  own  hearts  and  discover  our  motives  ? 
Because  we  fear  to  be  face  to  face  with  ourselves  self-examination  is  so  greatly 
neglected.  God  looks  into  our  hearts  and  weighs  our  motives  in  His  just  and 
unchanging  balance.  Our  daily  work  is  being  weighed  in  God's  balances,  and  it  is 
a  weighing  for  eternity.  People  make  a  great  mistake  about  their  preparations  for 
eternity.  It  is  the  duty  of  a  Christian  man  to  prepare  for  eternity  every  day  he 
lives  by  trying  to  do  his  duty  in  the  place  where  God  puts  him.  Temptations  and 
trials  are  weights  and  scales  by  which  God  tries  our  hearts.  Perhaps  you  are  vexed 
by  a  spiteful  tongue  that  speaks  cruelly  and  unjustly.  That  is  a  balance  in  which 
you  are  weighed  to  see  whether  your  heart  is  right  with  God,  whether  you  bear 
your  trials  meekly,  giving  back  the  soft  answer,  not  rendering  evil  for  evil.  So 
every  other  trial  or  sorrow  is  a  test,  a  weighing,  to  prove  whether  you  are  the  true 
gold  or  base  alloy.  Prosperity  and  success  are  God's  balances.  Every  religious 
rite  and  service  are  means  by  which  God  weighs  us.  There  are  yet  two  more 
weighings  to  come.  At  our  death  we  shall  be  weighed  and  placed  in  our  proper 
waiting-place  till  the  last  judgment.  Then  will  come  the  final  weighing  and  the 
eternal  sentence,     (if.  J.  Wilmot-Baxion,  M.A.) 

Ver.  12.  For  the  throne  is  established  by  righteousness. — Religious  principUt 


422  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

the  bett  support  of  government : — I.  Eighteousness  most  effectdallt  answers  thb 
END  AKD  DESIGN  OF  GOVERNMENT.  Religion  coDsists  in  an  acknowledgment  of  God 
as  Governor  of  the  world.  Though  the  power  be  lodged  in  earthen  vessels,  there  ia 
no  power  but  of  God.  This  religious  sense  of  a  providential  government  will 
incline  the  subject  to  pay  due  reverence  to  the  prince,  because  it  reaches  farther 
than  his  own  person,  and  is  ultimately  referred  to  that  Divine  Original,  whose 
image  and  representative  he  is.  Eeligion  fixes  our  duty  to  our  sovereign  upon  a 
certain  basis  and  derives  our  obedience  from  the  noblest  motives,  not  from  a  slavish 
fear,  not  from  an  occasional  humour,  not  from  a  mercenary  regard  to  temporal 
interest,  but  from  a  filial  love  and  respect  to  the  Lord  of  glory.  An  awful  regard 
to  God  and  a  prevailing  sense  of  religion  possesses  the  subject  with  that  justice  and 
fidelity  which  cannot  be  shaken  by  any  temptation,  but  stands  unmoved  against 
the  assaults  of  danger  and  the  allurements  of  interest.  The  fear  of  God  is  so 
powerful  a  principle  of  action  that  it  necessarily  produces  happy  effects,  and  is  so 
mighty  a  restraint  from  sin  that  it  almost  supersedes  the  necessity  of  any  other 
restraint,  n.  Guard  against  those  pernicious  principles  that  subvert  the 
THRONE  AND  ARE  DESTRUCTIVE  OF  GOVERNMENT.  1.  Thosc  that  icmovc  the  foundations 
of  religion  and  deny  the  being  of  a  God.  Could  these  opinions  prevail,  fidelity  and 
justice  would  cease  and  the  distinction  between  right  and  wrong  would  be  lost  in 
confusion.  It  is  the  interest  of  every  prince  and  people  to  put  a  stop  to  these  fatal 
principles,  and  not  only  to  discourage  atheism  itself,  but  every  approach  towards  it. 
2.  A  scornful  neglect  of  God  the  Son,  and  an  avowed  denial  of  His  divinity,  may 
produce  as  dreadful  effects  as  even  the  denial  of  God  the  Father.  If  we  renounce 
the  authority  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  authority  of  revealed  religion  is  absolutely 
cancelled.  3.  Those  republican  doctrines  which  derive  all  power  from  the  people. 
4.  The  principle  that  makes  an  absolute  allowance  to  the  sincerity  of  every  man's 
persuasion  and  places  the  whole  of  religion  and  the  great  affair  of  eternal  salvation 
upon  the  authority  of  every  private  judgment.  This  is  contradictory  to  an  article 
of  our  creed ;  it  is  fruitful  of  erroneous  sects  and  impious  heresies,  and  it  has  a 
pernicious  influence  upon  the  State.  If  the  sincerity  of  men's  present  persuasions 
will  justify  them  in  all  their  consequences,  the  more  strongly  they  are  persuaded 
so  much  the  more  abundantly  will  they  be  justified.  And  if  they  are  hurried  on  to 
the  commission  of  any  evil  action  the  strength  of  the  impulse  will  sanctify  the 
crime.  Let  us,  then,  show  our  regard  to  government  by  discharging  our  duty  to 
God.    (T.  Newlin,  M.A.) 

Ver.  15.  In  the  light  of  the  king's  countenance  is  life. — The  blesiednest  of  the 
king^s  favour : — This  is  a  general  proverb.  Its  primary  apphcation  is  to  royalty. 
In  the  previous  verse  the  wrath  of  a  king  has  been,  by  a  striking  metaphor, 
represented  as  messengers  of  death  (Esther  vii.  6-10).  When  a  king  is  angry  how 
swift  and  sure  is  his  vengeance.  Before  the  word  goes  forth  out  of  his  mouth  his 
will  is  executed ;  messengers  of  death  stand  about  him  ready  to  execute  his 
indignant  sentence.  And  so  a  wise  man  will  seek  to  soften  the  king's  wrath  and 
pacify  him — nay,  will  keep  at  peace  with  him.  In  this  verse  "  the  light  of  his 
countenance"  and  "his  favour"  supply  the  antithesis  to  his  wrath.  Apply  this  to 
the  King  of  kings,  and  what  a  sublime  lesson  on  life  1  Here  we  have  suggested — 
1.  The  blessedness  of  reconciUation.  2.  The  conditions  of  serviceableness.  A 
holy  life  in  its  ideal  combines  two  elements — abiding  in  the  light  and  love  of  God, 
and  yielding  fruit  in  service.  This  proverb  suggests  sunshine  and  shower.  He 
who  is  reconciled  to  God  in  Christ  abides  in  the  light  of  His  smile.  He  walks  in 
light  and  dwells  in  love,  and  so  every  condition  of  holiness  and  happiness  ifl 
assured.     {Homiletic  Review.) 

Ver.  16.  How  much  better  is  it  to  get  wisdom  than  gold ! — Wisdom  better  than 
wealth  : — I.  The  doterence  between  wisdom  and  understanding.  It  is  like  that 
which  exists  between  the  moving  and  the  acting  power,  between  the  principle  and 
the  practice,  between  the  plan  and  the  process,  between  the  cause  and  the  effect. 
Wisdom  is  the  knowledge  and  preference  of  the  best  and  worthiest  end ;  under- 
standing is  the  apprehension  and  the  employment  of  the  means  which  shall  be 
most  effectual  for  attaining  it.  The  well-being  of  the  imperishable  part  of  man 
throughout  eternity  is  the  chief  end  of  his  existence,  and  the  knowledge  and 
preference  of  this  is  "wisdom."  Then  the  apprehension  and  the  employment  of 
the  means  which  shall  be  effectual  in  obtaining  it  is  "  understanding."  The 
habitual  avoidance  and  resistance  of  all  known  sin  is  a  sure  test  of  spiritual 


CHAP,  m.]  PROVERBS.  423 

"  wisdom "  and  spiritual  "  understanding."  II.  Why  are  wisdom  and  under- 
STANcmo  TO  BE  CHOSEN  RATHER  THAN  siLTER  AND  GOLD  ?  These  are  more  conducive 
than  silver  and  gold  to  solid  happiness.  There  are  many  things  in  the  countless 
evUs  which  make  up  man's  heritage  of  woe  for  which  silver  and  gold  can  provide 
no  remedy  whatever.  Wisdom  imparts  to  man  the  power  of  subjecting,  if  not  of 
satisfying  the  bodily  appetites ;  it  makes  him  rich,  if  not  by  increasing  his 
substance,  by  diminishing  his  wants ;  it  sets  before  him  the  continual  feast  of  a 
contented  heart.  And  it  teaches  how  to  avoid  and  escape  evils.  It  may  also  be 
added  that  wisdom  and  understanding  are  better  than  gold  and  silver  because  they 
alone  can  be  conducive  to  the  happiness  of  the  "life  that  is  to  come."  (T. 
Dale,  M. A.)  Better  than  gold  : — But  gold  is  good.  Solomon  evidently  regarded 
gold  as  among  his  most  valued  possessions.  Gold  is  precious,  when  we  remember 
aU  the  straits  and  struggles  it  can  save  us  from,  and  all  the  ease  and  comfort  it  can 
bring.  The  moral  teacher  who  speaks  hard  things  against  gold  only  confirms 
those  who  hear  him  in  the  idea  that  religion  will  not  do  for  this  work-a-day  world 
at  all.  All  the  gold  you  can  get  by  honest  labour,  conscientiously,  by  all  means  get. 
Ill-gotten  gold  will  ultimately  bum  both  your  fingers  and  your  pocket,  aye,  and  scar 
your  soul  too.  Yes,  gold  is  good,  but  wisdom  is  better  than  gold.  To  know  Christ 
in  the  heart  as  a  Saviour,  in  the  mind  as  a  Teacher,  in  the  life  as  a  Pattern,  and  in 
all  things  as  a  King — this  is  wisdom.  It  is  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  the  love  of  His 
law,  faith  in  His  Cross,  the"power  of  His  Spirit,  the  hope  in  His  Word.  Gold  can 
be  but  an  external  possession,  a  mere  accessory  of  life.  Nay,  all  the  luxuries  which 
gold  can  bring  do  all  the  sooner  exhaust  the  senses,  and  invite  their  fate.  But 
wisdom,  the  power  of  religion,  is  not  external,  though  it  affects  all  surrounding 
circumstances  for  good.  Wisdom  is  a  well,  a  fountain,  in  the  Christian's  soul.  It 
is  fed,  by  secret  channels,  direct  from  the  river  of  life.  Here,  then,  I  take  my  stand. 
Gold  may  be  with  me,  grace  shall  be  in  me.  Wealth  may  be  about  me,  wisdom 
shall  be  of  me,  not  an  endowment,  but  an  enduement.  Gold  is  but  lent  to  me,  but 
God's  favour  and  mercy  are  eternally  mine.  (J.  Jackson  Wray.)  Wisdom  : — 
This  is  reaUy  a  mental  contrast  instituted  between  the  respective  values  of  the  two 
flides  of  man's  nature — the  mind  and  the  body,  the  soul  and  the  senses.  In 
imagination  wisdom  is  made  to  stand  for  the  one,  and  gold,  the  most  coveted  of 
earthly  possessions,  for  the  other.  What  to  Solomon  did  "  wisdom "  mean  ? 
What  was  its  warp  and  woof  ?  what  its  mental  form  ?  There  are  elements  in 
wisdom  that  are  older  than  the  foundations  of  the  world,  nay,  that  are  coeval  with  the 
eternal  existence  of  God  Himself.  There  are  elements  in  even  human  wisdom,  as 
found  in  every  race  that  has  thought  and  risen  to  morality  and  virtue,  which  are  as 
imperishable  as  right  and  as  unalterable  as  the  laws  of  nature.  The  root  of  the  word 
"  wisdom "  is  "  weis,"  to  know,  or  to  think,  clearly.  It  reappears  in  the  word 
••wit."  Nimbleness  in  the  mental  perception  of  congruity  and  incongruity  is  the 
essence  of  wit.  Wisdom  should  mean  a  quick,  clear,  vivid  perception  of  the  true 
and  right  relations  of  every  kind  of  knowledge.  A  sophist  is  a  man  who  seeks  to 
gain  his  ends  quite  regardless  of  the  means  employed.  He  aims,  not  at  right 
judgment,  but  at  the  triumph  of  a  purpose.  True  wisdom  is  the  instinctive  and 
resolute  right  using  of  knowledge.  Knowledge,  taken  by  its  naked  and  unaided 
self,  instead  of  eimobling  a  man's  character,  may  even  be  the  most  powerful 
instrument  in  degrading  it.  The  very  core  of  wisdom  is  conscience.  Wisdom  in 
its  broadest  aspect  is  the  outcome  of  manhood,  trained,  disciplined,  and  cultured  to 
its  highest.  It  is  human  nature  in  equilibrium,  the  body  harnessed,  and  the  soul 
with  a  calm  grip  upon  the  reins.  There  are  some  who  banish  wisdom  from  the 
personal  sanctuary  of  noble  spiritual  life.  They  tell  us  that  wisdom  is  of  the  head, 
the  intellect — a  secular  not  a  sacred  quality.  Ignore  the  distinction.  A  soul 
without  reverence  may  become  learned,  but  can  never  become  wise.  The  reverent, 
the  worshipful  faculty  is  of  all  others  the  one  that  lifts  man  most  above  the  level  of 
the  brute.  Eeverence  is  human,  and  it  is  so  because  in  a  high  and  noble  sense 
humanity  is  Divine.  The  retaining  this  upwardness,  this  sense  of  reverence  in  the 
soul,  is  the  first  and  highest  duty  of  every  man.  This  reverence  we  are  in  danger 
of  losing.  The  very  greatness  of  manhood  is  that  wrong-doing  and  wrong-being 
are  possible  to  us  all,  and  possible  to  us  always.  Eight  can  only  be  where  wrong 
would  have  been  a  possible  alternative.  "  Know  thyself  "  is  a  maxim  of  supreme 
value.  We  can  penetrate  into  the  depths  of  ourselves,  and  discover  our  weakness  or 
strength.  No  influence  is  more  powerful  in  our  destiny  than  the  formation  of 
habit.  "  Sow  an  act,  and  you  reap  a  habit ;  sow  a  habit,  and  you  reap  a  character." 
The  chief  hindrance  to  the  getting  of  wisdom  is  the  early  formation  of  habits. 


424  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

They  may  morally  imprison  and  slay  ua.  You  are  responsible  before  God  and 
man  for  your  character.  (W.  H.  Dallinger,  D.D.)  Moral  and  material  wealth  .- — 
There  are  two  things  implied  in  this  verse.  1.  That  material  wealth  is  a  good 
thing.  "Gold  and  silver"  are  not  to  be  despised.  These  are  good — (1)  As  the 
creatures  of  God.  All  the  silver  and  gold  found  locked  up  in  the  chests  of 
mountains  He  made.  He  created  nothing  in  vain.  (2)  As  the  means  of  good. 
How  much  good  can  be  accomplished  by  material  wealth.  Intellectual,  social, 
moral,  religious  good.  2.  That  the  pursuit  of  material  wealth  is  a  legitimate  thing. 
I.  It  IS  "better"  in  its  possession.  1.  It  is  better  because  it  enriches  the  man 
himself.  The  wealth  of  Croesus  cannot  add  a  fraction  of  value  to  the  man. 
Millionaires  are  often  moral  paupers.  But  moral  wealth,  the  wealth  of  holy  loves, 
great  thoughts,  Divine  aims,  and  immortal  hopes  enrich  the  man  himself.  2.  It  is 
better,  because  it  creates  higher  enjoyments.  Money  has  no  necessary  power  to 
make  men  happy.  3.  It  invests  with  higher  dignities.  4.  It  is  destined  to  a  longer 
endurance.  II.  It  is  better  in  its  pursuit.  It  is  better  in  the  getting,  the 
choosing.  1.  The  pursuit  is  more  ennobUng.  The  mere  pursuit  of  material  wealth 
whUst  it  develops  certain  faculties  cramps  others  and  deadens  the  moral  sensibilities. 
Often  in  the  pursuit  of  riches  we  see  souls  that  might  have  expanded  into  seraphs 
running  into  grubs.  Not  so  with  the  pursuit  of  true  spiritual  wisdom.  All  the 
faculties  are  brought  into  play,  and  the  soul  rises  in  might  and  majesty.  2.  The 
pursuit  is  more  heavenly.  Amongst  the  millions  in  the  hierarchies  of  heaven  not 
one  soul  can  be  found  pursuing  material  good.  Their  "excelsior  "  is  for  a  higher 
assimilation  to  the  Infinite.  3.  The  pursuit  is  more  successful.  Thousands  try  for 
material  wealth  and  fail.  The  ditches  along  the  road  of  human  enterprise  are 
crowded  with  those  who  ran  with  all  their  might  in  the  race  for  wealth,  but  who 
fell  into  the  slough  of  pauperism  and  destitution.  But  you  will  not  find  one  who 
ever  earnestly  sought  spiritual  wealth  who  failed.  Every  true  effort  involves 
positive  attainment.      (D.    Thomas,  D.D.)  Wisdom  better  than  gold: — I.  In 

WHAT  respects  WISDOM  IS  BETTER  THAN  GOLD.  1.  It  is  better  in  its  origin.  No  man 
has  got  wisdom  without  a  knowledge  of  its  source  and  its  purity.  Whence  comes 
gold?  Let  the  miner  answer,  who  digs  it  with  great  labour  out  of  the  earth. 
Whence  comes  wisdom  ?  Let  the  Saviour  answer,  who  of  God  is  made  unto  us 
wisdom.  God  is  the  Source  of  wisdom.  He  that  teaches  man  knowledge  shall  He 
not  know  ?  There  is  a  spirit  in  man,  and  the  inspiration  of  the  Almighty  giveth 
him  understanding.  2.  It  is  better  in  its  nature.  Befine  gold  as  you  may,  it  has 
stUl  dross ;  but  the  wisdom  which  cometh  from  above  is  pure.  Love  gold  as  you 
may,  it  never  can  become  part  of  the  mind  ;  but  wisdom  can  be  incorporated  with 
it.  A  rich  man  may  have  to  leave  his  gold,  or  his  gold  may  leave  him ;  but  no 
matter  to  what  a  wise  man  is  subjected,  he  carries  his  wisdom  with  him.  8.  It  is 
better  in  its  influence.  Although  gold  is  a  good  thing  in  itself,  it  has  often  a  bad 
influence  on  depraved  minds.  Its  possession  not  unfrequently  contracts  the  mind, 
blunts  the  feelings,  and  increases  covetousness.  II.  For  what  purposes  is  wisdom 
BETTER  THAN  GOLD  ?  1.  It  is  better  for  guiding  a  man  in  the  affairs  of  this  life. 
How  many,  when  they  come  to  possess  gold,  show  themselves  to  be  fools  I  They 
spend  it  improperly,  and  damage  their  health,  ruin  their  character,  disgrace  their 
friends.  How  much  inferior  is  gold  to  wisdom  1  This  gives  a  man  forethought, 
teaches  him  to  avoid  evU,  to  improve  time,  and  to  conduct  his  affairs  with 
discretion.  It  gives  to  the  young  man  hope  of  success,  to  the  middle-aged  man 
perseverance  in  a  right  course,  and  to  the  aged  man  the  reward  of  his  diligence. 
Without  it,  the  scholar  can  make  no  advancement,  the  traveller  no  interesting 
observations,  nor  the  genius  any  important  di.scoveries.  By  wisdom  aU  the  arts 
and  sciences  have  been  advanced.  2.  It  is  better  for  guiding  a  man  in  the  choice 
of  things  for  another  life.  God  is  the  very  essence  of  wisdom.  This,  in  the  view 
of  created  intelligences,  makes  Him  greater  than  His  dominions  do :  He  created 
man,  and  put  wisdom  within  him,  and  riches  around  him ;  these  riches  could  not 
have  kept  him  from  falling,  but  his  wisdom  could.  No  amount  of  gold  or  riches 
could  reinstate  him  after  he  fell.  But  by  wisdom  he  was  restored.  By  wisdom 
God  baCfled  Satan's  designs  and  bruised  his  head.  III.  To  what  degree  is  it 
BETTER  TO  GET  WISDOM  THAN  GOLD  ?  I.  It  is  better,  as  the  soul  is  more  valuable  than 
the  body.  The  body  is  subject  to  decay,  and  must  soon  go  down  to  the  dust.  The 
soul  is  immortal,  and  though  it  must  leave  the  body  at  death,  it  continues  its 
existence  in  another  state.  What  can  gold  do  for  it  then?  How  much  better  is 
wisdom,  which  adorns  the  soul  with  heavenly  graces,  and  makes  it  shine  in  the 
beautieb  of  hoUness.    Blessed  with  heavenly  wisdom,  the  soul  is  rich  for  eternity. 


CHAP.  XVI.]  PROVERBS.  425 

2.  It  is  better,  as  eternity  is  more  enduring  than  time.  Gold  had  its  beginning  in 
this  world,  and  will  end  with  it.  Wisdom  comes  from  another  world  and  will 
continue  in  it.  3.  It  is  better,  as  heaven  is  more  glorious  than  this  world.  4.  It 
is  better,  as  its  possession  gives  more  lasting  happiness.  5.  It  is  better,  as  a  crown 
of  glory  is  more  dignifying  than  a  crown  of  gold.  (1)  Learn  the  great  importance 
of  being  wise  for  eternity.  (2)  True  wisdom  is  now  to  be  found.  (3)  Let  me 
entreat  you,  ask  wisdom  of  the  Lord.  (John  3Iiller.)  Better  than  gold  : — A  few 
years  ago  the  news  of  gold  in  California  spread  like  wildfire  all  over  the  country. 
Everybody  wanted  to  go  and  get  some.  The  storekeeper  shut  up  his  shop  and 
went.  The  mason  threw  down  his  trowel  and  went.  The  farmer  left  his  crops, 
and  the  shoemaker  his  last,  and  hurried  off  to  the  land  of  gold.  The  excitement 
was  so  great  that  it  was  called  the  "  gold  fever."  Good  as  that  getting  was  thought 
to  be,  there  is  something  better  to  get,  better  than  a  whole  gold-mine.  Why  is  it  so 
much  better  ?  1.  You  cannot  be  robbed  of  it.  Wisdom  cannot  be  stolen.  Neither 
can  fire  burn  it,  or  water  drown  it.  Locusts  cannot  eat  it,  or  bhght  or  mildew 
harm  it.  Bad  times  cannot  damage  its  value,  or  bad  partners  gamble  it  away. 
You  may  sail  round  the  world,  and  not  leave  it  behind.  You  may  be  shipwrecked, 
and  not  lose  it.  You  may  be  put  in  prison  and  carry  it  with  you.  It  is  not  too 
rich  for  a  cottage,  or  too  poor  for  a  palace.  Sickness  does  not  cheapen  its  worth, 
or  health  add  to  it.  Nothing  robs  it  of  its  value.  Times  and  seasons,  which  alter 
everything  else,  make  no  alteration  in  this.  2.  Wisdom  is  better  than  gold, 
because  it  pays  better.  "  Godliness  is  profitable  unto  all  things,  having  promise  of 
the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come."  It  says  in  keeping  God's 
commands  there  is  "  great  reward."  Yes,  wisdom  yields  a  greater  profit,  a  better 
gain,  than  gold  or  silver.  Can  gold  buy  the  pardon  of  sin  ?  Can  it  get  you  peace 
and  happiness  ?  Can  it  secure  to  you  room  in  heaven  ?  No,  gold  cannot  purchase 
these ;  and  these  are  what  you  want.  When  Mr.  Astor  had  acquired  his  large 
property,  and  was  called  the  richest  man  in  the  country,  "I  wish,"  he  said,  "I 
could  go  back  to  a  poor  boy,  and  make  it  all  over  again."  The  possession  of  it  did 
not  make  him  happy.    Gold  does  not  satisfy.    (Church  of  England  Magazine.) 

Ver.  17.  The  highway  of  the  upright  is  to  depart  from  eviL — Departing  from 
evil : — In  this  text  is — I.  The  upeight.  Those  who  are  bent  on  doing  the  will  of 
God.  Those  who  keep  the  commandments  of  their  Maker.  Those  who  endeavour, 
by  God's  grace,  so  to  live  as  to  be  justified,  and  pardoned  and  acquitted  in  the  day 
of  judgment.  II.  The  highway.  By  this  is  meant  the  general  course,  the  mode 
of  living,  the  habitual  practice,  the  constant  endeavour,  all  the  thoughts  and  words 
and  actions  of  the  man  at  all  times.  The  way,  the  royal  road,  the  highway  of  his 
life.  III.  The  term  "  depart."  It  does  not  say,  "  The  highway  of  the  upright  is 
not  to  do  evil " — that  is  true ;  but  it  does  not  say  so  here.  The  text  is  "  depart  from 
evil,"  go  from  it ;  give  it  his  back ;  walk  off  and  leave  it  behind ;  shun  it  as  an 
adder;  avoid  it  as  a  scorpion;  flee  from  it  as  a  serpent.  IV.  Evil.  Need  not 
concern  ourselves  with  the  origin  of  evil.  We  have  enough  to  do  with  the  thing  as 
it  is.  We  find  its  presence  everywhere.  The  two  principles,  good  and  evil,  must 
live  as  long  as  the  world  lasts  ;  and  live  constantly  at  variance,  constantly  fighting 
against  one  another,  constantly  overcoming  one  another.  It  is  ours  to  avoid  the 
one  and  cleave  to  the  other — that  is  our  wisest  course  ;  that  is  our  plainest  duty. 
All  the  actions  of  life  must  be  either  good  or  evil.  There  is,  and  there  can  be,  no 
neutrality  in  them.  The  degree  of  goodness  or  badness  may  be  great  or  small,  but 
the  one  or  the  other  they  must  be.  We  are  speaking  of  moral  evil.  There  is  what 
is  called  natural  evil,  i.e.,  evU  belonging  to  the  material  and  physical  world  around 
us.  But  what  is  it  that  makes  one  thing  or  action  good  and  another  evil  ?  Who 
is  it  that  pronounces  on  the  quality  of  actions  ?  Where  is  the  rule  by  which  we 
are  to  determine  what  is  right  or  wrong  ?  It  is  the  will  of  that  Being  who  gives  us 
the  power  by  which  aU  we  do  is  done — that  will  makes  things  right  or  wrong.  It 
is  the  manifestation  of  that  will  in  the  Bible  ;  therefore  the  Bible  contains  the  rule, 
the  law,  by  which  all  our  actions  are  to  be  judged  and  determined.  It  is  there  we 
must  find  what  is  right  and  what  is  wrong.  We  may  divide  evil  into  two  branches — 
1.  Actions  that  are  wrong  in  themselves.  2.  Actions  that  are  wrong  only  on 
account  of  their  effects.  Thus  far  we  have  spoken  of  actions  individually  con- 
sidered. But  God  has  created  other  men  and  women  beside  ourselves,  and  placed 
them  and  us  to  dwell  on  the  face  of  the  earth  together.  They  bear  certain  relations 
to  us,  and  we  to  them.  These  relations  give  rise  to  certain  common  interests ;  and 
these  interests,  again,  to  certain  laws  and  regulations  by  which  they  are  sustained 


426  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

and  guarded.  These  laws  must  be  consulted  in  all  public  acts,  and  the  breach  of 
one  of  these  laws  on  the  part  of  a  member  of  the  community  is  an  evil.  These 
remarks  apply  to  men  as  members  of  families  and  of  communities,  as  citizenB  of 
towns  and  cities,  as  subjects  of  countries  and  kingdoms,  as  fellows  of  all  men 
besides.  A  public  act  is  an  evU  if  it  bring  more  evil  than  good  to  the  community 
as  a  whole,  and  as  a  community,  therefore,  you  ought  to  condemn  and  prevent  an 
act  which  brings  more  evil  than  good  into  your  midst.     {Maxwell  M.  Ben  Oliel.) 

Ver.  18.  Pride  goeth  before  destruction,  and  an  haughty  spirit  before  a  fall. — 

Shame  and  contempt   the  end  of  pride : — I.  Show  what  pride   and   haughtiness 
MEAN.     Pride  is  thinking  of  ourselves  more  highly  than  we  ought  to  think.     It  is 
a  corruption  of  self-love,  it  is  self-flattery.    A  man  thinks  too  highly  of  himself 
when  he  thinks  that  anything  he  has  is  his  own ;  or  when  he  conceives  himself  to 
have  what  he  really  has  not ;  or  when  he  challenges  more  respect  than  is  due  to 
him  on  the  score  of  what  he  has.    Pride  is  not  peculiar  to  persons  of  any  one 
rank.    II.  Illustrate  the  truth  of  this  observatiok  from  Scripture  and  reason. 
Pride  will  generally  have  a  fall.     1.  Argue  from  the  reason  of  the  thing  itself,  and 
its  natural  tendency.     Some  kinds   of  pride  are  very  expensive.     Pride   is  very 
contentious,  and  makes  a  man  enemies.    Pride  makes  men  over-confident  in  their 
own  efficiency.    Vanity  runs  men  into  error  and  mistakes.     2.  Argue  that  God  has 
particularly  declared  His  detestation  of  pride,  and  His  resolution  to  punish  it.    The 
whole  tenor  of   Scripture  intimates  how  exceeding  hateful  pride  is  to  Almighty 
God.     The  reasons  for  it  are  obvious.     Pride  is  improper  and  unbecoming  our 
condition  and  circumstances.     It  is  an  inlet  to  all  vices.     Reflections :  (1)  Here 
is  a  proper  consideration  for  dissuading  men  from  pride,   or  curing  them  of 
it.     (2)  Commend    the    humility  which   is   spoken   so    highly   of    in   Scripture. 
(D.  Waterlajid,  D.D.)         The  vice  of  pride  : — This  vice  is  animadverted  on  with 
peculiar  severity  in  this  Book  of  Proverbs.     For  this  two  reasons  may  be  assigned. 
I.  The  extensiveness  of   the    sin.     Pride  is   a  corruption   that   seems  almost 
originally  ingrafted  in  our  nature ;  it  exerts  itself  in  our  first  years,  and,  without 
continual  endeavours  to   suppress  it,  influences  our  last.     Other  vices  tyrannise 
over  particular  ages,  and  triumph  in  particular  countries  ;  but  pride  is  the  native 
of  every  country,  infects  every  climate,  and  corrupts  every  nation.     It   mingles 
with  all  our  other  vices,  and  without  the  most  constant  and  anxious   care  will 
mingle  also  with  our  virtues.     11.  The  circumstances  of  the  preacher.     Pride 
was  probably  a  crime  to  which  Solomon  himself  was  most  violently  tempted.     He 
was  placed  in  every  circumstance  that  could  expose  him  to  it.    He  had  the  pride  of 
royalty,  prosperity,  knowledge,  and  wealth  to  suppress.     1.  Consider  the  nature  of 
pride,  with  its  attendants  and  consequences.     It  is  an  immoderate  degree  of  self- 
esteem,  or  an  over-value  set  by  a  man  upon  himself.     It  is  founded  originally  on 
an  intellectual  falsehood.    In   real  life  pride  is  always  attended  with  kindred 
passions,  and  produces  effects  equally  injurious  to  others  and  destructive  to  itself. 
He  that  over-values   himself  will  under-value  others,  and  he  that  under-values 
others  will  oppress  them.     Pride  has  been   able  to   harden  the  heart  against 
compassion,  and  stop  the  ears  against  the  cry  of  misery.     He  that  sets  too  high 
a  value  upon  his  own  merits  will,  of  course,  think  them  ill  rewarded  with  his 
present  condition.     To  pride  must  be   attributed  most  of  the  fraud,  injustice, 
violence,  and  extortion,  by  which  wealth  is  frequently  acquired.    Another  con- 
comitant of   pride  is  envy,   or  the   desire  of   debasing  others.     Another  is   an 
insatiable  desire  of  propagating  in  others  the  favourable  opinion  he  entertains  of 
himself.     No  proud  man  is  satisfied  with  being  simply  his  own  admirer.     2.  The 
usual   motives   to   pride.     We  grow  proud   by  comparing   ourselves  with   others 
weaker  than  ourselves.     Another  common  motive  to  pride  is  knowledge.     Another, 
a  consciousness  of  virtue.     Spiritual  pride   is   generally  accompanied  with  great 
uncharitableness  and  severe  censures  of  others,  and  may  obstruct  the  great  duty 
of  repentance.     It  may  be  well  to  conclude  with  the  amiableness  and  excellence  of 
humility.     "  With  the  lowly  there  is  wisdom."     (S.  Johnson,  LL.D.)       Knowledge 
nourishes  humility  : — We  may  arm   ourselves  against  the   haughty  spirit  which 
Solomon  speaks  of  as  precursor  of  a  fall.     There  is  a  tendency  in  knowledge  to 
the  producing  of  humility,  so  that  the  more  a  man  knows,  the  more  likely  is  he  to 
think  little   of   himself.     The   arrogant   and   conceited   person   is   ordinarily  the 
superficial   and   ignorant.     The   man   of  real   powers  and  great  acquirements  is 
usually  a  simple  and  unaffected  man.     He  who  knows  most  is  most  conscious  of 
how  little  he  knows.     There  is  no  truer  definition  of  human  knowledge  than  that 


CHAP,  xn.]  PROVERBS,  427 

it  is  the  knowledge  of  human  ignorance.  Oh  singular  constitution  of  pride,  thai 
its  very  existence  should  be  our  proof  of  its  absurdity  1  Try  the  afiQrmation  that 
knowledge  produces  humility,  in  relation  to  our  state  by  nature,  and  to  our  state  by 
grace.  Pride  proves  deficiency  of  knowledge  in  both  these  respects.  As  to  man's 
natural  condition,  how  can  anybody  be  i^roud  who  knows  that  condition  ?  There 
is  no  such  contrast  as  that  which  may  be  drawn  between  man  a  fallen  creature, 
and  man  a  redeemed  creature.  But  this  does  not  puff  the  redeemed  man  up  with 
pride,  seeing  redemption  is  not  his  work,  but  emanates  from  free-grace.  Therefore, 
study  ye  yourselves ;  pray  God  for  the  aid  of  His  Spirit  to  discover  you  to 
yourselves.      Then    you    may  grow   up    into  the   stature  of    the   perfect    man. 

iH.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Pride  and  humility  : — I.  Pkide  as  the  precursor  of  ruin. 
?ride  and  haughtiness  are  equivalents.  What  is  here  predicted  of  pride — 
1.  Agrees  with  its  nature.  It  is  according  to  the  instinct  of  pride  to  put  its 
subject  in  an  unnatural,  and,  therefore,  in  an  unsafe  position.  The  proud  man's 
foot  is  on  quicksand,  not  on  rock.  2.  Agrees  with  its  history.  Destruction  always 
has  followed  in  its  march.  II.  Humility  is  the  pledge  of  good.  What  are  all 
the  spoils  of  earth's  haughty  conquerors  to  be  compared  with  the  blessedness  of 
a  genuinely  humble  soul?  "  Humility,"  says  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie,  "leads  to  the 
highest  distinction,  because  it  leads  to  self-improvement.  Study  to  know  your  own 
character ;  endeavour  to  learn,  and  to  supply  your  own  deficiencies  ;  never  assume 
to  yourselves  qualities  which  you  do  not  possess."  (Homilist.)  The  dangers  of 
pride : — I.  What  is  it  we  are  to  beware  of  ?  Pride  and  a  haughty  spirit. 
1.  Lofty  thoughts  of  ourselves.  2.  Disdain  of  others.  3.  Boastful  talk.  4.  liash 
and.  vain  actions.  H.  The  evils  of  pride.  1.  It  separates  us  from  God  (Psa. 
cxixviii.  6;  ver.  5).  2.  Makes  men  hate  us.  3.  Brings  us  to  ruin.  Examples 
and  illustrations :  Pharaoh,  Goliath,  Absalom,  Sennacherib,  Belshazzar, 
Haman,  Lucifer,  the  Pharisees,  Herod,  Wolsey  ("I  and  the  king"),  Napoleon 
Bonaparte,  Boulanger.  {R.  Brewin.)  The  doiunfall  of  pride  : — A  kite  having 
risen  to  a  very  great  height,  moved  in  the  air  as  stately  as  a  prince,  and  looked 
down  with  much  contempt  on  all  below.  "  What  a  superior  being  I  am  now  !  " 
said  the  kite  ;  "  who  has  ever  ascended  so  high  as  I  have  ?  What  a  poor  grovelling 
set  of  beings  are  all  those  beneath  me  !  I  despise  them."  And  then  he  shook  his 
head  in  derision,  and  then  he  wagged  his  tail ;  and  again  he  steered  along  with  so 
much  state  as  if  the  air  were  all  his  own,  and  as  if  everything  must  make  way 
before  him ;  when  suddenly  the  string  broke,  and  down  fell  the  kite  with  greater 
haste  than  he  ascended,  and  was  greatly  hurt  in  the  fall.  Pride  often  meets  with 
a  downfall.    (W.  Cohhin.) 

Ver.  19.  Better  it  is  to  be  of  an  humble  spirit  with  the  lowly,  than  to  divide  the 
spoil  with  the  proud. — The  character  and  conduct  of  the  lowly  under  affliction  : — 
There  is  a  generation  of  lowly  afflicted  ones,  having  their  spirit  lowered  and 
brought  down  to  their  lot,  whose  case,  in  that  respect,  is  better  than  that  of  the 
proud  getting  their  will,  and  carrying  all  to  their  mind.  1.  There  is  a  generation 
of  lowly  afflicted  ones  in  the  world,  as  bad  as  the  world  is.  They  are  in  this 
world,  where  the  state  of  trial  is.  2.  If  it  v?ere  not  so,  Christ,  as  He  was  in  the 
world,  would  have  no  followers  in  it.  3.  Nevertheless,  they  are  very  rare  in  this 
world.  Many  a  high-bended  spirit  keeps  on  the  bend  in  spite  of  lowering  circum- 
stances. 4.  They  can  be  no  more  in  number  than  the  truly  godly.  To  bring  the 
spirit  truly  to  a  low  and  crossed  lot  must  be  the  effect  of  humbling  grace.  5.  A 
lowly  disposition  of  soul,  and  habitual  aim  and  bent  of  the  heart  that  way,  has 
a  very  favourable  construction  put  upon  it  in  heaven.  Enter  into  particulars  of 
the  character  of  the  lowly.  There  is  a  yoke  of  affliction,  of  one  kind  or  other, 
oftentimes  upon  them.  There  is  a  particular  yoke  of  affliction,  which  God  has 
chosen  for  them,  that  hangs  about  them,  and  is  seldom,  if  ever,  off  them.  That 
is  their  special  trial,  the  crook  in  their  lot.  They  think  soberly  and  meanly  of 
themselves,  but  highly  and  honourably  of  God.  They  think  favourably  of  others,  as 
far  as  in  justice  they  may.  They  are  sunk  down  into  a  state  of  subordination  to 
God's  wiU.  They  are  not  bent  on  high  things,  but  disposed  to  stoop  to  low  things. 
They  are  apt  to  magnify  mercies  bestowed  on  them.  Consider  the  generation  of 
the  proud,  getting  their  will,  and  carrying  all  to  their  mind.  1.  There  are  crosses 
in  their  lot.  Sin  has  turned  the  world  from  a  paradise  to  a  thicket ;  there  is  no 
getting  through  without  being  scratched.  The  pride  of  the  heart  exposes  them 
particularly  to  crosses.  They  have  an  over-value  for  themselves.  Men  are  bigger 
in  their  own  conceit  than  they  are  indeed.     They  have  an  unmortified  self-will. 


428  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

They  have  a  crowd  of  unsubdued  passions  taking  part  with  the  self-will. 
But  a  holy  God  crosses  the  self-will  of  the  proud  creatures  by  His  providence,  over- 
ruling and  disposing  of  things  contrary  to  their  inclination.  Getting  their  will, 
and  carrying  all  to  their  mind,  teUs  of  holy  Providence  yielding  to  the  man's 
unmortified  self-will,  and  letting  it  go  according  to  his  mind  ;  it  tells  also  of  the 
lust  remaining  in  its  strength  and  vigour  ;  of  the  cross  removed  ;  and  of  the  man's 
pleasure  in  having  carried  his  point.  Confirm  the  doctrine  of  the  text,  that  the 
case  of  the  former  is  better  than  that  of  the  latter.  1.  Humility  is  a  piece  of  the 
image  of  God.  Pride  is  the  masterpiece  of  the  image  of  the  devil.  2.  Humility 
and  lowliness  of  spirit  qualify  us  for  friendly  communion  and  intercourse  with 
God  in  Christ.  Pride  makes  God  our  enemy.  3.  Humility  is  a  duty  pleasing 
to  God,  pride  a  sin  pleasing  to  the  devil.  Those  whose  spirits  are  brought  down 
to  their  afflicted  lot  have  quiet  and  repose  of  mind.  This  is  a  great  blessing, 
upon  which  the  comfort  of  life  depends.  Our  whole  trouble  in  our  lot  ariseth 
from  the  disagreement  of  our  mind  therewith.  The  proud  can  but  make  a  better 
condition  in  outward  things ;  but  humility  makes  a  better  man ;  and  the  man  is 
more  valuable  than  all  external  conveniences  that  attend  him.    (T.  Boston.) 

Yer.  20.  He  that  handleth  a  matter  wisely  shall  find  good :  and  whoso  trusteth 
in  the  Lord,  happy  is  he. — Trust  in  God—  true  ivisdom : — "Wisdom  is  man's  true 
path — that  which  enables  him  to  accomplish  best  the  end  of  his  being,  and  which, 
therefore,  gives  to  him  the  richest  enjoyment  and  the  fullest  play  for  all  his 
powers.  Give  man  wisdom,  in  the  true  sense  of  the  term,  and  he  rises  to  all 
the  dignity  that  manhood  can  possibly  know.  But  where  shall  this  wisdom  be 
found  ?  He  that  trusts  in  the  Lord  has  found  out  the  way  to  handle  matters 
wisely,  and  happy  is  he.     Take  this  text — I.  With  regard  to  the  wise  handling 

OF   MATTERS  OF   TIME  WHICH   CONCERN  OUR  BODIES  AND  OUR  SOULS  WHILST  WE  ARE  HERE 

BELOW.  Satan  says,  to  handle  a  matter  wisely  is  to  make  your  own  wiU  your  law ; 
or  he  says,  "Be  crafty";  or  he  moderates  his  tone  and  says,  "Be  careful."  It  is 
often  said  to  the  young  man,  "  Be  self-reliant ;  be  independent."  The  true  way  of 
wisdom  is  to  act  in  all  prudence  and  in  all  uprightness,  but  to  rely  simply  and 
entirely  on  God.  Faith  is  as  much  the  rule  of  temporal  as  of  spiritual  life. 
Trust  God,  and  you  will  not  have  to  mourn  because  you  have  used  sinful  means 
to  grow  rich.     Trust  God,  and  you  will  not  be  guilty  of  self-contradiction.    II.  In 

SPIRITUAL   MATTERS,   HE   THAT   HANDLETH  A  MATTER  WISELY   SHALL   FIND   GOOD.      Here 

Satan  tempts  to  be  careless  or  to  be  credulous ;  or  he  bids  us  work  out  our  own 
salvation.  The  true  way  of  dealing  wisely  here  is  believing  in  Christ,  trusting 
Him  fully.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  conditions  of  a  happy  life: — I.  Skilful 
MANAGEMENT.  "He  that  handleth  a  matter  wisely  shall  find  good."  Skilful 
management  in  every  department  of  life  is  of  the  utmost  importance.  1.  It  is  so 
in  intellectual  improvement.  The  man  who  desires  to  get  a  well-informed  and  a 
well-disciplined  mind  must  arrange  both  the  subjects  and  the  seasons  of  study 
with  skill.  Method  is  of  primary  moment  in  the  business  of  intellect.  2.  It  is  so 
in  mercantile  engagements.  3.  It  is  so  in  spiritual  culture.  A  wise  selection  of  the 
best  readings,  and  the  most  favourable  seasons  for  devotion  cannot  be  dispensed 
with  if  great  spiritual  good  is  to  be  got.  II.  A  well-stated  heart.  "  Whoso 
trusteth  in  the  Lord,  happy  is  he."  God  is  the  stay  of  the  heart.  1.  He  is  happy 
in  his  love.  2.  He  is  happy  in  his  policy.  3.  He  is  happy  in  his  speech.  "And 
the  sweetness  of  his  lips  increaseth  learning."  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The 
happiness  of  trusting  in  God : — This  proverb  builds  on  the  ground  that  aU  men 
desire  happiness.  Philosophers,  in  all  ages  of  the  world,  have  been  trying  to  find 
out  and  teach  what  is  man's  greatest  good  ;  and  people  generally,  from  the  days  of 
David,  have  been  asking,  "  Who  will  show  us  any  good?"  The  Stoics  gave  one 
answer,  the  Epicureans  another,  as  to  man's  chief  good.  Those  who  now  ask, 
"  Is  life  worth  living  ? "  agree  with  neither.  It  is  doubtless  the  case,  that  the 
devotee  of  wealth,  of  fame,  of  power,  or  social  eminence  finds,  whenever  he  is 
successful  in  his  efforts,  that  neither  wealth  nor  fame,  neither  power  nor  eminence 
in  social  position,  gives  the  happiness  which  he  sought  therein.  The  results  of 
thousands  of  years  of  experiments  and  of  experience,  before  and  since  Solomon's 
day,  are  set  forth  in  the  words  of  the  proverb  which  is  my  text,  "Whoso  trusteth 
in  the  Lord,  happy  is  he."  I.  Trust  in  God  la  the  ground  on  which  man  finds 
freedom  from  the  bondage  of  sin,  and  from  the  painful  sense  of  the  condemna- 
tion due  to  him  foe  his  sin.  Every  one  knows,  and  sometimes  feels,  that  he  is  a 
Binful  man.    This  sense  of  sin  is  felt  in  the  greatest  variety  of  circumstances.     It 


CHAP,  xn.]  PROVERBS.  429 

may  arise  in  a  man's  breast  when  his  condition  is  most  prosperous — when  he  ia 
driying  forward  some  business  on  which  his  heart  has  long  been  set.  Sometimes 
this  painful  consciousness  of  guilt  springs  up  after  the  accomplishment  of  some 
undertaking  which  has  taxed  one's  powers  for  months,  or  even  years.  It  is  not 
unfrequently  the  case  that  a  man  is  disturbed  in  this  way  soon  after  he  has  yielded 
to  some  evil  thought  or  impulse,  or  soon  after  he  has  neglected  to  perform  some 
duty.  The  world  is  full  of  instances  of  this  sense  of  sin  in  times  of  danger  and 
calamity.  Thus  King  Saul  felt  it  in  his  last  days.  Thus  the  brothers  of  Joseph 
found  it  pierced  their  hearts  when  they  were  in  trouble.  Thus  it  overwhelmed  the 
Boul  of  King  David  when  the  prophet  Nathan  told  him  the  tender  story  of  the  poor 
citizen  and  his  lamb.  But  this  painful  sense  of  sin  comes  to  other  persons  than 
these  terrible  offenders.  Is  there  any  person  here  who  did  not  feel  it  even  in  his 
childhood  ?  It  comes,  perhaps,  after  some  act  of  disobedience  or  neglect  toward 
father  or  mother.  Perhaps  it  aroso  after  some  feeling  of  anger,  or  of  envy  toward 
brother  or  sister.  It  may  have  sprung  up  in  the  mind  after  some  unkind  word  or 
selfish  act  toward  playmate  or  schoolfellow.  This  fearful  consciousness  of  sin  has 
been  many  a  time  felt  when  thought  has  been  given  to  the  truth,  that  God  has 
appointed  death  for  every  man,  and  the  judgment  after  it.  The  poets  of  human 
nature  abound  in  the  manifestation  of  this  painful  sense  of  sin.  Milton  represents 
a  guilty  spirit  as  saying  that  others  little  know  under  what  torments  inwardly  he 
groans,  so  that  he  has  to  cry  in  his  agony,  "  Which  way  I  fly  is  hell ;  myself 
am  hell ! "  This  sense  of  sin,  which  is  felt  with  all  degrees  of  painfulness,  all 
who  trust  in  the  Lord  find  relieved  by  the  assurance  of  His  forgiveness  through  His 
Son  Jesus  Christ.  For  "there  is  no  condemnation  to  them  who  are  in  Christ 
Jesus."  II.  Whoever  trusts  God  is  no  longer  hostile  to  Him.  The  en:\iitt  op 
THE  heart  against  THE  MosT  HiGH  AND  THE  MosT  HoLT  One  CEASES.  Accepted  in 
the  Beloved,  he  has  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  This  gives 
the  faithful  happiness.  It  was  no  shallow  source  of  joy  for  the  brothers  of  Joseph 
(when  their  sin  had  found  them  out)  to  be  made  sure  that  there  was  peace  between 
the  ruler  of  Egypt  and  themselves ;  and  it  is  not  a  small  boon  for  any  man, 
conscious  of  his  sin,  to  know  that  there  is  reconciliation  and  peace  between  himself 
and  his  Omnipotent  Maker  and  righteous  Judge,  through  the  mediation  and 
redemption  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     III.  Another  reason  why  the  man  who 

TRUSTS  IN  the  LoRD  IS  HAPPY  MAY  BE   SEEN  IN  THIS  FACT NAMELY,  THAT    HE  HAS  THE 

INDWELLING  OF  THE  DiVINE  SpIRIT  TO  MAINTAIN    HIS    SPIRITUAL  AND  ETERNAL  LIFE.      If 

the  faithful  had  to  rely  upon  their  own  wisdom,  strength,  and  other  resources,  they 
might  soon  despair  of  perseverance  in  the  Christian  life.  But  whosoever  trusteth 
in  the  Lord  is  not  abandoned  by  the  Almighty.  The  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  given 
unto  the  faithful,  sheds  abroad  the  love  of  God  in  their  hearts ;  and  neither  death, 
nor  hfe,  nor  angels,  nor  principalities,  nor  powers,  nor  things  present,  nor  things 
to  come,  nor  height,  nor  deptlh,  nor  any  other  creature  shall  be  able  to  separate 
them  from  the  love  of  God.  IV.  The  man  whose  trust  is  in  God  has  the  feeling 
OF  happiness  because  he  has  the  assurance  of  safety  and  salvation.  There  is, 
indeed,  a  sense  of  security  in  some  persons  which  springs  not  from  the  full  trust  of 
the  heart  in  God ;  but  it  exists  because  there  is  no  heed  to  Him.  A  man  may 
build  his  hope  of  everlasting  happiness  and  heaven  on  no  better  foundation  than 
the  he  which  the  fool  tells  to  his  heart  when  he  says  there  is  no  God.  He  may 
build  it  on  his  own  thoughtlessness  in  respect  to  the  existence,  the  character, 
the  law,  and  the  purposes  and  judgments  of  God.  This  kind  of  assurance  of 
safety  is  the  belief  of  some  prodigals  that  they  will  never  become  spendthrifts.  It 
is  the  assurance  of  some  drunkards  that  they  will  never  drink  too  much,  and 
become  intemperate.  How  different  is  the  safe  and  serene  condition  of  the  man 
who  puts  his  trust  in  God  !     V.  Whosoever  trusts  in  the  Lord  is  happy  because 

HE  DELIGHTS  IN  GOD  AND  DESIRES  TO  DO  HIS  DUTY  TOWARD  HiM.       Some   children  loVS 

their  parents,  delight  in  them,  and  find  a  rich  gratification  in  pleasing  and  obeying 
them.  The  manifestation  of  their  filial  affection  is  charming  to  others.  The 
outflow  of  it  is  joy  to  themselves.  Very  much  of  their  happiness  springs 
from  it.  The  faithful  generally  delight  in  doing  their  duty  toward  God.  The 
way  of  duty  is  their  chosen  path.  The  sources  of  their  joy  never  faU. 
They  are  not  surface  streams  that  freeze  over  in  winter  and  run  dry  in  sum- 
mer. The  touch  of  death  cannot  reach  them.  They  are  as  perpetual  in 
heaven  as  upon  earth.  VI.  Whosoever  trusts  in  God  is  happy  because  thb 
Divine  Peovidencb  is  unchangeably  set  to  do  the  faithful  good.  {E. 
Whitaker,  D.D.) 


430  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chai-.  rn. 


Ver.  21.  The  wise  in  heart  shall  be  called  prudent. — The  wise  in  heart : — 
I.  These  words  are  an  assertion  that  true  wisdom  will  show  itself  in  a 
PR0DENT  CONDUCT  OF  LIFE.  His  wisdom  will  gain  him  the  reputation  of  a  discreet, 
serious,  and  sensible  man.  Wisdom  is  the  mother  of  intellectual  and  prudence 
of  practical  virtues.  It  may  be  said  that  wisdom  may  be  separated  from 
prudence,  that  knowing  and  doing  are  two  things.  There  are  many  men 
in  the  world  who  have  wise  heads  and  foolish  hearts — men  of  good  capacities, 
clear  understandings,  well  improved  by  reading  and  observation ;  but  they 
have  some  odd  humour,  fond  opinion,  beloved  lust,  which  hinders  them  from 
living  according  to  their  knowledge.  Such  wise  men  as  these  Solomon  puts 
into  the  catalogue  of  his  "  fools,"  because  they  have  the  means  of  doing 
well  in  their  power,  and  make  no  use  of  them.  The  prudent  man  is  careful 
to  enter  upon  good  ways,  and  walk  uprightly  in  them.  He  chooses  honest 
ends,  and  takes  honest  methods  to  attain  them.  A  false  and  counterfeit 
wisdom  is  wholly  made  up  of  fallacies  and  cunning  devices.  "  The  folly  of 
fools  is  deceit."  Their  sense,  learning,  reasonings,  and  vivacity  of  wit  serve 
but  to  heighten  their  folly,  to  sweeten  their  delusions,  and  confirm  them  in 
their  errors.  This  is  the  case  where  wisdom  rests  only  in  the  head :  but  when  it 
descends  to  the  heart,  and  warms  the  affections  with  the  love  of  that  which  is 
good,  it  fails  not  to  bless  the  world  with  a  truly  valuable  and  useful  man.  He  that 
is  truly  wise  differs  from  a  conceited,  talkative  man  in  this,  that  he  thankfully 
receives  good  advice,  and  avoids  the  dangers  of  which  he  is  admonished.  U.  A 
COMPARISON  BETWEEN  WISDOM  AND  ELOQUENCE.  The  powcrful  charms  of  eloquence 
add  value  to  wisdom.  Solomon  in  several  places  testifies  his  approbation  of 
ornaments  of  speech.  Wisdom  and  eloquence  united  together  are  very  desirable 
talents  in  a  legislator,  governor,  or  teacher  of  religion.  Moses  and  Jeremiah  seem, 
however,  to  have  lacked  this  gift  of  eloquence.  Eloquence  should  be  put  under 
the  direction  of  wisdom.  There  is  no  heresy  or  other  error  in  religion  but  what 
has  prevailed  and  gained  acceptance  by  abused  eloquence.  HI.  The  words  of  the 
TEXT  intimate  A  RULE  OF  PROFITABLE  TEACHING.  In  ordcr  to  get  wisdom,  we  must 
study  to  know  ourselves,  and  see  what  faculties  and  talents  God  hath  bestowed 
upon  us,  and  by  daily  use  and  exercise  improve  them,  and  add  both  to  their 
weight  and  number.  Jesus  Christ  is  called  the  "  Wisdom  of  God,"  as  containing 
in  Himself  all  the  treasures  of  Divine  wisdom.  His  hearers  asked,  "Whence 
hath  this  man  this  wisdom  ?  "  His  prudence  was  far  superior  to  the  craft  and 
contrivance  of  His  enemies.  He  had  also  all  external  advantages  of  an  eloquent 
speaker.  They  said,  "Never  man  spake  like  this  man."  The  same  gifts  He 
promised  to  bestow  on  His  apostles  for  the  same  end  and  purpose.  He  that  seeks 
after  wisdom  by  his  prayers  to  God,  and  his  reading  and  hearing  of  His  holy 
Word,  and  honest  application  of  it  in  the  ordering  of  his  life,  shall  not  seek  in 
vain.  Though  his  wisdom  seem  at  first  but  as  a  grain  of  mustard-seed,  by  a 
diligent  cultivation  of  it  that  wisdom  will  wonderfully  increase  and  bring  forth 
abundance  of  fruit.  (W.  Reading,  M.A.)  Wiae-hearted  folk  .—The  "wise  in 
heart"  are  those  who,  under  the  influences  of  sound  principles,  know  how  to 
"order  their  affairs  with  discretion."  Men  of  the  most  splendid  powers  and 
attainments  are  not  always  the  most  remarkable  for  practical  good  sense. 
Better,  therefore,  in  many  respects,  is  the  man  whose  wisdom  regulates  his 
temper  and  affections,  his  words  and  actions,  aright.  That  is  far  more  important 
for  the  production  of  personal  and  social  happiness  than  the  most  brilliant  genius 
without  it.  He  shall  be  "  called  prudent  "  means  his  having  a  character  for  it : 
his  being  looked  up  to,  respected,  consulted,  confided  in,  chosen  as  an  adviser. 
Such  a  man  is  more  valuable  and  useful  than  the  man  of  mere  learning,  who 
has  not  discretion  and  common  sense  to  guide  the  use  of  it.  It  is,  at  the  same 
time,  of  great  moment,  that  along  with  the  possession  of  wisdom  and  prudence 
there  be  the  "  sweetness  of  the  lips,"  or  honeyed  lips,  gentleness  and  persuasive- 
ness of  counsel,  impressive  eloquence  of  speech,  which  gives  vast  advantage  in 
the  application  of  wisdom  for  the  benefit  of  others.  It  "  increaseth  learning," 
effectually  spreading  it,  rendering  others  wise  as  well  as  the  possessor  himself.  If 
the  "  wise  in  heart  "  be  understood  of  the  truly,  spiritually,  divinely  wise,  then  the 
phrase  "  shall  be  called  prudent "  must  be  interpreted,  according  to  a  common 
Hebrew  idiom,  as  meaning  "is  prudent,"  deserves  to  be  so  called.  The  sentiment 
will  thus  be  the  oft-repeated  one,  that  true  religion  is  the  only  genuine  prudence. 
Godliness  has  the  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  as  well  as  of  that  which  is  to 
come.     (R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.) 


CHAP.  XVI.]  PROVERBS.  431 

Vers.  23,  24.  The  heart  of  the  wise  teacheth  his  month,  and  addeth  learning'  to 
his  lips. — Ideal  eloquence  : — These  two  verses  lead  us  to  infer  several  things  con- 
cerning true  eloquence.  I.  It  is  the  uttebance  op  the  tbtje  heakt.  "  The 
heart  of  the  wise  teacheth  his  mouth."  1.  It  is  when  the  genuinely  patriotic  heart 
"  teacheth  the  mouth  "  of  the  statesman  that  his  speeches  are  really  eloquent,  and 
that  his  voice  bends  the  senate  to  his  will.  2.  It  is  when  the  genuinely  justice- 
loving  heart  "teacheth  the  mouth"  of  the  counsel  that  his  address  is  really 
eloquent,  and  that  he  carries  the  jury  with  him,  and  makes  the  cause  of  his  client 
triumphant.  3.  It  is  when  the  genuinely  Christ-loving  heart  "  teaches  the  mouth  " 
of  the  preacher  that  his  sermons  become  eloquent,  and  mighty  through  God.  11.  It 
IS  THE  MEANS  OF  USEFUL  rNSTRucTioN.  "  It  addcth  learning  to  his  lips."  True 
eloquence  does  more  than  awaken  mere  emotion  in  the  hearer.  It  instructs.  Its 
spirit  is  in  such  vital  alliance  with  eternal  reality  that  its  very  sounds  echo  such 
truths  as  start  the  highest  trains  of  thought.  Who  is  the  best  religious  teacher  ? 
Not  the  mere  theologian,  however  vast  his  learning.  Scriptural  his  theory,  or  per- 
fect his  language ;  but  the  Christ-loving  man,  however  untutored  his  intellect  and 
nngrammatical  his  speech.  He  dispenses  the  best  "  learning,"  learning  which 
teaches  men  rightly  to  live  and  triumphantly  to  die.  III.  It  is  a  source  of  soul- 
EEFRESHMENT.  Honcy  was  prized  by  those  of  old  times,  not  only  as  a  luxury  to  the 
palate,  but  also  on  account  of  its  medicinal  and  salutary  properties.  To  this  there 
is  an  allusion  here.  The  words  express  the  twofold  idea  of  pleasantness  and  of 
benefit.  Many  things  have  the  one  quality  which  have  not  the  other.  Many  a 
poison  is  like  honey,  sweet  to  the  taste,  but  instead  of  being  "  health  to  the  bones," 
is  laden  with  death.  Words  of  true  eloquence,  indeed,  fall  as  drops  of  honey  on 
the  soul,  not  only  delicious  to  the  taste  but  a  tonic  to  the  heart.     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  25.  There  is  a  way  that  seemeth  right  unto  a  man,  but  the  end  thereof 
are  the  ways  of  death. — A  way  of  death  : — I.  Multitudes  judge  of  duty  by  the 

BTANDASD     OF     THEIR     OWN     MORAL     SENTIMENTS   AND   FEELINGS,    AND    THEREFORE     THE 

WAY  OF  DEATH  IS  THOUGHT  TO  BE  RIGHT.  1.  Sin  first  dcfilcs  the  principles  and 
then  the  conduct.  2.  Sin  has  therefore  brought  down  the  ideal  as  well  as  the 
visible  standard  of  duty  among  men.  3.  Men  thus  rise  and  sink  in  their  appre- 
hensions of  God's  law,  as  they  rise  and  sink  in  their  own  moral  and  spiritual 
attainments.  4.  The  more  polluted,  therefore,  the  man,  the  more  will  he  think  the 
way  of  death  to  be  right.     11.  Multitudes  judge  of  duty  by  the  standard  of 

COMMON   practice   AND   OPINION,    AND   THEREFORE    THE    WAY   OF   DEATH   18    THOUGHT   TO 

BE  RIGHT.     1.  The  standard  of  the  world  is  the  average  performances  of   duty. 

2.  This  is  the  standard  employed  for  most  worldly  or  social  purposes.  It  decides 
the  reputation ;   the   fitness    for    any  society ;  the    relationship ;   the    situation. 

3.  Men  identify  this  standard  with  the  Divine,  and  determine  by  it  eternal  things. 

4.  Having  stood  the  judgment  of  his  fellows,  man  supposes  that  he  can  stand  the 
judgment  of   God.     III.  Multitudes  judge  of  duty,  and  of   the   safety  of  a 

COURSE  OF  CONDUCT,  ACCORDING  TO  THE  BELIEF  THAT  THE  DiVINE  LaW-GIVER  ACCEPTS 
OF    COMPENSATION    IN    ONE   DEPARTMENT   FOR    WRONGS   DONE    IN   ANOTHER.       1.    FcW  loVO 

equally  every  form  of  sin.  It  does  not  consist  with  constitutional  bias ;  outward 
circumstances  ;  the  pursuits  of  life  ;  formed  habits ;  the  energy  of  the  nature  ;  the 
idols  of  the  heart.  2.  Many,  therefore,  attempt  to  balance  their  deficiency,  and 
imagined  excess,  in  duty.  3.  This  is  impracticable  (Jas.  ii.  10).  All  is  God's. 
The   law  is   one.     The  loved  sin  is  the  test.     IV.  Multitudes  judge   of   duty 

ACCORDING     to     THE     PRINCIPLE     THAT    WHATEVER    TENDS    TO    PRESENT   AND    TEMPORAL 

ADVANTAGE  IS  DEFENSIBLE.  1.  Many  appear  to  think  that  this  world  is  altogether 
insulated.  2.  They  therefore  confine  their  views  to  those  objects  of  pursuit  which 
it  presents.  3.  They  suppose  that  they  have  acted  their  part  well  when  they  have 
escaped  from  the  stage  with  approbation.  4.  The  way  of  such  seems  right,  but  the 
end  thereof  are  the  ways  of  death.     V.  Multitudes  judge  of  the  safety  of  a 

COURSE     ON     the     PRINCIPLE     THAT     ALL     IS     WELL     THAT     ENDS     WELL.        1.    This    is    a 

common  and  destructive  perversion  of  truth.  2.  The  offers  of  grace  are  only  for 
the  present.  3.  Every  instance  of  rejection  increases  guilt,  hardens  the  heart,  and 
tends  to  bring  about  a  death  of  indifference.     VI.  Multitudes  judge  of  duty 

ACCORDING  AS  IT  BULKS  IN  THE  EYE,  AND  THEREFORE  THE  WAY  OF  DEATH  IS  THOUGHT 

TO  BE  THE  RIGHT  WAY.  Ulustratc  from — 1.  The  relative  duties  of  the  moral  law. 
2.  Charities— rehgious  societies.  3.  The  business  of  worship.  It  may  be  added 
that  multitudes  misinterpret  Scripture.  {James  Stewart.)  A  way  may  geem  right, 
yet  lead  to  hell : — Imagine  a  large  company  travelling  through  a  gloomy  forest 


432  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

attended  by  a  faithful  and  well-informed  guide.  The  course  becomes  rugged  and 
dreary,  while  on  either  hand  ways  open  which  are  wide,  verdant,  and  picturesque. 
The  travellers  wish  to  deviate,  and  perceiving  their  guide  determined  to  pursue  his 
own  course  they  leave  him.  But  they  soon  learn  the  way  they  have  chosen  is  full 
of  dangers.  The  allurements  which  seduced  them  vanish.  This  is  a  true  picture 
of  human  life.  We  aU  have  erred  and  gone  astray;  multitudes  have  perished 
irrecoverably.  I.  Mark  the  man  of  pleasure.  "  God  is  not  in  all  his  thoughts." 
He  tells  us  that,  as  we  are  sure  only  of  the  present,  we  need  seek  nothing  higher 
than  the  gratification  of  our  natural  desires  ;  that  religion  may  perhaps  serve  as  a 
lamp  through  the  dark  valley  and  shadow  of  death,  but  cannot  fail,  on  the  bright 
eminence  of  life,  to  appear  unnecessary  and  obtrusive.  Such  language  opposes 
the  whole  tenor  of  that  religion  which  inculcates  faith,  patience,  contrition,  and 
self-denial,  and  leads  to  the  grosser  habits  of  the  drunkard  and  the  fornicator,  con- 
cerning whom  an  apostle  declares,  "  they  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God." 
n.  Mark  the  thoughtless  and  indifferent  person — the  man  who,  being  too 
indolent,  too  timid,  or  too  superstitious  to  think  and  act  for  himself,  borrows  his 
system  of  doctrines  and  forms  of  worship  from  a  long  train  of  credulous  ancestors 
or  the  opinions  prevalent  around  him  which  are  considered  the  most  reputable.  "  I 
am  right,"  he  exclaims,  "  or  aU  these  are  wrong.  If  I  do  err,  it  is  in  the  company 
of  those  whom  I  have  chosen  as  my  perpetual  companions."  The  way  may  seem 
right,  it  may  save  labour,  and  serve  his  present  convenience ;  but  death  lurks  at  the 
end.  The  fool  shall  be  destroyed,  and  his  companions  also ;  the  destruction  of 
transgressors  shall  be  together.  III.  Mark  the  formalist.  I  mean  one  who  is  a 
strict  observer  of  all  the  outward  ceremonies  of  religion ;  the  faithful  adherent  to 
her  most  minute  forms.  He  divides  the  circle  of  the  day ;  on  one  side  he  puts  aU 
his  devotion,  and  thither  he  looks  for  comfort  when  conscience  disturbs  him  for  the 
follies  so  distinctly  marked  on  the  other  side.  He  does  not  take  with  him  into  the 
world  a  principle  which  will  enable  him  to  resist  temptation ;  and  when  he  has 
fallen  into  sin  he  goes  back  to  his  formal  services,  thinking  these  may  be  a  suffi- 
cient atonement.  Or,  perhaps,  being  habitually  restrained  within  the  bounds  of 
decorum,  he  flatters  himself  that  he  is  regenerated.  Formality  is  a  slow  but  eiiec- 
tual  poison ;  it  is  a  dead  and  putrid  carcass  laid  upon  the  altar  of  Him  who 
demands  a  "  living  sacrifice."  IV.  Mark  the  self-confident  man.  None  that  I 
have  mentioned  are  in  greater  danger.  1.  There  are  rich  men  who  delude  them- 
selves with  the  vain  conceit  that  silver  and  gold,  and  the  things  which  silver  and 
gold  procure,  render  them  independent  of  God.  Not  all  their  splendid  array,  and 
sumptuous  fare,  and  bowing  menials,  and  princely  estates,  wiU  save  them  from 
lifting  up  their  eyes,  being  in  torments,  2.  Men  of  intellectual  capacity  are 
peculiarly  prone  to  self-confidence.  It  were  wicked  to  disparage  reason  ;  but  may 
it  not  be  overrated  ?  It  is  a  guide,  but  surely  not  through  regions  it  has  never 
visited.  It  is  a  luminary :  so  likewise  is  the  moon,  and  so  are  the  stars  ;  but  can 
we,  therefore,  dispense  with  the  sun  ?  3.  There  are  the  self-confident  who  trust  in 
their  fancied  rectitude.  V.  Mark  the  subject  of  partial  conviction,  the  man 
who  mistakes  remorse  for  repentance,  and  a  state  of  alarm  for  the  unfailing  pledge 
of  salvation.  They  have  mourned,  and  watched,  and  been  oppressed  with  dread. 
At  length,  however,  they  became  tranquil.  They  were  received  with  due  form  into 
a  Christian  society.  But  they  soon  settle  down  into  heartless  regularity ;  their  con- 
science keeps  pace  with  their  profession,  till  at  length  they  come  to  regard  it  as  a 
sin  to  doubt  respecting  their  good  estate,  and  are  offended  at  every  faithful 
admonition.  But  the  gospel  has  had  no  practical  and  saving  efiicacy  upon  their 
hearts.  Woe  unto  them  who  are  thus  at  ease  in  Zion,  who  despise  the  warning 
contained  in  the  text !  VI.  Is  there  a  better  way — a  way  which  leadeth  to 
LIFE  ?  Jesus  the  Son  of  God  has  opened  it ;  He  suffered,  bled,  and  died  that  He 
might  secure  it  for  us.  He  is  the  way  of  pardon,  of  peace,  and  of  salvation.  He  is 
the  way  that  leads  to  heaven  and  glory.  (R.  Elton,  D.D.)  Mistaken  views  : — ■ 
This  ia  the  age  of  specialists;  and  one  of  the  most  important  departments 
is  that  which  deals  with  the  eye  and  its  defects.  We  hear  in  this  connection 
of  heredity;  the  different  effects  of  town  and  country  life,  with  their  near 
and  remote  objects ;  the  results  of  overwork  and  unhealthy  surroundings,  &c. 
So  with  the  inward  eye  and  the  vision  of  the  moral  life.  Here  also  we  have  short- 
sightedness, discrepancy  of  focus,  stealthy  cataract ;  the  inflammation  that  makes 
light  an  agony ;  the  eye  that  exaggerates  and  sees  double,  and  that  which  makes 
everything  seem  insignificant  and  far  away ;  and  there  is  an  eye  that  dotes  on  the 
dark  end  of  the  spectrum.    I.  Honest  and  dishonest  krbob.    The  text  confines 


CHAP.  XTL]  PROVERBS.  433 

our  attention  to  honest  derangement  of  vision,  or  what  claims  to  be  such.  •'  There 
is  a  way  that  seemeth  right  unto  a  man."  The  seat  of  the  trouble  is  in  the  man, 
not  in  the  way.  The  way  remains  where  it  is,  and  he  chooses  it  and  walks  into 
it.  II.  Inheeent  DiFricuLTiES.  Many  of  our  troubles  in  moral  vision  arise  from 
the  inability  to  see  distance.  Some  things  are  present,  others  are  past.  It  is  easy 
to  put  paint  on  paper,  but  it  is  aerial  perspective  that  makes  a  picture.  Again, 
errors  of  judgment  are  due  to  the  fact  that  we  give  fixed  measurements  to  things 
that  are  themselves  in  motion :  growing  larger  or  smaller,  advancing  or  receding. 
Closely  connected  with  this  is  the  weak  eye  for  angles  and  the  feeble  sense  of 
proportion.  If  we  could  only  see  it,  there  is  a  difference  between  self  and  society, 
between  party  and  mankind,  between  time  and  eternity.  III.  Decision  and 
INDECISION.  Under  given  conditions  a  diminished  area  always  makes  a  brighter 
disc.  Micrcsccpic  ol'jects  have  no  mist.  Downrightuess  is  always  a  desirable 
thing,  especially  for  emergencies  that  come  suddenly  and  only  once.  It  means 
health  to  its  possessor  and  safety  to  those  who  know  what  to  expect.  It  draws  to 
itself  unattached  particles,  and  has  an  incisive  momentum  that  bruises  into  softer 
substances.  "  Yes  "  and  "  No  "  are  great  civilisers.  But  clearness  that  is  gained 
by  exclusion  may  cost  too  much.  When  the  narrowing  process  begins  it  goes  on, 
and  self  is  always  the  most  tempting  centre  ;  in  fact,  the  only  terminus.  It  is 
sometimes  difiicult  for  robust  natures  to  see  it,  but  strength  of  conviction  does  not 
necessarily  mean  correspondence  with  fact.  And  fact  is  the  chief  thing.  IV.  The 
CULPABILITY  OF  MISTAKEN  VIEWS.  Where  and  when  is  the  error  found  blameworthy  ? 
Not  directly  in  the  region  of  intellect  and  its  knowledge,  but  in  that  of  the  will  and 
its  preferences  and  energies.  The  individual  error  becomes  a  process  and  the 
process  becomes  a  system.  There  is  first  hght  defied  and  then  light  debased. 
This  belongs  to  us,  not  to  circumstance.  "  Business  is  business  " — how  much  that 
is  made  to  cover  and  countenance !  "  Others  do  it,  and  why  should  not  I  ?  "  The 
same  man  will  always  say  with  regard  to  any  loved  indulgence,  "  This  is  safe  for 
me,  and  what  have  I  to  do  with  others  ?  "  If  we  pass  from  difficulties  of  the 
personal  life  we  find  the  same  obscurity  or  obliquity  of  view  in  things  that  affect 
communities,  nations,  and  Churches.  There  was  the  slavery  question,  over  which 
the  British  Parliament  struggled  for  many  years,  and  for  which  America  poured 
out  its  blood.  So  with  the  great  temperance  question  of  to-day.  {(?.  M.  Mackie, 
31. A.)  The  seeming  right: — Our  difficulty  in  life  is  often  with  things  that 
seem  to  be  right.  Where  they  are  obviously  wrong  there  is  no  need  for 
hesitation,  but  where  probabilities  are  in  their  favour  we  must  pause  and 
consider.  How  far  does  our  own  experience  confii'm  the  doctrine  of  the 
text  ?  1.  Does  not  the  way  of  self-protection  seem  to  be  right  ?  To  a  certain 
extent  it  is  right.  Pressed  unduly  it  becomes  practical  atheism.  2.  Does 
not  the  way  of  physical  persecution  for  truth's  sake  seem  to  be  right?  If  a 
man  is  teaching  error  why  not  burn  him,  or  otherwise  put  a  forcible  end  to  his 
ministry?  3.  Does  not  the  way  of  self -enjoyment  seem  right.  4.  Does  not  the 
way  of  judgiug  by  appearances  seem  right?  What  can  be  better?  What  can  be 
simpler  ?  5.  Does  not  the  way  of  self -redemption  seem  right  ?  Is  it  not  brave  and 
spirited  to  say  that  we  take  our  own  recovery  into  our  own  hands  ?  This  is  the 
fatal  error  of  mankind.  "  O  Israel,  thou  hast  destroyed  thyself,  but  in  Me  is  thy 
help."  AppUcation:  1.  Lean  not  to  thine  own  understanding.  The  coiled  scorpion 
may  be  mistaken  for  an  egg.  2.  Seek  higher  than  human  counsel.  Be  religious. 
Put  thy  whole  life  into  the  keeping  of  God.  "  The  steps  of  a  good  man  are  ordered 
by  the  Lord."  Distrust  appearances.  Even  when  the  way  seems  right  stand  still 
and  commune  with  Heaven.  "Except  Thy  presence  go  with  me,  carry  me  not  up 
hence."  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Sincere  belief  no  safeguard  : — See  that  man  who  is 
just  t«o  late,  or  the  other,  who  was  sitting  quietly  at  his  breakfast  when  he  heard 
the  departing  signal.  Neither  can  believe  he  is  in  fault.  Oh,  no !  his  watch  is 
right.  The  conductor  hurried  the  train  ;  the  agent's  watch  is  out  of  order.  1.  There 
has  been  error.  His  watch  was  wrong,  after  all.  He  did  not  take  care  to  set  it  by 
the  true  standard.  Men  fail  of  success  because  they  adopt  wrong  principles.  They 
blame  the  Bible,  the  Church,  the  ministry  ;  anything,  anybody,  everything,  every- 
body, rather  than  self.  2.  Our  sincere  belief  that  we  are  right  will  not  save  us. 
God  has  a  certain  fixed,  and  immutable,  and  holy  law.  If  we  follow  his  teachings 
we  shall  be  safe ;  but  if  we  follow  our  own  notions  He  makes  no  provision  for  our 
faults;  we  are  left  to  suffer.  3.  There  are  favoured  times  for  obtaining  Gorl's 
favour.  {Christian  Treasury.)  Beware  of  imverce-ptihle  cvrr^nts: — The  onrren's 
of  the  sea  are  found  to  run  in  all  directions,  east,  west,  north,  south,  being  toriu'^d 

29 


434  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

by  various  causes — the  prominence  of  the  shores,  the  narrowness  of  the  straits,  the 
variations  of  the  ■wind,  and  the  inequalities  at  the  bottom.  These  currents  are  of 
the  most  material  consequence  to  the  mariner,  without  a  knowledge  of  which  h« 
could  never  succeed.  It  often  happens  that  when  a  ship  gets  unknowingly  into  one 
of  these  everything  seems  to  go  forward  with  success,  the  mariners  suppose  them- 
selves every  hour  approaching  their  wished-for  port,  the  wind  fills  their  sails,  and 
the  ship's  prow  seems  to  divide  the  water,  but  at  last  by  miserable  experience  they 
find  that  instead  of  going  forward  they  have  been  all  the  time  receding.  The  busi- 
ness of  currents,  therefore,  makes  a  considerable  article  in  navigation,  and  the 
direction  of  their  stream  and  their  rapidity  has  been  carefully  set  down,  {Scientific 
Illustrations.)  ' 

Ver.  27.  An  ungodly  man  diggeth  up  &nL— Digging  up  evil : — An  ungodly  man 
is  "  a  son  of  Belial."  In  the  expression  "  diggeth  up  evil  "  two  ideas  may  be 
included.  I.  Taking  pains  to  devise  it.  We  dig  and  search  for  treasure  in  a  mine, 
or  where  we  fancy  it  lies  concealed ;  thus  the  wicked  man  does  in  regard  to  evil.  It 
is  his  treasure,  that  on  which  he  sets  his  heart,  and  for  it,  as  for  treasure,  he  digs 
and  searches,  aye,  often  deep  and  long.  He  is  specially  laborious  and  persevering, 
when  any  one  chances  to  have  become  the  object  of  his  pique  or  malice.  Mar- 
vellous is  the  assiduity  with  which  he  then  strains  every  nerve  to  produce  mischief, 
plodding  and  plotting  for  it,  mining  and  undermining,  exploring  in  every  direction, 
often  where  no  one  could  think  of  but  hunself,  and,  with  savage  delight,  exulting 
in  the  discovery  of  aught  that  can  be  made  available  for  his  diabohcal  purpose. 
11.  Taking  pains  to  revive  it,  aftee  it  has  been  buried  and  forgotten.  He  goes 
down  into  the  very  grave  of  old  quarrels,  brings  them  up  afresh  ;  puts  new  life 
into  them ;  wakes  up  grudges  that  had  long  slept ;  and  sets  people  by  the  ears  again 
who  had  abandoned  their  enmities,  and  had  for  years  been  living  in  reconciliation 
and  peace.  The  son  of  Belial,  in  relation  to  evil,  is  like  one  in  quest  of  some  mine 
of  coal  or  precious  metal.  He  examines  his  ground,  and  wherever  he  discovers  any 
hopeful  symptoms  on  the  surface,  he  proceeds  to  drill,  and  bore,  and  excavate. 
The  slightest  probability  of  success  will  be  enough  for  his  encouragement  to  toil 
and  harass  himself  night  and  day  until  he  can  make  something  out  of  it.  (R. 
Wardlaw,  D.D.) 

Ver.  31.  The  hoary  head  Is  a  crown  of  glory,  if  it  he  found  in  the  way  of 
righteousness. — On  the  duties  and  consolaiiojis  of  the  aged: — To  every  age  there 
belongs  a  distinct  propriety  of  behaviour.  There  arises  from  it  a  series  of  duties 
peculiar  to  itself.  I.  Some  counsels  concerning  the  errors  which  are  most 
incident  to  the  aged.  1.  Almost  all  of  them  may  be  traced  up  to  the  feebleness 
and  distresses  peculiar  to  that  time  of  life.  Life  is  then  contracted  within  a  narrow 
and  barren  circle.  Year  after  year  steals  somewhat  away  from  their  store  of 
comfort,  deprives  them  of  some  of  their  ancient  friends,  blunts  some  of  their  powers 
of  sensation,  or  incapacitates  them  for  some  function  of  life.  The  aged  should 
consider  that  to  bear  the  infirmities  of  age  with  becoming  patience  is  as  much 
their  duty  as  is  that  of  the  young  to  resist  the  temptations  of  youthful  pleasure. 
Though  querulous  temper  may  be  regarded  as  a  natural  infirmity,  no  apology  can 
be  made  for  that  peevish  disgust  at  the  manners,  and  that  malignant  censure  of 
the  enjoyments  of  the  young,  which  is  sometimes  found  to  accompany  declining 
years.  Nothing  can  be  more  unjust  than  to  take  offence  at  others  on  account  of 
their  partaking  of  pleasures  which  it  is  past  your  time  to  enjoy.  2.  One  of  the 
vices  of  old  age,  which  appears  the  most  unaccountable,  is  that  covetous  attach- 
ment to  worldly  interest  v»'ith  which  it  is  often  charged.  As  vigour  of  body  and 
mind  declines,  timidity  may  be  expected  to  increase.  Hence  the  old  sometimes 
over- value  riches,  as  securing  them  from  danger.  But  though  their  apprehensions 
may  justify  a  cautious  frugality,  they  can  by  no  means  excuse  a  sordid  avarice. 
As  increasing  years  debilitate  the  body,  so  they  weaken  force,  and  diminish  the 
warmth  of  affections.  Chilled  by  the  hand  of  time,  the  heart  loses  th:LL  tender 
sensibility  with  which  it  once  entered  into  the  concerns  and  sorrows  of  others. 
II.  The  duties  which  peculiarly  belong  to  old  age.  1.  A  timely  reti-eat  from 
the  world.  It  is  only  in  the  shade  that  the  virtues  of  old  age  can  flourish.  By  this 
is  not  meant  a  total  cessation  from  worldly  enjoyment.  The  aged  should  loosen 
their  communication  with  active  life.  2.  They  should  quit  the  pursuit  of  such 
plfeasures  as  are  unsuitable  to  their  years.  Cheeifulness,  in  old  age,  is  graceful. 
It  is  the  natural  concomitant  of  virtue.     But  the  cheerfulness  of  age  ii  widely 


CHAP.  XVI.]  PROVERBS.  435 

different  from  the  levity  of  youth.  3.  A  material  part  of  the  duty  of  the  aged 
consists  in  studying  to  be  useful  to  the  race  who  are  to  succeed  them  :  to  impart  to 
the  young  the  fruit  of  their  long  experience  ;  to  instruct  them  in  the  proper 
conduct,  and  to  warn  them  of  the  various  dangers  of  life.  4.  Let  the  aged  not  forget 
those  religious  employments  which  their  own  state  particularly  requires.  III.  The 
CONSOLATIONS  WHICH  BELONG  TO  OLD  AGE.  Such  as  arise  from  patient  submission; 
from  the  respect  rendered  by  others ;  from  the  many  enjoyments  that  remain ; 
from  the  love  and  service  of  those  bound  to  them  in  family  relationships  ;  from  the 
favour  of  God.  {Hugh  Blair,  D.D.)  The  duties  of  the  aged  : — Long  life  all  men 
desu-e :  and  yet  to  most  no  part  of  life  seems  to  have  much  happiness  in  it ;  and 
that  part  least  of  all,  to  which  living  long  brings  them.  And  yet,  if  life  is  a  bless- 
ing, long  life  must  be  a  greater  blessing.  Old  age  may  be  both  honourable  and 
happy.  I.  What  assistance  virtue  and  piett  contribute  towauds  making  old  age 
HONOURABLE  AND  HAPPY.  1.  Laj'ing  propcr  foundations  in  the  former  part.  Neglect 
of  right  conduct  in  our  early  years  is  the  main  reason  that  our  advanced  ones  are 
despicable  and  miserable.  See  the  influence  of  youthful  irregularities  ;  idle 
expenses ;  neglect  of  attaining  knowledge  ;  early  indulgence  of  ill-temper ;  for- 
getting the  Creator  in  the  days  of  youth.  "  Wisdom  is  the  grey  hair  unto  men, 
and  an  unspotted  life  is  old  age."  2.  Directing  to  proper  behaviour  when  old  age 
comes.  Avoiding  the  faults  to  which  men  are  then  peculiarly  subject.  Such  are 
artfulness  and  insensibility,  selfishness  and  avarice.  A  mean  and  penurious 
behaviour.  Sparing  and  accumulating,  without  reason  or  use,  is  both  sin  and 
folly.  Another  fault  is,  giving  improperly  and  inequitably  what  they  give,  whether 
in  their  lives  or  at  their  deaths.  The  aged  are  sometimes  imposed  upon  by  artful 
people,  who  supplant  those  naturally  dependent  on  them.  Or  they  let  little  piques 
and  preferences  influence  them,  contrary  to  the  justest  motives  and  their  own 
former  kind  intentions.  Another  danger  of  the  aged  is  ill-temper.  Sometimes  a 
consequence  of  loss  of  strength,  and  bodily  pain.  1.  The  aged  should  therefore 
anxiously  endeavour  to  preserve  a  composed  and  even  mind.  2.  To  practise  the 
duties  to  which  they  are  peculiarly  bound.  One  is  serious  reflection  on  their  past 
conduct,  accompanied  with  earnest  endeavours  to  undo,  as  far  as  they  can,  what- 
ever they  have  done  amiss,  and  rectify  the  errors  of  their  busier  and  warmer  days. 
The  more  piously  and  virtuously  men  have  lived,  the  less  necessity  will  they  have 
in  their  old  age  for  so  minute  a  review  of  their  ways ;  but  then  they  will  receive 
the  greatest,  the  most  seasonable  comfort  from  it.  Another  duty  is  that  of 
religious  exercises  and  contemplations.  Another  duty  is  to  imprint,  on  those 
who  come  within  the  sphere  of  their  influence,  the  same  right  sentiments  of  life 
and  conduct  which  they  have  acquired  for  themselves.     II.  The  directions  which 

VIRTUE    AND    RELIGION    FURNISH    ARE    EFFECTUAL    TO    THE    DESIRED    END.       As    loug    aS 

persons  in  years  can  enjoy  anything,  the  regard  paid  by  those  about  them  to  their 
established  character  must  support  and  revive  them  to  a  great  degree.  Those  who 
have  proceeded  so  far  in  life  with  innocence  must  feel  from  it  the  highest  joy  ; 
they  who  have  truly  repented  cannot  fail  to  be  sensible  of  much  consolation. 
Eecollection  of  their  life  associations  and  experiences  must  be  a  fruitful  source  of 
improving  amusement  to  them,  and  relating  them  an  acceptable  entertainment 
and  instruction  to  others.  (T.  Seeker.)  On  the  relative  duties  of  the  aged  and  the 
young  : — We  contemplate  the  aged  with  sentiments  that  might  be  profitable  to  us, 
and  that  are  Hkely  to  make  some  impression  on  the  heart.  But  we  cannot  con- 
sider the  "  hoary  head  a  crown  of  glory  "  unless  it  be  stored  with  that  wisdom 
which  time  and  reflection  are  hourly  instilling  into  the  mind,  in  order  to  wean  us 
from  the  world,  and  prepare  us  for  heaven.  A  young  person  has  reason  to  expect 
from  the  aged  information.  They  have  long  sojourned  in  the  land  of  discipline. 
To  the  aged  the  young  apply,  as  to  experienced  travellers,  that  can  direct  their 
course  through  stormy  seas  or  perplexing  wilds.  The  aged  cannot  acquit  themselves 
of  negligence  and  folly  if  it  should  appear  that  they  are  unable  to  warn  youth  of 
unexpected  dangers,  and  to  point  out  the  path  that  leads  to  safety.  Life  has  been 
of  little  advantage  to  him  who  derives  no  wisdom  from  its  variety,  and  no  virtue 
from  its  trials.  It  is  a  man's  duty  to  become  practically  wise,  through  a  right  use 
of  the  experiences  of  life.  It  should  be  the  care  of  the  aged  to  communicate  to  the 
young  only  that  which  is  good.  Too  often  they  only  inculcate  a  sort  of  worldly 
prudence,  and  selfish  kind  of  knowledge,  which  chokes  the  seed  of  every  growing 
virtue,  and  disqualifies  the  child  of  immortality  for  heaven.  Another  moral  excel- 
lence, which  it  is  the  duty  of  the  aged  to  acquire,  is  a  proper  regulation  of  the 
passions.    Time,  and  often-repeated  experience  of  sorrow,  wiU  often  accomplish,  in 


438  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xri. 

this  respect,  what  reason  and  religion  have  attempted  in  vain.  The  experience  of 
life  should  produce  settled  habits  of  virtue ;  it  should  establish  some  determined 
pursuit  of  good  ;  it  should  show  that  life  has  not  been  squandered  away  without 
improvement.  From  a  proper  regulation  of  the  passions  would  arise  that  com- 
placent dignity,  which  is  the  characteristic  of  true  greatness ;  and  that  charity  and 
humiUty,  that  mildness  and  forbearance,  which  are  the  ornaments  of  true  religion. 
It  is  so  ordered  by  the  wisdom  of  Providence,  that  the  most  effectual  means  of  good 
should,  by  the  perversion  of  sin,  become  the  most  dangerous  instruments  of  evil. 
There  is  nothing  more  pernicious  to  the  morals  of  youth,  or  so  likely  to  spread 
depravity  through  the  different  orders  of  society,  as  a  vicious  old  man.  A  number 
of  minor  vices  and  imperfections  of  character  often  deprive  the  aged  of  honour,  and 
prevent  them  from  being  extensively  useful.  There  is  sometimes  a  severity  in  their 
conversation,  and  a  moroseness  in  their  disposition,  which  spoil  their  influence  on 
the  young.  Age  should  be  averse  to  violence  and  disorder  of  every  kind.  The 
tempests  of  the  mind  should  be  no  more ;  neither  the  emotions  of  anger,  the 
murmurings  of  discontent,  nor  the  bitterness  of  wrath,  should  disturb  the  calm 
evening  of  our  days.  The  aged  should  avoid  that  querulousness  and  discontent 
which  they  are  so  often  apt  to  indulge.  The  religion  which  administers  comfort  in 
age  must  be  cultivated  in  the  days  of  our  youth.  It  is  a  mockery  of  devotion  to 
serve  that  great  and  gracious  God  in  the  moment  of  fear  only  who  requires  that 
His  service  should  be  perfect  freedom.  {J.  Heiolett,  B.D.)  The  way  of  righteous- 
ness : — I.  Desceibe  the  way  of  eighteousness.  Eighteousness  here  includes  the  whole 
rule  of  our  duty  towards  God  and  man.  Way,  in  a  moral  sense,  is  expressive  of  a 
person's  course  of  behaviour,  or  his  ordinary  conduct.  The  way  of  righteousness 
is  a  course  of  behaviour  or  conduct  prescribed  by  the  Divine  Word,  that  perfect  rale 
of  righteousness.  It  is  the  way  wherein  Christ  walked.  On  it  rests  the  Divine  appro- 
bation. A  godly  life  is  neither  a  light  matter  nor  easy  attainment.  All  who  walk 
in  this  way  must  deny  themselves.  In  this  way  holiness  is  visible.  "  It  shall  be 
called  the  way  of  holiness."  II.  What  is  implied  in  being  found  in  the  way  of 
BiGHTEOusNEss  ?  It  is  to  be  found  accustoming  oneself  to  obey  the  Divine  commands, 
being  employed  in  the  practice  of  religion,  and  of  all  virtue.  It  is  a  way  wherein  a 
person  usually  walks  ;  that  which  is  his  ordinary  practice.  A  man  is  denominated 
by  the  general  tenor  of  his  conversation.  Being  found  in  a  way  implies  that  the 
conduct  of  the  professor  is  taken  notice  of  by  others.  "  Only  the  person  who  is 
following  after  righteousness  can  properly  be  said  to  be  found  in  the  way  of  it." 
III.  The  beauty,  honoue,  and  dignity  which  aee  upon  an  aged  disciple  of  Christ. 
There  is  the  beauty  of  true  wisdom  and  understanding  age.  Spiritual  wisdom,  the 
graces  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  are  ornaments  far  more  honourable  than  chains  of  gold. 
Such  disciples  are  honoured  now  with  the  approbation  of  heaven.  Use  this 
subject — 1.  To  correct  mistakes  often  made  concerning  religion.  2.  To  encourage 
those  who  desire  to  walk  in  this  way.  3.  To  exhort  to  constancy  those  who  have, 
through  grace,  entered  the  way  of  righteousness.  4.  To  awaken  all  to  a  sense  of 
their  duty.  They  ought  to  enter  and  walk  in  this  way.  {Thomas  Flower.)  The 
honour  of  aged  piety : — It  is  a  dictate  of  natural  conscience,  that  reverence  is  due  to 
the  aged  merely  on  account  of  their  age.  The  general  practice  of  the  heathen, 
both  ancient  and  modern,  confirms  and  illustrates  this  dictate  of  nature.  And  the 
Scriptures  command  us  to  show  respect  to  the  aged.  When  wisdom  and  piety 
accompany  old  age,  it  is  peculiarly  venerable.  I.  On  what  accounts  aged  piety  is 
peculiably  honoueable.  1.  It  began  early.  This  must  be  supposed.  It  is  implied 
in  the  expression  "found"  in  the  way  of  righteousness.  Such  a  one  hath  been 
long  walking  in  that  way.  Where  persons  have,  with  good  Obadiah,  feared  the 
Lord  from  their  youth,  and  walked  in  His  fear  all  their  days,  they  claim  peculiar 
respect.  They  have  indeed  lived — lived  to  a  good  purpose.  This  will  command 
honour  from  others.  2.  Their  piety  is  founded  on  knowledge  and  experience. 
Knowledge  is  gained  by  observation,  reflection,  reading,  and  converse.  Our  stock 
of  knowledge  naturally  increaseth  with  advancing  years.  It  will  be  more  or  less 
according  to  men's  natural  abilities,  education,  and  pains  taken  in  improving  their 
nnderstandings.  The  aged  are  not  always  wise,  but  they  frequently  are  so,  and 
always  much  wiser  than  younger  persons  of  equal  capacities,  advantages,  and 
applications.  Aged  saints  are  peculiarly  honourable,  because  their  knowledge  is  of 
the  best  kind,  and  applied  to  the  best  purposes.  Their  wisdom  is  an  ornament  of 
grace  to  them.  3.  The  piety  of  aged  Christians  is  approved  and  steadfast.  Many 
pot  on  an  appearance  of  piety  to  serve  some  secular  purpose.  But  the  piety  of  the 
aged  Christian  has  been  severely  tested   and   proved,   in  the  long   and   severe 


CHAP.  XVI.]  PROVERBS.  437 

experiences  of  life.  An  aged  saint  is  like  a  tree  arrived  at  maturity,  that,  having 
brought  forth  fruit  many  years,  in  its  season,  stood  many  storms,  and  taken  root 
the  faster,  is  known  by  all  around  to  be  very  valuable.  He  is  rooted  in  the  faith, 
grounded  and  settled.  4.  The  piety  of  the  aged  is  attended  with  great  usefulness. 
God  is  glorified  when  Christians  bring  forth  much  fruit :  and  in  proportion  to 
men's  usefulness  will  be  their  honour.  The  piety  of  an  aged  Christian  is  much  to 
the  glory  of  God,  as  it  shows  the  excellency  of  His  dispensations.  Aged  saints  are 
useful  to  mankind.  They  shine  as  lights  in  a  dark  world,  and  produce  a  secret 
veneration  for  religion  in  the  hearts  of  those  who  will  not  be  persuaded  to  pursue 
it.  They  are  living  witnesses  to  the  kindness  of  God's  providence,  the  riches  of  His 
grace,  and  His  faithfulness  to  His  promises.  They  are  patterns  of  patience,  con- 
tentment, and  thankfulness.  Their  prayers  are  serviceable  to  the  world  and  to  the 
Church.  They  are  capable  of  giving  excellent  counsel.  5.  Their  piety  renders 
them  peculiarly  ripe  for  glory.  Graces  shine  brighter  through  the  wrinkles  that 
deform  the  countenance.  II.  Useful  instructions  fkom  this  subject.  1.  The 
hoary  head  is  a  disgrace  and  reproach  to  an  old  sinner.  2.  Aged  saints  ought  to 
be  reverenced.  Let  us  speak  of  them  and  to  them  with  the  greatest  respect; 
tenderly  pity,  and  patiently  bear  with,  their  weaknesses,  and  consider  the  excel- 
lences of  their  characters,  as  casting  a  lustre  even  over  their  infirmities.  3.  Aged 
saints  should  proceed  in  the  ways  of  righteousness,  with  thankfulness  and  courage. 
4.  It  is  the  wisdom  of  young  persons  to  enter  on  the  ways  of  righteousness.  There  is 
very  little  hope  for  those  who  forget  God  in  their  youthful  days.  (<7.  Orton.) 
The  distinguished  honour  of  aged  piety : — There  is  no  beauty  or  comeliness  like 
that  of  holiness.  Nothing  tends  more  to  adorn  or  recommend  a  person.  Here 
holiness  is  presented  under  the  notion  of  a  most  excellent  and  comely  ornament 
which  suits  persons  of  any  age  or  condition.  Some  think  these  words  are  a 
proposal  of  the  most  likely  course  men  can  take  to  prolong  their  days.  Others 
think  that  the  duty  of  the  aged  is  here  prescribed.  We  take  it  thus  :  "  Then  is  the 
hoary  head  more  especially  an  ornament  and  glory  when  it  is  found  in  the  way  of 
righteousness."  There  is  somewhat  venerable  in  old  age.  1.  The  knowledge  of 
the  aged  may  be  supposed  to  be  very  considerable,  by  reason  of  the  long  time  they 
have  had  for  acquiring  it.  2.  The  virtue  and  sincerity  of  the  aged  is  more  tried 
and  approved  than  of  those  who  have  but  lately  set  out  and  engaged  in  reUgion. 
3.  As  the  virtue  and  holiness  of  the  aged  is  more  tried  and  approved  through  their 
long  standing,  so  it  is  more  considerable  in  the  degree  and  measure.  There  is  a 
double  improvement  which  we  may  suppose  Christians  to  make,  the  one  by 
becoming  more  confirmed  and  established  in  their  holy  rehgion,  and  the  other  by 
their  abounding  more  in  the  fruits  of  righteousness.  4.  Such  persons  are  eminent 
instruments  of  bringing  glory  to  God  and  of  usefulness  to  His  Church.  The  more 
conspicuous  the  power  of  goodness  in  such  people,  the  more  God  is  glorified  by 
them.  5.  The  hoary  head  that  is  found  in  the  way  of  righteousness  is  ripe  for 
glory  and  just  ready  to  enter  into  it.  Infer — (1)  The  unreasonableness  of  the 
contempt  that  young  persons  sometimes  show  to  those  who  are  old,  even  mocking 
at  their  infirmities.  (2)  The  reasonableness  of  the  apostolic  rule,  "  Ye  younger, 
submit  yourselves  unto  the  elder."  (3)  Persons  should  make  preparation  for  the 
honour  and  comfort  of  old  age,  even  by  choosing  the  ways  of  righteousness  while 
they  are  young.  (TF.  Pierce.)  Christian  experience : — Some  of  the  distinguishing 
features  in  the  experience  of  aged  disciples.  1.  They  have  a  greater  knowledge 
and  more  enlarged  experience — knowledge  of  the  Scriptures,  and  of  God'a 
providence,  and  of  the  world.  They  have  learned  much  in  the  school  of  affliction. 
2.  Another  feature  in  the  experience  of  the  fathers  in  Christ  is  their  deadness  to 
the  world.  Years  have  taught  them  to  moderate  their  estimate  of  what  the  world 
can  do  for  them.  They  sit  loose  from  the  world,  knowing  that  they  must  soon 
leave  it.  3.  Heavenly-mindedness  is  another  feature.  This  appears  in  their 
contemplating  passing  events,  chiefly  in  their  reference  to  the  spiritual  and  eternal 
world,  and  in  the  interest  they  take  in  what  has  a  special  reference  to  the  Church, 
and  in  spending  their  time  in  retirement  and  meditation.  4.  Humility  is  another 
feature.  In  looking  back  over  the  way  in  which  God  has  led  them  they  see  much 
to  keep  them  humble.  5.  A  calm,  composed,  and  peaceful  state  of  mind  is  another 
feature.  They  are  now,  in  great  measure,  freed  from  the  turbulence  of  unruly 
passions  within.  6.  Their  being  in  a  waiting  posture  is  another  feature.  They 
resign  business  details  to  younger  hands.  7.  A  joyful  anticipation  of  the 
blessedness  and  glory  awaiting  them  is  another  feature:  This  is  intended  to 
present  a  high  standard  of  the  distinguishing  features  in  the  experience  of  far- 


438  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

advanced  Christians.  {George  Muirhead,  D.D.)  Honourable  old  age  : — I.  What 
IS  THE  WAT  OF  KiGHTEousNESS  in  which  the  old  man  is  supposed  to  be  found? 
1.  It  is  supposed  that  the  old  man  has  spent  the  preceding  part  of  his  life  in 
devotional  exercises.  2.  It  is  supposed  that  the  old  man  has,  in  the  preceding 
part  of  his  life,  practised  self-control,  and  regulated  his  pursuits  and  pleasures  by 
the  discipline  of  religion.  It  is  the  remembrance  of  his  good  deed  which  awakens 
our  esteem  and  love.  3.  It  is  supposed  that  the  old  man  has  been  a  useful  member 
of  society.  To  those  insignificant  beings  who  have  contributed  nothing  to  the 
benefit  of  mankind  we  owe,  when  they  arrive  at  old  age,  not  honour,  but  pity. 
n.  That  honour  is  due  to  the  old  man  who  is  found  in  the  way  op  eighteous- 
NESS.  1.  He  is  a  man,  the  sincerity  of  whose  religion  is  placed  beyond  suspicion 
by  the  long  trial  which  it  has  sustained.  2.  He  is  a  man  who,  through  Divine 
assistance,  has  fulfilled  the  end  of  his  creation.  3.  He  is  a  man  who  is  qualified, 
by  the  wisdom  which  he  has  acquired,  to  be  the  instructor  and  guide  of  his 
inferiors  in  years.  4.  He  is  a  man  who  stands  high  in  the  favour  of  God.  5.  He 
is  a  man  who  is  about  to  receive  the  reward  of  his  labours.  (John  Dick,  D.D.) 
The  glory  of  aged  piety  : — 1.  That  righteousness  is  conducive  to  old  age.  This  is  a 
fact  sustained  both  by  philosophy  and  history.  2.  That  piety  is  conducive  to 
honour.  I.  It  is  the  glory  op  spiritual  ripeness.  There  is  something  glorious 
in  maturation.  The  seed  ripened  into  an  autumnal  crop,  the  youth  ripened  into 
mature  manhood,  the  student  ripened  into  the  accomplished  scholar,  are  all  objects 
of  admiration.  In  an  old  saint  there  is  a  truly  glorious  ripeness.  There  you  have 
all  the  seeds  of  truth  and  holiness  as  sown  by  holy  teachers,  cultured  by  experience, 
fostered  by  the  sunbeam  and  the  showers  of  God,  tried  and  strengthened  in  their 
roots  by  the  storms  of  adversity,  hanging  in  rich  clusters  on  the  boughs  ready  to  be 
gathered  in.  "  Thou  shalt  come  to  thy  grave  in  a  full  age,  like  as  a  shock  of  corn 
Cometh  in  in  his  season  "  (Job  v.  26).  II.  It  is  the  glory  of  spiritual  command. 
Even  Egypt's  proud  despot  bowed  before  it.  "  And  Joseph  brought  in  Jacob  his 
father  and  set  him  before  Pharaoh,  and  Jacob  blessed  Pharaoh  "  (Gen.  xlvii.  7-10). 
Samuel  was  an  old  saint  when  he  died  (1  Sam.  xxv.  1 ;  2  Chron.  xxiv.  15,  16). 
in.  It  is  the  glory  of  spiritual  prospects.  '*  Now  lettest  Thou  Thy  servant  depart 
in  peace,"  &c.  We  conclude  with  the  utterance  of  a  modern  author:  "As  ripe 
fruit  is  sweeter  than  green  frait,  so  is  age  sweeter  than  youth,  provided  the  youth 
were  grafted  into  Christ.  As  harvest-time  is  a  brighter  time  than  seed-time,  so  is 
age  brighter  than  youth ;  that  is,  if  youth  were  a  seed-time  for  good.  As  the 
completion  of  a  work  is  more  glorious  than  the  beginning,  so  is  age  more  glorious 
than  youth ;  that  is,  if  the  foundation  of  the  work  of  God  were  laid  in  youth.  As 
sailing  into  port  is  happier  than  the  voyage,  so  is  age  happier  than  youth  ;  that  is, 
when  the  voyage  from  youth  is  made  with  Christ  at  the  helm."  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
The  old  age  of  the  righteous,  honourable  : — This  is  a  just  aphorism  and  beautifully 
expressed.  Old  age  is,  in  a  figurative  and  poetical  manner,  described  by  one  of  its 
concomitants,  and  by  one  which  does  not  directly  imply  any  of  its  infirmities,  but 
rather  is  in  its  very  appearance  venerable.  I.  The  old  age  of  the  virtuous  is 
honourable  on  account  of  the  life  which  has  preceded  it.  It  is  the  termination 
of  a  wise,  a  well-spent,  and  a  useful  life.  Such  a  life  reflects  great  glory  on  the 
person  who  has  accomplished  it.  1.  In  a  religious  and  virtuous  old  man  we  behold 
one  who  has  long  been  exposed  to  the  temptations  of  the  world  and  has  overcome 
them.  2.  A  virtuous  old  age  is  the  termination  of  a  hfe  which  has  been  filled  up 
with  worthy  and  useful  actions.  II.  The  old  age  of  the  virtuous  is  honourable 
IN  itself.  1.  The  character  which  a  pious  and  virtuous  old  person  exhibits  to  our 
view  is  that  of  goodness,  genuine,  improved,  and  useful ;  of  all  characters  the  most 
respectable.  This  character  was  acquired  by  the  conduct  of  the  whole  life,  and 
therefore  naturally  turns  our  eye  backward  to  its  course ;  but  when  we  consider  it 
as  now  possessed  in  its  maturity,  and  actuating  the  aged  person  in  all  his  motions, 
it  is,  in  itself,  and  without  regard  to  the  life  which  preceded  it,  a  glorious  ornament. 
2.  In  old  age  virtue  is  naturally  accompanied  by  wisdom  and  prudence,  derived 
from  long  experience.  III.  The  old  age  of  good  men  is  honourable  in  respect 
OF  the  prospects  ^\-nicH  ATTEND  IT.  Thcsc  are  the  principal  causes  of  that  firmness 
and  cheerfulness  under  their  infirmities  which  procures  them  reverence ;  and  these 
reflect  honour  upon  them  in  other  ways.  Old  age  is  the  termination  of  this  mortal 
Sfe  ;  but  to  good  men  it  is  the  immediate  prelude  to  immortality.  A  person  who 
early  began  to  follow  holiness,  and  has  persisted  in  it  to  an  advanced  age,  is  ripe 
for  the  glory  and  happiness  of  heaven.  His  hoary  head  is  a  natural  emblem  and 
the  direct  forerunner  of  that  everlasting  crown  which  he  is  ready  to  receive. 


CHAP.  XVI.]  PROVERBS.  439 

Practical  reflections :  1.  This  subject  gives  us  a  striking  view  of  the  excellence  of 
religion,  of  the  importance  of  true  goodness,  fit  to  recommend  it  to  our  love  and  to 
engage  us  in  the  practice  of  it.  It  alone  can  preserve  us  innocent  and  blameless  in 
our  younger  and  gayer  days  and  render  us  useful  in  our  maturity.  2.  It  instructs 
the  young  in  the  duty  which  they  owe  to  their  elders.  Their  years  give  them  a 
superiority,  their  experience  gives  them  prudence,  and,  if  they  have  exercised  them- 
selves unto  godliness,  the  length  of  their  exercise  has  rendered  them  proficients  in 
hoUness  :  these  are  all  natural  motives  to  respect,  esteem,  and  honour.  The 
subject  of  this  discourse  suggests  to  the  young  instructions  likewise  of  a  more 
extensive  nature ;  it  urges  them  to  begin  early  a  religious  and  holy  life.  Would  you 
establish  your  claim  to  honour  when  you  shall  arrive  at  old  age  ?  Be  good  betimes  : 
begin  early,  and  persist  steadily.  3.  In  the  subject  of  this  discourse  the  old  are 
particularly  interested.  Are  any  of  you,  ye  aged,  yet  strangers  to  the  way  of 
righteousness?  Your  hoary  head  is  your  disgrace.  At  every  age  vice  is  the 
greatest  folly,  for  at  every  age  men  may  be  hurried  in  a  moment  to  suffer  the 
punishment  of  vice ;  but  in  old  age  vice  is  perfect  madness,  for  the  hoary  sinner 
must  quickly  be  summoned  to  his  doom.  How  dreadfully  dangerous  is  your  state  I 
(Alex.  Gerard,  D.D.)  Ideal  age : — I.  Its  characteristics.  1.  Established  faith. 
(1)  His  saving  trust  is  perfected.  (2)  His  theological  convictions  are  consolidated. 
2.  Beautiful  spirit.  (1)  Devoutness.  (2)  Humility.  (8)  Patience.  (4)  Cheerful- 
ness. (5)  Liberality.  (6)  "Wisdom.  (7)  Piesignation.  (8)  Hopefulness.  3.  Con- 
tinued usefulness.  (1)  Sympathy.  (2)  Counsel.  (3)  Prayer.  (4)  Work.  II.  Its 
GLOEY.  1.  The  glory  of  rich  experience.  Has  learnt  among  other  lessons — (1)  To 
believe  in  the  love  of  God  in  spite  of  aU  contrary  appearances.  (2)  To  always  do 
right  irrespective  of  possible  consequences.  (3)  To  be  kind  to  all,  but  to  place 
confidence  only  in  the  select  few.  (4)  To  sit  loose  to  earthly  possessions.  (5)  To 
receive  advice,  but  act  with  an  independent  judgment.  (6)  To  seek  right  con- 
clusions, uninfluenced  by  conventional  notions.  (7)  To  put  the  best  probable 
construction  on  doubtful  actions.  (8)  To  make  allowances  for  the  infirmities  of 
others.  2.  The  glory  of  pleasing  memories.  (1)  Memories  of  blessings  thank- 
fully received.  (3)  Memories  of  work  faithfully  done.  3.  The  glory  of  deserved 
honour.  4.  The  glory  of  thrilling  hopes.  (1)  Hope  of  a  happy  departure  from 
earth.  (2)  Hope  of  a  blessed  existence  in  paradise  to  the  end  of  time.  (3)  Hope  of 
a  glorious  resurrection  to  eternal  life.     (T.  Baron.) 

Yet.  32.  He  that  is  slow  to  anger  is  better  than  the  mighty ;  and  he  that  ruleth 
his  spirit  than  he  that  taketh  a  city. — Christian  heroisvi : — I.  What  is  it  to  rule 
THB  spirit  ?  Spirit  is  used  sometimes  for  the  thoughts  of  the  mind,  the  passions 
of  the  heart,  the  emotions  of  sense,  phantoms  of  imagination,  and  illusions  of  con- 
cupiscence. To  rule  the  spirit  is  never  to  suiler  one's  self  to  be  prejudiced  by  false 
ideas,  always  to  see  things  in  their  true  point  of  view,  to  regulate  our  hatred  and 
our  love,  our  desires  and  our  inactivity,  exactly  according  to  the  knowledge  we 
have  obtained  after  mature  deliberation  that  objects  are  worthy  of  our  esteem 
or  deserve  our  aversion  that  they  are  worth  obtaining  or  proper  to  be  neglected. 
Consider  man — 1.  In  regard  to  his  natural  dispositions.  Man  finds  himself  the 
slave  of  his  heart,  instead  of  being  the  master  of  it.  He  finds  himself  indisposed 
to  truth  and  virtue,  and  conciliatory  to  vice  and  falsehood.  Who  does  not  feel  in 
huuself  and  observe  in  others  a  resistance  to  the  practice  of  virtue  ?  By  virtue 
understand  an  universal  disposition  of  an  intelligent  soul  to  devote  itself  to  order, 
and  to  regulate  its  conduct  as  order  requires.  To  avoid  vice  is  to  desist  from 
everything  contrary  to  order,  from  slander  and  anger,  from  indolence  and  volup- 
tuousness, and  so  on.  We  bring  into  the  world  propensities  hostile  and  fatal  to 
such  obligations.  Some  of  these  are  in  the  body,  and  some  are  in  the  mind.  As 
we  feel  in  our  constitution  obstacles  to  virtue  and  propensities  to  vice,  so  we 
perceive  also  inclinations  to  error  and  obstacles  to  truth.  Every  vice,  every 
irregular  passion,  includes  this  error,  that  a  man  who  gratifies  his  passion  is 
happier  than  he  who  restrains  and  moderates  it.  The  disposition  of  mind  indicated 
by  the  term  "  ruling  the  spirit"  supposes  labour,  constraint,  and  exercise.  A  man 
who  would  rule  his  spirit  must  recreate  himself.  2.  In  regard  to  surrounding 
objects.  Society  is  composed  of  many  enemies,  who  seem  to  be  taking  pains  to 
increase  those  difliculties  which  our  natural  dispositions  oppose  against  truth  and 
virtue.  Everywhere  around  us  are  false  judgments,  errors,  mistakes,  and  preju- 
dices— prejudices  of  birth,  education,  country,  religion,  friendship,  trade  or 
profession,  and  of  fortune.    What  efforts  must  a  man  make  to  hold  lais  soul  in 


440  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

perpetual  equilibrium,  to  maintain  himself  against  so  many  prejudices !  As  the 
men  around  us  fascinate  us  by  their  errors,  so  they  decoy  us  into  vice  by  their 
example.  To  resist  example  we  must  incessantly  oppose  those  natural  inclinations 
which  urge  us  to  imitation.  To  resist  example  we  must  love  virtue  for  virtue's 
sake.  3.  In  regard  to  the  habits  which  man  has  contracted.  Most  men  have  done 
more  acts  of  vice  than  of  virtue ;  consequently  we  contribute  by  our  way  of  living  to 
join  to  the  depravity  of  nature  that  which  comes  from  exercise  and  habit.  What  a 
task,  when  we  endeavour  to  prevent  the  return  of  ideas  which  for  many  years  our 
minds  have  revolved  1  II.  Peove  the  truth  of  the  statement  of  the  text.  By 
one  who  takes  a  city  Solomon  means  a  man  who  lives  upon  victories  and  conquests 
— a  hero  in  the  world's  sense.  He  that  ruleth  his  spirit  discovers  more  fortitude, 
more  magnanimity,  and  more  courage.  Compare  the  worldly  with  the  Christian 
hero  in  four  particulars.  1.  The  motives  which  animate  them.  2.  The  exploits 
they  perform.  3.  The  enemies  they  attack.  4.  The  rewards  they  obtain.  The 
enemy  whom  the  Christian  combats  is  his  own  heart ;  for  he  is  required  to  turn  his 
arms  against  himself.  He  must  actually  deny  himself.  Let  us  religiously  abide 
by  our  principle.  The  duty  of  an  intelligent  soul  is  to  adhere  to  truth,  and  to 
practise  virtue.  We  are  born  with  a  disinclination  to  both.  Let  us  not  be  dismayed 
with  the  greatness  of  the  task  of  ruling  our  spirit.  "  Greater  is  He  that  is  in  us, 
than  he  that  is  in  the  world."  Grace  comes  to  the  aid  of  nature.  Prayer  gains 
strength  by  exercise.  The  passions,  after  having  been  tyrants,  become  slaves  in 
their  turn.  The  danger  and  pain  of  battle  vanish  when  the  eyes  get  sight  of 
conquest.  How  inconceivably  beautiful  is  victory  then!  {J.  Saurin.)  Self- 
respect  and  self-control : — Above  aU  conquests  of  states  and  cities  is  the  greater 
conquest  of  self.  Greater  is  the  man  who  conquers  himself,  who  rules  his  own 
spirit,  and  brings  his  whole  being  under  the  supremacy  of  will,  than  he  who  takes  a 
city — greater  in  his  character,  deeds,  results.  The  outcome  of  a  life  depends  on 
the  answer  to  two  questions — what  a  man  thinks  of  himself ;  what  he  does  with 
himself.  The  two  closely-related  and  all  essential  conditions  of  genuine  manhood 
are  self-respect  and  self-control.  I.  Self-respect  involves  a  sense  of  the  dignity 
which  belongs  to  humanity:  a  sense  of  one's  individuality,  and  the  consequent 
maintenance  of  one's  selfhood.  Distinction,  in  such  a  world  as  this,  is  gained,  not 
by  following  the  multitude,  but  by  standing  aside  in  your  own  personahty  while 
the  vulgar  crowd  sweep  by.  As  a  reason  for  conduct,  "  They  all  do  it  "  is  a  cheap 
and  silly  excuse.  There  comes  with  a  sense  of  dignity  and  individuality  an  insight 
into  the  significance  of  a  man's  life,  and  an  overmastering  thought  of  its  measure- 
less responsibilities,  and  a  fuU  impression  of  the  sacredness  of  life.  There  is  too 
much  that  is  great  and  sacred  in  man's  nature  and  destiny  to  permit  him  to  misuse 
a  life  so  richly  endowed.  Such  self-respect  is  in  no  way  self-conceit.  U.  Self- 
control,  OR  self-government.  If  such  is  our  being,  there  must  be  some  strong 
power  to  preside  over  it.  "  I  must  be  my  own  master,"  the  self-respecting  man  says. 
Then  he  wiU  want  to  know  the  scope  of  the  government  to  be  maintained.  It  must 
seek  a  man's  own  highest  interests,  the  real  interests  of  others,  and  the  honour  of 
God ;  and  it  must  fulfil  all  obligations  arising  from  this  highest  of  relationships. 
This  a  first  law ;  nothing  deleterious  to  character — either  of  our  own  or  that  of 
another — shall  ever  be  permitted.  But  true  self-government  does  not  stop  with 
self-restraint.  It  demands  the  right  exercise  of  every  power  to  the  fullest  measure 
of  abihty.  It  involves  the  highest  self-development,  and  the  largest  happiness  to 
others.  HI.  The  fruits  of  self-respect  and  self-government.  1.  All  the  higher 
parts  of  a  man's  being  are  ennobled  and  given  their  rightful  sway ;  all  the  lower 
are  rightly  held  in  subjection.  The  conscience  becomes  supreme.  All  the  moral 
powers  are  in  fuU  development  and  play.  The  will  is  chief  executive,  and  God  is 
an  active  power,  a  real  factor  in  practical  life.  The  entire  man  is  at  his  best. 
2.  Thus  is  realised  the  proper  end  of  all  true  education.  3.  This  quaUty  of  self- 
control  pre-eminently  prepares  us  for  great  emergencies.  Self-respect  is  the  early 
form  in  which  greatness  appears ;  it  is  our  practical  perception  of  the  Deity  in  man. 

"  Self-reverence,  self-knowledge,  self-control, 
These  three  alone,  lead  life  to  sovereign  power." 

(C.  H.  Payne,  D.D.,  LL.D.)  On  the  government  of  the  temper: — Important  is 
an  early  discipline  of  the  passions,  and  a  steady  attention  to  the  government  of  our 
conduct.  Such  are  the  frailties  and  imperfections  of  man,  that  even  his  virtues  are 
often  blended  with  corresponding  vices,  and  are  always  united  with  errors  congenial 


CHAP.  XVI.]  PROVERBS.  441 

to  them.  Previous  to  the  cultivation  of  good  dispositions  is  the  duty  of  guarding 
against  evil  ones.  The  evil  now  dealt  with  is  what  self-love  would  be  content  to 
call  a  foible,  or  a  mere  natural  infirmity;  but  religion  always  associates  it  with 
folly  and  condemns  it  as  sin.  I  mean  a  peevish  temper  and  an  irritable  disposition. 
Consider  this — I.  Ab  the  source  of  continual  unhappiness  to  ourselves  and  others. 
The  ills  and  vexations  of  life  are  of  themselves  sufficiently  numerous,  without 
cherishing  such  dispositions  in  our  own  bosoms  as  are  calculated  to  give  them 
additional  violence.  The  best  tempers  will  indeed  sometimes  be  ruffled.  And  the 
good  carmot  always  resist  the  encroachments  of  passion.  But  the  passionate  man 
magnifies  every  trifle  that  thwarts  him  into  a  real  evil.  But  no  one  ever  harboured 
in  his  bosom  the  gloomy  passions  of  anger,  hatred,  and  revenge,  without  feeling  a 
pang  that  corroded  his  own  heart,  while  he  wished  to  disturb  the  peace  of  others, 
Repeated  hours  of  vexation  and  sorrow,  which  sprang  wholly  from  internal  disorder 
or  irritable  passions,  has  led  some,  from  mere  self-love,  to  inure  their  minds  to 
discipline  at  a  more  advanced  season  of  life.  Such  are  the  effects  of  an  irascible 
temper,  that  the  dearest  blessings  and  the  most  rational  satisfactions  which  this 
life  can  afford  are  often  lost  by  it.  However  careful  we  may  be  in  disciplining  our 
own  minds,  we  cannot  hope  to  live  secure  against  the  wild  and  unprovoked  attacks 
of  anger,  or  the  hourly  vexations  of  peevishness.  And  those  who  are  contented  to 
live  under  the  loose  dominion  of  the  passions  mdst  be  in  constant  fear  of  saying  or 
doing  something  to-day  which  they  may  be  truly  ashamed  of  to-morrow.  And  the 
passionate  man  may  justly  apprehend  dreadful  consequences.  He  is  in  danger  of 
every  species  of  injustice  and  every  degree  of  guilt.  The  temper  to  evil  is  cherished 
■within  his  own  breast.     II.  The  peevish  temper  is  incompatible  with  that  frame 

OF  MIND  which  THE  GOSPEL  OP  ChRIST  TEACHES  AND  REQUIRES  US  TO   CULTIVATE.      Out 

Lord  requires  of  His  disciples  a  holy  disposition,  which  may  well  be  regarded  as  the 
good  ground  in  which  the  seed  of  every  virtue  will  grow  up  to  perfection.  And  He 
requires  of  us  also  works  of  charity  and  neighbourly  love,  mutual  forbearance,  long- 
suffering,  and  steady  perseverance  in  the  course  of  every  duty.  The  efficacy  of 
piety  and  prayer  will,  in  a  great  measure,  be  destroyed  by  an  evil  disposition.  We 
must  cultivate  habits  of  religion  as  well  as  of  virtue.  {J.  Hewlett,  B.D.)  The 
government  of  our  passions,  especially  anger : — The  text  may  be  resolved  into  this 
proposition — that  the  private  rule  or  government  over  our  passions  is  far  more 
honourable  than  any  other  rule  or  dominion  whatever.  The  passion  of  anger  is 
specially  mentioned  in  the  text.  The  excellency  of  dominion  over  this  passion 
appears — 1.  Because  it  carries  us  to  a  nearer  resemblance  of  the  Divine  nature  than 
any  other  power  or  authority.  The  great  excellency  of  our  natures,  or  our  likeness 
and  conformity  to  God,  does  not  consist  in  any  one  single  perfection,  but  requires 
a  great  variety  to  complete  it.  Those  are  the  noblest  perfections  that  most 
improve  and  better  the  temper  of  our  minds.  The  right  temper  of  our  minds 
depends  on  the  regularity  of  our  passions.  A  just  government  over  these  is  there- 
fore a  much  greater  perfection  than  might  and  power.  The  great  glory  of  God 
Himself  is  that  His  eternal  mind  is  always  acted  by  eternal  reason,  without  passion 
or  resentment.  He  deUghts  and  glories  in  this,  that  He  is  slow  to  anger. 
2.  Because  it  gives  us  a  reputation  of  greater  wisdom  and  understanding. 
Solomon  always  links  together  a  man  of  temper  and  a  man  of  understanding. 
Take  one  branch  of  understanding,  that  which  goes  by  the  name  of  prudence  and 
discretion.  Prudence,  as  a  moral  virtue,  is  wholly  employed  about  the  private 
conduct  and  government  of  our  own  selves.  To  exercise  rule  over  others  is  more 
of  an  art  and  policy  than  a  moral  virtue.  There  is  nothing  that  deserves  the  name 
of  prudence  but  what  relates  to  a  man's  self,  and  the  private  economy  within  him- 
self. A  wise  man  is  the  greatest  seK-lover,  in  a  true  sense,  and  prudence  as  well  a». 
charity  begins  at  home.  No  man  can  be  fitted  to  command  others  that  never 
made  the  experiment  of  governing  himself.  The  art  of  quieting  our  spirits  is  the 
noblest  piece  of  wisdom  in  relation  to  our  own  selves.  3.  Because  it  bespeaks  more 
true  courage  and  bravery  than  any  other  conquest.  It  is  the  true  fortitude  and 
bravery  of  the  mind  to  queU  those  passions  that  are  enemies  to  our  reason.  A 
fierce,  ungovernable  temper  only  shows  the  greatness  of  a  man's  passion,  not  the 
greatness  of  his  mind.  The  greatness  of  a  man's  mind  as  much  consists  in  the 
command  over  its  passions  as  that  of  a  prince  in  the  command  over  his  subjects. 
So  great  is  the  bravery  of  conquering  one  single  passion,  it  leaves  always  an 
honourable  impression  of  a  great  mind.  4.  Because  it  affords  the  truest  freedom 
and  liberty.  If  the  right  notion  of  human  liberty  were  an  entire  exemption  from 
the  will  of  a  Superior,  the  advantages  of  liberty  would  lie  on  the  side  of  might  andi 


442  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

power.     But  this  account  of  liberty  is  false.     By  liberty  we  mean  that  inward 
freedom  and  vigour  of  mind  that  consist  in  the  absolute  command  over  its  own 
acts ;  in  the  free  and  undisturbed  exercise  of  its  powers.     This  implies  the  free 
exercise  of  our  reason,  the  ruling  of  our  spirits,  and  the  subjection  of  our  passions. 
Where  there  is  the  most  perfect  reason,  there  is  the  most  perfect  liberty.    It  is 
thought  by  some  that  those  have  the  best  pretensions  to  liberty  that  are  left 
absolutely  at  large,  and  nowise  confined  to  the  commands  of  reason.    But  that  is 
the  idea  of  human  passions,  not  of  human  reason.     Where  is  there  any  such  thing 
as  human  liberty  without  the  observance  of  rules  and  laws?     5.  Because  it  gives 
us  more  ease   and  quiet.     Our  passions  naturally  break  our  repose   and   quiet. 
There  is  some  trouble  and  difficulty  in  conquering  a  passion,  but  there  is  infinitely 
greater  in  being  a  slave  to  it.     Whether  we  are  concerned  in  bearing  the  evils  or 
enjoying  the  good  things  of  this  world,  we  find  a  mighty  difference  in  point  of  ease 
and  quiet  betwixt  the  conduct  of  our  reason  and  the  misgovernment  of  our  passions. 
The  main  spring  of  the  passion  of  anger  is  an  opinion  of  our  being  slighted  and 
despised,  or  a  fancy  of  some  indignity  that  is  offered  to  us.     Now  this  fancy  and 
opinion,  just  like  jealousy,  is  always  tormenting.     Every  imaginary  slight,  every 
groundless  and  trifling  accident,  will  soon  be  made  a  fresh  occasion  of  trouble 
and   disquiet.     How  much  it  makes  for   the  ease  and  quiet  of  our   minds  to 
keep  them  within  the  bounds  of  reason  and  discretion  !     In  conclusion,  enforce 
this  advice,  of  being  "slow  to  anger,"  and   of   "ruling  our  spirits."     Nothing 
better  recommends  the   Christian    religion    than    this,   that    it    is    most    fitted 
and    accommodated    for    the    sweetening    men's    tempers,   and    for    taking    off 
the    edge    and    keenness    of    their    spirits.     It    not    only    provides    rules,    but 
also  sufficiency  of   grace  for  carrying  them  out.     {George  Rouse,   D.D.)        The 
essentials  of  self-control : — The  records  of  the  past  are  replete  with  the  triumphs 
of  human  genius.    In  all  lands  monuments  are  the  marks  of  greatness.     To  be 
recorded  in  history,  to  be  eulogised  in  panegyric,  is  the  dream  of  this  world's 
ambition.    But  what  shall  we  say  to  him  who  has  gained  the  mastery  of  himself  ? 
"What  Phidias  shall  rear  for  him  the  temple  of  his  renown  ?     Only  God  is  the  com- 
petent eulogist  of  such  a  man.     Three  things  essential  to  self-mastery — self-know- 
ledge, self-denial,  and  self-consecration.     Self-control  is  not  self-destruction.    All 
the  great  appetites  and  passions  of  our  natures  were  given  for  a  beneficent  pur- 
pose, and  when  gratified  within  the  limitations  of  law,  the  gratification  is  as  pure 
as  a  saint's  prayer  or  an  angel's  song.   There  is  no  sin  in  temptation.    The  sin  comes 
in  yielding  to  temptation.     Temptation  is  the  evidence  of  virtue.     Totally  depraved 
spirits  are  never  tempted.     Self-mastery  is  the  harmonious  action  of  sensibilities, 
of  all  our  mental  appreciations,  of  all  our  physical  functions,  in  harmony  with  tha 
purpose  for  which  they  were  created.     There  is  an  old  saying  in  the  Church  that 
"vice  is  the  excess  of  virtue."    That  which  is  holy  in  itself  becomes  unholy  by 
transcending  the  law  of  limitations.     1.  Each  one  of  us  must  sit  in  judgment  upon 
his  own  temperament.     How  shall  we  gain  the  necessary  self-knowledge  ?     Science 
will  throw  light  upon  your  path,  but  you  may  see  yourself  in  this  precious  book 
photographed  in  pen-portraiture.     The  Divine  illumination  it  gives  will  be  more 
than  a  Mentor,  it  will  be  a  Divine  companion  suggesting  thoughts,  awakening 
desires,  creating  motives,  exalting  purposes.     2.  Indispensable  to  self-mastery  is 
self-denial.     This  is  of  two  kinds— the  refusal  to  do  those  things  which  are  pro- 
hibited in  the  Divine  law ;  the  magnanimity  of  self-abnegation  for  the  sake  of, 
and  service  of,  others.     This  is  the  higher  self-denial.    A  man  should  deny  himself 
of  what  is  lawful  to  him,  that  he  may  be  a  benefactor  of  mankind.     3.  Most 
important  of  all  is  self -consecration.     Conscious  weakness  is  more  often  an  ebment 
of  real  strength  and  victory  than  conscious  power,  for  weakness  may  lean  on  the 
strength  of  God.     You  will  never  get  this  self-mastery  otherwise  than  here  in  the 
reading  of  the  Scripture.    I  reject  everything  except  the  Divine  Saviour,  who  has 
power  to  invest  me  with  power  to  master  every  passion  and  every  appetite,  and 
then  to  refine  all  my  sensibilities,  and  give  tone  and  character  to  my  conversation, 
and    spirit   to    all   my  life.     {Bp.  Newman,   U.S.A.)        Christian  moderation: — 
Book  of  Proverbs  is  the  best  of  all  manuals  for  the  formation  of  a  well-balanced 
mind.    We  go  to  this  book,  not  so  much  for  full  and  definite  statements  of  the 
distinguishing   doctrines  of   revealed  religion,  as  for  those  wise  and  prudential 
canons  whereby  we  may  reform  extravagance,  prune  down  luxuriance,  and  combine 
the  whole  variety  of  traits  and  qualities  into  a  harmonious  and  beautiful  unity. 
Hero  in  this  text  is  described  and  recommended  a  certain  kind  of  temper  which 
should  be  possessed  and  cherished  by  the  people  of  God.    I.  Desckibe  this  lEiirzE. 


CHAP.  XVI.]  PROVERBS.  443 

It  is  Christian  moderation.  St.  Paul  writeg,  "  Let  your  moderation  be  known  unto 
all  men."  He  who  ruleth  his  spirit  is  characterised  by  sobriety  and  equanimity. 
He  is  never  driven  to  extremes  in  any  direction.  A  well-poised  and  symmetrical 
character  floated,  as  an  unattainable  ideal,  before  the  minds  of  the  better  pagan 
philosophers.    This  is  the  famous  "  temperance  "  of  Plato  and  Aristotle.    11.  Some 

OF    THE    OBSTACLES    THAT    OPPOSE    THE    FORMATION     OF     A     ChEISTIAN     SOBEIETY     AND 

MODERATION.  1.  It  is  opposcd  to  the  appetites  and  passions  of  the  body.  It  is  one 
of  the  effects  of  the  apostasy,  that  human  nature  is  corrupted  on  the  physical  side 
of  it,  as  well  as  upon  the  mental  and  moral  sides.  The  bodily  appetites  are  very 
different  now  from  what  they  would  have  been  had  man  remained  in  his  original 
and  holy  condition.  2.  Christian  sobriety  and  moderation  meets  with  an  obstacle 
in  man's  disordered  mental  nature.  How  lawless  and  ungoverned  is  the  human 
imagination !  It  is  in  some  respects  easier  to  control  the  physical  appetites  than 
to  rule  an  inflamed  and  extravagant  fancy.  And  a  man's  purely  intellectual  con- 
clusions and  convictions  may  be  so  one-sided  and  extreme  as  to  spoil  his  temper. 
Fanaticism  in  every  age  furnishes  examples  of  this.  III.  The  tette  souece  of 
Cheistian  tempeeance  and  modeeation.  It  must  have  its  root  in  love.  The  secret 
of  such  an  even  temper  is  charity.  No  man  can  have  this  large-minded,  compre- 
hensive, and  blessed  equilibrium  who  does  not  love  God  supremely,  and  his 
neighbour  as  himself.  Our  subject,  therefore,  teaches  the  necessity  of  the  new 
birth.  There  may  be  outward  self-control  without  any  inward  self -improvement. 
Without  a  change  of  heart,  there  is  nothing  but  the  austere  and  ungenial  attempt 
of  a  moralist  to  perform  a  repulsive  task.  Love — holy  and  heavenly  charity- 
must  be  generated,  and  then  under  its  spontaneous  and  happy  impulse,  it  will  be 
comparatively  easy  to  rectify  the  remaining  corruption,  and  repress  the  lingering 
excesses  and  extremes  of  appetite  and  passion.  {G.  T.  Shedd,  D.D.)  The  great- 
ness of  self-rule : — "Por  myself  I  lay  no  claim  to  any  exceptional  fineness  of  nature. 
But  I  say  that,  beginning  life  as  a  rough,  Hi-educated,  impatient  man,  I  have  found 
my  schooling  in  these  very  African  experiences.  ...  I  have  learned  by  actual 
stress  of  imminent  danger  that  self-control  is  more  indispensable  than  gunpowder, 
and  that  persistent  self-control  is  impossible  without  real,  heartfelt  sympathy." 
(H.  31.  Stanley.)  The  ruling  of  the  spirit : — The  things  which  cost  a  man  the 
greatest  effort  and  the  hardest  work  may  be  done  with  no  bodily  exertion  at  aU ;  as 
a  man  sits  in  his  easy  chair  with  his  eyes  shut.  The  hardest  of  all  work  is  that 
which  puts  the  soul  upon  the  stretch  ;  there  is  no  wear  like  the  wear  of  a  heart  and 
brain.  The  text  points  out  to  us  a  certain  work,  very  difficult  to  do,  very  noble 
when  done,  which  yet  is  done  with  so  little  outward  appearance  and  physical 
effort  that  some  might  perhaps  fancy  that  it  is  no  work  at  all.  Every  one  who 
has  sought  to  believe  in  the  Saviour,  and  to  lead  a  Christian  life,  must  have  learned 
by  experience  how  great  a  part  of  the  work  of  an  immortal  being  is  mental  work, 
is  work  that  makes  no  bodily  show.  I  am  not  thinking  of  merely  intellectual 
effort ;  I  am  thinking  of  the  exertion  of  the  whole  spiritual  nature.  Our  entire 
spiritual  life  is,  in  one  sense,  a  "  ruling  of  our  spirit."  The  idea  of  unseen 
exertions,  of  spiritual  strivings  and  efforts,  is  one  with  which  all  believers  are 
perfectly  familiar.  To  rule  our  spirit  rightly  is  a  difficult  thing,  and  a  thing  from 
doing  which  great  and  valuable  results  are  to  follow.  This  implies  that  within  the 
heart  of  man  are  many  unruly  tendencies.  There  is  a  great  deal  in  every  human 
soul  that  needs  to  be  kept  down.  If  man's  spirit  were  always  ready  to  do  right,  it 
would  need  no  ruling,  or  the  ruling  would  be  a  very  easy  thing.  But  as  it  is,  it  is 
very  difficult.  What  are  the  things  about  our  spiritual  nature  that  stand  especially 
in  need  of  ruling  ?  There  are  impulses  to  think  and  feel  wrong,  and  impulses 
to  do  wrong.  The  first  of  these  takes  in  little  impulses,  which  to  resist  is  no  more 
than  matter  of  worldly  prudence,  as  well  as  grander  temptations,  to  resist  which  is 
of  the  very  essence  of  religion.  It  is  a  noble  thing  to  hold  the  tendency  of  anger 
in  check,  whether  it  manifest  itseK  in  fretfulness,  or  in  sullenness,  or  in  violent 
outbursts  of  passion.  To  give  way  to  little  spurts  of  petulance,  or  fretfulness,  or 
general  ill-temper  is  a  symptom  that  something  is  amiss  in  your  Christian  character. 
The  sullen  humours  or  peevish  outbursts  of  a  professing  Christian  are  not  small 
matters,  if  they  go  to  fix  in  the  mind  of  the  young  a  disagreeable  and  painful  idea 
of  what  Christianity  and  Christian  people  are.  Little  duties  and  little  temptations 
make  up,  for  most  of  us,  the  sum  of  human  life.  Consider  the  tendency,  in  most 
hearts,  to  discontent  with  the  allotments  of  God's  providence;  to  envy  and  jealousy 
as  regards  those  of  our  fellow-creatures  who  are  more  favoured  and  fortunate  than 
we.     We  should  rule  our  spirit  so  as  to  become  reconciled  to  painful  things,  to 


444  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

acquiescence  in  mortification  and  disappointment  when  they  come ;  and  to  feel 
lightly  towards  people  to  whom  we  are  disposed  to  feel  unkindly  and  bitterly.     In 
all  professions  and  occupations  there  is  competition,  and  there  will  be  temptation 
to  envy,  jealousy,  and  detraction,  as  regards  a  man's  competitors.     That  ruling  of 
th'e  spirit  which  is  needful  in  Christianity  to  meet  disappointment  brings  out  the  best 
and  noblest  qualities  that  can  be  found  in  man.     Then  there  is  the  tendency  to 
procrastination  as  to  our  spiritual  interests.     Many  a  soul  has  dated  its  ruin  to 
yielding  to  an  impulse  that  ought  to  have  been  resolutely  put  down,  to  postponing 
till  to-morrow  a  work  which  should  have  been  done  to-day.     {A.  K.  H.  Boyd.) 
Ruling  the  spirit  the  test  of  greatness  : — Ruling  the  spirit  is  better  than  outward 
conquest,  because— I.  The  spirit  within  a  man  is  itself  of  more  worth  than  ant 
EXTERNAL  CONQUESTS.      1.  Its    inherent   excellence.      Life  in  a  single  individual 
endowed  with  intellectuality,  conscience  and  sesthetic  feeling,  hope,  &c.,  is  of  more 
value  than  any  number  or  extent  of  soulless  possessions :  a  single  spirit  outweighs 
the  material  globe.     2.  It  is  the  object  of  God's  love.     He  is  interested  in  things, 
but  loves  spirits.     3.  It  is  immortal.     Empires  gone ;  cities  desolate ;  aU  else  but 
spirits  passing  away.    II.  It  requires  more  personal  strength  to  rule  one's  own 
6PnviT  than  to  make  outward  conquest.     The  outward  conquest  is  through  the 
machinery  of  circumstance  ;  the  inner  by  one's  own  resources.     III.  Self-conquest 
is  better  than  secular,  because  it  is  accomplished  through  a  higher  process  of 
WARFARE.     It  drills  not  with  arms,  but  with  virtues.    Its  manual  consists  in  "  what- 
soever things  are  honest,  just,  pure,  lovely,  of  good  report."     The  fight  itself  pays 
independently  of  the  promised  results.     What  the  control  of  one's  spirit  involves. 
1.  The  independent  ordering  of  one's  own  words  and  actions.    Few  are  able  to 
determine  within  themselves  what  shall  be  the  outcome  of  their  lives.     2.  Back  of 
this,  self-control  involves  not  only  the  ordering  of  one's  own  conduct,  but  also  the 
deliberate  moulding  of  one's  desires  and  purposes  in  accordance  with  one's  best 
judgment.    Reason  must  check  or  encourage  the  feelings.     3.  And  back  of  this, 
self-control  involves  the  deliberate  determination  of   one's  own  judgment  in  the 
light  of  evidence.     It  rigidly  excludes  prejudice.     What  helps  have  we  for  the 
control  of  our  own  spirits  ?     1.  The  Holy  Spirit :  an  impartation  of  peace,  purity, 
and  a  sound  mind.     2.  The  sense  of  the  presence  of  Christ :  the  influence  of  the 
knowledge  that  the  greatest  and  holiest  of  beings  is  watching  and  encouraging  us. 
3.  Engrossment  with  the  great  things  of  God  :  all  life  lifted  above  the  plane  of  its 
own  littleness ;  meditating  the  eternal,  the  spiritual,  the  mighty  laws  of  the  glorious 
kingdom ;  and  thus  unaffected  by  temporary  influences,  as  the  stars  are  unaffected 
by  the  winds.     4.  Charity  in  the  heart:    a  loving  man  unjostled  by  enmities, 
envies,  the  pinches  of  pride ;  an  essential  serenity.     {Homiletic  Review.)        Self- 
victory  : — Do  not  people  often  say  to  us,  "Conquer  yourself"?     Can  anybody 
conquer  himself  ?     God  can   conquer  him !      "  Better."     Why  is  a  person  who 
conquers  himself  "better"  than  a  general  who  takes  a  city?     1.  He  is  a  greater 
hero ;  he  does  a  more  difficult  thing — a  nobler  deed.     Shall  I  tell  you  why  it  is  so 
difficult?    Because  God  meant  it  to  be  difficult.     When  Adam  and  Eve  ate  the 
forbidden  fruit,  they  were  friends  with  the  devil.     But  God  said,  in  great  mercy, 
"  You  shall  not  always  be  friends.     I  will  put  enmity  between  you."    And  when 
boys  or  girls  begin  to  try  to  conquer  themselves,  they  find  the  "  enmity"  :  they  find 
what  a  hard  thing  it  is  to  fight  against  their  sins.     2.  And  the  reason  why  it  is  so 
difficult  to  conquer  any  bad  habit  is  because  there  are  all  sorts  of  powers  fighting 
with  that  fault  against  you.     3.  It  is  not  only  a  braver  but  a  happier  thing  to 
conquer  one's  self  than  to  "  take  a  city."    There  is  happiness  in  one's  conscience 
if    one  succeeds  in   conquering  something  that  is  naughty;    and  there  is   no 
happiness  like  it  in  the  world.     If  you  take  cities  it  will  not  make  you  happy. 
When  Alexander  the  Great  took  nearly  all  the  cities  in  the  world,  he  sat  down 
crying,  because  he  could  not  find   more  worlds  to  take.     But  if  you  try  to  do 
good,  and  gradually  conquer  your  own  besetting  sin,  you  will  feel  within  such 
a  peace  as  no  words   can  describe  !     4.  Now,  there  is  another  thing — it  is  not 
only  braver  and   happier,   but  something    better   still — it  pleases   God.      That 
must  be  best.     Now,  the  reason  why  it  pleases  God  so  much  for  you  to  conquer 
your  sins  is  because  you  will  be  growing  like  Jesus  Christ.     (c7.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 
The  ruling  of  the  spirit : — You  remember  the  story  of  "  Sindbad  the  Sailor  " :  how 
the  Old  Man  of  the  Sea,  when  he  got   Sindbad  to  lift  him  up  in  pity  for  his 
infirmities,  sat  astride  upon  his  shoulders,  clinging  closely  to  the  poor  man  wherever 
he  went,  compelling  him  to  do  whatever  he  wanted  until  his  life  became  a  burden 
to  him.     So  the  lower  nature  when  it  gets  the  better  of  the  higher  makes  it  its 


CHAP.  XVI.]  .  PROVERBS.  445 

slave  and  compels  it  to  do  its  bidding,  until  the  degrading  bondage  becomes  so 
irksome  that  one  would  give  anything  to  throw  it  off.  Now,  you  are  all  bom  with 
a  sinful  nature.  You  inherit  a  tendency  to  sin.  God  only  can  give  you  power  to 
rule  your  spirit,  and  through  your  ruling  spirit  to  rule  your  whole  body  and  life. 
God  only  can  crown  the  king  in  you  again  and  make  him  master  of  all  your  unruly 
passions  and  rebellious  desires.  You  can  reign  as  kings  over  yourselves,  only  in 
subjection  to  Him.  Now,  it  is  to  be  feared  that  in  every  one's  nature  there  is  a 
devil's  corner ;  that  while  strict  in  some  points  you  are  apt  to  be  lax  in  others,  and 
to  compound  for  sins  that  you  love  by  condemning  sins  that  you  do  not  care  for. 
You  want  to  be  considered  good,  while  you  sacrifice  a  part  of  your  nature  to  evil. 
But  this  is  a  terrible  delusion.  If  a  corner  of  that  kind  is  allowed  to  remain  waste 
and  uncared  for  in  your  hearts  it  will  assuredly  corrupt  the  whole  of  your  nature. 
1.  The  very  first  thing  you  have  to  do  in  ruling  your  own  spirit  is  to  commit  your 
spirit  to  God.  That  is  what  David  did ;  that  is  what  Jesus  did.  You  are  apt  to 
think  that  you  commit  your  spirit  to  God  only  when  you  die  and  give  up  the 
breath  of  your  body.  But  you  can  do  that  now  in  your  youth,  in  your  health  and 
strength.  You  will  have  on  your  side  the  strength  of  Omnipotence.  God  will  help 
you  to  subdue  every  rebellious  attempt  your  spirit  makes  to  escape  from  its  blessed 
yoke.  You  can  defy  the  devil  in  the  name  of  the  righteous  Lord  who  claims  you. 
I  remember  when  sailing  one  day  in  a  steamer,  the  captain's  son,  a  bright  little 
fellow  of  five  or  six  years  of  age,  was  on  board  and  wanted  to  take  the  place  of  the 
man  at  the  helm.  The  good-natured  steersman,  to  humour  him,  put  the  spoke  of 
the  wheel  into  his  little  hand,  which  was  hardly  able  to  grasp  it.  But  he  was 
careful  at  the  same  time  to  put  his  own  big  hand  on  the  child's  tiny  fingers,  and 
took  a  firm  hold  and  moved  the  wheel  in  the  right  direction.  And  the  boy  was  in 
high  glee,  imagining  that  he  himself  was  steering  the  huge  steamer.  Now,  so  God 
deals  with  you.  He  puts  His  almighty  hand  on  your  feeble  hand  when  you  are 
ruUng  your  own  spirit,  and  makes  His  strength  perfect  in  your  weakness.  2.  Now, 
I  want  you  to  rule  your  spirit,  not  under  the  influence  of  fear,  but  under  the 
influence  of  love.  He  who  asks  you  to  do  this,  who  gives  you  strength  to  do  it, 
rules  you  in  love.  3.  And  is  it  not  a  happy  thing  to  rule  your  own  spirit  under 
God?  You  have  seen  a  piece  of  complicated  machinery  with  all  the  cog-wheels 
fitting  into  each  other,  and  all  set  going  and  controlled  by  one  central  force.  How 
smoothly  the  machine  worked  toward  the  one  good  result !  In  a  model  city  where 
every  one  obeyed  the  governor  and  did  his  own  work,  and  the  good  of  each  was  the 
good  of  all,  how  pleasant  would  life  be  !  And  so  when  the  spirit  in  each  one  of 
you  is  ruled  by  the  love  of  God,  by  the  supreme  desire  to  do  His  will,  your  condition 
is  a  truly  happy  one.  You  are  so  made  that  all  your  faculties  and  powers,  when 
working  in  their  just  relations,  make  up  the  most  complete  unity  in  the  universe, 
the  image  of  the  very  unity  of  God.  Better  far  is  it  to  rule  your  spirit  and  produce 
this  blessed  unity  than  to  conquer  the  gi-andest  city  in  the  world.  The  conqueror 
of  a  city  overcomes  it  by  force  and  rules  it  by  fear.  He  enters  it  against  the  wish 
of  its  inhabitants,  and  there  is  disorder  and  bloodshed,  fire  and  sword ;  and  if  he 
succeeds  in  producing  order  it  is  all  on  the  surface — beneath,  in  the  hearts  of  the 
people,  there  are  hatred  and  the  desire  for  revenge.  But  if  you  rule  your  own 
spirit,  then  all  your  powers  fall  into  their  right  order,  and  all  that  is  within  you 
willingly  obeys  the  control  of  the  spirit.     {H.  Macmillan,  D.D.) 

Ver.  33.  The  lot  is  cast  into  the  lap  ;  but  the  whole  disposing'  thereof  is  of  the 
Lord. — All  contingencies  under  the  direction  of  God's  providence : — I.  Consider  thk 
RESULT  OF  A  "  LOT  "  IN  REFERENCE  TO  MEN.  Why  suspcud  the  decisiou  of  some 
dubious  case  upon  it  ?  It  implies  something  future,  and  something  contingent.  It 
is  something  absolutely  out  of  the  reach  of  man's  knowledge,  and  equally  out  of 
reach  of  his  power.  A  contingent  event  baflSles  man's  knowledge  and  evades  his 
power,  n.  CoNsroER  the  result  of  a  lot  in  respect  op  God.  All  contingencies 
are  comprehended  by  a  certain  Divine  knowledge,  and  governed  by  as  certain  and 
steady  a  providence.  God  directs  the  greatest  casualties  under  His  providence  to 
certain  ends,  in  reference  to  societies  and  to  particular  persons.  In  the  latter  case, 
touching  their  lives,  their  health,  their  reputation,  their  friendships,  and  their 
employments  or  preferments.  Since  the  interest  of  governments  and  nations,  of 
princes  and  private  persons,  notwithstanding  all  the  contrivance  and  power  that 
human  nature  can  exert  about  them,  remain  so  wholly  contingent,  as  to  us,  surely 
all  the  reason  of  mankind  cannot  suggest  any  solid  ground  of  satisfaction,  but  in 
making  that  God  our  friend  who  is  the  sole  and  absolute  disposer  of  all  these  tiling-, 


446  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 


and  in  carrying  a  conscience  so  clear  towards  Him  as  may  encourage  us  with  con- 
fidence to  cast  ourselves  upon  Him,  and  in  all  casualties  still  to  promise  ourselves 
the  best  events  from  His  providence,  to  whom  nothing  is  casual,  who  constantly 
wills  the  truest  happiness  of  those  that  trust  in  Him,  and  works  all  things  accord- 
ing to  the  counsel  of  that  blessed  will,     {R.  South.)         Grounds  and  limitations  of 
human  responsibility : — Define  the  provinces  of  human  and  Divine  agency.     Our 
duty  is  commensurate  with  our  power.    We  are  responsible  for  the  moral  character 
of  what  is  done  just  so  far  as  it  depends  upon  ourselves.     Within  the  circle  where 
man  has  the  power  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  own  pleasure  is  the  field  of  human 
agency.      Here  man  is  held  responsible.      All  beyond  this   province  of  human 
responsibility  is  done  by  the  power  of  God.     This  thought  of  Divine  providence  is 
the  most  consoling  and  inspiring  that  ever  visits  the  heart,  though  it  cannot  give  joy 
to  the  heart  where  it  is  not  welcomed.   Our  knowledge  of  human  and  Divine  agency 
is  constantly  extending.  We  are  continually  opening  upon  new  views,  which  show  us 
that  many  things  which  are  called  acts  of  God  come  within  the  sphere  of  our  own 
responsibiUty,  and  are,  in  truth,  our  own  actions  springing  from  our  own  doing  or 
our  own  neglect ;  and  the  consequences  of  them  we  must  expect  to  bear.   Moreover, 
the  arts  and  improvements  of  civil  hfe  are  continually  investing  men  with  new 
powers,  and  given  him  a  mastery  over  nature  which  in  former  days  he  never 
dreamed  of  possessing.      Then  is  not  the   sphere  of   Divine  providence  getting 
lessened  ?    Nay,  the  more  we  feel  our  own  responsibility,  the  more  shaU  we  recognise 
the  agency  of  Heaven  in  all  things.   What  is  it  we  adore  in  the  providence  of  God? 
It  is  Tts  vast  reach  of  vision,  and  its  ever  steadfastly  pressing  on  to  that  which  is 
right.      (TF.   B.    0.    Peabody.)         Divine  providence: — The  general   doctrine  of 
providence  derives  support  from  sources  independent  of  Divine  revelation.    It  is 
another  term  for  the  government  of  God,  by  which  all  events  are  made  to  concur 
with   His  wise  and  holy  purposes.     Look  at  providence — 1.  In  the  mode  of  its 
operations.     2.  In  the  vastness  of  its  range.     3.  In  the  punishment  of  the  wicked. 
4.  In  its  aspect  on  the  Church.     The  doctrine  of  Divine  providence  is  full  of  con- 
solation.   All  must  be  right  when  God  controls  and  reigns  over  all.    {John  George.) 
God's  providence  even  in  trifles  : — God's  providence  may  be  seen  not  only  in  the 
whirlwind  and  the  hurricane,  the  lightning  and  the  storm,  but  also  in  the  very 
least  of  natural  manifestations.     Surely,  without  unduly  pressing  our  text,  we  may 
bring  forward  a  familiar  illustration  of  the  way  in  which  even  trifles,  as  man  calls 
them,  have  been  made  to  work  out  mighty  results.     Take,  for  instance,  the  dis- 
covery of  the  laws  of  gravitation,  and  the  great  results  in  which  that  discovery  has 
issued :  how  it  opened  the  way  to  the  understanding  of  the  courses  of  the  heavenly 
bodies;   how  the  orbits  of  the  planets,  and  their  distances,  and  their  relative 
positions  at  various  periods  came  to  be  clearly  defined  ;  the  influence  of  these 
discoveries  on  the  laws  of  navigation,  and  the  consequent  facilities  for  communica- 
tion between  places  separated  by  thousands  of  miles  upon  the  ocean.     We  are  daily 
in  the  enjoyment  of  the   conveniences   and  luxuries  which  spring  from  these 
discoveries.     We  may  be  ignorant  of  the  laws  which  have  been  deduced,  or  even  of 
the  practical  appUcations  of  these  laws ;  of  their  results  in  adding  to  our  comforts 
we  cannot  be  ignorant.    Now,  is  it  too  much  to  say  that  these  discoveries  are  the 
result  of  God's  providential  government  ?    But,  if  this  be  granted,  we  cannot  stop 
here ;  it  follows  that  the  means  by  which  this  knowledge  was  acquired  were  not 
beyond  the  Divine  control ;  nay,  rather  were  subservient  to  it,  and  governed  by  it. 
And  so,  at  last,  we  see  by  manifest  logical  conclusion  that  the  finger  of  God  may 
be  traced  even  in  that  trifle,  as  it  might  have  been  called,  which  led  the  wise  man's 
mind  to  excogitate  the  mysteries  among  which  we  live.   And  whether  we  endeavour 
to  trace  the  working  of  the  finger  of  God  in  the  intricacies  of  the  human  mind,  or 
in  the  external  influences  which  affect  the  mind,  or  in  the  coincidences  by  which 
great  events  are  deduced  from  small  beginnings,  yet  in  each  alike  we  may  say,  and  say 
with  reason,  "  It  is  the  Lord's  doing,  and  it  is  marvellous  in  our  eyes."   Apply  this 
lesson  in  another  way,  to  the  case  of  sickness— for  here,  again,  we  may  attain  to 
very  practical  results.    Now,  I  apprehend  that  the  generality  of  men  do  certainly 
look  upon  sickness  as  a  casualty — a  mere  matter  of  accident  or  chance.     If  you 
were  to  question  them  strictly  you  might  at  last  extract  from  them  in  general  terms 
a  confession  that  God  is  the  author  of  life  or  death,  of  health  or  sickness ;  but 
it  has  no  practical  effect.     It  is  not  a  really  powerful  religious  principle,  for 
they  are  ever  speaking  of  proximate  causes,  and  not  of  the  great  First  Cause. 
Take  now  a  particular  case,   in  part  illustrative  of  my  meaning;   it  shall  be 
the  case  of  the  blind  man,  recorded  in   St.  John  ix.     I  adduce  this  case  to 


CHAP,  xvn.]  PROVERBS.  447 

illustrate  the  general  principle  that  sickness  cometh  not  by  chance,  bnt  by 
God's  will  and  permission,  and  that  its  results  are  known  by  God,  and  that  it 
conies  to  accomplish  the  purpose  for  which  He  hath  sent  it.  Again,  the  same  order 
and  regularity  are  observable  in  the  kingdom  of  grace.  All  the  profit  and 
advantage  which  men  receive  from  the  ministry  of  the  Word  and  Sacraments  is  of 
God.  An  eloquent  sermon  may  be  delivered,  but  the  preacher  cannot  tell  whose 
heart  it  may  reach  or  whose  mind  it  may  affect.  The  lot  is  cast,  as  it  were,  into 
the  lap  ;  the  preacher  knoweth  not  the  issue  thereof,  for  the  whole  disposing  of  it 
is  of  the  Lord.  Now,  I  think  that  these  considerations  may  have  a  very  practical 
effect  upon  us ;  they  touch  our  every-day  life ;  they  console  us  in  failure,  when  failure 
results  from  no  lack  of  diligence  on  our  part ;  they  humble  us  in  success.  But 
does  this  lead  us  to  believe  in  any  doctrines  like  those  of  the  fataUsts?  By  no 
means.  Every  man  is  a  free  agent,  working  out  for  himself  future  weal  or  woe  as 
he  will.  His  mind  is  fixed  in  a  certain  course,  and  his  thoughts  tend  to  that 
direction.  God  often  checks  him  if  he  is  going  astray,  and  pleads  with  him,  and 
throws  hindrances  in  the  paths  which  lead  to  evil.  And  though  a  man's  course  of 
life  may  be  evil,  yet  there  are  influences  which  are  running  counter  to  that  evil 
course,  and  checking  him,  and  compelling  him  to  pause  and  think.  And  why  is 
this — but  because,  though  the  lot  be  cast  into  the  lap,  yet  the  whole  disposing 
thereof  is  of  the  Lord?  (TF.  S.  Simpson,  M.A.)  The  Lord's  disposing: — After 
all,  what  silly  and  short-sighted  children  we  are!  Only  spelling  out  the  alphabet 
in  God's  infant  school,  and  yet  aspiring  to  a  seat  in  His  cabinet !  How  differently 
our  life-stories  will  read  when  we  have  a  chance  to  correct  them  in  the  clear  light 
of  heaven  1  Then  we  shall  discover  under  the  head  of  "  Accidents  "  there  was 
written  as  in  invisible  ink,  "  The  lot  is  cast  into  the  lap,  but  the  disposing  thereof 
is  of  the  Lord."  On  the  page  that  we  had  surrounded  with  black  lines,  and 
inscribed  it  "  Obituaries,"  we  shall  see  how  distinctly  a  Divine  finger  has  written, 
••  Whom  I  love  I  chasten."    {Theodore  L.  Cuyler.) 


CHAPTEE  XYH. 


Veb.  1.  Better  is  a  dry  morsel,  and  quietness  tberewitb,  than  an  house  full  of 
eacriflces  with  strife. — The  maker  and  breaker  of  a  family's  peace : — Truth  sweetens 
the  relations  of  life ;  falsehood  eats  like  rust  into  their  core.  When  they  live  in 
love,  men  meet  each  other  softly  and  kindly,  as  the  eyelids  meet.  Envy  casts 
grains  of  sand  between  the  two,  and  under  each.  Every  movement  then  sends 
a  shooting  pain  through  all  the  body,  and  makes  the  salt  tears  flow.  So  good  are 
peace  and  love  for  human  kind,  that  with  them  a  family  will  be  happy,  though 
they  have  nothing  else  in  the  world ;  and  without  them  miserable,  although  they 
have  the  whole  world  at  their  command.  A  dinner  of  herbs  and  a  stalled  ox 
indicate  the  two  extremes — humble  poverty  on  the  one  side  and  pampered  luxury 
on  the  other.  When  love  leaves  the  family  circle,  it  is  no  longer  a  piece  of  God's 
own  handiwork,  and  there  is  no  security  for  safety  in  any  of  its  motions.  Love  is 
the  element  in  which  all  its  relations  are  set,  for  softness  and  safety ;  and  when  it 
has  evaporated,  nothing  remains  but  that  each  member  of  the  house  should  be 
occupied  in  mounting  a  miserable  guard  over  his  own  interests,  and  against  the 
anticipated  contact  of  the  rest.  Li  that  dislocated  house,  each  dreads  all,  and  all 
dread  each.  Some  rich  families  live  in  love,  and  doubly  enjoy  their  abundance : 
some  poor  families  quarrel  over  their  herbs.  Biches  cannot  secure  happiness,  and 
poverty  cannot  destroy  it.  Whether  it  be  husband  or  wife,  parent  or  chUd,  master 
or  servant,  the  disturber  of  a  house  must  answer  to  its  ahnighty  Protector  for 
abusing  His  gifts,  and  thwarting  His  gracious  designs.     (W.  Amot,  D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  The  fining  pot  is  for  silver,  and  the  furnace  for  gold  :  but  the  Lord  trieth 
the  hearts. — God's  fining  pot  and  furnace  : — The  text  is  a  paraboUcal  description  of 
God's  almighty  power  and  wisdom,  for  the  discovery  and  reformation  of  the  closest, 
and  subtlest,  and  perfectest  thing  in  the  world,  which  is  the  heart  of  man.  I.  The 
PROPOSITION.  First  part  of  the  verse.  The  metals  mentioned  are  silver  and  gold. 
The  instruments  are  the  fining  pot  and  the  furnace.  Good  men  are  Uke  gold  and 
silver  in  sundry  regards.    1.  From  the  solidity  and  substantialness  of  their  prin- 


448  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xtH. 

oiples.      2.   From  the  purity  and  sincerity  of   their  conversation.    .,3.  From  the 
eplendonr  of  their  example.     Their  hearts  are  like  gold  and  silver,  but  it  is  like 
gold  and  silver  in  the  ore,  which  has  a  great  deal  of  dross  mixed  with  it,  and  must 
be  separated  from  it  by  God's  instruments  of  purification.      The   "fining  pot" 
represents  the  Word  of  God,  the  "  furnace  "  represents  the  rod  of  God,  or  afiiiction. 
The  furnace  is  not  for  the  hurt  of  the  gold,  but  for  its  advantage.    Labour  to  be 
bettered  by  every  hand  of  God  upon  us,  that  so  therein  we  may  close  with  His 
gracious  ends.     11.  The  Reddition.      "But  the  Lord  trieth  the  hearts."     This 
adversative  particle  hath  a  threefold  emphasis  in  it.     1.  An  emphasis  of  propor- 
tion.    Taking  "  but "  for  "  so."     The  Lord  is  no  less  able  or  careful  to  try  the 
hearts  of  the  sons  of  men  than  the  goldsmith  is  his  silver  and  gold.     God  tries  the 
heart  either  in  a  way  of  discovery  or  of  purification.     He  tries  them  so  as  to  discern 
them,  and  make  known  what  they  are.     This  kind  of  trial  has  two  seasons,  this 
present  time  and  the  world  to  come.     He  tries  them  to  purge  them,  and  remove 
their  corruptions  from  them.     This  He  does  out  of  love  to  themselves,  that  He  may 
make  them  vessels  of  honour.     In  reference  to  their  works,  that  they  may  bring 
forth  more  fruit.     For  the   sake  of   others.     2.  An  emphasis  of  exception     As 
restraining  the  skill  of  the  refiner  in  this  particular.     He  may  be  able  to  refine  his 
metals,  but  he  cannot  try  the  heart.    3.  An  emphasis  of  appropriation.    "  The  Lord 
trieth  the  hearts,"  i.e.,  the  Lord  alone  does  it.    This  is  His  prerogative.    None  other 
can  try  the  heart  thus  authoritatively,  and  none  can  try  it  so  effectually.    {T.  Norton, 
D.D.)        Heart  tests  : — The  chemical  analyst  has  different  tests  for  different  poisons. 
If  he  suspect  the  presence  of  arsenic,  he  will  use  one  thing  to  detect  that ;  if  he  is 
looking  for  antimony,  he  will  take  another  to  discover  that ;  if  he  is  trying  for 
strychnine,  he  will  employ  quite  another  to  bring  that  to  light.    (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.) 
Religious  lessons  from  metallurgy  : — To  get  the  dross  out  of  us,  this  is  the  sovereign 
aim  of  our  training  in  this  world.     In  education  the  main  puij^,  se  is  to  free  the 
mental  faculties  of  the  dross  of  sloth  and  prejudice.     In  active  life  the  great  success 
is  in  confirming  the  fibre  of  energy  and  character.     In  higher  relations  the  object 
of  the  Almighty  is  to  burn  out  the  dross  of  the  spirit  and  make  us  noble  and  pure. 
What  is  dross  in  human  character?     Suppose  you  are  inclined  to  avarice,  the 
excessive  love  of  money.     If  you  think  of  your  own  character  as  strengthened, 
made  better,  do  you  think  of  that  quality  of  avarice  as  untouched  ?     Do  you  think 
of  it  as  stronger  than  it  is  now  ?     Or  do  you  think  of  it  as  weaker,  as  melted  down 
in  part,  and  poured  off  from  your  soul  like  scum  ?    Now  consider  profanity,  levity, 
intemperance,  lust,  moral  sluggishness,  vanity,  haughtiness,  insolence  of  words  or 
manners,  irreverence,  rebellion  in  feeling  against  Providence — translate  these  into 
natural  language,  into  the  language  of  metals  and  the  crucible,  what  are  they  ? — 
valuable  elements  or  foul  ones,  dross  or  gold  ?    But  take  the  converse  qualities — 
reverence,  purity,  zeal  for  good,  aspiration,  generous  use  of  money,  the  spirit  of 
sacrifice,  charity,  devotion  to  the  will  of  God — how  do  you  represent  these  in  your 
imagination  ?    You  say  at  once  these  are  the  precious  elements  of  human  nature 
and  human  life.     These  are  the  pure  silver  and  gold  of  the  moral  world.    Now, 
God  is  seeking  to  bring  out  these  qualities  into  greater  concentration  and  prominence 
by  His  moral  government.     Left  to  ourselves,  to  the  wandering,  undirected  impulses 
of  our  constitution,  mentally  and  morally,  we  should  always  be  in  the  ore  state. 
The  hardships  of  life,  the  tough  conditions  that  surround  the  attainment  of  truth 
and  the  training  of  character,  are  God's  reducing  and  refining  processes.     I  do  not 
mean  to  maintain  here  that  all  the  hard  conditions  of  life  can  be  explained  by  this 
figure,  or  by  any  figure  or  theory  of  man's  device.     But  a  world  without  hardships 
to  such  beings  as  we  are  would  be  a  far  worse,  a  far  more  disastrous  world  than  the 
present.    What  would  a  ton  of  ore,  taken  out  in  one  slab,  be  likely  to  say  if  it 
could  be  conscious,  when  carried  to  the  batteries  of  the  mill,  and  then  washed  for 
gold,  and  roasted  to  drive  off  sulphur,  and  pounded  again,  and  mixed  with  quick- 
silver, and  heated  once  more  to  drive  off  the  mercury,  and  melted  again  into  a 
mixed  bar,  and  assayed,  and  still  once  more  melted  and  granulated  into  cold  water, 
and  then  gnawed  by  nitric  acid,  to  take  up  the  silver  and  leave  the  gold  as  sedi- 
ment, and  then  precipitated  from  the  acid  as  pure  silver  powder,  and  washed,  and 
packed  into  cakes  by  hydraulic  presses  to  squeeze  the  water  out  of  it,  and  melted 
again  in  bars,  and  run  through  rollers,  and  punched,  and  milled,  and  stamped — 
thus  becoming  fit  to  serve  the  daily  necessities  of  civilisation  ?     Suppose  it  should 
be  told,  haH-way  in  the  process,  that  all  this  was  good  for  it,  was  part  of  a  great 
plan,  supremely  wise,  for  its  permanent  benefit !     Would  it  not  be  likely  to  say, 
"  Why  did  you  not  leave  me  in  my  sluggish  content  in  the  darkness  of  the  mine  ? 


CHAP.  XVII.]  PEOVERBS.  449 

I  was  happy  there.     I  had  no  dream  there  of  a  higher  and  better  lot.     I  should 
have  never  known  these  terrible  buffets  and  scourgings  and  bitings  and  pressures  if 
I  had  been  left  there.     Oh,  for  that  gloom  and  calm  again  !  "     In  its  silver-bar 
state,  afterwards  in  its  coin-state,  will  it  say  so  ?    It  can  look  back  then  on  the 
trials  and  pains,  and  see  their  meaning  and  read  their  bitter  but  splendid  benevo- 
lence.    We  see  enough  now  to  show  that  the  best  qualities  of  human  nature  are 
brought  out  and  tested  by  difiSculty  and  suffering.     To  the  choice  characters  of  the 
world  God  can  say  now,  as  the  Spirit  said  through  Isaiah,  "  I  have  refined  thee, 
but  not  with  silver  :  I  have  chosen  thee  in  the  furnace  of  affliction."    And  if  this 
world  is  designed  not  as  the  final  state  for  the  enjoyment  of  God,  but  as  the  state 
in  which  we  get  the  preparation  of  quality  within  for  the  true  knowledge  and 
enjoyment  of  Him,  we  find  the  whole  secret  of  life— of  its  terrors  and  its  hidden 
mercy — when  we  follow  the  ore  from  its  cave  to  its  appearance  as  the  clean  silver 
tnd  the  flaming  gold.     Do  not  fail  either  to  receive  the  searching  lesson  as  to 
judgment  hidden  in  this  analogy.     The  ore  is  tested  thoroughly  at  the  final  process 
of  its  history.     The  assayer,  by  balance  and  fire,  determines  exactly  what  its  quality 
is  and  its  worth.    And  the  processes  of  God's  government  are  taking  us  to  judg- 
ment.    It  is  to  be  known  and  seen  one  day  just  what  we  are.    To  the  great  judgment 
cf  truth  you  and  I,  and  all  the  millions  living,  are  moving  with  every  heart-beat, 
aad  nothing  can  save  us  from  its  severity  and  its  rewards.     "  The  fining-pot  is  for 
silver,  and  the  furnace  for  gold ;  but  the  Lord  trieth  the  hearts."     1.  If  we  pass  now 
to  consider  sectarian  divisions  and  strifes  in  the  Christian  Church,  we  can  gain 
some  help  in  a  right  estimate  of  them  and  for  a  wise  charity,  from  analogies  in  the 
science  of  metallurgy.     The  great  object  of  the  New  Testament  and  of  Christianity 
is  to  increase  religious  qualities  practically  in  the  world,  to  add  pure  working  forces 
to  lie,  so  that  men  will  be  nobler  and  happier  in  themselves  and  in  their  relations 
to  etch  other.     God  has  made  different  kinds  of  ores,  and  equally  rich  in  different 
kinds.    For  some  kinds  of  mineral  one  process  is  admirable ;  for  other  kinds  a 
Tery  different  treatment  is  essential.     And  human  nature  is  analogous.     Evils  are 
thrown  off  from  men,  and  good  is  practically  brought  out,  by  a  variety  of  spiritual 
methals  ;  and  that  Church  or  system  of  training  is  the  best  for  a  soul  which  fits  its 
tempeiament  and  quickens  its  will.     In  some  men  the  good  is  quickly  and  easily 
appeaUd  to  and  developed.     A  simple  faith  and  administration  will  reach  and 
awaken  it.     Others  have  the  sulphurets  in  the  soul.     They  are  obstinate.    Common 
batteries  and  cool  washings  do  not  do  the  work.     They  need  heat,  fire,  the  treatment 
of  the  eement  of  fear  ;  that  takes  hold  of  them.     Calvinism  is  the  process  that 
reduces  ftieir  stubborn  self-will  and  makes  them  agents  of  good.     Give  the  proper 
temperanents  to  each  Church  :  let  the  Episcopalians  take  those  that  can  be  best 
reached  by  their  methods,  and  the  Methodists  take  their  natural  material,  and  the 
Swedenboigians  and  the  Quakers  and  the  Calvinists  theh-s,  and  the  Unitarians 
theirs,  and  great  good  will  be  done.     The  world  of  character  will  be  richer.     The 
work  of  the  Spirit  will  be  variously  and  properly  performed.     ' '  There  are  differences 
of  administntions,  but  the  same  Lord."     In  science  men  appeal  to  the  facts.     If 
you  put  in  a  "ion  of  ore  and  take  out  a  pound  of  gold,  you  may  say  that  there  ought 
to  be  two  pouids,  but  you  can't  say  that  the  process  does  not  produce  any  gold.  • 
And  if  a  systeii  of  Christian  administration  produces  honesty,  integrity,  principle, 
charity,  interest  in  worship,  interest  in  good  ideas  and  good  government  and  Uberty 
and  order,  quieiand  elevated  homes,  readiness  to  serve  others  and  to  hold  gifts  and 
treasures  parti}  in  trust  for  others^are  these  qualities  to  be  denied  to  be  good 
because  the  prodss  which  produces  them  is  different  from  the  ordinary  customs  ? 
The  melter  and  assayer  does  not  make  coin ;  society  does  not  allow  him  to  put  his 
stamp  on  money  axd  say,  "All  gold  is  spurious  which  is  not  poured  from  my  crucibles." 
It  is  his  office  to  produce  gold.     The  Government  coins  and  issues  it,  and  allows 
that  great  office  to  no  private  hands.     So  the  business  of  Churches  is  to  produce 
purity,  reverence,  ittegrity,  charity,  readiness  to  do  good  in  all  forms.     God  rates 
and  stamps  the  prodicts,  and  His  judgment  is  the  final  and  the  only  one  as  to  the 
honesty  or  spuriousi^ss  of  the  products  of  the  sanctuaries.     There  is  one  other 
point  upon  which  I  wfeh  to  make  our  subject  bear  in  illustration.    2.  There  is  a  great 
discussion  now  about  fee  Bible,  especially  the  Old  Testament,  and  its  religious  value. 
Is  it  a  verbally  inspir el,  completely  accurate,  and  authoritative  I'evelation?     The 
Old  Testament  is  a  ver>  wonderful  book,  and  its  value  in  the  religious  and  provi- 
dential training  of  the  w^rld  cannot  readily  be  stated.     But  it  is  not  a  continuous 
revelation.     It  does  not  cffer  you  concentrated  spiritual  truth  in  all  its  pages,  the 
pare  silver  and  gold  of  tl^  Spirit.    The  Old  Testament  is  a  great  lode,  or  precioug 

30 


450  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 

mineral  vein,  upheaved  and  winding  through  the  Btrata  of  a  national  history. 
There  are  different  kinds  and  qualities  of  ore  in  it,  some  easy,  some  difficult  of 
reduction  to  the  pure  standard  of  moral  truth.  The  Old  Testament,  compared 
with  all  other  ancient  national  literatures,  is  a  religious  gold  and  silver  vein 
immensely,  incalculably,  divinely  rich.  That  is  its  distinction  in  the  world,  and 
wiU  be  its  distinction  for  ever.  And  by  the  statement  and  authority  of  Jesus  Him- 
self, we  get  its  concentrated  value  in  the  laws  of  love  to  God  and  our  neighbour. 
If  you  understand  little  of  commentaries  and  theological  discussion  and  council 
lore,  and  have  these,  you  have  what  Jesus  Christ  called  the  essentials.  Knowledge 
of  mining  is  good,  but  its  practical  value  is  in  furnishing  the  silver  for  human  use. 
This  spirit  of  love  is  the  sUver  into  which  the  inspiration  collected  from  the  ore  of 
the  Bible  is  finally  reduced.  If  you  do  not  possess  this  spirit,  your  Biblical  learning 
is  only  intellectual  wisdom,  your  soundness  of  faith  is  only  correct  thinking; 
and  though  j'ou  may  be  baptized  every  day  in  the  name  and  forms  of  the  most 
orthodox  creed,  you  advance  not  by  a  step  towards  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  (T, 
Starr  King.) 

Yet.  4.  A  wicked  doer  ^veth  heed  to  false  lips ;  and  a  liar  giveth  ear  to  a 
naughty  tongue. —  The  conversational  likings  of  bad  men : — Men's  characters  ma^ 
be  known  by  the  conversations  they  most  relish.  The  text  enables  us  to  see  the 
kind  of  conversation  that  bad  men  like.  I.  Thet  like  flattery.  "A  wicked  dojr 
giveth  heed  to  false  lips."  The  flatterer  is  a  man  of  false  lips.  The  more  corrupt 
men  are,  the  more  blindly  credulous  to  everything  that  makes  them  appear  betier 
than  they  are.  He  who  compliments  them  palliates  their  offences,  gives  them 
credit  for  virtues  they  possess  not,  is  their  favourite  companion,  and  they  ever 
"give  heed"  to  his  lips.  One  of  the  best  things  recorded  of  George  IH.  is,  <hat 
one  of  his  first  acts  after  his  ascension  to  the  throne  was  to  issue  an  order 
prohibiting  any  of  the  clergy  who  should  be  called  to  preach  before  him  from 
paying  him  any  compliment  in  their  discourses.  His  Majesty  was  led  to  this  from 
the  fulsome  adulation  which  Dr.  Thomas  Wilson,  Prebendary  of  Westminster, 
thought  proper  to  deliver  in  the  Chapel  Koyal,  and  for  which,  instead  of  ttanks, 
he  received  from  his  royal  auditor  a  pointed  reprimand,  his  Majesty  observing 
that  he  came  to  chapel  to  hear  the  praise  of  God,  not  his  own.  11.  They  like 
CALUMNY.  The  liar  is  also  the  "  wicked  doer."  The  "  naughty  tongue,"  vhilst  it 
speaks  flatteries  and  falsehoods  of  all  kinds,  speaks  calumnies  also.  And  tie  worse 
the  man  is  the  more  welcome  to  his  depraved  heart  are  the  reports  of  bal  things 
concerning  others.  1.  Calumny  gratifies  the  pride  of  evil  men.  It  helps  them  to 
cherish  the  thought  that  they  are  not  worse  than  others,  perhaps  better. 
2.  Calumny  gratifies  the  mahgnity  of  evil  men.  The  worse  a  man  is  the  more 
malevolence  he  has  in  him ;  the  more  gratified  he  is  at  hearing  bad  tiings  con- 
cerning other  men.  "If,"  said  Bishop  Hall,  "I  cannot  stop  other  men's  mouths 
from  speaking  ill,  I  will  either  open  my  mouth  to  reprove  it  or  else  I  wil  stop  mine 
ears  from  hearing  it,  and  let  him  see  in  my  face  that  he  hath  no  room  in  my 
heart."     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  10.  A  reproof  entereth  more  into  a  wise  man  than  an  hindred  stripes 
into  a  fool. — Moral  and  corporeal  chastisement : — I.  The  one  j^  its  spheke 
IS  AS  LEGITIMATE  AS  THE  OTHER.  Look  at  the  Sphere  of  each.  1.  The  sphere 
of  the  moral.  It  is  for  the  wise.  The  "  reproof  "  is  for  men  open  to  reason 
and  impression — men  whose  natures  are  susceptible  to  moral  arguments  and 
appeals.  2.  The  sphere  of  the  corporeal.  It  is  for  "fools."  Cf  what  service  is 
an  argument  to  an  ox,  or  a  whip  to  a  soul  ?  U.  The  one  in  ns  sphere  is  more 
THOROUGH  THAN  THE  OTHER.  "  A  icproof  entcreth  more  into  a  wise  man  than  an 
hundred  stripes  into  a  fool."  1.  The  one  is  more  painful  than  tie  other.  What  is 
pain  arising  from  a  few  lashes  on  the  body  compared  to  the  pain  arising  in  the 
soul  from  a  conviction  of  moral  wrong?  What  pain  did  -eproof  give  David  t 
(Psa.  li.).  What  agony  did  the  reproving  look  of  Christ  give  Peter!  _.  The  one 
is  more  corrective  than  the  other.  Corporeal  chastisement  viH  never  do  the  fool 
any  moral  good.  You  cannot  whip  the  moral  devil  out  of  aien  (chap,  xxvii.  22). 
But  moral  chastisements  correct  the  wrongs  of  the  soul.  The  fires  of  moral 
conviction  separate  the  gold  from  the  dross.     {Homilist.) 

Ver.  12.  Let  a  bear  robbed  of  her  whelps  meet  a  man,  ather  than  a  fool  in  Ma 
folly. — The  cruelty  of  fools  .-—The  rage  of   wild  beasts  is  short-hved,  and  their 


CHAP,  xvn.]  PROVERBS.  451 

power  is  circumscribed  within  narrow  limits.  Man  has  more  cause  to  dread  his 
brother  than  all  the  beasts  of  the  forest.  Ambition,  jealousy,  and  superstition  are 
sad  sources  of  cruelty.  We  all  abhor  the  deeds  of  cruelty  which  the  "  fool  in  his 
folly  "  so  frequently  commits  ;  but  alas  !  we  have  not  all  an  adequate  estimate  of 
the  guilt  attaching  to  the  man  at  the  moment,  and  in  the  act  of  entering  into  his 
folly.     (IF.  Arnot,  D.D.) 

Ver.  14.  The  beginning  of  strife  is  as  when  one  letteth  out  water :  therefore  leave 
off  contention,  before  it  be  meddled  with. — Strife  and  contention  : — Here  contention 
seems  to  differ  from  strife,  the  former  being  more  general,  the  latter  more  particular. 
Strife  is  by  implication  wholly  forbidden,  as  being  most  mischievous  ;  contention  is 
regulated  and  ordered  to  be  left  off,  ia  due  time,  before  it  be  meddled  with.  Con- 
tending by  reason  and  argument  is  frequently  a  duty  recommended  and  practised 
by  the  best  of  men.  But  so  soon  as  the  contending  parties  refuse  to  hear  reason, 
and  proceed  with  heat  and  passion,  then  arises  strife.  Then  every  me  ';ud  made 
use  of  to  can-y  a  cause  tends  to  widen  the  breach  and  inflame  the  adversaries.  If 
the  matter  of  the  strife  should  only  be  unseasonable  it  may  nevertheless  prove 
mischievous  and  fatal  by  drawing  men  off  from  attending  to  things  of  the  greatest 
importance  to  the  public  welfare,  and  by  souring  their  temper,  make  union  and 
concord  impracticable.  For  the  manner  alone  in  which  strife  is  usually  carried  on 
renders  it  impossible  to  be  kept  in  due  bounds.  Even  the  end  itself,  for  which  the 
strife  was  at  first  begun,  is  neglected  or  forgotten.  The  parties  engaged  go  on  from 
skirmishes  to  battles,  from  the  provoking  of  wrath  to  the  drawing  of  blood.  Would 
you  avoid  strife,  and  the  mischiefs  which  naturally  follow  from  it  ?  Then  leave 
off  contention  in  due  season:  "  before  it  be  meddled  with,"  i.e.,  before  the  conten- 
tion be  too  much  diffused  or  blended  with  passion  ;  or  the  parties  proceed  to  open 
rupture  and  hostilities ;  or  other  persons  mix  themselves  in  the  quarrel.  Compare 
"  It  is  an  honour  for  a  man  to  cease  from  strife  ;  but  every  fool  wiU  be  meddling." 
The  advice  is  so  excellent  and  so  necessary  that  one  cannot  but  wish  means  might 
be  found  to  put  it  in  practice.  When  men  of  birth,  education,  and  fortune  are 
governed  in  aU  questions  by  the  dictates  of  reason  and  divest  themselves  of  all 
prejudice  and  passion,  they  soon  reduce  all  their  differences  to  an  inconsiderable 
quantity,  and  settle  in  such  a  manner  as  candour  and  equity  can  approve.  Let 
every  one,  then,  in  his  sphere  and  station,  endeavour  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit 
in  the  bond  of  peace :  to  quench  every  spark  of  discord  or  strife.  To  bring  this 
happy  work  to  effect  there  is  but  one  certain  and  never-failing  method,  which  is 
this,  to  regulate  our  whole  conduct  by  the  Word  of  God,  from  whence  we  are 
instructed  to  practise  every  duty  recommended  by  right,  reason,  and  the  best  pohcy. 
{John  Neivcomhc,  D.D.)  The  beginning  of  strife  : — The  history  of  the  French 
port  of  St.  Valery,  where  WiUiam  I.  embarked  for  the  conquest  of  England  in  1066, 
may  well  illustrate  the  truth  that  the  beginning  of  strife  is  as  the  letting  out  of 
water.  The  success  of  the  Norman  enterprise  did  not  prevent  but  occasioned  the 
return  of  the  tide  of  war  after  an  interval  of  two  centuries.  Then  during  the 
Hundred  Years  War  it  was  first  burnt  by  the  English,  and  then  by  Charles  the  Bad 
of  Navarre.  After  that  it  was  destroyed  by  Louis  XI.  to  keep  it  out  of  our  hands, 
and  in  later  years  it  was  sacked  by  Leaguers,  Eoyalists,  and  Spaniards,  so  that  the 
historian  of  Abbeville  says  that  "  history  has  failed  to  keep  count  of  its  disasters." 
[J.  F.  B.  Tinling,  B.A.)  Strife: — Crabb  makes  a  difference  between  discord  and 
strife.  He  says,  "Discord  evinces  itself  in  various  ways — by  looks,  words,  or 
actions ;  strife  displays  itself  in  words,  or  acts  of  violence.  Discord  is  fatal  to  the 
happiness  of  families ;  strife  is  the  greatest  enemy  to  peace  between  neighbours ; 
discord  arose  between  the  goddesses  on  the  apple  bemg  thrown  into  one  assembly. 
Homer  commences  his  poem  with  the  strife  that  took  place  between  Agamemnon 
and  Achilles."  The  passages  suggests  three  ideas  concerning  strife.  I.  It  is  an 
EVIL  OF  TEREiFic  PEOGRESS.  This  Strife  Spreads.  One  angry  word  leads  to  another, 
one  act  of  resentment,  will  kindle  a  fire  that  may  set  a  whole  neighbourhood  or  a 
nation  into  conflagration.  A  drop  of  strife  soon  becomes  a  river,  and  the  river  a 
torrent.  II.  It  is  an  evil  that  should  be  checked.  "  Therefore  leave  off  con- 
tention." Every  lover  of  his  race  and  his  God  should  suppress  it.  It  is  a  deso- 
lating thing,  it  makes  sad  havoc  in  families,  neighbourhoods,  churches,  nations. 
1.  Be  inspired  with  the  spirit  of  peace.  2.  Maintain  the  character  of  peace. 
3.  Use  the  argument  of  peace.     Thus  he  will  check  the  spirit  of  strife.     IH.  It  ifl 

AN    EVIL   WHICH    CAN    BE    EASILY   CHECKED   AT    THE    BEGINNtNG.        YoU    may    mend    the 

embankment  with  tolerable  ease  at  the  stage  when  it  emits  only  a  few  oozrng 


452  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 

drops.  The  mightiest  and  most  furious  beasts  of  prey  you  can  easily  destroy  at 
their  birth;  the  most  majestic  and  resistless  river  you  can  stop  at  its  spring  head. 
So  it  is  with  strife,  in  its  incipient  state  you  may  easily  crush  it.  Crush  the  upas 
in  the  germ,  tread  out  the  conflagration  in  the  spark.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  15.  He  that  Jnstifleth  the  wicked,  and  he  that  condemneth  the  just,  even 
they  both  are  abomination  to  the  Lord. — Our  estimate  of  other  men : — We  may 
regard  such  an  estimate  from  three  points  of  view :  in  its  effect  on  those  thus 
estimated,  on  society  in  general,  and  on  ourselves.  Did  we  ever  question  with 
ourselves,  "  On  what  is  my  estimate  of  others  usually  founded  "  ?  If  we  did  we 
should  surely  be  dissatisfied  with  our  present  practice.  It  would  be  unnatural  and 
absurd  to  pretend  that  no  influence  should  be  exerted  over  our  estimate  of  men  by 
the  organs  of  public  opinion;  equally  unreasonable  to  decry  them  as  perfectly 
unreliable  in  the  matter.  But  there  may  be  very  much  untruthfulness,  short  of 
what  is  utter  and  absolute  ;  very  much  which  is  utter  and  absolute,  and  yet  escapes 
detection.  What  is  the  duty  of  Christians  with  regard  to  the  blame  and  praise  of 
others  ?  Insist  first  on  the  general  duty  of  conscientiousness  in  forming  all  our 
estimates  of  other  men.  It  should  be  our  aim  as  Christians,  not  obsequiously  to 
follow  public  opinion,  but  to  act  for  ourselves  and  for  God.  There  is  a  timidity, 
even  amounting  to  cowardice,  among  us  in  forming  and  expressing  our  opinion  of 
other  men.  The  body  of  Christian  men  among  us  seems  to  have  abjured  the  duty 
of  conscientiousness ;  and  this  abjuration  is  one  of  the  most  fearful  symptoms  of 
our  times.  The  duty  of  estimating  others  as  in  the  sight  of  God  is  not  by  any 
means  a  light  one,  but  a  most  solemn  one.  Unholy  and  unprincipled  life,  wherever 
found,  ought  to  be  protested  against  by  the  servants  of  God.  There  is  a  sad 
tendency  among  us  to  overlook  those  faults  which  fall  in  with  the  practice  of  the 
day,  which  consist  in  the  neglect  of  unwelcome  duties,  or  the  committal  of  lightly- 
esteemed  sins.  The  second  person  who  is  said  to  be  an  abomination  to  the  Lord  is 
"he  that  condemneth  the  just."  We  are  always  more  prone  to  condemn  than  to 
justify.  It  is  an  abuse  of  our  instinct  of  self-preservation  to  be  ever  ready  with  our 
hostility  to  other  men.  The  general  propensity  to  depress  others  renders  it  very 
easy,  in  any  case,  to  condemn.  Point  out  a  few  ways  by  which  we  may  guard 
ourselves  against  this  tendency  to  condemn  the  just.  The  first  caution  is  this — look 
ever  at  the  life  which  is  palpable  rather  than  at  the  motive  or  the  creed,  which  are 
usually  mere  matters  of  surmise.  A  second  caution  is,  avoid  and  refuse  to  use,  and 
protest  against  the  use  of,  all  party  names.  Another  caution  is  this — form  your 
opinions  of  others,  not  at  the  prompting  of  the  world,  but  as  under  the  eye  of  God. 
For  all  our  most  secret  judgments  of  men  and  things  we  are  accountable  to  Him. 
{H.  Alford,  B.D.)  Just  estimates: — It  was  a  saying  of  Solon,  the  Athenian 
lawgiver,  that  a  republic  walks  upon  two  feet ;  one  being  just  punishment  for  the 
unworthy,  the  other  due  reward  for  the  worthy.  If  it  fail  in  either  of  these,  it 
necessarily  goes  lame.     How  if  it  fail  in  both  ? 

Ver.  16.  Wherefore  is  there  a  price  in  the  hand  of  fool  to  get  wisdom,  seeing  he 
hath  no  heart  to  it  ? — Opportunities  of  youth  : — The  term  "  fool "  is  not  used  in  the 
modern  sense  of  a  man  without  reason ;  but  rather  in  the  sense  of  an  unreasoning 
man.  The  term  is  applied  much  as  we  apply  the  term  "  wicked  man."  The  figure 
in  the  text  is  one  drawn  frotsi  commerce.  It  represents  a  man  who  has  been  given 
a  sum  which  he  is  to  invest.  He  spends  part  of  it  in  dissipation,  part  in  unwise 
and  unprofitable  commodities,  and  some  part  in  shadows  and  cheats  and  pretences ; 
and  when  he  has  expended  that  sum  he  is  a  bankrupt.  Wicked  or  foolish  men 
have  committed  to  them  a  price  or  a  capital,  and  what  is  the  use  if  tlipy  have  no 
heart  to  use  it  right  ?  What  good  does  it  do  them  if  they  do  not  employ  it  as  they 
should  ?  The  idea  that  men  are  sent  into  this  world  for  a  purpose,  and  that  they 
are  equipped  for  the  accomplishment  of  that  purpose,  is  given  in  both  the 
Testaments.  Men  comprehensively  have  committed  to  them,  in  bodily  organs,  and 
in  their  mental  equipment,  a  power  singularly  complex,  but  wise  and  efficient,  and 
as  compared  with  the  agencies  of  nature  in  its  adaptations  to  the  work  of  life, 
surpassing  the  human  frame  itself.  Natural  laws  are  the  gieat  agencies  of  nature 
that  are  being  used  or  fructified  by  the  volition  of  man.  Each  man  stands  at  the 
centre  of  a  sphere  of  possibilities  where  he,  throucrh  knowlclge,  may  come  to 
control  natural  law  and  work  in  his  limited  sphere  as  God  works  in  the 
infinite  sphere.  Then  there  is  the  good  name  and  fame  which  descends  to 
many  of  ua  from  our  parents.     There  is  a  presumption  that  stock  and  blood  will 


C£UP.  xvn.]  PROVERBS.  453 

tell,  and  that  a  good  father  will  have  good  children.  It  is  invaluable  to  a  young 
man  beginning  life  to  have  the  kindly  expectation,  the  generous  sympathy  and 
goodwill  of  those  to  whom  he  comes.  What  a  price  is  put  into  the  hands  of  the 
young  in  our  time  in  the  matter  of  education ;  if  a  man  has  a  heart  for  knowledge, 
if  he  has  an  ambition  to  acquire  it,  and  if  he  is  quick  to  discern,  the  eye,  the  ear, 
every  sense  becomes  the  minister  of  education.  Alas  !  that  there  should  be  so  many 
who  care  nothing  for  it !  Closely  connected  with  this  is  the  capital  of  bodily  health. 
Good  health  is  a  wonderful  help  to  morality,  to  nobility  of  character,  and  to  calm- 
ness and  decision  of  judgment  and  action.  Next  is  the  capacity  of  industry.  I 
believe  fervently  in  enterprise,  but  I  also  believe  fervently  in  the  good  old-fashioned 
notions  about  patient  industry.  Every  person  has  that  in  him  by  which  he  can  win 
a  moderate  success  in  Ufe  by  simply  doing,  day  by  day,  the  right  things,  however 
humble  a  sphere  he  may  be  in.  To  many  have  also  been  given  the  invaluable 
qualities  of  integrity,  honour,  and  fidelity.  These  are  very  valuable  from  a 
commercial  point  of  view.  A  man  who  is  honest,  and  truthful,  and  full  of  integrity, 
when  he  has  finally  been  proved,  has  everybody  engineering  for  him.  Then  look 
upon  life  as  a  very  solemn  thing.  God  has  given  you  one  life,  and  has  put  capital 
into  your  hands,  and  sent  you  into  this  world  to  buy  immortality.  Do  not  squander 
that  price.  Listen  to  the  voice  of  wisdom.  {H.  Ward  Beecher.)  Means  and 
abilities  to  get  wisdom  : — We  may  define  wisdom  to  be  a  right  apprehension  of  those 
things  that  are  best  for  us,  and  a  diligent  pursuit  of  them  by  such  means  as  are 
agreeable  to  the  laws  of  piety  and  virtue.  Men  have  sonaetimes  abilities  and 
opportunities  to  act  wisely  for  themselves,  but  neglect  them,  and  have  no  heart  to 
make  their  just  advantages  of  them.  1.  A  man  of  good  natural  faculties  and 
endowments  of  mind  may  be  said  to  have  the  price  of  wisdom  in  his  hand,  when  he 
hatK  no  heart  to  it.  2.  This  price  may  be  understood  of  the  schools  of  good 
education  and  learning.  Those  who  are  brought  up  in  such  places  often  act  the 
part  of  fools.  3.  Riches  are  in  many  respects  the  price  of  wisdom,  in  that  they 
enable  their  owners  to  buy  books,  to  hire  teachers,  and  to  be  at  leisure  to  spend 
their  time  in  the  study  of  useful  learning.  4.  Men  of  great  power  and  authority 
have  the  price  of  wisdom  in  their  hands.  5.  We  have  a  noble  price  put  into  our 
hands  to  get  wisdom,  in  the  ordinances  of  religion  and  means  of  grace  we  enjoy. 
These  advantages  are  the  portion  of  every  Christian.  But  these  opportunities  are 
Badly  often  in  the  hands  of  those  who  have  no  heart  to  make  use  of  them.  This 
appears — (1)  From  the  want  of  zeal^in  attending  public  worship  ;  and — (2)  From  the 
errors  and  vices  of  our  common  conversation.  We  often  condemn  our  own 
mismanagement  of  the  talents  which  God  has  given  us,  and  look  back  with  much 
regret  upon  those  opportunities  which  have  slipped  through  our  hands.  •  But  the 
power  is  often  given  without  the  will,  so  that  we  suffer  many  opportunities  to  pass 
away  and  be  lost  without  improving  them  to  any  good  purpose.    {W.  Reading,  M.A.) 

Ver.  17.  A  friend  loveth  at  all  times,  and  a  brother  is  bom  for  adversity. — TJie 

unrivalled  Friend  : — Few  men  enjoy  from  others  the  highest  and  truest  form  of 
friendship.  There  is,  however,  a  higher  friendship  among  men  of  principle,  among 
men  of  virtue.  Where  godliness  builds  her  house,  true  friendship  finds  a  rest. 
Take  this  text  and  refer  it  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  I.  Thk  endxjeance  of  the  love 
OF  Jesus  Chbist.  He  loved  before  time  began.  He  loved  you  when  time  began 
with  you.  Since  that  day  this  Friend  has  loved  us  at  all  times.  Consider  the 
reality  of  Christ's  love  at  all  times.  His  love  has  never  been  a  thing  of 
mere  words  and  pretensions.  Consider  the  nature  of  the  love  of  Christ,  as 
accounting  for  its  endurance  and  reality.  His  love  sprang  from  the  purest 
possible  motives.  Christ's  love  was  a  wise  love,  not  blind  as  ours  often  is.  He 
loved  us  knowing  exactly  what  we  were  whom  He  loved.  His  love  is  associated 
continually  with  an  infinite  degree  of  patience  and  pity.  He  is  so  constant  in  His 
love,  because  He  sees  us  as  what  we  are  to  be.  He  is  described  as  "born  for 
adversity,"  the  adversity  of  the  fall,  and  of  tribulation.  H.  Refer  the  text  to 
THE  Christian.  You  have  found  Jesus  Christ  to  be  a  true  brother  and  a  blessed 
friend ;  now  let  the  same  be  true  of  you.  If  Christ  be  such  a  friend  to  us,  what 
manner  of  people  ought  we  to  be  towards  Him  ?  We  should  be  friends  that  love 
Christ  at  all  times.  [C.H.  Spurgeon.)  A  brother  born  for  adversity : — I.  Adversity 
IS  the  common  lot  of  brotherhood.  It  comes  sooner  or  later  to  all  of  us.  It  is  a 
necessity  of  our  nature.  It  is  a  wise  appointment  of  God.  H.  The  ties  of  brother- 
hood .4.RE  FORMED  FOR  ADVERSITY.  We  are  United  in  families  for  purposes  of  mutual 
succour.     HI    Aj)yersity  tends  to  sahctify  the  intercourse  of  the  brotherhood. 


454  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

Some  of  the  most  valuable  of  our  lessons  are  taught  us  in  our  intercourse  with  one 
another.    IV.  In  adveesitt  we   ake   led   to  know,  in  an  especial  manner,  the 
PRESENCE  OF  THE  Elder  Brother  WITH  THE  BROTHERHOOD.    Jesus  became  &  brother 
in  adversity.    His  sufferings  and  sorrows  enabled  Him  to  sympathise  with  us  in  aU 
our  struggles  and  troubles.     V.  It  is  by  adversity  that  the  whole  brotherhood 
AF.E  gathered  AT  LAST  INTO  ouii  Tather's  HOUSE  ABOVE.    {Anou.)       Men's  friendship 
and   Chrisfs  : — Friendship  is  no  fiction ;   all  history  bears  record  to  its  reality. 
There  are  many  relationships  in  this  world  dignified  by  the  name  of  friendship 
which  really  do  not  deserve  it,  as,  for  example,  acquaintanceship,  the  freedom  to 
interchange  visits  of  courtesy,  and  association  in  business.  These  pass  for  friendship ; 
but  they  are  only  its  shadows.     The  perfect  friendship  is  a  very  exacting  relation. 
1.  The  first  value  of  friendship  is  that  it  will  give  support  in  weakness,  under- 
standing amid  evU  reports,  consolation  in  sorrow,  and  help  in  the   bearing   of 
burdens;  and  that  is   no  friendship   which   breaks  down  under  such   demands. 
Trouble  is  a  splendid  thing  for  any  man  if  it  only  sifts  his  friends  ;  it  saves  him  a 
deal  of  trouble  in  other  ways.     There  is  an  admirable  compensation  about  our 
existence.     2.  The  second  service  of  a  friend  is  that  he  is  one  to  whom  all  our 
thoughts  may  be  uttered,  one  to  whom  we  may  be  absolutely  sincere.     Ordinarily, 
a  man  is  only  honest  when  he  is  alone ;  let  another  man  come  in,  and  hypocrisy 
begins.     Our  words  are  a  kind  of  clothes  to  hide  our  real  selves.    But  with  a  friend 
we  are  absolutely  open ;  we  do  all  our  thinking  aloud,  we  stand  erect  before  him, 
and  find  in  his  mind  a  true  picture  of  what  we  are.     Such  a  friend  is  a  masterpiece 
of  nature.     3.  A  third  service  is  that  it  affords  us  the  possession  of  one  soul  to 
whom  we  may  be  tender  without  shame.     See  the  tenderness  between  David  and 
Jonathan,  and  between  Achilles  and  Patroclus.     When  one  man  becomes  dear  to 
another  they  have  both  reached  the  goal  of  fortune.    By  a  tender  friendship  the 
Divine  part  in  us  finds  exercise.    4.  The  fourth  service  which  friendship  renders  is 
that  it  helps  us  to  know  ourselves  and  to  know  God.     When  you  enjoy  friendship 
most  it  is  in  contrast  to  solitude,  and  you  seek  solitude  again,  in  order  to  know 
what  you  have  gained  from  your  friend.     You  cannot  reckon  up  a  profit  and  loss 
account  while  you  are  in  his  company;  you  have  to  retire  to  your  own  soul's 
communion  in  order  to  ascertain  your  gain  and  loss  thereby.     Thus  you  have  a 
compensation  for  intercourse  with   another  soul  by  introspection  of  your  own. 
Further,  as  the  power  that  keeps  the  atoms  together  in  one  body  is  of  God,  the  tie 
between  your  friend's  heart  and  your  own  is  of  God,  and  you   cannot  let  your 
consciousness  of  friendship   deepen  without  deepening  at  the  same  time  your 
consciousness  of  God.     {H.  H.  Snell.)        Friendship  in  adversity  : — Love,  whUe  it 
remains  essentially  the  same,  appears  tenfold  more  loving  when  its  object  has 
fallen  from  prosperity  into  poverty ;  as  a  lamp  burning  in  daylight  shines  much 
more  brightly  in  the  darkness.     Many  wiU  court  you  while  you  have  much  to  give ; 
when  you  need  to  receive,  the  number  of  your  friends  will  be  diminished,  but  their 
quality  will  be  improved.     Your  misfortune,  hke  a  blast  of  wind  upon  the  thrashed 
corn,  will  drive  the  chaff  away,  but  the  wheat  wiU  remain  where  it  was.     How  very 
Bweet  sometimes  is  the  human  friendship  that  remains  when  sore  adversity  has 
sifted  it!     (W.  Arnot,  D.D)        Friendship: — The  more  we  understand  the  world 
the  better  we  comprehend  the  Bible.     The  Spirit  that  overshadowed  its  writers 
knew  all  the  ins  and  outs  of  human  hearts,  all  the  mysteries  of  human  guilt  and 
grief.    I.  The  ideal  of  FRiENDsniP.     Every  man  cannot  be  a  friend.     Friendships 
cannot  be  willed,  they  must  be  made.      They  grow ;   they  want  resemblances. 
Earthly  friendships  have  often  some  element  of  weakness  in  them.     No  man  can 
know  more  of  his  brother  without  knowing  the  worst  as  well  as  the  best  of  him. 
Friendship  with  Christ  alone  satisfies.     Here  is — 1.  The  test  of  friendship.    "  At  all 
times."    True  only  of  Christ.     2.  The  preciousness  of  friendship.     3.  The  future 
of  friendship.     II.  The  ideal  of  brotherhood.     "  A  brother  is  born  for  adversity." 
1.  This  is  a  unique  fact.     2.  It  is  a  designed  fact.     3.  It  is  an  adapted  fact.     To 
be  a  true  brother,  Christ  must  take  account  of  the  world  as  it  is,  and  what  word  is 
there  more  expressive  of  life  than  this,  "  adverse  things  " — things  that  turn  against 
us  1     (TF.il/.  Statham.)        Constancy  in  friendship : — That  is  not  true  friendship 
which  is  not  constant ;  it  will  be  so  if  it  be  sincere  and  actuated  by  a  good  principle. 
Those  that  are  fanciful  and  selfish  in  their  friendship  will  love  no  longer  than  their 
humour  is  pleased   and  their  interest  served,  and  therefore  their  affections  turn 
with  the  wind,  and  change  with  the  weather.     Swallow-friends,  that  fly  to  you  in 
summer,  but  are  gone  in  winter ;   such  friends  there  is  no  loss  of.     But  if  the 
friendship  be  prudent,  generous,  and  cordial,  if  I  love  my  friend  because  he  is  wise, 


CHAP,  rra.]  PROVERBS.  455 

and  virtuous,  and  good,  so  long  as  he  continues  so,  though  he  fall  into  poverty  and 
disgrace,  still  I  shall  love  him.     {Matthew  Henry.) 

Ver.  22.  A  merry  heart  doeth  good  like  a  medicine :  but  a  broken  spirit  drieth 
the  bones. — Mental  and  bodily  influence: — The  connection  between  the  mind  and 
the  body,  though  not  to  be  explained,  is  so  striking  as  to  force  itself  upon  the  notice 
of  the  least  observant.  There  is  such  a  sympathy  between  the  two  that  the  one  cannot 
suffer  and  the  other  be  unaffected.  But  the  mind  will  often  claim  such  indepen- 
dence of  the  body  as  the  body  can  never  assert  over  the  mind.  When  the  torture 
is  of  the  mind  alone,  there  will  be  comparatively  httle  bodily  capacity  to  bear  up 
under  the  pressure.  Solomon  says  here  that  a  "merry  heart,"  a  cheerful  mind,  a 
spirit  contented  and  well  at  ease,  will  administer  support  and  strength  for  endurance. 
But  Solomon  treats  also  the  case  of  a  mind  assailed  and  out  of  joint,  and  says  that, 
in  this  case,  the  body  as  well  as  the  mind  will  be  utterly  prostrated.     I.  The  poweb 

WHICH    THE    MIND    CAN    EXEKT    IN    SUPPORT    OF     THE     BODY     SO    LOXG    AS    ITSELF    IS    IN 

GOOD  CONDITION.  Where  there  is  no  aid  drawn  from  the  resources  of  religion,  there 
may  be  firmness  the  most  unflinching  in  the  endurance  of  pain.  The  records  of 
savage  life  prove  the  existence  of  a  sustaining  principle  in  man.  There  is  a  power 
in  man's  spirit  to  sustain  his  infirmity.  The  truth  that  men  have  no  power  of 
renewing  their  nature  must  not  be  interpreted  as  implying  that  men  have  no 
power  of  reforming  their  lives.  The  doctrine  of  human  degeneracy,  preached 
in  an  unguarded  and  overwrought  strain,  makes  men  imagine  that  they  can  do 
nothing  unless  they  feel  themselves  acted  on  by  a  supernatural  machinery,  and 
that,  until  they  have  experienced  inward  revelation,  it  is  idle  to  set  about  outward 
reformation.  We  would  always  hold  that  a  great  deal  lies  in  the  unconverted 
man's  power.  We  can  never  believe,  whilst  there  is  the  spectacle  on  earth  of  mind 
wielding  a  thorough  sovereignty  over  matter,  a  sovereignty  so  perfect  that  the  body 
is  set  before  us  as  literally  the  vassal  of  the  spirit,  we  at  all  exaggerate  his  abilities 
when  we  urge  him,  as  a  candidate  for  the  prizes  of  eternity,  to  improve  the  life,  and 
break  away  from  habits  and  associations  of  unrighteousness.  II.  A  man's  tot.al 
INCAPACITT  TO  BEAK  A  WOUNDED  spiEiT.  Wc  aic  uot  accustomcd  to  admit  up  to  the 
full  a  matter  of  fact — the  physical  destructiveness,  so  to  speak,  of  an  overwrought 
mind.  The  greatest  wear  and  tear  is  from  mental  labour.  Mental  disquietude  tells 
on  the  health  with  corroding  and  devastating  power.  It  is  the  gracious  appoint- 
ment of  God  that  a  wound  in  the  spirit  begins  to  close  so  soon  as  made ;  so  that 
where  there  is  the  wish  there  is  not  the  power  of  keeping  it  long  open.  If  it  be  true 
that  the  endurance  of  grief  cannot  be  referred  to  indwelling  energy,  but  rather  to 
that  soothing  action  of  time  which  comes  into  play  on  the  first  moment  of  affliction, 
then  there  is  no  witness  from  the  experience  of  mankind  against  the  truth  of  the 
text.  It  cannot  be  assumed  that  a  spirit  is  broken  until  stricken  by  that  Word  of 
God  which  is  "  quick  and  powerful."  Conviction  of  sin  is  the  unbearable  thing, 
and  an  awakened  conscience  an  irresistible  tormentor.  A  truly  broken  spirit  is 
that  which  is  bruised  by  a  sense  of  sin.  It  is  impossible  that  man  should  long 
sustain  the  anguish  of  conviction  of  sin.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  A  cheerful  spirit : — 
I.  The  VALUE  of  a  cheerful  spirit.  1.  It  helps  bodily  health.  2.  It  is  a  clarifier 
and  invigorator  of  the  mind.  3.  It  lubricates  the  wearing  machinery  of  business 
and  daily  care.  II.  How  attain  this  spirit?  1.  Look  at  your  mercies  with 
both  eyes  ;  your  troubles  with  only  one  eye.  2.  Learn  Paul's  secret :  "  In  whatso- 
ever state  I  am,  therewith  to  be  content."  3.  Be  useful.  Light  somebody's  torch, 
and  your  own  will  burn  brighter.  4.  Make  God  your  trustee.  Believe  in  His  care 
of  your  welfare.  (Homiletic  Review.)  Bodily  health  depending  on  mental 
moods : — So  closely  connected  is  the  soul  with  the  body,  that  physical  health  is  ever, 
to  a  great  extent,  dependent  on  mental  states.  A  dark  thought  has  power  to  work 
disease  and  death  into  the  corporeal  frame.  This  is  a  fact — 1 .  Eecognised  by  medical 
science.  A  wise  physician  avails  himself  of  this  fact,  and  is  ever  anxious  not  only 
to  dispel  all  sad  thought  from  the  mind  of  the  patient,  but  to  awaken  the  most 
pleasurable  thoughts  and  emotions.  It  is  a  fact — 2.  Attested  by  general  experi- 
ence. I.  The  responsibility  of  man  fob  his  physical  health.  Man  is  responsible 
for  his  mental  disposition,  whether  cheerful  or  gloomy,  and  his  disposition  greatly 
determines  his  health.  II.  The  duty  of  the  guardians  of  childhood  azw  youth. 
in.  The  sanitary  influence  of  Christianity.  The  design  of  Christianity  is  to 
fill  the  human  heart  with  joy.  "  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto  you  that  your 
joy  may  be  full."  Christianity  is  the  best  physician  to  the  body.  E^  who  promotes 
Christianity  is  the  wise  philanthropist.     Some  people  are  always  trying  to  keep  the 


456  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 

body  well,  and  neglect  entirely  the  condition  of  the  soul.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
The  effects  of  cheerfulness  and  of  despondency  : — I.  The  meaninq  of  the  terms. 
1.  By  "  a  merry  heart "  is  meant  a  heart  which  has  been  taught  by  the  Spirit  of  Grod 
to  seek  its  happiness  in  Divine  and  heavenly  objects,  which  is  disposed  to  look  at 
the  bright  side  of  things  under  the  influence  of  contentment  and  hope.  Such  a 
heart  has  the  best  reason  for  cheerfulness.  Faith  keeps  it  from  suspicion  and  dis- 
trust, hope  from  despair,  and  charity  from  that  envy  which  is  a  rottenness  of  the 
bones.  The  love  of  God  shed  abroad  in  the  heart  makes  it  form  the  most  favour- 
able idea  of  every  dispensation,  and  Christ  dwelling  there  brightens  all  around  by 
His  presence.  2.  By  the  "  broken  spirit "  is  meant  a  heart  crushed  by  affliction, 
and  which  refuses  to  be  comforted.  Such  is  his  spirit  who,  seeing  his  affairs  ruined 
by  his  own  folly,  or  the  knavery  of  others,  or  by  misfortunes  which  he  could  neither 
foresee  nor  prevent,  sinks  into  utter  despondence,  and  becomes  incapable  of  the  least 
effort  to  better  his  circumstances.  Such  is  his  spirit  who,  seeing  the  desire  of  his 
eyes  taken  away  with  a  stroke,  imagines  he  has  nought  now  to  live  for.  Such  also 
is  the  spirit  of  the  man  wounded  by  remorse,  or  shattered  by  the  influence  of 
indulged  melancholy,  jealousies,  suspicions,  and  fears.     II.  Illustbate  this  view 

HERE  GIVEN    OF    THE   RESULT    OF    CHEERFULNESS   AND    DEPRESSION.       1.    Let  US  COUSidei 

their  influence  on  the  body.  The  influence  of  a  suitable  medicine  on  the  body  is 
wonderful.  Disease  is  checked  or  alleviated  by  it  when  first  received ;  the  con- 
tinued use  of  it  removes  it  entirely,  and  strengthens  the  constitution  to  resist  its 
further  attacks.  Such  is  the  power  of  holy  joy  over  the  health.  On  the  other 
hand  a  broken  spirit  dries  up  the  bones,  and  the  finest  constitution  sinks  under  its 
influence.  2.  Consider  their  influence  on  prosperity  and  adversity.  All  the  com- 
forts of  prosperity  are  heightened  by  a  cheerful  spirit.  So  amiable  does  prosperity 
appear  when  thus  enjoyed,  that  every  heart  wishes  its  continuance  ;  but  the  broken 
spirit  is  a  stranger  to  all  the  satisfactions  as  well  as  the  homage  of  gratitude.  On 
such  a  heart  all  its  delights  are  lavished  in  vain.  The  cheerful  heart  can  triumph  in 
adversity.  But  how  different  is  the  case  with  the  broken  spirit !  Every  temporal 
disaster  is  the  supposed  prelude  to  their  ruin,  &c.  3.  Consider  the  influence  of 
cheerfulness  and  of  depression  on  the  soul.  Cheerfulness  quickens  all  the  powers  of 
the  soul  in  their  exercise  ;  the  imagination  forms  the  most  pleasing  ideas  of  scenes 
and  objects ;  memory  calls  up  the  most  joyous  recollections ;  hope  paints  the  future 
blissful  as  the  present ;  and  the  understanding,  rejoicing  in  the  truth,  pursues  its 
inquiries  with  unwearied  ardour.  On  the  other  hand,  when  the  spirit  is  broken,  the 
imagination  calls  up  only  scenes  of  woe ;  memory  brings  nought  to  remembrance 
but  what  tends  to  disquiet  and  torment  us ;  despair  clothes  the  heavens  with  black- 
ness ;  and  the  understanding  doth  nought  but  write  bitter  things,  and  form  the 
most  dreadful  conclusions  against  itself.  4.  Consider  the  influence  of  cheerfulness 
and  depression  on  the  duties  and  the  pursuits  of  life.  When  the  heart  is  cheerful 
the  duties  of  a  man's  calling  are  a  pleasure  to  him.  How  ingenious  is  the  cheerful 
heart  in  finding  the  means  of  enjoyment  and  in  extending  these  1  On  the  other 
hand,  when  the  spirit  is  broken  the  duties  of  a  man's  profession  are  a  burden  to 
him.  5.  Consider  their  influence  on  the  connections  of  life.  The  man  of  a  merry 
heart  is  the  happiness  of  his  family  and  friends.  How  different  is  the  case  with 
the  broken  spirit !  The  indications  of  joy  in  his  presence  such  a  man  is  apt  to 
regard  as  an  insult  to  his  wretchedness.  Conclusion :  1.  How  strongly  does  the 
broken  spirit  claim  our  pity  and  our  prayers  !  It  is  impossible  to  conceive  on  this 
side  the  grave  a  condition  more  dreary.  2.  Let  us  carefully  guard  against  the  first 
symptoms  of  despondence  in  ourselves  and  in  others.  Let  us  seek  out  those 
remedies  which  the  gospel  contains  for  raising  the  bowed  down,  3.  Let  me  address 
those  who  are  blessing  themselves  in  a  false  mirth.  I  know  not  whether  the 
despairing  mourner  or  the  jovial  sinner  is  the  greatest  object  of  pity.  The  jovial 
sinner's  mirth  is  hke  the  laughter  of  the  maniac,  or  like  the  singing  of  a  patient 
whose  brain  a  fever  hath  disordered.  The  broken  spirit  may  lead  to  that  godly 
sorrow  which  worketh  repentance  to  salvation,  but  the  audacious  mirth  of  the  sinner 
is  most  likely  to  end  in  weeping,  and  wailing,  and  gnashing  of  teeth,  (if. 
Belfrage,  D.D.) 

Ver.  24.  Wisdom  is  before  him  that  hath  understanding ;  but  the  eyes  of  a  fool 
are  in  the  ends  of  the  earth. — The  nearness  of  life's  interest  and  work  : — "Far  fowls 
have  fine  feathers  " — that  is  our  modern  rendering  of  the  Hebrew  proverb.  Both 
proverbs  are  directed  against  a  common  weakness  of  human  nature,  our  English 
proverb  hitting  it  off  with  a  good-natured  smile,  the  Hebrew  proverb  rebuking  it 


CHAP.  XVII.]  PROVERBS.  457 


with  the  blantness  of  a  moral  censor.  To  make  little  of  what  is  at  our  door,  and 
to  magnify  what  is  distant,  is  a  familiar  way  in  which  the  weakness  of  human 
nature  shows  itself.  It  is  a  weakness  to  which  most  of  us  must  plead  guilty,  and  it 
is  a  weakness  which  proves  itself  a  formidable  enemy  of  spiritual  life.  There  is  no 
chance  of  our  achieving  anything  great  in  the  spiritual  life  while  we  hug  the 
delusion  that  greatness  is  to  be  found  far  off  in  space  or  in  time,  and  that  its  only 
congenial  surroundings  are  far  different  from  those  in  which  we  find  ourselves. 
The  wise  man  knows  where  to  look  for  the  interest  and  grandeur  of  life ;  he  knows 
they  are  to  be  found  near  at  hand,  even  at  his  own  door.  Two  directions  in  which 
this  lesson  is  needed.  I.  We  may  look  tor  the  intekest  of  life  in  the  wrong 
PLACE.  It  is  difficult  to  see  the  spiritual  in  what  is  commonplace,  the  great  in  what 
is  near,  the  sacred  in  what  is  ordinary.  Men  go  to  far-off  lands  seeking  beauty 
which  can  be  found  almost  at  their  doors.  The  romance  of  life  has  often  been  sought 
far  afield,  while  all  the  time  a  nobler  romance  was  to  be  found  around  the  door. 
The  wisest  delineators  of  human  life  have  found  its  romance  near  home.  One 
reason  of  the  popularity  of  George  Eliot's  novels  lies  just  here,  that  she  has  taken 
up  the  lives  of  ordinary  people,  and  shown,  with  fine  sympathy,  how  rich  in 
interest  is  the  common  life  of  the  common  people.  It  is  of  supreme  importance  for 
the  living  of  a  Christian  life  that  we  should  have  our  interest  kept  fresh  and  rightly 
directed.  It  is  not  only  the  flesh  that  wars  against  the  spirit,  but  listlessness  ;  not 
only  positive  sins,  but  the  deadening  weight  of  the  conviction  that  we  are  set  down 
in  the  midst  of  duU  commonplace.  Our  enthusiasm  needs  to  be  aroused,  and  the 
rousing  of  our  enthusiasm  must  spring  from  the  conviction  that  there  is  something 
within  our  reach  worth  being  enthusiastic  about.  That  conviction  often  fails  us 
just  because  we  commit  the  f  oUy  which  our  proverb  reproves.  Immanuel  Kant  was 
never  more  than  a  few  miles  from  his  native  Konigsberg.  He  found  in  the  human 
mind  a  field  of  study  exhaustless  in  its  scope  and  interest.  If  the  life  of  our  town 
is  duU  it  is  because  our  own  souls  are  duU.  The  insipidity  and  commonplaceness 
of  which  we  complain  belong  to  our  own  vision.  II.  We  may  look  for  the  work 
OF  LIFE  IN  the  WRONG  PLACE.  The  OHC  crror  is  linked  with  the  other.  From  false 
views  of  life  there  spring  erroneous  conceptions  of  the  work  we  may  accomplish. 
It  is  not  circumstances  that  make  a  man  spiritually  great,  but  the  way  in  which  he 
handles  the  circumstances.  Spiritual  greatness  springs  not  from  without,  but  from 
within.  It  matters  little  what  may  be  the  rough  material  put  into  our  hands.  The 
spiritual  product  we  turn  out  depends  upon  the  spirit  in  which  we  work.  Our  work 
is  not  far  off  in  the  ends  of  the  earth ;  it  is  close  beside  us.  These  are  no  tame, 
prosaic  days  in  which  we  live.  They  may  be  days  of  trouble,  and  unrest,  and 
upheaval,  but  the  Spirit  of  God  is  moving  as  of  old  upon  the  face  of  the  waters. 
We  need  not  sigh  for  the  opportunity  of  playing  our  part  in  the  movements  of  other 
days.  The  movements  of  to-day  are  enough  for  our  faith,  and  energy,  and  devotion. 
(D.  M.  Ross,  M.A.)  Contrast  between  a  wise  man  and  a  fool .- — I.  That  the  one 
HAS  A  meaning,  THE  OTHER  AN  UNMEANING  FACE.  One  translator  renders  the  words 
"In  the  countenance  of  a  wise  man  wisdom  appeareth,  but  the  fool's  eyes  roll  to 
and  fro."  God  has  so  formed  man  that  his  face  is  the  index  to  his  soul ;  it  is  the 
dial-plate  of  the  mental  clock.  A  wise  man's  face  looks  wisdom — calm,  devout, 
reflective.  The  fool's  face  looks  folly.  As  the  translucent  lake  reflects  the  passing 
clouds  and  rolling  lights  of  sky,  so  does  the  human  countenance  mirror  the  soul. 

II.  That  the  one  has  an  occupied  the  other  a  vacant  mind.  The  meaning  of 
Solomon  perhaps  maybe  wisdom  as  before,  that  is,  present,  with  the  man  that  hath 
understanding.  The  principles  of  wisdom  are  in  his  mind,  are  ever  before  his  eye. 
Wisdom  is  "  before"  his  mind  in  every  circumstance  and  condition.  Its  rule,  the 
Word  of  God,  is  before  him.  Its  principle,  the  love  of  God,  is  before  him.  Thus 
he  has  an  occupied  mind.  But  the  mind  of  the  fool  is  vacant.  His  "eyes  are  in 
the  ends  of  the  earth."  He  has  nothing  before  him,  nothing  true,  or  wise,  or  good. 
He  looks  at  emptiness.  Alas  1  how  vacant  the  mind  of  a  morally  unwise  man !  It. 
is  a  vessel  without  baUast,  at  the  mercy  of  the  winds  and  waves.  His  thoughts  are 
unsubstantial,  his  hopes  are  illusory,  the  sphere  of  his  conscious  life  a  mirage. 

III.  That  the  one  has  a  settled,  the  other  an  unsettled  heart.  The  morally 
wise  man  is  fixed,  wisdom  is  before  him  and  his  heart  is  on  it.  He  is  rooted  and 
grounded  in  the  faith.  He  is  not  used  by  circumstances,  but  he  makes  circum- 
stances serve  him.  But  the  fool  is  unsettled,  his  "eyes  are  in  the  ends  of  the- 
earth."  His  mind,  like  the  evil  spirit,  walks  to  and  fro  through  the  earth,  seeking 
rest  and  finding  none.  (Homilist.)  Common  follies : — If  the  eyes  are  in  the  ends 
of  the  earth,  they  cannot  be  here,  where,  probably,  the  work  and  duty  lie.   The  man 


453  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [.chap.  xvn. 

will  stumble  over  obstacles  which  he  would  see  if  his  eyes  were  where  they  should  be, 
and  he  will  lose  his  way.  This  is  a  common  kind  of  folly,  and  appears  under  different 
aspects.  I.  The  folly  of  discontent.  A  man's  eyes  may  be  said  to  be  in  the 
ends  of  the  earth  if  he  thinks  his  happiness  lies  in  a  different  sphere  from  that 
which  Providence  has  allotted  to  him.  The  grumbling  spirit  is  widespread,  and  is 
not  confined  to  any  class  of  the  community.  Sometimes  the  round  man  is  put  into 
the  square  hole.  God  does  not  invariably  wish  a  man  to  stay  for  ever  in  the  place 
where  he  has  been  drojDped.  The  mistake  is  when  we  so  allow  these  feelings  to 
work  in  us  that  they  make  us  disheartened  where  we  are.  Some  time  the  tide  of 
opportunity  rises  to  every  man's  feet,  and  happy  is  he  if  he  is  ready  to  take  it  when 
his  hour  comes.  But  if  it  does  not  come,  what  then  ?  Why,  then  we  must  surely 
conclude  that  God  needs  us  where  we  are.  II.  The  follt  of  the  scornek.  A 
person's  eyes  are  in  the  ends  of  the  earth  if  the  objects  of  his  admiration  are  all 
people  he  has  never  seen,  and  if  he  has  nothing  but  contempt  for  those  among  whom 
he  lives.  If  the  only  causes  that  can  awaken  your  enthusiasm  are  causes  belonging 
to  past  centuries,  if  all  your  heroes  are  men  who  are  dead,  and  you  have  no  living 
heroes,  your  eyes  are  in  the  ends  of  the  earth.  Some  go  to  romance  and  poetry  for 
the  objects  of  their  admiration.  But  it  is  one  thing  to  pity  the  poor  in  a  book,  and 
quite  a  different  thing  to  pity  them  in  the  flesh.  III.  The  folly  of  the  busybody. 
A  person's  eyes  are  in  the  ends  of  the  earth  when  he  occupies  his  eyes  with  the 
affairs  of  other  people  and  neglects  his  own.  The  gossip  ;  the  loud-mouthed 
politician ;  the  satirist  who  lashes  the  iniquities  of  the  times,  and  who  himself  is 
the  slave  of  the  same  vices.  A  wise  man  said  that  ours  is  an  age  when  every  man 
wants  to  reform  the  world  and  no  one  is  willing  to  reform  himself.  IV.  The  folly 
OF  THE  PRocRASTiNATOE.  A  man's  cyes  are  in  the  ends  of  the  earth  if  he  is  looking 
forward  to  the  proper  use  of  future  time  and  not  making  proper  use  of  present  time. 
We  all  do  it.  How  easy  and  pleasant  is  the  duty  which  is  going  to  be  done 
to-morrow  !  Some  are  committing  this  folly  in  regard  to  the  most  important  of  all 
concerns — the  concern  of  the  soul  and  eternity.  This  is  a  threefold  foil  v.  1.  The 
future  opportunity  may  never  come.  2.  If  it  does  come,  can  you  be  sure  that  you 
will  then  be  anxious  about  eternity  ?  3.  You  can  only  have  a  mean  and  selfish 
conception  of  religion  if  you  defer  it  to  some  future  time.  You  are  going  to  spend 
your  life  on  yourself,  going  to  give  it  to  the  devil,  and  at  last  going  to  creep  to 
Christ  and  get  Him  to  take  you  into  heaven  and  save  you  from  the  consequences  of 
your  sin.  Can  you  hold  your  face  up  to  a  conception  of  religion  like  that  ?  Christ 
wants  your  life— wants  to  make  it  year  by  year  more  and  more  useful  and  noble. 
(James  Stalker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  26.  Also  to  punish  the  just  is  not  good,  nor  to  strike  princes  for  equity. — 

Striking  princes : — The  spirit  of  lawlessness,  which  sought  a  remedy  for  real  or 
imaginary  ills  by  striking  at  princes,  was  not  a  strange  thing  in  the  times  of 
Solomon.  The  simple  negative  in  Scripture  is  often  stronger  and  more  significant 
than  the  first  blush  of  the  expression  suggests.  It  is  "  not  good  "  to  strike  princes 
for  equity  means  that  it  is  absolutely  bad.  It  is  "  not  good  "  morally,  for  it  is  a 
heinous  crime  ;  it  is  "  not  good  "  socially,  for  it  fosters  a  spirit  of  restlessness  and 
insecurity ;  it  is  "  not  good  "  politically,  for  it  fails  to  establish  the  peace  and  pros- 
perity of  a  nation  ;  it  is  "  not  good  "  spiritually,  for  in  the  eyes  of  the  Eternal  Judge 
it  is  an  odious  sin.  Morally,  socially,  politically,  and  spiritually  it  is  a  gigantic 
error,  a  .colossal  folly,  an  abominable  iniquity,  to  strike  at  princes.  The  expression 
is  capable  of  three  interpretations.  1.  It  may  mean  a  dogged  defiance  of  their 
authority — a  fixed  determination  not  to  obey  their  laws.  2.  It  may  mean  an  effort 
to  supplant  a  prince,  a  secret  or  overt  attempt  to  alienate  the  affections  and  confi- 
dence of  the  subjects,  and  transfer  the  same  to  another  person;  a  concerted 
method  for  placing  in  the  post  of  honour  a  rival  candidate  for  popular  favour. 
3.  It  may  mean  assassination,  a  cruel  and  cowardly  attempt  on  the  life  of  the 
sovereign,  an  execrable  conspiracy  to  hurry  into  the  unseen  world  the  occupant  of 
the  national  throne.  This  is  a  most  diabolical  and  detestable  way  of  attempting  to 
settle  real  or  imaginary  grievances ;  a  sin  which  is  sternly  condemned  by  God,  and 
denounced  by  all  right-thinking  men.  {J.  Hiles  Hitchcns,  D.D.)  A  discourse 
against  rebellion  : — Treason  and  rebellion  are  such  horrid  and  loathsome  crimes 
that  if  they  should  appear  in  their  native  visage  and  genuine  deformity  they  could 
never  form  a  party  nor  allure  men  to  divorce  their  allegiance.  They  always,  there- 
fore, insinuate  into  the  affections  of  the  unwary  or  easily  deceived  multitude  under 
the  specious  pretences  of  piety  and  purity.     Some  render  the  second  clause  of  this 


CHAP.  XVII.]  PROVERBS.  459 

verse  "  princes  striking  for  equity  "  instead  of  "  striking  princes  for  equity."  But 
this  cannot  be  the  true  sense  in  this  place.  It  is  against  the  natural  order  of 
the  words.  The  proverb  has  a  double  aspect ;  the  one  respects  princes,  forbidding 
them  to  punish  their  righteous  subjects ;  the  other  respects  the  people,  forbidding 
them  to  rebel  against  their  princes  for  equity's  sake.  Dealing  with  this  second  part, 
consider — I.  The  doom  and  censure.  "It  is  not  good."  It  speaks  only  dislike, 
but  means  detestation.  It  implies  that  it  is  a  crime  most  impious  in  itself,  and 
most  odious  and  abominable  to  God.  II.  The  action  condemned.  "  To  strike 
princes."  1.  We  must  not  strike  princes  with  the  tongue,  in  their  fame  and  repu- 
tation. 2.  We  must  not  strike  princes  in  their  authority,  nor  the  exercise  of  it  over 
us.  This  may  be  done  by  refusing  to  be  subject  to  their  laws,  or  by  deposing  them 
from  their  dominion.  3.  It  is  sacrilege  to  strike  them  in  their  persons,  and  to  offer 
violence  to  their  liberty  or  life.  III.  The  cause,  motive,  or  provocation  to  this 
ABOMINABLE  ACTION.  That  is  equity.  Either  the  prince's  equity  or  the  subject's 
equity.  To  strike  for  either  is  here  censured  as  a  heinous  crime.  1.  It  may  be 
understood  of  resisting  and  rebelling  against  them  for  their  own  equity  and  the 
execution  of  that  justice  which  is  committed  to  them.  2.  It  may  be  understood  of 
striking  them  for  their  subject's  equity.  That  is,  it  is  a  great  injustice  to  strike 
priuces  upon  any  pretences  of  equity  and  justice  in  so  doing.  Never  yet  was  there 
any  insurrection  against  the  lawful  magistrate  but  what  was  prefaced  with  glorious 
pretences,  the  honour  of  God,  the  liberty  of  the  subject,  a  due  freedom  for  tender 
consciences,  &c.  These  are  all  excellent  things,  and  we  can  never  too  much  prose- 
cute them  while  we  do  it  in  a  lawful  and  allowed  manner.  But  a  good  purpose  can 
never  justify  a  wicked  action,  and  God  abhors  that  our  sins  should  be  made  the 
means  of  His  glory.     {E.  Hopkins,  D.D.) 

Vers.  27,  28.  He  that  hath  knowledge  spareth  his  words. — Signs  of  a  wise 
man : — Two  ways  a  man  may  show  himself  to  be  a  wise  man.  1.  By  the  good 
temper,  the  sweetness  and  the  sedateness  of  his  mind.  "  A  man  of  understanding 
is  of  an  excellent  spirit,"  i.e.,  a  precious  spirit.  He  is  one  that  looks  well  to  his 
spirit,  that  it  be  as  it  should  be,  and  so  keeps  it  in  an  even  frame,  easy  to  himself, 
and  pleasant  to  others.  A  gracious  spirit  is  a  precious  spirit,  and  renders  a  man 
amiable  and  more  excellent  than  his  neighbour.  He  is  of  a  cool  spirit  (so  some 
read  it),  not  heated  with  passion  nor  put  into  any  tumult  or  disorder  by  the  impetus 
of  any  corrupt  affection,  but  even  and  stayed.  A  cool  head  with  a  warm  heart  is  an 
admirable  composition.  2.  By  the  good  government  of  his  tongue.  A  wise  man 
wiU  be  of  few  words,  as  being  afraid  of  speaking  amiss  ;  he  that  has  knowledge,  and 
aims  to  do  good  with  it,  is  careful,  when  he  does  speak,  to  speak  to  the  purpose, 
and  says  little,  in  order  that  he  may  take  time  to  deliberate.  He  spares  his  words, 
because  they  are  better  spared  than  ill-spent.  This  is  generally  taken  for  such  a 
sure  indication  of  wisdom  that  a  fool  may  gain  the  reputation  of  being  a  wise  man 
if  he  have  but  wit  enough  to  hold  his  tongue,  to  hear,  and  see,  and  say  little.  If  a 
fool  hold  his  peace,  men  of  candour  will  think  him  wise,  because  nothing  appears 
to  the  contrary,  and  because  it  will  be  thought  that  he  is  making  observations 
on  what  others  say  and  gaining  experience,  and  is  consulting  with  himself  what 
he  shall  say  that  he  may  speak  pertinently.  See  how  easy  it  is  to  gain  men's 
good  opinion  and  to  impose  upon  them.  But  when  a  fool  holds  his  peace  God 
knows  his  heart,  and  the  folly  that  is  bound  up  there  ;  thoughts  are  words  to  Him, 
and  therefore  He  cannot  be  deceived  in  His  judgment  of  men.  {Matthew  Henry.) 
The  empire  of  silence: — Looking  round  at  the  noisy  inanity  of  the  world,  words 
with  little  meaning,  actions  with  little  worth,  one  loves  to  reflect  on  the  great  empire 
of  silence.  The  noble  sUent  men  gathered  here  and  there,  each  in  his  department, 
silently  thinking,  silently  working,  whom  no  morning  newspaper  makes  mention  of, 
they  are  the  salt  of  the  earth.  A  country  that  has  none  or  few  of  these  is  in  a  bad 
way.  Like  a  forest  which  has  no  roots,  which  has  all  turned  into  leaves  and  boughs, 
which  must  soon  wither  and  be  no  forest.  Woe  to  us  if  we  had  nothing  but  what 
we  can  show  or  speak.  Silence,  the  great  empire  of  silence,  higher  than  the  stars ; 
deeper  than  the  kingdoms  of  death  1  It  alone  is  great ;  aU  else  is  small.  {Thomas 
Carlyle.)  Silence  and  thought : — Bees  will  not  work  except  in  darkness ;  thought 
will  not  work  except  in  silence ;  neither  will  virtue  work  except  in  silence.  Let  not 
thy  right  hand  know  what  thy  left  hand  doeth.    (Ibid.) 


460  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvm. 


CHAPTEE  xvm. 

Yer.  1.  Through  desire  a  man,  having  separated  himself,  seeketh  and  inter- 
meddleth  with  all  wisdom. — The  case  of  diversions  stated  : — Dull  and  insipid  is  every 
performance  where  inclination  bears  no  part.  Any  one  man's  sense,  however 
excellent,  unless  it  mixes  in  society  with  that  of  others,  always  degenerates  into 
singularity  and  caprice.  I.  How  fab  are  social  crvERsioNS  allowable?  1.  When 
there  is  no  reason  against  any  social  pleasure  there  is  always  a  reason  for  it,  viz., 
that  it  is  a  pleasure.  To  suppose  that  the  Deity  would  abridge  us  of  any  pleasure 
merely  as  such  when  it  does  not  interfere  with  higher  and  nobler  delights  is  a 
notion  highly  derogatory  to  His  goodness.  2.  Diversions  are  necessary  to  relieve 
the  cares,  sweeten  the  toils,  and  smooth  the  ruggedness  of  life.  He  who  applies 
himself  to  his  studies,  or  any  other  employment,  with  proper  intervals  of  refresh- 
ment to  recruit  his  spirits,  will  upon  the  whole  do  more  good  than  he  who  gives 
unrelieved  application.  And  diversions  are  necessary  under  afflictions.  The  first 
step  towards  a  recovery  of  happiness  is  to  steal  ourselves  gradually  from  a  sense  of 
our  misery.  3.  Diversions  are  necessary  to  endear  us  to  one  another.  To  comply 
with  men's  tastes  as  far  as  we  innocently  can  in  the  little  incidents  of  life,  to  bear 
a  part  in  their  favourite  diversions — this  knits  men's  hearts  to  one  another  and  lays 
the  foundations  of  friendship.  4.  Diversions  are  requisite  to  enlarge  the  usefulness 
and  influence  of  a  good  character.  It  would  be  worth  while  for  the  good  to  endear, 
by  Mttle  compliances,  their  persons  to  the  affections  of  mankind,  that  they  might 
recommend  their  actions  to  their  imitation.  If  it  be  asked,  When  do  we  exceed  the 
bounds  of  reason  in  our  diversions  ?  it  may  be  said  if,  after  having  made  a  party  in 
some  entertainments,  the  soul  can  recall  her  wandering  thoughts  and  fix  them,  with 
the  same  life  and  energy  as  is  natural  to  us  in  other  cases,  upon  any  subject  worthy 
of  a  rational  creature,  it  is  plain  that  we  have  not  gone  too  far.  And  things  suitable 
enough  in  youth  come  with  an  ill  grace  in  advanced  years.  The  greatest  hazard  is 
that  we  should  contract  a  habit  of  doing  nothing  to  the  purpose  and  should  fool 
away  life  in  an  impertinent  course  of  diversions.  II.  The  necessity  of  an  eari^t 
AND  CLOSE  application  TO  WISDOM.  It  is  ucccssary  to  habituate  our  minds,  in  our 
younger  years,  to  some  employment  which  may  engage  our  thoughts  and  fill  the 
capacity  of  the  soul  at  a  riper  age.  We  outgrow  the  relish  of  childish  amusements, 
and  if  we  are  not  provided  with  a  taste  for  manly  satisfactions  to  succeed  in  their 
room  we  must  become  miserable  at  an  age  more  difficult  to  be  pleased.  Nothing 
can  be  long  entertaining,  but  what  is  in  some  measure  beneficial,  because  nothing 
else  will  bear  a  calm  and  sedate  review.  There  is  not  a  greater  inlet  to  misery  and 
vices  of  all  kinds  than  the  not  knowing  how  to  pass  our  vacant  hours.  When  a 
man  has  been  laying  out  that  time  in  the  pursuit  of  some  great  and  important 
truth  which  others  waste  in  a  circle  of  gay  follies  he  is  conscious  of  having  acted 
up  to  the  dignity  of  his  nature,  and  from  that  consciousness  there  results  that 
serene  complacency  which  is  much  preferable  to  the  pleasures  of  animal  life. 
Happy  that  man  who,  unembarrassed  by  vulgar  cares,  master  of  himself,  his  time 
and  fortune,  spends  his  time  in  making  himself  wiser,  and  his  fortune  in  making 
others  happier.  III.  Some  reflections  which  have  a  connection  with  this  surject. 
1.  Let  us  set  a  just  value  upon  and  make  a  due  use  of  those  advantages  which  we 
enjoy.  Advantages  of  a  regular  method  of  study  (as  at  a  university).  Direction  in 
the  choice  of  authors  upon  the  most  material  subjects.  A  generous  emulation 
quickens  our  endeavours,  and  the  friend  improves  the  scholar.  2.  It  is  a  sure 
indication  of  good  sense  to  be  diffident  of  it.  We  then,  and  not  till  then,  are 
growing  wise  when  we  begin  to  discern  how  weak  and  unwise  we  are.  {J.  Seed,  M.A .) 
TJie  stimulus  of  desire : — A  person  under  the  strong  influence  of  desire  is  like  a 
hound  in  pursuit  of  a  deer,  which  he  keenly  and  steadfastly  follows  when  he  has 
once  caught  the  scent  of  it,  and  continues  to  track  it  through  a  herd  of  others,  and 
for  many  a  weary  mile  until  he  has  hunted  it  down,  although  those  which  he  has 
passed  by  may  seem  easily  within  his  reach.  (G.  Harrii'.)  Extractittg  kiioir- 
ledge  : — There  is  no  kind  of  knowledge  which,  in  the  hands  of  the  diligent  and  skilful, 
will  not  turn  to  account.  Honey  exudes  from  all  flowers,  the  bitter  not  excepted  ; 
and  the  bee  knows  how  to  extract  it.  {Bp.  Home.)  Desire  an  excitement  to  dili- 
gence : — If  we  would  get  knowledge  or  grace  we  must  desire  it  as  that  which  we 
need  and  which  will  be  of  great  advantage  to  us.  We  must  separate  ourselves 
from  all  those  things  which  would  divert  or  retard  us  in  the  pursuit,  retire  out  of 
the  noise  of  this  world's  vanities,  be  willing  to  take  pains,  and  try  all  the  methoda 


CHAP,  xvni.]  PROVERBS.  461 


of  improving  ourselves,  be  acquainted  with  a  variety  of  opinions,  that  we  may 
prove  all  things,  and  hold  fast  that  which  is  good.  {Matthew  Henry.)  The  evil 
of  isolation  : — There  are  people  who  shun  all  togetherness  in  their  lives  ;  they  are 
voluntarily,  deliberately  separated  from  their  kind.  "We  are  to  think  of  one  who 
chooses  a  life  of  solitariness  in  order  to  follow  out  his  own  desire  rather  than  from 
any  necessity  of  circumstance  or  disposition  ;  we  are  to  think  of  a  misanthrope. 
There  are  men  who  separate  themselves  for  the  common  welfare,  such  as  the 
student  and  the  inventor.  But  the  misanthrope  is  one  who  has  no  faith  in  his 
fellows,  and  shrinks  into  himself  to  escape  them.  Every  man  is  not  only  a  "  self," 
a  personality ;  he  is  a  very  complex  being,  made  up  of  many  relations  with  other 
men.  He  is  a  son,  a  brother,  a  friend,  a  father,  a  citizen.  Stripped  of  these  he  is 
not  a  man,  but  a  mere  self,  and  that  is  his  hideous  condemnation.  An  old  Greek 
saying  declared  that  one  who  lives  alone  is  either  a  god  or  a  wild  beast.  The  social 
instinct  is  one  of  two  or  three  striking  characteristics  which  mark  us  out  as  human. 
It  becomes  therefore  a  necessity  to  every  wise  human  being  to  recognise,  to  main- 
tain, and  to  cultivate  all  those  wholesome  relationships  which  make  us  truly  human. 
Neighbouiiiness  is  the  larger  part  of  life.  Our  hfe  is  rich  and  true  and  helpful  just 
in  proportion  as  we  are  entwined  with  those  who  live  around  us  in  bonds  of  mutual 
respect  and  consideration,  of  reciprocal  helpfulness  and  service,  of  intimate  and 
intelligent  friendship.  The  relation  of  Christ,  as  the  Son  of  God,  to  the  human 
race  as  a  whole  immediately  opened  up  the  possibility  of  a  world-wide  society  in 
which  all  nations,  all  classes,  all  castes,  all  degrees,  all  individualities  should  be 
not  so  much  merged  as  distinctly  articulated  and  recognised  in  a  complete  and 
complex  whole.  The  person  of  Christ  is  the  link  which  binds  all  men  together ; 
the  presence  of  Christ  is  the  guarantee  of  the  union  ;  the  work  of  Christ,  which 
consists  in  the  removal  of  sin,  is  the  main  condition  of  a  heart  union  for  all 
mankind.  The  Christian  life  must  be  the  life  of  a  community.  {R.  F.  Horton,  D.D.) 
Seeking  wisdom  .-—Two  opposite  views  have  been  taken  of  this  verse.  One  makes 
Solomon  refer  to  a  pursuit  of  knowledge  and  wisdom  that  is  right  and  commend- 
able ;  the  other  regards  him  as  speaking  of  what  is  wrong  and  censurable. 
Schultens  describes  the  intended  character  thus:  "A  self -conceited,  hair-brained 
fool  seeks  to  satisfy  his  fancy,  and  intermingleth  himself  with  all  things."  Park- 
hurst  thus :  "  The  recluse  seeks  his  own  pleasure  or  inclination  ;  he  laughs  at  or 
derides  everything  solid  or  wise."  Another  thus:  "A  retired  man  pursueth  ihe 
studies  he  delights  in,  and  hath  pleasure  in  each  branch  of  science."  I  am 
disposed  to  think  that  our  own  translation  gives  the  sense.  "Through  desire" — 
that  is,  the  desire  of  knowledge— "  a  man,  having  separated  himself" — that  is, 
having  retired  and  secluded  himself  from  interruption  by  the  intrusion  of  com- 
panions and  the  engagements  of  social  life—"  seeketh  and  intermeddleth  with  all 
wisdom."  There  is  a  contrast  between  the  character  in  the  first  verse  and  the 
character  in  the  second  verse.  The  contrast  is  between  the  man  that  loves  and 
pursues  knowledge  and  the  man  who  undervalues  and  despises  it.    (R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  The  words  of  a  man's  mouth  are  as  deep  waters. — The  importance  of 
language  : — Language  is  one  of  the  principal  tests  and  standards  of  civilisation. 
The  study  of  language  is  one  of  the  most  naturally  interesting  and  naturally 
elevating  studies  with  which  the  human  mind  can  occupy  itself.  I.  It  is  or  gkeat 
INTELLECTUAL  iMPOKTANCE.  Only  through  the  instrumentality  of  language  can  the 
thoughts  of  the  mind  be  revealed  and  displayed.  Nothing  bewrays  more  obviously 
the  rustiness  and  disorganisation  of  the  intellect  than  inaccuracy  and  dulness  of 
language.  II.  The  moral  importance  of  language  is  still  greater.  As  a  rule 
the  relations  between  intellect  and  conscience  are  harmonious.  When  the  intellect 
is  illuminated  it  brightens  the  conscience ;  when  the  conscience  is  quickened  it 
animates  the  intellect.  Language  is  often  a  standard  of  morals.  Exactitude^  of 
utterance  is  seldom  compatible  with  great  frequency  of  utterance.  Modern  writing 
and  modern  speech  are  impotent  because  they  are  slipshod.  Language  is  also  a 
great  moral  force  in  the  world  by  reason  of  its  variety.  A  world  of  one  language 
would  not  be  a  very  interesting  world.  III.  The  great  religious  importance  of 
language.  The  utmost  solemnity  is  attached  in  the  Bible  to  the  use  of  language. 
What  man  can  think  that  words  are  light  and  Httle  things  when  he  remembers 
that  it  is  through  the  instrumentality  of  words  inspired  that  God  has  made  known 
His  greatest  revelations  to  mankind  ?  {Canon  Diggle.)  The  words  of  iufvirfid 
wisdmn : — There  are  some  who  regard  the  two  clauses  of  this  verse  as  antithetic. 
The  former  indicating  hidden  depths  of  evil  in  the  wicked  man.    "  The  words  of 


462  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvm. 

his  mouth  are  as  deep  waters."  That  is,  he  is  so  full  of  guile  and  deceit  that  you 
cannot  reach  his  meaning.  The  latter  indicating  the  transparent  communications 
of  the  wise  and  the  good.  "  The  wellspring  of  wisdom  as  a  flowing  brook."  The 
communications  of  the  one  are  guileful — the  words  conceal  rather  than  reveal. 
The  words  of  the  other  are  honest  and  lucid.  There  are  others  who  regard  the  two 
clauses  as  a  parallelism.  The  character  of  the  former  clause  is  to  be  taken  from 
the  latter.  The  words  of  a  man's  mouth — that  is,  according  to  the  second  clause, 
of  a  wise  man's  mouth — are  as  deep  waters,  and  the  wellspring  of  wisdom  as  a 
flowing  brook.  We  shall  use  the  words  thus  as  a  parallelism  to  illustrate  the 
■words  of  inspired  wisdom  which  are  "wise"  in  the  highest  sense.  I.  Thky  abe 
FULL.  They  are  as  "  deep  waters."  The  world  abounds  with  shallow  words,  mere 
empty  sounds.  The  words  in  the  general  conversation  of  society  and  in  the 
popular  hterature  of  the  day  are  empty,  shells  without  a  kernel,  mere  husks  without 
grain.  But  the  words  of  inspired  men  are  full,  brimful,  full  of  light  and  full  of 
power.  1.  The  greatest  thinkers  have  failed  to  exhaust  their  meaning.  2.  Every 
modern  thinker  discovers  new  significance.  Every  paragraph  has  a  continent  of 
thought. 

"  There  lie  vast  treasures  unexplored, 
And  wonders  yet  untold." 

II.  Thei  are  flowing.  "A  flowing  brook."  The  words  of  eternal  truth  are  always 
in  motion.  They  pulsate  in  thousands  of  souls  every  hour,  and  onward  is  their 
tendency.  1.  They  flow  from  the  eternal  wellspring  of  truth.  2.  They  flow  through 
human  channels.  Divine  wisdom  speaks  through  man  as  well  as  through  other 
organs.  "  Holy  men  spake  as  they  were  moved,"  &c.  The  highest  teacher  was  a 
man,  Christ,  the  Logos.  The  words  of  His  mouth  were  indeed  as  deep  waters. 
Since  Heaven  has  thus  made  man  the  organ  of  wisdom,  it  behoves  man — (1)  Devoutly 
to  reahse  the  honour  God  has  conferred  upon  his  nature.  (2)  Earnestly  to  aspire 
to  the  high  honour  of  being  a  messenger  of  the  Eternal.  Man  should  not  only  be 
the  student,  but  the  revealer  of  God.  III.  They  are  fertilising.  They  are  here 
compared  to  "waters"  and  to  "a  flowing  brook."  What  water  is  to  all  physical 
life  the  words  of  heavenly  wisdom  are  to  souls.  They  quicken  and  satisfy.  1.  It 
is  a  perennial  brook.  It  has  streamed  down  these  centuries,  imparting  life  and 
beauty  in  its  course.  2.  It  is  an  accumulating  "brook."  As  brooks  in  nature 
swell  into  rivers  by  the  confluence  of  contributory  streams,  so  the  brook  of  Divine 
truth  widens  and  deepens  li^  overy  contribution  of  holy  thought.  And  never  was 
it  so  broad  and  deep  as  now.     (Homilist.) 

Vers.  6-8.  A  fool's  lips  enter  into  contention. — The  speech  of  a  splenetic  fool : — 
How  frequently  Solomon  speaks  of  the  fool !  and  the  fool  in  his  idea  was  not  an 
intellectually  demented  man,  but  a  morally  bad  man.  I.  It  is  querulous.  "A 
fool's  lips  enter  into  contention."  His  ill-nature  shows  itself  in  his  readiness  to 
pick  quarrels,  to  create  frays.  11.  It  is  provocational.  "  His  mouth  calleth  for 
strokes."  They  irritate  the  men  they  speak  to,  and  often  prompt  to  acts  of 
violence.  IH.  It  is  belf-buinous.  "A  fool's  mouth  is  his  destruction,  and  his 
lips  are  the  snare  of  his  soul."  Such  speech  is  indeed  destructive.  1.  It  destroys 
the  man's  own  reputation.  A  querulous  man  has  no  social  respect  or  command  ; 
he  is  shunned.  2.  It  destroys  the  man's  own  social  enjoyment.  He  has  no  loving 
fellowships,  no  lasting  friendships.  3.  It  destroys  the  man's  own  peace  of  mind. 
IV.  It  is  socxally  injurious.  "  The  words  of  a  talebearer  are  as  wounds,  and 
they  go  down  into  the  innermost  parts  of  the  belly."  The  talebearer  as  a  rule  is  a 
man  with  a  splenetic  temperament ;  he  delights  in  mischief.     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  9.  He  also  that  is  slothful  in  his  work. — Indolence : — Indolence  is  a  stream 
which  flows  slowly  on,  but  yet  undermines  the  foundation  of  every  virtue.  It  were  as 
little  hazard  to  be  tossed  in  a  storm  as  to  lie  thus  perpetually  becalmed  ;  nor  is  it  to 
any  purpose  to  have  within  one  the  seeds  of  a  thousand  good  qualities,  if  we  want 
the  vigour  and  resolution  necessary  for  the  exerting  them.  That  the  necessity  of 
labour  ought  to  be  regarded  as  a  punishment  is  a  mean  and  sordid  notion,  invented 
by  the  effeminate,  the  lazy,  and  the  vicious.  On  the  contrary,  if  God  had  pro- 
hibited labour,  such  prohibition  might  justly  have  been  deemed  a  token  of  His 
displeasure,  since  inaction  is  a  kind  of  lethargy,  equally  pernicious  to  the  mind 
and  body.  An  effeminate  Sybarite,  we  are  told,  thanked  the  gods  very  heartily 
that  he  had  never  seen  the  sun  rise  in  his  life.     Can  there  be  a  more  striking 


CHAP,  xvni.]  PROVERBS,  463 

emblem  of  a  narrow  and  unenligiitened  mind? — of  a  wicked  and  unprofitable 
servant  ? 

Ver.  10.  The  name  of  the  Lord  is  a  strong  tower :  the  righteous  runneth  into  it 
and  is  safe. — The  security  of  those  who  trust  in  God : — I.  Explain  what  is  to  be 
t-NDERSTooD  BY  "  THE  NAME  OF  THE  LoRD."  No  particular  virtue  or  charm  attaches  to 
the  sound  or  pronunciation  of  the  name.  In  a  mistaken  veneration  for  the  name 
the  Jews  refused  to  pronounce  it  at  all.  But  a  rash  profanation  of  the  name  of 
God  is  unspeakably  more  criminal.  By  the  name  of  the  Lord  we  are  to  understand 
the  Lord  God  Himself — His  nature,  as  it  is  discovered  to  us  in  all  His  glorious 
perfection,  particularly  in  His  power  and  goodness  to  save  and  deliver  them 
that  put  their  trust  in  Him.  Three  principal  ways  by  which  God  hath 
discovered  Himself  to  mankind.  1.  The  visible  creation.  2.  The  written  "Word. 
3.    The   daily  administration  of    His  providence.     II.  What  is  implied  m  the 

r.IGHTEOUS   RUNNING   INTO    THE  NAME    OF  THE   LoRD  AS  A  STRONG  TOWER  ?       The  epithet 

"  strong  tower  "  conveys  to  the  mind  the  idea  of  protection  and  defence.  God's 
almighty  providence  is  the  surest  and  strongest  defence  against  all  enemies  of 
whatever  kind,  let  their  art,  their  activity,  their  malignity  be  what  they  will. 
1.  Eunning  into  the  name  implies  the  lively  exercise  of  faith  both  in  the  power  and 
the  willingness  of  God  to  protect.  It  is  only  by  faith  that  we  can  go  to  an  invisible 
God.  Faith,  in  applying  the  power  and  promise  of  God,  receives  very  much 
strength  from  the  examples  of  His  mercy,  either  towards  ourselves  or  others.  The 
name  is  recorded  in  every  page  of  the  history  of  providence.  2.  The  righteous 
"  runneth  into  the  name "  by  the  exercise  of  fervent  prayer.  Praying  is  the 
immediate  and  direct  means  of  imploring  the  Divine  assistance  and  protection. 
Faith  is  the  habitual  principle,  and  prayer  is  the  actual  application  of  it.  Though 
God  knows  all  our  wants  perfectly.  He  requires  that  we  implore  His  assistance  by 
prayer.  And  prayer  is  the  natural  remedy  to  which  all  are  ready  to  fly  in 
extremity.  3.  The  righteous  "  runneth  into  the  name"  by  diligence  in  his  duty; 
which  implies  three  things :  (1)  Diligence  in  all  duties  in  general.  (2)  A  watchful 
attention  to  his  conduct  in  every  time  of  trial  or  danger.  Whether  his  danger 
arises  from  bodily  distress,  from  worldly  losses,  from  slander  and  reproach,  the  first 
and  great  care  of  the  Christian  should  be  to  keep  his  conscience  undefiled.  (3)  The 
diligent  use  of  every  lawful  means  for  his  protection  and  deliverance.  (4)  A 
renunciation  of  dependence  on  all  created  help.  We  run  into  the  strong  tower  from 
everything  else.  IH.  The  perfect  security  of  the  righteous.  1.  Wherein  does 
this  safety  consist  ?  "  Is  safe  "  might  be  rendered  "  is  exalted,"  "  placed  on  high." 
God  preserves  them  from  dangers  which  they  could  not  escape.  They  have  the 
promise  of  strength  and  support  in  the  time  of  trial.  They  are  sure  of  deliverance 
in  the  end,  and  complete  victory  over  all  sufferings  of  every  kind.  2.  The  certainty 
of  it  is  based  on  the  Divine  perfections,  on  the  faithful  promises,  and  on  the 
experience  of  the  saints.  Learn — (1)  The  sinfulness  of  distrust.  (2)  The  remedy 
for  distrust.  (J.  Witherspoon,  D.D.)  Two  defences— real  and  imaginary  : — The 
two  verses  put  side  by  side  two  pictures,  two  fortifications:  "The  name  of  the 
Lord  is  a  strong  tower  " ;  that  is  so,  whether  a  man  thinks  it  or  not ;  that  is  an 
objective  truth  and  always  true.  "The  rich  man's  wealth  is  his  strong  city," 
because  "in  his  own  conceit"  he  has  made  it  so.  So  we  have  on  the  one 
side  fact  and  on  the  other  side  fancy.  The  two  pictures  are  worth  looking 
at.  "  The  name  of  the  Lord  is  a  strong  tower."  Now,  of  course,  I  need 
not  remind  you  that  "  the  name  of  the  Lord,"  or  "  the  name  of  Jesus 
Christ,"  means  a  great  deal  more  than  the  syllables  by  which  He  is  desig- 
nated, which  is  all  that  we  understand  generally  by  a  name.  It  means,  to  put 
it  into  far  less  striking  words,  the  whole  character  of  God,  in  so  far  as  it  is  revealed 
to  men.  So  we  have  to  recognise  in  that  great  expression  the  clearest  utterance  of 
the  two  thoughts  which  have  often  been  regarded  as  antagonistic,  viz.,  the  imper- 
fection, and  yet  the  reality,  of  our  knowledge  of  God.  His  name  is  not  the  same 
cs  Himself,  but  it  is  that  by  which  He  is  known.  Our  knowledge  of  Him,  after  all 
revelation,  is  incomplete,  but  it  is  His  name — that  is  to  say,  it  corresponds  to  the 
realities  of  His  nature,  and  may  be  absolutely  and  for  ever  trusted.  "  The  name  of 
the  Lord  is  a  strong  tower,"  which,  translated  into  plain  prose,  is  just  this — in  that 
revealed  character  there  is  all  that  shelterless,  defenceless  men  can  need  for 
absolute  security  and  perfect  peace.  We  may  illustrate  that  by  considering  either 
Him  who  defends  or  him  that  is  defended.  On  the  one  hand,  perfect  wisdom, 
perfect  love,  perfect  power,  that  endure  for  ever;  and  on  the  other  hand,  men 


464  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xym. 

weighed  upon  by  sore  distresses,  crippled  and  wounded  by  many  transgressions. 
These  two,  the  defence  and  the  defenceless,  fit  into  each  other  like  the  seal  to  its 
impress,  the  convexity  to  the  cavity.  Whatever  man  needs,  God  is,  and  whatever 
dangers,  dreads,  pains,  losses,  sorrows,  sins,  attack  humanity,  in  Him  is  the  refuge 
for  them  all.  "  The  name  of  the  Lord  is  a  strong  tower."  Do  you  believe  that ; 
and  is  it  an  operative  belief  in  your  lives  ?  "  The  righteous  runneth  into  it "  ;  and 
what  is  that  running  into  it  ?  Neither  more  nor  less  than  the  act  of  faith.  One 
of  the  words  of  the  Old  Testament  which  is  frequently  translated — and  rightly 
so — "  trust,"  has  for  its  literal  meaning  to  flee  to  a  refuge.  So,  says  our  teacher, 
the  way  to  get  into  the  fortress,  and  to  have  the  solemn  battlements  of  that  Divine 
name  round  our  unarmed  and  else  shelterless  weakness,  is  sim^jly  to  trust  in  Him. 
But  the  word  suggests  the  urgency  and  the  effort  that  will  always  go  with  faith. 
"  The  righteous  runneth  into  it  " — not  dawdles  in  it — "  and  is  safe."  And  that 
takes  effort  and  means  haste.  Do  not  put  off  your  flight.  And  stop  in  it  when  you 
are  there,  by  that  constant  communion  with  the  name  of  the  Lord,  which  will 
bring  you  tranquillity.  "  In  Me  ye  shall  have  peace."  Stay  behind  the  strong 
bulwarks.  But  there  is  a  formidable  word  in  this  old  proverb.  "The  righteous 
runneth  into  it."  Does  not  that  upset  all  our  hopes  ?  I  need  not  say  anything 
about  the  safety,  except  to  make  one  remark.  The  word  rendered  "is  safe" 
literally  means  "is  high."  The  intention,  of  course,  is  to  express  safety,  but  it 
expresses  it  in  a  picturesque  fashion  which  has  its  bearing  upon  the  word  in  the 
next  verse,  viz. ,  it  sets  before  us  the  thought  that  the  man  who  has  taken  refuge  in 
the  strong  tower  goes  up  to  the  top  of  it  by  the  winding  staircase,  and  high  up 
there  the  puny  bows  of  the  foe  below  cannot  shoot  an  arrow  that  will  reach  him. 
That  is  a  truth  for  faith.  We  have  to  bear  the  common  lot  of  humanity,  but  the 
evil  that  is  in  the  evil,  the  bitterness  that  is  in  the  sorrow,  the  poison  that  is  in 
the  sting,  all  these  may  be  taken  away  for  us.  And  now  I  need  only  say  a  word  or 
two  about  the  companion  picture,  the  illusory  imagination.  "  The  rich  man's 
wealth  is  his  strong  city,  and  a  high  wall  in  his  own  conceit."  It  is  very  hard  to 
have,  and  to  be  concerned  about,  and  to  use,  the  external  good  without  putting  our 
trust  in  it.  The  Bible  has  no  foolish  condemnation  of  wealth.  And  we  all  know, 
whether  in  regard  to  money,  or  to  earthly  loves,  or  to  outward  possessions  and 
blessings  of  all  sorts,  how  difficult  it  is  to  keep  within  the  limit,  not  to  rely  upon 
these,  and  to  think  that  if  we  have  them  we  are  blessed.  What  can  we  do,  any  of 
us,  when  real  calamities  come ?  Will  wealth  or  anything  else  keep  away  the  tears? 
What  will  prevent  the  sorrows,  deal  with  the  sins,  or  enable  us  to  be  of  good  cheer 
in  the  face  of  death  and  disease,  and  to  say,  "  You  cannot  touch  me  "  ?  Ah !  there 
is  but  one  thing  that  will  do  that  for  us.  "  The  name  of  the  Lord  is  a  strong 
tower."  The  other  man  has  "  a  high  wall  in  his  own  conceit."  Did  you  ever  see 
the  canvas  fortifications  at  some  entertainments  that  they  put  up  to  imitate  strong 
castles  ? — canvas  stretched  upon  bits  of  stick.  That  is  the  kind  of  strong  wall 
that  the  man  puts  up  who  trusts  in  the  uncertainty  of  any  earthly  thing, 
or  in  anything  but  the  living  God.  Let  us  keep  ourselves  within  the 
Divine  limits  in  regard  to  all  external  things.  It  is  hard  to  do  it,  but  it  can 
be  done.  And  there  is  only  one  way  to  do  it,  and  that  is  by  the  same  act 
by  which  we  take  refuge  in  the  true  fortress — viz.,  by  faith  and  communion. 
When  we  realise  that  God  is  our  defence,  then  we  can  see  through  the  insufficiency 
of  the  others.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  name  of  the  Lord  a  strong  tower  : — It 
is  essential  that  man's  hopes  should  rest  on  a  firm  basis.  I.  The  name  of  the 
Lord  is  a  stbong  tower.  Names  have  a  twofold  use — to  distinguish  and  describe. 
Our  names  generally  serve  only  to  distinguish  the  individual.  Sometimes, 
however,  they  describe  as  well  as  distinguish,  and  when  this  is  the  case,  their 
significancy  is  greatly  increased.  The  name  of  God  is  descriptive  ;  it  describes  the 
attributes  of  His  character  as  revealed  to  us.  What  God  is  in  Himself  is  implied 
in  the  name  Jehovah,  the  existent.  What  the  Almighty  God  is  to  His  sinful  and 
rebellious  creatures  is  a  matter  of  anxious  inquiry.  He  is  condescending,  full  of 
compassion,  ready  to  forgive,  slow  to  anger,  yet  by  no  means  clearing  the  guilty. 
Such  is  the  name  of  the  Lord,  which  the  text  reminds  us  is  a  "  strong  tower,"  A 
tower  is  a  place  built  for  shelter  and  security.  Its  strength  consists  in  the 
durability  of  the  materials  of  which  it  is  composed.  God's  name  is  called  a  strong 
tower,  on  account  of  the  strength  of  the  foundation  on  which  they  build  who 
are  sheltered  within  it.  II.  The  conduct  of  the  righteous.  He"rarmeth  into 
it."  The  real  Christian  is  the  one  who  is  earnest  in  the  pursuit  of  everlasting  life. 
He  is  impelled  by  a  sense  of  danger.  He  is  animated  by  the  hope  of  safety.  III.  Thb 


CHAP,  xvra.]  PROVERBS.  465 

SAFETY   OF   THE   EIGHTEOUS   WITHIN   THE   TOWEB.      Hc  is   Safe   from — 1.    The   ESSaultS 

of  the  devil.  2.  From  the  world.  3.  From  his  own  natural  depravity.  4.  From 
the  accusations  of  the  law.  5.  From  the  accusations  of  conscience.  6.  From 
the  fear  of  death.  (J.  R.  Shurlock,  M.A.)  On  trust  in  God  : — As  a  strong  tower 
was  considered,  under  the  ancient  system  of  warfare,  to  be  a  place  of  entire 
security  from  harm,  this  text  is  nothing  else  than  a  figurative  manner  of  expressing 
the  extreme  importance  of  putting  our  whole  trust  in  God.  The  reasonableness 
of  this  duty  wiU  appear  if  we  consider  the  Divine  perfections.  1.  God's  unlimited 
power.  It  is  proclaimed  by  the  heavens,  the  work  of  His  fingers,  and  by  the  earth, 
which  He  has  suspended  upon  nothing.  Everything  declares  that  He  is  at 
least  fully  competent  to  our  preservation  and  deUverance.  2.  His  particular 
providAice,  as  displayed  in  the  government  of  the  universe.  Even  things  which 
we  are  wont  to  regard  as  casual  and  trivial  are  subjected  to  His  perpetual  control. 
3.  His  beneficence.  He  is  ever  ready  to  relieve  and  to  bless.  He  is  not  only 
competent,  He  is  willing  to  promote  our  good.  4.  His  tried  and  approved  veracity 
"  God  is  faithful,  who  hath  promised."  In  our  intercourse  with  each  other, 
experience  is  the  basis  of  confidence,  of  mercantile  credit,  and  of  moral  character. 
The  same  principle  should  lead  us  to  place  confidence  in  God.  Two  remarks  to 
guard  the  subject  from  misconception.  (1)  God  may  sometimes  appear  unkind, 
and  yet  be  not  the  less  deserving  of  our  full  reliance.  (2)  A  compliance  with  the 
Divine  will  is  an  indispensable  requisite  to  a  well-grounded  confidence  in  the  Divine 
favour.  A  right  trust  in  God  includes  personal  exertions  towards  attaining  the 
objects  of  our  desire.  (J.  Grant,  M.A.)  Our  strong  tower: — There  are  many 
war  similes  in  the  Bible.  1.  Men  mistake  by  resting  satisfied  with  unstable  and 
insecure  bases.  The  sense  of  dependence  is  in  every  man  so  strong  that  no  man 
can  be  happy  quite  alone,  and  leaning  on  nothing.  Men  try  to  satisfy  themselves 
with  one  or  other  of  three  things.  (1)  Health.  They  assure  themselves  that  if 
they  were  to  lose  all  they  possessed,  their  health  and  energy  would  enable  them  to 
make  their  way  in  the  world  again.  (2)  Friends.  They  say,  "  I  have  friends  who 
are  well  ofif,  and  they  will  be  sure  to  help  me."  (3)  Money.  "  The  rich  man's 
wealth  is  his  strong  city,  and  as  a  high  wall  in  his  own  conceit."  Neither  of 
these  "  towers  "  can  be  safe  trusting-places.  Health  is  uncertain.  Friends  fail. 
Money  takes  wing.  If  they  provide  some  little  shelter  from  the  common  sorrows  of 
life,  they  can  provide  none  for  those  spiritual  sorrows  which  are  the  real  sorrows. 
2.  Men  cannot  be  truly  strong  for  life  until  they  have  God  behind  them.  To  know 
a  man  is  to  apprehend  all  that  makes  up  his  individuality,  or  to  "  know  his  name." 
So  the  "  name  of  God  "  includes  everything  that  spheres  Him  as  God :  a  just 
apprehension  of  God  and  His  relations — a  true  knowledge  of  God.  To  know  God 
in  covenant  is  a  strong  tower.  The  "  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,"  is  God 
known  through  relationships  and  tried  by  experience.  That  God  can  be  our 
"tower."  In  Scripture,  to  know  the  name  of  any  one  implies  familiarity  and 
confidence ;  and  to  know  God  by  name  implies  such  confidence  as  makes  Him  to 
us  a  strong  "  tower."  To  do  anything  in  the  name  of  another  is  to  cany  with 
you  their  authority,  as  with  the  ambassador  or  the  old  prophet.  The  name 
of  God  is  a  storehouse  of  wealth  and  strength,  from  which  all  recurring 
needs  can  be  supplied.  Then  comes  the  moral  force  needed  to  deal 
with — 1.  The  attacks  of  life.  2.  The  defences  of  life.  3.  The  retreats  of  life. 
Who  can  use  this  defence  of  God  ?  Only  the  man  whose  purpose  is  to  live  the 
righteous  life,  and  whose  constant  effort  is  to  realise  his  purpose.  [Weekly  Pulpit.) 
The  name  of  the  Lord : — I.  Christ  is  a  Steonqhold,  for  as  such  He  has  been 

APPOINTED  and  ORDAINED  BT  GoD.  Wisdom.  II.  ChRIST  IS  A  STRONGHOLD,  BECAUSE 
OF  THE  ABSOLUTE  PERFECTION  OF   HiS    OBEDIENCE,  AND    THE   ENTIRE    ADEQUACY   OF   HiS 

ATONEMENT.    Holiucss  and  justice.    III.  Christ  is  a  Stronghold,  because  God  has 

ACTUALLY    ACCEPTED     OF     HiS    VICARIOUS    WORK.        FaithfuluCSS.         IV.     ChEIST    IS     A 

Stronghold,  because  as  a  King  He  hath  sat  down  on  the  eight  hand  of  the 
Majesty  on  high.  Power.  V.  The  testimony  of  men — those  "  who  have  fled 
roE  refuge."  {James  Stewart.)  Our  Stronghold  : — Strong  towers  were  a  greater 
security  in  a  bygone  age  than  they  are  now.  Castles  were  looked  upon  as  being 
very  difficult  places  for  attack ;  and  ancient  troops  would  rather  fight  a  hundred 
battles  than  endure  a  single  siege.  He  who  owned  a  strong  tower  felt,  however 
potent  might  be  his  adversary,  his  walls  and  bulwarks  would  be  his  sure  salvation. 
I.  The  character  of  God  furnishes  the  righteous  with  an  abundant  security. 
The  character  of  God  is  the  refuge  of  the  Christian  in  opposition  to  other  refuges 
which  godless  men  have  chosen ;  and  as  a  matter  of  fact  and  reality.    The  purpose 

81 


466  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvm. 

of  God  in  our  salvation  is  the  glorifying  of  His  own  character,  and  this  it  is  that 
makes  our  salvation  positively  sure  ;  if  every  one  that  trusts  in  Christ  be  not  saved, 
then  is  God  dishonoured.  His  character  is  the  great  granite  formation  upon  which 
must  rest  all  the  pillars  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  the  sure  mercies  thereof. 
His  wisdom,  truth,  mercy,  justice,  power,  eternity,  and  immutability,  are  the  seven 
pillars  of  the  house  of  sure  salvation.  This  is  true  not  only  as  a  matter  of  fact  but 
also  as  a  matter  of  experience.  Even  when  the  Lord  Himself  chastens  us,  it  is 
most  blessed  to  appeal  against  God  to  God.  U.  How  the  righteods  avail 
THEMSELVES  OF  THIS  STRONG  TOWER.  They  ruu  into  it.  They  do  not  stop  to  make 
any  preparation.  And  the  running  implies  that  they  have  nothing  to  carry ;  and 
that  fear  quickens  them.  When  a  man  enters  a  castle,  he  is  safe  because  of  the 
impregnability  of  the  castle,  not  because  of  the  way  in  which  he  entered  into  the 
castle.  HI.  Entering  the  strong  tower  is  a  joyous  experience.  For  "is  safe" 
the  margin  reads  "  is  set  aloft."  1.  This  is  a  matter  of  fact.  He  is  safe,  for  who 
can  hurt  him  ?  Who  has  power  to  reach  him  ?  What  weapon  is  there  that  can  be 
used  against  him  ?  2.  This  is  a  matter  of  experience.  The  believer  in  his  high  days 
(and  they  ought  to  be  every  day)  is  like  an  eagle  perched  aloft  on  a  towering  crag. 
Yonder  is  a  hunter  down  below,  who  would  fain  strike  the  royal  bird ;  he  has  his 
rifle  with  him,  but  his  rifle  would  not  reach  one-third  of  the  way.  So  the  royal 
bird  looks  down  upon  him  in  quiet  contempt,  not  intending  even  to  take  the  trouble 
to  stretch  one  of  his  wings,  for  he  is  quite  safe,  he  is  up  aloft.  Such  is  the  faithful 
Christian's  state  before  God.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  A  place  of  refuge  : — In  the 
ancient  Greek  states  certain  temples  afforded  protection  to  criminals,  whom  it  was 
unlawful  to  drag  from  them,  although  the  supply  of  food  might  be  intercepted.  As 
early  as  the  seventh  century  the  protection  of  sanctuary  was  afforded  to  persons 
fieeiug  to  a  church  or  certain  boundaries  surrounding  it.  .  .  .  In  several  English 
churches  there  was  a  stone  seat  beside  the  altar,  where  those  fleeing  to  the  peace  of 
the  church  were  held  to  be  guarded  by  its  sanctity.  (Chambers'  Encyclopcedia,) 
The  name  of  God  a  refuge  : — The  name  of  God  is  his  harbour,  where  he  puts  in  as 
boldly  as  a  man  steps  into  his  own  house  when  taken  in  a  shower.     (If.  G.  Salter.) 

Yer.  12.  Before  destruction  the  heart  of  man  is  haughty,  and  before  honour 
is  humility. — Honour  and  humility : — I.  Explain  the  nature  of  genuine 
HUMILITY.  1.  It  does  not  consist  in  a  mean  and  servile  state  of  mind, 
in  anything  that  is  unworthy  of  the  man  or  the  Christian.  Humility  dignifies 
human  nature  ;  a  spirit  of  servility  degrades  it.  Some  persons  are  naturally 
timid  and  faint-hearted.  But  this  is  mere  human  weakness.  2.  It  does  not 
consist  in  indulging  a  low  and  dejected  frame  of  mind,  or  in  being  pensive  and 
sad  on  all  occasions.  Distance  and  reserve  are  so  far  from  being  the  fruit  of 
genuine  humility,  that  they  often  proceed  from  pride  and  self-conceit.  3.  There  is 
what  the  Scriptures  call  a  "  voluntary  humility  "  unrequired  and  unapproved.  An 
apparently  humble  demeanour  may  consist  with  a  haughty  and  aspiring  spirit. 
4.  Genuine  humility  consists  chiefly  in  the  state  of  our  hearts  towards  God.  Here 
reason  bows  to  faith,  and  interest  to  obligation.  5.  Humility  consists  in  thinking 
of  ourselves  as  we  ought  to  think,  and  conducting  ourselves  accordingly.  6.  Our 
humility  will  appear  in  the  sentiments  we  entertain  of  others,  of  the  behaviour  we 
manifest  towards  them.  II.  The  honour  with  which  Christian  humility  is 
accompanied.  1.  It  is  the  forerunner  of  just  and  worthy  commendation.  God 
exalts  the  low  tree,  and  brings  down  the  high.  2.  Humility  is  a  preparative  for 
honour.  A  meek  and  quiet  spirit  is  itself  an  ornament.  It  prepares  the  way 
for  further  honours.  3.  Eternal  honours  shall  be  the  gracious  reward  of  true  and 
genuine  humility.  God  shall  save  the  humble  person.  {B.  Beddovie,  M.A.) 
Humility  : — The  text  contains  a  most  certain  truth  ;  and  yet  it  is  in  its  proper 
and  most  extensive  sense  a  truth  we  owe  to  revelation.  The  natural  man  is  not 
fond  of  believing  in  the  necessity  of  humility.  He  contends  for  the  dignity 
of  his  nature,  he  asserts  the  sufficiency  of  his  own  powers.  Unaided  nip^n  has 
been  able  to  discover  a  considerable  number  of  important  truths  in  the  tiieory  of 
morals.  With  the  polished  nations  of  antiquity  morals  formed  a  part  of  the  science 
of  government.  They  examined  into  morals,  and  erected  systems  of  morals,  not 
with  a  view  to  ascertain  and  lay  down  the  duties  of  the  man,  but  of  the  citizen. 
The  Christian  cannot  expect  much  assistance  from  this  quarter.  As  they  do  not 
rest  on  the  right  foundation,  or  aim  at  the  right  end,  the  ancient  ethics  are 
miserably  defective,  and  often  grievously  false.  In  no  part  are  the,>  more  delusive 
than  in  the  estimate  they  teach  men  to  make  of  themselves.    If  we  turn  our  eyes 


CHAP,  xvin.]  PROVERBS.  467 

upon  the  world  around  us,  we  shall  readily  find  instances  of  the  connection  between 
pride  and  ruin.  Pride  leads  men  to  make  an  offensive  assumption  of  superiority. 
We  know  the  infatuating  nature  of  pride.  It  may  be  illustrated  by  the  career  of 
the  first  Napoleon.  It  is  i:ot  less  certain  that  "  before  honour  is  humility.' 
Nothing  more  frequently  leads  men  to  situations  of  respect  and  eminence  than  modesty 
and  diffidence.  Every  man  of  merit  is  so  conscious  of  his  deficiencies,  he  judges 
himself  so  severely,  he  adopts  such  an  elevated  standard  of  excellence,  that  he  ever 
thinks  hardly  of  himself.  Thinking  people  know  this,  and  give  their  verdict 
accordingly.  And  it  is  the  thiaking  part  of  society  that  allot  to  a  man  his 
reputation.  And  humility  has  an  effect  upon  the  man  himself,  in  whom  it  prevails. 
The  sense  of  the  smallness  of  his  attainments  will  drive  him  to  make  large 
attainments.  And  thus,  as  the  cause  is  before  the  effect,  so  before  honour  is 
humility.  Now  apply  the  text  to  the  spiritual  life.  Both  in  what  regards  faith,  and 
in  what  regards  practice,  pride  inevitably  leads  to  ruin.  No  one  is  likely  to  attain 
truth  on  spiritual  subjects  who  approaches  them  in  a  spirit  of  pride.  The  man  who 
depends  on  his  intelligence,  who  examines  the  objects  of  faith  in  a  self-sufficient 
spirit,  is  quite  sure  to  fall  into  infidelity  or  error.  If  the  man  whose  heart  is 
haughty  does  get  to  entertain  orthodox  opinions  of  religious  truth,  his  opinions 
cannot  profit  him :  the  truth  must  enter  his  heart  as  a  living  principle  before  it  can 
be  of  personal  benefit  to  him.  The  very  first  effect  which  it  has  on  the  heart  is  to 
bring  down  the  reign  of  pride.  Whenever  pride  reigns  in  a  heart,  there  the  kingdom 
of  God  is  not  set  up.  When  a  sinner  passes  from  a  state  of  impenitence  to  a  state 
of  grace,  the  whole  process  will  be  attended  by  humility.  And  there  is  no  growth 
in  grace,  there  is  no  safety,  without  humility.  The  more  we  know  of  ourselves  the 
more  cause  we  shall  find  for  humility.  Humility  is  our  security.  When  he 
distrusts  himself,  and  thinks  meanly  of  himself,  the  Christian  is  in  the  state  most 
favourable  for  his  advancement  in  faith  and  holiness.  (J.  G.  Bowling,  M.A.) 
Pride  and  humility  : — When  destruction  walks  through  the  land,  it  casts  its  shadow ; 
it  is  in  the  shape  of  pride.  When  honour  visits  a  man's  house,  it  casts  its  shadow 
before  it ;  it  is  in  the  fashion  of  humility.  I.  The  vice  of  pride.  1.  Describe 
pride.  It  is  a  groundless  thing ;  a  brainless  thing ;  the  maddest  thing  ;  a  protean 
thing,  ever  changing  its  shapes.  2.  The  seat  of  pride.  The  true  throne  of  pride  is 
the  heart  of  man.  3.  The  consequence  of  pride—destruction.  11.  The  grace  of 
HUMILITY.  A  good  man  may  have  honour  in  this  life.  But  God  forbids  our  making 
that  honour  a  cloak  for  pride  1.  What  is  humility  ?  To  think  rightly  of  ourselves. 
Humility  is  to  make  a  right  estimate  of  ourselves.  It  is  no  humility  for  a  man  to 
think  less  of  himself  than  he  ought.  2.  What  is  the  seat  or  throne  of  humility  ?  It 
is  the  heart.  I  hate,  of  all  things,  the  humility  that  lives  in  the  face.  Cringing 
men  that  bow  before  everybody  are  truly  proud  men ;  humble  men  think  of  them- 
selves so  little,  thej^o  not  think  it  worth  while  to  stoop  to  serve  themselves. 
3.  What  comes  of  humility?  "Before  honour  is  humility."  Humility  is  the 
herald  which  ushers  in  the  great  King.  He  who  has  humility  wiU  haye  honour 
afterwards.     Apply  this  spiritually.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  14.  The  spirit  of  a  man  will  sustain  his  infirmity ;  tut  a  wounded  spirit 
who  can  hear  ? — Sustaining  our  infirmities : — The  sufferings  of  this  life  are  not 
disproportioned  to  our  strength  to  bear  them.  And  the  only  evUs  that  are  intolerable 
and  insupportable,  are  wholly  owing  to  ourselves.  I.  What  is  meant  by  sustaininci 
INFIRMITIES?  Infirmities  here,  being  opposed  to  a  wounded  spirit,  must  signify 
only  external  sufferings,  whatever  is  grievous  by  afflicting,  excepting  the  disorders 
and  troubles  of  our  own  minds.  By  sustaining  infirmities  is  not  meant  that  we 
must  not  feel  them.  It  is  to  feel  but  not  sink  under  the  weight  of  them  :  as  that 
man  sustains  his  burden  who  can  go  upright,  and  not  stagger,  or  at  least  not  fall, 
though  he  feels  the  weight  of  it  on  his  shoulders.  II.  By  what  means  can  the  spirit 
OF  A  MAN  sustain  HIS  INFIRMITIES?  1.  By  natural  courage  and  strength  of  mind. 
There  is  an  inbred  greatness  in  human  nature  which  does  not  care  to  confess  its 
own  weakness  ;  an  untaught  courage  which  supports  the  rude  and  illiterate  part  of 
mankind,  even  without  reason  and  discourse.  2.  By  the  power  of  reason,  which 
adds  to  our  natural  courage,  and  gives  us  a  more  confirmed  sense  of  decency  and 
honour.  The  mere  power  of  natural  reason  and  moral  arguments  cannot  support 
us  under  all  events;  but  reason  is  the  strength  of  the  mind,  and  it  is  the  mind 
which  must  bear  up  under  external  sufferings.  Nature  furnishes  ns  with  a  great 
many  arguments  to  bear  sufferings  easily,  without  fainting.  3.  By  the  arguments 
which  religion  furnishes  us  with.     Kefer  to  two.     That  whatever  we  suffer  is  not 


468  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xviii. 

the  effect  of  a  blind  chance  or  fatal  necessity,  but  is  ordered  by  a  wise  and  good 
Providence.     That  if  we  bear  our  present  sufferings  with  patience  and  submission 
to  the  will  of  God,  and  make  a  wise  use  of  them  to  our  improvement  in  grace  and 
virtue,  our  very  sufferings  shall  be  greatly  rewarded  in  the  next  world.    If  God  sees 
pain  and  sickness,  poverty  and  disgrace,  necessary  to  cure  or  restrain  our  vicious 
and  distempered  passions,  or  to  improve  and  exercise  our  graces,  have  we  any 
reason  to  complain  that  God  takes  such  severe  measures  to  save  our  souls?     This 
may  be  very  grievous  and  afflicting  at  present,  but  then  we  have  the  hopes  of 
immortal  life  to  support  us.    III.  What  is  meant  by  "  a  wounded  splrit  "  ?    This  is  a 
metaphorical  expression,  and  signifies  a  spirit  which  suffers  pain  and  trouble.     A 
wound  in  the  body  is  a  division  of  one  part  from  another,  which  is  always  painful ; 
and  though  a  spirit  cannot  be  thus  divided,  yet  because  a  wound  causes  pain,  a  spirit 
which  is  disordered  and  suffers  pain  is  said  to  be  wounded.    Some  men's  spirits  are 
wounded  with  the  disorders  and  violence  of  their  own  passions.    They  love,  or  hope, 
or  fear,  or  desire,  or  grieve  immoderately ;  and  all  passions  are  very  painful  when  they 
are  in  excess.     Other  men's  spirits  are  wounded  with  a  sense  of  guilt.     Their  own 
consciences  reproach  and  shame  them.    IV.  How  unsupportable  a  wounded  spirit 
IS !     Anger,  when  it  grows  immoderate,  worries  the  mind.    An  immoderate  love  of 
riches    or  honours   or  pleasures   causes    us   infinite  trouble,   torments   with  an 
impatient  thirst.    All  this  is  nothing  to  the  agonies  of  a  guilty  mind.    And  more- 
over, a  wounded  spirit  has  no  refuge  or  retreat,  has  nothing  left  to  support  itself 
with.     The  spirit  of  a  man  can  bear  his  infirmities,  but  when  the  spirit  itself  is 
wounded,  there  is  nothing  to  support  that.     This  wounds  our  courage,  our  reason, 
makes  all  external  comforts  tasteless,  and  deprives  us  of  all  the  comforts  of  religion. 
A  wounded  spirit  cannot  find  any  support  from  the  considerations  of  religion  unless 
it  find  its  cure  there.      Useful  thoughts :  1,  This  is  a  great  vindication  of  the 
providence  of  God  with  respect  to  those  evils  and  calamities  that  are  in  the  world. 
God  inflicts  nothing  on  us  but  what  the  spirit  of   a  man  can  sustain,  but  our 
greatest  sufferings  are  owing  to  ourselves,  and  no  more  chargeable  on  the  providence 
of  God  than  our  sins  are.     2.  This  greatly  recommends  the  Divine  wisdom  in  that 
provision_God  has  made  for  our  support  under  sufferings.    3.  It  is  better  to  suffer  than 
to  sin,  even  with  respect  to  our  present  case,  because  sufferings  may  be  borne  by  an 
innocent  and  virtuous  mind.     4.  The  government  of  our  own  passions  contributes 
more  to  our  happiness  than  any  external  enjoyments.     What  a  wrong  course  do 
the  generality  of  mankind  take  to  make  themselves    happy  1      They  seek  for 
happiness  without,  when  the  foundation  of  happiness  must  be  laid  within,  in  the 
temper  and  disposition  of  our  minds.    An  easy,  quiet  mind  wiU  weather  all  the 
storms  of  fortune.    But  how  calm  and  serene  soever  the  heavens  be,  there  is  no 
peace  to  the  wicked,  who  have  nothing  but  noise  and  tumult  and  confusion  within. 
{W.  Sherlock,  D.D.)         The  burden  of  a  icounded  heart : — This  text  presents  a 
comparison  between  the  grief  that  afflicts  the  outward  man  and  that  which  preys 
upon  the  inward.     What  is  meant  in  the  text  by  "  spirit "  ?     In  the  soul  of  man  ia 
an  upper  and  lower  part;  not,  indeed,  in  respect  of   its  substance,  for  that  is 
indivisible,  but  in  respect  of   its   faculties.     There  is  a  higher  and   more   noble 
portion  of  the  soul,  purely  intellectual ;  and  in  operation,  as  well  as  in  substance, 
perfectly  spiritual,  and  this  is  expressed  in  the  text  by  the  term  "  spirit."    What  is 
the  import  of  the  soul  being  "  wounded"?     This  signifies  nothing  else  but  its  being 
deeply  and  intimately  possessed  with  a  lively  sense  of  God's  wrath  for  sin.     The 
sense  of  the  text  lies  full  and  clear  in  this  one  proposition,  viz.,  that  the  trouble 
and  anguish  of  a  soul  labouring  under  a  sense  of  God's  displeasure  for  sin  is 
inexpressibly  greater  than  any  other  grief  or  trouble  whatsoever.     I.  Wh.\t  kind  of 
PERSONS  ARE  THE  PBOPER  SUBJECTS  OF  THIS  TROUBLE  ?    Both  the  righteous  and  the 
wicked  ;  but  with  a  very  different  issue  in  one  and  in  the  other.     II.  Wherein  does 

THE    STRAJSGE,   EXCESSIVE,    AND    SOMETIMES    SUPERNATURAL    GREATNESS    OF    IT    APPEAR  ? 

We  may  gather  this — 1.  From  the  behaviour  of  our  Saviour  Himself  in  this 
condition.  2.  From  the  most  raised  and  passionate  expressions  that  have  been 
uttered  from  time  to  time,  by  persons  eminent  in  the  ways  of  God,  while  they  were 
labouring  under  it.  3.  From  the  uninterrupted,  incessant  continuance  of  it. 
4.  From  the  violent  and  more  than  ordinary  manifestation  of  itself  in  outward 
signs  and  effects.  5.  From  those  horrid  effects  it  has  had  upon  persons  not  upheld 
under  it  by  Divine  grace.  Both  history  and  experience  testify  what  tragical  ends 
men  deserted  by  God,  under  the  troubles  of  a  wounded  spirit,  have  been  brought  into. 

III.    By    what   ways   and    means    this   trouble    is    brought    into    THE    SOUL.        1.    By 

reflections  upon  the  Divine  justice,  as  provoked.     2.  By  fearful  apprehensions  of 


CHAP.  XVIII.]  PROVERBS.  469 

the  Divine  mercy,  as  abused.  3.  By  God's  withdrawing  His  presence  and  the 
sense  of  His  love.  4.  These  wounding  perplexities  are  brought  upon  the  soul  by 
God's  giving  commission  to  the  tempter  more  than  usually  to  trouble  and  disquiet 
it,  IV.  What  is  God's  end  and  design  in  casting  men  into  such  a  pekplexed 
CONDITION?  God  brings  anguish  upon  the  spirit  of  the  pious  and  sincere 
for  a  twofold  end.  1.  To  embitter  sin  to  them.  2.  To  endear  and  enhance 
the  value  of  returning  mercy.  V.  Deaw  some  useful  inferences  feom  the 
WHOLE.  1.  Let  no  man  presume  to  pronounce  anything  scoffingly  of  the  present 
or  severely  of  the  final  estate  of  such  as  he  finds  exercised  with  the  distracting 
troubles  of  a  wounded  spirit.  2.  Let  no  secure  sinner  applaud  or  soothe  up 
himself  in  the  presumed  safety  of  his  spiritual  estate  because  he  finds  so  much 
trouble  or  anguish  upon  his  spirit  for  sin.  3.  Let  no  person  exclude  himself 
from  the  number  of  such  as  are  truly  sincere  and  regenerate,  only  because  he 
never  yet  felt  any  of  these  amazing  pangs  of  conscience  for  sin.  (R.  South.) 
On  the  wounds  of  the  heart : — There  are  two  classes  of  good  and  evil  belonging  to 
man — those  which  respect  his  corporeal  and  those  which  respect  his  spiritual  state. 
But  it  is  not  easy  to  convince  men  that  the  soul  hath  interests  of  its  own,  quite 
distinct  from  those  of  the  body,  and  is  liable  to  diseases  and  wounds  as  real  as  any 
which  the  body  suffers,  and  often  much  more  grievous.  The  natural  vigour  and 
courage  of  a  man's  mind  may  enable  him  to  surmount  the  ordinary  distresses  of 
life  ;  but  if,  within  him,  the  disease  rankles  in  mind  and  heart,  to  what  quarter  can 
he  look  for  relief  ?  The  spirit  or  soul  of  man  is  wounded  chiefly  by  three  causes — ■ 
by  folly,  by  passion,  by  guilt.  I.  By  folly.  That  is,  by  vain,  light,  and  improper 
pursuits  ;  by  a  conduct  which,  though  it  should  not  be  immediately  criminal,  yet 
is  unsuitable  to  one's  age,  character,  or  condition  in  the  world.  Good  sense  is 
no  less  requisite  in  our  religious  and  moral  behaviour  than  it  is  in  our  worldly 
affairs.  In  this  age  of  dissipation  and  luxury,  how  many  avenues  are  open  that 
lead  to  the  Temple  of  Folly.  If  something  happens  to  awaken  persons  of  this 
description  from  their  dreams  of  vanity,  what  mortifying  and  disquieting  views  of 
themselves  will  arise !  Conscience  now  begins  to  exert  its  authority,  and  lift  its 
scourge.  U.  By  passion.  If  by  folly  the  spirit  is  wounded,  it  is  exposed  by  passion 
to  wounds  still  more  severe.  Passions  are  those  strong  emotions  of  the  mind  which 
impel  it  to  desire,  and  to  act,  with  vehemence.  When  directed  towards  proper 
objects,  and  kept  within  just  bounds,  they  possess  a  useful  place  in  our  frame  ; 
but  they  always  require  the  government  and  restraint  of  reason.  When  a  man's 
passions  have  been  so  far  indulged,  and  left  to  run  to  excess,  a  dangerous  blow  has 
been  given  to  the  heart.  The  balance  of  the  soul  is  lost.  The  case  becomes 
infinitely  worse  if  the  passion  which  has  seized  a  man  be  of  the  vicious  and 
malignant  kind.  Over  his  dark  and  scowling  mind  gloomy  ideas  continually  brood. 
The  wounds  given  to  the  heart  by  ill-governed  passions  are  of  an  opprobrious 
nature,  and  must  be  stifled  in  secret.  III.  By  guilt.  If  beyond  being  misled  by 
folly  or  overcome  by  passion  a  man  be  conscious  of  having  committed  deeds  of 
injustice  or  cruelty,  deep  and  lasting  is  the  sting  which  is  sent  into  the  heart.  The 
voice  of  nature,  of  conscience,  and  of  God  wiU  make  itself  heard  within  him.  He 
will  become  despicable  in  his  own  sight.  Remorse  will  prey  the  deeper  on  the  bad 
man's  heart,  if  it  should  happen  that  there  was  a  period  in  his  life  when  he  was  a 
different  man.  Then  let  us  learn — 1.  To  give  the  most  serious  and  vigilant  atten- 
tion to  the  government  of  our  hearts.  2.  To  join  prayer  to  Almighty  God,  in 
addition  to  our  own  endeavours  of  guarding  and  governing  our  spirits.  3.  That 
the  great  God  hath  already  begun  to  punish  bad  men  for  their  sins  and  vices.  You 
see  His  hand  in  all  that  they  are  made  to  suffer  by  the  "  wounded  spirit."  He  has 
not  delayed  all  retribution  to  another  world.  Let  us  hold  fast  by  this  truth,  that 
every  man's  real  happiness  or  misery  is  made  by  the  appointment  of  the  Creator, 
to  depend  more  on  Himself,  and  on  the  proper  government  of  his  mind  and  heart, 
than  upon  any  external  thing.  {Hugh  Blair,  D.D.)  The  viisery,  causes,  and 
remedies  of  a  dejected  mind  : — Render  the  passage  thus  :  The  spirit  of  a  man  (of  a 
brave  man)  will  sustain  his  infirmity  ;  but  a  wounded  (dejected)  spirit,  who  shaU 
raise  it  up  ?  A  caution  is  intimated  against  yielding  too  far  to  any  misfortunes  or 
troubles  ;  against  letting  our  spirits  sink  or  our  courage  fail  us  in  our  day  of 
calamity.  A  vigorous  mind,  a  manly  spirit,  will  support  us  under  bodily  infirmities 
within,  or  cross  accidents  without.  The  subject  here  is  a  troubled  and  dejected 
mind.  I.  The  misery  of  it.  Not  a  wounded  conscience  only,  but  generally  a  mind 
wounded  by  grief  and  troubles.  All  manner  of  trouble  and  misery,  as  felt  by  the 
patient,  is  resolvable  into  pain  of  body  or  pain  of  mind ;  into  some  uneasy  sensa- 


470  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XTm. 

tions,  which  we  commonly  call  anguish.  What  an  advantage,  in  all  kinds  of 
uneasinesses,  to  have  a  mind  well  fortified  and  steeled  against  them.  Strength  of 
mind  and  fortitude  are  of  admirable  use  to  repel  uneasiness  and  pain,  and  to  pre- 
vent its  making  any  deep  and  durable  impressions.  The  spirit  of  a  man,  while  firm 
and  erect,  becomes  a  kind  of  armour  of  proof  against  either  inward  pains  or 
untoward  disasters.  When  the  spirit  sinks,  every  calamity  puts  on  the  blacker 
face,  and  every  pain  and  uneasiness  stings  to  the  quick,  and  is  much  increased 
with  galling  reflections  The  mind  is  haunted  with  dark  images.  The  man  sits 
down  and  indulges  his  sorrow,  hugs  his  grief,  abandons  himself  to  impatience,  bitter 
wailing,  and  despair,  refusing  to  be  comforted.  II.  The  causes  which  lead  to  this 
MELiiNCHOLY  EXTBEMiTT.  The  occasional  and  immediate  causes  of  this  malady  are 
either  from  without  or  from  within.  The  outward  calamities  of  life  are  many  and 
various.  A  second  cause  is  the  sense  of  some  grievous  sin  lying  hard  upon  the 
conscience.  The  greatest  calamity  that  can  be  is  an  ill-spent  life.  There  is  such 
a  thing  as  reUgious  melancholy — bodily  indisposition,  which  is  frequently  the 
sole  cause  of  a  broken,  dejected  mind.  III.  Peescbibe  some  peopee  eemedies  or 
PRESEEVATivEs.  Natural  courage,  inborn  strength  of  mind,  is  one  of  the  best  pre- 
servatives. Bule  1.  Trust  in  God  and  live  a  life  conformable  to  the  doctrine  of 
Christ.  2.  Sit  as  loose  as  possible  to  the  world ;  weave  and  disentangle  the  affec- 
tions from  temporal  things.  If  we  can  be  content  with  a  moderate  share  of 
temporal  prosperity,  we  shall  be  the  less  concerned  at  disappointments,  and  of  con- 
sequence the  better  prepared  to  meet  afflictions  and  to  bear  up  under  them.  Other 
inferior  rules  are,  agreeable  company ;  good  books ;  employment  in  an  honest 
calling  ;  innocent  diversions,  and  the  like.  Rely  rather  upon  faith,  a  good  life,  and 
a  good  conscience  consequent  thereon  ;  together  with  fixed  and  constant  medita- 
tions upon  the  joys  of  a  life  to  come.  If  ye  do  these  things  ye  can  never  fail.  (D. 
Waterland,  D.D.)  A  wounded  spirit : — I.  What  is  meant  by  "  A  wounded  spibit  "  ? 
A  guilty  and  self-condemning  conscience  arising  both  from  a  sense  of  sin  and  of 
the  danger  which  a  man  by  sinning  has  brought  himself  into.  II.  Why  is  a 
wounded  spibit  so  GEiEvous  AND  uNsuppoETABLE  ?  1.  It  imports  a  sense  of  sin  in 
offending  against  the  light  and  conviction  of  our  own  minds.  2.  In  offending 
against  the  majesty  of  a  gracious  and  good  God.  3.  A  sense  of  danger  in  provoking 
the  justice  of  an  angry  and  avenging  God.  The  spirits  of  men  are  often  wounded, 
and  their  thoughts  afflicted,  at  a  sense  of  the  present  shame  and  sufferings  which 
theu'  evil  courses  bring  upon  them.  The  following  are  crimes  which,  in  their  own 
nature  are  attended  with  uneasy  and  stinging  reflections  :  (1)  Public  offences 
against  government  and  the  common  interests  and  good  of  society.  (2)  When  the 
wrong-doer  is  under  any  obligations  of  love,  fidelity,  or  obedience  to  those  whom 
he  injures.  III.  Though  the  condition  of  such  a  peeson  is  so  deplobable,  it  is 
NOT  hopeless  ob  despeeate.  By  the  grace  of  God  means  are  left  for  his  recovery. 
That  faith  which,  according  to  the  terms  of  the  gospel,  justifies  a  sinner,  and  is 
reckoned  unto  him  for  righteousness,  imports  a  firm  belief  that  Jesus  was  the 
Messiah,  the  Saviour  of  the  world,  and  that  His  sUperings  and  death  upon  the  Cross 
were  a  true  and  proper  expiatory  sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world.  Let  us 
apply  the  benefits  of  that  general  expiation  Christ  made  for  the  sins  of  mankind 
to  our  particular  persons.     {R.  Fiddes,  D.D.)         Sitstainitig  infirmity  : — I.  A  sound 

BPIBIT  is  what  will  BELIEVE    UNDEE    OUTWAED    INFIEMITIES  AND  TROUBLES.       1.    When 

may  the  spirit  of  a  man  be  said  to  be  sound  ?  When  it  is  renewed  and  sanctified 
by  the  Spirit  of  God.  A  holy  soul  is  a  healthful  one.  There  is  a  natural  soundness 
or  stoutness  of  spirit  which  is  not  easily  discouraged  or  broken  by  external  trouble 
or  pain.  There  is  a  moral  soundness  of  spirit  when  enlightened  conscience  hath 
nothing  gross  to  upbraid  a  man  withal.  A  sound  spirit  is  one  pardoned  through 
the  blood  of  Jesus,  and  through  Him  restored  to  the  favour  of  God.  It  is  in  some 
measure  comforted  with  a  sense  of  God's  love,  and  its  own  safety  for  eternity. 
2.  Show  that  every  man  has  his  infirmities.  "  Man  is  born  to  trouble  as  the  sparks 
fly  upward."  "Through  much  tribulation  we  must  enter  the  kingdom."  The 
term  "  infirmity"  denotes  what  afflictions  are,  both  in  their  nature  and  tendency, 
viz.,  weakening  things.  And  man  has  no  ability  to  prevent  their  coming,  nor  to 
free  himself  from  them  when  they  come.  3.  How  far  will  a  sound  spirit  sustain 
under  these  ?  The  man  does  not  hereby  become  insensible.  But  a  sound  spirit 
will  be  a  praying  one ;  it  will  not  let  go  its  hope  in  God  of  a  blessed  issue,  either  in 
this  world  or  a  better  ;  it  will  keep  something  of  cheerfulness.  This  sound  spirit 
is  not  alone ;  it  has  the  Spirit  of  God  with  it.  And  this  Spirit  proves  a  comforter 
and  helper,  by  leading  the  afflicted  Christian  into  an  acquaintance  with  what  is 


CHAP,  xvra.]  PROVERBS.  471 

wi'itten  in  the  Word,  and  what  has  been  wrought  within  himself.     II.  A  wounded 

SPIRIT  IS  ITSELF  A  BURDEN,  UNDER  WHICH  THERE  IS  NO  STANDING  WITHOUT  RELIEF  GIVEN 

FROM  HEAVEN.  1.  The  Spirit  or  soul  in  man  may  be  wounded.  There  is  such  a 
thing  as  a  grieved  soul  as  well  as  a  pained  body.  There  is  a  bitterness  peculiar  to 
the  heart  which  can  only  be  understood  by  God  and  itself.  A  wounded  spirit  is 
one  filled  with  anguish  from  a  sense  of  sin.  2.  When,  and  in  whom,  may  the 
spirit  be  wounded.  Either  before  conversion  or  after.  The  soul  of  the  sinner  is 
wounded  that  Christ  may  be  rendered  precious  and  amiable  to  it,  and  bring  it  to 
close  with  Him  upon  His  own  terms  ;  that  it  might  be  filled  with  a  greater  hatred 
of  sin  ;  that,  when  it  is  healed,  it  may  be  the  more  enlarged  in  thankfulness  towards 
its  gracious  God.  The  distress  of  a  wounded  spirit  will  for  ever  be  an  argument  of 
love  to  God  and  Christ,  and  it  will  put  others  upon  considering  what  they  are  liable 
to  suffer  on  account  of  sin  in  this  world,  besides  the  death  which  is  the  wages  of  it 
in  another.  The  spirit  is  wounded  in  such  as  God  is  about  to  recover  to  Himself,  to 
make  and  keep  them  humble  all  their  days.  By  the  distress  that  goes  before  recover- 
ing grace  God  will  encourage  His  people's  trust  in  Him  in  after-trials.  What  com- 
passion is  due  to  such  as  know  by  experience  the  insupportable  burden  of  a  wounded 
spirit  I  (D.  Wilcox.)  A  wounded  spirit : — Writing  of  General  Grant's  last  days, 
General  Badeau  says:  "The  physicians  constantly  declared  that  although  the 
cancer  was  making  irresistible  advance,  it  was  not  the  cancer  that  produced  the 
exhaustion  and  nervousness  which,  unless  arrested,  would  bring  about  death  very 
soon.  It  was  only  too  plain  that  the  mental,  moral  disease  was  kilhng  Grant — it 
was  the  blow  which  had  struck  him  to  the  dust,  and  humiliated  him  before  the 
world,  from  which  he  could  not  recover.  He  who  was  thought  so  stolid,  so  strong, 
so  undemonstrative,  was  dying  for  a  sentiment — because  of  the  injury  to  his  fame, 
the  aspersions  on  his  honour."  {J.  F.  B.  Tinling)  The  torture  of  a  wounded 
conscience : — As  long  as  Adam  maintained  a  conscience  pure  towards  God,  he  was 
happy ;  but  having  once  taken  the  forbidden  fruit,  he  tarried  a  while  there,  but 
took  no  contentment  therein ;  the  sun  did  shine  as  bright,  the  rivers  ran  as  clear  as 
ever  they  did,  birds  sang  as  sweetly,  beasts  played  as  pleasantly,  flowers  smelt  as 
fragrant,  herbs  grew  as  fresh,  fruits  flourished  as  fair ;  no  punctilio  of  pleasure  was 
either  altered  or  abated  ;  the  objects  were  the  same,  but  Adam's  eyes  were  other- 
wise. Such  is  the  torture  of  a  wounded  conscience,  that  it  is  able  to  unparadise 
paradise,  and  the  burthen  thereof  so  insupportable,  that  it  is  able  to  quell  the 
courage  and  crush  the  shoulders  of  the  hugest  Hercules,  of  the  mightiest  man  upon 
the  face  of  the  earth :  who  can  bear  it  ?  [J.  Spencer)  Grievances  of  the  spirit : — 
These  are  of  all  others  most  heavy  and  grievous  to  be  borne  ;  these  make  sore  the 
shoulders  which  should  sustain  the  other  infirmities.  If  the  spirit  be  wounded  by 
the  disturbance  of  the  reason,  dejection  under  the  trouble,  whatever  it  is,  and 
despair  of  relief ;  if  the  spirit  be  wounded  by  the  amazing  apprehensions  of  God's 
wrath  for  sin,  and  the  fearful  expectations  of  judgment  and  fiery  indignation,  who 
can  bear  this  ?  Wounded  spirits  cannot  help  themselves,  nor  do  others  know  how 
to  help  them.  It  is  therefore  wisdom  to  keep  conscience  void  of  offence.  {Matthew 
Henry.) 

Vers.  15,  16.  The  heart  of  the  prudent  getteth  knowledge. — The  attainment  of 
knowledge  and  the  power  of  kindness  : — I.  The  attainment  of  knowledge.  "The 
heart  of  the  prudent  getteth  knowledge,"  &c.  It  is  suggested  by  the  words  that  the 
attainment  of  knowledge  requires  two  things.  1.  A  heart  for  it.  "  The  heart  of 
the  prudent."  There  must,  at  least,  be  in  every  "heart,"  a  consciousness  of  its 
need.  The  opinionated,  self-sufficient  man,  who  is  wise  in  his  own  conceit,  will 
never  get  knowledge.  Though  the  sun  of  knowledge  shine  around  him,  its  beams 
cannot  enter  him.  All  the  shutters  of  his  mental  house  are  so  closed  by  self- 
Bufliciency  that  no  rays  can  enter.  A  sense  of  ignorance  is  the  first  step  to  the 
attainment  of  knowledge.  2.  An  effort  for  it.  "  The  ear  of  the  wise  seeketh  know- 
ledge." The  ear  is  one  of  the  great  inlets.  Wisdom  does  not  come  into  the  soul 
unless  it  is  searched  for  as  a  "  hidden  treasure."  Whilst  all  this  is  true  of  general 
knowledge,  it  is  especially  true  of  Divine  knowledge.  II.  The  power  of  kindness. 
"A  man's  gift  maketh  room  for  him  and  bringeth  him  before  great  men."  There 
are  two  kinds  of  gifts,  the  gift  of  selfishness  and  the  gift  of  kindness.  A  man 
sometimes  bestows  a  favour  on  another  in  order  to  get  back  something  of  a  higher 
value.  This  gift  is  a  bribe.  The  gift  of  kindness  is  the  true  gift  and  the  real 
power.  It  makes  room  for  the  giver  in  the  heart  of  the  receiver,  and  it  bringeth  him 
before  truly  great  men.    Great  men  recognise  and  honour  the  generous.    1.  Kind- 


472  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvm. 

ness  is  the  mightiest  power.  2.  Kindness  is  the  Divinest  power.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
A  man's  gift  maketh  room  for  him. — Giving :  a  study  in  Oriental  manners  : — In 
the  East  the  custom  of  giving  gifts  affects  all  the  relationships  of  life — domestic, 
social,  commercial,  political,  and  religious.  It  is  difficult  in  lands  of  law-defended 
liberty,  democratic  representation,  and  freedom  of  the  press  to  realise  how  much  is 
awanting  where  these  are  absent,  and  how  great  an  importance  comes  to  be 
attached  to  the  means  and  resources  by  which,  when  right  cannot  be  legally 
enforced,  promises  may  nevertheless  obtain  fulfilment,  the  indifferent  be  made 
interested,  the  alienated  reconciled,  and  the  powerful  and  rich  become  considerate 
and  gracious.  It  is  in  this  connection  that  the  giving  and  receiving  of  gifts  plays  a 
prominent  part.  Amid  much  variety  as  to  the  occasions  of  giving,  and  the 
character  of  the  things  given,  there  are  two  principal  uses.  The  first  and  funda- 
mental meaning  is  affectionate  and  sincere,  and  owes  its  popularity  to  the  warm  and 
impulsive  feelings  of  the  people  within  a  certain  area.  It  is  the  expression  and 
proof  of  the  sincerity  of  love  (2  Cor.  viii.  8).  The  second  is  utilitarian.  "A 
man's  gift  maketh  room  for  him."  The  abounding  hypocrisy  that  surrounds  this 
second  meaning  is  a  tribute  to  the  reahty  and  strength  of  the  original  affectionate 
meaning  thus  simulated.  For  illustration  we  must  turn  to  the  circumstances  in 
Oriental  life  that  make  gift-giving  popular  and  expedient.  To  the  visitor  to  the 
East,  beset  on  all  hands  by  demands  for  backshish,  "  a  present,"  the  principle  of 
gift-giving  seems  to  be  the  summary  of  Oriental  life  and  all  its  institutions. 
I.  Family  life.  Here  the  giving  of  gifts  is  pleasant  and  unconstrained  :  the  proof 
of  the  abundance  rather  than  merely  the  sincerity  of  love.  Special  occasions  are 
birth,  betrothal,  marriage,  recovery  from  sickness,  and  return  of  a  member  of  the 
family  from  a  journey.  Money  is  freely  given  and  lent,  the  refusal  of  it  being  con- 
sidered shameful,  and  causing  alienation  not  easily  forgotten.  A  favourite  gift  is 
that  of  jewellery  or  clothing  taken  from  the  person  and  given  to  a  friend  to  be  a 
constant  memorial  of  the  absent,  and  a  proof  that  he  will  be  treasured  in  the  heart 
even  as  his  body  is  now  encased  in  the  clothes  of  his  friend.  II.  Social  life. 
Public  life  is  conducted,  as  far  as  possible,  on  family  lines.  The  family  is  not 
merely  an  inner  circle  of  affectionate  devotion  ;  it  is  also  a  guild  of  common 
interests.  A  daughter  is,  if  possible,  married  among  her  relatives.  A  father 
putting  his  son  in  a  shop  or  office  says  to  the  manager,  "  He  is  your  son,"  implying 
complete  authority  over  him  and  regard  also  for  his  welfare.  The  Oriental  laws  of 
neighbourhood  teaching  sympathy,  toleration,  and  helpfulness  spring  from  the 
family.  The  conditions  of  industrial  life  and  the  patriarchal  form  of  government 
have  further  tended  to  develop  the  habit  of  giving  gifts,  making  an  affectionate  act 
the  means  of  attaining  mercenary  ends,  and  leading  the  way  to  bribery,  intrigue, 
and  dishonesty.  The  Oriental  landowner  has  always  paid  his  labourers  in  kind — 
giving  them  a  certain  portion  of  the  produce.  It  is  a  gift  out  of  what  is  his 
personal  estate.  The  sheikh  or  emir  of  the  leading  family  further  protected  the 
peasantry  from  the  marauding  Bedouin,  "  the  children  of  the  East,"  and  presents 
given  to  him  were  a  grateful  acknowledgment  of  protection  and  prosperity.  Such 
gifts,  putting  the  receiver  in  the  position  of  a  benefactor,  easily  took  the  form  of 
blackmail,  and  the  omission  of  them  was  a  grave  discourtesy.  Thus  David  regarded 
Nabal  after  having  protected  his  shepherds.  Starting  from  the  simple  conditions  of 
pastoral  and  industrial  life,  the  habit  became  resorted  to  wherever  dignity  had  to 
be  flattered  or  favourable  intervention  was  needed.  To  the  Oriental  litigant  the 
chief  thing  is  to  obtain  the  judge's  personal  favour,  and  a  present  to  him  seems  a 
more  direct  and  effective  outlay  than  feeing  counsel  and  collecting  witnesses.  Even 
when  the  judge  is  known  to  be  intelligent  and  upright,  Orientals  pay  respect  and 
send  presents  to  the  personal  friends  of  the  judge  in  order  that  they  may  use  their 
influence  with  him.  Thus,  even  under  the  rule  of  David,  Absalom  could  spread 
sedition  and  discontent  by  declaring  how  he  would  revolutionise  the  administration 
of  the  land.  Absolute  freedom  from  this  taint  was  a  chief  item  in  Samuel's 
testimony  as  to  his  own  official  life.  III.  Eeligion.  The  claims  of  religion  are  much 
more  intimately  interwoven  with  common  affairs  in  the  East  than  they  are  in  the 
West,  There  is  nothing  of  Sunday  segregation.  All  business  prosperity  is  publicly 
declared  to  be  from  God,  whatever  may  be  the  means  taken  to  obtain  it.  Two 
sentences  especially  are  often  seen  written  over  shop  doors,  "  Prosperity  is  in  God's 
hand,"  and  "  This  is  also  from  the  grace  of  my  Lord."  Street  beggars  recognise 
this,  and  pause  for  a  gift  when  they  see  a  purchase  being  effected.  Something  is 
due  to  them  as  a  share  of  the  profits  from  the  same  Lord.  A  beggar  at  the  door 
does  not  plead  his  poverty  or  attempt  to  explain  hi^  circumstances,  but  pronounces 


CHAP.  XVIII.]  PROVERBS.  473 

the  name  of  God,  and  says,  "  I  am  a  guest  at  your  door  I "  and  if  the  door  is  not 
opened  calls  aloud,  "  You  are  also  servants !  "  The  beggar  is  seldom  dismissed 
from  the  door  with  the  declaration  that  there  is  nothing  for  him.  He  is  told,  "  God 
will  give  you."  Similarly,  the  constant  cry  at  the  side  of  the  street  is,  "  God  will 
bless  you  "  ;  "  God  will  direct  your  path  "  ;  "  God  will  repay  it."  The  custom  of  giving 
gifts  in  its  best  and  most  sincere  applications  thus  has  its  origin  in  duty  to  the 
family  and  indebtedness  to  God.  Its  adaptation  to  more  social  and  public  relation- 
ships is  the  result  of  these  two.  Indifference  to  family  honour  and  the  claims  of 
religion  makes  the  "  prof  ane  person  "  or  "fool"  of  the  Bible.  The  unjust  judge 
(Luke  xviii.  1-8)  is  sharply  silhouetted  by  the  omission  of  these  two  principal 
regards.  Orientally  there  was  no  third  position  such  as  that  of  an  official  acting 
justly  for  the  sake  of  justice,  although  atheistical  and  immoral  in  personal  life. 
(G.  M.  Mackie,  M.A.) 

Ver.  17.  He  that  is  first  In  his  own  caase  Beemeth  just. — The  Mat  on  the  side  of 
telf: — This  proverb  touches  human  life  at  many  points,  and  human  beings  feel  it 
touching  them.  It  accords  with  common  experience.  It  is  true  to  nature — nature 
fallen  and  distorted.  It  does  not  apply  to  humanity  in  innocence.  It  has  no  bear- 
ing on  the  new  nature  in  a  converted  man.  This  Scripture  reveals  a  crook  in  the 
creature  that  God  made  upright.  Self-love  is  the  twist  in  the  heart  within,  and 
self-interest  is  the  side  to  which  the  variation  from  righteousness  steadily  tend^. 
A  man's  interest  is  touched  by  the  word  or  deed  of  another  ;  forthwith  he  persuades 
himself  that  what  is  against  his  own  wish  is  also  against  righteousness,  and  argues 
accordingly.  He  states  his  own  case,  but  he  leans  over  to  one  side,  and  sees  every- 
thing in  a  distorted  form.  His  case  is  both  a  sin  and  a  blunder.  In  the  statement 
of  your  case  do  you  permit  a  selfish  desire  for  victory  to  turn  your  tongue  asid» 
from  the  straight  line  of  truth?  There  is  room  for  improvement  here,  and  improve- 
ment here  would  tell  upon  the  world.  If  a  man  can  detect  exaggerations  on  one 
side  and  concealments  on  the  other,  amounting  to  untruthfulness  in  their  general 
effect,  it  shows  that  the  fear  of  God  was  not  before  the  eyes  of  the  witness  when  he 
omitted  his  evidence.  To  walk  with  God  in  the  regeneration  is  the  short  and  sure 
way  to  rigid  truth  in  all  your  intercourse  with  men.  The  adversary  will  find 
nothing  if  a  greater  than  he  has  been  there  before  him.    {W.  Arnot,  D.D.) 

Ver.  19.  A  brother  offended  is  harder  to  be  won  than  a  strong  city. — Physical 
power  and  moral  power  : — In  the  early  life  of  men  and  communities,  the  power  most 
admired  is  physical  power.  Those  who  can  conquer  in  the  material  world  are  the 
heroes  of  the  young.  Later,  men  thick  more  of  intellectual  achievements.  The 
greatest  in  the  schools  is  the  greatest  in  the  world.  In  the  maturest  stage  of  life  we 
are  content  with  less  conspicuous  feats  ;  for  we  see  that  the  less  may  be  greater. 
We  deem  it  greater  to  conquer  in  the  realm  of  moral  life  than  in  the  field  of  nature  or 
the  area  of  intellect.  The  conqueror  in  the  field  of  battle  may  be  great,  but  the 
conqueror  of  the  hearts  of  men  is  greater.  A  brother  offended  may  be  harder  to 
win  than  the  bars  of  a  castle,  but  so  much  the  nobler  is  the  victory.  To  win  men 
is  a  nobler  achievement  than  the  defeat  of  men's  bodies  or  the  confounding  of  their 
minds.  {Bp.  Boyd  Carpenter.)  Discords  among  brethren : — No  discords  are 
like  those  of  brethren ;  the  nearer  the  union,  the  greater  the  separation  upon  a 
breach  ;  for  natural  ties  being  stronger  than  artificial,  when  they  are  once  broken, 
they  are  hardly  made  up  again,  as  seams  when  they  are  ripped  may  be  sown 
again ;  but  rents  in  the  whole  cloth  are  not  so  easily  remedied.      [H.  G.  Salter.) 

Ver.  21.  Death  and  life  are  in  the  power  of  the  tongue. — The  power  of 
speech : — Of  all  the  powers  that  man  possesses  there  is  scarcely  any  more 
awful  than  the  power  of  speech.  It  is  a  God-like  power.  Human  speech  is 
no  mere  evolution  from  the  cry  of  the  animals.  Speech  became  possible  on  the 
earth  only  when  on  the  earth  there  appeared  one  into  whom  the  Divine  Spirit  had 
breathed  the  breath  of  life,  and  made  him  a  living  soul.  It  is  because  the  origin 
of  speech  is  Divine  that  words  have  such  awful  power.  Consider  what  a  word  is. 
From  the  materialist's  point  of  view,  it  is  but  a  slight  agitation  of  the  particles  of 
air  around  us.  Nothing  feebler,  nothing  more  evanescent,  can  be  conceived.  Yet 
that  word  can  make  or  mar  a  human  life  ;  that  word  can  fill  a  home  with  gladness 
or  despair.  I.  Death  is  in  the  power  of  the  tongue.  How  significant  it  is  of  the 
fallen  condition  of  our  race  that  death  should  here  be  put  first  1  To  prove  the  truth 
of  our  text,  let  us  take  some  illustrations  of  the  death-dealing  power  of  the  tongue. 


474  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvm. 

1.  Take  the  deadly  power  of  careless,  vain,  frivolous  words.  They  seem  harmless. 
How  much  harm  is  done  by  the  light  and  careless  conversation  even  of  Christian 
people  about  religion  !  How  much  damage  is  done  by  the  far  too  common  habit  of 
jesting  with  Scripture  !  Such  a  habit  induces  irreverence,  and  lays  the  foundation 
for  irreligion.  2.  Take  the  deadly  power  of  mocking  words.  A  gibe,  a  sneer,  cuts 
many  a  man  like  a  knife.  By  the  mocking  words  of  companions  many  a  soul  who 
has  just  escaped  has  been  forced  back  into  the  bondage  of  sin,  and  driven  to  a 
Christless  grave.  3.  As  a  graver  illustration  of  the  same  thing,  take  the  power  of 
false  words.  "While  open  and  deliberate  lying  is  reprobated  by  all,  many  have  not  a 
sufficient  sense  of  the  mischief  wrought  by  falsehood  and  insincerity  of  speech. 
Every  lie  begets  other  lies ;  and  from  the  thoughtless  exaggerations  of  conversation 
to  the  deliberate  perjury,  which  has  in  our  day  become  so  common  in  our  law 
courts,  the  descent  is  quick  and  easy.  4.  A  still  more  serious  illustration  of  the 
death-dealing  power  of  the  tongue  is  seen  in  connection  with  slander.  Says 
Eobertson,  of  Brighton,  in  a  great  sermon  upon  the  tongue,  "  In  the  drop  of  poison 
which  distils  from  the  sting  of  the  smallest  insect,  or  the  spikes  of  the  nettle  leaf, 
there  is  concentrated  the  quintessence  of  a  poison  so  subtle  that  the  microscope 
cannot  distinguish  it,  yet  so  virulent  that  it  can  inflame  the  blood,  irritate  the 
whole  system,  and  convert  night  and  day  into  a  restless  misery.  So  it  is  in  the 
power  of  slanderous  words  to  inflame  hearts,  to  fever  human  existence,  to  poison 
human  society  at  the  fountain  springs  of  life."  5.  But  the  supreme  illustration  of 
the  death-dealing  power  of  the  tongue  is  found  in  indecent  words.  The  man  of 
indecent  speech  may  be  compared  with  the  murderer.  The  one  destroys  the  body, 
the  other  destroys  the  soul.  If  we  would  execrate  the  man  who  in  the  time  of 
pestilence  would  smear  the  walls  of  a  city  with  plague-poison,  what  shall  we  say  of 
the  man  who  defiles  the  temple  of  the  soul  with  his  indecent  speech  ?  To  thou- 
sands and  tens  of  thousands  indecent  speech  is  the  revelation  of  a  world  of  wicked- 
ness previously  unknown.  By  it  the  imagination  is  defiled,  the  corrupt  nature  set 
on  fire,  the  barriers  that  guard  purity  broken  down,  and  the  soul  led  to  absolute 
ruin.  II.  Life  is  in  the  power  of  the  tongue.  When  the  tongue  is  consecrated, 
■when  it  is  guided  and  controlled  by  a  heart  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  it  becomes  a 
mighty  power  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil.  1.  Grave  and  gracious  speech 
takes  the  place  of  careless,  light,  and  frivolous  speech.  Our  words  lead  seekers  to 
Christ,  in  Him  to  find  eternal  life.  2.  Comforting  and  encouraging  words  take  the 
place  of  mocking  words.  The  power  of  words  of  comfort  to  encourage  those  who 
are  sorrowing  and  desponding  is  simply  marvellous.  They  literally  bring  life  to 
the  soul.  3.  Kind  words  take  the  place  of  cruel  words.  Every  kind  word  that  is 
uttered  makes  this  world  more  like  heaven.  For  where  slander  begets  hate,  kind- 
ness begets  love.  4.  True  words  go  forth  to  do  battle  against  the  falsehoods  of 
which  the  earth  is  full.  Every  true  word  that  is  spoken  binds  human  society  more 
closely  together,  and  makes  the  burden  of  life  easier  to  bear.  5.  And  then  pure 
words  go  forth  to  enlighten  and  purify  and  cleanse  lives  darkened  and  debased  and 
defiled  by  the  evils  of  the  world.  Before  the  man  of  pure  speech  the  indecent  man 
hides  himself  Purity  is  like  the  sunlight.  When  it  is  let  in  upon  the  mind  the 
evil  and  unclean  things  which  dwell  there  flee,  as  noisome  creatures  under  a  stone 
flee  from  the  light  of  day.  But  what  is  true  of  the  tongue  is  true  also  of  the  pen. 
Literature  to-day  has  a  tremendous  power.  And  who  doubts  that  in  countless 
instances  it  is  a  power  making  for  death?  (1)  Who  can  estimate  the  damage  done 
by  the  innumerable  frivolous  and  absolutely  worthless  books  which  are  issued  from 
the  press?  Even  where  they  are  not  positively  harmful,  they  waste  time.  (2)  And 
if  these  are  hurtful,  how  much  more  so  are  the  false  and  misleading  books  which 
are  issued  in  such  numbers  in  our  day  1  (3)  But  the  death-dealing  power  of  the 
press  is  seen  in  nothing  so  dreadfully  as  in  its  issue  of  impure  and  indecent  litera- 
ture. But  if  the  press  has  such  power,  and  if  authors  are  using  this  power  for 
evil,  it  becomes  all  the  more  necessary  that  we  should  use  it  for  good.  A  good 
book  entering  a  house  may  prevent  the  entrance  of  a  bad  book.  A  good  book 
following  a  bad  book  may  largely  neutralise  the  mischief  which  the  first  has 
done.  (G.  H.  C.  Macgregor,  M.A.)  The  power  of  the  tongue  : — The  faculty 
of  speech  is  one  of  the  very  highest  faculties  with  which  we  have  been 
endowed.  Great  is  its  value  to  man  as  an  intelligent  and  social  being,  and 
great  is  the  weight  of  responsibility  which  is  implied  by  the  impression  of  it.  Yet 
the  Hebrew  sage  appears  to  have  exceeded  the  fair  limit  allowable  even  to  hyperbole 
when  he  says,  "  Death  and  life  are  in  the  power  of  the  tongue."  Yet  there  is 
nothing  but  what  is  strictly  accurate  in  this  sentence.     Literally  the  words  are. 


CHAP,  xvm.]  PROVERBS.  475 

*'  Death  and  life  are  in  the  hand  of  the  tongue."  The  author  represents  this  faculty 
as  a  living  thing — as  the  arbiter  of  good  and  ill,  as  the  disposer  of  human  fortune. 
I.  See  the  truth  of  the  text  in  its  application  to  the  present  life.  As  a 
maxim  of  common  prudence  the  words  deserve  attention.  There  are  some  persons 
who  never  speak  well  of  others.  And  fatal  often  is  their  cruel  activity.  Eeverse 
the  picture,  and  see  happiness  smiling  about  the  man  who  speaks  of  others  in  the 
language  of  justice,  and  gentleness,  and  charity.  Wherever  he  can  he  will  bear  his 
testimony  to  the  integrity  and  good  character  of  others.  But  our  proverb  does  not 
merely  apply  to  extreme  cases,  such  as  these.  When  a  man  speaks  in  mere 
thoughtlessness,  there  may  be  those  hearing  him  on  whom  his  very  random  words 
may  be  falling  as  a  balm,  or  as  a  poison  If  we  set  any  value  upon  the  happiness 
and  comfort  of  others,  it  becomes  us  to  set  a  watch  over  our  mouth.  What  we  say  is 
a  most  important  influence  on  our  own  condition  in  this  world,  because  our  con- 
dition is  greatly  affected  by  what  others  think  of  us,  and  we  know  full  well  that  it 
is  not  easy  to  struggle  against  the  difficulties  created  by  a  bad  character.  The 
estimation  in  which  we  are  held  is  very  greatly  affected  by  our  words.     II.  See  the 

TRUTH  OF  THE  TEXT  IN  ITS    BEARING    UPON  OUR    SPIRITUAL  CONDITION.       Spiritual  death 

is  the  frequent  and  melancholy  effect  of  the  impious  efforts  of  some  men's  tongues. 
But  life,  too,  is  in  the  power  of  the  tongue.  The  cause  of  God  has  never  been  with- 
out its  noble  band  of  witnesses.  Important,  however,  as  may  be  the  effects  of  what 
we  say  on  others,  they  cannot  be  greater  than  they  are  upon  ourselves.  A  word 
may  determine  our  condition  for  ever.  Prayers,  praises,  and  holy  conversation, 
cannot  be  in  vain — nor  can  curses,  and  railing,  and  idle  talk,  be  in  vain.  It  is 
greatly  to  be  feared  that  we  may  find  much  that  is  amiss  in  ourselves,  when  we 
press  our  consciences  with  the  question.  Have  we  acted  as  those  who  believed 
that  death  and  life  are  in  the  power  of  the  tongue  ?  {J.  G.  Bowling,  M.A.)  The 
tongue,  or  well-speaking : — As  in  the  physical,  so  in  the  moral,  the  tongue  is  the 
criterion  of  the  hidden  and  eternal  man.  Self-government  alone  can  conform  men 
to  Christ,  and  there  is  no  self-government  where  the  tongue  is  untamed.  I.  The 
TONGUE  IS  A  GREAT  BLESSING.  The  gift  of  spcech  is  &  Valuable  boon.  The  animal 
creation  have  it  not.  In  man's  case,  mind  utters  itself  through  matter.  Spirit 
sipeaks  through  clay.  Blessed  boon,  the  gift  of  speech ! — the  richest  melody  of 
creation,  the  music  of  nature,  the  life  of  poetry,  the  vehicle  of  common  sense,  the 
incarnation  of  the  soul's  contemplations.  II.  The  tongue  is  the  servant  of  the 
HEART.  Strictly,  the  tongue  never  speaks  at  random.  The  tongue  is  the  criterion 
of  the  moral  man.  A  diseased  or  healthy  heart  is  thereby  truthfully  advertised. 
While  the  mind  is  the  standard  of  the  man,  the  tongue  is  the  standard  of  the  mind. 
The  apostle  James  regarded  a  wholesome  tongue  in  so  important  a  Ught  that  he 
came  to  the  conclusion,  "  if  any  man  offend  not  in  word,  the  same  is  a  perfect  man, 
and  able  also  to  bridle  the  whole  body."  With  him  it  involved  such  mortification 
of  nature,  such  growth  in  goodness,  and  such  constant  self-government,  that  he 
regarded  the  man  who  had  mastered  his  lips  as  not  far  from  perfection.  Idle  words 
betray  a  mind  waste,  worthless,  and  uncultivated  ;  severe  words,  a  mind  savage 
and  malicious  ;  angry  words,  a  mind  set  on  fire  of  hell ;  whispering  words,  a  mind 
cast  in  the  mould  of  Judas ;  boasting  or  disparaging  words,  a  mind  stuffed  with 
self-conceit ;  false  and  deceitful  words,  a  mind  which  he  who  was  a  liar  from  the 
beginning  has  usurped  as  his  pleasure-ground.  Thus  our  daily  sayings  are  our 
daily  selves,  and  our  words  testify  our  inmost  thoughts.  III.  The  tongue  spoiled 
BY  SIN  IS  emphatically  THE  STRONGHOLD  OF  Satan.  No  member  of  the  body  has 
done  Satan  more  service  than  the  tongue.  Through  all  generations,  how  many  of 
the  best  and  most  useful  men  have  been  assailed  by  calumnies.  The  sensual 
tongues,  the  flattering  tongues,  the  sceptical  tongues  of  bad  men,  and  the  strife  of 
tongues  among  good  men,  have  shown  Satan  to  be  the  lord  of  language.  The 
tongue  is  God's  organ,  but  beware  lest  the  devil  play  upon  it  till  in  death  it  cyphers 
and  is  heard  no  more.  IV.  The  tongue  can  only  be  cured  by  the  habitual  con- 
templation OF  Christ.  It  is  by  looking  unto  Him,  the  author  and  finisher  of  our 
faith,  by  closely  studying  His  excellences,  and  getting  full  of  His  Spirit,  that  we 
effectually  keep  the  door  of  our  lips  against  every  ungodly  and  unamiable  intruder. 
The  tongues  of  Christians  should  be  eminently  instructive.  They  should  also  be 
comforters.  And  they  should  be,  at  proper  times,  reprovers.  Keep  the  door  of  your 
lips.  Be  slow  to  speak,  slow  to  wrath.  {Mortlock  Daniel.)  The  use  and  abuse 
of  speech  : — Eeligion  requires  much  more  than  mere  outward  decency  or  refinement 
of  manners.  We  gather  from  Scripture  that  we  should  order  our  speech  with  a 
view  to  the  benefit  of  our  fellow-creatures  and  the  promotion  of  the  glory  of  God. 


476  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvm. 

We  must  have  regard  to  the  moral  character  and  consequences  of  our  speech. 
Many  people  abuse  the  power  of  the  tongue  so  incessantly  that  they  cease  to  be 
aware  what  a  depraved  state  of  heart  is  thereby  indicated.  Inasmuch  as  God  hears 
and  notes  our  sayings,  we  bring  good  or  evil  upon  our  souls  according  to  the  manner 
in  which  the  power  of  the  tongue  is  employed.  Speech  forms  part  of  character. 
There  is  an  inseparable  connection  between  what  we  say  and  what  we  think.  Each 
man's  conversation  has  a  distinct  personality  from  which  it  cannot  be  divested. 
Thought  awakens  feeling,  and  feeling  induces  utterance.  When  a  man  speaks  his 
character  passes  into  action.  By  our  words  our  own  immortal  future  is  affected, 
and  we  are  continually  exercising  an  influence  upon  the  welfare  of  our  neighbours. 
The  power  of  the  tongue  is  infinitely  reproductive.  Its  effects  are  incalculable. 
And  the  guidance  of  our  speech  is  a  matter  which  deeply  concerns  us.  Few  of  us 
can  look  back  upon  the  past  without  a  consciousness  of  having  offended  much  with 
the  tongue.  The  consideration  of  this  subject  shows  the  necessity  of  a  gracious 
renewal  of  the  heart.  (A.  B.  Whatton,  LL.B.)  The  tongue  an  agency  of  good  or 
g^il ; — The  tongue  is  a  member  which  God  has  used  to  produce  great  misery  or 
great  blessing.  As  soon  as  thought  is  embodied  in  language,  it  assumes  the  form 
of  a  living  engine.  I.  The  engine  of  counsel.  If  men  be  asked  for  counsel  or 
advice,  they  can  give  it  only  in  proportion  to  the  knowledge  they  possess.  Illustrate 
from  the  counsel  given  by  the  master  of  a  family  or  by  a  pubUc  teacher.  II.  The 
ENGINE  OF  SLANDER.  Slanderers  include  the  backbiter,  the  gossiper,  the  keen 
anatomist.  The  mind  of  man  is  by  nature  eminently  fitted  for  becoming  the  engine 
of  slander.  III.  As  the  engine  of  flatteby.  Men  are  more  ready  to  forgive  an 
ill  done  to  them  than  an  ill  said  of  them.  Men  often  entertain  a  higher  respect  for 
individuals  who  flatter  them  than  for  those  who  confer  upon  them  a  substantial 
benefit.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  religious  flattery.  Even  an  advance  in  spiritual 
attainments  may  engender  spiritual  pride.  Where  there  is  spiritual  prosperity  there 
is  a  risk  of  becoming  spiritually  vain.  (If.  Melvill.)  The  power  of  the  tongue  : — 
Intellectual,  spiritual,  social,  and  political  life  and  death  are  in  the  tongue.  Apply 
the  proverb — I.  To  the  Christla.n  in  general.  He  prays  with  the  tongue.  He 
confesses  with  the  tongue.  He  converses  with  the  tongue.  11.  To  the  preacher 
OF  the  gospel.  The  tongue  of  a  true  gospel  minister  produces  life  intentionally. 
The  tongue  of  a  true  gospel  minister  may  produce  death  incidentally.  III.  To  the 
Saviour  of  men.  This  is  true  of  Him  as  a  Teacher,  as  an  Advocate,  and  as  a  Judge. 
Learn  the  awful  responsibility  attached  to  speech.  Burnet  says  of  the  incomparable 
Leighton,  "  In  a  free  and  frequent  conversation  with  him  for  twenty-two  years,  I  never 
heard  him  utter  an  idle  word,  or  a  word  that  had  not  a  dh-ect  tendency  to  edifica- 
tion." {John  Sibree.)  Partisan  misrepresentation  : — Three  forms  of  misrepre- 
sentation may  be  indicated — 1.  The  suppression  of  facts  essential  to  a  right  estimate 
of  character.  This  is  perhaps  the  most  usual  and  most  dangerous  form  of  the 
evil.  "  No  lie  is  so  dangerous  as  a  half-truth."  2.  The  accepting  of  unverified 
rumour  for  fact.  He  who  does  this  becomes  an  indorser  of  the  rumour.  A  premium 
is  thereby  placed  upon  slander.  3.  Direct  fabrication  of  known  falsehood.  The 
evils  of  such  misrepresentation  are  lasting  and  obvious.  (1)  It  defiles  the  individual, 
blunts  his  sense  of  honour  and  justice,  numbs  his  conscience,  and  weakens  his  moral 
influence  over  his  fellows.  (2)  It  is  a  crime  against  one's  country.  (3)  It  is  a  sin 
before  God.  In  the  thunders  of  Sinai  it  was  condemned.  Christ  Himself  was  the 
victim  of  partisan  misrepresentation.     (Homiletic  Review.) 

Ver.  22.  WhOBO  flndeth  a  wife  findeth  a  good  thing,  and  obtaineth  favour  of  the 

Lord. — A  happy  viarriage : — At  the  outset  these  words  strike  two  thoughts  on  our 
attention.  1.  That  celibacy  is  not  the  best  mode  of  social  life.  Solomon  means 
to  say  that  it  is  a  good  thing  to  have  a  wife.  Even  in  the  state  of  innocence  it  was 
not  good  for  man  to  be  alone.  "  Celibate,"  says  Bishop  Taylor,  "  like  the  fly  in  the 
heart  of  an  apple,  dwells  in  perpetual  sweetness,  but  sits  alone,  and  is  confined  and 
dies  in  singularity;  but  marriage,  like  the  useful  bee,  builds  a  house  and  gathers 
sweetness  from  every  flower,  and  labours  and  unites  into  societies  and  republics,  and 
sends  out  colonies  and  feeds  the  world  with  delicacies,  and  obeys  their  king  and 
beeps  order,  and  exercises  many  virtues,  and  promotes  the  interests  of  mankind, 
and  is  that  state  of  good  things  to  which  God  hath  designed  the  present  constitution 
of  the  world."  2.  That  monogamy  is  the  true  marriage.  Solomon  does  not  say, 
"He  that  findeth  wives,"  but  "He  that  findeth  a  wife."  Though  Solomon  had 
many  wives,  he  nowhere  justified  plurality.  Duality  appears  everywhere,  and 
throughout  the   universe   is  necessary.     The   text  in  its  completeness  teaches — 


CHAP,  xvra.]  PROVERBS,  477 

1.  That  a  good  wife  is  a  good  thing.  Of  a  good  wife,  of  course,  the  writer  must  be 
supposed  to  speak,  for  a  bad  wife  is  a  bad  thing.  Manoah  found  a  good  thing  in 
his  wife  (Judg.  iii.  13).  The  patriarch  of  Uz  does  not  seem  to  have  found  a  good 
thing  in  his  (Job  ii.  9,  10).  "A  good  wife"  must  be — 1.  A  good  woman.  A 
woman  of  chaste  loves,  incorruptible  virtues,  and  godly  sympathies  and  aims. 

2.  A  suitable  companion.  A  good  woman  would  not  be  a  good  wife  to  all  men. 
There  must  be  a  mutual  fitness,  a  fitness  of  temperament,  taste,  habits,  culture, 
associations.  II.  A  good  wife  is  a  Divine  gift.  "  Obtaineth  favour  of  the  Lord." 
All  good  things  are  His  gifts.  Young  men,  be  cautious  of  your  choice  of  a  com- 
panion for  life.  "  When  Themistocles  was  to  marry  his  daughter,  there  were 
two  suitors,  the  one  rich  and  a  fool,  and  the  other  wise  but  not  rich ;  and  being 
asked  which  of  the  two  he  had  rather  his  daughter  should  have,  he  answered,  'I 
had  rather  she  should  marry  a  man  without  money  than  money  without  a  man.' 
The  best  of  ma,rriage  is  in  the  man  or  woman,  not  in  the  means  or  the  money." 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D. ) 

Ver.  24.  A  man  that  hath  friends  mast  shew  himself  friendly. — Duties  to  eqxials, 
neighbours,  friemls,  husband,  and  wife : — The  carriage  of  equals  to  one  another 
should  be  friendly  and  equal  on  both  sides.  Almost  every  relation  gives  love  and 
benevolence  a  new  cast  and  form,  and  calls  for  a  new  set  of  officers,  new  either  for 
kind,  measure,  or  manner.  I.  Duties  to  those  who  are  neighbours  in  situation 
TO  ONE  another.  So  far  as  consists  with  the  care  of  our  own  spiritual  preservation 
and  with  all  our  engagements  elsewhere,  the  sum  of  what  we  owe  to  our  neighbours 
is  to  be  as  kind,  useful,  and  beneficent  among  them  as  possible,  strictly  avoiding 
what  may  be  to  the  hurt  of  any.  To  be  courteous  on  all  occasions  of  converse,  and 
to  be  ready  to  do  and  return  those  good  offices  which  tend  to  mutual  protection  and 
accommodation.  We  should  strive  to  promote  virtue  and  goodness  in  the  places  of 
our  respective  residence.  II.  The  duties  of  friendship.  Friendship  arises  from 
a  voluntary  agreement  or  choice  of  persons,  in  other  respects  independent,  to  culti- 
vate a  familiar  correspondence  together.  Contracting  alliances  is  not  properly  a 
moral  obligation,  but  rather  a  matter  of  private  convenience  and  pleasure.  Let 
the  first  rule  be,  to  be  agreed  on  the  terms,  and  neither  to  raise  nor  take  up  expec- 
tations beyond  the  just  intention  and  import  of  them.  The  second  is  for  a  person  to 
use  his  utmost  endeavours  to  answer  the  confidence  he  has  suffered  another  to 
repose  in  him.  Fidelity  must  be  strictly  maintained.  A  third  duty  is  to  observe  a 
decency  and  respectfulness  in  our  own  language  and  behaviour  to  them,  together 
with  a  candid  interpretation  of  their  words  and  actions.  A  fourth  rule  is  that  all 
flattery  must  be  banished  from  friendship.  III.  The  duties  of  brothers  and 
sisters.  This  relation  is  formed  by  nature  itself.  Nature,  reason,  and  Scripture 
dictate  that  there  should  be  a  peculiar  affection,  with  very  kind  effects  of  it,  passing 
between  those  that  are  thus  related  together.  Brethren  should  be  specially  careful 
to  cultivate  peace  among  themselves.  IV.  The  duties  of  the  conjugal  relation. 
A  relation  which  comprehends  all  the  sweets  and  endearments  of  the  strictest  friend- 
ship. The  duties  are — 1.  Love  to  each  other's  persons.  2.  A  strict  care  about 
maintaining  peace.  3.  The  inviolable  preservation  of  conjugal  fidelity;  a  bond  of 
equal  obligation  on  the  husband  and  on  the  wife.  4.  Constant  effort  to  promote 
each  other's  interest  as  one  common  interest.  The  husband's  authority  should  be 
full  of  tenderness,  condescension,  and  forbearance.  (J.  Hubbard.)  Human  and 
Divine  friendship : — Here  is  a  comprehensive  doctrine  of  Christian  friendship. 
Friendship  is  a  principle  of  mutual  interchange  and  mutual  sacrifice.  There  can 
be  no  onesidedness,  no  selfish  engrossment,  no  taking  without  giving.  Selfishness 
is  the  death  of  social  reciprocity  and  sympathy,  as  it  is  of  piety  to  God.  Chris- 
tianity is  not  an  abstraction.  It  is  all  in  a  person  with  every  attribute  of  personal 
life  and  love.  About  all  our  other  friendships  there  are  some  easily-reached  and 
sorely-felt  limitations.  Turn,  then,  to  the  One  Friend.  His  friendship  never  fails 
or  disappoints  for  want  of  knowledge,  or  patience,  or  skill,  or  strength,  or  endur- 
ance. Putting  together  the  two  declarations  of  the  text — that  of  the  Christian 
lawfulness  and  mutual  blessing  of  human  friendship  with  that  of  the  supreme 
attraction  and  fidelity  of  the  Divine  friendship  of  the  Saviour,  we  have  the  ground 
for  two  or  three  great  practical  principles  of  almost  universal  application.  1.  The 
Christian  guidance  we  need  in  the  choice  of  friends  and  the  formation  of 
friendships.  2.  The  Christian  test  of  every  friendship  and  every  affection.  3.  The 
Christian  direction  how  to  hold  and  handle  these  friendships  so  that  they  shall  bear 
their  part  and  yield  their  fruit  in  the  ripening  of  character  and  the  eternal  life  of 


478  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvm. 

the  soul.  (Bjp.  Huntington,  D.D.)  Man's  clinging  Friend  : — I.  The  eela- 
TioNSHip  OF  A  BKOTHER.  A  brother  does  sometimes  stick  close.  The  ties  of  blood 
are  the  last  thing  which  prevents  us  from  sinking  into  selfish  atoms,  or  hardening 
into  mere  machines  for  minting  money.  Each  relationship  in  the  family  has  its 
own  blessed  meaning  and  duty.  Brothers  feel  that  their  descent  from  one  stock 
begets  mutual  alliances  and  obligations.  But  sometimes  the  links  of  brotherhood 
are  broken.  A  brother  in  blood  has  sometimes  been  unbrotherly  in  will  and  in 
deed.  II.  The  moke  than  brotherhood  of  a  bosom  friend.  Probably  the  majority 
of  men  have  friends  nearer  to  them  than  blood-relations.  Our  kin  are  not  always 
kind,  whereas  our  friend  is  always  our  brother.  There  are  less  occasions  for 
bickerings  between  friends  than  between  brothers.  Our  friend  is  not  with  us  con- 
stantly, and  friendship  loses  none  of  its  gloss  by  over-frequent  contact.  The 
superiority  of  friendship  over  brotherhood  is  due  mostly  to  the  fact  that  a 
"brother"  may  be  a  being  apart,  while  a  "friend"  is  a  second  self.  Friends  are 
one  in  kind,  "  moulded  like  in  nature's  mint."  The  true  melodic  charm  of  friend- 
ship lies  in  the  devotion  of  both  friends  to  the  service  of  Christ.  III.  The  Friend 
more  than  a  brother  can  be  no  other  than  Jesus  Christ.  Christ  alone  has  those 
elements  of  character  which  can  make  Him  the  clinging  Friend.  (F.  G.  Collier.) 
Friendship  : — Man  is  a  social  being.  Eeligion  sanctions  and  encourages  the  unions 
to  which  nature  prompts.  Friendship  has  its  inner  and  its  remoter  circles.  The 
heart  craves  for  intimate  friends — those  to  whom  it  can  confide  its  innermost 
thoughts,  and  to  whom  it  can  repair  for  sympathy  and  help  in  times  of  trouble. 
We  have  here  the  way  to  make  friends  and  the  strength  of  a  true  friendship. 

1.  The  way  to  make  friends.  Reciprocity  is  the  soul  of  friendship.  No  man  can 
expect  to  be  long  cherished  as  a  friend  who  does  not  reciprocate  the  feeling.  At 
the  basis  of  friendship  must  be  confidence.  You  must  place  confidence  in  the  man 
whom  you  desire  to  place  confidence  in  you.  Another  essential  ingredient  of 
friendship  is  fidelity  to  the  trust  reposed  in  you.  If  you  would  wish  others  to  be 
faithful  to  you,  you  must  be  faithful  to  them ;  you  must  never  make  that  pubho 
which  was  intended  to  be  private.  Friendship  involves  the  discharge  of  all  the 
kind  offices  of  sympathy  and  help.  If  you  would  wish  others  to  sympathise  with 
you  in  your  troubles,  you  must  be  ever  ready  to  sympathise  with  them.  This  is  the 
way  in  which  we  are  to  make  friends.  We  are  to  be  to  others  what  we  wish  them 
to  be  to  us.  II.  The  strength  of  a  true  friendship.  The  words  of  the  text  are 
emphatically,  but  not  exclusively,  true  of  Jesus  Christ.  They  here  express  a  fact 
of  ordinary  experience.  The  ties  of  a  true  friendship  are  stronger  than  the  ties  of 
the  closest  natural  relationship.  In  the  absence  of  friendship  the  ties  of  nature 
are  often  very  slender.  1.  This  is  seen  in  times  of  adversity.  2.  In  times  of 
moral  delinquency  and  degradation.  3.  A  friend  will  encounter  sacrifices  and 
sufferings  from  which  a  brother  wiU  often  shrink.  All  that  can  be  said  about 
friendship  when  it  exists  between  man  and  man  is  unspeakably  more  true  when 
applied  to  Jesus  Christ.  We  may  learn  from  this — 1.  The  reason  why  many  men 
are  without  friends.  It  is  because  they  do  not  show  themselves  friendly.  2.  That 
the  best  friend  you  can  have  offers  you  His  friendship.  And  He  makes  the  first 
advance.  3.  Next  to  having  Jesus  Christ  as  your  friend,  the  best  friendships  you 
can  form  will  be  with  those  who  are  in  fellowship  with  Him.  Then  strive  to  make 
friends.  (A.  Clark.)  Companionship  versus  friendship  : — The  word  rendered 
"friend"  is  from  a  root  which  means  "to  delight  in."  The  word  might  be 
rendered  "  lover."  In  the  former  clause  of  the  verse  read  "  companions,"  in  the 
latter  clause  "  friend."  Then  read  the  verse  thus — "A  man  of  companions  breaks 
himself  up,  but  thei-e  is  a  Friend  more  attached  than  a  brother."  I.  The  safeguard 
of  companionship.     1.  Indiscriminate  companionships  may  meet  with  ingratitude. 

2.  They  may  involve  injustice.  3.  They  may  produce  infidelity.  U.  The  satis- 
factions OF  friendship.  1.  Friendship's  inspiration  is  to  a  higher  purpose  thaa 
companionship's.  2.  Its  impulse  is  to  a  more  unselfish  relationship.  3.  Its  industry 
is  seen  in  assuring  a  more  enduring  attachment.  {C.  M.  Jones.)  Friendship  : — 
I  propose  to  treat  of  friendship,  which  is  one  of  the  noblest  and,  if  I  might  use  such 
an  expression,  the  most  elegant  relation  of  which  human  nature  is  capable.  It 
tends  unspeakably  to  the  improvement  of  the  mind,  and  the  pleasures  which 
result  from  it  are  most  sincere  and  delightful.  It  is  an  observation  of  the  best 
writers  that  friendship  cannot  subsist  but  between  persons  of  real  worth,  for  friend- 
ship must  be  founded  upon  high  esteem ;  but  such  esteem  cannot  be — at  least  it 
cannot  be  rational  and  lasting — where  there  is  not  true  moral  worth.  This  is  the 
proper  object  of  esteem,  and  no  natural  advantages  will  do  without  it.     Besides,  in 


V. 


CHAP,  xvin.]  PBOVEBBS.  479 

friendship  there  must  be  a  certain  likeness  and  content  of  soul,  a  content  in  the 
great  ends  and  views  of  life,  and  also  in  the  principal  methods  and  conduct  of  it, 
and  this  content  is  effectually  begotten  and  secured  only  by  true  probity  and  good- 
ness ;  this  is  the  same  in  every  one,  and  forms  the  mind  into  the  same  sentiments, 
and  gives  it  the  same  views  and  designs  in  all  the  most  important  affairs  of  life. 
Good  spirits,  therefore,  are  kindred  spirits,  and  resemble  one  another.  But  what  is 
principally  to  be  considered  is  this,  that  no  friendship  can  bind  a  man  to  do  an  ill 
thing.  Friendship,  then,  must  be  built  upon  the  principles  of  virtue  and  honour; 
and  cannot  subsist  otherwise.  But,  in  truth,  a  bad  man  is  not  capable  of  being  a 
friend ;  there  is  a  certain  greatness  of  soul,  a  benevolence,  a  faithfulness,  an 
ingenuity,  necessary  to  friendship,  which  are  absolutely  inconsistent  with  a  bad 
moral  character.  But  though  every  true  friend  be  a  good  man,  yet  every  good 
man  is  not  fit  to  be  a  friend.  A  person's  character  may  be,  in  general,  a  good 
^.  one,  and  yet  he  may  want  many  qualities  which  are  necessary  to  friendship  ;  such 
i^  as — 1.  Generosity.  Friendship  abhors  everything  that  is  narrow  and  contracted. 
2.  To  generosity  must  be  added  tenderness  of  affection.  Jonathan  loved  David  as 
his  own  soul.  The  friendly  mind  does,  with  great  tenderness,  enter  into  all  the  cir- 
cumstances and  sentiments  of  his  companion ;  can  be  affected  with  all  his  cares  and 
fears,  his  joys  and  sorrows.  Everything  is  of  importance  to  him  that  is  so  to  his 
friend.  And  this  tenderness  of  affection  begets  that  strange  but  affecting  harmony 
of  souls,  if  I  might  term  it  so,  like  the  cords  of  two  musical  instruments  strained  to 
the  same  key,  where  if  one  of  them  is  touched  any  wise,  the  sound  is  communicated 
to  the  other.  Where  there  is  true  friendship  there  must  be  an  exquisite  mutual 
i^  feeling.  3.  And  when  I  have  said  that  the  affection  must  be  tender,  this  is  saying 
too  that  it  must  be  undissembled.  Sincerity  in  love  is  essential.  4.  I  add  that 
there  must  be  in  friendship  great  openness  and  frankness  of  spirit ;  there  must  be  a 
communication  of  secrets,  without  reserve ;  unless  that  reserve  necessarily  arises 
from  and  is  caused  by  friendship,  for  this  sacred  relation  cannot  bear  any  other. 
5.  But  although  a  friend  must  be  ingenuous  ani  open-hearted,  a  man  of  simplicity, 
and  whose  very  heart,  if  I  might  use  the  expression,  is  transparent  to  his  friend, 
yet  he  must  be  discreet  and  prudent ;  capable  of  concealing  from  others  what  ought 
to  be  concealed ;  capable  of  managing,  in  anything  that  is  committed  to  his  care, 
with  wisdom.  Men  must  not  be  put  to  the  blush,  they  must  not  suffer  by  their 
friends'  disingenuity ;  unfaithfulness  is  the  very  worst  thing  that  can  happen  in 
friendship ;  and,  next  to  that,  weakness  and  imprudence,  which,  though  they  do 
not  speak  so  bad  a  mind,  yet  may  be  the  cause  of  as  great  mischief,  and  make  it 
impossible  for  friendship  to  subsist.  6.  Again,  it  is  necessary  to  the  character  of  a 
friend  that  he  should  be  of  a  constant  temper,  directed  by  reason,  and  acting  un- 
changeably according  to  its  direction.  A  true  friend  is  always  the  same ;  that  is, 
his  sentiments  and  conduct  never  change  but  when  there  is  reason  for  it.  7.  But 
there  is  one  particular  in  which  the  firmness  of  a  friendly  mind  is  as  much  tried  as 
in  any  other,  and  that  is  in  resisting  any  solicitation  to  do  a  thing  that  may  be  in 
itself  bad  or  indiscreet,  or  hurtful  to  him  that  desires  it.  What  is  right  and  fit 
must  always  be  our  rule,  and  we  ought  to  observe  it  inviolably,  not  only  because 
the  obligation  to  this  is  superior  to  all  the  obligations  of  friendship,  but  also  from 
principles  of  kindness  and  benevolence.  Next  to  the  firmness  that  ought  to  be 
maintained  in  denying  what  is  hurtful,  there  ought  to  be  a  resolution  in  animad- 
verting upon  faults.  This  is  the  most  friendly  and  useful  office  imaginable,  and  an 
office  to  which  an  affectionate  mind  does  with  difficulty  bring  itself.  To  admonish 
and  rebuke  is  to  put  one  to  great  pain,  and  whatever  gives  pain  to  a  friend  is  gone 
about  with  reluctance  and  aversion :  yet  there  is  no  true  faithfulness  when  this  is 
not  done ;  and  it  is  one  of  the  noblest  ends  of  friendship.  Nor  can  anything  give 
more  satisfaction  to  an  ingenuous  mind  than  to  be  thus  intimately  related  to  one 
who,  he  knows,  will  use  faithful  freedom  with  him,  and  prudently  animadvert 
upon  all  his  weaknesses.  But  though  strict  virtue  is  necessary  as  the  foundation 
of  true  friendship,  and  great  freedom  ought  to  be  used  in  animadverting  upon 
faults,  yet  intimate  friendship  does  not  bear  any  rigid  severity,  any  haughty  stiff- 
ness of  manners.  It  expects  sweetness,  and  gentleness,  and  condescendency,  so  far 
as  innocence  and  virtue  will  allow.  8.  Again,  friendship  abhors  all  jealousy^a 
disposition  to  be  suspicious,  where  there  is  no  just  cause  given.  The  temper  of  one 
that  is  fit  to  be  a  friend  is  frank  and  open ;  conscious  of  no  ungenerous  cunning  in 
itself,  it  does  not  suspect  it  in  others.  And  if  any  circumstance  appears  less 
favourable  than  one  would  desire,  yet  it  puts  the  most  candid  interpretation  upon 
it  that  may  be ;  and  will  not  entertain  a  bad  opinion  of  a  friend,  nor  break  with 


480  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvm. 

him,  without  manifest  proof  of  his  doing  what  renders  him  unworthy  that  relation. 
9.  Lastly,  there  can  be  no  fast  friendship  where  there  is  not  a  disposition  to  bear 
with  unavoidable  infirmities  and  to  forgive  faults.  There  may  be  infirmities  and 
culpable  defects  in  characters  which  in  general  are  good  and  worthy,  and  very 
capable  of  intimate  and  fast  friendship  ;  yet  this  cannot  be  without  that  generosity 
which  overlooks  little  infirmities,  and  can  fix  upon  excellent  and  amiable  qualitiea 
(though  blended  with  the  others)  as  the  objects  of  its  esteem  and  friendship.  This 
generosity  we  ought  by  all  means  to  cultivate  in  ourselves,  considering  how  much 
we  need  it  in  others,  and  how  much  we  expect  it.  Seeing,  then,  that  so  many 
shining  qualities  are  necessary  to  make  a  perfect  friend,  they  must  be  very  few 
who  are  perfectly  qualified  for  that  relation,  and  men  should  be  very  cautious  in 
their  choice — careful  not  to  run  into  intimacies  all  of  a  sudden,  intimacies  fit  to  be 
used  only  in  the  highest  friendship ;  not  to  run  into  them,  I  say,  with  persons  who 
are  not  capable  of  friendship  at  all.  As  there  cannot  be  too  great  caution  in 
choosing  an  intimate  friend,  so  there  cannot  be  too  great  firmness  in  cleaving  to 
him  when  well  chosen.  Providence  gives  nothing  in  mortal  life  more  valuable 
than  such  a  friend,  and  happy  they  who  enjoy  this  blessing  1  But,  to  conclude  the 
whole,  let  it  be  ever  remembered  that  true  friendship,  this  glorious  union  of  spirits, 
is  founded  in  virtue  ;  in  virtue,  I  say,  in  that  only.  It  is  this  that  begets  a  likeness 
in  the  most  important  dispositions,  sentiments,  business,  and  designs  of  life  ;  it  i3 
this  in  which  the  attracting  and  cementing  power  consists,  which  we  admire  for  it3 
own  sake,  and  love  for  itself ;  it  is  this  only  that  will  make  friendships  firm,  and 
constant,  and  reputable ;  it  is  this  only  that  will  make  present  friendship  truly 
gainful,  and  the  remembrance  of  past  intimacies  pleasing.  And  as  virtue  must  he 
at  the  foundation  of  friendship,  so  all  friendship  ought  to  be  considered  and  im- 
proved as  a  means  of  confirming  and  exalting  our  virtue.  {Jas.  Duchal,  D.D.) 
Friendship  : — I.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  friendship  and  human  affection.  1.  God 
has  implanted  in  our  nature  a  social  principle.  2.  There  are  certain  qualifications, 
distinctions,  and  relations  that  give  scope  to  this  principle.  3.  There  have  been 
surprising  instances  of  friendship  among  mankind.  11.  The  wisdom  and  goodness 
OF  Providence  in  thus  ordering  things.  1.  It  keeps  society  together.  2.  The 
pleasures  that  attend  its  exercise.  3.  It  makes  us  in  a  humble  degree  like  God. 
4.  It  is  suited  to  our  state  both  in  this  world  and  another.  III.  This  friendship  is 
imperfect.  1.  Peculiarities  of  natural  temper.  2.  Clashing  of  interests.  3.  In- 
capacity to  help.  4.  Want  of  religion.  5.  Distance.  6.  Short  duration.  Con- 
clusion:  1.  What  reason  to  admire  the  Divine  wisdom  and  goodness  1  2.  It  is  a 
duty  we  owe  to  our  Maker  and  our  fellow-creatures  to  cultivate  this.  3.  Let  us  not 
depend  on  human  friendship.  (T.  N.  Toller.)  Making  friends  a  gift  .-—When 
Abraham  Lincoln  was  a  young  man  starting  in  life,  it  used  to  be  said  of  him, 
"Lincoln  has  nothing — only  plenty  of  friends."  To  have  plenty  of  friends  is  to 
be  very  rich — if  they  are  the  right  sort.  Those  are  indeed  blessed  who  have 
received  from  God  this  gift  of  making  friends — a  gift  which  involves 
many  things,  but,  above  all,  the  power  of  going  out  of  one's  self  and 
seeing  and  appreciating  whatever  is  noble  and  loving  in  another.  There 
is  a  Friend  that  aticketh  closer  than  a  brother. — The  faithful  Friend  : — The 
two  most  eminent  philosophers  of  pagan  antiquity  saw  in  friendship  little  more 
than  a  calculation  of  benefits  which  it  might  be  supposed  to  confer,  and  scarcely 
recognised  at  all  the  possibility  of  its  possessing  a  disinterested  character.  Plutarch 
afiBrmed  that  in  his  time  friendship  did  not  exist  any  longer  even  in  families  ;  that 
it  had  once  existed  in  the  heroic  ages,  but  was  now  confined  to  the  stage.  The 
moral  condition  of  a  nation  must  have  become  corrupt  below  the  point  of  recovery, 
when  so  Godlike  a  relation  as  that  of  friendship  can  be  so  discountenanced, 
depreciated,  and  suspected.  It  is  not  Christianity  which  has  created  friendship, 
but  Christianity  has  lifted  it  up  and  transfigured  it.  Even  in  our  common  life  we 
meet  with  friends  who  are  better  to  us  than  even  our  relations  ;  but  certainly  the 
text  does  emphatically  describe  the  character  of  One  who  is  pre-eminently  the 
Friend  of  man,  the  Friend  of  sinners,  and  the  Friend  of  saints.  The  history  of 
brothers,  as  exemplified  in  the  Scriptures,  is  somewhat  disheartening.  (Illustrate 
by  Cain  and  Abel ;  Jacob  and  Esau  ;  and  Joseph's  brethren.)  Still,  few  things  are 
more  common  than  implacable  feuds  between  brethren.  There  are  jealousies  of 
brotherhood.  I.  The  love  of  our  best  Friend  is  disinterested.  All  love, 
according  to  some,  is  a  thing  of  interest.  But  there  certainly  is  friendship  which 
loves,  not  for  what  one  can  get  out  of  the  other,  but  which  loves  the  other  for  hia 
own  sake.    There  are  friends  who  live  in  each  other.    And  surely  we  may  say  that 


CHAP.  XTin.]  PROVERBS.  481 

the  love  of  Jesus  is  a  disinterested  one.  He  left  the  world  in  which  He  is,  and  was, 
God  over  all,  not  to  seek  His  own  happiness,  but  ours.  His  friendship  for  us 
would  have  been  noble  and  disinterested  had  His  mission  involved  in  it  no 
humiliation  and  no  suffering.  Whatever  God  docs  for  man  must  be  spontaneous 
and  disinterested,  springing  from  a  will  which  nothing  can  coerce,  and  from  a 
benevolence  which  finds  its  highest  joy  in  the  holiness  and  happiness  of  those 
whom  it  seeks  to  bless.  The  recompense  which  Christ  sought  was  not  His  own 
exaltation,  but  the  joy  of  seeing  others  rescued,  redeemed,  purified,  glorified. 
n.  It  is  an  intelligent  fkiendship.  It  is  based  on  knowledge,  a  complete  know- 
ledge of  us.  The  foundation  of  many  friendships  is  not  the  rock  of  knowledge, 
but  the  sand  of  ignorance.  They  are  the  creations  of  a  mere  impulse,  the  result 
of  a  casual  meeting  in  circumstances  which  revealed  neither  friend  in  his  real 
character.  But  Christ  does  not  throw  around  us  a  glamour  of  fancy  in  which  we 
seem  better  than  we  are.  He  knows  what  is  in  man.  He  knows  the  worst  of  us. 
It  is  a  friendship  in  which  there  is  every  conceivable  disparity,  and  yet  He  sticketh 
closer  than  a  brother.  HI.  The  friendship  of  Cheist  is  marked  by  its  fidelity. 
And  what  is  a  friendship  worth  that  does  not  possess  this  property  ?  If  friendship 
has  its  pleasures,  it  has  also  its  obligations,  which  must  be  fulfilled  if  friendship  is 
not  to  degenerate  into  a  soft  and  contemptible  acquaintanceship  without  nobleness 
or  true  advantage.  The  only  bond  of  certain  friends  seems  to  be  one  of  mutual 
flattery.  To  love  one's  friend  means  far  more  than  to  love  his  comfort  and  self- 
complaisance.  To  tell  men  of  their  faults  is  the  luxury  of  enemies  but  the  duty 
of  friends.  Now,  the  friendship  of  Christ  is  one  which  never  neglects  this  essential 
duty.  Many  of  the  deepest  and  most  sorrowful  mysteries  of  your  life  may  some 
day  be  explained  by  a  single  word — the  faithfulness  of  Christ.  IV.  His  friend- 
BHiP  IS  MASKED  BY  ITS  CONSTANCY.  Fcw  friendships  have  sufficient  vitality  in  them 
to  extend  from  youth  to  old  age.  Many  friendships  are  but  summer  friendships. 
The  friendship  of  Christ  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.  He  does  not 
break  off  from  us  because  we  are  not  all  we  should  be  to  Him.  There  is  a  limit  to 
all  our  earthly  friendships,  a  limit  to  their  power,  a  limit  to  their  help.  If  we 
need  friendship  on  this  side  of  the  grave,  how  much  more  shall  we  need  it  on  the 
other  side.  So  we  say,  "  Seek  not  friends  that  die,  or  whom  you  must  leave,  but 
seek  for  One  who  never  dies,  and  whom  you  can  never  leave."  {Enoch  Mellor, 
D.D.)  Christ  closer  than  a  brother : — Christ  has  shown  His  friendship  towards 
us — 1.  In  His  incarnation,  and  in  His  death  for  us.  He  is  a  brother  born  for 
adversity,  the  adversity  that  comes  through  sin.  2.  By  tendering  to  us  the  means 
of  grace.  3.  By  protecting  us  and  providing  for  us  so  long.  He  is  "  a  very  present 
help  in  our  time  of  trouble."  In  temptation  He  has  opened  a  way  of  escape,  and 
in  affliction  He  has  sent  a  Divine  Comforter.  (J.  W.  Reeve,  M.A.)  Christ  our 
Friend  : — The  following  excellent  qualities  of  Christ,  as  a  Friend,  may  serve  to 
recommend  and  endear  Him  to  our  hearts  :  1.  He  is  an  ancient  Friend.  Who  can 
declare  the  antiquity  of  this  friendship?  Is  it  ancient  as  the  incarnation  ?  Is  it 
ancient  as  His  baptism  ?  Is  it  ancient  as  the  prophetical  or  patriarchal  age  ? 
Nay,  it  is  older  than  time  itself.  It  is  from  everlasting.  2.  He  is  a  careful  Friend. 
It  was  the  psalmist's  complaint,  "  No  man  careth  for  my  soul."  But  the  Christian 
has  a  Friend  who  cares  for  him.  3.  He  is  a  prudent  Friend.  Our  best  earthly 
friends  may  err  through  ignorance  or  mistake ;  but  this  Friend  "  abounds  in  all 
wisdom  and  prudence."  4.  He  is  a  faithful  Friend.  Friends  frequently  prove 
false,  and  sad  indeed  it  is  when  they  prove  like  a  brook  in  summer.  Some  men 
are  not  to  be  trusted.  Those  in  whom  you  confide  most  will  be  ready  to  betray  you 
soonest.  But  Christ  is  faithful  in  all  His  promises.  5.  He  is  a  loving  Friend. 
Friendship  without  love  is  like  religion  without  love  ;  a  friendless  and  inconsistent 
• — a  cold,  unmeaning,  and  impossible  thing.  Christ's  love  is  said  to  surpass  the 
love  of  women.  6.  He  is  a  constant  and  unchangeable  Friend.  His  compassions 
fail  not.  Our  Friend  is  a  Friend  for  ever.  "  The  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  without 
repentance."  "  Having  loved  His  own.  He  loveth  them  to  the  end."  If  Christ  is 
our  Friend,  we  may  rest  satisfied.  All  things  will  work  together  for  our  good. 
(D.  Mclndoe.)  Jesus,  the  true  Friend  : — I.  Reasons  why  it  is  most  desirable 
THAT  THE  YOUNG  SHOULD  SECURE  THE  FRIENDSHIP  OF  Jesus. — 1.  His  great  know- 
ledge about  us  and  all  future  events  makes  His  friendship  most  desirable.  2.  His 
extraordinary  power.  3.  His  vast  undying  love.  I  do  not  care  for  that  friendship 
•which  is  based  upon  selfishness,  or  which  tries  to  secure  mere  personal  ends.  The 
love  of  Jesus  is  the  root,  the  foundation,  of  His  friendship.  Love  is  the  most 
sacrificing  principle  in  the  world.     No  one  ever  yet  saw  all  the  spirit  of  sacrifice 

32 


482  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xviu. 


there  was  in  the  love  of  Christ,  and  how  He  ever  sought  our  good,  our  pardon,  our 
happiness,  our  heaven,  our  glory.  Love  is  not  only  the  sweetest  and  most  lovely 
power,  but  also  the  strongest  in  the  universe.  4.  His  truth  to  His  engagements. 
5.  Sad  consequences  must  arise  if  the  friendship  of  Jesus  be  not  secured.     H.  How 

SHOULD    WE    ACT    IN     REFEKENCE     TO     SUCH     A     FrIEND  ?       1.    Wc    mUSt    do    what    will 

please  Him.  The  little  word  "do"  must  be  written  in  good,  fair  characters  in 
our  hearts,  in  our  efforts,  and  in  our  lives.  2.  "We  must  on  all  suitable  occasions 
acknowledge  His  friendship.  3.  We  must  go  direct  to  this  Friend  in  all  our 
troubles,  as  well  as  with  all  our  joys.  4.  We  must  faithfully  look  after  His 
interests.  Solomon  says  that  this  Friend  "  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother  "  ;  and 
they  are  the  wisest  who  resolve  to  stick  the  most  closely  to  Jesus,  through  sunshine 
and  through  shower,  through  life  and  through  death.  {J.  Goodacre.)  A  faithful 
Friend  .-—Cicero  has  well  said,  "  Friendship  is  the  only  thing  in  the  world  con- 
cerning the  usefulness  of  which  all  mankind  are  agreed."  He  who  would  be  happy 
here  must  have  friends.  Yet  friendship  has  been  the  cause  of  the  greatest  misery 
to  men  when  it  has  been  unworthy  and  unfaithful.    I.  Christ  is  a  Friend  that 

STICKETH   closer   THAN    A   BROTHER.      II.    ThE     REASONS     WHY     WE     MAT   DEPEND    UPON 

Christ  as  being  a  faithful  Friend.  1.  True  friendship  can  only  be  made 
between  true  men,  whose  hearts  are  the  soul  of  honour.  2.  Faithfulness  to  us  in 
our  faults  is  a  certain  sign  of  fidelity  in  a  friend.  3.  There  are  some  things  in  His 
friendship  which  render  us  sure  of  not  being  deceived  when  we  put  our  confidence 
in  Him.  4.  The  friendship  that  will  last  does  not  take  its  rise  in  the  chambers  of 
mirth,  nor  is  it  fed  and  fattened  there.  5.  A  friend  acquired  by  folly  is  never  a 
faithful  friend.  6.  Friendship  and  love,  to  be  real,  must  not  lie  in  words,  but  in 
deeds.  7.  A  purchased  friend  will  never  last  long.  IH.  An  inference  to  be 
derived  from  this.  Lavater  says,  "The  qualities  of  your  friends  will  be  those 
of  your  enemies ;  cold  friends,  cold  enemies ;  half  friends,  half  enemies ;  fervid 
enemies,  warm  friends."  Then  we  infer  that,  if  Christ  sticks  close,  and  is  our 
Friend,  then  our  enemies  will  stick  close,  and  never  leave  us  till  we  die.  {C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  friendship  of  Christ : — I.  The  value  of  the  friendship  of 
1/'  Christ.  1.  He  is  a  Friend  to  His  people,  and  does  for  them  more  than  what  the 
*  strongest  earthly  friendship  can  dictate.  (1)  To  a  kind  and  constant  friend  we 
can  freely  unfold  the  secrets  of  our  heart,  and  look  for  counsel  and  direction  in 
every  perplexing  circumstance.  With  far  greater  freedom  may  the  humble 
Christian  apply  for  direction  to  the  wonderful  Counsellor  and  Prince  of  Peace. 
(2)  From  a  kind  and  generous  friend  we  expect  compassion  in  our  troubles  and 
sympathy  in  our  affliction.  The  merciful  High  Priest,  and  the  Friend  of  His 
people,  is  touched  with  a  feeling  of  their  infirmities.  (3)  From  a  constant  and 
kind  friend  we  expect  protection  when  injured  and  in  danger.  This  also  the 
gracious  Friend  of  sinners  willingly  imparts  to  all  who,  in  the  exercise  of  faith, 
humility,  and  trust,  betake  themselves  to  Him.  (4)  From  firm,  constant,  and 
generous  friends,  we  receive  such  supplies  of  good  things  as  they  can  bestow,  when 
we  stand  in  need  of  them.  But  what  are  all  the  bounties  of  the  creature  when 
compared  with  the  bounty  and  benevolence  of  our  gracious  Lord  ?  2.  His  Divine 
friendship  is  free  from  those  imperfections  which  lessen  the  comfort  of  human 
intimacy  and  attachment.  (1)  A  friend  and  a  brother  may  withdraw  their  regard, 
and  prove  inconstant.  Some  real  or  imaginary  offence,  some  impropriety  of 
conduct,  the  injurious  misrepresentations  of  the  malicious,  or  some  scheme  of 
self-interest,  may  make  those  whom  we  have  loved  and  esteemed  avert  their 
countenances  from  us,  withdraw  their  intercourse,  and  prove  false  in  their  friend- 
ship; but  this  Beloved  of  the  soul  continues  steadfast  in  His  love — "  the  same 
yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever."  (2)  The  best  of  friends  or  brothers  on  earth  may 
not  be  able  to  administer  that  Divine  assistance  or  support  which  circumstances 
may  require ;  they  may  be  ignorant  what  course  should  be  taken ;  they  may  be 
oppressed  with  poverty,  or  laid  on  beds  of  languishing,  or  borne  down  with  a 
succession  of  griefs.  But  the  compassionate  Kedeemer  is  a  brother  born  for 
adversity.  (3)  The  best  of  friends  and  brothers  may  be  called  to  station.,  of  work 
and  usefulness  in  places  of  the  world  to  which  we  can  have  but  little  access,  so  that, 
after  years  of  happy  intimacy,  distance  of  place  may  interrupt  the  sweetest  friend- 
ship and  all  the  joys  of  mutual  intercourse.  But  it  is  not  thus  with  that  best 
Friend  whom  the  text  extols.  Wherever  His  people  are,  He  is  there  to  bless  them, 
and  to  do  them  good.  (4)  Death  dissolves  the  sweetest  friendships.  But  Jesus, 
our  Redeemer  and  Friend,  is  immortal  and  unchangeable.  II.  I  am  to  recommend 
THE  Saviour  to  yodb  axxenxion,  admibatiom,  and  acceptanck.     I.  The  personal 


CHAP.  XVIII.]  PROVERBS.  483 

excellences  He  inherits.  2.  The  unspeakable  blessings  He  bestows.  HI.  Let  us 
now  direct  you  to  the  impkovement  of  what  has  been  said.  1.  This  subject  suggests 
important  directions  to  believers  in  Jesus.  (1)  He  that  has  friends  must  show 
himself  friendly.  Beware  of  whatever  may  offend  your  heavenly  Friend,  or  cause 
Him  to  withdraw  the  manifestations  of  His  presence.  (2)  Testify  the  sincerity  and 
ardour  of  your  friendship,  by  regard  for  those  who  are  the  friends  of  Christ. 
(3)  Testify  your  friendship  to  the  Saviour,  by  warm  concern  for  His  interests  in 
the  world.  (4)  Maintain  daily  and  delightful  fellowship  with  your  heavenly  Friend, 
that  thus  you  may  cultivate  the  sense  of  His  friendship,  and  may  guard  against  all 
distance,  coldness,  and  reserve.  (5)  Ye  friends  of  the  heavenly  Bridegroom  long 
for  the  coming  of  your  Lord,  and  for  the  full  enjoyment  of  His  immediate  presence 
in  heaven.  2.  I  shall  now  conclude  with  addressing  men  in  different  situations. 
(1)  This  Friend  demands  the  affection  of  the  young  by  motives  the  most  engaging 
and  tender.  (2)  Are  you  afflicted  ?  Be  entreated  to  seek  your  support  and  conso- 
lation in  the  friendship  of  Chi-ist.  (3)  Are  you  indifferent  and  careless  about 
religion,  but  pursuing  the  enjoyments  of  sense  with  the  whole  bent  of  a  corrupted 
mind  ?  Yield  to  the  entreaties  of  a  dying  Saviour ;  fly  to  Him ;  make  the  Judge 
your  friend,  and  know  for  your  comfort,  that  in  receiving  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord, 
you  become  through  faith  in  Him  the  children  of  God,  and  are  made  joint  heirs 
with  Christ,  that  best  of  friends,  who  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother.  {A.  Bonar.) 
friendship  (a  sermon  to  children):  —  I.  How  aee  we  to  hold  our  friends? 
Friendliness  preserves  friendship.  But  what  is  friendliness  ?  1.  A  friendly  man 
is  a  sincere  man.  True,  trustworthy,  transparent  in  character.  Mocking  and 
deceitful  men,  like  Mr.  Facing-both-Ways,  are  never  loved  and  trusted.  By  their 
duplicity  and  insincerity  the  Stuarts  lost  a  kingdom,  and  King  George  I.,  who 
succeeded  them,  and  prospered  and  won  the  affection  of  the  great  Enghsh  people, 
was  once  heard  to  say,  "  My  maxim  is,  never  to  abandon  my  friends,  to  do  justice 
to  all,  and  to  fear  no  man."  2.  A  friendly  man  is  frank  and  generous.  A  story 
is  told  of  Demetrius,  one  of  the  conquerers  of  Athens,  that  shows  the  power  of 
generosity  in  making  friends.  After  the  glorious  victory  Demetrius  did  not  harass 
and  humiliate  the  inhabitants  of  the  beautiful  city,  but  treated  them  generously. 
Commanding  his  soldiers  to  fill  the  empty  houses  of  the  citizens  with  provisions, 
they  wondered  at  his  goodness,  and  fear  grew  into  love.  II.  Who  is  the  noblest 
friend  ? — "  There  is  a  friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother."  What  a  faithful 
friend  was  Jonathan  to  David !  1.  In  Jesus  we  have  a  royal  Friend,  possessing 
treasures,  and  crowns,  and  kingdoms  such  as  no  earthly  monarch  owns.  2.  In 
Jesus  we  have  a  generous  Friend.  3.  Jesus  is  a  constant  Friend.  Some  people  use 
their  friends  as  shipwrecked  sailors  use  their  rafts,  as  masons  use  scaffolding,  as 
gardeners  use  clay  in  grafting  trees.  They  neglect  them  or  fling  them  away  when- 
ever they  have  served  their  selfish  purposes.  But  Jesus  is  a  steady  Friend,  "  Ever 
faithful,  ever  true."  He  will  never  leave  us  nor  forsake  us.  After  bidding  farewell 
to  all  his  relations,  President  Edwards,  when  dying,  said,  "  Now,  where  is  Jesus  of 
Nazareth,  my  true  and  never-failing  Friend  ?  "  And  immediately  the  "  Friend  born 
for  adversity  "  came  and  led  him  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow,  and  gave  him 
a  place  among  "  the  shining  ones  "  in  our  heavenly  Father's  home.  (J.  Moffat 
Scott. )  An  invisible  Friend  : — Not  able  to  conceive  of  an  invisible  Friend  I  Oh, 
it  is  not  when  your  children  are  with  you,  it  is  not  when  you  see  and  hear  them, 
that  they  are  most  to  you ;  it  is  when  the  sad  assembly  is  gone ;  it  is  when  the 
daisies  have  resumed  their  growing  again  in  the  place  where  the  little  form  was 
laid ;  it  is  when  you  have  carried  your  children  out,  and  said  farewell,  and  come 
home  again,  and  day  and  night  are  full  of  sweet  memories ;  it  is  when  summer 
and  winter  are  full  of  touches  and  suggestions  of  them ;  it  is  when  you  cannot  look 
up  towards  God  without  thinking  of  them,  nor  look  down  toward  yourself  and  not 
think  of  them ;  it  is  when  they  have  gone  out  of  your  arms,  and  are  living  to  you 
only  by  the  power  of  the  imagination,  that  they  are  the  most  to  you.  The  invisible 
children  are  the  realest  children,  the  sweetest  children,  the  truest  children,  the 
children  that  touch  our  hearts  as  no  hands  of  flesh  ever  could  touch  them.  And 
do  you  teU  me  that  we  cannot  conceive  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  because  He  is 
invisible?  (H.  W.  Beecher<)  Christ  a  personal  Friend: — What  made  so  great 
a  difference  ?  Of  two  friends  of  Alexander  the  Great,  the  historian  Plutarch  calls 
one  Philo-Basileus,  that  is,  the  friend  of  the  King,  and  the  other,  Philo-Alexandros, 
that  is,  the  friend  of  Alexander.  Similarly,  some  one  has  said  St.  Peter  was  Philo- 
Christos,  the  friend  of  the  Christ,  but  St.  John  was  Philo-Jesous,  the  friend  of 
Jesus.     This  touches  the  quick :  Peter  was  attached  to  the  person  who  filled  the 


484  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

oflQce  of  Messiah,  John  to  the  Person  Himself.  And  this  is  a  distinction  which 
marks  different  types  of  Christian  piety  in  all  ages.  The  Christ  of  some  is  more 
ofiQcial — the  Head  of  the  Church,  the  Founder  of  Christianity,  and  the  like — that 
of  others  is  more  personal ;  but  it  is  the  personal  bond  which  holds  the  heart.  The 
most  profoundly  Christian  spirits  have  loved  the  Saviour,  not  for  His  benefits,  but 
for  Himself  alone.     {J.  Stalker.) 


CHAPTEE  XIX. 


Veb.  2.  Also  that  the  soul  be  without  knowledge,  it  is  not  good. — The  advantage* 
of  knoicledge  to  the  lower  classes  : — I.  The  utility  of  knowledge  in  general.  The 
extent  to  which  we  have  the  faculty  of  acquiring  knowledge  forms  the  most 
obvious  distinction  of  our  species.  As  the  power  of  acquiring  knowledge  is  to  be 
ascribed  to  reason,  so  the  attainment  of  it  mightily  strengthens  and  improves  it, 
and  thereby  enables  it  to  enrich  itself  with  further  acquisitions.  Knowledge,  in 
general,  expands  the  mind,  exalts  the  faculties,  refines  the  taste  of  pleasure,  and 
opens  numerous  sources  of  intellectual  enjoyment.  The  moral  good  of  the  acquisi- 
tion of  knowledge  is  chiefly  this,  that  by  multiplying  the  mental  resources  it  has  a 
tendency  to  exalt  the  character,  and,  in  some  measure,  to  correct  and  subdue  the 
taste  for  gross  sensuality.  Some  think  that  the  instruction  of  the  lower  classes 
will  make  them  dissatisfied  with  their  station  in  life  ;  and  by  impairing  the  habits 
of  subordination,  endanger  the  tranquillity  of  the  state.  But,  in  truth,  nothing 
renders  legitimate  governments  so  insecure  as  extreme  ignorance  in  the  people. 
The  true  prop  of  good  government  is  the  opinion,  the  perception,  on  the  part  of  the 
subject,  of  benefits  resulting  from  it.  Nothing  can  produce  or  maintain  that 
opinion  but  knowledge.  Of  tyrannical  and  unlawful  governments,  indeed,  the 
support  is  fear,  to  which  ignorance  is  as  congenial  as  it  is  abhorrent  from  the 
genius  of  a  free  people.  Ignorance  gives  a  sort  of  eternity  to  prejudice,  and  per- 
petuity to  error.  II.  The  utility  of  religious  knowledge  in  particular.  Religion, 
on  account  of  its  intimate  relation  to  a  future  state,  is  every  man's  proper  business, 
and  should  be  his  chief  care.  The  primary  truths  of  religion  are  of  such  daily  use 
and  necessity,  that  they  form,  not  the  materials  of  mental  luxury,  so  properly  ag 
the  food  of  the'mind.  Two  considerations  may  suffice  to  evince  the  indispensable 
necessity  of  Scriptural  knowledge.  1.  The  Scriptures  contain  an  authentic  dis- 
covery of  the  way  of  salvation.  2.  Scriptural  knowledge  is  of  inestimable  value 
on  account  of  its  supplying  an  infallible  rule  of  life.  Of  an  accountable  creature, 
duty  is  the  concern  of  every  moment,  since  he  is  every  moment  pleasing  or  dis- 
pleasing God.  Hence  the  indispensable  necessity,  to  every  description  of  persons, 
of  sound  religious  instruction,  and  of  an  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  Scriptures 
as  its  genuine  source.  {R.Hall,  M.A.)  Evils  of  popular  ignorance: — I.  The 
EVTLS  OF  IGNORANCE.  The  faculties  of  reason,  and  judgment,  and  moral  determina- 
tion, must  ever  distinguish  man  from  "  the  beast  that  perisheth,"  must  for  ever 
constitute  the  true  dignity  of  human  nature ;  but  then  faculties  and  powers  are 
of  little  value  in  themselves,  and  if  they  be  not  cultivated  and  developed,  and 
directed  to  some  specific  end.  Instruction  is  to  man  what  culture  is  to  plants. 
When  he  is  deprived  of  its  aid,  his  powers  will  either  lie  wholly  dormant,  or  that 
which  they  bring  forth,  like  the  productions  of  the  uncultivated  plant,  will  be 
wild  and  worthless.  Ignorance  "  is  not  good  "  for  man,  in  regard  of  his  social 
advancement.  To  the  improvement  of  the  mind  all  nations  owe  whatever  of  social 
blessing  they  enjoy.  The  comforts  and  conveniences  of  life,  the  useful  and  pro- 
ductive arts,  the  blessings  of  law  and  order  and  good  government,  are  all  derived 
to  us  from  an  elevated  condition  of  the  national  intelligence.  Ignorance  may  be 
considered  as  negative  of  everything  that  is  good  and  useful :  it  is  the  night  of  a 
nation's  life,  during  which  it  can  neither  work  for  itself  nor  for  others.  Of  all 
despotisms,  the  despotism  of  ignorance  is  the  most  tyrannical ;  its  will  is  the  only 
law  it  recognises,  and  it  hates  the  light  of  reason  as  the  night-bird  dreads  the  sun. 
Ignorance  "  is  not  good  "  for  the  cause  of  national  morality  and  virtue.  Virtue 
can  no  more  exist  without  a  certain  amount  of  knowledge  than  an  animal  can 
exist  without  life.  In  proportion  as  ignorance  prevails  morality  will  be  destroyed. 
Ignorance  "  is  not  good  "  for  a  man's  individual  happiness.     Ignorance  is  a  state 


CHAP.  XIX.]  PEOVEEBS.  485 

in  which  all  the  finer  feelings  of  the  human  soul  are  locked  up,  and  the  subject  of 
it  is  deprived  of  some  of  the  purest  forms  of  moral  happiness  and  enjoyment. 
Bight  knowledge  tends  to  promote  a  man's  happiness,  even  with  regard  to  the 
present  state.  Such  knowledge  will  be  found  to  have  an  ulterior  effect  upon  a 
man's  character ;  it  will  awaken  within  him  many  pure  and  elevating  emotions. 
n.  The  nature  and  objects  of  tkue  knowledge.  It  may  be  questioned  whether 
the  term  education  is  understood  in  the  plain,  broad,  comprehensive  sense  in  which 
Hooker  defined  it,  by  whom  it  was  made  to  comprehend  the  cultivation  of  all  the 
moral,  spiritual,  immortal  powers  of  man.  The  knowledge  that  "  it  is  not  good  " 
for  the  soul  to  be  without,  includes  a  knowledge  of  Holy  Scripture.  Through  this 
knowledge  we  get  knowledge  of  other  things — ourselves,  redemption,  sanctification. 
Without  this  knowledge  a  man  cannot  be  moral,  cannot  be  happy,  cannot  have 
peace  in  this  life,  cannot  have  hope  for  the  life  to  come.  "  It  is  not  good  "  that  a 
man  should  be  without  knowing  what  are  those  remedial  agencies  which  have  been 
provided  of  God  for  lifting  up  his  soul  from  its  condition  of  degradation,  and  pre- 
paring it  for  endless  happiness  in  the  presence  of  his  God.  {Daniel  Moore,  M.A.) 
The  importance  of  knowledge  : — Man  alone  of  all  the  creatures  in  this  lower  world 
is  possessed  of  a  rational,  intelligent,  and  immortal  soul.  Whilst  other  creatures  are 
made  to  look  down  upon  the  ground,  man  stands  erect,  with  his  lofty  countenance 
looking  up  to  the  heavens.  He  can  look  abroad  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  under- 
stand, in  some  degree,  and  admire  the  wisdom  and  power  and  goodness  manifested 
in  the  works  of  the  great  Creator.  He  has  analysed  the  elements  of  air  and  water, 
and  can  even  make  them  of  their  component  gases.  He  can  explore  the  trackless 
ocean,  ride  in  safety  on  its  swelling  billows,  and  cut  his  liquid  way  to  the  most 
distant  regions  of  the  world.  Man  can  acquire  a  knowledge  of  foreign  languages,  and 
thus  converse  with  men  of  other  climes  and  kindreds  and  tongues.  Moreover,  by 
means  of  written  or  printed  characters,  he  can  spread  his  thoughts  around  him 
yet  wider  and  wider,  and  even  after  he  has  sunk  into  the  grave  he  can  thus 
mould  the  minds  of  generations  to  come.  If,|  then,  the  mind  of  man  be 
capable  of  such  great  things,  and  can  exert  such  a  mighty  influence,  we  should 
take  good  care  that,  by  affording  it  Christian  knowledge  and  a  religious  training, 
it  be  rightly  informed  and  properly  directed.  Thus  science  and  devotion  would 
walk  hand  in  hand  together,  and  lead  on  our  youthful  progeny  to  the  know- 
ledge of  the  true  God,  and  of  the  duties  which  they  owe  to  Him  and  to  one 
another.  "  That  the  soul  be  without  knowledge,  it  is  not  good,"  is  manifest 
from  the  consideration  that  without  the  knowledge  of  some  useful  art  or  science 
or  business,  man,  ordinarily  speaking,  cannot  procure  the  means  of  support,  or 
fulfil  the  duties  of  his  station  in  life.  Moreover,  that  it  is  not  good  for  the  soul 
to  be  without  knowledge  may  be  inferred  from  the  consideration  that  the  faculties 
of  the  mind,  on  the  one  hand,  are  suited  to  the  reception  and  pursuit  of  knowledge, 
and  are  strengthened  and  improved  when  they  are  so  employed ;  whilst,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  whole  economy  of  nature  is  such  as  to  invite  us  to  examine  and 
admire  it.  But  doubtless  the  knowledge  spoken  of  in  the  text  relates  principally 
to  Divine  things.  What  is  the  light  of  science  apart  from  the  light  of  Christ  ? 
Now,  that  the  soul  be  without  this  knowledge,  it  is  not  good — I.  With  eegard  to 
the  iNDivrouAL  HIMSELF.  1.  It  is  Hot  good,  because  such  a  state  is  unhappy  and 
unprofitable.  "  He  that  is  wise  may  be  profitable  unto  himself."  But  how  un- 
profitable is  the  state  of  a  child  growing  up  without  the  knowledge  of  what  is 
necessary  to  his  welfare  both  in  time  and  through  eternity  !  2.  Such  a  state  is  not 
good,  because  it  is  not  a  safe  one.  In  what  an  awfully  insecure  state  is  the  soul 
that  is  without  the  knowledge  of  God  !  Any  moment  the  thread  of  life  may  be 
cut  asunder,  and  then  shall  his  desire  and  expectation  perish !  H.  In  regard  to 
others.  1.  In  regard  to  God  and  His  work.  It  is  true  that  "  our  goodness 
extendeth  not  to  Him."  Our  knowledge  cannot  augment  His  infinite  stores  of 
knowledge.  Neither  does  He  need  our  services.  They  cannot  profit  Him,  nor  add 
to  His  perfection  and  blessedness.  But  still,  in  a  lower  sense,  God  may  be  said  to 
need  the  instruments  or  agents  which  He  is  pleased  to  make  use  of  in  accom- 
plishing His  designs.  It  is  manifest  that  without  the  knowledge  of  which  I  am 
speaking  we  cannot  be  fit  instruments  in  the  hands  of  God  for  performing  BUs 
work,  for  estabhshing  and  extending  His  kingdom  through  the  world.  2.  It  is 
not  good  in  regard  to  our  feUow-men.  How  should  he  who  is  without  know- 
ledge fulfil  the  relative  and  social  duties  of  life,  giving  to  each  his  due,  and 
benefiting  all  within  his  sphere  of  action?  [T.  H.  Terry,  B.A.)  Ignorance 
it   not  good : — I.  Man  is    fosbesseo   of    an    qiuobtal    fbinciplb    which,    once 


486  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxs. 

CALLED     INTO    EXISTENCE,    IS     BY    ITS    VERY    CONSTITUTION     COEVAL    WITH     ITS    MaKEE. 

Man  has  a  soul.  God  has  provided  for  the  supply  of  the  soul  as  well  as  of 
the  body.  The  mental  aliment  is  knowledge.  II.  Prove  in  what  respect  it  is 
NOT  good  that  the  SOUL  BE  WITHOUT  KNOWLEDGE.  The  knowledge  meant  is — 1.  The 
knowledge  of  God  as  revealed  in  His  Word.  2.  A  knowledge  of  Chi-ist  crucified. 
3.  The  knowledge  of  ourselves  as  fallen  moral  beings.  4.  The  knowledge  of  our 
threefold  duty  to  God,  to  our  neighbour,  and  to  ourselves.  (1)  It  is  not  good  for 
a  man's  self,  whether  we  consider  him  as  a  solitary  or  a  social  being.  (2)  It  is  not 
good  for  others.  Man,  as  even  heathen  moralists  maintain,  was  made  for  his 
feUow-creatures  as  well  as  for  himself.  As  causes  produce  effects,  so  ignorance 
produces  rudeness,  incivility,  insubordination,  and,  too  frequently,  cunning,  dis- 
honesty, cruelty,  sensuality,  and  every  evil  work.  It  cannot  be  good  for  others  that 
they  should  be  left  without  knowledge.  (J.  W.  Nihlock,  D.D.)  The  benefit  of 
religious  knowledge : — There  are  things  which  we  can  and  things  which  we  cannot 
know.  God  hath  set  a  limit  to  man's  capacity  of  knowing,  as  to  his  faculty  of 
hearing  and  seeing.  There  are  things  hid  altogether  from  mortal  ken.  Still  are 
there  unhallowed  longings  after  the  fruit  of  the  tree  of  knowledge.  All  that  we 
may  know  let  us  set  ourselves  with  energy  to  acquire.  The  benefits  of  knowledge 
may  be  traced  in  the  progress  of  civilisation.  It  is  knowledge  which  makes  the 
difference  between  the  refined  Chinaman  and  the  brutalised  Kaffir.  1.  If  the  soul 
be  left  without  knowledge,  it  will  be  unable  to  detect  the  false  maxims  of  the 
world,  and  of  course  to  avoid  the  consequences  to  which  they  lead.  2.  It  is  not 
good  that  the  soul  be  without  knowledge,  lest  we  should  be  contaminated  with  the 
noxious  errors  on  religious  subjects  which  prevail  so  extensively  amongst  us  in  the 
present  day.  3.  Let  the  Christian  remember  that  he  must  not  be  content  with  his 
present  attainments.      (Albert   Bibby,  3I.A.)  The  soul  tvithout  knowledge: — 

Other  translations  of  this  verse  are,  "It  is  not  good  for  the  soul  to  be  without 
caution,  for  he  that  hasteth  with  his  feet  sinneth  " ;  or  "  Quickness  of  action,  without 
prudence  of  spirit,  is  not  good,  for  he  that  hasteth  with  his  feet  sinneth  " ;  or 
" Fervent  zeal  without  prudence  is  not  good,"  &c.;  or  "Ignorance  of  one's  seli  is 
not  good,"  &c.  There  does  not  appear  the  least  necessity  for  any  alteration  of  the 
received  version.  I.  That  ignorance  is  not  good  eor  the  soul,  "  The  soul 
without  knowledge  is  not  good."     This  will  appear  if  we  consider  three  things. 

1.  That  an  ignorant  soul  is  exceedingly  confined.  The  mind  cannot  range  beyond 
what  it  knows.  The  more  limited  its  information,  the  narrower  is  the  scene  of  its 
activities.  The  man  of  enlarged  scientific  information  has  a  range  over  vast 
continents,  whereas  the  ignorant  man  is  confined  within  the  ceU  of  his  senses. 
Our  souls  get  scope  by  exploring  the  unknown.  "  Knowledge,"  says  Shakespeare, 
"  is  the  wing  on  which  we  fly  to  heaven."  2.  That  an  ignorant  soul  is  exceedingly 
benighted.  The  contracted  sphere  in  which  it  lives  is  only  lighted  with  the  rush- 
light of  a  few  crude  thoughts.  Knowledge  is  light.  The  accession  of  every  true 
idea  is  a  planting  of  a  new  star  in  the  mental  heavens.  The  more  knowledge,  the 
brighter  will  sparkle  the  sky  of  your  being.  3.  That  an  ignorant  soul  is  exceedingly 
feeble.  Exercise  and  food  are  as  essential  to  the  power  of  the  mind  as  they  are  to 
the  power  of  the  body.  Knowledge  is  at  once  the  incentive  to  exercise  it  and  the 
aUment  to  strengthen.  "  Ignorance,"  says  Johnson,  "  is  mere  privation  by  which 
nothing  can  be  produced ;  it  is  a  vacuity  in  which  the  soul  sits  motionless  and 
torpid  for  want  of  attraction.  And,  without  knowing  why,  we  always  rejoice  when 
we  learn,  and  grieve  when  we  forget."  Truly  the  soul  without  knowledge  is  not 
good.  Of  what  good  are  limbs  without  the  power  of  exercise  ;  what  good  are  eyes 
without  light  ?  II.  Ignorance  is  perilous  to  the  soul.  Ignorance  is  more  than 
a  negative  evil,  it  is  a  positive  curse.  The  text  teaches  that  ignorance — 1.  Exposes 
to  sinful  haste.  "  He  that  hasteth  with  his  feet  sinneth."  Men  without  knowledge 
are  ever  in  danger  of  acting  incautiously,  acting  with  a  reckless  haste.  As  a  rule 
the  more  ignorant  a  man  is  the  more  hasty  he  is  in  his  conclusions  and  steps  of 
conduct.  The  less  informed  the  mind  is  the  more  rapid  and  reckless  in  its 
generaUsation.     Impulse,  not  intelligence,  is  the  helmsman  of  the  ignorant  soul. 

2.  It  exposes  to  a  perversity  of  conduct.  The  foolishness  of  man  perverteth  his 
way.  What  is  foolishness  but  ignorance  ?  Ignorant  men  are  terribly  liable  to 
perversity  of  conduct  in  every  relation  of  life,  and  especially  in  relation  to  the 
great  God.  The  murderers  of  Christ  were  ignorant.  Paul  says,  had  they  known 
it,  they  would  not  have  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory.  3.  It  exposes  to  impiety  of 
feeling.  Ignorant  men  are  ever  disposed  to  find  fault  with  God.  Ignorance  is 
peevish.    It  is  always  fretting.    Learn  that  a  nation  of  ignorant  souls  is  not  only 


CHAP.  XIX.]  PROVERBS.  487 

a  nation  of  worthless  men,  but  a  nation  liable  to  the  commission  of  terrible  mis- 
takes and  crimes.  Men  should  get  knowledge  for  the  sake  of  becoming  useful. 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  evil  of  ignorance : — I.  A  case  supposed.  "  A  soul 
without  knowledge."  This  is  not  to  be  understood  absolutely.  All  knowledge  is 
not  blessing,  nor  all  ignorance  misfortune.  The  knowledge  specified  in  the  text 
may  imply — 1.  A  knowledge  of  the  works  of  God  in  creation.  God  is  known  by 
His  works.  Their  vast  magnitude  serves  to  display  His  power.  Their  amazing 
extent  shadows  forth  His  immensity.  The  admirable  harmony  that  prevails 
among  them  evidences  His  wisdom.  And  the  ample  provision  made  for  aU 
creatures  exhibits  His  goodness.  2.  A  knowledge  of  our  particular  calling,  trade,  or 
profession.  No  man  is  obliged  to  know  everything,  but  every  man  ought  to  know 
what  he  professes  to  know.  3.  A  knowledge  of  the  will  of  God,  as  revealed  in  the 
Bible.  This  revelation  is  so  plain  that  he  may  run  that  readeth  it ;  so  ample  as 
to  embrace  the  whole  of  our  duty ;  so  repeated  that  we  have  precept  upon  precept ; 
so  circumstantial  as  to  mark  every  description  of  character,  and  identify  every 
variety  of  situation  ;  so  impartial  as  to  know  no  distinction  between  the  monarch 
and  the  beggar  ;  and  so  full  and  perfect  that  nothing  can  be  added  to  it.  Our 
knowledge  of  the  will  of  God  should  be  Scriptural,  spiritual,  experimental,  and 
practical.  11.  An  affiejiation  made  concerning  it.  "It  is  not  good."  1.  It  is 
not  good,  as  it  does  not  harmonise  with  the  original  purpose  of  God  in  the  forma- 
tion of  man.  2.  It  is  not  good,  as  it  is  not  commendable.  3.  As  it  is  not  beneficial. 
4.  As  it  is  not  comfortable.  5.  As  it  is  not  safe.  From  this  subject  let  us  learn — 
(1)  What  gratitude  is  due  to  God,  who  hath  afforded  us  such  facilities  for  the 
acquisition  of  knowledge.  (2)  How  diligently  we  should  use  the  means  with  which 
God  hath  favoured  us  for  augmenting  our  stock  of  knowledge.  (3)  Let  us  com- 
miserate the  circumstances  of  those  who  are  destitute  of  the  means  of  information. 
{Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermons.)  The  evil  tendency  of  education  not  based 
on  religion : — What  is  meant  by  knowledge  ?  An  acquaintance  with  those  truths 
the  perception  and  practice  of  which  will  duly  qualify  us  both  for  our  present  and 
future  state  of  existence.  To  this  end  we  should  know  ourselves,  our  capacities, 
our  duties,  our  particular  business  or  vocation  in  life  ;  the  state  of  things  in  which 
we  are  placed,  the  character  of  mankind  in  general,  and  the  nature  of  our  social 
and  civil  relations.  We  should  know  also  the  revealed  character  of  God  ;  the 
position  in  which  we  stand  to  Him,  the  nature  of  His  transactions  with  the  human 
race,  our  present  condition  and  future  destiny.  The  matter  and  extent  of  knowledge 
is  almost  infinite.  Exhibiting,  as  the  mind  does,  a  most  varied  scale  of  intellectual 
strength,  a  corresponding  variety  in  the  measure  of  knowledge  is  the  necessary 
consequence.  Considerations  for  confirming  and  illustrating  the  truth  that  for 
the  soul  to  be  without  knowledge  is  not  good:  1.  The  human  mind  is  evidently 
framed  for  the  acquisition  of  knowledge.  2.  A  certain  degree  of  knowledge  is 
absolutely  necessary  to  enable  men  duly  to  perform  their  parts  in  life.  3.  Know- 
ledge tends  to  increase  the  influence  and  usefulness  of  its  possessor.  4.  It  tends  to 
increase  the  pleasures  of  life,  by  opening  new  sources  of  innocent  enjoyment.  If 
we  would  give  men  an  education  suitable  to  their  character  and  destinies,  we  must 
attend  to  the  cultivation  of  the  heart  as  well  as  that  of  the  head.  We  must  make 
religion  a  prominent  feature  in  our  systems  of  instruction.  Without  religion, 
worldly  knowledge,  by  stimulating  the  pride  and  pravity  of  a  corrupt  heart,  may  do 
much  injury.  When  the  foundation  of  morality  and  religion  is  firmly  laid,  we 
may  proceed  with  safety  to  erect  the  superstructure  of  human  science  and  general 
knowledge.  But  while  education  may  teach  men  their  duty,  it  cannot  enable  them 
to  perform  it.  Eeligion  alone  can  do  that.  He  who  would  establish  a  system  of 
education  without  making  religion  the  basis  of  it,  is  like  a  man  who  builds  his 
house  apon  the  sand.  He  wUl  find  the  corruptions  of  human  nature  too  strong  for 
his  intellectual  barrier.  There  is  no  more  effectual  method  of  checking  the  progress 
of  socialism  and  infideUty  than  a  system  of  sound,  solid,  and  religious  education. 
Then  educate  the  rising  generation,  but  do  so  in  a  sound  and  Scriptural  manner. 
(E.  B.  Were,  M.A.)  Knowledge  essential  to  man's  welfare  : — In  what  senses  does 
the  writer  afiirm  the  text  ?  1.  In  the  personal  sense.  To  man  as  an  individual. 
Knowledge  gives  him  mental  occupation.  2.  In  a  domestic  sense.  The  family  circle, 
or  household,  is  the  first  and  simplest  form  of  society.  It  is  necessary  to  its  well- 
being  that  a  legitimate  authority  and  a  due  subordination  should  exist  in  it.  The 
duties  ef  a  parent  cannot  be  performed  without  the  advantages  of  knowledge. 
3.  In  a  social  sense.  In  reference  to  the  proper  discharge  of  our  duties  towards 
friends  and  neighbours,  superiors  and  inferiors.    4.  In  a  political  sense.    If  we 


488  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

desire  to  make  a  man  a  good  member  of  the  state,  we  must  instruct  him  in  the 
principles  on  which  political  society  is  formed,  and  by  which  alone  can  exist.  We 
must  teach  him  the  grounds  of  moral  obligation.  And  what  are  those  grounds  but 
the  truths  of  rehgion?     (Geo.  Gibbon,  M.A.) 

Ver.  3.  The  foolisliness  of  man  perverteth  his  way:  and  his  heart  fretteth 
against  the  Lord. — The  folly  and  sin  of  men  i7i  perverting  their  own  way,  and  then 
fretting  against  God : — Men  are  apt  to  charge  all  the  afflictions  which  befall  them 
upon  God,  whereas  they  bring  most  of  them  upon  themselves.  God  is  no  further 
accessory  to  them  than  as,  in  the  nature  of  things,  and  in  the  course  of  His  wise 
providence,  He  hath  established  a  connection  between  folly  and  suffering,  between 
sin  and  misery.  Homer  observes  that  "  men  lay  those  evils  upon  the  gods  which 
they  have  incurred  through  their  own  folly  and  perverseness."  "  The  foolishness 
of  man "  signifies  his  want  of  thought  and  reflection ;  his  indiscretion  and 
rashness.  It  "  perverts  his  way,"  leads  him  aside  from  the  path  of  wisdom 
and  prudence,  safety  and  happiness ;  by  this  means  he  brings  himself  into 
trouble,  is  reduced  to  necessity,  perplexed  with  difficulties,  or  oppressed  with 
sorrow.  Then  he  committeth  this  grand  error  after  all  the  rest,  that  "  his  heart 
fretteth  against  the  Lord."  He  is  vexed,  not  at  himself,  but  at  Providence. 
"Fretteth"  expresses  the  commotion  and  uneasiness  there  is  in  a  discontented, 
ungoverned  mind.  I.  The  general  principle  on  which  men  act  in  this  case  is 
RIGHT  AND  JUST.  When  they  fret  against  the  Lord  they  suppose  that  there  is  a 
God,  and  that  He  observes  and  interests  Himself  in  the  affairs  of  His  creatures ; 
and  that  it  is  a  considerable  part  of  His  providential  government  to  try,  exercise, 
and  promote  the  virtues  of  His  rational  creatures  by  the  discipline  of  affliction, 
n.  The  conclusion  thet  draw  is  generally  wrong,  and  their  charge  upon  the 
PROVIDENCE  OF  GoD  GROUNDLESS  AND  UNJUST.  1.  It  is  oftcH  the  case  with  regard 
to  men's  health.  Many  complain  that  God  denies  them  the  health  and  spirits 
which  He  has  given  to  others.  But  health  very  largely,  and  very  directly,  depends 
on  men's  management  of  themselves,  by  indulgence,  fretfulness,  inactivity,  too 
close  application  to  business,  &c.  2.  With  regard  to  their  circumstances  in  life. 
We  see  men  impoverished  and  reduced  to  straits  and  difficulties.  They  complain 
that  God  brings  them  into  straits,  and  embarrasses  their  circumstances.  But  most 
persons  are  really  in  straits  through  their  own  negligence,  carelessness,  or  extrava- 
gance. Many  are  ruined  in  this  world  by  an  indolent  temper.  Cardinal  de  Ketz 
used  to  say  that  "  misfortune  was  only  another  word  for  imprudence."  3.  With 
regard  to  their  relations  in  life.  How  many  unhappy  marriages  there  are !  But 
they  are  almost  always  the  consequence  of  foolish  and  wilful  choices.  Many 
complain  that  their  children  are  idle,  disobedient,  and  undutiful.  But  this  is 
generally  the  result  of  parental  inefficiency  in  training  or  in  example.  4.  With 
regard  to  men's  minds  and  their  religious  concerns.  Many  who  make  a  profes- 
sion of  religion  are  uneasy  and  fretful,  without  any  external  cause ;  but  this  is 
usually  owing  to  their  own  negligence  or  self-willedness.  lU.  The  folly  and 
WICKEDNESS  OF  SUCH  CONDUCT.  It  is  Very  absurd,  for  in  most  of  these  cases  they 
have  no  one  to  blame  but  themselves.  It  likewise  proceeds  from  ignorance  of 
themselves.  Fretfulness  only  tends  to  aggravate  our  afflictions  and  to  hurt  our 
minds.  It  may  provoke  God  to  bring  upon  us  some  heavier  affliction.  Applica- 
tion :  1.  How  much  prudence,  caution,  and  foresight  are  necessary  for  those  who 
are  setting  out  in  life !  2.  What  a  great  and  mischievous  evil  pride  isl  3.  Inquire 
to  what  your  afflictions  are  owing.  4.  Guard  against  the  great  sin  of  fretting 
against  the  Lord.  (J.  Orton.)  Man's  sorrows  the  result  of  his  sins  : — I.  Illus- 
trate THE  PROVERB.  1.  As  regards  health.  2.  As  regards  worldly  substance. 
3.  As  regards  the  vexations  of  domestic  life.  4.  From  the  state  of  the  mind. 
5.  From  the  world  in  which  we  reside.  H.  Instructions  derivable  from  the 
PROVERB.  1.  It  instructs  us  with  regard  to  sin.  2.  It  shows  the  inefficacy  of  mere 
suffering  to  bring  a  man  to  a  proper  state  of  thinking  and  feeling.  3.  The 
disposition  of  the  mind  under  sanctified  affliction.  4.  The  reality  of  a  moral 
providence.  5.  Learn  to  look  to  God  for  His  grace  and  guidance.  (W.  Jay.) 
The  misfortunes  of  men  chargeable  on  themselves : — I.  Consider  the  external 
condition  op  man.  He  is  placed  in  a  world  where  he  has  by  no  means  the 
disposal  of  the  events  that  happen.  Calamities  befall  us,  which  are  directly  the 
Divine  dealing.  But  a  multitude  of  evils  beset  us  which  are  due  to  our  own 
negligences  or  imprudences.  Men  seek  to  ascribe  their  disappointments  to  any 
cause  rather  than  to  their  own  misconduct,  and  when  they  can  devise  no  other  cause 


CHAP.  XIX.]  PROVERBS.  489 

they  lay  them  to  the  charge  of  Providence.  They  are  doubly  unjust  towards 
God.  When  we  look  abroad  we  see  more  proofs  of  the  truth  of  this  assertion. 
We  see  great  societies  of  men  torn  in  pieces  by  intestine  dissensions,  tumults, 
and  civil  commotions.  But  did  man  control  his  passions,  and  form  his  conduct 
according  to  the  dictates  of  wisdom,  humanity,  and  virtue,  the  earth  would  no 
longer  be  desolated  by  wars  and  cruelties.  11.  CoNsroER  the  rNTEKNAi  state  of 
MAN.  So  far  as  this  inward  disquietude  arises  from  the  stings  of  conscience  and 
the  horrors  of  guilt,  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  its  being  self-created  misery,  which 
it  is  impossible  to  impute  to  Heaven.  But  how  much  poison  man  himself  infuses 
into  the  most  prosperous  conditions  by  peevishness  and  restlessness,  by  impatience 
and  low  spirits,  &c.  Unattainable  objects  pursued,  intemperate  passions  nourished, 
vicious  pleasures  and  desires  indulged,  God  and  God's  holy  laws  forgotten — these 
are  the  great  scourges  of  the  world ;  the  great  causes  of  the  life  of  man  being  so 
embroiled  and  unhappy.  1.  Let  us  be  taught  to  look  upon  sin  as  the  source  of  all 
our  miseries.  2.  The  reality  of  a  Divine  government  exercised  over  the  world. 
3.  The  injustice  of  our  charging  Providence  with  a  promiscuous  and  unequal  dis- 
tribution of  its  favours  among  the  good  and  the  bad.  4.  The  necessity  of  looking 
up  to  God  for  direction  and  aid  in  the  conduct  of  life.  Let  us  hold  fast  the 
persuasion  of  these  fundamental  truths— that,  in  all  His  dispensations,  God  is 
just  and  good;  that  the  cause  of  all  the  troubles  we  suffer  is  in  ourselves,  not  in 
Him ;  that  virtue  is  the  surest  guide  to  a  happy  life  ;  and  that  he  who  forsakes 
this  guide  enters  upon  the  path  of  death.  (H.  Blair,  D.D.)  Fretting  against 
God  a  frequent  sin  : — Men  are  oftener  guilty  of  this  sin  than  they  imagine.  Our 
hearts  fret  against  the  Lord  by  fretting  at  the  ministers  and  instruments  of  His 
providence ;  and  therefore,  when  the  people  murmured  against  Moses  in  the 
wilderness,  he  teUs  them  that  their  murmuring  was  not  against  him  and  his 
brother  Aaron,  but  against  the  Lord.  Instead  of  fretting,  it  is  our  duty  to  accept 
of  the  punishment  of  our  iniquity,  and  to  bless  God  that  matters  are  not  so  bad 
with  us  as  we  deserve.  If  our  troubles  come  upon  us  without  any  particular 
reason  from  our  own  conduct,  yet  reflections  upon  God  would  be  very  unjust. 
Job's  troubles  were  extremely  grievous,  and  as  they  came  upon  him  without 
cause  in  himself,  he  was  made  to  acknowledge  his  great  folly  in  reflecting  upon 
God  for  his  distresses.  (G.  Laicson,  D.D.)  The  untoward  incidents  of  life 
must  not  be  charged  against  God  .-—Let  us  not  charge  God  overhastily  with  the 
untoward  incidents  of  life.  In  the  main  we  are  the  manufacturers  of  our  own 
life-material.  If  you  give  the  weaver  none  but  dark  threads  he  can  only  fashion 
a  sombre  pattern.  (J.  Halsey.)  Life  regarded  as  a  wrong : — George  Eliot 
once  said  to  a  friend,  with  deep  solemnity,  that  she  regarded  it  as  a  wrong  and 
misery  that  she  had  ever  been  born.     (Oscar  Browning. ) 

Yer.  4.  Wealth  maketh  many  friends;  but  the  poor  la  separated  from  his 
neighbour. — The  rich  and  the  poor  : — Nothing  upon  earth  is  so  powerful  as  money. 
It  is  a  force  before  which  everything  bows.  Wealth  is  such  a  mighty  power,  that 
one  possessing  it  does  not  feel  his  dependence  as  other  men  do.  Being  more  easily 
spoiled  than  other  men,  his  salvation  is  more  difficult.  This  accounts  for  every- 
thing the  gospel  has  to  say  about  rich  men.  In  speaking  of  wealth,  we  are  very 
apt  to  make  the  mistake  of  supposing  that  only  very  rich  men  are  wealthy.  The 
Bible  accounts  that  man  wealthy  who,  free  from  debt,  has  anything  left  after 
making  provision  for  actual  necessities  of  life.  Poverty  is  isolation.  When  we 
become  poor  we  become  lonely.  Either  friends  withdraw  from  us  or  we  with- 
draw from  them.  When  one  gets  really  poor  he  is  pretty  much  left  by  his 
brethren.  They  may  not  mean  to  shun  him,  but  they  let  him  pretty  severely 
alone.  The  poor  are  the  material  we  Christians  are  to  work  upon.  To  these 
we  are  to  let  our  light  shine.  It  is  our  holiest  work  to  stop  this  separation  of 
the  poor  from  his  neighbours.  The  poor  are  here  by  Divine  intention.  The  poor 
help  to  save  our  souls.  We  are  not  to  relieve  them  only ;  we  are  to  help  them. 
Giving  is  not  enough  to  fulfil  our  Christian  duty  towards  them.  Helping  the  poor 
to  help  themselves  is  the  most  ChristUke  thing  you  can  do.  Machinery  in 
religious  life  is  to  be  avoided.  It  is  of  use  only  as  it  helps  to  concentrate 
energy.  (G.  R.  Van  de  Water.)  Poverty,  riches,  and  social  selfishness : — 
I.  The  TEiAiB  OF  POVERTY.  1.  Degradation.  "  The  poor  useth  entreaties."  To 
beg  of  a  feUow-man  is  a  degradation ;  it  is  that  from  which  our  manhood  revolts. 
"  The  poor  useth  entreaties."  They  have  to  mortify  the  natural  independence  of 
their  spirit.    They  are  subjected  to— 2.  Insolent  treatment.    "  The  rich  answereth 


490  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

roughly."  3.  Social  desertion.  "  The  poor  is  separated  from  his  neighbour." 
Who  in  this  selfish  world  will  make  friends  with  the  poor,  however  superior  in 
intellect  or  excellent  in  character  ?  When  the  wealthy  man  with  his  large  circle 
of  friends  becomes  poor  the  poles  of  his  magnet  are  reversed,  and  his  old  friends 
feel  the  repulsion.  II.  The  temptations  of  we.\ith.  1.  Upon  the  mind  of  its 
possessor.  It  tends  to  promote  haughtiness  and  insolence.  "  The  rich  answereth 
roughly."  The  temptation  of  wealth  is  revealed — 2.  Upon  the  mind  of  the  wealthy 
man's  circle.  "  Wealth  maketh  many  friends."  III.  The  selfishness  of  society. 
"Every  man  is  a  friend  to  him  that  giveth  gifts."  {Houiilist.)  Fi-iendshij)  of 
the  world : — When  I  see  leaves  drop  from  their  trees  in  the  beginning  of  autumn, 
just  such,  think  I,  is  the  friendship  of  the  world ;  just  such  are  the  comforts  and 
joys  of  this  life.  While  the  sap  of  maintenance  lasts  my  friends  will  swarm  in 
abundance,  my  joys  and  comforts  will  abide  with  me ;  but  when  the  sap  ceases, 
the  spring  which  supplies  them  fails;  in  the  winter  of  my  need  they  leave  ma 
naked.  {H.  G.  Salter.)  Friends  sought  for  money : — In  Dr.  Guthrie's  "Auto- 
biography "  there  is  a  good  illustration  of  the  unhappy  state  of  cynicism  into  which 
the  rich  are  prone  to  fall.  There  he  relates  how,  in  a  winter  of  extraordinary 
severity,  he  made  an  appeal  to  a  lady  who  had  succeeded  to  a  prodigious  fortune, 
on  behalf  of  the  starving  poor  of  his  parish.  In  doing  so  he  had  no  very  sanguine 
hope  of  success.  On  being  ushered  into  her  room,  she  turned  round,  and  showing 
her  thin,  spare  figure,  and  a  face  that  looked  as  if  it  had  been  cut  out  of  mahogany, 
grinned  and  said,  "  I  am  sorry  to  see  ye.  What  do  you  want  ?  I  suppose  you  are 
here  seeking  siller."  "  The  very  thing  I  am  here  for,"  was  the  Doctor's  frank 
reply.  Her  next  remark  demonstrated  how  little  power  her  riches  had  of  con- 
ferring happiness ;  and  with  all  her  wealth  of  flatterers,  what  a  poor,  lonely, 
desolate,  miserable  creature  this  possessor  of  more  than  a  million  sterling  was. 
"Ah,"  she  said,  "there  is  nobody  comes  to  see  me  or  seek  me;  but  it's  the 
money,  the  money  they  are  after."  We  are  glad  to  be  able  to  relate  that  this 
rich  old  lady  gave  to  Dr.  Guthrie  fifty  pounds  for  the  poor — an  act  which  we 
hope  shed  a  gleam  of  sunshine  into  her  dark  life. 

Ver.  5.  A  false  witness  shall  not  be  unpunished. — The  woe  of  the  untruthful : — 
The  man  who  gives  wrong  evidence.  The  man  of  untruthfulness  in  common 
conversation.  Such  men  are  always  punished  in  one  way  or  another.  Nothing  is 
more  frequently  inculcated  in  Holy  Scripture  than  the  practice  of  truth,  justice, 
and  righteousness.  The  commandments  of  God  are  called  "truth,"  because  in 
keeping  of  them  lie  our  truest  advantages  and  everlasting  comforts.  All  kinds 
of  fraud  and  deception  are  abominable  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  inconsistent 
with  the  ordering  of  any  civil  government.  For — 1.  Fraud  in  commerce  and 
dealing  is  but  a  species  of  robbery.  2.  Haughtiness  of  spirit  unfits  a  man 
for  those  offices  of  meekness,  courtesy,  and  humanity  which  make  society  agree- 
able and  easy.  3.  No  less  unsociable  is  a  tongue  addicted  to  calumny,  tale- 
bearing, and  detraction  It  is  impossible  for  men  of  these  dispositions  not  to 
meet  with  their  punishment  in  their  own  mischievous  ways.  The  law  of  Moses 
requires  the  judge  who  discovers  any  man  bearing  false  witness  against  another 
to  inflict  the  same  pains  upon  him  as  the  accused  should  have  suffered  had  the 
allegations  proved  true.  Among  the  Athenians  an  action  lay,  not  only  against  a 
false  witness,  but  also  against  the  party  who  produced  him.  The  punishment  of 
false  witness  among  the  Old  Romans  was  to  cast  the  criminal  headlong  from  the 
top  of  the  Tarpeian  rock.  Later  false  witnesses  were  branded  with  the  letter  K. 
By  our  own  statute  law  the  false  witness  is  to  be  imprisoned  for  six  months  and 
fined  twenty  pounds.  This  is  a  short  specimen  of  such  human  penalties  as  have 
been  awarded  to  false  witnesses,  considered  as  pests  of  mankind  and  enemies  of 
the  laws  and  governments  of  the  respective  communities  to  which  they  belong. 
Yet  if  such  receive  no  correction  from  the  hand  of  man,  they  cannot  hope  to 
escape  the  wrath  of  God.     {W.  Readijig,  M.A.) 

Ver.  7.  He  pursueth  them  with  words,  yet  they  are  wanting  to  him. — Coercing 
men  of  ill  principles  : — This  verse  prescribes  a  different  method  of  proceeding 
against  known  offenders,  according  to  their  different  characters.  The  scorner,  who 
makes  a  jest  of  everything  sacred,  and  professes  an  open  contempt  of  religion,  is  to 
be  treated  with  great  severity.  As  to  sinners  who  have  not  resolved  to  shut  their 
eyes  against  the  light  of  truth,  we  are  directed  to  apply  ourselves  to  them  in  a  more 
easy,  gentle,  and  humane  method  of  reproof.    I.  The  beasonauleness  of  Eiii'LO\i.\ii 


CHIP.  XIX.]  PROVERBS.  491 

THE  SECULAB  ARM  AGAINST  THE  scoRNER.  A  sense  of  religion  is  the  great  basis  upon 
which  all  government  stands.  The  scorner  is,  therefore,  an  enemy  to  the  state. 
The  scorner  who  laughs  at  the  very  name  and  pretence  of  conscience  itself  has  no 
claim  on  the  toleration  of  the  state.  II.  The  obligations  we  are  under  to  the 
DUTY  OF  fraternal  REPROOF.  1.  The  obligation  of  a  just  concern  for  the  honour  and 
mterests  of  religion.  The  sins  and  impieties  of  men  bring  a  scandal  and  discredit 
upon  religion.  To  admonish  and  reprove  them  for  such  sins  and  impieties  is  a 
proper  means  to  prevent  that  scandal  and  promote  the  interests  of  religion.  This 
is  one  of  the  methods  which  the  wisdom  of  God  Himself  has  appointed  in  order  to 
reclaim  sinners  from  the  evil  of  their  ways.  As  the  wisdom  of  God  has  directed 
this  method,  societies  have  been  formed  by  men  to  concert  how  it  may  be  most 
effectually  pursued.  2.  From  the  charity  we  owe  to  our  neighbour.  It  is  to  a  good 
man  one  of  the  greatest  pleasures  of  this  life  to  do  good  ;  then  what  an  exceeding 
pleasure  it  must  be  to  be  instrumental  in  recovering  a  lost  soul.  (1)  Great  tender- 
ness and  compassion  must  be  used,  to  give  our  reproof  the  greater  force  and 
eflScacy.  (2)  Our  reproofs  must  be  modest,  and  free  from  all  hypocritical  osten- 
tations. (3)  Avoid  exposing  the  offender  as  much  as  the  rule  of  charity  will  admit. 
(4)  Do  not  give  admonitions  to  superiors  the  air  of  reproof.  (5)  Take  care  that 
reproof  is  seasonable.  If  this  be  a  duty  of  so  great  a  nicety,  we  ought  not  rashly 
and  unadvisedly  to  take  it  in  hand,  but  to  consider  well  whether  we  be  in  any  good 
measure  qualified  for  it.  Those  who  find  themselves  really  qualified  for  it  ought 
not  to  be  discouraged  from  performing  it,  though  it  sometimes  expose  them  to 
inconvenience  or  make  them  incur  the  odium  of  those  with  whom  they  take  so 
unacceptable  a  freedom.  Let  us  resolve  to  discharge  a  good  conscience,  and  leave 
the  consequences  of  doing  our  duty  to  the  disposal  of  God.     (B.  Fiddes,  D.D.) 

Ver.  8.  He  that  getteth  wisdom  loveth  his  own  souL — On  getting  and  keeping 
wisdom  : — The  way  of  getting  this  wisdom  is  to  be  sensible  of  our  need  of  it ;  to 
trust  in  Him  to  whom  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  belong,  for  the 
communication  of  it ;  and  to  be  diligent  in  the  use  of  the  means  which  He  hath 
appointed,  and  will  bless,  for  conveying  it  to  us.  We  must  not  only  get,  but  keep, 
this  precious  treasure,  retaining  it  in  our  hearts,  showing  it  forth  in  all  our 
behaviour,  and  refusing  to  part  with  it  on  any  account.     [George  Lawson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  11.  The  discretion  of  a  man  deferreth  his  anger. — Anger : — If  any  vice  is 
often  reproved  in  the  Word  of  God,  you  may  be  assured  it  springs  prolific  in  the 
life  of  man.  In  this  book  of  morals  anger  is  a  frequently  recurring  theme.  Anger 
cannot  be  cast  wholly  out  of  man  in  the  present  state.  On  some  occasions  we  do 
well  to  be  angry.  But  the  only  legitimate  anger  is  a  holy  emotion  directed  against 
an  unholy  thing.  Sin,  and  not  our  neighbour,  must  be  its  object ;  zeal  for 
righteousness,  and  not  our  own  pride,  must  be  its  distinguishing  character. 
Although  anger  be  not  in  its  own  nature  and  in  all  cases  sinful,  the  best  practical 
rule  of  life  is  to  repress  it,  as  if  it  were.  As  usual  in  these  laws  of  God's  kingdom, 
suffering  springs  from  the  sin,  as  the  plant  from  the  seed.  The  man  of  great  wrath 
will  suffer,  although  no  human  tribunal  take  cognisance  of  his  case.  A  man  of 
great  wrath  is  a  man  of  little  happiness.  The  two  main  elements  of  happiness  are 
wanting ;  for  he  is  seldom  at  peace  with  his  neighbour  or  himself.  There  is  an 
ingredient  in  the  retribution  still  more  immediate  and  direct.  The  emotion  of 
anger  in  the  mind  instantly  and  violently  affects  the  body  in  the  most  vital  parts  of 
its  organisation.  When  the  spirit  in  man  is  agitated  by  anger  it  sets  the  life-blood 
flowing  too  fast  for  the  safety  of  its  tender  channels.  The  best  practical  specific 
for  the  treatment  of  anger  against  persons  is  to  defer  it.  Its  nature  presses  for 
instant  vengeance,  and  the  appetite  should  be  starved.  "  To  pass  over  a  trans- 
gression" is  a  man's  "glory."  "Looking  unto  Jesus"  is,  after  all,  the  grand 
specific  for  anger  in  both  its  aspects,  as  a  sin  and  as  a  suffering.  Its  dangerous 
and  tormenting  fire,  when  it  is  kindled  in  a  human  breast,  may  be  extinguished  best 
by  letting  in  upon  it  the  love  wherewith  He  loved  us.  (W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  Dis- 
cretion : — This  is,  strictly  speaking,  not  a  moral  but  an  intellectual  power.  It  is 
simply  discernment;  discernment  and  discretion  are  radically  the  same  words, 
though  cast  into  different  forms.  Discernment  is  the  ability  to  distinguish  between 
things.  A  discreet  man  is  a  man  who  sees  what  is  to  his  own  interest,  and  acts 
accordingly.  A  man's  discretion  leads  him  to  discern  the  men  whom  he  may  trust, 
as  distinct  from  the  men  whom  it  is  not  safe  to  trust.  A  man's  discretion  is  of 
immense  service  to  him  in  the  conduct  of  life ;  and  if  a  man  have  little  or  no 


492  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xe. 

discretion  he  comes  off  very  badly :  he  makes  many  blunders,  sustains  many  losses, 
gets  into  many  troubles,  which  a  discreet  man  entirely  escapes.  Discretion  is  the 
main  secret  of  secular  success.  But  discretion  can  do  some  very  questionable 
things.  It  is  great  in  concealing  facts.  It  is  not  a  very  noble  property.  A  man's 
discretion  nurses  many  old  grudges,  watching  for  the  right  occasion  to  pay  them 
off.  Discretion  has  a  side  of  cunning  and  craft,  and  links  with  long-deferred  anger 
and  revenge.  (Hu^h  Stowell  Brown.)  Anger : — If  you  will  always  be  ready  to 
go  off  like  a  loaded  gun  even  by  an  accident,  depend  on  it  you  will  get  into 
difficulty.  {Scientific  Illustrations.)  Anger  controlled  and  uncontrolled: — Anger 
is  an  affection  inherent  in  our  nature.  It  is,  therefore,  not  wrong  in  itself ;  it  is 
•wrong  only  when  it  is  directed  to  wrong  objects,  or  to  right  objects  in  a  wrong 
degree  of  amount  and  duration.  Anger  in  itself  is  as  holy  a  passion  as  love. 
Indeed,  in  its  legitimate  form  it  is  but  a  development  of  love.  Love  indignant  with 
that  which  is  opposed  to  the  cause  of  right  and  happiness.  Albeit,  like  every 
affection  of  our  nature,  it  is  often  sadly  perverted,  it  not  unfrequently  becomes 
malignant  and  furious.  I.  Controlled.  "  The  discretion  of  a  man  deferreth  his 
anger;  and  it  is  his  glory  to  pass  over  a  transgression."  The  wise  man  is  liable  to 
the  passion,  and  circumstances  in  his  Hfe  occur  to  evoke  it.  Instead  of  acting 
under  its  impulse,  he  waits  until  its  fires  cool.  It  is  said  of  Julius  Csesar  that  when 
provoked  he  used  to  repeat  the  whole  Eoman  alphabet  before  he  suffered  himself  to 
speak;  and  Plato  once  said  to  his  servant,  "  I  would  beat  thee  but  I  am  angry." 
It  is  noble  to  see  a  man  holding  a  calm  mastery  over  the  billows  of  his  own  passions, 
bidding  them  to  go  so  far  and  no  farther.  He  who  governs  himself  is  a  true 
king.  We  have  anger  here — 11.  Uncontrolled.  The  text  suggests  two 
remarks  in  relation  to  uncontrolled  anger.  1.  It  is  sometimes  terrible.  "  The 
king's  wrath  is  as  the  roaring  of  a  lion."  It  is  a  lamentable  fact  that  kings 
have  shown  less  command  over  their  evil  tempers  than  have  the  ordinary  run 
of  mankind.  Their  temper,  it  is  implied,  affects  the  nation.  Their  anger 
terrifies  the  people  like  the  "roar  of  a  lion"  ;  their  favour  is  as  refreshing  and 
blessed  as  the  "  dew  upon  the  grass."  2.  It  is  always  self -injurious.  "  A  man  of 
great  wrath  shall  suffer  punishment ;  for  if  thou  deliver  him,  yet  thou  must  do  it 
again."  Violent  passions  ever  inflict  their  own  punishment  upon  their  unhappy 
subjects.  They  injure  the  body.  It  sets  the  blood  flowing  too  quickly  for  its 
narrow  channels.  But  it  injures  the  soul  in  a  variety  of  ways.  Well  does  Pope 
say,  "To  be  angry  is  to  revenge  others'  faults  upon  ourselves."  Anger  is  misery. 
Dr.  Arnold,  when  at  Laleham,  once  lost  all  patience  with  a  dull  scholar,  when  the 
pupil  looked  up  in  his  face,  and  said,  "  Why  do  you  speak  angrily,  sir  ?  Indeed  I 
am  doing  the  best  I  can."  Years  after  he  used  to  tell  the  story  to  his  children,  and 
say,  "  I  never  felt  so  ashamed  of  myself  in  my  life.  That  look  and  that  speech  I 
have  never  forgotten."    (Homilist.) 

Ver.  14.  And  a  prudent  wife  is  from  the  Lord. — Divine  direction  needed  in  the 
choice  of  a  wife : — In  the  choice  of  a  wife,  first  of  all  seek  Divine  direction.  About 
thirty-five  years  ago,  when  Martin  Farquhar  Tupper  urged  men  to  prayer  before 
they  decided  upon  matrimonial  association,  people  laughed.  And  some  of  them 
have  lived  to  laugh  on  the  other  side  of  their  mouths.  The  need  of  Divine  direction 
I  argue  from  the  fact  that  so  many  men,  and  some  of  them  strong  and  wise,  have 
wrecked  their  lives  at  this  juncture.  Witness  Samson  and  the  woman  of  Timnath. 
Witness  Socrates,  pecked  of  the  historical  Xantippe.  Witness  Ananias,  a  liar,  who 
might  perhaps  have  been  cured  by  a  truthful  spouse,  yet  marrying  as  great  a  liar 
as  himself — Sapphira.  Witness  John  Wesley,  one  of  the  best  men  that  ever  lived, 
united  to  one  of  the  most  miserable  women,  who  sat  in  City  Road  Chapel  making 
mouths  at  him  while  he  preached.  Witness  the  once  connubial  wretchedness  of 
John  Euskin,  the  great  art  essayist,  and  Frederick  W.  Eobertson  the  great  preacher. 
On  this  sea  of  matrimony,  where  so  many  have  been  wrecked,  am  I  not  right  in 
advising  Divine  pilotage  ?  Especially  is  devout  supplication  needed  because  of  the 
fact  that  society  is  so  full  of  artificiaUties  that  men  are  deceived  as  to  whom  they 
are  marrying,  and  no  one  but  the  Lord  knows.  After  the  dressmaker,  and  the 
milliner,  and  the  jeweller,  and  the  hair-adjuster,  and  the  dancing-master,  and  the 
cosmetic  art  have  completed  their  work,  how  is  an  unsophisticated  man  to  decipher 
the  physiological  hieroglyphics,  and  make  accurate  judgment  of  who  it  is  to  whom 
he  offers  hand  and  heart?  That  is  what  makes  so  many  recreant  husbands. 
They  make  an  honourable  marriage  contract,  but  the  goods  delivered  are  so 
different  from  the  sample  by  which  they  bargained.    They  were  simply  swindled. 


CHAT.  XIX.]  PROVERBS.  493 

They  mistook  Jezebel  for  Longfellow's  Evangeline,  and  Lucretia  Borgia  for  Martha 
Washington.     {T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 

Ver.  15.  Slothfulness  casteth  into  a  deep  sleep ;  and  an  idle  soul  shall  snffer 
hunger. — Idlers  and  idleness : — In  the  big,  busy  city,  the  one  who  seems  out  of 
touch  with  it  is  the  idler.  He  who  has  no  other  business  than  the  wretched  one 
of  killing  time  has  no  portion,  right,  or  memorial  in  it ;  nor  has  he  any  right  or 
portion  in  the  age  which  we  are  serving.  There  is  the  rich  idler,  who  lives  to 
amuse  himself.  Such  provide  the  demoraUsing  element  in  our  society.  They  lead 
the  fashion  in  vice  and  frivolity.  There  is  the  poor  idler.  There  are  some  who 
"  for  the  sake  of  equalising  poverty  and  wealth  would  really  equalise  indolence  and 
industry."  In  our  great  towns,  more  than  half  of  our  poverty  is  the  result,  direct 
or  indirect,  of  that  slothfulness  which  casts  into  a  deep  sleep.  There  is  a  hereditary 
pauperism.  There  is  the  poverty  of  recklessness  and  thoughtlessness  and  thriftless- 
ness.  A  third  type  of  idler  is  the  idle-souled.  Busy  enough  with  earth,  such  have 
no  business  with  heaven,  no  business  with  love,  no  business  even  with  the  ideals  of 
duty.  Leisure  is  very  different  from  idleness.  There  is  no  leisure  at  all  when  the 
life  is  spent  in  idleness.  It  is  the  interval  between  work  and  work  that  gives  the 
helpful  leisure.  Leisure  is  good,  idleness  is  bad.  Above  all  things,  avoid  heart 
indolence,  moral  and  spiritual  indolence,  the  indolence  of  the  soul.  (J.  Marshall 
Lang,  D.D.) 

Ver.  16.  But  he  that  despiseth  his  ways  shall  die. — The  folly  of  despising  our 
own  ways  : — I.  The  sinner's  fall  and  euin.  "He  shall  die."  There  is  a  death 
that  is  common  to  all  mankind.  That  is  the  general  effect  of  sin.  But  there  is  a 
death  which  is  the  particular  lot  of  impenitent  sinners.  This  is — 1.  A  spiritual 
death,  which  is,  being  cut  off  from  all  communion  with  God.  2.  An  eternal  death. 
This  is  but  the  perfection  of  the  former.  This  second  death  is  a  real  thing,  and  a 
fearful  thing,  and  it  is  very  near  to  all  who  are  going  on  still  in  their  trespasses. 
n.  The  sinner's  fault  and  folly  which  brings  him  to  this  ruin.  "  Despising  his 
own  ways."  When  may  we  be  said  to  despise  our  own  ways?  When  we  are 
altogether  unconcerned  about  the  end  of  our  ways.  When  we  are  indifi'erent 
about  the  rule  of  our  ways,  and  the  measures  by  which  we  govern  ourselves 
in  them.  Those  certainly  despise  their  ways  who  walk  at  all  adventures, 
and  live  at  large  when  they  should  walk  circumspectly  and  live  by  rule.  God  has 
given  us  the  Scriptures  to  be  the  guide  of  our  way.  He  has  appointed  conscience 
to  be  a  monitor  to  us  concerning  our  way.  When  we  are  wavering  and  unsettled 
in  the  course  and  tenor  of  our  ways,  then  we  despise  them.  If  we  do  not  apply 
ourselves  to  God  in  our  ways,  and  acknowledge  Him,  we  despise  our  own  soul. 
When  we  are  careless  of  our  past  ways  and  take  not  the  account  we  ought  to  take 
of  them.  When  we  are  heedless  and  inconsiderate  as  to  the  way  that  is  before  us, 
and  walk  at  all  adventures.  If  we  are  in  no  care  to  avoid  sin,  or  to  do  our  duty. 
III.  The  foolishness  and  danger  of  despising  our  own  wats.  1.  The  God  of 
heaven  observes  and  takes  particular  notice  of  all  our  ways.  2.  Satan  seeks  to 
pervert  our  ways.  3.  Many  eyes  are  on  us  that  are  witnesses  to  our  ways. 
4.  According  as  our  ways  are  now,  it  is  likely  to  be  ill  or  well  with  us  to  eternity. 
Application:  1.  Caution  not  to  be  rigid  and  severe  in  our  censures  of  other  people's 
ways.  2.  Let  it  charge  us  to  look  well  to  our  own  ways.  Be  strict  in  your 
inquiries  concerning  your  present  ways.  Be  impartial  in  your  reflections  upon 
your  past  ways.  Be  very  circumspect  and  considerate  as  to  the  particular  paths 
that  are  before  you.     {Matthew  Henry.) 

Ver.  17.  He  that  hath  pity  upon  the  poor  lendeth  unto  the  Lord. — Christian 
pity  for  the  Christian  poor : — I.  The  great  stress  which  the  Scriptures  lay 
UPON  PITY  FOR  the  POOR.  That  man  must  be  a  cursory  reader  of  the  Bible 
who  does  not  see  that  it  pervades  the  Bible.  The  old  dispensation  is  full  of 
it.     In  the  new  dispensation  it  is  brought  out  stiU  more  prominently.     II.  Why 

IS    so    GREAT    A    MASS    OF    THE    LoRD's    PEOPLK    FOUND    AMONG    THE    POOR?       If    Wealth 

would  have  been  their  blessing,  wealth  they  would  have  had.  God  would  have 
this  manifested  by  them — that  He  considers  these  things  in  themselves  as 
nothing.  Some  part  of  the  mystery  is  to  answer  Satan's  accusations.  And  it 
is  for  the  trial  of  the  grace  that  is  in  His  people.  III.  The  motives  urging 
A  GOOD  MAN  TO  SHOW  PITY  TO  THE  POOR.     He  "  lendeth  to  the  Lord."     Here  ig 


494  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

a  payment  spoken  of.  The  Lord  is  a  bounteous  giver.  {J.  H.  Evans.)  The 
deserving  poor : — We  are  told  that  the  poor  shall  never  cease  out  of  the  land. 
Paley  defines  a  poor  man  as  he,  of  whatever  rank,  whose  expenses  exceed  his 
resources.  It  is  very  clear  from  this  that  there  may  be  poverty  which  has  no  claim 
to  our  commiseration  and  charity.  I.  Man's  duty  towaeds  the  deserving  poor. 
"He  that  hath  pity  on  the  poor."  Two  things  are  implied  concerning  this  pity. 
1.  It  must  be  practical.  The  text  speaks  of  it  as  lending  to  the  Lord.  It  is  pity, 
therefore,  that  gives,  that  does  something  to  relieve  distress.  The  pity  that  goes  off 
in  sentimental  sighs,  or  goes  no  farther  than  words,  saying,  "  Depart  in  peace,  be 
warmed,  be  filled,"  is  not  true  pity — the  pity  that  God  demands  for  the  poor.  2.  It 
must  be  genuine.  The  words  imply  that  the  pity  is  "  accepted  of  the  Lord."  He 
takes  it  as  a  loan  ;  therefore  it  must  be  genuine.  The  service  rendered  is  from  right 
principles.  There  is  a  large  amount  of  charity  shown  to  the  poor  which  is  inspired 
by  motives  abhorrent  to  Omniscient  Purity.  II.  God's  interest  in  the  deserving 
POOR.  God's  interest  in  the  poor  is  shown  in  three  ways.  1.  In  the  obligation 
that  is  imposed  on  the  rich  to  help  them.  He  denounces  all  neglect  and  cruelty  of 
the  poor.  "  Woe  unto  him  that  buildeth  his  house  by  unrighteousness  and  his 
chamber  by  wrong,  that  useth  his  neighbour's  service  without  wages."  Again, 
"  Whoso  mocketh  the  poor  reproacheth  his  Maker."  He  inculcates  practical 
sympathy  for  the  poor  (Exod.  xxii.  21,  22,  xxiii.  9 ;  Lev.  xix.  33,  xxv.  35 ; 
Deut.  X.  19,  xxiv.  19  ;  Prov.  xxii.  22 ;  Isa.  i.  17-23).  2.  In  the  earthly  condition 
into  which  He  sent  His  Son.  3.  In  the  class  from  which  He  selected  His  servants. 
in.  The  Divine  acknowledgment  of  service  to  the  poor.  "  And  that  which  he 
hath  given  will  He  pay  him  again."  Every  gift  of  genuine  piety  to  the  poor  is  a 
loan  to  the  Lord,  and  a  loan  that  shall  be  paid.  1.  It  is  often  amply  repaid  in  this 
world  (Deut.  xvi.  17-20 ;  2  Cor.  ix.  6-8).  2.  It  will  be  acknowledged  in  the  day 
of  judgment.  "  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it  unto  the  least  of  these  My  brethren, 
ye  have  done  it  unto  Me."  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Lending  to  the  Lord : — We  are  to 
give  to  the  poor  out  of  pity.  Not  to  be  seen  and  applauded,  much  less  to  get 
influence  over  them  ;  but  out  of  pure  sympathy  and  compassion  we  must  give  them 
help.  We  must  not  expect  to  get  anything  back  from  the  poor,  not  even  gratitude ; 
but  we  should  regard  what  we  have  done  as  a  loan  to  the  Lord.  He  undertakes 
the  obligation,  and  if  we  look  to  Him  in  the  matter  we  must  not  look  to  the  second 
party.  What  an  honour  the  Lord  bestows  upon  us  when  He  condescends  to  borrow 
of  us  !  That  merchant  is  greatly  favoured  who  has  the  Lord  on  his  books.  It 
would  seem  a  pity  to  have  such  a  name  down  for  a  paltry  pittance  ;  let  us  make  it  a 
heavy  amount.  The  next  needy  man  that  comes  this  way,  let  us  help  him.  As 
for  repayment,  we  can  hardly  think  of  it,  and  yet  here  is  the  Lord's  note  of  hand. 
Blessed  be  His  name.  His  promise  to  pay  is  better  than  gold  and  silver.  Are  we 
running  a  little  short  through  the  depression  of  the  times  ?  We  may  venture 
humbly  to  present  this  bill  at  the  Bank  of  Faith.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  For  long 
credit : — A  wealthy  but  niggardly  gentleman  was  waited  on  by  the  advocates  of  a 
charitable  institution,  for  which  they  solicited  his  aid,  reminding  him  of  the  Divine 
declaration,  "  He  that  hath  pity  on  the  poor  lendeth  unto  the  Lord ;  and  that  which 
he  hath  given  will  He  pay  him  again."  To  this  he  replied,  "  The  security,  no 
doubt,  is  good,  and  the  interest  liberal;  but  I  cannot  give  such  long  credit."  Poor 
rich  man !  the  day  of  payment  was  much  nearer  than  he  anticipated.  Not  a 
fortnight  had  elapsed  from  his  refusing  to  honour  this  claim  of  God  upon  his 
substance  before  he  received  a  summons  with  which  he  could  not  refuse  to  comply. 
He  was  dead.  The  best  loan  (to  the  young) : — Pity  is  the  feeling  of  sorrow  we 
find  in  our  hearts  when  we  see  a  person  in  trouble  or  distress.  There  are  two  kinds 
of  pity,  a  wrong  and  a  right.  The  wrong  kind  of  pity  makes  people  feel  without 
making  them  do  or  give.  The  right  kind  makes  people  do  or  give,  as  well  as  feel. 
What  we  do  for,  or  give  to  the  poor,  God  regards  as  done  or  given  to  Himself. 
What  we  lend  to  another  we  call  a  loan.  There  are  many  different  kinds  of  loans, 
but  that  which  is  lent  to  the  Lord  is  the  best  loan.     I.  Because  He  receives  the 

SMALLEST  SUMS.   11.  BECAUSE  IT  18  SO  SAFE.   III.  BECAUSE  He  PAYS  GOOD  INTEREST. 

(R.  Newton,  D.D.)  Argument  for  charity  : — This  is  an  argument  for  charity  of 
wonderful  force.  No  pagan  moralist  could  ever  produce  a  motive  for  any  social 
duty  equal  to  this.  It  is  sufficient  to  open  the  closest  fist,  and  to  enlarge  the  most 
selfish  heart.  Can  we  lose  anything  by  lending  it  to  the  Lord  ?  God  will  be  sure 
to  repay  what  is  given  to  the  poor  at  His  command  with  great  increase.  The  greatest 
usurer  on  earth  cannot  make  so  much  of  his  money  as  the  man  that  gives  to  the 
poor.     (George  Lawson,  D.D.) 


CHAP.  XIX.]  PROVERBS.  495 

Ver.  20.  Heax  counsel  and  receive  instruction,  that  thou  mayest  h8  wise  in  thy 
latter  end. — Instruction  and  counsel  placed  before  the  young : — I.  The  advick 
GIVEN.  These  two  things  in  the  text  will  be  found  to  imply  all  that  is  valuable  in 
principle  and  all  that  is  useful  in  practice.  What  is  here  meant  is  not  the  history 
of  the  world,  the  instructions  of  science,  or  the  general  field  of  literature ;  but  the 
principles  and  instructions  of  religion.  The  Word  of  God  discovers  evidences  of 
the  fact  that  there  must  be  such  a  being  as  God.  It  gives  instruction  concerning 
the  government  of  God  and  concerning  man.  What  is  the  distinction  between 
counsel  and  instruction?  Instruction  consists  in  the  communication  of  right 
principles;  counsel  in  the  advice  by  which  you  may  apply  these  principles 
practically.  II.  Look  to  the  end  to  be  obtained  by  eeceiving  the  instruction, 
AND  heaeinq  the  COUNSEL.  The  benefit  here  stated — wisdom  in  the  latter  end — is  a 
benefit  of  the  greatest  importance ;  it  delivers  you  from  the  disgrace  of  sin,  of 
growing  up  a  foolish  old  man  in  the  midst  of  so  many  opportunities  of  acquiring 
the  blessings  of  instruction.     {J.  Burnet.) 

Yer.  21.  There  are  many  devices  In  a  man's  heart ;  nevertheless,  the  counsel  of 
the  Lord,  that   shall  stand. — Devices  and  counsel : — It  being  impossible  for  us 
to  know  God  absolutely,  the  highest  degree  of  knowledge  we  can  hope  to  attain 
unto  is  by  way  of  comparison  with  ourselves  and  other  creatures.    But  because  we 
fail  in  right  knowledge  of  ourselves,  we  fail  also  in  right  knowledge  of  God.     We 
think  God  is  altogether  such  an  one  as  ourselves,  and  yet  we  do  not  know  what  we 
ourselves  are.     The  subject  introduced  by  this  text  is,  the  difference  between  the 
devices  of  a  man  and  the  counsel  of  the  Lord.     I.  The  differences.     1.  In  the 
names.    Devices,   imaginations,   fancies,    chimseras,   "  castles  in   the   air."     The 
vanity  of  men's  fancies  is  seen  in  our  ordinary  dreams.    The  name  of  devices  is  too 
high  an  appellation  to  bestow  upon  our  vain  imaginations,  if  we  knew  a  worse ;  so 
the  name  of  counsel  is  too  low  to  bestow  upon  God  Almighty's  eternal  purpose,  if  we 
knew  a  better.    2.  In  the  number.    Ours  are  devices — in  the  plural ;  His  but  one — 
counsel  in  the  singular.     Men's  purposes  are  various  and  changeable.     It  is  the 
honour  of  God  that  His  counsel  is  but  one,  and  unchangeable.     The  immutability  of 
His  counsel.    With  God  there  is  no  after-counsel,  to  correct  the  errors  of  the  former. 
3.  The  efficacy.     Seen  in  their  different  manner  of  existing.     The  devices  of  man 
are  in  his  heart,  but  he  cannot  make  them  stand.     The  counsel  of  the  Lord  "  shall 
stand  "  ;  nothing  can  hinder  it  from  having  its  intended  effect.     The  foundation  of 
God  standeth   firm.     II,  The  reasons  for  these  differences.     1.  God   is  the 
prima  causa,  the  sovereign  agent,  and  first  mover  in  every  motion  and  inclination 
of  the  creature.     God  so  orders  the  vain  things  of  man's  devices  by  His  overruhng 
providence  as  to  make  them  subservient  to  His  everlasting  counsels.     2.  God's 
eternity.      Man  is  but  of   yesterday,   and  his  thoughts   casual.     As  himself  ia 
mutable,  fickle,  and  uncertain,  so  are  the  things  he  hath  to  do  with  subject  to  con- 
tingencies and  variations.    But  the  nature  of  the   Godhead  is  not  subject  to 
mutabihty.    All  change  is  either  for  the  better  or  for  the  worse,  but  God  cannot 
change  for  the  better,  because  He  is  aheady  best ;  nor  for  the  worse,  for  then  He 
should  cease  to  be  best.     3.  The  wisdom  of  God.     Besides  their  natural  ignorance, 
through  precipitancy,   misinformation,   prejudice,   partial    affections,   and    other 
causes,  they  are  subject  to  very  many  mistakes  and  aberrations.     God  alone  is 
wise.     He  will  not  deceive,  being  of  infinite  goodness ;  He  cannot  be  deceived  by 
any,  being  of  infinite  wisdom.     There  is  no  room  for  second  thoughts  or  after- 
counsels.     4.  The  power  of  God.    It  is  not  in  the  power  of  man  to  remove  those 
obstacles  which  prevent  his  accomplishing  his  devices,  but  the  power  of  God  has  no 
bars    or    bounds  other    than    those    of    His    own  will.      HI.   The  Inferences. 
1.  Learn  not  to  trust  too  much  to  our  own  wit ;  neither  to  lean  to  our  own  under- 
standings ;  nor  to  please  ourselves  over-much  in  the  vain  devices,  imaginations, 
fancies,  and  dreams  of  our  own  hearts.    2.  However  judgment  may  begin  at  the  house 
of  God,  most  certain  it  is  that  it  shall  not  end  there.     3.  This  is  a  comfortable  con- 
sideration to  all  those  that  with  patience  and  cheerfulness  suffer  for  the  testimony 
of  God,  or  a  good  conscience,  and  in  a  good  cause,  under  the  insolences  of  proud 
and  powerful  persecutors.    God  can  curb  and  restrain  their  malice,  when  they  have 
devised  wicked  devices.     4.  It  is  well  for  us,  and  our  bounden  duty,  to  submit  to 
such  sufferings  as  God  shall  call  us  to.     Give  up  thyself  faithfully  to  foUow  the 
good  counsel  of  God  in  His  revealed  wiU ;  and  then  give  up  thy  desires  entirely,  to 
be  disposed  by  His  wise  counsel  in  His  secret  will ;  and  He  shall  undoubtedly  give 
thee  thy  heart's  desire.    If  we  submit  our  wills  to  His,  both  in  doing  and  suffering, 


«96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

doubtless  we  cannot  finally  miscarry.  He  will  consult  nothing  but  for  our  good ;  and 
what  He  hath  consulted  must  "stand."  {Bp.  Sanderson.)  Man's  devices  and 
God's  counsel; — A  "man's  heart"  is  a  little  world,  full  of  scheming  and  busi- 
ness. Let  a  man  have  a  full  inspection  of  his  heart,  its  "  devices,"  its  schemes, 
its  designs,  in  their  succession.  Notice  the  variety  in  the  kinds  of  devices,  and  in 
men's  temper  and  manner  in  respect  to  them.  Some  men  are  very  communica- 
tive of  their  heart's  devices ;  others  are  close,  reserved,  dark.  Suppose  that  all  the 
devices  of  all  men  could  be  brought  out,  in  full  manifestation,  then  you  would  have 
human  nature  displayed  in  its  real  quality.  What  manner  of  spectacle  would  it 
be!  Suppose  that  all  these  devices  could  be  accomplished.  What  a  world  you 
have  then !  One  man's  devices  cannot  be  accomplished  compatibly  with  the 
accomplishments  of  another's.  The  great  collective  whole  of  the  "  devices  "  of  all 
hearts  constitutes  the  grand  complex  scheme  of  the  human  race  for  their  happi- 
ness. To  every  device  of  all  hearts,  God's  "  counsel,"  His  design,  exists  parallel, 
whether  in  coincidence  or  in  opposition.  In  other  words,  respecting  the  object  of 
every  device.  He  has  His  design.  The  text  implies  a  great  disconformity — a  want  of 
coalescence  between  the  designs  of  man  and  God  ;  an  estranged  spirit  of  design  on 
the  part  of  man.  I.  The  designs  of  men's  hearts  are  fokmed  independentlt 
or  God.  In  what  proportion  of  men's  internal  devisings  may  we  conjecture 
that  there  is  any  real  acknowledgment  of  God?  Man's  devising  and  pro- 
secuting are  in  such  a  spirit  as  if  there  were  no  such  thing  as  Providence 
to  aid  or  defeat.  It  is  deplorable  to  see  dependent,  frail,  short-sighted 
creatures  confidently  taking  on  themselves  the  counsel,  execution,  and  hazard 
of  their  schemes  for  being  happy,  in  the  very  presence,  and  as  in  contempt, 
of  the  aU-wise  and  almighty  Director.  II.  Man's  heart  entertains  mant 
DEVICES  IN  coNTRARiETT  TO  GoD.  It  Can  cherish  devices  which  involve  a  rebellious 
emotion  of  displeasure,  almost  resentment,  that  there  is  a  Sovereign  Lord,  whose 
"  counsel  shall  stand."  There  is  one  other  Mind,  which  has  the  knowledge  and 
command  of  all  things,  a  fixed  design,  respecting  them  all,  paramount  to  all  designs 
and  devices.  The  counsel  of  the  Lord  sometimes  is,  not  to  prevent  man's  designs 
taking  effect  in  the  first  instance.  He  can  let  men  bring  their  iniquitous  purposes 
into  effect,  and  then  seize  that  very  effect,  reverse  its  principle  of  agency,  and  make 
it  produce  immense,  unintended  good.  But  in  other  cases  God  directly  frustrates 
them.  Some  devise  to  oppose  religion  ;  others  to  baffle  the  practical  measures 
taken  for  promoting  religion ;  others  strive  to  get  rid  of  the  strictness  of  the  laws  of 
God.  There  are  also  many  projects  for  temporal  gomod,  ade  Lq  a  right  spirit, 
which  nevertheless  are  disappointed  and  fail,  so  that  we  have  humbly  and  com- 
placently to  repose  in  the  determination  of  our  God  as  to  what  is  best.  (John 
Foster.)  The  decrees  of  God,  or  imj^resdve  impressions : — The  Westminster 
divines  say,  "  The  decrees  of  God  are  His  eternal  purpose,  according  to  the  counsel 
of  His  will,  whereby  for  His  own  glory  He  hath  foreordained  whatsoever  comes  to 
pass."  This  embraces  three  propositions.  I.  There  are  decrees  of  God.  God 
must  have  formed  a  plan  by  which  to  conduct  all  His  operations.  God  knows  the 
arrangements  upon  the  accomplishment  of  which  He  has  determined.  The  word 
"  decree  "  is  of  the  same  meaning  as  the  word  "  determine."  II.  The  decrees  of 
God  are  all  involved  in  one  eternal  purpose.  All  the  future,  and  everything 
included  in  all  the  future,  is  at  once  and  for  ever  before  the  glance  of  His  eye. 
lU.  The  decrees  of  God  were  all  formed  according  to  the  counsel  of  His  will. 
Who  can  comprehend  all  that  the  counsel  of  His  wiU  embraced  as  to  things 
decreed  to  exist  ?  IV.  The  decrees  of  God  take  effect  in  everything  th.\.t  comes 
TO  PASS.  This  has  its  illustration  in — 1.  God's  works  of  creation.  2.  God's  works  of 
providence.  3.  God's  works  of  grace.  Objections  to  this  explanation  of  the 
decrees  of  God  may  be  taken.  (1)  Some  say  that  this  doctrine  annihilates  man's 
responsibility.  (2)  Some  say,  "  Then  if  we  are  to  be  saved,  we  shall  be  saved  ;  and  if 
to  be  lost,  lost."  But  this  is  a  gross  perversion  of  gospel  truth.  The  means, 
through  the  appointed  use  of  which  eternal  life  may  be  obtained,  should  be 
diligently  and  unweariedly  cultivated.  (Thomas  Adam.)  The  devices  of  man  and 
the  counsel  of  God  : — Two  parts  in  this  text — the  proposition  and  the  qualifica- 
tion. I.  Thb  proposition.  1.  The  property  mentioned.  "  Many  devices  " ;  by 
which  we  may  understand  "  conceits"  or  "  contrivances."  Man  by  nature  is  very 
apt  and  prone  to  these,  whether  in  matter  of  apprehension  or  resolution.  Eeference 
here  is  specially  to  vain  and  foolish,  or  wicked  and  sinful,  devices,  which  man  easily 
frames,  since  he  voluntarily  and  wilfully  forsook  the  counsel  of  God.  The  variety 
of  man's  devices  from  the  impetuousuess  and  unsatiableness  which  is  commonly  in 


CHAP,  XIX.]  PROVERBS.  497 

men's  deeires  ;  from  the  levity  and  inconstancy  which  is  upon  men's  souls  ;  from 
a  variety  of  lusts,  and  corrupt  and  inordinate  principles,  with  which  the  heart  of 
man  is  cumbered.  2.  The  subject  of  this  property,  man,  and  precisely,  the  heart  of 
man.  Devices  seem  to  belong  to  the  head  rather  than  to  the  heart.  The  heart  is 
here  put  for  the  whole  mind  and  soul.  The  devices  are  in  the  heart  originally,  as 
the  spring  and  fountain  of  all.  Men's  opinions  and  conceits  take  their  rise  first 
from  their  heart.  II.  The  QUALmcATioN.  1.  The  simple  assertion.  The  counsel 
of  God  may  be  the  Word  and  truth  of  God,  or  the  purpose  and  decree  of  God. 
2.  The  additional  opposition  or  cori'ection  of  it.  "  Nevertheless."  Here  is  the 
consistence  of  God's  counsels  with  man's.  Though  man  has  his  devices,  God  wiU 
have  His.  Because  man  has  his  devices,  therefore  God  the  rather  has  His.  His 
counsel  is  even  promoted  by  man's  devices.  {T.  Horton,  D.D.)  Man's  devices 
and  God's  ovarndings  : — I.  Men  pkojecting.  They  keep  their  designs  to  them- 
selves, but  they  cannot  hide  them  from  God.  There  are  devices  against  God's 
counsels,  without  His  counsels,  and  unlike  His  counsels.  Men  are  wavering  in 
their  devices,  and  often  absurd  and  unjust ;  but  God's  counsels  are  wise  and  holy, 
steady  and  uniform.  II.  God  ovebkuling.  His  counsel  often  breaks  men's 
measures,  and  baifles  their  devices;  but  their  devices  cannot  in  the  least  alter  His 
counsel,  nor  disturb  the  proceedings  of  it,  nor  pat  Him  upon  new  counsels.  What 
a  check  does  this  put  on  designing  men,  who  think  they  can  outwit  all  mankind ! 
There  is  a  God  in  heaven  who  laughs  at  them!  (Psa.  ii.  4).  (Matthew  Henry.) 
Human  devices  : — I.  The  devices  of  men's  heakts.  The  heart  of  man  is  a  little 
world  of  scheming,  and  planning,  and  business.  We  are  always  devising.  II.  The 
VANITY  OF  THESE  DEVICES.  OuT  Safety  consists  in  their  being  kept  in.  They  could 
not  be  suffered  to  come  forth  but  at  the  expense  of  the  ruin  of  the  world.  They 
cannot  all  be  accomplished,  because  they  oppose  each  other.  III.  The  counsel  of 
THE  Lord  overruling  these  devices.  Amidst  all  these  various  devices,  there  is 
one  mighty  will  going  on.  AH  human  devices  serve  God's  counsel.  Therefore  we 
should  seek  to  have  our  devices  in  principle  compatible  with  God's  counsel.  {The 
Evangelist.)  The  mind  of  man  and  the  viind  of  God  : — I.  The  mind  of  man  has 
MANY  devices  ;  the  mind  of  God  has  but  one  counsel.  II.  The  mind  of  man  is 
subordinate,  the  mind  of  God  supreme.  1.  This  is  a  fact  well  attested  by  history. 
2.  This  is  a  fact  that  reveals  the  greatness  of  God.  III.  The  mind  of  man  is 
changeable,  the  mind  of  God  unalterable.  Lessons  :  1.  The  inevitable  fall  of  all 
that  is  opposed  to  the  will  of  God.  2.  The  inevitable  fulfilment  of  aU  God's 
promises.     (J>.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  22.  The  desire  of  a  man  is  his  kindness :  and  a  poor  man  is  better  than  a 
liar. — Circumstances  or  character : — The  imperial  standard  of  weights  and  measures 
has  been  sent  by  the  King  into  the  market-place  of  human  life,  where  men  are 
busy  cheating  themselves  and  each  other.  Public  opinion  greatly  needs  to  be 
elevated  and  rectified  in  its  judgments  of  men  and  things.  Society  is  like  a  house 
after  an  earthquake.  Everything  is  squeezed  out  of  its  place.  A  standard  has 
been  set  up  in  the  market-place  to  measure  the  pretences  of  men  withal,  and  those 
who  will  not  employ  it,  must  take  the  consequences.  According  to  that  standard 
•'  a  poor  man  is  better  than  a  liar  "  ;  if,  in  the  face  of  that  sure  index,  you  despise 
an  honest  man  because  he  is  poor,  and  give  your  confidence  to  the  substance  or 
semblance  of  wealth,  without  respect  to  righteousness,  you  deserve  no  pity  when 
the  inevitable  retribution  comes.  Error  in  this  matter  is  not  confined  to  any  rank. 
"  Do  not  cheat  "  is  a  needful  and  useful  injunction  in  our  day  ;  and  "Do  not  be 
cheated "  is  another.  The  trade  of  the  swindler  would  fail  if  the  raw  material 
were  not  plentiful,  and  easily  wrought.  If  the  community  would  cease  to  value  a 
man  by  the  appearance  of  his  wealth,  and  judge  him  according  to  the  standard  of 
the  Scriptures,  there  would  be  fewer  prodigies  of  dishonesty  among  us.  In  the 
Scriptures  a  dishonest  man  is  called  a  liar,  however  high  his  position  may  be  in 
the  city.  And  the  honest  poor  gets  his  patent  of  nobility  from  the  Sovereign's 
hand.  (TF.  Amot,  D.D.)  The  desire  of  kindness  : — In  the  Revised  Version  this 
sentence  reads,  "  The  desire  of  a  man  is  the  measure  of  his  kindness."  The 
Divine  rule  of  weights  and  measures  is  the  only  true  one  in  the  sphere  of  man's 
duties  and  obligations.  But  a  principle,  however  good,  must  not  be  strained.  A 
man's  kindness  is  in  his  heart,  not  in  the  measure  of  the  gifts  themselves.  The 
hand  may  be  hberal,  whilst  the  heart  is  illiberal.  A  desire  to  do  good  is  a  Divine 
emanation.  A  desire  must  be  content  to  go  as  far  as  it  can,  and  to  do  as  much  as 
it  can.     When  that  limit  is  reached,  we  must  not  be  ashamed  of  doing  so  Uttle. 

S3 


498  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chai.  xn. 

The  desire  to  be  kind  is  worth  cherishing,  because  it  does  not  always  survive  the 
changes  in  our  circumstances.  The  desire  often  diminishes  in  exact  proportion  to 
the  increase  of  means  and  opportunities  for  doing  good.  Where  our  desire  to  be 
kind  fails  through  incapacity  to  do  more,  God  will  add  what  is  necessary.  The 
desire  to  be  kind  sometimes  needs  educating.  It  is  not  so  large  as  it  should  be, 
because  it  is  narrowed  by  ignorance  or  want  of  thought  about  the  responsibilities  of 
wealth.  When  will  men  study  as  earnestly  how  to  use  what  they  have  got  together 
as  they  studied  and  toiled  to  get  it  together?     (Thomas  Wilde.) 

Ver.  23.  The  fear  of  the  Lord  tendeth  to  life. — The  happjj  life  .-—Godliness 
has  "  the  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is."     It  might  have  been  otherwise.     Infinite 
Benevolence  would  have  His  saints  to  be  happy.     As  God  is  the  source  of  all  hap 
piness  in  heaven,  so  all  contact  with  God  brings  happiness  here.     I.  The  fear  of 
THE  Lord.     Not  that  dread  of  God  that  is  in  a  sense  innate  in  every  unconverted 
and  unregenerate  soul,  nor  that  dread  which  comes  into  the  heart  of  man  when 
the  Holy  Spirit  opens  up  the  law  of  God  to  him,  nor  the  dread  that  comes  into 
the  heart  of  an  unfaithful  and  backsliding  Christian.     This  is  the  fear  of  a  child, 
wrought  in  the  soul  by  the  Spirit.     This  fear  comes  from  a  view  of  Jesus,  from  a 
sight  of  God  in  Christ.     H.  Great  blessings  connected  with  this  fear.     1.  This 
fear  tendeth  to  life  ;  that  is,  to  prolong  life,  and  that  a  true  life.      2.  He  that  hath 
it  shall  abide  satisfied.     There  is  some  satisfaction  in  lower  things,  but  not  abiding 
satisfaction.     Everything  connected  with  the  service  of  God  has  an  unutterable 
blessing  in  it.     3.  He  shall  not  be  visited  with  evil.     Though  there  may  come  to 
him  a  thousand  things  that  seem  only  evil,  not  one  real  evil  shall  befall  him. 
(./.  H.  Evans,  M.A.)         The  blessedness  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord  : — Life,  satisfaction, 
freedom  from  evil !     What  more  can  be  wanted  ?    And  what  is  there  that  can 
bring  all  this,  except  the  one  thing  which  is  mentioned  in  the  text — the  fear  of  the 
Lord  ?     Oh,  why,  then,  are  other  things  so  eagerly  sought,  and  this  one  thing  so 
lamentably  neglected  ?     "  The  fear  of  the  Lord  "  often  stands  in  Scripture  for  the 
whole  of  true  religion  ;  just  as  we  find  "  the  love  of  God  "  or  the  "  keeping  of  His 
commandments"  put  for  the  same  thing.     "The  fear  of  the  Lord"  is  that  dis- 
position of  grace  given  by  His  own  Spirit  to  His  children  whereby  they  regard 
Him,  their  heavenly  Father,  with  a  holy  awe  and  reverence  and  filial  di-ead  of 
offending  Him.     Of  the  wicked  it  is  said  that  "  there  is  no  fear  of  God  before  his 
eyes."     He  lives,  he  acts,  he  speaks,  he  meditates  evil,  as  if  there  were  no  God 
observing  and  taking  account  of  his  every  thought  and  word  and  deed.     I.  "  The 
fear  of  the  Lord  tendeth  to  life."     The  fear  of    the  Lord,  in   many  cases, 
"  prolongeth  days  "  even  in  this  world.     For  while  "  the  wicked  and  the  sinner" 
often,  through  his  own  transgressions  and  excesses,  shortens  his  life,  and  perhaps 
does  not  "  live  out  half  his  days,"  the  fear  of  the  Lord  frequently,  through  His 
blessing,  brings  health  and  long  life.     It  does  so  partly  through  the  temperance 
and  well-regulated  habits  to  which  it  leads,  and  partly  through  the  peace,  content- 
ment, and  happiness  which  it  causes  to  the  mind,  and  which  are  better  than 
medicine  for  the  health  of  the  body.     II.  But  now  let  us  observe  the  next  thing 
•which  is  said  in  connection  with  the  fear  of  the  Lord  :  "  He  that  hath  it  shall 
ABIDE  SATISFIED "  ;   Hot  Only  shall   be,  but  shall    abide,  satisfied.     Satisfaction, 
thorough,  abiding  satisfaction— is  not  this  the  thing  which  every  soul  of  man 
desires  above  all  the  things  that  can  be  named  ?     Riches,  honour,  power,  pleasure, 
all  the  so-called  goods  of  earth— are  these  things  desired,  even  by  the  most  worldly, 
for  their  own  sake  ?  or  are  they  not  coveted  rather  for  the  sake  of  the  satisfaction 
which  it  is  secretly  thought  they  will  furnish?    But  do  they,  can  they  furnish 
satisfaction  ?     Alas !   how  often  do  the  choicest  and  most  valued  earthly  prizes 
wither  and  crumble  in  the  grasp  of  those  who  have  attained  them  !     And  here  we 
are  led  to  look  into  the  nature  and  reasons  of  the  abiding  satisfaction  enjoyed  by 
him  that  hath  the  fear  of  the  Lord.     Such  a  person  is  united  to  God  through 
Christ.    And  this  being  his  happy  case,  he  has  God  in  Christ  as  his  "  portion  " 
and  "  exceeding  great  reward."     And  who  or  what  can  satisfy  as  God  cau  ?     God, 
the  infinite  and  eternal  God,  has  pleasui-es,  comforts,  satisfactions,  joys,  with 
which  He  can  so  fill  the  soul  as  to  give  it  the  most  perfect  and  overflowing  content- 
ment and  happiness,  and  that  for  ever  and  ever.     It  is  true  that  the  complete  and 
absolute  perfection  of  this  contentment  and  happiness  cannot  be  enjoyed  in  this 
world  of  sin  and  trouble ;  but  still  it  is  equally  true  that,  even  here,  great  and 
blessed,  albeit  imperfect  and  partial,  foretastes  may  be  enjoyed  of  what  wiU  be 
perfect  and  complete  hereafter.     HI.  "  He  that  hath  it  shall  not  be  visited 


CHAP,  xix.]  PROVERBS.  499 

WITH  EVIL."  What  a  blessed  and  cheering  promise,  in  a  world  like  ours,  which  is 
so  full  of  evil !  But  what  are  we  to  understand  by  this  promise  ?  Have  not  the 
chosen  of  God,  in  multitudes  of  cases,  appeared  to  inherit  even  a  more  than 
ordinary  share  of  trouble  and  calamity  ?  Certainly,  God  has  often  wrought  out 
wonderful  deliverances  from  such  outward  evil  for  His  chosen  ;  and  every  one  of 
them  would,  doubtless,  freely  acknowledge  that  he  has  never  been  visited  with  such 
things  as  often  or  as  severely  as  his  sins  have  deserved.  But,  on  the  other  hand, 
it  is  also  undeniable  that  painful  losses,  cutting  griefs,  and  sore  temptations  have 
visited  God's  children  more  or  less  from  the  beginning,  and  at  times  with  remark- 
able severity.  And  were  not  these  things  "  evil"?  No,  never  were  any  of  them 
really  evil  to  a  single  one  of  the  true  children  of  God,  who  feared  His  name. 
Though  evil  in  their  own  nature,  they  were  not  evil  to  them.  Even  the  most 
trying  and  painful  things  work  through  God's  grace  for  great  good  in  forming  the 
soul  to  faith  and  patience,  and  unworldlLness,  and  humble  waiting  upon  God ;  so 
that  affliction  is  made  a  school  of  training  and  most  blessed  discipline  for  heaven. 
*'  It  is  good  for  me  that  I  have  been  afflicted."  Yes,  there  shall  no  evil  happen  to 
the  just,  no  evil  that  shall  hurt  his  spiritual  and  eternal  interests,  no  evil  which  he 
will  think  of  pronouncing  such  when  he  has  once  quitted  this  world,  where  evil  is 
so  commonly  called  good,  good  evil ;  and,  when  he  finds  himself  in  that  happy 
state  of  existence,  in  which  he  will  no  longer  "  see  through  a  glass  darkly,"  but 
with  clear,  full,  and  perfect  vision.  [G.  R.  Hay,  M.A.)  The  fruits  of  personal 
relicjion : — I.  Vitality.  "  It  tendeth  to  life."  1.  It  is  conducive  to  bodily  life. 
2.  It  is  conducive  to  intellectual  life.  Love  to  God  stimulates  the  intellect  to  study 
God  and  His  works.  3.  It  is  conducive  to  spiritual  life.  "  This  is  life  eternal,  to 
know  Thee,"  &c.  II.  Satisfaction.  "  Shall  abide  satisfied."  1.  It  pacifies  the 
conscience.  2.  It  reconciles  to  providence.  "Not  My  will,  but  Thine  be  done." 
ni.  Safety.  "  He  shall  not  be  visited  with  evU."  He  may  have  sufferings,  but 
sufferings  in  his  case  will  not  be  evils ;  they  will  be  blessings  in  disguise.  His 
light  afflictions  will  work  out  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  glory.     {Homilist.) 

Ver.  24.  A  slothful  man  hideth  his  hand  in  Ms  bosom. — A  protest  against 
laziness  : — Most  critics  substitute  the  word  "  dish  "  for  "  bosom  "  here  :  "A  sloth- 
ful man  hideth  his  hand  in  his  dish."  This  certainly  makes  the  description  of 
the  lazy  man  more  graphic.  His  repast  is  provided  for  him  ;  it  is  spread  before 
him,  but  he  is  too  lazy  to  take  it :  he  drops  his  hand  in  the  dish.  This  laziness 
may  be  seen  in  different  departments  of  life.  I.  In  worldly  concerns.  II.  In 
intellectual  MATTERS.  The  "  dish  "  of  knowledge  is  laid  before  a  lazy  man ;  he 
has  books,  leisure,  money,  everything  in  fact  to  enable  him  to  enrich  his  mind 
with  knowledge,  and  train  his  faculties  for  distinguished  work  in  the  realm  of 
science,  but  he  is  too  lazy.  His  mind  becomes  enfeebled  and  diseased  for  the  want 
of  exercise.  It  may  be  seen — III.  In  spiritual  interests.  Gospel  provisions  are 
laid  before  the  lazy  man.  There  are  the  "  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ  "  ;  but  he 
is  too  indolent  to  make  any  exertion  to  participate  in  the  heavenly  blessings. 
(David  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  25.  Smite  a  scomer,  and  the  simple  •will  beware. — Man  chastising  the 
wrong  : — I.  Wrong  may  exist  in  very  different  characters.  There  are  three 
characters  mentioned  in  the  passage.  1.  "  The  scorner."  The  scomer  is  a 
character  made  up  of  pride,  irreverence,  and  cruelty.  He  mocks  at  sin  ;  he  scoffs 
at  religion.  He  looks  with  a  haughty  contempt  upon  those  opinions  that  agree 
not  with  his  own.  2.  "  The  simple."  The  simple  man  is  he  who  is  more  or  less 
unsophisticated  in  mind,  and  untainted  by  crime.  One  who  is  inexperienced, 
unsuspicious,  too  confiding,  and  impressible.  3.  "One  that  understandeth  know- 
ledge." This  is  a  character  whom  Solomon  represents  in  other  places  as  the  just 
man,  the  wise  man,  the  prudent  man — expressions  which  with  him  mean  personal 
religion.  These  three  characters,  therefore,  may  comprise  the  man  against 
religion,  the  man  without  religion,  and  the  man  with  religion.  The  "  scorner  "  is 
thoroughly  wrong.  The  "  simple  "  is  potentially  wrong.  He  that  "  hath  under- 
standing "  is  occasionally  wrong,  or  he  would  not  require  "reproof."  It  is 
implied — II.  That  wrong  in  all  characters  should  be  chastised.  "  Smite  a 
scorner,  and  the  simple  wUl  beware ;  and  reprove  one  that  hath  understanding, 
and  he  will  imderstand  knowledge."  It  is  not  only  the  duty  of  rulers  to  punish 
crime,  but  it  is  the  duty  of  every  honest  man  to  inflict  chastisement  upon  wrong 
wherever  it  is  seen.     The  withdrawal  of  patronage,  separation  from  the  offender's 


600  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

society,  social  ostracism,  the  administration  of  reproof,  and  the  expression  of  dis- 
pleasure, are  amongst  the  means  by  which  an  honest  man,  even  in  his  private 
capacity,  can  chastise  the  wrong.  III.  That  the  kind  of  chastisement  should 
BE  ACCORDING  TO  CHARACTEB.  "  The  scomcr "  is  to  be  smitten.  "  Smite  a 
scomer."  The  man  of  "  understanding  "  is  to  be  reproved.  Eeproof  to  an  invete- 
rate scomer  would  be  useless.  IV.  That  the  effects  of  the  chastisement  wu.l 
VARY  ACCORDING  TO  THE  CHARACTER.  1.  The  chastiscment  inflicted  upon  the 
scomer  wiU  be  rather  a  benefit  to  others  than  himself.  "  Smite  a  scorner,  and  the 
simple  will  beware."  Severity  towards  the  incorrigible  may  act  as  a  warning  to 
others.  2.  The  chastisement  inflicted  on  the  man  of  understanding  is  of  service 
to  himself.  He  takes  it  in  good  part.  Wrong  exists  everywhere  around  us.  Evil 
meets  us  in  almost  every  man  we  meet.  It  is  for  us  to  set  ourselves  in  strong 
opposition  to  it  wherever  it  appears.     (Hid.) 

Ver  27.  Cease,  my  son,  to  hear  the  instruction  that  causeth  to  err  from  the 
words  of  knowledge. — Temptation  to  perilous  listening: — By  the  "words  of 
knowledge "  understand  the  principles  and  dictates  of  virtue  and  religion.  The 
wise  man's  advice  amounts  to  this — That  we  should  be  careful  to  guard  against 
the  arts  and  insinuations  of  such  as  set  up  for  teachers  of  infidelity  and  irreligion. 

I.    The  SEVERAL    TEMPTATIONS  WHICH  MEN  LIE  UNDER  TO  LISTEN  TO  SUCH  INSTRUCTORS. 

It  is  one  step  toward  security  to  see  the  dangers  we  are  exposed  to.     Since  the 
fears  and  apprehensions  of  guilt  are  such  strong  motives  to  infidelity,  the  inno- 
cence of  the  heart  is  absolutely  necessary  to  preserve  the  freedom  of  the  mind.     In 
the  most  unhappy  circumstances  of  sin  and  guilt,  religion  opens  to  us  a  much 
safer  and  more  certain  retreat  than  infidelity  can  possibly  afford.     Vice  is  not  the 
only  root  from  which  infidelity  springs.     Eeason  itself  is  betrayed  by  the  vanity  of 
our  hearts,  and  sinks  under  the  pride  and  affectation  of  knowledge.     All  kinds  of 
laudable  ambition  grow  to  be  vicious  and  despicable  when,  instead  of  pursuing  the 
real  good  which  is  their  true  object,  they  seek  only  to  make  a  show  of  an  ap- 
pearance of  it.     Thus  it  is  that  ambition  for  virtue  produces  hypocrisy ;  ambition 
for  courage,  boastings  and  unreasonable  resentments ;  ambition  for  learning  and 
knowledge,  pedantry  and  paradoxes.     Another  sort  of  temptation  is  a  kind  of  false 
shame,  which  often,  in  young  people  especially,  prevails  over  the  fear  of  God  and 
the  sense  of  religion.     When  religion  suffers  under  the  hard  names  of  ignorance 
and  superstition,  they  grow  ashamed  of  their  profession,  and  by  degrees  harden 
into  denying  God.     II.  The  danger  that  lies  in  listening  to  these  instructors. 
Here  only  speak  to  such  as  have  not  yet  made  shipwreck  of  reason  and  conscience. 
It  is  an  unpardonable  folly  and  inexcusable  perverseness  for  men  to  forsake  religion 
out  of  vanity  and  ostentation  ;  as  if  irreligion  were  a  mark  of  honour  and  a  noble 
distinction  from  the  rest  of  mankind.     We  must  answer  for  the  vanity  of   our 
reasoning  as  well  as  for  the  vanity  of  our  actions.     If  the  punishments  of  another 
life  be,  what  we  have  too  much  reason  to  fear  they  wiU  be,  what  words  can  then 
express  the  foUy  of  sin  ?     Consider,  therefore,  with  yourselves,  that  when  you  judge 
of  religion,  something  more  depends  upon  your  choice  than  the  credit  of   your 
judgment  or  the  opinion  of  the  world.     Eeligion  is  so  serious  a  thing  as  to  deserve 
your  coolest  thoughts,  and  it  is  not  fit  to  be  determined  in  your  hours  of  gaiety  and 
leisure,  or  in  the  accidental  conversation  of   public  places.     Trust  yourself  with 
yourself ;  retreat  from  the  influence  of  dissolute  companions,  and  take  the  advice 
of  the  psalmist,  "  Commune  with  your  own  heart."     [T.  Sherlock,  D.D.)        Avoid 
false  books  and  teachers : — The  enemies  of  religion  now  say  that  every  man  in 
search  of  truth  ought  to  put  himself  in  a  way  to  hear  botli  sides.     Lay  it  down 
as  a  general  rule  that  men  ought  not  to  read  those  books  or  hear  those  preachers 
that  inculcate  gross  errors,  i.e.,  essential  errors.     The  popular  pretence  that  men 
must  hear  both  sides  is  an  insidious  attack  on  the  Bible,  a  covered  insinuation 
that  the  Bible  is  insufficient  to  enlighten.     Every  one  should  early  settle  his  belief 
in  the  leading  doctrines  of  the  gospel.    Why  need  such  an  one  expose  himself  to 
the  infection  of  error.     Men  are  naturally  so  averse  to  the  truth  that  it  is  infinitely 
dangerous  for  those  not  fully  confirmed  in  it  to  expose  themselves  to  the  contagion 
of  error.     They  ought  not  to  presume  so  much  on  their  own  stability.     Men  cannot 
parley  with  error  and  be  safe.     And  if  the  man  himself  is  safe,  he  ought  to  consider 
the  injury  he  may  do  to  others  by  encouraging  the  promulgation  of  dangerous 
errors.     The  encouragement  of  erroneous  teachers  and  books  is  conspiring  against 
God.     Popularly  it  is  said  that  truth  will  recommend  itself  to  every  man's  con- 
science, and  none  can  be  injured  by  seeing  it  compared  with  error.    In  answer,  it 


CHAP.  XX.]  PROVERBS.  601 

may  be  said — 1.  This  is  founded  on  a  principle  which  men  would  not  admit  in  any 
other  case.  2.  The  objection  would  be  less  deceptive  if  in  matters  of  religion  men 
were  more  inclined  to  truth  than  to  error.  3.  The  retailers  of  false  doctrine  do 
not  state  things  candidly.  4.  The  antidote  to  error  does  not  always  go  along  with 
the  error  itself.  5.  Facts  speak  decisively  against  the  encouragement  of  false 
books  and  teachers,  under  the  pretence  mentioned  in  the  objection.  Apply — 1.  To 
those  who  profess  to  be  the  friends  of  God  and  established  in  the  truth.  Do  not 
encourage  the  promulgation  of  known  errors.  2.  To  such  as  are  not  estabUshed 
in  religious  opinions.  Get  established  without  delay.  Error  in  every  form  is 
couching  to  make  you  his  prey.  Beware  of  an  indiscreet  desire  to  read  every  new 
book  and  to  hear  every  new  preacher.  {E.  D.  Griffin,  D.D.)  A  protest  against 
the  immoral : — Socrates  often  frequented  the  theatre,  which  brought  a  great  many 
thither  out  of  a  desire  to  see  him.  On  which  occasion  it  is  recorded  of  him  that 
he  sometimes  stood  to  make  himself  the  more  conspicuous,  and  to  satisfy  the 
curiosity  of  the  beholders.  He  was  one  day  present  at  the  first  representation  of  a 
tragedy  of  Euripides,  who  was  his  intimate  friend,  and  whom  he  is  said  to  have 
assisted  in  several  of  his  plays.  In  the  midst  of  the  tragedy,  which  had  met  with 
very  great  success,  there  chanced  to  be  a  line  that  seemed  to  encourage  vice  and 
immorality.  This  was  no  sooner  spoken,  but  Socrates  rose  from  his  seat,  and 
without  any  regard  to  his  affection  for  his  friend  or  to  the  success  of  the  play, 
showed  himself  displeased  at  what  was  said,  and  walked  out  of  the  assembly. 
{The  Tatler.) 


CHAPTER  XX. 


Yeb.  1.  Wine  is  a  mocker,  strong  drink  is  raging  :  and  whosoever  is  deceived 
thereby  is  not  wise. — The  evil  effects  of  drunkenness : — I.  It  deadeks  evert  moral 
SENsrBiLiTT.  And  what  is  the  evidence  of  the  drunkard  himself?  On  his  own 
declaration,  are  the  principles  of  virtue  as  vigorous  in  his  heart  now  as  before  ? 
Is  he  as  sensible  of  delight  in  contemplating  the  morally  sublime,  as  much  shocked 
with  the  morally  deformed,  as  much  grieved  and  disgusted  with  the  depraved  and 
Ucentious?  II.  It  impairs  evert  intellectual  facultt.  III.  It  accelerates 
DEATH.  IV.  It  entails  misert  on  families,  v.  It  terminates  in  everlastino 
destruction  (1  Cor.  vi.  10).  [The  Weekly  Christian  Teacher.)  Strong  drink 
deceptive  : — The  characteristic  of  strong  drink  is  deceitfulness.  1.  A  great  quantity 
of  precious  food  is  destroyed  that  strong  drink  may  be  extracted  from  the  rubbish. 
2.  The  curative  and  strengthening  properties  of  our  strong  drinks,  which  are  so 
much  vaunted,  are  in  reality  next  to  nothing.  3.  Strong  drink  deceives  the  nation 
by  the  vast  amount  of  revenue  that  it  pours  into  the  public  treasury.  4.  In  as  far 
as  human  friendship  is,  in  any  case,  dependent  on  artificial  stimulant  for  the 
degree  of  its  fervency,  it  is  a  worthless  counterfeit.  5.  Its  chief  deception  lies  in 
the  silent,  stealthy  advances  which  it  makes  upon  the  unsuspecting  taster,  fol- 
lowed, when  the  secret  approaches  have  been  carried  to  a  certain  point,  by  the 
sure  spring  and  deathly  grip  of  the  raging  lion.  (TF.  Arnot,  D.D.)  Mischief  and 
folly  of  drunkenness : — I.  The  mischief.  To  the  sinner  himself.  It  mocks  him, 
makes  a  fool  of  him,  promises  him  that  satisfaction  which  it  can  never  give  him. 
In  reflection  upon  it :  it  rages  in  his  conscience.  It  is  raging  in  the  body,  putting 
the  humours  into  a  ferment.  Pretending  to  be  a  sociable  thing,  it  renders  men 
unfit  for  society,  for  it  makes  them  abusive  with  their  tongues  and  outrageous  in 
their  passions.  II.  The  follt.  He  that  is  deceived  thereby,  that  suffers  himself 
to  be  drawn  into  this  sin,  when  he  is  so  plainly  warned  of  the  consequences  of  it, 
is  not  wise :  he  shows  that  he  has  no  right  sense  or  consideration  of  things ;  and 
not  only  so,  but  he  renders  himself  incapable  of  getting  wisdom ;  for  it  is  a  sin 
that  infatuates  and  besets  men  and  takes  away  their  heart.  {Matthew  Henry.) 
Total  abstinence  : — The  following  story  is  told  of  General  Harrison,  one  of  the 
candidates  for  the  Presidency  of  the  United  States,  in  connection  with  a  public 
dirmer  given  him  on  one  occasion:  "  At  the  close  of  the  dinner  one  of  the  gentle- 
men drank  his  health.  The  General  pledged  his  toast  by  drinking  water.  Another 
gentleman  offered  a  toast,  and  said,  '  General,  will  you  not  favour  me  by  taking  a 
glass  of  wine  ?  '  The  General,  in  a  very  gentlemanly  way,  begged  to  be  excused. 
He  was  again  urged  to  join  in  a  glass  of  wine.    This  was  too  much.     He  rose  from 


502  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

his  seat  and  said  in  the  most  dignified  manner  :  '  Gentlemen,  I  have  twice  refused 
to  partake  of  the  wine-cup.  I  hope  that  will  be  sufficient.  Though  you  press  the 
matter  ever  so  much,  not  a  drop  shall  pass  my  lips.  I  made  a  resolve  when  I 
started  in  life  that  I  would  avoid  strong  drink.  That  vow  I  have  never  broken. 
I  am  one  of  a  class  of  seventeen  young  men  who  graduated  together.  The  other 
sixteen  members  of  my  class  now  fill  drunkards'  graves,  and  all  from  the  pernicious 
habit  of  wine-drinking.  I  owe  all  my  health,  my  happiness,  and  prosperity  to 
that  resolution.  Would  you  urge  me  to  break  it  now?'"  Better  sink  than 
drink  : — A  clergyman  complained  to  the  late  Sir  Andrew  Clark  of  feeling  low  and 
depressed,  unable  to  face  his  work,  and  tempted  to  rely  on  stimulants.  Su-  Andrew 
saw  that  the  position  was  a  perilous  one,  and  that  it  was  a  crisis  in  the  man's  life. 
He  dealt  with  the  case,  and  forbade  resort  to  stimulants,  when  the  patient  declared 
that  he  would  be  unequal  to  his  work,  and  ready  to  sink.  '"Then,"  said  Sir 
Andrew,  "sink  like  a  man."  Abstinence  favourable  to  health: — The  working 
man's  capital  is  health,  not  wealth.  It  does  not  consist  in  landed  property,  but  in 
sinew  and  muscle  ;  and  if  he  persist  in  the  use  of  intoxicating  Hquors  they  will 
strike  at  the  very  root  of  his  capital — a  sound  physical  constitution.  After  this  is 
lost  he  becomes  unfit  for  the  workshop,  for  no  master  will  employ  a  man  who 
wants  capital.  He  has  then  to  repair  to  the  poorhouse  or  infirmary.  (J.  Hunter.) 
Water  the  best  drink: — "  The  best  of  all  drinks  for  the  athlete,"  says  Dr.  Eichard- 
son,  "  is  pure  water.  The  athletic  lower  animals^the  racehorse,  the  hound,  the 
lion,  the  leopard — thrive  well  on  water,  because  their  bodies,  like  our  own,  are 
water  engines,  as  steam  engines  are,  and  that,  too,  almost  as  simply  and  purely." 

Ver.  3.  It  Is  an  honour  for  a  man  to  cease  from  strife. — The  law  of  honour : — 
The  rules  of  life  by  which  men  are  ordinarily  governed  are  the  law  of  honour,  the 
law  of  the  land,  and  the  law  of  God.     It  is  the  object  of  reUgious  institutions  and 
instruction  to  uphold  the  last  of  these  as  the  supreme  and  universal  rule.    In  doing 
this,  it  is  sometimes  necessary  to  bring  the  other  two  into  a  comparison  with  it,  as 
standards  of  duty  and  right.   There  ought  to  be  no  opposition  between  the  law  of  the 
land  and  the  commandment  of  God,  and  no  contradiction  to  either  of  them  in  the 
sentiment  of  honour.     The  word  "  honour,"  in  its  original  idea,  signifies  respect  or 
praise.     It  is  that  tribute  of  good  opinion,  which  attends  a  character  thought  to 
be  commendable.     It  is  the  external  expression  of  the  respect  which  is  conceived  to 
be  due.     The  man  of  true  honour  is  the  man  of  real  desert — the  man  who  has  this 
sense  of  character  because  he  is  conscious  that  his  integrity  of  purpose  and  upright- 
ness of  life  give  him  a  claim  to  the  honour  which  is  always  rendered  to  such  a 
character.     His  sense  of  honour  is  sense  of  desert,  rather  than  desire  of  reputation. 
Proceeding  from  this  origin,  it  will  appear  that  the  characteristic  ideas  comprised 
in  the  sentiment  of  honour  are,  self-respect  and  respect  for  others.     Such  a  man, 
valuing  himself  on  the  dignity  of  his  nature,  which  others  have  in  common  with 
himself,  conducts  himself  toward  them  as  he  desires  that  others  should  do  toward 
him,  in  the  spirit  of  apostolic  injunction,  "  Honour  all  men."     He  thinks  himself 
less  disgraced  by  its  omission  on  their  part  than  on  his  own.     He  is  rather  ready  to 
defer  to  others,  agreeably  to  the  other  injunction,  "  In  honour  preferring  one 
another."    He  yields,  in  this  spirit  of  mutual  respect,  something  to  his  fellows 
beyond  what  he  thinks  it  necessary  to  insist  on  receiving.     It  is  thus  a  generous 
spirit :  it  always  consults  the  feelings  of  others ;  desires  their  happiness  ;  guards 
their  reputation  ;  shuns  wrong  toward  any  one  as  the  first  disgrace  ;  strives  for 
right  as  the  chief  honour.     Taken  in  this  sense,  the  sentiment  in  question  is  a 
suitable  one  for  man,  and  seems  to  have  been  designed  in  the  constitution  as  one  of 
the  guardians  of  his  virtue.     When  thus  enlisted  on  the  side  of  right  it  becomes  a 
high  instinct,  prompting  to  spontaneous  rectitude,  and  causing  an  intuitive  shrinking 
from  whatever  is  unworthy  and  base.     It  contradicts  no  law  of  man,  and  is  in 
harmony  with  the  law  of  God.     But,  at  the  same  time,  from  its  intimate  connec- 
tion with  what  is  personal  in  interest  and  feeling,  it  is  greatly  exposed  to  degenerate 
into  a  false  and  misguiding  sentiment.    And  so  it  has,  in  fact,  happened.     Con- 
necting itself  with  the  notions  of  character  which  prevail  by  chance  in  the  com- 
munity, rather  than  with  the  rule  of  light  and  of  God,  it  has  erected  a  false  standard 
of  estimate,  and  kindled  a  light  that  leads  astray.     'Thus  honour  comes  to  bear  the 
same  relation  to  virtue  that  politeness  does  to  kindness  ;  it  is  its  representative ;  it 
keeps  up  the  form  and  pretension  when  the  principal  is  absent ;  and,  for  all  the 
ordinary  purposes  of  the  superficial  social  system  of  the  world,  it  is  accounted 
quite  as  good  as  that  which  it  stands  for.     This,  then,  is  the  first  objectionable 


CHAP.  XX.]  PEOVERBS.  503 

trait  in  the  world's  law  of  honour  as  a  rule  of  life ;  it  is  deceptive  and  super- 
ficial ;  it  is  a  thing  of  appearance  only,  and  not  a  reality.  And  from  this  the 
descent  is  natural  and  easy,  down  to  the  next  ill  quality.  Setting  the  value 
which  it  does  on  appearance,  it  finds  the  object  of  right  gained  by  seeming 
to  be  right ;  then  the  heinousness  of  wrong  may  be  avoided  by  concealing  the 
wrong.  The  man  has  learned  to  act,  not  with  a  view  to  doing  right,  but  with  a 
view  to  reputation — sometimes  even  for  the  appearance  of  having  the  reputation. 
Thus  it  appears  that  a  man  of  worldly  honour  may  be  guilty  of  a  certain  degree  of 
baseness  and  crime  without  inconsistency  and  without  compunction,  if  he  have  but 
the  skill  to  keep  it  from  being  known.  It  is  not  wonderful  that  it  should  soon 
follow  from  this  that  he  may  be  guUty  of  certain  sorts  of  baseness  and  crime  openly, 
and  yet  not  forfeit  his  reputation.  And  such  is  the  fact.  One  may  be  a  gambler 
to  a  certain  extent,  and  actually  ruin  a  friend  and  drive  him  to  despair — yet  no 
impeachment  of  his  honour.  He  may  be  unprincipled  in  his  expenditures,  so  that 
the  poor  whom  he  employs  shall  be  unable  to  obtain  of  him  their  just  dues ;  he  may 
revel  in  luxury,  while  defrauding  the  mechanics  and  tradesmen  on  whose  ingenuity 
and  toil  he  lives — yet  no  impeachment  of  honour.  He  may  be  a  known  debauchee, 
trampling  on  the  most  sacred  rights  and  affections  of  his  own  home  ;  he  may,  by  a 
process  of  dehberate,  heartless  cunning  and  fraud,  bring  down  an  humble  beauty  to 
hopeless  disgrace  and  misery  ;  he  may  be,  on  a  very  trivial  offence,  the  murderer  of  his 
friend — yet  not  one  nor  all  of  these  crimes,  accompanied  as  they  are  with  what  is 
mean  and  base,  takes  from  him  his  claim  to  be  treated  as  a  man  of  honour.  1.  The 
spirit  of  worldly  honour  is  thus  evidently  characterised  by  selfishness.  Its  funda- 
mental idea  is  a  reference  to  what  the  world  will  think  of  me  ;  my  reputation,  my 
standing — how  are  they  affected  ?  What  will  secure  them  in  the  eyes  of  the  world  ? 
Everything  must  give  way  to  this  paramount  consideration.  I  must  secure  my 
own  good  name  among  those  with  whom  I  move,  come  what  may.  It  is  amazing 
what  deeds  are  done  in  consequence !  2.  It  is  equally  distinguished  for  its 
jealousy.  Selfishness  is  always  jealous.  It  cannot  have  anything  of  sincere  and 
generous  confidence  in  others.  The  man  whose  rule  of  life  is  to  refer  everything 
to  its  bearing  on  its  own  reputation,  to  weigh  all  the  words  and  looks  of  other  men 
with  a  view  to  discover  whether  they  sufiiciently  acknowledge  his  claims  to  con- 
sideration acquires  thereby  an  unreasonable  sensitiveness  of  feeling,  nourishes  an 
uneasy  sphit  of  jealous  suspicion,  is  annoyed  by  slight  causes,  and  offended  by 
trifling  inadvertences.  3.  Thus  jealous  and  revengeful,  it  is  not  surprising  that  the 
system  in  question  should  be  despotic  also.  Such  tempers  are  always  so.  It  rules 
with  arbitrary,  inexorable,  imcompromising  sway.  It  allows  no  wavering,  no 
relenting,  no  appeal.  The  slave  is  not  more  entirely  deprived  of  his  right  over  his 
own  limbs  and  labour  than  the  devotee  of  honour  is  deprived  of  a  right  to  his  own 
judgment  in  all  things  within  her  province.  He  is  in  the  hands  of  the  ministers  of 
honour,  and  they  allow  him  no  retreat.  He  must  go  on  by  that  rule  which  he  has 
adopted.  The  terrors  of  disgrace  and  ruin  await  him  if  he  draw  back.  And  thus, 
willing  or  unwilling — like  a  victim  to  the  sacrifice — he  is  led  out  and  immolated  on  the 
altar  at  which  he  had  been  proud  to  worship.  This  is  the  consummation  to  which 
the  system  leads.  The  duel  is  its  tribunal  and  its  place  of  execution.  Worthy  close 
of  the  progress  we  have  described  !  It  is  fit  that  what  began  in  meanness  should 
issue  in  blood.  The  pulpit,  beneath  which  so  many  young  men  sit  while  forming 
the  characters  by  which  they  are  to  influence  their  country  and  their  fellow-men 
during  many  future  years  of  active  and  pubUc  life,  would  be  false  to  its  momentous 
trust  if,  at  such  a  moment  as  this,  it  failed  to  lift  its  warning  cry ;  if  it  did  not 
attempt  to  disabuse  their  minds  of  the  delusive  fascination  with  which  the  reckless 
spirit  of  worldly  honour  is  too  often  invested.  The  halls  of  learning,  where 
Philosophy  teaches,  and  Science  utters  truth,  and  Christianity  communicates  the 
law  of  brotherhood  and  love,  would  be  unworthy  of  their  lofty  place  if  they  did  not 
resound  with  the  proclamation  that  all  those  great  and  deathless  interests  denounce 
and  abhor  the  masked  impostor  that,  under  the  name  of  honour,  opens  to  the 
aspiring  young  the  highway  of  sin  and  death.  And  therefore  it  is  that  I  have 
sought  to  tear  away  its  disguise  and  expose  its  deformity ;  therefore  it  is  that  I  would 
bring  forward  in  its  place  the  true  honour,  founded  in  right — exercised  in  self- 
respect  and  respect  for  all: — faithful  to  all  trusts  alike — fearing  only  God.  Let  the 
future  men  of  our  country  hear,  and  make  it  theirs.     (H.  Ware,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  The  sluggard  will  not  plow  by  reason  of  the  cold;  therefore  shall  he 
beg  in  haxrest,  aad  hav«  nothing. — The  present  and  the  future  : — The  present  is 


504  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

intimately  related  to  the  future ;  and  the  future  will  faithfully  reflect  the  character. 
Here  is  a  principle  from  the  operation  of  which  none  can  escape.     Life  stands  in 
the  same  relation  to  eternity  as  the  time  of  ploughing  does  to  the  harvest.     If  this 
life   is   spent  in   neglect   of    the   soul,   there  will  be  eternal  poverty.    I.  Life's 
PLOUGHrNG-THiE,  OR  THE  PERIOD  OF  PREPARATION.     1.  Notc,  that  life  is  the  seed-time 
is  universally  recognised  and  taught.     The    armer  knows  the  time  for  preparing 
the  soil,  and  is  himself  responsible  if  he  does  not  improve  it.     2.  The  ploughing- 
time  is  short,  not  too  long  if  it  is  all  well  spent ;  the  seasons  quickly  succeed  each 
other.     How  short  is  life— (1)  Comparatively.    Fifty,  sixty,  seventy  years,  what  is  it 
to  look  back  upon  ?     (2)  Actually  in  numberless  instances.     (3)  Possibly  in  your 
case  how  uncertain  is  the  time  of  death!     3.  Though  short,  it  is  long  enough. 
Life  is  short ;  there  is  no  time  to  lose,  but  to  each  is  given  space  for  repentance. 
4.   Unlike  the  farmer,   who    may   miss  one   harvest    but  secure  the  next,   our 
opportunity  once  lost  never  returns.     H.  The  paltry  reasons   assigned  as  a>j 
EXCUSE  FOR  NEGLECT.     "  The  sluggard  will  not  plow  by  reason  of  the  cold."    It  is 
palpably  unreal,  the  true  reason  is  unconfessed ;  but  it  is  found  in  the  fact  that  the 
man  is  a  sluggard — he  loves  not  his  work.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)         The  sluggard  in 
harvest: — This  saying  inculcates  the  lesson  t'  at  men  should  diligently  seize  the 
opportunity  whilst  it  is  theirs.     The  sluggard  is  one  of  the  pet  aversions  of  the 
Book  of   Proverbs.     The  text  contains  principles  which  are  true  in   the  highest 
regions  of  human  life.     Religion  recognise     the   same  practical  common-sense 
principles  that  daily  business  does.     I.  The  principles  which  ark  crystallised  in 
THIS  picturesque  SAYING.     1.  Present  conduct  determines  future  conditions.     Lile 
is  a  series  of  epochs,  each  of  which  has  its  destined  work,  and  that  being  done,  all 
is  well ;  and  that  being  left  undone,  all  is  ill.     What  a  man  does,  and  is,  settles 
how  he  fares.     The  most  trivial  act  has  an  influence  on  all  that  comes  after,  and 
may  deflect  a  man's  whole  course  into  altogether  different  paths.    There  come  to 
each  of  us  supreme  moments  in  our  Uves.     And  if,  in  all  the  subordinate  and 
insignificant  moments  we  have  not  been  getting  ready  for  them,  but  have  been 
nurturing  dispositions  and  acquiring  habits,  the  supreme  moment  passes  us  by, 
and  we  gain  nothing  from  it.     The  mystic  significance  of  the  trivialities  of  life  is 
that  in  them  we  largely  make  destiny,  and  that  in  them  we  wholly  make  character. 
2.  The  easy  road  is  generally  the  wrong  road.     There  are  always  obstacles  in  the 
way  to  noble  life.     Self-denial  and  rigid  self-control,  in  its  two  forms— of  stopping 
your  ears  to  the   attractions   of  lower  pleasures,  and   of   cheerily  encountering 
difficulties — is  an  indispensable  conditi  n  of  any  life  which  shall  at  the  last  yield 
a  harvest  worth  the  gathering.     Nothi  g  worth  doing  is  done  but  at  the  cost  of 
difficulty  and  toil.     3.  The  season  let  slip  is  gone  for  ever.     Opportunity  is  bald 
behind,  and  must  be  grasped  by  the  forelock.     Life  is  full  of  tragic  might-have- 
beens,    n.  Flash  the  rays  of  these  principles  on  one  or  two  subjects.     1.  In 
business,  do  not  trust  to  any  way  of  getting  on  by  dodges,  or  speculation,  or  favour, 
or  anything  but  downright  hard  work.     2.  In  your  intellects.     Make  a  conscience 
of  making  the  best  of  your  brains.     3.  In  the  formation  of  character.     Nothing 
will  come  to  you  noble,  great,  elevating,  in  that  direction  unless  it  is  sought,  and 
sought  with  toil.     Don't  let  yourselves  be  shaped  by  accident,  by  circumstance. 
You  can  build  yourselves  up  into  forms  of  beauty  by  the  help  of  the  grace  of  God. 
4.  Let  these  principles  applied  to  religion  teach  us  the  wisdom  and  necessity  of 
beginning  the  Christian  life  at  the  earliest  moment.     There  is  a  solemn  thought 
still  to  consider.     This  life,  as  a  whole,  is  to  the  future  life  as  the  ploughing-time 
is  to  the  harvest.     (A.  Madaren,  D.D.)        A  beggar  in  harvest: — No  lifeis  really 
secular.     The  sanctification  of  our  labour  for  the  bread  that  perisheth  is  one  of 
the  purposes  of  our  holy  religion.     The  principles  set  forth  in  this  text  in  relation 
to  earthly  business  have  also  their  capplication  to  the  spiritual  life.     1.  Human 
co-operation  is  necessary  in  the  beginnings  of  the  religious  life.     God  does  not 
save  men  as  a  rule  by  sudden  movements  of  His  Spirit  upon  their  souls  without 
their  co-operation  with  Him.     Spiritual  ploughing  consists  of  self-exmnination  in 
the  light  of    God's   Word,   followed  by  self-condemnation,   the  confession  a,nd 
renunciation  of  sin,  and  the  other  exercises  of  repentance.    2.  Human  co-operation 
in  the  Divine  hfe  is  necessary  all  the  way  from  the  beginnings  of  repentance  up  to 
the  throne  of  glory.     3.  The  text  teaches  not  only  the  necessity  for  diligence,  but 
also  for  courage.     The  sluggard  was  af-aid  of  the  cold.     4.  The  ploughing  must 
be  done  at  the   right  season.     Youth  is  the  best  time  for  spiritual  ploughing. 
(G.  A.  Bennetts,  B.A.)      The  soul-sluggard  .—The  words  "  sluggard  "  and  "  sluggish" 
have  the  same  derivation.     We  speak  of  sluggish  water,  stagnant,  covered  with 


CHAP.  XX.]  PROVERBS.  505 

green,  breeding  disease  and  death.  What  a  contrast  to  a  fountain  of  clear, 
sparkling  water,  dancing  in  the  sunlight,  quickening  everything  it  touches  into  hfel 
The  soul's  harvest  is  in  eternity.  Why  does  the  sinner  neglect  preparation  for  this 
harvest?  Let  us  look  at  a  few  of  his  reasons.  1,  He  says  that  his  heart  is 
"cold";  he  has  not  the  proper  feeling.  He  forgets — (1)  That  duty  is  a  debt. 
The  taxpayer  does  not  wait  for  feeling  before  he  pays  the  assessment.  (2)  Work 
in  the  line  of  duty  brings  feeling,  warmth.  Friction  begets  heat.  If  you  lack 
feeling,  search  for  some  unpleasant  duty  and  discharge  it.  2.  The  sinner  urges, 
"  The  Church  is  '  cold.'  "  He  says,  "  No  one  speaks  to  me  about  my  soul."  Does 
the  traveller  at  the  railway  station  wait  till  the  train  starts  and  the  ticket-office 
closes  because  "  no  one  speaks  to  him  "  ?  It  is  frivolous  reasoning,  that  because 
Church  members  fail  in  their  duty  I  have  a  right  to  fail  in  mine.  3.  It  is  even 
urged  by  the  impenitent  that  God  is  "cold  " — indifferent  to  their  salvation.  They 
wait  until  He  is  ready — until  He  moves  upon  their  hearts.  Observe — 1.  The 
reasons  urged  by  the  impenitent  are  but  shallow  pretexts  to  hide  their  disinclina- 
tion. The  man  would  not  plough  because  he  was  a  sluggard.  2.  "Therefore," 
Bays  the  text,  "  shall  he  beg."  The  begging  is  the  effect  of  a  sufficient  cause. 
Eternal  death  is  not  the  result  of  an  accident.  3.  They  that  beg  in  harvest  shall 
beg  in  vain,  "  and  have  nothing."  The  prayer  of  Dives  was  not  answered. 
(P.  S.  Davis.)  Good  effects  of  honest  and  earnest  toil : — I.  Plentt.  We  must 
not  think  that  diligence  is  only  manual ;  it  is  also  mental.  It  implies  thought, 
forethought,  planning,  arranging.  The  general  rule  is  that  they  who  work  obtain 
the  things  needful  for  this  life,  at  least  in  sufficiency.  II.  Power.  It  is  industry, 
rather  than  genius,  which  commends  us  to  our  fellow-men,  and  leads  us  to  positions 
of  influence  and  power.  III.  Peksonal  wokth.  It  is  diligence,  the  capacity  of 
taking  pains,  that  gives  to  a  man  his  actual  worth,  making  him  compact  and 
strong  and  serviceable.  The  greatest  gifts  are  of  little  worth,  unless  there  is  this 
guarantee  of  the  conscientious  and  intelligent  employment  of  them.  {R.  F.  Horton, 
D.D.)  Duty  sacrificed  to  convenience  : — There  are  two  powers  constantly  pressing 
their  claims  on  men :  those  of  duty  and  convenience.  These  two  generally  come 
into  collision  here.  The  sacrificing  of  duty  to  convenience  is  an  immense  evil, 
because — I.  It  involves  a  sacbifice  of  the  cultivating  season.  Sluggard  neglects 
the  seed-time.  It  is  so  with  men  who  postpone  their  day  of  religious  decision. 
The  whole  of  their  earthly  Ufe  is  intended  as  a  season  for  cultivation.  But  a  very 
large  portion  of  the  cultivating  season  is  already  gone.  The  residue  of  their  time 
is  very  short,  and  very  uncertain.  II.  Because  it  involves  a  disregard  of  existing 
FACILITIES.  The  sluggard  had  everything  else  necessary  to  cultivate  his  land.  He 
disregarded  all,  because  it  was  rather  cold.  It  is  so  with  those  who  are  putting  off 
religion.  IH.  Because  it  involves  the  decay  of  individual  qualification  for  the 
WORK.  The  qualification  for  any  work  consists  in  a  resolute  determination,  and 
a  sufficiency  of  executive  energy.  While  the  sluggard  was  waiting,  these  two 
things  were  decreasing.  IV.  Because  it  involves  the  loss  of  great  personal 
ENJOYMENT.  He  would  losc  the  joy  arising  from  fresh  accessions  of  manly  power ; 
from  the  consciousness  of  having  done  his  duty ;  a  freedom  to  engage  in  any  other 
affair;  prospect  of  reward.  V.  Because  it  involves  a  certainty  of  ultimate 
BUiN.  Destitution.  Degradation.  Misery  of  these  enhanced  by  their  being — 
1.  Self-created.  2.  Unpitied.  3.  Irretrievable.  Physical  indolence  brings  physical 
ruin,  moral  indolence  moral  ruin.     {Homilist). 

Yer.  5.  Counsel  in  the  heart  of  man  la  like  deep  water ;  but  a  man  of  under- 
standing will  draw  it  out. — The  getting  of  loisdom  from  the  wise  : — I.  Wisdom  to 
MAN  13  A  VERY  VALUABLE  THWG.  1.  It  improves  the  Sphere  of  his  being.  2.  It 
improves  the  power  of  his  being.  II.  Sane  men  are  favoured  with  more  wisdom 
THAN  OTHERS.  The  difference  in  the  amount  of  men's  intelligence  arises  from  the 
difference  in  their  capacities,  proclivities,  and  opportunities  for  mental  improvement. 
in.  Those  who  have  the  most  wisdom  abb  generally  the  most  reserved.  Where 
knowledge  dwells  in  large  quantities,  it  is  not  like  water  on  the  surface  that  you  can 
get  at  easily  ;  it  is  rather  like  water  that  lies  fathoms  under  earth — clear,  beautiful, 
and  refreshing — got  at  only  by  the  pump,  or  the  windlass  and  bucket.  It  has  to  be 
drawn  out.  IV.  In  consequence  of  this  reservedness  of  the  most  wise,  it 
requires  sagacity  in  others  to  draw  it  forth.  Even  Christ  Himself  felt  that  He 
could  not  unfold  what  was  in  Him,  on  account  of  the  ignorance  and  the  prejudice 
of  His  auditory.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 


606  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

Ver.  G.  Most  men  will  proclaim  every  one  Ms  own  goodness;  but  a  faithful  man, 
who  can  find  7 — On  goodness  and  fidelity : — I.  What  are  we  to  understand  by  "  good- 
ness "  and  a  "  FAITHFUL  MAN  "  ? — Goodness  often  means  the  whole  of  a  viituous 
or  religious  temper.     In  Scripture  it  is  sometimes  limited  to  good  aliections,  and 
the  proper  expression  of  them  in  our  conduct.     Goodness  here  is  kindness ;  and  a 
"  faithful  man  "  is  one  sincere  and  steady  in  goodness,  who  really  feels  benevolent 
affections,  and  is  uniform  and  constant  in  the  practical  exercise  of  them.     1.  He  is 
"  faithful  in  goodness,"  whose  general  conduct  is  kind  and  beneficent.    He  is  affable 
and  courteous  in  his  ordinary  conversation,  and  never  without  necessity  deliberately 
says  that  which  may  hurt  or  offend.     He  does  not  withhold  his  bounty  till  it  is 
wrung  from  him  by   importunity.     His    friendly   offices    reach    men's   spiritual 
necessities.     2.  He  is   "faithful  in   goodness"   whose  goodness  flows    from    an 
inward,  a  sincere,  and  a  religious  principle.     Goodness  sufficiently  diffusive  in  its 
objects   and  exerci;:es  can  only  be  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  of   God.     3.  The  man 
"  faithful  in  goodness "   is    steady,   constant,   and    persevering  in   doing    good. 
Important   services  to   others   often  require   much   of   diligence,  self-denial,  and 
disinterestedness.     He  does  good,  expecting  nothing  again.    II.  What  is  suggested 
when  it  is  said,  "  A  faithful  man,  who  can  find  "?     1.  He  reminds  us  that  this  is  a 
character  not  to  be  found  among  unconverted  sinners.    2.  Faithfuhiess  in  goodness 
is  uncommon.     3.  Fidelity  in  goodness  in  a  strict  sense,  and  in  full  perfection,  is 
not  the  character  of  the  best  saints  on  this  side  the  grave.     HI.  Solomon's  maxim, 
that  "  MOST  men  will  PROCLAIM  EVERY  ONE  HIS  OWN  GOODNESS."     Men  are  prone  to 
dis'^uise  their  true  characters  under  a  deceitful  mask,  and  profess  sentiments  and 
affections  to  which  their  hearts  are  utter   strangers.     There  are  some  who,  in 
proclaiming  their  own  goodness,  cannot  be  charged  with  gross  hypocrisy.     They 
are  self-deluded.     Let  every  one  press  after  the  fidelity  in  goodness,  to  which  every 
false  display  of   it  is  opposed.     {John  Erskine,  D.D.)        Self-applause  and  self- 
consistency : — I.  The  COMMONNESS  OF  SELF-APPLAUSE.    See  it  in  uatious ;  in  churches. 
Pursue  the  subject  more  personally.     1.  The  profane.     These  say  they  mean  well ; 
their  hearts  are  good;   they  are  liberal,  &c.     2.  The  Pharisees.     What  attempts 
they  make  to  recommend  themselves  to  others!     3.  The  orthodox.     Those  who 
pride  themselves  on  their  orthodoxy.     4.  The  godly.     These  are   often  guilty  in 
a  measure.     II.  The  rareness  of  self-consistency.    A  man  faithful — 1.  In  his 
civil  concerns.     2.  In  his  friendly  connections.     3.  To    his    trusts.     4.  To    his 
convictions.     5.  To  his  religious  professions.     Enough  has  been  said — (1)  To  make 
Christians  thankful  that  they  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace.     (2)  To 
induce  us  to  be  diffident  and  humble.     (3)  And  to  seek  after  the   influence  of 
Divine  grace.     {TV.  Jay.)        Subtle  self-praise: — Some,  quite  as  vain,   and   as 
ambitious  of  commendation  and  praise,  knowing  that  everything  of  the  nature  of 
ostentation  is  exceedingly  unpopular,  set  about  their  object  with  greater  art.     They 
devise  ways  of   getting  their  merits  made  known   so   as  to   avoid  the  flaw  of 
ostentatious  self-display.     In  company  they   commend  others  for  the   qualities 
which  they  conceive  themselves  specially  to  possess,  or  for  the  doing  of  deeds 
which  they  themselves  are  sufficiently  well  known  to  have  done  ;  and  they  turn  the 
conversation  dexterously  that  way ;  or  they  find  fault  with  others  for  the  want  of 
the  good  they  are  desirous  to   get  praise  for ;  or  they  lament  over  their  own 
deficiencies  and  failures  in  the  very  points  in  wliich  they  conceive  their  excellence 
to  lie — to  give  others  the  opportunity  of  contradicting  them  ;  or,  if  they  have  done 
anything   they  deem   particularly    generous   and   praiseworthy,    they    introduce 
some  similar  case,  and   bring  in,  as  appai'ently  incidental,  the  situation  of  the 
person  or  the  family  that  has  been  the  object  of  their  bounty.     Somehow,  they 
contrive    to   get  in  themselves   and  their  goodness.     {R.    Wardlaw,  D.D.)        A 
prevalent  vice  and  a  rare  virtue  :—l.  A  prevalent  vice.     •'  Most  men  will  proclaim 
every  one  his  own  goodness."     Self-conceit — men  parading  their  imaginary  merits. 
It   is   seen  in  the  religious  world,  in   the   way   in  which   certain   men  get  their 
subscriptions  trumpeted   in  reports,  and  their  charitable  doings   emblazoned  in 
journals.     It  is  seen  in  the  political  world.     1.  This  vice  is  an  obstruction  to  self- 
improvement.     The  man  who  prides  himself  on  his  own  cleverness  will  never  get 
knowledge;  who  exults  in  his  own  virtue  will  never  advance  in  genuine  goodness. 
Vanity  is  in  one  sense  the  fruit  of  ignorance.     2.  This  vice  is  socially  offensive. 
Nothing  is  more  offensive   in  society  than  vanity.     3.  This  vice  is  essentially 
opposed  to  Christianity.     What  says  Paul?     "For  I  say,  through  the  grace  given 
unto  me,  to  every  man  that  is  among  you,  not  to  think  of  himself  more  highly 
than  he  ought  to  "think  ;  but  to  think  soberly,  according  as  God  hath  dealt  to  every 


CHAP.  XX.]  PROVERBS.  507 

man  the  measure  of  faith."  What  says  Christ?  "Let  not  thy  left  hand  know 
what  thy  right  hand  doeth."  II.  A  eake  viktue.  "  But  a  faithful  man,  who  can 
find  ?  "  What  is  faithfulness  ?  The  man  who  in  this  verse  is  called  faithful  is  in 
the  next  represented  as  just,  "  walking  in  his  integrity."  Each  of  the  three  terms 
represents  the  same  thing.  1.  Practically  true  to  our  own  convictions.  Never 
acting  without  or  against  them.  2.  Practically  true  to  our  own  professions. 
Never  breaking  promises,  swerving  from  engagements.  Now  this  is  a  rare  virtue. 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Self-laudation: — It  magnifies  and  multiplies  matters.  Loud 
was  the  lie  which  that  bell  told,  hanging  in  a  clock-house  at  Westminster,  and 
usually  rung  at  the  coronation  and  funeral  of  princes,  having  this  inscription 
about  it ; — 

'King  Edward  made  me, 

Thirty  thousand  and  three, 

Take  me  down  and  weigh  me. 

And  more  you  shall  find  me." 

But  when  this  bell  was  taken  down  at  the  doom's-day  of  abbeys,  this  and  two 
more  were  found  not  to  weigh  twenty  thousand.  Many  tales  of  fame  are  found  to 
Bhrink  accordingly,     {W.  Fuller.) 

Ver.  7.  His  children  are  blessed  after  him. — The  just  man's  legacy : — 1.  Anxiety 
about  our  family  is  natural,  but  we  shall  be  wise  if  we  turn  it  into  care  about  our 
own  character.  It  we  walk  before  the  Lord  in  integrity,  we  shall  do  more  to 
bless  our  descendants  than  if  we  bequeathed  them  large  estates.  A  father's  holy 
life  is  a  rich  legacy  for  his  sons.  (1)  The  upright  man  leaves  his  heirs  his 
example,  and  this  in  itself  will  be  a  mine  of  true  wealth.  How  many  men  may 
trace  their  success  in  life  to  the  example  of  their  parents !  (2)  He  leaves  them 
also  his  repute.  Men  think  all  the  better  of  us  as  the  sons  of  a  man  who  could 
be  trusted,  the  successors  of  a  tradesman  of  excellent  repute.  Oh,  that  all  young 
men  were  anxious  to  keep  up  the  family  name  !  (3)  Above  all,  he  leaves  his 
children  his  prayers  and  the  blessing  of  a  prayer-hearing  God,  and  these  make 
an  offspring  to  be  favoured  among  the  sons  of  men.  God  will  save  them  even 
after  we  are  dead.  Oh,  that  they  might  be  saved  at  once !  2.  Our  integrity  may 
be  God's  means  of  saving  our  sons  and  daughters.  If  they  see  the  truth  of  our 
religion  proved  by  our  lives,  it  may  be  that  they  will  believe  in  Jesus  for  them- 
selves.    Lord,  fulfil  this  word  to  my  household  1     [G.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  9.  Who  can  say,  I  have  made  my  heart  clean ;  I  am  pure  from  my  sin  7 — 

Purity  of  heart: — I.  Who  can  sat,  I  have  made  my  heart  clean?  We  read  of 
some  who  have  clean  hands,  which  implies  an  abstinence  from  outward  sins.  A 
clean  heart  implies  more  than  this  ;  it  relates  to  the  inward  temper  and  disposition, 
to  the  bias  of  the  will,  and  the  various  operations  of  the  affections,  as  being 
spiritual  and  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God.  1.  Purity  of  heart  is  much  to  be 
desired.  2.  It  is  the  work  of  the  Spirit  alone  to  impart  it.  3.  There  is  so  much 
self-righteous  pride  and  vanity  in  man  that  many  are  apt  to  think  they  have  made 
their  hearts  clean.  II.  Who  can  sat,  I  am  puke  from  mt  sin  ?  To  be  pure  from 
sin  is  similar  to  our  being  in  a  state  of  sinless  perfection.  This  no  one  ever  enjoyed 
in  the  present  life,  except  Him  only  who  "knew  no  sin."  1,  Who  can  say  that 
they  were  never  defiled  with  original  sin,  or  that  they  are  now  free  from  that 
defilement?  2.  Who  can  say  that  they  are  pure  from  inward  sins,  the  evils  of  the 
heart  ?  8.  Who  can  say  that  they  are  wholly  free  from  practical  evil  in  life  and 
conversation  ?  4.  Who  can  say  they  are  free  from  every  besetting  sin,  or  that 
they  are  not  defiled  with  any  of  those  evils  to  which  they  are  more  especially 
exposed  by  constitutional  habits,  or  by  their  occupation  or  immediate  connections. 
As  no  one  can  say  with  truth  that  he  is  pure  from  his  sin,  what  reason  have  the 
best  of  men  to  be  abased  before  God!  (B.  Beddome,  3I.A.)  The  duty  of 
viortijlcation  : — The  trial  and  examination  of  our  hearts  and  ways  in  reference  to 
God  is  a  duty  which,  though  hard  and  difficult,  is  exceedingly  useful  and  beneficial 
to  us.  I.  The  ddtt  of  mortification.  The  cleansing  of  our  hearts,  to  be  pure 
from  sin.  1.  The  nature  of  the  action.  Cleansing.  A  word  implying  some 
change  and  alteration  that  is  to  be  made  in  us.  That  which  is  purged  was 
formerly  impure.  God  is  pure  ;  the  saints  are  purged  and  purified.  This  shows 
us  the  nature  of  sin :  it  is  a  matter  of  uncleanness.  Uncleanness  is  a  debasing 
quality ;  a  loathsome  quality ;  a  thing  odious  in  itself  and  for  itself.     Cleansing 


608  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

shows  the  sovereign  virtue  of  grace  and  repentance.  It  is  of  a  purging  virtue.  It 
hath  a  power  of  cleansing  us  from  the  poDutions  of  sin.  It  is  compared  to  clean 
water,  which  washes  away  filth.  To  a  wind,  which,  passing,  cleanseth.  To  a  fire, 
that  consumes  dross  and  corruption.  2.  The  property  of  the  agent.  The  text 
makes  us  agents  in  this  great  work.  Sin  is  cleansed  in  our  justification,  when  it 
is  pardoned  and  forgiven.  The  act  of  forgiveness  is  God's  alone.  Sin  is  cleansed 
by  mortification,  and  regeneration,  and  conversion.  The  progress  of  these  acts 
God  works  in  us,  and  by  us.  His  Spirit  enables  us  to  carry  forward  this  work 
which  He  graciously  begins,  and  to  cleanse  ourselves.  3.  The  circumstance  of 
time.  "I  have  cleansed."  Mortification  is  a  work  of  long  continuance;  it 
requires  progress  and  perseverance.  II.  The  object  that  must  be  wrought 
UPON.  "  The  heart."  The  whole  man  must  be  cleansed,  but  first  and  specially 
the  heart.  The  heart  is  the  fountain  and  original  from  whence  all  other  unclean- 
nesses  do  stream  and  flow.  The  heart  is  the  lurking-hole,  to  which  sin  betakes 
itself.  The  heart  is  the  proper  seat  and  residence  of  sin.  III.  The  measure  or 
degree  of  mortification.  "  I  am  pure  from  my  sin."  This  is  the  high  aim  that 
a  Christian  must  set  to  himself,  to  press  forward  to  perfection.  The  text  lays  our 
sin  at  our  own  doors,  and  so  it  concerns  us  to  rid  ourselves  of  it.  Sin  is  the 
offspring  of  our  will.  There  is  the  sin  of  inbred  and  natural  inclination ;  the  sin 
to  which  our  particular  age  disposes  us:  childhood  is  idle,  youth  wanton,  age 
covetous ;  the  sins  of  our  calling  and  vocation :  every  calling  has  its  special 
temptations.  IV.  The  difficulty  of  mortification.  This  question,  "Who?" 
is  not  meant  for  all  sorts  of  sinners.  It  is  not  propounded  to  the  profane  man,  to 
the  grossly  ignorant  man,  or  to  the  negligent  and  careless  man.  The  question 
reaches  to  the  best  sort  of  men,  those  that  have  made  good  progress  in  this  work 
of  cleansing  and  mortification,  who,  nevertheless,  are  condemned  by  their  own 
consciences ;  who  have  still  leaven  to  purge  out ;  find  some  sins  of  surreption  will 
steal  in  upon  them.  As  to  the  question  itself.  It  runs  thus  :  "  Who  can  say?  " 
Not  ♦'  Who  doth  say  ?  "  or  "  Who  will  say  ?  "  or  "  Who  dare  say  ?  "  We  may  safely 
resolve  the  question  into  a  peremptory  assertion,  and  conclude  that  no  man  is  clear 
or  free  from  sin.  The  earnest  Christian  can  say,  "  Through  grace  I  have  broken 
the  strength  and  dominion  of  sin.     {Bp.  Brownrigg.) 

Yer.  10.  Divers  weights  and  divers  measures;  both  of  them  are  alike 
abomination  to  the  Lord. — Caveat  venditor  : — I.  Dishonesty  in  trade  is  various 
IN  ITS  FORMS.  "  Divers  weights  and  divers  measures  .  .  .  and  a  false  balance." 
II.  Dishonesty  in  tbade  is  offensive  to  God.  1.  Dishonesty  is  known  to 
Him :  His  eye  is  on  our  business  transactions,  and  no  names  or  pretences,  how- 
ever plausible,  can  deceive  Him.  2.  Dishonesty  is  abhoired  by  Him.  It  is  "an 
abomination  unto  the  Lord."  III.  Dishonesty  in  trade  is  great  folly  and 
sin.  This  seems  to  be  the  idea  of  the  latter  clause  of  ver.  23  :  "A  false  balance  is 
not  good."  The  man  who  is  dishonest  for  gain  sacrifices — 1.  The  greater  for  the 
less.  2.  The  spiritual  for  the  material.  3.  The  eternal  and  permanent  for  the 
temporal  and  uncertain.  4.  The  Divine  for  the  worldly.  Dishonesty  is  arrant 
folly ;  the  man  who  gains  by  fraud  is  a  great  loser.  Conclusion :  1.  Transact 
business  by  the  rule  laid  down  by  our  Lord  (Matt.  vii.  12).  2.  Transact  business 
as  in  the  sight  of  God.  (W.  Jones.)  Short  weights  and  measures  : — All  pound 
weights  do  not  draw  16  ounces.  Every  yard  stick  is  not  quite  36  inches  long. 
There  are  multitudes  of  things  short  weight,  and  not  a  few  short  measure.  If  all 
men  were  weighed  and  measured,  some  of  us  would  need  to  be  placed  under  short 
sticks,  or  require  a  big  "  make  weight "  to  bring  us  up  to  the  right  standard. 
Besides  men,  there  are  things  not  quite  full  measure.  Many  things  sold  and  used 
in  Manchester,  you  may  depend  upon  it,  would  be  "  short  measure,"  especially 
when  compared  with  the  standards  the  excise  oflicers  are  in  the  habit  of  carrying 
about  with  them.  I  have  met  many  men  that  would  weigh  14  stone,  but  if  you 
try  to  weigh  their  common  sense  it  would  not  reach  14  ounces.  There  are 
hundreds  of  men  whose  tailors  may  be  able  to  tell  you  how  much  cloth  it  would 
take  to  cover  them ;  their  shoemakers  could  tell  you  that  their  feet  measured  9, 
10,  or  11  inches  in  length ;  but  if  you  tried  to  measure  all  their  good  deeds — deeds 
of  kindness  done  at  home — deeds  of  sympathy  to  those  who  are  poor — acts  of  love 
and  mercy  such  as  angels  delight  to  see,  and  God  smiles  upon — you  could  do  it 
with  a  35-inch  stick.  And  the  misfortune  is  that  these  people  are  always  the  tall 
talkers.  Talking  does  little  work.  Talking,  minus  doing,  is  minus  weight.  But 
there  are  some  men  that  weigh  too  much.     When  I  was  a  lad  I  used  to  see  butter 


CHAP.  XX.]  PROVERBS.  609 

sold  that  was  called  "long  weight."  Well,  what  was  that?  Eighteen  ounces  to 
the  pound.  I  have  met  men  more  than  18  ounces  to  the  pound.  If  they  are 
workmen  they  can  do  twice  as  much  as  others  in  the  same  time.  If  you  talk  to 
them  about  their  wives — there  are  not  such  women  in  the  world.  Their  children 
are  perfect  models  ;  their  horses  are  better  than  their  neighbours  ;  and  if  they  go 
out  to  buy  goods,  they  can  always  get  more  for  their  money  than  anybody  else, 
often,  indeed,  25s.  worth  for  their  sovereign.  But  get  a  little  nearer  to  them,  and 
you  will  find  the  work  they  do  needs  doing  over  again  ;  as  to  their  children,  they 
are  unruly  and  impudent ;  whilst  the  bargains  they  make  are  no  bargains  at  all. 
I  want  now  to  look  more  particularly  at  men  "short  weight."  [Belshazzar 
instanced.]  Pride?  Can  a  proud  man  be  short  weight?  Look  at  him,  how  big 
he  is  !  Ah !  you  can  measure  some  people's  pride,  and  you  wiU  get  37  inches 
to  the  yard.  It  takes  24  yards  of  silk  to  cover  the  pride  of  some  women — and  it 
will  take  24  months  to  pay  for  it.  Belshazzar  was  not  the  only  proud  person 
the  world  has  known.  I  am  afraid  that  pride  exists  in  these  days  as  well 
as  in  those.  {Charles  Leach.)  Divers  weights  and  divers  measures  : — Trade 
tricksters  are  not  caUed  highly  respectable  in  Scripture,  whatever  they  are  in 
society.  Apologists  for  tricks  in  trade  say  that  the  real  fault  is  in  the  consumer, 
who  wiU  have  a  cheap  article.  On  which  showing,  the  whole  charge  of  adultera- 
tion, and  of  the  wickedness  of  selling  worsted  and  silk  for  silk,  shoddy  for  broad- 
cloth, and  sloe-juice  for  vine-wine,  is  held  to  amount  to  nothing.  Cicero's  rule 
holds  good  to-day,  that  everything  should  be  disclosed,  in  order  that  a  purchaser 
may  be  ignorant  of  nothing  that  the  seller  knows.  But  few  people  have  leisure  for 
investigating  the  real  quality  and  quantity  of  their  purchases.  It  is  only  necessary, 
remarks  Mr.  Emerson,  to  ask  a  few  questions  as  to  the  progress  of  the  articles  of 
commerce  from  the  fields  where  they  grew  to  our  houses,  to  become  aware  that  we 
"  eat  and  drink,  and  wear  perjury  and  fraud  in  a  hundred  commodities."  Christian 
critics  have  been  fain  to  admire  in  Mohammed  the  vigour  and  emphasis  with 
which  he  inculcated  a  noble  sincerity  and  fairness  in  dealing.  "  He  who  sells  a 
defective  thing,  concealing  its  defect,  will  provoke  the  anger  of  God  and  the  curses 
of  the  angels."  Every  age  has  its  recognised  offenders  of  this  sort,  from 
Solomon's  days  downwards.  It  was  reserved,  apparently,  for  our  own  age  to 
merit  in  full  the  bad  eminence  of  attaining  such  a  pitch  of  refinement  "  in  the 
art  of  the  falsification  of  elementary  substances,"  that  the  very  articles  used  to 
adulterate  are  themselves  adulterated.     (F.  Jacox,  B.A.) 

Ver.  11.  Even  a  child  is  known  by  his  doings,  •whether  his  work  be  pure,  and 
whether  it  be  right. — A  child's  accountability  : — The  Bible  recovers  lost  truths,  as 
well  as  lost  souls.  The  recovery  of  lost  truth  is  one  means  of  restoring  lost  souls. 
It  is  like  a  guide  in  a  wilderness,  as  food  in  famine,  as  light  in  darkness  :  it  is  the 
restoration  of  that  which  is  useful  and  essential.  The  truth  of  this  passage  is  a 
lost  truth.  That  human  beings  are  early  accountable,  and  early  assume  a  decided 
character,  is  evident  to  refiection  and  observation.  Apart  from  the  teaching  of 
Scripture,  it  is  a  lost  truth  that  a  "child  is  known  by  his  doings."  "Child" 
means  a  son  or  daughter  under  parental  control.  I.  The  actions  of  children 
BECOME,  IN  PROCESS  OF  TIME,  THEIR  OWN  DOINGS.  Children  move  before  they  act, 
and  they  live  as  mere  animals  before  they  act  spiritually  and  morally.  In  process 
of  time  the  child  acts.  All  its  movements  become  conduct,  the  result  of  a 
determination  to  behave  itself  in  a  particular  way.  1.  An  act  which  we  are 
justified  in  describing  as  right  or  wrong,  and  which  we  can  lawfully  call  the 
act  of  an  accountable  individual,  must  be  performed  by  a  being  endowed  with  the 
following  capacities :  He  must  be  able  to  conceive  the  act  before  its  performance, 
mentally  to  see  the  thing  done  before  doing  it.  He  must  be  capable  of  appreciating 
motives  for  and  against  the  action.  He  must  know  good  and  evil.  He  must  have 
the  power  of  saying,  "  I  wiU,"  and  "  I  will  not."  The  "  doings  "  of  an  individual 
are  those  acts  which  he  rationally  and  intentionally  performs.  2.  A  child,  in 
course  of  a  few  years,  exhibits  the  capabilities  of  which  we  speak.  3.  Then  it  is, 
whether  it  comes  early  or  late,  that  the  actions  of  a  child  are  his  "  doings."  He 
now  performs  the  functions  of   a  rational  creature.     H.  When  the  actions  of 

CHILDREN    become    THEIR    DOINGS     THE     CHILDREN    ARE    RECOGNISED    AS    ACCOUNTABLE. 

1.  God  recognises  the  child  as  the  author  of  its  own  actions :  He  sees  the  doings 
of  the  child  spring  from  a  motive  and  principle  within.  He  now  holds  the  child 
guilty  for  its  transgressions  of  His  law.  The  child  is  now  exposed  to  punishment ; 
and  to  escape  punishment,  a  dispensation  of  mercy  to  that  individual  child  is 


510  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOE.  [chap.  xx. 

necessary.  God's  treatment  of  the  child  recognises  the  child's  doings.  2.  The 
god  of  evil  knows,  by  the  doings  of  children,  with  whom  and  with  what  he  has  to 
do.  He  cannot,  as  God,  search  the  heart,  but  he  can  observe  the  principles,  tastes, 
and  inclinations.  He  studies  the  child's  nature  that  he  may  know  best  how  to 
injure  it.  3.  The  angelic  inhabitants  of  heaven  recognise  children  in  their  minis- 
trations. A  child  who  is  an  heir  of  salvation  is  known  to  the  angels — they  minister 
to  him,  performing  offices  of  kindness  and  services  of  charity,  ordained  by  the 
God  of  love.  4.  Children  are  recognised  as  accountable  by  their  feUow 
human  beings.  Children  are  known  to  other  children,  and  known  to  men. 
HI.  Feom  these  two  facts  draw  certain  imfeeences.  1.  The  evils  of  sin  are 
not  escaped  by  the  childhood  of  the  sinner.  God  does  not  hold  him  guiltless 
because  he  is  a  child.  But  the  Supreme  Lawgiver  does  not  account  the  child  a 
man.  Sin  brings  darkness  into  a  child's  mind,  and  disquiet  into  a  child's  heart, 
and  gloom  over  a  child's  spirit.  There  are  wages  paid  now,  and  paid  in  the 
spiritual  condition  of  the  early  sinner,  and  those  wages  are  death.  2.  As  a  child, 
he  is  exerting  influence  for  good  or  for  evil.  The  measure  of  the  influence  is  not 
so  considerable  as  in  the  case  of  the  adult,  but  there  is  influence.  3.  All  the 
differences  of  human  character  are  not  traceable  to  education.  Some  of  these 
differences  may  be  thus  explained,  but  not  all,  and  not  the  greatest.  The  earliest 
doings  of  a  child  do  not  make  manifest  his  education,  but  himself.  4.  The 
character  of  the  future  man  is  often  indicated  by  the  character  of  the  present 
child.  If  the  earliest  actions  of  children  be  observed,  they  will  indicate  the 
character  which  the  child  so  constituted  will  form.  5.  God  does  not  treat  a 
generation  of  children  en  viasse,  but  individually.  There  is  a  personality  about 
every  child.  6.  If  a  child  be  known  by  his  doings,  one  test  of  character  is 
universally  employed  by  the  Judge  of  all.  The  decisions  of  the  final  judgment 
are  according  to  that  a  man  hath  done,  whether  good  or  bad.  The  child  and  the 
man  are  under  one  Lawgiver.  {E.  Martin.)  Fruit : — We  must  be  good  before 
we  can  do  good.  What  fruits  will  be  found  on  that  tree  which  God's  Holy  Spirit 
has  made  a  living  tree  ?  1.  There  will  be  love  to  God,  which  will  make  you  try  to 
please  Him,  and  to  care  for  everything  which  belongs  to  your  heavenly  Father, 
His  book.  His  house.  His  day.  2.  There  will  be  obedience  to  parents.  Obedience 
to  our  parents  on  earth  leads  up  naturally  and  pleasantly  to  obedience  to  our 
Father  which  is  in  heaven.  3.  There  will  be  truthfulness.  Two  great  causes  of 
untruthfulness  are  cowardice  and  the  habit  of  exaggeration.  Do  not  use  over- 
Btrained  expressions.  Speak  in  a  natural,  straightforward,  simple  way.  4.  There 
will  be  conscientiousness.  The  conscientious  person  will  do  his  best,  as  in  God's 
sight.  He  will  do  his  work  thoroughly.  He  will  be  trustworthy.  You  may  depend 
upon  him.  No  one  can  be  a  Christian  unless  he  is  conscientious  in  his  work,  and 
conscientious  in  all  his  dealings  with  others.  5.  There  wiU  be  two  things  found  in 
you,  modesty  and  temperance.  Would  you  think  a  pert  girl  or  a  saucy  boy  at  all 
like  Christ?  By  "temperance"  I  mean  self-control,  self-restraint.  Greediness, 
the  desire  to  get  all  you  can  for  yourself,  is  the  opposite  of  it.  Temperance  teaches 
us  where  to  stop — shows  us  how  to  keep  om-selves  within  bounds.  AU  these  good 
things  are  "  fruits  of   the   Spirit."     (G.    Calthrop,  M.A.)  Children  may   be 

known  .-—A  young  tree  is  known  by  its  first  fruits,  a  child  by  his  childish  things. 

1.  Children  will  discover  themselves.  One  may  soon  see  what  their  temper  is, 
and  which  way  their  inclination  leads  them,  according  as  their  constitution  is. 
Children  have  not  learned  the  art  of  dissembling  and  concealing  their  bent  as 
grown  people  have.  2.  Parents  should  observe  their  children,  that  they  may 
discover  their  disposition  and  genius,  and  both  manage  and  dispose  of  them 
accordingly,  drive  the  nail  that  will  go,  and  draw  out  that  which  goes  amiss.  Wisdom 
is  herein  profitable  to  direct.  (Matthew  Henry.)  The  child's  fortune  told : — 
We  know  persons  by  sight,  or  by  name,  or  by  description.  They  are  best  known 
by  their  actions.  I.  What  is  meant  by  "  doings  "  here  ?  1.  The  tempers  a 
child  indulges  in.     These  tempers  are  fretful,  or  patient,  or  selfish,  or  generous. 

2.  The  ill  habits  he  forms.  Idle,  or  industrious,  or  careless,  or  careful,  or  dilatory, 
or  prompt.  3.  The  company  he  keeps.  The  choice  of  companions  is  a  very 
important  thing.  II.  What  may  be  known  of  a  child  by  his  doings?  You  are 
making  your  fortunes  now  every  day.  The  tempers  you  are  indulging,  the  habits 
you  are  forming,  and  the  company  you  are  keeping  are  all  helping  to  make  them. 
How  careful  you  should  be  to  find  out  what  is  wrong  in  your  tempers  and  habits, 
and  pray  to  God  to  help  you  to  correct  it  at  once.  [R.  Neivton,  D.D.)  A  chiUVt 
doings : — This  big  world  of  oura  is  really  made  up  of  a  multitude  of  little  ones. 


CHAP.  XX.]  PROVERBS.  511 

Every  living  creature  has  a  world  of  its  own.  Every  child  has.  So  he  can  be 
known  by  what  he  does.  1.  We  are  not  to  be  judged  merely  by  our  sayings. 
Many  people  would  like  to  be  judged  that  way.  2.  We  are  not  to  be  judged  only 
by  our  appearance.  3.  We  can  only  be  known  by  our  doings.  But  who  is  it 
knows  us  thus  ?  In  this  way  our  fellow-men  know  us.  In  this  way,  above  all, 
God  knows  us.  If  we  are  to  be  doing  always  what  we  ought  to  do,  we  shall  need  a 
helper.  (1)  Because  of  our  inclinations  to  do  evil.  (2)  Because  we  have  so  many 
powerful  enemies.  Give  the  story  of  Telemachus  and  Mentor,  and  show  that 
Jesus  is  our  ever-present  friend,  helper,  and  guide.  {R.  Tuck,  B.A.)  Christian 
childhood  soon  discovers  itself: — How  do  we  know  a  Christian  boy  or  girl?  Why 
in  the  same  way  that  you  know  a  candle  has  been  lighted — by  its  shining.  Do  you 
suppose  that  people  do  not  know  whether  you  love  your  mother  or  not  ?  You  need 
not  say  to  them,  "  I  am  very  fond  of  my  mother  " ;  they  will  find  it  out  soon 
enough  for  themselves — by  the  way  you  speak  of  your  mother ;  by  the  way  you 
speak  to  your  mother  ;  by  your  obedience  to  her  directions  ;  by  your  thoughtfulnesg 
when  you  think  you  can  help  her ;  by  your  willingness  to  be  in  her  company  ;  by 
your  grief  when  she  is  grieved,  or  in  trouble  or  pain.  Yes,  in  a  hundred  different 
ways  people  can  discover  your  affection  for  your  mother.  So  with  your  love  and 
devotion  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  But  though  you  need  not  announce  to  the 
world  how  good  you  are,  the  world  will  find  out  if  you  are  good,  will  find  out  if 
you  love  Jesus  Christ,  when  they  see  that  you  really — not  in  pretence,  but  really — 
like  all  that  belongs  to  Him :  His  book,  His  house,  His  day.     (G.  Calthrop,  M.A .) 

Ver.  12.  The  hearing  ear,  and  the  seeing  eye,  the  Lord  hath  made  even  both  of 
them. — Ears  and  no  ears,  eyes  and  no  eyes  : — 1.  There  are  wise  men  in  the  world 
who  will  not  admit  that  it  was  God  who  made  the  seeing  eye,  or  the  hearing  ear,  or 
anything  else  ;  who  will  rather  assume  that  the  ear  and  the  eye  made  themselves 
by  a  gradual  process  of  development.  And  you  may  not  be  able  to  withstand  their 
arguments.  The  text  may  have  an  inexpressible  value  for  you.  If  you  can  quote 
against  the  wise  the  words  of  a  wiser,  you  are  on  firm  ground.  And  the  vast 
majority  of  the  wisest  and  best  men  of  every  age  concur  with  Solomon.  2.  There 
is  something  in  the  text  suitable  for  young  children.  When  Solomon  spoke  of  the 
hearing  ear,  he  meant  to  remind  us  that  some  have  ears  which  do  not  hear,  and 
eyes  that  do  not  see.  What  we  hear  in  any  utterance  depends  on  what  we  bring 
the  power  of  hearing,  just  as  what  we  see  in  any  scene  depends  on  what  we  bring 
the  power  of  seeing.  We  are  all  apt  to  overlook  that  which  is  unknown  to  us. 
What  we  do  not  understand,  or  do  not  expect,  excites  no  curiosity,  touches  no 
interest,  rouses  no  attention  ;  and  hence  it  slips  by  unseen,  unheard — just  as  the 
snapping  of  a  slender  twig  might  say  nothing  to  us,  and  yet  might  tell  a  sportsman 
where  the  wild  creature  was  which  he  was  trying  to  shoot  down.  If  God  makes  the 
hearing  ear  and  the  seeing  eye.  He  expects  us  to  make  them  too.  He  expects  us  to 
use  and  train  these  wonderful  faculties.  He  rewards  us  in  proportion  as  we  meet, 
or  disappoint.  His  expectation  and  our  duty.  3.  When  the  Bible  speaks  of  deaf 
men  who  hear,  and  blind  men  who  see,  it  almost  always  refers  to  men's  moral 
condition,  to  their  attitude  towards  truth,  righteousness,  and  God,  as  well  as  to  the 
use  they  make  of  their  mental  faculties  and  capacities.  It  praises  them  for  seeing 
and  hearing  as  for  an  act  of  virtue  and  piety ;  it  blames  them  for  not  seeing  and 
hearing  as  for  a  sin.  Knowledge  without  love  is  at  once  a  poor  and  a  perilous 
endowment.  To  be  clever  without  being  good,  without  even  trying  to  be  good,  is 
only  to  deserve,  and  to  secure,  a  severer  condemnation.  You  have  not  even  begun 
to  be  truly  wise  until  you  love  and  reverence  God  ;  until,  from  reverence  and  love 
for  Him,  you  set  yourselves  to  know  and  do  that  which  is  right,  however  hard  it 
may  be,  and  refuse  to  do  that  which  is  wrong,  however  easy  and  pleasant  it  may 
look.  Men  also  prize  goodness  more  than  knowledge  and  cleverness,  and  value  a 
kind  heart  more  than  even  a  full  and  well-trained  mind.  Be  good,  then,  if  you 
would  be  wise,  if  you  would  prove  that  you  have  an  eye  that  sees  and  an  ear  to 
hear  and  obey.  To  be  good  no  doubt  is  hard  work.  But  that  is  the  very  reason 
why  God  asks  you  to  trust  in  Him  and  to  lean  on  Him.  He  is  good,  and  He  both 
can  and  will  make  you  good,  if  you  will  let  Him.  {S.  Cox,  D.D.)  The  hearing  ear 
and  the  seeing  eye : — Why  does  Solomon  say  this  ?  I.  That  God  should  be 
STUDIED  IN  THESE  OROANS.  1.  In  them  Divine  wisdom  is  manifest.  Take — (1)  The 
mechanism  of  these  organs.  "  The  eye,  by  its  admirable  combination  of  coats 
and  humours,  and  lenses,  produces  on  the  retina,  or  expansion  of  nerve  at  the 
back  of  the  socket  or  bony  cavity  in  which  it  is  so  securely  lodged,  a  distinct 


512  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

picture  of  the  minutest  or  largest  object ;  so  that,  on  a  space  that  is  less  than  an 
inch  in  diameter,  a  landscape  of  miles  in  extent,  with  all  its  variety  of  scenery  ia 
depicted  with  perfect  exactness  of  relative  proportion  in  all  its  parts."  Nor  is  the 
ear  less  wonderful.  It  is  a  complicated  mechanism  lying  wholly  within  the  body, 
showing  only  the  wider  outer  porch  through  which  the  sound  enters.  It  conveys 
the  sounds  through  various  chambers  to  the  innermost  extremities  of  those  nerves 
which  bear  the  messages  to  the  brain.  So  delicate  is  this  organ,  that  it  catches  the 
softest  whispers  and  conveys  them  to  the  soul,  and  so  strong  that  it  can  bear  the 
roll  of  the  loudest  thunders  into  the  chamber  of  its  mistress.  (2)  The  adaptation 
of  these  organs.  How  exquisitely  suited  they  are  to  the  offices  they  have  to  fulfil ! 
"  Conveying  the  impressions  of  the  outer  universe  to  the  spiritual  dweller  within, 
we  can,"  says  an  eminent  author,  "  by  attending  to  the  laws  of  vision  and  sound, 
produce  something  that,  in  structure  and  in  mechanism  or  physical  effect,  bears 
some  analogy  to  them.  But  this  is  not  sight ;  this  is  not  hearing.  These  imply 
perception.  Oh,  this  is  the  highest  and  deepest  wonder  of  aU  !  The  mechanical 
structure  we  can  trace  out  and  demonstrate.  We  can  show  how  by  the  laws  of 
transmission  and  refraction,  the  picture  is  made  on  the  retina  of  the  eye ;  and  how, 
by  the  laws  of  sound,  the  yielding,  tremulous,  undulating  air  affects  the  tympanuni 
or  drum  of  the  ear.  But  we  can  get  no  farther.  How  it  is  that  the  mind  receives 
its  perceptions,  how  it  is  that  it  is  affected,  what  is  the  nature  of  nervous  influence, 
or  of  the  process  by  which,  through  the  medium  of  the  nerves  and  the  brain, 
thought  is  produced  on  the  mind — of  all  this  we  are  profoundly  ignorant.  2.  In 
them  Divine  goodness  is  manifest,  3.  In  them  Divine  intelligence  is  symbolised. 
II.  That  God  should  be  served  by  these  organs.  The  service  for  which  God 
intends  us  to  use  them  is  to  convey  into  our  understandings  His  ideas,  into  our 
hearts  His  Spirit ;  translate  the  sensations  they  convey  to  us  into  Divine  ideas ; 
apply  Divine  ideas  to  the  formation  of  our  characters.  God's  ideas  should 
become  at  once  the  spring  and  rule  of  all  our  activities.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
The  hearing  ear  and  seeing  eye  : — For  all  the  faculties  of  a  man's  body,  as  well  as 
of  his  soul,  he  is  entirely  indebted  to  his  great  Creator.  The  forgetf ulness  of  the 
Creator  of  our  bodily  faculties  is  always  accompanied  by  a  forgetf  ulness  of  our 
responsibility  for  the  use  of  them.  How  far  have  we  turned  to  the  best  account 
those  organs  of  the  body  which  are  more  immediately  connected  with  the  mind, 
with  the  immortal  spirit,  with  the  state  and  well-being  of  the  soul  ?  The  eye  and 
ear  are  inlets  to  the  soul.  Be  anxious  to  use  your  faculties  while  they  are  merci- 
fully continued.  As  God  made  and  opened  the  natural  ear  for  the  perception  of 
sound,  so  does  He  make  and  open  the  spiritual  ear  for  the  reception  of  Divine  truth 
into  the  heart.  The  mental  ear,  as  well  as  the  bodily,  is  liable  to  be  disordered. 
In  a  state  of  spiritual  deafness  every  child  of  Adam  was  born.  None  of  us,  when 
we  came  into  the  world,  had  an  ear  for  spiritual  things.  Every  prayer  we  offer  up 
to  God  for  grace  to  bless  and  prosper  His  preached  Word  to  our  souls  is  an  acknow- 
ledgment that  the  hearing  ear,  the  willing  and  longing  and  profiting  ear,  is  His 
own  gracious  gift.  Does  He  open  thine  ear  ?  Listen  faithfully.  Does  He  open 
thine  eye?  Drink  in  fully  the  stream  of  light  from  heaven's  eternal  fountain. 
{J.  Slade,  M.A.)  Hearing  and  sight : — Every  one  hears  and  sees  all  day  long, 
so  perpetually  that  we  never  think  about  our  hearing  and  our  sight,  unless  we  find 
them  fail  us.  And  yet,  how  wonderful  are  hearing  and  sight.  How  we  hear,  how 
we  see,  no  man  knows,  nor  perhaps  ever  will  know.  Science  can  only  tell  us  as 
yet  what  happens,  what  God  does ;  but  of  how  God  does  it,  it  can  tell  us  little  or 
nothing  ;  and  of  why  God  does  it,  nothing  at  aU.  It  is  wonderful  that  our  brains 
should  hear  through  our  ears,  and  see  through  our  eyes  ;  but  it  is  more  wonderful 
still,  that  they  should  be  able  to  recollect  what  they  have  heard  and  seen.  Most 
people  think  much  of  signs  and  wonders,  but  the  commonest  things  are  as 
wonderful,  more  wonderful,  than  the  uncommon.  It  is  not  faith  only  to  see  God 
m  what  is  strange  and  rare.  This  is  faith,  to  see  God  in  what  is  most  common 
and  simple  ;  not  so  much  from  those  strange  sights  in  which  God  seems  to  break 
His  laws,  as  from  those  common  ones  in  which  He  fulfils  His  laws.  It  is  difficult 
to  believe  that,  because  our  souls  and  minds  are  disorderly ;  and  therefore  order 
does  not  look  to  us  what  it  is,  the  likeness  and  glory  of  God.  The  greatness  of  God 
is  manifest  in  that  He  has  ordained  laws  which  must  work  of  themselves,  and  with 
which  He  need  never  interfere.  The  universe  is  continually  going  right,  because 
Gk)d  has  given  it  a  law  which  cannot  be  broken.  (Charlet  Kingsley,  M.A.) 
Living  faculties  : — The  Lord  is  willing  to  be  judged  by  His  work.  The  sculptor 
.«aD  make  an  ear,  the  Lord  makes  the  hearing  ear.    But  man  haa  loat  hia  power  to 


CHAP.  XX.]  PROVERBS.  613 

listen.  The  mischief  is  that  he  thinks  he  is  listening,  and  is  deceiving  himself. 
Listening  is  the  act  of  the  soul.  The  Lord  maketh  the  seeing  eye.  The  artist  has 
made  a  thousand  eyes,  but  no  seeing  eye.  God  did  not  give  such  faculties  without 
a  purpose.  The  very  quality  and  capacity  of  the  faculty  must  have  some  suggestion. 
These  faculties  were  given  us  for  education,  not  for  prostitution.  Take  care  how 
you  use  the  ear  and  the  eye.  Has  anybody  been  the  better  for  your  hearing  or 
your  seeing?  Where  faculties  are  given  in  man  or  beast  or  bird,  there  is  a 
corresponding  opportunity  for  their  exercise  provided.  There  are  internal, 
spiritual  eyes.  The  non-use  of  faculties  is  a  religious  crime.  As  certainly  as  we 
have  bodily  faculties  that  have  meanings,  missions,  and  issues,  as  there  is  a  balance 
and  relationship  between  the  bodily  and  the  external,  so  we  have  what  is  called  a 
"religious  nature."  We  know  the  meaning  of  reason,  we  know  the  meaning  of 
faith,  we  kno  .V  the  meaning  of  passionate  and  wordless  yearning.  What  are  you 
going  to  do  with  your  reUgious  nature  ?    You  can  starve  it.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  14.  It  is  naught,  it  ia  naught,  saith  the  buyer :  but  when  he  is  gone  his 
way,  then  he  boasteth. — Fraud  exposed  and  condemned  : — The  man  who  would  be 
really  religious,  must  be  influenced  by  religion  in  every  part  of  his  conduct,  and  on 
all  occasions,  during  the  week,  as  well  as  on  the  Sabbath  ;  in  his  intercourse  with 
man,  as  well  as  in  his  approaches  to  God.  To  conduct  worldly  business  in  a 
perfectly  fair  and  upright  manner,  in  such  a  manner  as  God  prescribes,  is  a  most 
important  and  difficult  part  of  true  religion.     I.  Some  general  rules  which  God 

HAS   GIVEN    FOR   THE   DIRECTION    OF    THOSE    WHO    WISH    TO     KNOW    AND    DO    THEIR    DUTY. 

1.  The  rule  that  requires  us  to  love  our  neighbour  as  ourselves.  2.  The  rule  which 
forbids  us  to  covet  any  part  of  our  neighbour's  possessions.  The  command  is 
express  and  comprehensive.  We  are  not  forbidden  to  desire  the  property  of 
another,  on  fair  and  equitable  terms.  It  forbids  every  desire  to  increase  our 
property  at  our  neighbour's  expense.  3.  We  are  commanded  to  observe  in  all  our 
transactions  the  rules  of  justice,  truth,  and  sincerity.  4.  We  are  directed  in  all 
our  transactions  to  remember  that  the  eye  of  God  is  upon  us.     II.  Apply  these 

RULES   AND     SHOW     WHAT     THEY    REQUIRE,    WHAT     THEY     FORBID,    AND    WHEN    THEY   ARE 

VIOLATED.  1.  What  do  these  rules  require  of  us  as  subjects  or  members  of  civil 
society  ?  There  is  an  implied  contract  or  agreement  between  a  government  and  its 
subjects,  by  which  the  subjects  engage  to  give  a  portion  of  their  property  in 
exchange  for  the  blessings  of  protection,  social  order,  and  security.  2.  The 
application  of  these  rules  to  the  common  pecuniary  transactions  of  life.  They 
forbid  every  wish,  and  much  more  every  attempt,  to  defraud  or  deceive  our  neigh- 
bour. And  this  on  the  part  of  both  buyer  and  seller.  We  must  put  ourselves  in 
the  place  of  our  neighbour,  and  do  as  we  would  be  done  by.  We  are  always  to  act 
as  we  would  do  if  our  fellow-creatures  could  see  our  hearts.  3.  Apply  these  rules 
to  our  past  conduct,  that  we  may  ascertain  how  far  we  have  observed,  and  in  what 
instances  we  have  disregarded  them.  God  takes  special  cognisance  of  the  wrongs 
which  are  done  by  artifice,  fraud,  and  deceit,  and  which  human  laws  cannot 
prevent  or  discover.  Any  who  have  violated  these  rules  in  their  pecuniary 
transactions  are  required  to  repent,  and  to  bring  forth  fruits  meet  for  repentance. 
There  is  no  repentance,  and  of  course  no  forgiveness,  without  restitution.  How 
can  a  man  repent  of  iniquity  who  still  retains  the  wages  of  iniquity  ?  And  these 
rules  must  regulate  our  future  transactions  if  we  mean  to  be  the  real  subjects  of 
Christ.  They  are  the  laws  of  His  kingdom,  which  you  have  covenanted  to  obey. 
{E.  Payson,  D.D.)  Bargain-driving  : — The  inconsiderate  thirst  for  cheapness  is 
one  of  the  social  curses  of  our  age.  Here  is  a  concise  description  of  a  bargain- 
driver.  Say  anything  to  depreciate  the  article,  and  get  it  at  a  lower  price  than  is 
asked ;  then  boast  of  your  success.  This  may  be  sharp,  but  if  it  is  not  always  sin, 
it  is  constantly  on  the  very  margin  of  vice.  In  buying  cbeap  we  may  avail  our- 
selves only  of  lawful  advantages,  and  may  not  compass  unrighteous  or  unfair  gains. 
To  get  what  a  man  wants,  and  to  give  as  little  as  possible  for  it,  need  not  be  sinful. 
Lying  is  a  sin  in  trade  just  as  much  as  in  common  conversation.  The  inconsiderate 
craving  for  cheapness  has  a  bad  effect  on  the  mind.  It  makes  it  grasping  and 
selfish,  greedy  of  its  own  gain,  but  careless  of  others'  well-doing.  It  produces,  if 
long  indulged  in,  a  spirit  of  low  and  unworthy  cunning.  Observe  how  the  influence 
of  this  thirst  for  cheapness  spreads.  I  have  no  words  to  express  my  contempt  and 
abhor^'ence  for  the  meanness  which  goes  into  a  shop  with  the  deliberate  r^Sblve  to 
get  the  articles  wanted  for  less  than  the  price  asked.  Such  questions  are  the  very 
essence  of  religion.     A  religion  that  does  not  touch  our  every-day  Ufe,  our  money 

34 


514  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xx, 

matters,  our  actions  in  and  on  society,  ia  a  religion  that  is  on  the  surface  merely. 
It  is  the  undue  severance  of  things  secular  from  things  sacred  which  makes  so 
much  of  men's  religion  unreal,  and  so  much  of  their  business  unrighteous,  i.e.,  not 
carried  out  with  a  full  sense  of  what  is  right  from  man  to  man.  (J.  E.  Clarke, 
M.A.)  Chicanery  : — Mr.  Bridges  says  "  that  Augustine  mentions  a  somewhat 
ludicrous,  but  significant  story.  A  mountebank  published  in  the  full  theatre  that 
in  the  next  entertainment  he  would  show  to  every  man  present  what  was  in  his 
heart.  An  immense  concourse  attended,  and  the  man  redeemed  his  pledge  to  the 
vast  assembly  by  a  single  sentence  :  '  Vili  vultis  emere,  et  caro  vendere'  ('  You  all 
wish  to  buy  cheap,  and  to  sell  dear'),  a  sentence  generally  applauded;  every  one, 
even  the  most  trifling  (as  Augustine  observes)  finding  the  confirmimg  witness  in  his 
own  conscience."  There  is  no  harm  in  buymg  in  the  cheapest  market  and  selling 
in  the  dearest.  In  fact,  this  is  both  wise  and  right  in  the  vendor.  Some  regard 
the  word  "  buyer  "  here  in  the  sense  of  possessor,  and  then  the  idea  of  the  passage 
is  changed,  and  it  is  this — that  a  man  attaches  greater  value  to  a  thing  after  he 
has  lost  it  than  before.  This  is  a  law  of  human  nature.  The  lost  piece  of  silver, 
the  lost  sheep,  the  lost  son.  But  it  is  more  like  Solomon  to  regard  the  text  as 
meaning  what  it  says — the  "buyer."    We  offer  two  remarks  upon  the  passage. 

1.  That  it  reveals  a  COMMON  commercial  pkactice.  The  "buyer"  depreciates  the 
commodity  in  the  process  of  purchase.  He  does  this  in  order  to  get  it  at  a  price 
below  its  worth.  And  when  he  succeeds,  and  it  comes  legally  into  his  possession, 
the  value  of  the  article  is  not  only  properly  estimated,  but  greatly  exaggerated. 
"  He  boasteth  " — 1.  Because  his  vanity  has  been  gratified.  He  feels  that  he  has 
done  a  clever  thing.  "He  boasteth" — 2.  Because  his  greed  has  been  gratified. 
II.  That   it  reveals   an   immoral    commercial    practice.      1.  There  is  falsehood. 

2.  There  is  dishonesty.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Honest  buying  : — It  was  once 
proposed  to  the  Duke  of  Wellington  to  purchase  a  farm  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Strathfieldsaye,  which  lay  near  to  his  estate,  and  was  therefore  valuable.  The 
Duke  assented.  When  the  purchase  was  completed,  his  steward  congratulated  him 
upon  having  made  such  a  bargain,  as  the  seller  was  in  difficulties,  and  forced  to 
part  with  it.  "What  do  you  mean  by  a  bargain?"  said  the  Duke.  The  other 
replied,  "  It  was  valued  at  £1,100,  and  we  have  got  it  for  £800."  "In  that  case," 
said  the  Duke,  "  you  will  please  to  carry  the  extra  £300  to  the  late  owner,  and 
never  talk  to  me  of  cheap  land  again."     {Home  Words.) 

Ver.  15.  Tliere  is  gold,  and  a  multitude  of  rubies. — On  the  moral  end  of 
business  : — Let  me  define  my  meaning  in  the  use  of  this  phrase — "  the  moral  end  of 
business."  It  is  not  the  end  for  which  property  should  be  sought.  It  is  not  the 
moral  purpose  to  be  answered  by  the  acquisition,  but  by  the  process  of  acquisition. 
And  again,  it  is  not  the  end  of  industry  in  general — that  is  a  more  comprehensive 
subject — but  it  is  the  end  of  business  in  particular,  of  barter,  of  commerce.  "  The 
end  of  business!"  some  one  may  say;  "why,  the  end  of  business  is  to  obtain 
property ;  the  end  of  the  process  of  acquisition  is  acquisition."  I  hold  that  the 
ultimate  end  of  all  business  is  a  moral  end.  I  believe  that  business— I  mean  not 
labour,  but  barter,  traffic — would  never  have  existed  if  there  had  been  no  end  but 
sustenance.  The  animal  races  obtain  subsistence  upon  an  easier  and  simpler 
plan  ;  but  for  man  there  is  a  higher  end,  and  that  is  moral.  The  broad  grounds 
of  this  position  I  find  in  the  obvious  designs  of  Providence,  and  in  the  evident 
adaptation  to  this  moral  end  of  business  itself.  1.  There  is,  then,  a  design  for 
which  all  things  were  made  and  ordained,  going  beyond  the  things  themselves. 
To  say  that  things  were  made,  or  that  the  arrangements  and  relations  of  things 
■were  ordained,  for  their  own  sake,  is  a  proposition  without  meaning.  The  world, 
its  structure,  productions,  laws,  and  events,  have  no  good  nor  evil  in  them — none, 
but  as  they  produce  these  results  in  the  experience  of  living  creatures.  The  end, 
then,  of  the  inanimate  creation  is  the  welfare  of  the  living,  and,  therefore, 
especially  of  the  intelligent  creation.  But  the  welfare  of  human  beings  lies 
essentially  in  their  moral  culture.  We  are  not  appointed  to  pass  througli  tliis  life 
barely  that  we  may  live.  We  are  not  impelled,  both  by  disposition  and  necessity, 
to  buy  and  sell,  barely  that  we  may  do  it ;  nor  to  get  gain,  barely  that  we  may  get 
it.  There  is  an  end  in  business  beyond  supply.  There  is  an  object  in  the  acquisi- 
tion of  wealth  beyond  success.  There  is  a  final  cause  of  human  traffic,  and  that 
is  virtue.  With  this  view  of  the  moral  end  of  business  falls  in  the  constant 
doctrine  of  all  elevated  philosophy  and  true  religion.  Life,  say  the  expounders  of 
every  creed,  is  a  probation.     Now,  if  anything  deserves  to  be  considered  as  a  part 


CHAP.  XX.]  PEO VERBS.  515 

of  that  probation,  it  is  business.  Life,  say  the  wise,  is  a  school.  But  the  end  of 
a  lesson  is  that  something  be  learned ;  and  the  end  of  business  is,  that  truth, 
rectitude,  virtue,  be  learned.  This  is  the  ultimate  design  proposed  by  Heaven,  and 
it  is  a  design  which  every  wise  man,  engaged  in  that  calling,  will  propose  to 
himself.  It  is  no  extravagance,  therefore,  but  the  simple  assertion  of  a  truth,  to 
say  to  a  man  so  engaged,  and  to  say  emphatically,  "  You  have  an  end  to  gain 
beyond  success,  and  that  is  the  moral  rectitude  of  your  own  mind."  2.  That 
business  is  so  exquisitely  adapted  to  accomplish  that  purpose,  is  another  argument 
with  me  to  prove  that  such,  in  the  intention  of  its  Ordainer,  was  its  design.  An 
honest  man,  a  man  who  sincerely  desires  to  attain  to  a  lofty  and  unbending 
uprightness,  could  scarcely  seek  a  discipline  more  perfectly  fitted  to  that  end  than 
the  discipline  of  trade.  For  what  is  trade?  It  is  the  constant  adjustment  of  the 
claims  of  different  parties,  a  man's  seK  being  one  of  the  parties.  This  competition 
of  rights  and  interests  might  not  invade  the  soUtary  study,  or  the  separate  tasks  of 
the  workshop,  or  the  labours  of  the  silent  field,  once  a  day ;  but  it  presses  upon 
the  merchant  and  trader  continually.  Do  you  say  that  it  presses  too  hard  ?  Then, 
I  reply,  must  the  sense  of  rectitude  be  made  the  stronger  to  meet  the  trial.  Every 
plea  of  this  nature  is  an  argument  for  strenuous  moral  effort.  A  man  must  do  more 
than  to  attain  to  punctilious  honesty  in  his  actions ;  he  must  train  his  whole  soul, 
his  judgment,  his  sentiments  and  affections,  to  uprightness,  candour,  and  good-will. 
I  have  thus  attempted  to  show  that  business  has  an  ultimate,  moral  end — one 
going  beyond  the  accumulation  of  property.  3.  This  may  also  be  shown  to  be 
true,  not  only  on  the  scale  of  our  private  affairs,  but  on  the  great  theatre  of 
history.  Commerce  has  always  been  an  instrument  in  the  hands  of  Providence 
for  accomplishing  nobler  ends  than  promoting  the  wealth  of  nations.  It  has  been 
the  grand  civiliser  of  nations.  With  its  earliest  birth  on  the  Mediterranean  shore, 
freedom  was  born.  Phcenicia,  the  merchants  of  whose  cities.  Tyre  and  Sidon,  were 
accounted  princes ;  the  Hebrew  commonwealth,  which  carried  on  a  trade  through 
those  parts  ;  the  Grecian,  Carthaginian,  and  Eoman  States,  were  not  only  the 
freest,  but  they  were  the  only  free  states  of  antiquity.  In  the  middle  ages 
commerce  broke  down  in  Europe,  the  feudal  system,  raising  up,  in  the  Hanse 
Towns,  throughout  Germany,  Sweden,  and  Norway,  a  body  of  men  who  were  able 
to  cope  with  barons  and  kings,  and  to  wrest  from  them  their  free  charters  and 
rightful  privileges.  In  England  its  influence  is  proverbial ;  the  sheet-anchor,  it 
has  long  been  considered,  of  her  unequalled  prosperity  and  intelligence.  Its  moral 
influences  are  the  only  ones  of  which  we  stand  in  any  doubt,  and  these,  it  need  not 
be  said,  are  of  unequalled  importance.  The  philanthropist,  the  Christian,  are  all 
bound  to  watch  these  influences  with  the  closest  attention,  and  to  do  all  in  their 
power  to  guard  and  elevate  them.  It  is  upon  this  point  that  I  wish  especially  to 
insist ;  but  there  are  one  or  two  topics  that  may  previously  claim  some  attention. 
(1)  If,  then,  business  is  a  moral  dispensation,  and  its  highest  end  is  moral,  I  shall 
venture  to  call  in  question  the  commonly  supposed  desirableness  of  escaping  from 
it — the  idea  which  prevails  with  so  many  of  making  a  fortune  in  a  few  years,  and 
afterwards  of  retiring  to  a  state  of  leisure.  If  business  really  is  a  scene  of  worthy 
employment  and  of  high  moral  action,  I  do  not  see  why  the  moderate  pursuit  of  it 
should  not  be  laid  down  in  the  plan  of  entire  active  life ;  and  why,  upon  this  plan, 
a  man  should  not  determine  to  give  only  so  much  time  each  day  to  his  avocations 
as  would  be  compatible  with  such  a  plan  ;  only  so  much  time,  in  other  words,  as 
will  be  compatible  with  the  daily  enjoyment  of  life,  with  reading,  society,  domestic 
intercourse,  and  all  the  duties  of  philanthropy  and  devotion.  (2)  Another  topic  is 
the  rage  for  speculation.  I  wish  to  speak  of  it  now  in  a  particular  view — as 
interfering,  that  is  to  say,  with  the  moral  end  of  business.  It  is  not  looking  to 
diligence  and  fidelity  for  a  fair  reward,  but  to  change  and  chance  for  a  fortunate 
turn.  It  is  drawing  away  men's  minds  from  the  healthful  processes  of  sober 
industry  and  attention  to  business,  and  leading  them  to  wait  in  feverish  excitement 
as  at  the  wheel  of  a  lottery.  To  do  business  and  get  gain,  honestly  and  con- 
scientiously, is  a  good  thing.  It  is  useful  discipline  of  the  character.  I  look  upon 
a  man  who  has  acquired  wealth,  in  a  laudable,  conscientious,  and  generous  pursuit 
of  business,  not  only  with  a  respect  far  beyond  what  I  can  feel  for  his  wealth — for 
which  indeed,  abstractly,  I  can  feel  none  at  all — but  with  the  distinct  feeling  that 
he  has  acquired  something  far  more  valuable  than  opulence.  But  for  this  discipline 
of  the  character,  for  the  reasonableness  and  rectitude  of  mind  which  a  regular 
business  intercourse  may  form,  speculation  furnishes  but  a  narrow  field,  if  any  at 
all ;  such  speculation,  I  mean,  as  has  lately  created  a  popular  frenzy  in  this 


516  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xi 

country  about  the  sudden  acquisition  of  property.  This  insane  passion  for 
accumulation,  ever  ready,  when  circumstances  favour,  to  seize  upon  the  public 
mind,  is  that  "love  of  money  which  is  the  root  of  all  evil,"  that  "  covetousness 
which  is  idolatry."  It  springs  from  an  undue,  an  idolatrous  estimate  of  the 
value  of  property.  Many  are  feeling  that  nothing — nothing  will  do  for  them 
or  for  their  children  but  wealth;  not  a  good  character,  not  well-trained  and 
well-exerted  faculties,  not  virtue,  not  the  hope  of  heaven — nothing  but  wealth. 
It  is  their  god,  and  the  god  of  their  families.  (0.  Dewey,  D.D.)  The  lips 
of  knowledge  axe  a  precious  jewel. — The  use  of  the  tongue .- — It  is  very  difficult 
to  control  the  noble  faculty  of  speech,  but  it  may  be  controlled.  You  may 
bridle  it.  I.  The  power  ok  speech  is  a  great  endowment.  One  of  the  essential 
distinctions  between  us  and  the  mere  animal.  Expression  is  thus  given  to 
our  power  of  thinking,  which  is  another  great  endowment.  The  tongue  is  the 
heart's  interpreter.  Used  as  it  may  and  ought  to  be,  its  influence  is  luminous  as 
the  light  and  fragrant  as  the  rose.    But  what  mischief  it  may  work  !     11.  We  have 

GREAT  RESPONSIBILITY  IN  THE  MATTER  OF  OUR  SPEAKING.      All  OUr  endowmCUtS  iuVOlvO 

an  accountability  proportionate  to  their  magnitude  and  importance,  and  speech  is 
no  exception.  The  impression  seems  common  that  our  words  are  of  little  import- 
ance, and  that  while  actions  must  be  accounted  for,  speaking  is  but  a  voice,  and 
will  not  be  recorded,  or  appear  again  to  confront  us.  Every  serious  person  must 
be  sensible  how  heavily  the  burden  of  sins  of  speech  presses  on  him.     III.  God  has 

AFFORDED  FULNESS  OF  INSTRUCTION  IN  REGARD  TO  OUR  BEARING  OF  THIS  RESPONSIBILITY. 

The  instruction  is,  for  the  most  part,  general  in  its  nature.  1.  Truth.  Departure 
from  truth  is  specially  condemned.  Untruth  includes  exaggerated  statements. 
2.  Sincerity.  Heart  and  lips  must  never  be  at  variance.  3.  Purity.  This 
excludes  levity  in  speaking  of  holy  things.  4.  Love.  This  will  induce  to  active 
good.  IV.  Speech  is  capable  of  control.  How  is  it  to  be  bridled  ?  1.  By  right 
thinking.  2.  By  watchfulness.  3.  By  correct  habits.  4.  By  prayer.  "  He  that 
seemeth  to  be  religious  and  bridleth  not  his  tongue,  that  man's  religion  is  vain." 
{H.  Wilkes,  D.D.) 

Ver.  18.  Every  purpose  is  established  by  counseL — Counsel: — "Of  all  apostolio 
habits  the  most  habitual,"  writes  Archbishop  Benson,  "  was  the  usage  of  counsel. 
The  upper  chamber,  the  house,  the  home  of  Mary,  Jerusalem,  Antioch,  the  school 
of  Ephesus,  the  Hired  House  at  Eome,  were  so  many  conciliahula  and  scenes  of 
high  debate.  How  full  is  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  of  mentions  of  '  disputation,' 
'conference,'  '  reasoning,'  and  of  such  expressions  as  these  :  '  They  came  together 
to  consider  the  matter,'  '  It  pleased  the  apostles  and  elders  and  the  whole  Church,' 
'  Being  assembled  together  with  one  accord,'  and  the  like.  How  strong  are  the 
injunctions  '  to  assemble  themselves,'  'to  come  together  in  the  assembly,'  'to  be 
gathered  together  with  one  spirit ' !  "  1.  It  is  a  familiar  experience  that  we  can 
tune  ourselves  for  any  work  of  our  own  by  placing  ourselves  in  touch  with  some 
kindred  work  by  a  master  hand.  By  this  simple  method  we  can  in  some  measure 
"  kindle  when  we  will  the  fire  which  in  the  heart  resides."  Our  spirits  drink  in 
refreshment  from  those  living  founts  of  inspiration.  What  others  have  consum- 
mately done  lends  us  at  least  the  impulse  to  go  and  do  likewise.  2.  By  with- 
drawing ourselves,  if  only  for  a  brief  space,  from  the  absorbing  interests,  the  keen 
controversies,  of  the  present  into  the  serener  regions  of  the  past,  where  principles 
and  men  and  methods  can  be  more  impartially  studied,  by  going  "  back  to  the 
Bible  "  in  the  modest  but  unflinching  spirit,  and  with  the  enriched  equipment  of 
scientific  research — our  minds  are  tranquillised  and  balanced  as  wc'l  as  quickened 
and  enlightened  for  dealing  with  the  urgent  needs,  the  burning  questions,  the 
conflicting  points  of  view  and  policies  of  the  hour.  So  by  God's  help  may  it  be  with 
us  as  we  rapidly  survey  "  the  type  and  model  "  of  Christian  councils  of  every  kind 
and  degree,  and  thus  look  for  guiding  principles,  practical  indications,  and  spiritual 
tone  to  "  the  rock  whence  we  are  hewn."     (Bp.  Jayne,  D.D.) 

Ver.  19.  Meddle  not  with  him  that  flattereth  with  his  lips.— On  keeping  aicay 
people  we  don't  want : — Not  all  insects  are  welcome  visitors  to  plants ;  there  are 
unbidden  guests  who  do  harm.  To  their  visits  there  are  often  obstacles.  Stiff  hairs, 
impassably  slippery  or  viscid  stems,  moats  in  which  the  intruders  drown,  and  ether 
structural  peculiarities,  whose  origin  may  have  had  no  reference  to  insects,  often 
justify  themselves  by  saving  the  plant.  Even  more  interesting,  however,  is  the  preser- 
vation of  some  acacias  and  other  shrubs  by  a  bodyguard  of  ants,  which,  innocent 


CHAP.  XX.]  PROVERBS.  617 

themselves,  ward  off  the  attacks  of  the  deadly  leaf-cutters.  In  some  cases  the 
bodyguard  has  become  almost  hereditarily  accustomed  to  the  plants,  and  the  plants 
to  them,  for  they  are  found  in  constant  companionship,  and  the  plants  exhibit 
structures  which  look  almost  as  if  they  had  been  made  as  shelters  for  the  ants.  On 
some  of  our  European  trees  similar  little  homes  or  domatia  constantly  occur,  and 
shelter  small  insects,  which  do  no  harm  to  the  trees,  but  cleanse  them  from  inj  urious 
fungi.     (J.  Arthur  Thomson,  M.A.) 

Yer.  21.  An  inheritance  may  be  gotten  hastily  at  the  beginning;  but  the  end 
thereof  shall  not  be  blessed. — Patience  and  permanence: — Ours  is  an  age  of  haste. 
Short  cuts  to  learning,  professional  life  without  due  preparation,  fortunes  before 
labour;  all  this  foretells  disaster  and  collapse.  In  behalf  of  an  energy  that  is 
persistent,  a  labour  that  is  patient,  enterprises  that  count  the  cost  I  wish  to  speak. 
The  truth  of  the  text  appears — I.  In  the  material  world.  Tremendous  forces  have 
operated  through  ages  to  bring  the  earth  into  its  present  condition.  Geological, 
chemical,  astronomical  science  teU  of  changes  slow,  silent,  but  persistent,  and 
therefore  permanent.  II.  In  the  intellectual  world.  The  human  mind  has  a 
physical  basis.  As  grew  the  material,  so  grows  the  mental  world.  A  process  here, 
a  progress  there.  Ideas  endure  hardness  in  their  battle  for  recognition.  Doctrines 
are  developed  according  to  this  law  of  progress.  Scripture  unfolds  like  herbage  in 
the  field.  Intellectual  power  is  secured  by  labour  and  persistent  effort.  Nature 
reveals  her  secrets,  history  discloses  the  past,  revelation  makes  known  her  truth, 
only  to  the  studious  and  devout.  III.  In  the  spiritual  world.  Scripture  has 
styled  the  Almighty  "  the  God  of  aU  patience."  His  works  bear  evidence  of  finish 
and  completeness.  Why  does  He  deliberate,  tarry,  and  hasten  not  ?  Let  this  God 
of  patience  interpret  His  own  plans.  With  Him  millenniums  are  as  days.  Sudden 
movements  in  grace,  as  in  nature,  are  of  the  destructive  kind.  Gentle  dews,  not 
crashing  storms,  make  good  pasture.  A  lamb,  not  the  lion,  is  final  conqueror,  and 
the  servant  who  sows  and  waits,  prays  and  persists,  believes  and  does  not  make 
haste,  shall  have  a  sure  reward.     {Frank  Rector,  M.A.) 

Ver.  23.  And  a  false  balance  is  not  good. — False  balance  applied  to  providences: — 
We  may  apply  a  false  balance  to  the  providences  which  make  up  our  life.  What 
skill  some  people  have  in  dealing  only  in  dark  things,  black  aspects,  wintry  phases, 
deprivations,  bereavements,  losses  !  They  are  eloquent  when  they  tell  you  what 
they  have  parted  with.  Who  can  be  equally  eloquent  in  numbering  mercies  ?  Who 
ever  gets  beyond  the  outside  of  things,  the  mere  rim,  the  palpable  environment  ? 
Who  gets  into  the  soul,  and  who  says,  "  I  have  reason,  how  can  I  be  poor?  I  have 
health,  how  can  I  fail  ?  I  have  home,  how  can  I  be  desolate  ?  "  In  balancing  life 
take  in  all  these  reasons  and  thoughts  and  considerations,  and  so  doing  you  will 
see  that  all  the  while  God  has  been  making  you  rich,  or  giving  you  the  possibilitity 
and  opportunity  of  acquiring  and  enjoying  the  true  wealth.  Who  is  there  that 
keeps  a  right  balance  when  he  has  to  weigh  the  present  and  the  future  ?  The 
unsteady  hand  can  never  get  an  equipoise ;  the  palsied  fingers  cannot  hold  the 
scales.  The  present  is  here,  the  future  is  yonder;  and  when  did  "here"  fail  to 
carry  the  war  against  "  yonder  "  ?  We  have  even  formed  little  foolish  proverbs 
about  this  ;  we  have  gone  so  far  as  to  tell  the  lie  that  "  a  bird  in  the  hand  is  worth 
two  in  the  bush."  Whoever  says  that  is  guilty  of  a  palpable  sophism.  He  seems 
to  be  speaking  truth,  he  forgets  that  everything  depends  on  the  bird  that  is  in  the 
bush,  and  all  the  possibilities  and  contingencies  and  promises  which  relate  to  the 
possibility  and  certainty  of  its  capture  if  the  right  way  be  pursued.  We  are  the 
victims  of  the  present.  It  would  seem  impossible  for  some  men  to  do  justice  to 
spirituality.  Spiritual  teaching  goes  for  nothing.  If  you  deal  in  clothing  for  the 
head  you  will  get  your  money  ;  there  is  a  county  court  to  support  you — but  if  yoa 
give  a  man  ideas,  if  you  pray  him  into  heaven,  if  you  lift  up  his  soul  into  a  new 
selfhood,  the  county  court  would  smile  at  you  if  you  made  application  for  assistance 
in  any  direction  that  you  might  think  honest  and  equitable.  And  the  very  best  of 
men  play  at  that  game.     They  cannot  help  it.     (<7.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Yer.  24.  Man's  goings  are  of  the  Lord :  how  can  a  man  then  understand  Ms  own 
way  ? — Man's  goings : — I.  The  text  in  its  negative  bearings.  1.  Appeal  to  Scrip- 
ture (chap.  xvi.  9  ;  Jer.  x.  23).  2.  Appeal  to  history.  Hazael  (2  Kings  viii.  11). 
3.  Appeal  to  your  own  experience.  Is  it  not  true  that  when  you  trust  to  your  own 
strength  you  are  apt  to  trifle  with  temptation?    n.  The  tbxt  in  its  positive 


618  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

BEARiNQS.  "  Man's  goings  are  of  the  Lord."  His  goings  in  the  path  of  duty  are. 
What  is  true  of  duty  is  true  also  of  the  conduct  of  ^ife.  From  this  gather 
encouragement,  and  nourish  humility.  Check  all  presumptuous  schemes  as  to  the 
future.     (A.  Nicholson,  B.A.) 

Ver.  25.  It  is  a  snare  to  the  man.  who  devoureth  that  which  is  holy. — Selfishness 
in  religio7i : — There  were  under  the  Levitical  dispensation  certain  things  prescribed 
by  the  law  as  consecrated  to  God  ;  such  as  tithes,  first-fruits,  firstlings  of  the  herds 
and  the  flock.  There  were  also  things  that  were  voluntarily  consecrated  as  free-will 
offerings  to  Jehovah.  It  is  to  these,  perhaps,  that  Solomon  here  specially  refers. 
The  expression,  "to  devour  that  which  is  holy,"  characterises  the  conduct  of  those 
who  appropriate  that  to  their  own  use  which  had  been  either  by  themselves  or 
others  consecrated  to  the  service  of  God.  The  subject  leads  us  to  consider  selfish- 
ness in  religion.  Selfishness  everywhere  is  bad,  but  when  selfishness  intrudes  into 
the  temple  of  religion,  it  is  peculiarly  hideous.  It  is  then  the  serpent  amongst 
seraphs.  I.  The  appropriating  of  the  consecrated  to  personal  use.  The  text 
speaks  of  the  man  who  "  devoureth  that  which  is  holy."  This  was  the  sin  of 
Achan  :  he  robbed  the  treasury  of  the  Lord  (Josh.  vi.  19,  vii.  1).  "Will  a  man 
rob  God?"  (Mai.  iii.  8,  9).  This  is  done  now  in  England.  1.  In  the  personal 
appropriations  of  ecclesiastical  endowments.  2.  In  the  assumption  of  sacred  oflBces 
for  personal  ends.  3.  In  the  adoption  of  the  Christian  profession  from  motives  of 
personal  interest.  11.  The  endeavouring  to  avoid  the  fulfilment  of  religious 
vows.  "  And  after  vows  to  make  inquiry."  There  are  three  ideas  that  must  not  be 
attached  to  this  expression.  1.  The  idea  that  it  is  wrong  to  make  religious  vows 
is  not  here.  2.  The  idea  that  it  is  wrong  to  break  improper  vows  is  not  here. 
3.  The  idea  that  it  is  wrong  to  think  upon  the  vow  after  it  is  made  is  not  here. 
(D,  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  26.  A  wise  king  scattereth  the  wicked,  and  bringeth  the  wheel  over  them. — 

Persecution  and  righteous  penalty : — A  passage  of  this  kind  may  easily  be  per- 
verted by  being  used  for  the  purpose  of  supporting  a  doctrine  of  persecution.  To 
bring  the  wheel  over  a  man  seems  to  be  a  figurative  expression  for  the  very  direst 
cruelty.  If  a  man  is  wicked,  crush  him  with  the  wheel,  tear  him  limb  from  limb, 
decapitate  him,  in  some  way  show  that  there  is  a  power  that  can  terminate  not  only 
his  enjoyment  and  his  liberty,  but  his  life.  That,  however  is  not  the  meaning  of 
the  text.  Always  distinguish  between  persecution  and  righteous  penalty,  between 
mere  oppression  and  the  assertion  of  that  righteousness  which  is  essential  to  the 
consolidation  of  society.  When  the  stacks  of  corn  were  spread  upon  the  threshing- 
floor,  the  grain  was  separated  from  the  husk  by  a  sort  of  sledge  or  cart  which  was 
driven  over  them.  The  process  was  for  the  purpose  of  separating  the  chaff  from 
the  wheat ;  the  process  therefore  was  purely  beneficent :  so  with  the  wise  king  ;  he 
winnows  out  evil  persons,  he  signalises  them,  he  gives  them  aU  the  definiteness  of 
a  separate  position,  and  by  bringing  them  into  startling  contrast  with  persons  of 
Bound  and  honest  heart  he  seeks  to  put  an  end  to  their  mischievous  power. 
Indiscrimination  is  the  ruin  of  goodness.  Men  are  separated  by  different  ways,  not 
by  imprisonment,  not  by  merely  personal  penalty,  not  by  stigma  and  brand  of  an 
offensive  character  ;  they  are  separated  by  contrariety  of  taste,  aspiration,  feeling, 
sympathy ;  in  proportion  as  the  good  are  earnest  do  they  classify  themselves, 
bringing  themselves  in  sacred  association  with  one  another,  and  by  sensitiveness 
of  moral  touch  they  feel  the  evil  and  avoid  it ;  they  know  the  evil  person  at  a 
distance  and  are  careful  to  put  themselves  out  of  his  way  and  reach.  What  is 
represented  as  being  done  by  the  wise  king  is  done  by  the  cultivation  of  high 
principle  and  Christian  honour.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  27  The  spirit  of  man  is  the  candle  of  the  Lord. — The  nature  and  function 
of  conscience : — The  spirit  of  man  is  the  breath  of  the  Creator.  The  breath  kindled 
intelligence  in  the  brain,  and  infused  vitality  into  the  heart.  It  did  more  than 
that.  It  made  man  a  moral  being,  capable  of  virtue,  and  responsible  for  his 
actions.  The  vitalizing  breath  of  the  Lord  kindled  a  light  in  man — here  called 
"  the  candle  of  the  Lord."  By  that  candle  man  sees  his  own  inner  i  uure, 
witnesses  the  process  of  his  own  mind,  and  observes  the  motions  of  his  affections 
and  will.  Conscience  has  a  place  of  pre-eminent  importance  in  our  nature. 
1.  Scientific  men  give  one  definition  of  conscience,  while  popular  usage  sanctions 
another  materially  different.     In  every-day  usage  the  word  is  used  to  indicate  the 


CHAP.  XX.]  PROVERBS.  519 

whole  moral  nature  of  man.  When  a  man  resists  temptation  he  says,  "  My 
conscience  will  not  let  me  do  it."  Conscience  includes  three  things :  the  percep- 
tion of  right  or  wrong ;  the  judgment  of  a  particular  action  as  being  right  or 
wrong ;  the  feeling  of  pleasure  or  remorse  which  follows  right  or  wrong  action. 
The  Bible  usage  of  the  word  is  the  same  as  our  ordinary  usage  in  every-day  speech. 
In  Scripture  usage,  conscience  includes  the  perception,  the  judgment,  and  the 
feeling.  Conscience  is  not  an  Old  Testament  term.  And,  singularly  enough,  the 
word  was  never  used  in  the  teaching  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  2.  Paul's  most  frequent 
word  for  the  function  of  conscience  is  the  figurative  word  "  witness."  Conscience 
is  a  witness  testifying  in  the  soul.  A  witness  is  one  who  testifies,  one  who  tells 
clearly  what  he  knows  of  a  matter.  To  what  facts  or  truths  does  conscience  bear 
testimony.  It  testifies  to  the  existence  of  a  fundamental  distinction  between  right 
and  wrong.  It  testifies  that  right  ought  to  be  done,  and  that  wrong  ought  not 
to  be  done.  It  convicts  a  man  when  wrong  has  been  done.  Its  witness  becomes 
a  check  on  man's  doings.  [Jesse  T.  Whitley.)  The  spiritual  part  of  man : — 
The  text  is  an  account  of  the  soul,  or  spiritual  part  in  man.  The  spirit  of 
man  is  the  lamp  of  Jehovah,  i.e.,  its  operations  and  manner  of  performing  them 
are  similar  to  those  of  a  lamp,  and  it  is  supported  in  them^  by  Jehovah 
spiritually,  as  a  lamp  is  in  nature  physically.  In  a  lamp  are  four  things.  1,  A 
vessel.  2.  A  substance  capable  of  being  illuminated.  3.  Necessity  for  kindling  it. 
4.  Constant  recruits  of  oil  to  supply  it  and  keep  it  burning.  These  particulars 
are  as  spiritually  true  in  the  soul  of  man.  I.  The  soul  has  a  vessel  in  which  it  is 
ENCLOSED  AND  CONTAINED.    The  body  is  the  vessel  of  this  lamp  of  Jehovah.    II.  The 

BOUL,  THOUGH  CAPABLE  OF  EECEIVINQ  ILLUMINATION  rKOM  GoD,  IS  IN  ITSELF  ABSOLUTELY 

DARK.  When,  by  that  grand  and  original  sin  at  the  faU,  the  light  that  was  in  us 
became  darkness,  how  great  was  that  darkness  !  By  the  fall  this  most  glorious 
excellency  and  perfection  of  our  nature,  spiritual  discernment  by  faith,  was  lost, 
and  we  became  like  the  beasts.  III.  Christ  was  sent  to  kindle  a  light  in  the 
SOUL.  "  A  light  to  lighten  the  Gentiles."  "  The  true  light  that  lighteth  (the  lamp 
of)  every  one  coming  into  the  world."  When  the  light  of  Jehovah  is  lighted  in 
the  soul  of  man,  and  not  overwhelmed  by  sensuality,  it  conquers  and  triumphs 
over  the  natural  darkness  that  is  in  us.  When  the  Divine  light  is  the  agent  in  the 
soul,  the  moment  it  meets  with  any  darkness  to  impede  and  obstruct  its  opera- 
tions it  at  once  recoils,  and  by  that  means  admonishes  us  of  it ;  after  which  it 
never  rests  till  it  has  either  expelled  it  or  conformed  it  to  itself.     IV.  SpiEiTU.4i 

OIL    IS    NECESSARY    TO    KEEP    THE   LIGHT    ALIVE    IN    OUR   HEARTS.        The    Holy    Spirit    is 

the  Divine  oil  that  must  feed  and  nourish  our  lamps.  Inferences  for  our 
direction  in  faith  and  practice  :  1.  If  the  body  is  a  vessel  to  contain  the  heavenly 
lamp,  how  few  are  seeking  to  "  possess  this  vessel  in  sanctification  and  honour." 
2.  If  the  soul  be  dark  by  nature,  what  becomes  of  that  idol  of  the  deists,  the  "  light 
of  nature  "  ?  3.  If  Christ  be  the  only  person  that  can  hghten  our  darkness,  to  Him 
let  every  man  go.  4.  Let  us  not  make  the  fatal  mistake  of  setting  out  to  meet  the 
Bridegroom,  without  taking  oil  in  our  vessels,  with  our  lamps.  {Bp.  Home.) 
The  nerve  of  religious  sensation : — Able  to  shine ;  constructed  to  shine ;  but  not 
alight  until  it  has  been  lighted — the  candle  of  the  Lord.  Man's  spirit  is  part  of  us, 
and  able  to  produce  flame  when  it  has  been  touched  with  flame.  It  is  a  special 
capacity  we  have  for  feeling,  appreciating,  and  responding  to  Divine  things.  Sound 
affects  the  ear  ;  hght  the  eye  ;  the  spirit  is  the  nerve  of  religious  sensation.  Man 
is  a  bundle  of  adaptations.  The  religious  sense  is  the  faculty  which  all  men  have, 
in  varying  degree,  of  appreciating  religious  and  Divine  things.  We  could  not  be 
holy  without  the  instinct,  but  the  instinct  does  not  insure  our  being  holy.  There 
is  in  this  no  difference  between  the  rehgious  instinct  and  other  of  our  instincts. 
The  religious  sense  forms  part  of  each  man's  original  outfit.  It  gives  the  teacher 
and  preacher  something  with  which  to  start.  The  facility  with  which  children  can 
be  approached  in  religious  matters  shows  that  religion  is  a  matter  of  instinct 
before  it  is  a  matter  of  education.  This  inborn  religious  sense  is  an  easy  argument 
for  the  existence  of  God.  The  possession  of  this  religious  instinct  puts  us  upon 
the  track  of  a  very  simple  and  practical  duty.  Whether  we  become  holy  or  not 
will  depend  mostly  upon  how  we  treat  that  instinct,  and  upon  whether  we  repress 
and  smother  it,  or  give  it,  free  chance  of  unfolding.  It  rests  with  us  to  take  some 
sturdy  measures  to  bring  out  this  religious  consciousness  into  greater  force  and 
fuUer  glow.  (C.  H.  Parkhurst,  D.D.)  The  spirit  of  man: — When  God  had 
completed  the  house  of  the  soul,  He  furnished  it  most  liberally  with  glorious  lights. 
The  intellect  is  one  of  the  bright  lights  placed  in  the  soul's  house  to  cheer  and 


520  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxr 

guide  men  in  this  life.  The  light  of  the  human  mind  is  invaluable.  Man  is  scarcely 
a  man  without  its  illuminating  flame.  Then  there  is  the  guiding  light  of 
conscience.  And  there  is  the  spiritual  light  which  characterises  all  mankind,  that 
leads  humanity  everywhere  to  worship  God.  I.  Man  is  a  great  beino.  It  is  said 
alone  of  man,  "  In  the  image  of  God  created  He  him."  This  singles  out  man  as 
the  greatest  being  on  earth.  Every  earnest,  intelligent,  and  devout  man  is  in  some 
degree  conscious  of  an  inherent  greatness.  Conscious  personality  is  a  unique 
power.  In  the  moral  realm  every  man  is  a  sovereign  who  conceives  plans  and 
executes  purposes  of  high  significance  and  far-reaching  consequences.  Man's 
conscious  personality  survives  the  shock  of  death.  Man  is  the  son  of  God.  The 
sons  of  God  are  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature.  This  raises  them  to  a  plane  that 
is  at  an  infinite  distance  from  the  creatures  next  to  them  in  the  scale  of  existence. 
Beally  true  greatness  consists  in  likeness  to  God.  A  good  man  is  one  of  the 
greatest  works  of  God.  II.  Man  is  Divinely  illuminated.  1.  The  intellectual 
light  of  man  is  from  God.  2.  The  light  of  conscience  is  from  God.  It  is  a  pure, 
clear  flame,  that  reveals  to  us  the  character  of  our  thoughts  and  purposes  before 
they  become  actions.  3.  The  spiritual  light  in  man  is  from  God.  Savage  and 
civLlised,  the  world  over,  worship  some  god.  The  lamp  that  lights  aU  men  who 
come  into  the  world,  and  leads  them  to  worship,  is  doubtless  of  God's  kindling.  In 
worship,  the  soul  pays  its  filial  homage  to  God.  III.  Man  has  been  illuminated 
FOR  A  Divine  purpose.  God  created  all  things  for  His  own  glory.  Men  of  great 
intellectual  powers  are  placed  by  God  in  the  midst  of  the  world's  moral  darkness, 
that  by  their  superior  light  they  might  scatter  the  mental  night  of  their  fellows. 
Great  intellects  possess  a  tremendous  power  for  good  or  evil.  "  Man  is  like  the 
candle  lighted  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  radiating  the  glory  of  God's  nature,  and  itself 
glorified  by  the  Divine  fire.  But  some  men  are  unlighted  candles."  [D.  Rhys 
Jenkiris.)  The  light  of  conscience  : — Victor  Hugo  says :  "  In  every  human  heart 
there  is  a  light  kindled  and,  close  by,  a  strong  wind  which  seeks  to  extinguish  it ; 
this  light  is  conscience,  this  wind  is  superstition.  Conscience  is  the  child  of  God  ; 
superstition,  the  child  of  the  devil.  Conscience  loves  and  rejoices  in  the  light ; 
superstition  hates  the  light  of  mind  and  spirit,  because  its  deeds  are  evil." 

Ver.  29.  The  glory  of  young  men  is  their  strength. — The  glory  of  young  men : — 
Power,  force,  might,  strength,  are  divers  names  for  a  thing  which  always  has  been,  and 
always  will  be,  admirable  in  human  esteem.  In  all  its  forms  it  is  a  glorious  thing. 
The  man  of  indomitable  will  is  always  an  object  of  reverence  to  his  fellows.  In 
every  region  of  the  humanities  the  man  who  can  do  the  most,  and  with  the  least 
apparent  expenditure  of  power,  acquires  a  kind  of  moral  chieftainship  among  his 
compeers  in  the  same  sphere.  The  text  says  that  strength  is  the  peculiar  glory 
of  young  men.  Other  things  will  come  by  and  by,  but  this  is  the  thing  that  comes 
first.  The  glory  of  young  men  is  not  their  wisdom.  Young  men  are  not  generally 
very  wise.  They  make  a  good  many  mistakes.  The  time  for  wisdom  will  come, 
whether  the  wisdom  will  come  or  not.  The  strength  that  is  to  be  their  glory  is 
physical,  bodily  strength.  A  vast  multitude  of  soul-iUs  come  of  a  much  lower  kind 
of  ill.  Some  men  are  born  weak.  And  it  is  a  very  terrible  thing,  though  a  very 
merciful  thing  for  the  world.  It  is  God's  law  for  preventing  the  perpetuation  of 
moral  evil.  It  is  a  provision  that  depraved  lives  of  humanity  shall  die  out  if  they 
do  not,  by  conforming  to  the  Divine  laws,  repair  and  improve  themselves.  There 
are  some  young  men  who  are  shorn  of  their  glory,  and  have  nobody  to  blame  but 
themselves.  What  caricatures  of  humanity  one  sometimes  passes  in  the  street,  in 
the  form  of  young  men  !  And  there  are  old  young  men,  enervated  by  folly  and 
wickedness,  doomed  to  drag  out  a  weary  existence  for  a  few  years,  with  no  proper 
force  for  any  of  life's  duties  and  relations,  and  self-doomed.  Keep,  I  beseech  you, 
by  all  the  means  in  your  power,  a  strong,  healthy  body — vigorous,  athletic,  nervous, 
firm.  But  the  text  means  more  than  this.  Body  is  not  yet  manhood.  There  is 
moral  power.  One  wants  a  deal  of  moral  force,  especially  at  life's  beginning,  to 
live  a  true,  and  worthy,  and  noble  life.  Force  is  of  two  sorts :  there  is  quiet 
force-inertia,  and  there  is  active  force-motion.  Both  of  these  sorts  of  force  go  to 
make  manhood.  You  must  try  to  get  moral  solidity,  gravity,  weight,  firmness, 
immovability,  steadfastness.  The  elements  of  this  force  are  conviction  and  decision. 
You  must  try  to  get  active  force,  enthusiasm,  energy,  enterprise.  Without  this, 
nothing  is  done  in  any  department  of  life.  Seek  the  ability  to  go  out  of  yourselves, 
to  do  and  to  dare  for  God.  (G.  W.  Conder.)  The  glory  of  young  men  : — Men 
look  with  admiration  and  with  awe  upon  great  power,  wherever  it  is  seen.    The 


CHAP.  XX.]  PROVERBS.  621 

visitor  to  Niagara  cannot  but  be  moved  by  the  thought  of  the  immeasurable  power 
of  that  river  as  it  dashes  over  the  declivity.  The  man  of  power  has  always  been 
the  object  of  the  veneration  of  his  less  talented  fellow-men.  He  has  but  to  move 
and  straightway  his  movements  are  chronicled  all  over  the  civilised  world.  There 
is  no  sight  in  all  the  earth  so  impressive  as  is  that  of  young  manhood  in  its  youth- 
ful power  and  vigour  of  faculty,  eager  for  the  struggle  of  life.  I.  The  strength  of 
YOUNG  MANHOOD  SHOULD  BE  CONTROLLED.  Power  is  productivc  of  good  Only  when  its 
energies  are  guided  in  right  channels  and  directed  to  right  uses  by  intelligence  and 
wisJom.  When  power  becomes  master  and  goes  out  from  beneath  the  hand  of 
wise  control  it  is  always  destructive.  The  locomotive,  Titan  giant  serving  men 
meekly  so  long  as  they  hold  its  movements  obedient  to  their  will,  goes  crashing  into 
the  train  ahead,  because  the  engineer  has  lost  control  of  his  iron  steed ;  and  the 
shrieks  of  the  wounded  and  the  moans  of  the  dying  tell  us  of  the  awful  death- 
dealing  ability  of  great  power  which  has  become  a  law  to  itself.  The  waters  behind 
the  dam  at  South  Fork  were  harmless,  except  potentially,  so  long  as  they  were  con- 
trolled. They  served  only  to  further  the  peaceful  industries  of  the  mountain 
vaUey.  But,  breaking  the  bonds  and  acknowledging  no  ruler  but  anarchy,  they 
spread  desolation  in  their  wake.  Powerful  though  machinery  and  the  forces  of 
nature  are,  they  are  pigmies  in  comparison  with  a  young  man.  He  has  done 
more  than  they  all.  What  the  world  is  to-day  it  has  been  made  by  young  men. 
"  Through  all  time,  the  greatest  victories  have  been  achieved,  the  wisest  and  most 
beneficent  reforms  instituted,  the  greatest  Christian  enterprises  undertaken,  and 
the  most  decided  impetus  given  to  the  advance  of  the  world  by  men  who  have 
"  begun  to  be  about  thirty  years  of  age."  Bichat,  French  physician  and  physio- 
logist, had  revolutionised  the  practice  of  medicine  and  died  before  he  was  thirty-one. 
John  Wesley  founded  the  Methodist  Church  before  he  was  thirty-six.  Luther  was 
thirty-three  when  he  nailed  his  theses  to  the  door  of  Wittenberg  Church.  Wilber- 
force  had  compelled  England  to  free  all  her  slaves  by  the  time  he  was  thirty-two. 
At  the  same  age  Watt  had  invented  the  steam-engine.  But  on  the  other  hand  the 
destructive  influence  of  the  strength  of  young  manhood,  when  that  strength  is  not 
wisely  controlled,  is  seen  when  we  glance  at  the  rostors  of  our  jails  and  penal 
institutions  and  discover  the  fact  that  the  inmates  of  those  institutions  are  for  the 
most  part  young  men.  History  also  reminds  us  that  Alexander  the  Great  had 
made  his  name  odious,  conqueror  of  the  world  though  he  was,  by  the  time  he  was 
thirty-three,  and  Napoleon  had  come  to  ignominy  by  the  time  he  was  thirty-four. 
II.  But  this  strength  of  toung  manhood  should  also  be  conserved.  One  of  the 
most  difficult  things  to  impress  upon  young  men  is  the  fact  they  will  not  always  be 
overflowing,  as  they  are  in  their  teens  and  twenties,  with  strength  and  spirits. 
When  God  makes  a  man.  He  puts  into  him  a  certain  amount  of  life-force.  When 
that  is  consumed,  there  is  no  way  in  which  it  may  be  replaced.  Buskin  overtaxed 
himself  in  his  younger  days,  with  the  result  that  the  lamp  of  his  genius  burned  but 
dimly  in  later  life.  Walter  Scott  did  the  same,  and  suffered  the  same  fate.  Scientists 
tell  us  that  there  is  no  reason  why  a  man  should  not  live  past  the  century  mark  in 
years,  if  he  be  well  born  and  if  he  conserve  his  strength.  It  lies  within  the  power 
of  every  well-born  man  so  to  use  the  strength  which  nature  has  given  him  that,  as- 
the  psalniist  says,  "  in  old  age  he  shaU  be  fat  and  flourishing."    HI.  This  strength 

OF  TOUNG  MEN  SHOULD   ALSO    BE    CONCENTRATED.       "  This    One    thing    I    do."       SuCCCSS 

in  life  depends  upon  concentration  of  one's  energies  upon  one  thing.  Paul  was  a> 
successful  preacher  because  he  was  "  determined  to  know  nothing  but  Jesus  Christ 
and  Him  crucified."  The  sun  casts  a  genial  warmth  over  a  large  area,  but  if  we 
wish  to  Ught  a  fire  by  it  we  must  take  the  sun-glass  and  concentrate  its  rays  upon 
one  point.  IV.  This  power  should  also  be  consecrated.  This  is  the  capstone 
and  the  keystone  of  all  that  we  have  thus  far  pointed  out.  "  Whatsoever  ye  do,  do 
all  to  the  glory  of  God."  The  subordination  of  every  power  and  faculty  to  the 
law  contained  in  the  great  commandment  will  in  itself  lead  to  the  control,  the  con- 
servation, and  the  concentration  of  power  and  faculty.  (R.  S.  Young.)  The 
glory  of  young  men  : — Man  has  a  threefold  nature — physical,  mental,  and  spu-itual; 
body,  brain,  and  soul.  Therefore  there  are  three  kinds  of  strength — physical,  intel- 
lectual, spiritual.  There  is  a  close  connection  between  health  and  virtue.  "Before 
any  vice  can  fasten  on  a  man,  his  physical  nature  must  be  debilitated."  The 
conditions  of  health  are — 1.  We  must  learn  the  laws  of  our  physical  well-being. 
2.  We  must  act  and  live  up  to  these  laws.  The  laws  of  health  are — pure  air,  suit- 
able food,  and  sufficient  exercise.  You  have  a  healthy  craving  for  innocent 
recreation.    Do  not  repress  it.    It  is  God-implanted,  and  therefore  sacred,  sacred 


522  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

as  are  any  of  the  other  Divine  instincts  within  yoa.  You  have  a  many-sided 
nature,  and  every  side  must  have  a  fair  chance  of  development.  Intellectual 
strength.  The  mind  is  the  measure  of  the  man;  it  is  the  empire  or  kingdom  of  the 
soul.  The  thinker  is  the  acknowledged  king  of  men.  A  trained  mind,  developed 
by  reading  and  reflection,  is  worth  striving  for.  Moral  and  spiritual  strength.  A 
clever  man  is  greater  than  a  merely  strong  man,  but  a  good  man  is  greater  than 
either.  Moral  and  spiritual  gains  are  the  most  enduring.  {David  Watson.)  The 
ijlory  of  youth  and  the  beauty  of  age : — I.  Godliness  makes  the  strength  of  tounq 
MEN  GLOKious.  1.  Bccausc  that  strength  is  governed  by  a  glorious  inspiration. 
2.  Because  it  is  directed  to  glorious  ends.  3.  Because  it  endows  him  with  a 
glorious   steadfastness    of    principle,    an    unswerving    attachment    to   the  right. 

4.  Because  of  the  glorious  reward  he  will  finally  attain.  II.  Godliness  makes  the 
HOARY  heads  OF  AGE  BEAUTIFUL.  1.  Godly  age  is  beautiful,  because  of  its  wealth  of 
'experience.      2.  Because  it  is  connected  with  maturity  of  Christian   character. 

5.  Because  of  the  connection  with  a  holy  peace  and  brightening  hope.    III.  The 

BEAUTY    OF    THE    GREY    HEAD    IS    THE  NATURAL  AND  FITTING  RESULT  OF  THE  DEVELOPED 

GLORY  OF  YOUTHFUL  STRENGTH.  Pious  strength  in  the  earlier  half  of  life  is  the  seed 
that  ripens  into  the  glad  harvest  of  hopeful,  resting  readiness  which  should  mark 
the  end.  1.  Youthful  godliness  is  likely  to  secure  the  beauty  of  age,  because  godly 
principles  and  practices  are  best  calculated  to  lengthen  life.  2.  Because  the  conduct 
of  youth  gives  character  to  age.     {Jackson  Wray.)         The  glory  of  young  men : — ■ 

I.  Ideals  of  manhood  have  differed  with  every  age.  Physical  strength  was  the 
primary  glory  of  the  race.  Samson  among  the  Hebrews,  Hector  among  the 
Trojans,  Achilles  among  the  Greeks,  and  Kichard  the  Lion-hearted  among  the 
Crusaders,  were  as  valuable  as  batteries  or  battalions  now  are.  Until  Christian 
civilisation  changed  it,  the  measure  of  the  man  was  his  muscle,  and  his  passport 
to  respect  was  his  fighting  weight.  But  we  live  in  a  different  era.  Gunpowder 
and  dynamite  have  abolished  physical  differences  and  put  all  men  on  a  common 
level.  It  is  not  brawn  but  brain  which  tell  in  this  age.  Christianity  has  subordi- 
nated the  material  to  the  mental.  "  There  is  nothing  great  in  the  world  but  man ; 
there  is  nothing  great  in  man  but  mind."  2.  But  there  are  two  kinds  of  mental 
strength — a  lower  and  a  higher  order,  the  intellectual  and  the  spiritual.  There  is 
something  better  than  a  clear,  cold  intellectuality.  Man  has  a  heart  as  well  as  a 
head,  emotions  as  well  as  thoughts.  Some  of  the  most  atrocious  characters  in 
history  were  men  of  giant  intellect.  The  Duke  of  Alva  was  accomplished  and 
scholarly.  As  mental  strength  is  higher  in  rank  than  the  physical,  so  moral 
strength  is  higher  than  the  merely  mental.  The  most  valuable  possession  in  this 
world  for  a  young  man  is  strength  of  character.  With  it  poverty,  obscurity,  and  ill- 
health  are  not  misfortunes.  Without  it  wealth,  fame,  and  physical  endurance  are 
not  blessings.  But  how  little  this  is  appreciated  by  youth.  3.  Every  boy  longs  to 
be  a  man.  It  is  a  legitimate  ambition.  But  does  he  know  manhood's  perils  ? 
The  moral  innocence  of  childhood  grown  into  manhood  is  a  thousandfold  stronger 
than  reformed  manhood,  built  out  of  the  fragments  which  were  gathered  up  from 
the  wreck  and  ruin  of  the  former  self.  4.  The  great  arena  for  the  development  of 
moral  strength  is  in  conquering  one's  self.  5.  But  how  shall  this  hardest  of 
victories  be  won — the  victory  of  self  ?  Remember  Constantine's  vision.  So  with 
you.  By  the  Cross  of  Christ  thou  shalt  conquer.  The  testimony  of  the  unrighteous 
to  the  worth  of  religion  as  a  moral  armour  is  an  exceedingly  valuable  testimony. 
{J.  C.  Jackson,  D.D.)  Muscular  Christianity  : — I.  Physical  strength.  We  are 
prone  to  glorify  and  exalt  the  man  of  strong  intellect  at  the  expense  of  the 
muscular  man.  We  are  apt  to  despise  physical  strength,  and  look  upon  it  as 
something  very  necessary  in  an  ox  or  horse,  but  nothing  for  a  Christian  to  be  proud 
of.  The  development  of  physical  strength  lies  very  much  with  ourselves.  Physical 
development  is  related  to  mental  and  moral  culture  as  the  foundation  to  the  super- 
structure which  rests  upon  it.  The  best  students  carry  their  physical  and  mental 
training  along  together.  Nor  should  we  lose  sight  of  the  influence  of  physical 
training  upon  the  morals  of  the  young.  Muscular  Christianity  is  the  kind  of 
religion  that  will  live,  and  make  itself  felt  in  the  world.  Mawkish  sentimentality 
is  not  religion.  But  if  our  strength  is  to  be  a  glory  to  us  it  must  be  consecrated 
strength.  There  are  those  who  value  their  strength,  not  for  the  amount  of  good 
they  can  a^-complish  with  it,  but  for  the  amount  of  supposed  pleasure  or  vice  their 
strength  e  lables  them  to  indulge  in.     Such  strength  is  no  glory  to  young  men. 

II.  Mental  strength.  No  college  can  confer  brains  where  nature  has  withlield 
them ;  and  yet  it  is  true  that,  as  regards  intellectual  power,  we  are  very  much  what 


CHAP,  xn.]  PROVERBS.  623 

we  make  ourselves.  It  is  not  those  endowed  naturally  with  great  talents  who  rule 
in  the  political,  social,  and  religious  world.  It  is  those  of  medium  talents,  men  of 
activity,  diligence,  and  earnestness,  who  go  up  to  the  top  of  the  ladder — those  who 
deposit  their  mental  capital,  such  as  it  is,  where  it  will  give  the  highest  interest. 
Hard  work  kills  very  few.  The  men  who  live  longest  are  those  who  combine  severe 
mental  labour  with  proper  physical  exercise.  III.  Moral  steength.  If  a  man 
lack  moral  strength,  he  is  no  giant,  but  a  mere  pigmy,  in  so  far  as  usefulness  in 
the  world  is  concerned.  Moral  strength  consists — 1.  In  the  courage  to  do  the  right. 
2.  To  feel  our  own  weakness.  3.  Another  element  in  moral  strength  is  a  godly 
life.  A  consistent  man  is  a  tower  of  strength.  He  is  a  resistless  power  for  good. 
The  godly  lives  of  humble,  consistent  Christians  are  the  most  powerful  sermons. 
{Richmond  Logan,  M. A.)  The  beauty  of  age : — Spring  has  its  charms,  peculiar 
to  itself,  and  so  has  summer,  and  so  has  autumn — each  unlike  the  other,  but  the 
last  by  no  means  inferior  to  the  others.  There  is  a  beauty  peculiar  to  youth,  and 
a  beauty  that  belongs  to  manhood ;  is  there  not  a  beauty  which  belongs  to  age, 
unhke  youth,  unlike  middle  life,  but  something  analogous  to  the  glory  of  the 
autumnal  foliage  ?  Sometimes  we  see  it.  At  other  times,  disease,  overwork, 
trouble,  sorrow,  are  a  blight  whose  wasting  has  destroyed  all  beauty.  But  an  old 
age,  a  late  afternoon,  that  has  escaped  this,  why  should  it  not  be  like  an  autumn 
afternoon,  bright  and  beautiful?  Would  it  be  aTn  improvement  to  change  the  turn- 
ing leaves  into  fresh  green  again  ?  Would  you  rob  us  of  the  autumnal  beauty,  and 
take  the  later  glory  from  the  hillsides  ?  It  is  most  uncomely  in  man  or  woman, 
when  old,  to  affect  youthfulness — in  dress  and  manner,  and  association,  to  go  back 
to  early  life — to  endeavour  in  this  to  be  what  one  is  not.  The  attempt  is  always  a 
failure.  This  is  a  wheel  that  can  never  be  turned  backward.  On  the  other  hand, 
it  is  painful  to  see  age  anticipated,  a  premature  age  affected  and  taken  on.  Let  the 
days  linger,  if  they  will.  Let  the  leaves  continue  green,  if  they  may.  But  there  is 
a  beauty,  a  bloom,  a  joyousness  belonging  to  the  maturity  and  ripeness  of  full  age. 
Beauty  is  not  unbecoming  age.  Bloom  is  not  unbecoming  age,  neither  is  joyousness 
then  unbecoming.  But  let  it  be  itself  such  as  befits  age  and  belongs  to  it.  Let  it 
be  the  royal  purple,  running  into  the  dun  brown,  unlike  the  verdure  of  the  spring 
time — its  own  type  of  beauty— such  as  comes  only  when  the  sun  runs  low.  In 
some  localities,  as  the  late  autumn  days  are  frosty  and  crisp,  you  may  find  by  the 
wayside  a  flower,  there  opening  its  cluster  of  blossoms  in  f uU  beauty,  in  the  clear 
autumn  air  seeming  to  have  caught  the  hue  of  the  sky — a  pure  cerulean  blue — the 
fringed  gentian.  Why  does  it  blossom  so  late,  with  its  heavenly  hue,  unless  it  be 
to  remind  us  that  there  are  flowers  peculiar  to  the  late  autumn  of  life,  and  that 
they  should  be  the  evident  reflection  of  heaven?  Age  may  be  beautiful  with  its 
own  adornments.  We  dwell  the  longer  on  this  because  it  is  due  to  age,  and  because 
we  would  dissuade  from  that  mistake,  into  which  some  fall,  of  anticipating  and 
magnifying  the  sadder  aspects  of  advanced  life.  As  you  grow  old,  be  cheerful,  if 
you  may.  Keep  the  affections  of  the  heart  fresh  and  warm.  If  your  leaf  must 
fall,  forbid  it  not,  while  still  it  hangs,  to  redden  and  disport  its  beauty.  If  possible, 
let  your  sky  be  open  as  the  sun  goes  down.     {Alfred  E.  Ives.) 


CHAPTEE  XXL 


Veb.  1.   The  king's  heart  is  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord. — God  and  the  human 

race : — In  these  verses  we  have  God  unfolded  to  us. — I.  As  the  controller  of 
HU5IAN  HEARTS.  Somc  supposc  there  is  an  allusion  to  the  gardener  directing  the 
rills  of  water  through  the  different  parts  of  his  ground,  and  that  the  comparison  is 
between  the  ease  with  which  the  gardener  does  this  and  the  ease  with  which  the 
Almighty  controls  the  purposes  and  volitions  of  the  human  soul.  1.  This  is  an 
undoubted  fact.  A  priori  reasoning  renders  this  obvious.  The  God  of  infinite 
wisdom  must  have  a  purpose  to  answer  in  relation  to  the  existence  and  history  of 
the  human  race.  He  has  a  purpose  not  only  in  the  rise  and  fall  of  empires,  but  in 
all  the  events  that  happen  in  the  individual  history  of  the  obscure  as  well  as  the 
illustrious.  But  unless  He  has  a  control  over  the  workings  of  the  human  heart  and 
the  vohtions  of  the  human  soul,  how  could  this  purpose  be  realised  ?  If  He  controls 
not  the  thoughts  and  impulses  of  the  human  mind.  He  has  no  control  over  the 
human  race,  and  His  purposes  have  no  guarantee  for  their  fulfilment.   2.  This  fact 


524  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

interferes  not  with  human  responsibility.  Though  the  Creator  has  an  absolute 
control  over  all  the  workings  of  our  minds,  yet  we  are  conscious  that  we  are  free  in 
all  our  volitions  and  actions.  Though  the  reconciliation  of  these  two  facts 
transcends  our  philosophy,  they  involve  no  absurdity.  II.  As  the  judge  of  human 
CHABACTEB.  There  is  a  connection  between  the  second  and  first  verses.  The  con- 
nection suggests — 1.  That  God  judges  men's  characters,  not  according  to  their  own 
estimate.  Men  generally  are  so  vain  that  they  form  a  high  opinion  of  themselves, 
but  this  estimate  may  be  the  very  reverse  of  God's.  2.  That  God  judges  men's 
characters  not  according  to  the  result  of  their  conduct.  Though  they  may  un- 
wittingly work  out  His  plans,  they  do  not  approve  themselves  to  Him  on  that 
account.  3.  That  God  judges  men's  characters  by  the  heart.  The  essence  of  the 
character  is  in  the  motive.  III.  As  the  appbovee  of  human  goodness  (ver.  3). 
Sacrifice,  at  best,  is  only  circumstantially  good — rectitude  is  essentially  so.  Sacrifice, 
at  best,  is  only  the  means  and  expression  of  good — rectitude  is  goodness  itself. 
God  accepts  the  moral  without  the  ceremonial,  but  never  the  ceremonial  without 
the  moral.  The  universe  can  do  without  the  ceremonial,  but  not  without  the 
moral.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  God  rules  the  hearts  of  men : — General  Gordon  had 
an  Arab  text  inscribed  over  his  throne  in  the  Palace  of  Khartoum — "  God  rules  over 
the  hearts  of  men." 

Ver.  3.  To  do  justice  and  Judgement  is  more  acceptable  to  the  Lord  than 
sacrifice. — Ceremonial  and  moral  duties  : — This  text  is  a  complete  and  independent 
sentence.  Confirm  the  proposition  deduced  from  the  text — I.  Feom  otheb  places 
or  ScBiPTUBE.  We  find  God  rejecting  and  abhorring  sacrifices  if  they  were  not 
accompanied  with  a  real  repentance  and  inward  sincerity  of  mind,  and  the  outward 
works  of  mercy  and  justice  (ver.  27  ;  Micah  vi.  6,  7 ;  Isa.  i.  11).     II.  Fbom  the 

DIFFEEENT  NATUBE  OF  THESE  TWO  DUTIES,  AND  THE  DIFFEEENT    GBOUNDS    FEOM    WHENCE 

aeiseth  oub  OBLIGATION  TO  THEM.  Sacrifice  was  grounded  upon  a  positive  precept 
and  institution,  but  justice  has  its  foundation  in  the  nature  of  God.  If  we  consult 
merely  natural  light,  we  shall  discover  no  necessary  foundations  in  that  for 
sacrifices.  As  the  notion  of  God  includes  in  it  all  possible  and  conceivable  perfec- 
tion, we  discern  justice  to  be  one  of  His  most  essential  attributes.  III.  Feom  the 
DIFFEEENT  ENDS  OF  THESE  TWO  DUTIES.  Sacrifice  was  not  enjoined  for  its  own  sake, 
but  justice  always  was,  and  is,  and  ever  will  be.  Sacrifices  were  ordained  to  be 
types  of  Christ,  who  was  to  be  ofifered  up  in  the  fulness  of  time  upon  the  Cross. 
Sacrifices  were  enjoined  to  be  as  a  guard  and  security  for  other  duties,  to  be  as  a 
hedge  and  a  fence  for  the  moral  precepts,  and  especially  to  defend  the  Jews  against 
idolatry.  Evidently  the  goodness  of  this  duty  of  sacrifice  was  not  natural  and 
intrinsical,  but  relative  and  external.  But  jus'iice  was,  and  is,  and  ever  will  be, 
enjoined  for  its  own  sake.  It  has  a  natural  goodness  and  beauty  in  it  which,  at  all 
times,  and  in  all  ages,  recommends  it  to  the  practice  of  mankind.  Justice  is  a  duty 
that  ariseth  from  the  moral  frame  and  constitution  of  our  souls,  and  we  must  offer 
violence  to  ourselves,  if  we  be  not  just  to  others.  IV.  Feom  the  diffeeent  effects 
OF  these  two  duties.  The  effect  of  sacrifices  was  the  expiation  of  legal  guilt.  For 
deeper  guilt  no  sacrifices  were  appointed.  It  is  otherwise  in  the  distribution  of 
justice.  An  impartial  execution  of  that  in  magistrates  and  judges  does  not  only 
put  a  stop  to  the  growth  and  increase  of  sin,  but  it  also  appeaseth  the  wrath  and 
disarms  the  severity  of  God.     (William  Stainforth,  M.A.) 

Ver.  5.  The  thoughts  of  the  diligent  tend  only  to  plenteousness. — Diligence  : — 
Diligence,  while  it  is  opposed  to  laziness,  is  opposed  also  to  rashness — to  premature 
and  inconsiderate  haste.  The  diligent  man  first  plans  and  then  acts.  He  proceeds 
thoughtfully  and  systematically.  Diligence  can  effect  little,  unless  accompanied 
with  careful  forethought.  Diligence  means  steady  perseverance  in  execution.  The 
Ijrojects  of  the  attentive,  plodding,  persevering  man,  who  begins  in  earnest  and  goes 
on  to  the  end  in  earnest,  prepared  for  difficulties,  are  those  that  promise  to  produce, 
and  generally  do  produce,  a  favourable  result.     {R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.) 

Vers.  6,  7.  The  getting  of  treasures  by  a  lying  tong^ue  is  a  vanity. — Dishonesty  : — 
I.  The  evil  of  dishonesty.  1.  A  breach  of  the  law  of  God.  2.  An  invasion  of  the 
Divine  right  of  property.  3.  An  encouragement  to  indolence.  The  workshop  is 
one  of  the  finest  fields  for  human  development.  4.  A  certain  development  of 
selfishness.  5.  A  weapon  for  the  destruction  of  mutual  confidence.  Men  cannot 
trust  those  who  are  watching  for  opportunities  to  defraud  them.    6.  An  incentive 


CHAP.  XXI.]  PROVERBS.  625 

to  other  sins  (Jer.  vii.  8 ;  John  xii.  6 ;  Matt.  xxvi.  15).  II.  The  eemedt  fob 
DISHONESTY.  1.  A  renewed  nature.  The  Spirit  of  truth  dwelling  in  a  man  will 
make  war  against  all  dishonesty.  2.  A  sensitive  conscience.  Petty  pilfering  will 
deaden  conscience  with  respect  to  this  and  all  other  sins  (1  Tim.  iv.  2).  3.  A 
realisation  of  the  dignity  of  labour.  4.  A  due  estimate  of  the  value  of  human 
possessions.  5.  A  consciousness  of  the  Divine  presence  and  oversight.  6.  A 
remembrance  of  the  damaging  nature  of  property  dishonestly  acquired  (ver.  7). 
An  act  of  theft  often  destroys  self-respect,  peace  of  mind,  bodily  health,  and  the 
soul  itself.     {H.  Thome.) 

Ver.  8.  The  way  of  man  is  froward  and  strange ;  but  as  for  the  pure,  his  work 
is  right. — Pure  : — I.  The  nature  of  the  man  of  God.  It  is  pure.  It  is  a  grand 
thing  to  be  clean  in  character.  Take  care  that  your  words  are  clean.  The  very 
looks  of  a  man  of  God  are  pure.  The  word  "  pure  "  implies  that  there  is  no  wrong 
mixture  in  the  composition  of  the  righteous  man.  The  nature  of  the  pure  man  is 
genuine.  The  pure  man  is  one  who  acts  according  to  rule.  He  carries  that  rule  in 
his  conscience.  II.  The  natuke  of  the  work  of  the  man  of  God.  It  is  right,  and 
therefore  reliable.  The  man  of  God  works  as  faithfully  behind  your  back  as  before 
your  face.  He  is  always  ready  for  any  good  work.  His  work  is  for  the  benefit  of 
others.  The  man  who  sincerely  desires  to  be  pure  in  his  motives  and  life  is  upheld 
by  Divine  power.  The  man  of  God  has  an  inward  source  of  happiness  which  does 
not  depend  on  outward  things.  [W.  Birch.)  The  works  of  the  righteous  : — A 
Christian  is  like  the  rose  that  drinks  the  dew  as  the  sunbeam  opens  all  its  folds, 
then  sheds  a  grateful  fragrance  on  the  wings  of  every  gentle  breeze  which  blows 
across  it.  Like  also  the  rose,  which  spreads  its  varied  colours  to  the  sight  of  each 
beholding  eye,  proclaiming  thus  His  glory ;  the  glory  of  Him  who  sustains  the 
shining  sun,  and  sends  refreshing  morn  and  evening  dew.  So,  the  believer  drink- 
ing of  the  flowing  streams  of  love  Divine,  the  heart-cheering  promises  of  grace,  with 
generous  heart  and  bounteous  hand,  diffuses  blessings  like  a  fragrance  around  him, 
and  blesses  the  place  where  he  dwells.     (H.  G.  Salter.) 

Ver.  13.  Whoso  stoppeth  his  ears  at  the  cry  of  the  poor,  he  also  shall  cry  him- 
self, but  shall  not  be  heard. — The  cry  of  the  poor  : — I.  Social  distress.  "  The 
cry  of  the  poor."  The  poor  maybe  divided  into  two  classes.  1.  The  deserving. 
There  is  a  poverty  that  comes  on  men  by  circumstances  over  which  they  have  no 
control :  infirm  bodies,  diseased  faculties,  social  oppression,  untoward  events. 
Such  poverty  is  often  associated  not  only  with  great  intelligence,  but  with  virtue 
and  piety  of  a  high  order.  2.  The  undeserving.  II.  Social  heartlessness. 
'« Whoso  stoppeth  his  ears."  1.  The  wealthy.  2.  The  legislating.  In  the  name 
of  heaven,  what  is  the  good  of  a  government  if  it  cannot  overcome  pauperism? 
in.  Social  retribution.     {D.   Thomas,  D.D.)  An  unmerciful  disposition : — 

1.  We  may  always  expect,  both  in  general  society  and  in  the  Church  of  God,  "  the 
rich  and  poor  to  meet  together."  Wherever  there  has  been  property  it  has  been  in 
various  portions ;  and  were  there  an  equal  division  of  property  to-day,  there  would 
be  a  difference  to-morrow.  There  are  varieties  of  poverty  ;  for  poverty  is  a  relative 
and  comparative  term.  And  among  the  indigent  and  dependent  poor  there  are  also 
varieties — the  industrious  and  the  indolent ;  the  sober  and  the  intemperate ;  the 
virtuous  and  the  vicious,  the  deserving  and  the  undeserving.  2.  Nothing  can  be  of 
greater  consequence  than  marking  this  distinction,  and  regulating  our  charity 
accordingly.  There  is  a  "  stopping  of  the  ears  "  that  is  at  times  a  virtue — requiring 
an  effort  of  self-denying  principle  in  opposition  to  the  mere  emotion  and  impulse  of 
present  pity.  Charity  must  be  exercised  judiciously.  3.  The  sin  here  reproved  is 
an  unmerciful  disposition  ;  unfeeling  hardness  of  heart ;  pitiless,  avaricious,  griping 
selfishness.  This  may  be  exemplified  in  beating  down  the  wages  of  the  poor 
labourer  and  artisan ;  in  the  denial  of  protection  to  the  poor  when  it  is  pleaded 
for  against  oppression,  and  when  we  have  it  in  our  power  to  afford  it.  {R.  Ward' 
law,  D.D.) 

Ver.  15.  It  is  joy  to  the  lust  to  do  judgment— T/ie  pleasure  of  doing  right : — The 
text  virtually  says.  When  good  magistrates  discharge  their  trust  faithfully,  and 
execute  justice  impartially,  all  honest  and  good  men  are  greatly  rejoiced  at  it,  but 
it  brings  a  sore  terror  and  consternation  upon  the  workers  of  iniquity.  I.  It  is  a 
great  pleasure  to  a  just  man  to  do  justice.  1.  Because  it  is  acting  according  to 
his  own  inclinations.    It  is  always  pleasant  to  a  man  to  pursue  the  natural  or 


526  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xxi. 

habitual  inclinations  of  his  mind.  Even  evil  and  naughty  inclinations  make  it 
pleasant  in  some  degree  for  the  time  to  act  according  to  them.  2.  Because  he 
knows  that  he  does  well  in  so  doing,  and  that  his  action  is  approved  by  Almighty 
God.  3.  Because  of  the  assured  hope  it  gives  him  of  God's  favour,  who  is  evermore 
a  lover  and  rewarder  of  the  upright.  4.  Because  it  is  a  high  honour  done  him  by 
Almighty  God  to  be  employed  in  doing  part  of  His  work.  For  it  is  God  that  is  the 
great  doer  of  justice  to  all  His  creatures.     H.  It   is  a  great  pleasuee  to  thb 

SPECTATORS,  IF  THEY  BE  RIGHTEOUS  AND  GOOD  MEN,  TO  SEE  GOOD  MAGISTRATES  FAITH- 
FULLY DISCHARGING  THEIR    DUTY   IN  THE    EXECUTION  OF    JUSTICE.       1.    BeCaUSe  this  is  a 

thing  so  very  necessary  and  so  beneficial  to  mankind.  2.  There  are  some  particular 
cases  wherein  it  is  more  especially  a  pleasant  thing  to  do  justice  or  to  see  it  well 
done.  HI.  The  execution  of  justice  is  terrible  to  evil-doers.  It  must  needs 
be  so,  since  it  is  they  who  suffer  by  it.     IV.  Injustice  and  wickedness  will  mosi 

CERTAINLY    BRING    A    MAN    TO    BUIN    WITHOUT   REPENTANCE.       In     this    WOrld    It    Cannot 

otherwise  be  but  some  will  escape  from  justice,  as  it  is  executed  by  men.  There  is 
One  above  whom  no  man  can  deceive,  none  can  bribe,  who  will  not  fail  to  do  right 
to  all.  This  doctrine  will  afford  us  motives  sufiSicient  to  the  duties  which  all  or  any 
of  us  are  now  called  to.  1.  To  choose  such  a  magistrate  as  we  believe  wiU  be  faith- 
ful to  the  trust  reposed  in  him.  2.  To  discharge  the  great  trust  of  magistracy 
accordingly,  and  so  as  to  answer  the  hopes  and  expectations  of  good  men.  3.  To 
be  aiding  and  assisting  in  the  doing  thereof,  which  is  every  one's  duty  as  he  has 
ability  and  opportunity.  4.  To  behave  ourselves  so  that  a  good  magistrate  faithfully 
discharging  his  trust  may  be  no  terror,  but  a  joy  and  comfort  to  us.  (Samuel 
Barton,  D.D.) 

Ver.  16.  The  man  that  wandereth  out  of  the  way  of  understanding'  shall  remain 
in  the  congregation  of  the  dead. — The  icanderefs  gloomy  state  : — I.  What  is  meant 
BY  "  WANDERING  OUT  OF  THE  WAY  OF  UNDERSTANDING  "  ?  The  book  of  nature  and 
of  providence  is  the  way  of  understanding.  This  book  was  opened  to  all  the  heathen 
world,  but  from  it  they  most  shamefully  wandered.  Their  philosophers  erred 
most  grossly.  They  wandered  in  following  the  vile  affections  of  their  own 
depraved  hearts.  Another  way  of  understanding  is  the  book  of  revelation.  This 
■was  committed  to  the  -Jews  as  a  separate  and  distinct  people.  But  how  much  they 
wandered  from  it  !  Their  teachers  wandered  from  the  doctrines  and  duties  which 
they  knew.  We  have  the  book  of  revelation  complete,  but  there  are  those  who 
never  read  the  Scriptures,  and  there  are  many  who  wander  from  their  precepts, 
preferring  their  own  flattering  conceits  to  the  truth  of  God.  The  Bible  may  pro- 
perly be  called  "  the  way  of  understanding,"  because  it  contains  all  we  need  to 
know  of  God  our  maker,  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost  our 
teacher,  sanctifier,  guide,  and  comforter.  Where  pure  and  public  worship  is  per- 
formed, there  is  the  way  of  understanding.  II.  The  wanderer's  gloomy  state. 
"  The  congregation  of  the  dead"  means  that  vast  assembly  which  is  made  up  of  all 
who  are  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  This  is  called  "  spiritual  death."  It  implies 
the  prevalence  of  sin  in  the  soul.  Eternal  death  is  the  separation  of  soul  and  body, 
the  whole  man,  from  all  heavenly  possessions  and  enjoyments  for  ever  ;  and  the 
sensation  of  all  misery  in  heU — misery  in  full  measure,  without  mixture,  intermission, 
or  end.     [Edward  Phillips.) 

Ver.  17.  He  that  loveth  pleasure  shall  be  a  poor  man. — The  love  of  pleasure : — 
Here  is  the  secret  of  the  failure  of  nine-tenths  of  our  unsuccessful  young  men. 
They  loved  pleasure  and  gave  themselves  up  to  its  pursuit,  and  so  they  have  never 
got  on,  and  never  will.  When  poverty  comes  as  the  result  of  idleness  and  sloth 
and  self-indulgence,  it  is  both  a  curse  and  a  shame.  Poverty  is,  of  course,  a  relative 
term.  A  leading  business  man  says  that  only  three  out  of  every  hundred  who  enter 
upon  mercantile  life  become  ultimately  successful.  The  failures  are  largely  due  to 
causes  that  are  within  the  young  men's  own  control.  Some  young  men  fail  through 
trying  to  acquire  money  by  any  other  means  than  good  honest  work  ;  and  when  a 
young  fellow  once  gets  on  this  line  of  rail  you  may  say  he  is  done  for.  Some 
remain  poor  because  they  lack  business  capacity.  Others  fail  through  sheer  down- 
right laziness ;  others  through  mistaking  their  calling,  others  through  instability  or 
lack  of  originality  and  enterprise.  Some  through  extravagant  sanguineness  and 
boastfulness.  What  does  the  wise  man  mean  by  "  pleasure  "  ?  We  are  all  so  con- 
stituted that  the  love  of  happiness  is  both  a  necessity  of  our  nature  and  a  positive 
duty.     There  is  no  truer  index  of  character  than  the  kind  of  object  or  pursuit  thai 


CHAP,  m.]  PROVERBS.  527 

affords  us  our  intensest  pleasure.  The  word  "  pleasure"  is  often  used  in  the  Bible 
in  a  distinctly  evU  sense,  as  denoting  voluptuousness  and  carnality.  The  text 
reads  in  the  margin  "  He  that  loveth  sport  shall  be  a  poor  man."  Certain  forma 
of  "  sport "  in  moderation  are  perfectly  legitimate.  But  incalculable  mischief  is 
being  wrought  amongst  our  young  men  by  a  too  great  fondness  for  sports  and 
amusements.  The  inordinate  craving  for  excitement  has  much  to  do  with  the  ruin 
of  some  young  men.  It  has  been  the  same  in  every  age,  but  we  should  have  learned 
more  wisdom  by  this  time  of  day.  {Thain  Davidson,  D.D.)  Self-indulgence  a 
source  of  poverty  : — Self-indulgence  is  prevalent  amongst  all  classes.  I.  It  involves 
an  EXTRAVAGANCE  OF  EXPENDiTUKE.  Pleasure  is  an  expensive  divinity.  The  largest 
fortunes  must  often  be  laid  upon  its  altar.  II.  It  involves  a  fostering  of  laziness. 
The  self-indulgent  man  becomes  such  a  lover  of  ease  that  effort  of  any  kind  becomes 
distasteful;  the  spirit  of  industry  forsakes  him.  "He  that  loveth  pleasure,  shall 
be  a  poor  man  ;  he  that  loveth  wine  and  oil  shall  not  be  rich."  But  whilst  it  is 
true  that  self-indulgence  leads  to  material  poverty,  it  also  leads  to  intellectual 
poverty.  The  man  who  would  get  his  soul  strong  in  holy  resolves  and  righteous 
principles  must  agonise  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate  of  habitual  reflection,  holy 
labour  and  earnest  worship.  This  the  seK-indulgent  man  will  not  do.  (D,  Thomas, 
D.D.)  Moderation  in  pleasure  : — Let  not  your  recreations  be  lavish  spenders  of 
your  time ;  but  choose  such  which  are  healthful,  short,  transient,  recreative,  and 
apt  to  refresh  you  ;  but  at  no  period  dwell  upon  them,  or  make  them  your  great 
employment ;  for  he  that  spends  his  time  in  sports,  and  calls  it  recreation,  is  like 
him  whose  garment  is  all  made  of  fringes,  and  his  meat  nothing  but  sauces :  they 
are  healthless,  chargeable,  and  useless.  And,  therefore,  avoid  such  games  which 
require  much  time  or  long  attendance,  or  which  are  apt  to  steal  thy  affections  from 
more  severe  employments.  For,  to  whatsoever  thou  hast  given  thy  affections,  thou 
wilt  not  grudge  to  give  thy  time.  Natural  necessity  teaches  us  that  it  is  lawful  to 
relax  and  unbend  our  bow,  but  not  to  suffer  it  to  be  unready  or  unstrung.  (Jeremy 
Taylor.) 

Yer.  19.  It  is  better  to  dwell  in  the  wilderness  than  with  a  contentioas  and  an 
angry  woman. — An  angry  woman  : — I.  No  social  discomfort  is  to  be  compared  to 
that  of  an  ill-tempered  wife,  a  corner  of  the  housetop  would  be  exposed  to  the 
rain  and  to  the  storm,  both  of  which,  in  Eastern  countries,  are  generally  of  a  violent 
character.  Neither  is  the  wilderness  a  pleasant  place  of  abode.  But  it  is  better  to 
dwell  in  either  of  these  places  than  with  a  brawling  or  even  with  an  angry  woman. 
1.  Because  one  might  enjoy  intervals  of  repose.  2.  Because,  whatever  may  be  the 
discomforts  of  a  housetop  or  wilderness  dwelling,  they  may  leave  the  soul  at  rest. 
They  can  but  reach  the  body,  and  the  mind  may  be  so  absolutely  calm  or  absorbed 
in  thought  as  to  be  almost  unconscious  of  what  is  passing  without.     H.  Externaii 

GOOD-FORTUNE  IS  NO  PROOF    AGAINST  THIS  DOMESTIC  CURSE.       The  "  wide  hoUSe  "  01  the 

"  house  of  companionship  "  suggests  a  goodly  mansion.     (TF.  Harris.) 

Ver.  20.  There  is  treasure  to  be  desired  . .  .  in  the  dwelling  of  the  wise. — Treasure 

in  the  house  ;  or  proverbs  of  home-life : — One  simple  Saxon  word  has  taUsmanic 
power  over  every  heart.  That  word  is  "  home."  Who  of  us  can  forget  our  home 
and  home-life  in  the  past  ?  "We  are  now  what  our  mothers  made  us  in  that  far-off 
time  of  childhood.  Great  are  the  responsibilities  of  home-life,  for  it  is  the  seed- 
time of  the  eternal  harvest.  God  Himself  instituted  the  family  relationship  as  one 
of  His  antidotes  for  Satan's  various  enticements.  Terrible  is  the  vengeance  God 
exacts  for  the  violation  of  His  laws  of  love.  Education  cannot  be  confined  to  the 
school,  academy,  or  college.  The  true  educators  are  the  street  and  the  home. 
God  has  given  to  parents  a  mighty  instrument  for  good  in  the  family  relationship. 
But  home-life  and  home-lessons  will  avail  little  without  home-love.  And  there 
should  be  real  and  attractive  pleasures  by  the  fireside  and  round  the  home-table. 
Obedience,  truth,  and  love  will  give  us  treasure  in  the  house,  and  will  clothe  us 
with  the  ornaments  of  grace  in  our  earthly  homes.  The  same  qualities  of  mind 
and  temper  exercised  towards  the  great  All-Father  in  heaven  will  make  us  meet  for 
the  house  above,  and  lay  up  for  us  there  treasures  that  shall  never  fail.  (Wm, 
Stevens  Perry,  D.D.) 

Yer.  21.  He  that  followeth  after  righteonsness  and  mercy  findeth  life,  righteous- 
ness, and  honour. — Righteousness  and  mercy: — In  every  perfect  character  there 
will  be  found  many  opposite  virtues,  such  as  gentleness  and  courage,  energy  and 


528  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

patience,  determination  and  docility,  justice  and  mercy.  We  all  respect  the  sterling 
worth  of  justice,  yet  justice  alone  would  mark  a  defective  character.  It  could  be 
trusted,  but  not  loved.  Mercy  alone  would  make  one  too  weak.  Love  may  lack 
the  fidelity  required  to  rebuke  wrong,  as  is  often  seen  in  parental  indulgence. 
Judicial  laxity  that  sacrifices  law,  or  military  inefficiency  that  ignores  discipline, 
are  other  illustrations.  The  wider  the  government,  the  nobler  the  interests  to  be 
guarded,  the  more  imperative  the  need  of  the  union  of  law  with  love,  truth  with 
gentleness.  It  is  important  to  notice  that  this  union  of  apparently  opposing  virtues 
does  not  weaken,  but  really  makes  either  the  more  impressive  in  action.  The 
rebuke  of  a  loving  father  is  all  the  more  effective  on  account  of  the  affection  that 
inspires  it.  Justice  speaks  all  the  more  terribly  from  the  lips  of  a  tender  judge. 
When  Washington's  tears  blot  the  order  for  Andre's  execution,  the  awful  necessity 
of  Andre's  doom  is  seen  and  felt  at  every  camp-fire.  In  Jesus  Christ  we  see  the 
blending  of  these  diverse  qualities  in  a  remarkable  degree.  Tender  and  gentle  as 
He  was,  incarnate  mercy,  He  uttered  the  most  awful  denunciations  and  threats 
of  everlasting  fire.  The  awfulness  of  future  punishment  is  felt  when  we 
remember  it  is  the  "  wrath  of  the  Lamb "  I  This  theme  sheds  light  on  cer- 
tain problems  of  the  Divine  government.  The  universe  needs  a  corner-stone, 
and  human  hopes  an  anchorage.  These  are  found  in  God.  The  highest  triumph 
of  wisdom  is  seen  in  the  harmony  of  diverse  qualities.  As  our  character  approaches 
His,  we  can  the  better  interpret  the  problems  of  His  government  that  confound 
others.  President  Woolsey  rightly  marvels  at  the  foUy  of  men  who  legislate  about 
the  universe,  pass  judgment  on  sin  and  retribution,  yet  cannot  govern  their  own 
homes,  or  agree  on  the  principles  of  human  legislation.  A  greater  than  Woolsey 
exclaims :  "  Behold  the  goodness  and  severity  of  God  !  "  Christianity  exhibits  this 
union  as  an  exclusive  trait,  one  that  commands  at  once  the  hearts  and  the  con- 
sciences of  men.  At  the  Cross  of  Christ  justice  and  mercy  blend,  righteousness  and 
grace  kiss  each  other.  God  is  holy  as  well  as  loving.  Grace  makes  righteousness 
sure  and  pardon  free.  So  peace  comes,  for  justice  is  not  compromised  in  giving  a 
pardon  that  we  should  wish  to  hide  from  righteousness.  The  gospel  unites  them 
in  one  display.  We  show  these  virtues  at  different  times ;  here  they  appear  in 
parallel  glory.  No  human  justice  has  risen  to  this  conception,  no  philosophy  has 
embodied  these  ideas.  Grace  comes  to  be  the  marvel  and  the  loadstone  of  our 
hearts.  {Arthur  Mitchell,  D.D.)  The  true  pursuit  of  mankind  : — I.  Goodness  is 
THE  OBJECT.  "  He  that  followeth  after  righteousness  and  mercy."  1.  We  are  to 
follow  after  this  supremely.  2.  We  are  to  follow  after  this  constantly.  It  must  be 
pursued,  not  occasionally,  but  always  ;  not  on  the  Sundays,  but  on  the  weekdays 
as  well.  II.  Happiness  is  the  attendant.  Life  stands  for  happiness.  The 
unregenerate  has  no  true  life.  The  righteous  man  will  be  righteously  dealt  with, 
God  has  established  such  a  connection  between  excellence  and  conscience  that  con- 
science must  recognise  it  wherever  it  is  seen.  Happiness  comes  as  goodness  is 
pursued.  Happiness  never  comes  to  a  man  when  he  seeks  it  as  an  end.  It  wells 
out  of  those  activities  which  spring  from  generous  self-obliviating  love.  The 
unselfish  and  the  loving  have  ever  been  the  truly  happy  men.  Happiness  is  the 
end  of  the  universe,  but  God  has  ordained  that  our  happiness  shall  grow  out  of  our 
goodness.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Religion: — Eeligion  is  here  presented  in  two 
aspects.  I.  As  a  pursuit.  Keally  to  do  what  the  text  expresses  implies — 1.  A  true 
estimate  of  the  objects  to  be  pursued.  "  Kighteousness  and  mercy."  These  are 
the  two  cardinal  elements  of  moral  excellence  in  all  worlds,  are  essential  to  the 
well-being  of  all  moral  intelligences.  To  pursue  them  you  must  be  impressed  with 
their  transcendent  worth.  Thus  Moses  chose  "  rather  to  suffer  affliction  with  the 
people  of  God,"  &c.  2.  Kesolute  perseverance.  The  pursuit  of  these  cardinal 
blessings  involves  great  difl&culties.  The  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil  all  obstruct 
the  way.  H.  As  a  kealisation.  He  that  thus  successfully  pursues  "  findeth  life, 
righteousness,  and  honour."  Eeligion  is  its  own  reward.  The  good  man  is  blessed 
in  his  deed.  1.  The  reward  is  a  natural  effect  of  the  conduct.  Holiness  and  happi- 
ness are  inseparably  united.  2.  The  reward  agrees  with  the  conduct.  It  grows  out 
of  it.  "Life,  righteousness,  and  honour" — these  grow  out  of  "righteousness  and 
mercy":  the  fruit  is  of  the  same  kind  as  the  seed.  Man's  heavenly  joys  will  not  be 
grapes  gathered  from  thorns  but  from  the  vine-tree  of  goodness,  the  True  Vine. 
(Homilist.) 

Yer.  23.  Whoso  keepeth  his  mouth  and  his  tongue  keepeth   his  soul  ftom 
troubles. — The  Christian  yoverning  his  tongue: — Instead  of  simply  commanding 


CHAP.  XXI.]  PROVERBS.  529 

with  supreme  authority  that  men  should  keep  their  mouths  and  tongues,  he 
graciously  condescends  to  annex  reward  and  blessings  for  its  own  sake.  "  Keepeth 
his  soul  from  troubles."  In  keeping  of  God's  commandments  there  is  great  reward. 
In  proportion  as  any  faculty  is  important  in  the  use  and  rightful  application  of  it, 
6o  is  the  neglect  of  it  an  evil,  and  the  result  of  its  perversion  fatal  in  the  same 
degree.  The  government  of  the  tongue,  on  this  principle,  assumes  at  once  its  due 
importance.  Consider  the  benefits  that  must  accrue  to  society  from  the  judicious 
use  of  this  powerful  organ  on  the  part  of  those  who  in  God's  providence  are  fitted 
to  exert  influence  over  their  fellows.  Consider  the  Christian  governing  his  tongue, 
with  especial  reference  to  the  law  and  will  of  God.  Of  the  ten  commandments  two 
are  assigned,  one  in  each  table,  to  this  needful  admonition.  "  Thou  shalt  not  take 
the  name  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain";  "Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness 
against  thy  neighbour."  A  careless,  unreflecting  use  of  the  holy  na:-ne  betl-ays 
a  trifling  and  unstable  heart.  But  with  reference  to  his  neighbour,  the  Christian 
has  the  greatest  need  of  caution  as  to  the  government  of  his  tongue.  What  irre- 
parable injury  a  severe  remark,  whether  carelessly  or  wickedly  whispered  against 
the  character  of  another,  is  sure  to  produce.  It  may  be  our  duty  to  speak  to  the 
prejudice  of  others,  but  we  must  always  be  very  sure  that  the  duty  is  clear.  In 
cases  where  the  conduct  of  our  neighbour  appears  doubtful,  we  are  bound  to  give 
him  the  benefit  of  that  doubt,  and  to  feel  towards  him,  and  to  speak  of  him, 
accordingly.  When  a  Christian  is  reviled  and  calumniated,  how  is  he  to  act  ?  He 
should  "  in  patience  possess  his  soul."  One  topic  remains — the  responsible  oflice 
of  the  tongue,  employed  in  preaching  the  gospel  of  salvation  to  perishing  sinners. 
(Thos.  Nolan,  M.A.)  Aji  unbridled  tongue: — A  furious  horse  needs  a  bridle  to 
restrain  its  fierceness,  and  it  seems  the  tongue  of  man  needs  more  than  a  double 
bridle  to  keep  it  in  from  doing  hurt.  The  wise  man  never  ceases  to  admonish  us 
about  this  point.  As  a  high-spirited  horse,  if  its  fury  is  not  curbed  with  a  strong 
hand,  will  hurry  its  rider  along,  without  regarding  pits,  or  precipices,  or  deep 
waters,  and  expose  him  to  extreme  jeopardy  of  his  life,  so  an  unbridled  tongue 
will  make  a  man  hateful  to  God  and  men,  plunge  him  into  contentions  and  debates, 
and  expose  his  estate,  and  life,  and  credit,  to  extreme  danger.  Who  is  the  man 
that  wishes  to  enjoy  a  quiet  and  peaceable  life?  Let  him  set  a  guard  over  his 
mouth,  and  refrain  his  tongue  from  profaneness  and  corrupt  communication,  from 
railing  and  reviling,  and  all  evil  speaking,  from  foolish  talking,  and  from  incon- 
venient jesting.  Let  prudence  and  the  fear  of  God  stand  continually  like  sentinels 
at  the  door  of  his  lips.  (George  Lawson,  D.D.)  Keeping  the  tongue: — When 
trouble  is  brewing,  keep  still.  When  slander  is  getting  on  its  legs,  keep  still. 
When  your  feelings  are  hurt,  keep  still  tiU  you  recover  from  your  excitement,  at 
any  rate.  Things  look  differently  through  an  unagitated  eye.  Silence  is  the  most 
massive  thing  conceivable  sometimes.  It  is  strength  in  its  very  grandeur.  It  is 
like  a  regiment  ordered  to  stand  still  in  the  mid  fury  of  battle.  To  plunge  in  were 
twice  as  easy.  The  tongue  has  unsettled  more  ministers  than  small  salaries  ever 
did,  or  lack  of  ability.  The  government  of  the  tongue  : — I.  Such  a  government  is 
NECESSARY.  "  Whoso  kecpeth  his  mouth  and  tongue,  keepeth  his  soul  from  troubles." 
What  troubles  come  through  an  ungoverned  tongue?  1.  Troubles  on  self.  (1)  The 
troubles  of  moral  remorse  have  often  been  brought  into  the  soul  through  unguarded 
language.  (2)  The  troubles  of  social  distress  have  often  come  upon  a  man  through 
unguarded  language.  Friends  have  been  sacrificed,  enemies  created,  litigations 
commenced,  and  fines  and  penalties  enacted.  2.  Troubles  on  others.  An 
ungoverned  tongue  is  like  a  river,  whose  embankments  have  given  way,  spreading 
disasters  through  a  whole  neighbourhood.  In  America  the  Indians  strike  a  spark 
from  flint  and  steel,  and  thus  set  fire  to  the  dry  grass,  and  the  flames  spread  and 
spread  until  they  sweep  like  a  roaring  torrent  over  a  territory  as  large  as  England, 
and  men  and  cattle  have  to  flee  for  their  lives.  An  unguarded  word  can  produce  a 
social  conflagration  greater  far.  II.  Such  a  government  is  practicable.  The 
tongue  is  not  an  involuntary  organ,  an  organ  that  works  irrespective  of  the  will, 
like  the  heart  and  lungs ;  it  is  always  the  servant  of  the  mind ;  it  never  moves 
without  volition.  Heaven  has  endowed  us  with  a  natural  sovereignty  equal  not 
only  to  the  government  of  the  tongue,  but  to  all  the  lusts  and  passions  that  set  it 
in  motion.  A  finer  manifestation  of  moral  majesty  you  can  scarcely  have  than  in 
reticence  under  terribly  exciting  circumstances.    {Romiliit.) 

Ver.  25.  The  desire  of  the  slothful  killeth  him ;  for  his  hands  refuse  to  labour.— 
Shth : — Solomon  attaches  to  it  several  evils.    I.  Suicide.     "  The  desire  of  the 

85 


530  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxii. 

slothful  killeth  him."  The  man  who  is  too  lazy  to  move  his  limbs  or  open  his  eyes 
is  too  lazy  to  have  a  "  desire."  These  desires  kill  him.  There  are  several  things 
that  tend  to  kill  such  a  man.  1.  Ennui.  This  is  what  Byron  calls  "  that  awful 
yawn  which  sleep  cannot  abate."  In  all  life  there  is  not  a  more  crushing  power 
than  lassitude.  It  breeds  those  morbid  moods  that  explain  half  the  diseases  of  the 
rich.  2.  Disappointment.  Disappointment  kills.  3.  Envy.  The  slothful  sees 
others  succeed.  4.  Poverty.  Sloth  fills  our  workhouses  with  paupers,  our  prisons 
with  criminals,  our  army  with  recruits.  5.  Eemorse.  11.  Greed.  "  He  coveteth 
greedily  all  the  day  long."  In  the  Paris  French  translation  the  words  stand  thus^ 
"All  the  day  long  he  does  nothing  but  wish."  How  very  expressive  at  once  of  the 
unconquerable  indolence  and  the  fretful,  envious,  pining  unhappiness  of  the 
sluggard  !  III.  Unrighteousness.  "  But  the  righteous  giveth  and  spareth  not." 
This  implies  that  the  slothful  are  neither  righteous  nor  generous.    (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.   30.  There  is  no   ■wisdom  nor  understanding  nor   counsel   against   the 

Lord. — The  vanity  of  attempting  to  oppose  God : — One  of  the  most  formidable 
methods  of  attacking  religion  is  to  exhibit  it  as  a  contrivance  fit  for  narrow 
geniuses  and  mean  souls.  One  of  the  most  proper  means  to  establish  irreligion  is  to 
represent  it  as  suited  to  great  and  generous  minds.  I.  Consider  the  text  in  regard 
TO  worldly  grandeur.  We  sometimes  see  those  who  are  called  grandees  in  the 
world  resist  God,  pretend  to  compel  Him  by  superior  force,  or  by  greater  knowledge. 
How  often  is  grandeur  even  now  in  our  times  a  patent  for  insolence  against  God  ! 
II.  Worldly  policy  is  a  second  obstacle  which  some  men  set  against  the 
LAWS  OF  heaven.  We  sometimes  see  men  forget  that  they  are  Christians,  when 
they  deliberate  on  the  public  good.  III.  The  voluptuous  resist  God.  One  of 
the  most  inviolable  laws  of  God  is,  that  felicity  should  be  the  reward  of  virtue,  and 
misery  the  punishment  of  vice.  What  does  a  voluptuous  man  oppose  against  the 
execution  of  this  law  ?  Noise,  company,  diversions,  the  refinements  of  lascivious- 
ness.  Examine  the  system  of  the  voluptuary  at  the  bar  of  reason,  and  at  the  bar 
of  conscience.  Consider  it  in  the  declining  time  of  life,  and  in  view  of  death  and 
punishment.  IV.  A  stoical  obstinacy  is  an  obstacle  which  some  place  against 
the  purposes  of  God.  Hath  Zeno  any  disciples  now  ?  Yes,  there  are  yet  people 
who,  under  another  name,  maintain  the  same  sentiments,  affect  un  unshaken  firm- 
ness, and  glory  in  preserving  their  tranquillity  under  all  the  extremes  of  fortune. 
(J,  Saurin,) 


CHAPTEB  XXn. 


Vep..  1.  A  good  name  is  rather  to  be  chosen  than  great  riches. — On  good 
character,  or  general  esteem,  of  mankind  : — While  our  Maker  has  left  us  greatly  in 
the  dark  about  unimportant  and  disputable  matters,  He  has  given  plain  directions 
concerning  the  performance  of  our  duty.  There  is  nothing  more  closely  connected 
with  virtue  and  happiness  than  reputation.  Throughout  the  Word  of  God  we  are 
excited  by  examples,  as  well  as  by  precepts,  to  aim  diligently  at  obtaining  a  good 
report.  I.  The  wronqness  of  having  too  little  concern  about  our  reputation. 
There  are  those  who  affect  indifference  to  what  a  silly  or  malicious  world  may  think 
or  say  of  them.  They  say  that  avoiding  censure  is  impossible.  It  is  true  that 
sometimes  innocent  and  prudent  persons  may  fall  under  very  cruel  imputations  ; 
but  they  rarely  continue  under  them.  Professing  to  despise  the  ill  opinion  of  man- 
kind creates  a  shrewd  suspicion  that  we  have  deserved  it.  Innocent  persons  must 
distinguish  themselves  by  a  constant,  though  unaffected,  attention  to  their  reputa- 
tion. A  good  name  is  what  a  bad  person  cannot  secure.  And  therefore  you  who 
can  should  on  no  account  fail  of  doing  it.  The  judgment  of  others  conf^erning  us 
deserves  respect.  Preservation  of  mutual  esteem  makes  persons  amiable  to  each 
other.  Persons  who  care  not  what  they  are  thought  are  in  a  very  likely  way  not  to 
care  what  they  do.  Contempt  of  reputation  is  contrary  to  our  worldly  interests. 
An  eminently  fair  character  prepossesses  everybody  in  favour  of  him  who  bears  it, 
engages  friendly  treatment,  begets  trust  and  confidence,  gives  credit  and  weight. 
Such  persons  are  always  sought  after  and  employed.  The  feeling  of  being  esteemed 
is  one  of  the  joyfullest  feelings  in  the  heart  of  man.  Another  consideration  is,  that 
though  offenders  often  return  completely  to  their  duty,  it  is  but  seldom  and  imper* 


CHAP,  xxn.]  PROVERBS.  631 

fectly  that  they  ever  regain  their  characters  when  once  forfeited.  11.  The  weong- 
NESS  OF  SHOWING  AN  ovER-KEGABD  TO  OUR  REPUTATION.  Many  think  a  fair  appear- 
ance is  all  they  want.  Many  think  that  if  they  are  guilty  of  nothing  which  the 
world  thinks  enormous,  they  are  quite  as  good  as  they  need  be.  A  worse  case  of 
immoderate  regard  to  our  reputation  is  when,  to  raise  or  preserve  it,  we  transgress 
our  duty.  The  esteem  of  the  worthless  is  very  ill-purchased  at  the  price  of 
becoming  like  them.  The  most  fatal  consequences  daily  proceed  from  persons 
being  led  by  the  folly  of  others  rather  than  their  own  good  sense  and  that  of 
their  discreeter  and  more  experienced  friends.  Frequently  prejudices  of  education, 
worldly  interest,  vehemence  of  temper,  hurry  men  into  wrong-doing.  Often  the 
sole  inducement  is,  that  if  they  should  stop  short  their  friends  would  look  coldly 
upon  them,  and  think  meanly  of  them,  and  they  cannot  bear  the  reproach  of  not 
having  been  true  to  their  side  or  party.  In  preferring  the  good  opinion  of  others  to 
their  own  conscience,  persons  who  have  been  guilty  of  some  folly  or  sin  will  be 
guilty  of  almost  anything  to  cover  it  rather  than  expose  themselves.  Another  bad 
way  of  aiming  at  reputation  is,  when  we  demolish  that  of  others  to  raise  our  own, 
and  build  it  on  the  ruins.  They  who  are  known  to  give  such  treatment  generally 
meet,  as  they  well  deserve,  with  a  double  share  of  it.  Candour  towards  all  of 
whom  we  speak  is  the  true  art  of  obtaining  it  towards  ourselves.  Besides  those 
who  are  led  into  any  of  these  sins  by  an  undue  fondness  for  reputation,  they  also 
are  blamable  who  allow  it  to  give  them  too  much  uneasiness.  A  good  name  may 
be  the  subject  of  too  much  anxiety.  Undue  solicitude  for  fame  is  sure  to  bring  us 
distress.  It  is  injustice  to  demand  of  the  world  more  regard  than  we  have  a  right 
to.  Persons  who  claim  too  much  are  frequently  driven  to  unfair  and  even  criminal 
methods  of  getting  their  claim  allowed.  There  is  not  upon  earth  a  more  ensnaring 
temptation  than  that  of  too  fond   a   self-complacency.      (Abp.   Seeker.)  The 

elements  of  the  great  and  good  are  not — 1.  Great  wealth,  nor — 2.  Splendid  genius, 
nor — 3.  Self-advertisement.  I.  Modesty  is  an  element.  II.  Tenacity  of 
PURPOSE.  III.  Mighty  reserve  power.  IV.  Morality  and  religion.  {Homiletic 
Bevieiv.)  A  good  name  should  be  guarded: — Be  wondrous  wary  of  your  first 
comportments ;  get  a  good  name,  and  be  very  tender  of  it  afterwards,  for  it  is  like 
the  Venice-glass,  quickly  cracked,  never  to  be  mended,  though  patched  it  may  be. 
To  this  purpose,  take  along  with  you  this  fable.  It  happened  that  Fire,  Water,  and 
Fame  went  to  travel  together ;  they  consulted,  that  if  they  lost  one  another,  how 
they  might  be  retrieved,  and  meet  again.  Fire  said,  "  Where  you  see  smoke  there 
you  shall  find  me."  Water  said,  "  Where  you  see  marsh  and  moorish,  low  ground 
there  you  shall  find  me."  But  Fame  said,  "  Take  heed  how  you  lose  me  ;  for,  if  you 
do,  you  will  run  a  great  hazard  never  to  meet  me  again :  there's  no  retrieving  of 
me."     (Howell's  "Familiar  Letters,  1684.") 

Yer.  2.  Tlie  rich  and  poor  meet  together :  the  Lord  is  the  maker  of  them 

alL — The  mixture  of  rich  and  poor: — I.  In  all  civil  societies  there  are  rich 
AND  THERE  ARE  POOR  PEOPLE.  This  is  the  imavoidablc  consequence  of  the  constitu- 
tion of  things.  It  will  appear  so  if  we  examine  whence  ariseth  wealth  and 
whence  poverty.  Riches  arise  from  three  causes.  1.  The  virtues  and  abilities  of 
men.  2.  From  the  vices  of  men.  3.  From  chance  or  good-fortune ;  from  events 
towards  which  the  rich  man  himself  contributes  little  or  nothing.  To  the  same  three 
causes  poverty  may  also  be  ascribed.  Not  only  nations  are  necessarily  divided  into 
rich  and  poor,  but  there  must  be  also  a  perpetual  fluctuation  of  property,  by  which 
the  rich  becomes  poor,  and  the  poor  become  rich,  so  that  neither  state  is  of  a  fixed 
and  permanent  nature.  The  poor  will  always  be  far  more  numerous  than  the  rich. 
Whilst  there  is  human  liberty,  whilst  there  are  virtues  and  vices,  whilst  there  are 
vicissitudes  of  fortune  and  revolutions  of  affairs,  there  must  be  in  all  times  and 
places  a  mixture  of  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor.  Providence  permits  it,  and  in 
some  sense  may  be  said  to  appoint  it,  since  it  results  from  the  nature  and  constitu- 
tion of  this  world.  II.  The  moral  reflection  made  by  Solomon  upon  this 
inequality.  The  Lord  is  the  maker  of  them  aU.  They  have  one  common  parent. 
In  that  respect  they  are  equal.  If  so,  there  should  be  no  great  difference  as  to  real 
happiness  between  them.  Is  there  much  disparity  in  point  of  happiness  between 
the  great  and  the  small,  the  master  and  the  servant,  the  gentleman  and  the 
labourer,  the  rich  and  the  poor?  Superficial  observers  of  human  nature  and 
human  life  will  judge  without  hesitation  that  the  rich  have  every  advantage  on 
their  side.  But  to  have  honour  and  authority,  unless  it  be  honestly  acquired 
and  decently  supported,  is  to  be  raised  to  splendid  infamy.     Power  wantonly 


532  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

exercised  is  the  undesirable  opportunity  of  doing  mischief.  Wealth  used  for  vile 
purposes,  or  for  no  good  purposes,  can  be  no  real  blessing  to  the  master  or  the 
hoarder  of  it.  Independency  rightly  understood  is  sometimes  a  blessing,  but  it  is 
sometimes  a  calamity.  The  poor  are,  or  may  be,  more  free  from  uneasiness  than 
the  rich.  They  have  fewer  desires,  fewer  false  and  artificial  wants,  more  moderate 
expectations,  Ac,  and  these  sorts  of  cares  and  commotions  are  no  small  abatements 
of  human  happiness.  The  poor  have  usually  better  health.  The  extremes  either 
of  plenty  or  of  indigence  usually  occasion  various  distempers,  and  shorten  the 
thread  of  human  life.  They  therefore  who  are  in  a  middle  state  between  wealth 
and  want  should  be  thankful  for  their  lot,  and  instead  of  envying  those  who  are 
above  them,  should  consider  how  many  are  placed  below  them.  If  the  whole 
property  and  revenue  of  a  country  were  equally  divided  amongst  the  inhabitants, 
they  would  be  reduced  to  a  state  approaching  very  nearly  to  poverty.  If  all  the 
inhabitants  of  a  Christian  nation  were  to  live  up  exactly  to  the  precepts  of  our 
Lord  and  the  exhortation  of  His  apostles,  excessive  wealth  and  extreme  indigence 
would  hardly  be  found  among  them.  There  are  three  precepts  or  laws  of  Chris- 
tianity which  tend  directly  to  remove  these  extremes ;  and  they  are  the  law  of 
charity,  the  law  of  industry,  and  the  law  of  temperance.  (J.  Jortin,  D.I).)  The 
ranks  of  rich  and  poor  : — The  constitution  of  things  being  such  that  the  labour  of 
one  man,  or  the  labour  of  several,  is  sufficient  to  procure  more  necessaries  than  he 
or  they  stand  in  need  of,  this  immediately  gave  room  for  riches  to  arise  in  the 
world,  and  for  men's  acquiring  them  by  honest  means.  Thus  some  would  acquire 
greater  plenty  of  necessaries  than  they  had  occasion  for ;  and  others,  by  contrary 
means,  or  by  cross  accidents,  would  be  in  want  of  them.  A  family  with  more 
than  was  wanted  for  necessaries  would  soon  develop  secondary  wants,  and  inventions 
for  the  supply  of  them,  the  fruits  of  leisure  and  ease,  came  to  employ  much  of 
men's  time  and  leisure.  Hence  a  new  species  of  riches  came  into  the  world.  By 
and  by  the  superfluities  of  life  took  in  a  vastly  larger  compass  of  things  than  the 
necessaries  of  it.  Then  luxury  made  its  inroad,  and  all  the  numerous  train  of  evils 
its  attendants,  of  which  poverty  is  far  from  being  the  worst.  If  riches  had  con- 
tinued to  consist  only  in  things  necessary  or  luxurious,  this  must  have  embarrassed 
trade  and  commerce,  and  kept  riches  in  the  hands  of  a  few.  It  was  agreed  to 
substitute  something  more  lasting  and  portable,  which  should  pass  everywhere  in 
commerce  for  real  natural  riches.  Money  was  to  answer  for  all  things.  The 
improvement  of  trade  and  commerce  has,  very  happily,  enlarged  the  middle  rank 
of  people,  who  are,  in  good  measure,  free  from  the  vices  of  the  highest  and  the  lowest 
part  of  mankind.  The  ranks  of  rich  and  poor  being  thus  formed,  they  meet 
together — they  continue  to  make  up  one  society.  Their  mutual  want  unites  them 
inseparably,  but  they  meet  upon  a  footing  of  great  inequality.  The  superiority  on 
the  one  hand,  and  the  independence  on  the  other,  are  in  no  sort  accidental,  but  arise 
necessarily  from  a  settled  providential  dispensation  of  things  for  their  common 
good.  This  implies  duties  to  each  other.  The  lower  rank  of  mankind  go  on  for 
the  most  part  in  some  tract  of  living,  into  which  they  got  by  direction  and  example; 
and  to  this  their  understanding  and  discourse,  as  well  as  labour,  are  greatly  con- 
fined. Then  what  influence  and  power  their  superiors  must  have  over  them  !  The 
rich  have  the  power  of  doing  a  great  deal  of  good,  but  this  power  is  given  them  by 
way  of  trust,  in  order  to  their  keeping  down  that  vice  and  misery  with  which  the 
lower  people  would  otherwise  be  quite  overrun.  The  rich  are  charged  by  natural 
providence,  as  much  as  by  revealed  appointment,  with  the  care  of  the  poor.  This 
is  not  a  burden,  but  a  privilege  attached  to  riches.  Observations  on  public  charities : 
1.  What  we  have  to  bestow  in  charity  being  a  trust,  we  must  satisfy  ourselves  that 
we  bestow  it  upon  proper  objects  of  charity.  2.  Public  charities  are  examples  of 
great  influence.  3.  All  public  charities  should  be  regarded  as  open  to  counsels  of 
improvement.  4.  Our  laws  and  whole  constitution,  civil  and  ecclesiastical,  go  more 
upon  supposition  of  an  equality  amongst  mankind  than  the  constitution  and  laws 
of  other  countries.  5.  Let  our  charity  towards  men  be  exalted  into  piety  towards 
God,  from  the  serious  consideration  that  we  are  all  His  creatures.  (Bp.  Butler.) 
The  rich  and  poor  meet  together : — In  the  distinction  between  the  rich  and  the  poor 
there  is  something  not  altogether  pleasant  to  the  human  mind.  We  are  apt  to 
recoil  from  it.  Frequently  the  dissatisfaction  increases  as  we  can  discover  no  just 
rule  for  the  unequal  distribution  of  riches.  The  mind  of  the  author  of  this  proverb 
was  led  away  from  the  distinctions  between  these  two  classes  to  notice  agreements 
between  these  classes.  1.  There  is  a  substantial  agreement  between  rich  and  poor 
in  their  origin  and  their  situation  as  they  enter  the  world.    They  are  equally 


CHAP.  XXII.]  PROVERBS.  533 

dependent,  equally  helpless,  equally  miserable.  2.  In  their  training  and  prepara- 
tion for  after-life.  3.  A  value  is  set  upon  riches  as  a  means  of  enjoyment  or  use- 
fulness. With  the  rich  and  poor  alike  there  is  a  desire  for  wealth  which  arises 
from  the  hope  of  making  it  useful  to  one's  own.  4.  But  for  cherished  erroneous 
notions,  the  rich  and  the  poor  would  act  together  with  more  efficiency  and  more 
good-will.  Public  good  would  be  more  promoted.  5.  Between  rich  and  poor  there 
is  a  substantial  agreement  in  all  the  organs  of  perception  and  enjoyment.  The 
poor  man's  organisation  throughout  is  as  perfect  as  the  rich  man's.  6.  In  the 
intellectual  faculties  there  is  a  strong  resemblance.  7.  Axid  in  the  original  passions 
of  men.  8.  They  are  alike  in  their  natural  and  equal  dependence  upon  one 
another.  Neither  class  can  dispense  with  the  other  and  stand  independent  and 
alone.  9.  There  is  a  nearly  equal  distribution  of  the  disappointments,  vexations, 
and  distresses  of  life.  10.  There  is  perfect  equality  among  men  in  their  capabili- 
ties for  religion.  (J.  S.  Spencer,  D.D.)  The  relative  duties  of  the  rich  and  poor  : — 
Nothing  is  made  for  itself,  or  made  to  terminate  in  its  own  being.  I.  The  founda- 
tion OF  THE  EELATivE  DUTIES  OF  THE  EicH  AND  POOR.  1.  They  have  One  Creator, 
who  is  also  the  Father  of  all.  2.  They  are  brought  together  into  the  same  society 
or  department  of  being.  Society  is  a  Divine  constitution,  and  an  important 
ingredient  of  happiness.  In  society  mankind  exists  in  different  relations  to  each 
other.  In  respect  to  them  the  law  of  dependence,  which  pervades  the  whole 
universe,  prevails.  II.  What  are  the  relative  and  reciprocal  duties  of  rich 
AND  poor  ?  1.  One  duty  of  the  rich  is  benevolent  bestowment ;  to  supply  the  need 
of  the  poor,  to  aid  them  in  their  necessities.  2.  Another  duty  is  that  of  employment. 
3.  The  enactment  of  just  laws.  4.  The  practical  recognition  of  the  great  fact  of 
an  universal  religious  equality.  The  poor  owe — (1)  Gratitude  to  their  benefactors. 
(2)  Contentment  with  reasonable  wages.  (3)  Regard  to  the  interests  of  their 
employers.  (F.  A.  Cox,  D.D.,  LL.D.)  Points  of  agreement  in  the  state  of  the  rich 
and  the  poor  :-*-I.  In  the  participation  of  a  common  nature.  Poor  and  rich  have  •"^ 
equally  the  power  of  ascertaining  general  principles  ;  their  moral  sensibilities  are 
the  same ;  in  devotion  the  two  classes  meet.  They  are  alike  in  the  primary 
passions  of  the  human  mind.  The  more  we  analyse  actions,  and  trace  them  to 
their  primary  elements,  the  more  we  shall  perceive  the  identity  between  the  rich 
and  the  poor  as  to  their  intellectual,  moral,  accountable,  and  devotional  capacities. 
II.  In  the  process  of  the  same  social  economy.  III.  In  the  house  of  God.  In 
the  presence  of  the  great  and  good  Being  men  should  forget  all  their  distinc- 
tions, and  recollect  their  essential  relation  to  Him  who  is  equally  the  Father  of  all 
mankind.  IV.  In  the  circumstances  of  their  entrance  into  this  world,  and  in 
the  circumstances  of  their  exit  out  of  it.  Learn — 1.  That  those  who  are  rich 
should  recollect  that  they  are  rich  for  the  purpose  of  benefiting  their  generation. 
Let  such  persons  consider  seriously  whether  they  are  living  to  themselves  or  to 
God.  2.  Not  to  repine  if  we  are  poor  and  yet  partakers  of  true  piety  springing 
from  the  faith  of  the  gospel.  (Robert  Hall.)  The  doctrine  of  human  equality  : — 
There  are  great  points  of  resemblance  between  all  men  sufficient  to  constitute  a 
true  equality.  1.  All  possess  an  intellectual  and  immortal  nature.  Mind  is  a 
common  possession.  The  immortality  of  the  soul  stamps  all  men  with  equal 
honour.  2.  The  fact  of  a  common  possession  among  all  classes  of  the  social  and 
domestic  affections  establishes  the  doctrine  of  human  equality.  The  same  heart 
of  love  towards  friends  and  kindred  beats  in  the  breast  of  the  highest  and  lowest. 
3.  The  doctrine  of  human  equality  is  established  by  the  universal  distribution  of 
vice  and  virtue.  Everywhere  you  will  find  sin.  That  is  a  common  heritage.  So 
with  virtue.  You  will  find  grand  specimens  of  piety  and  goodness  in  the  dwellings 
of  the  rich,  the  middle  class,  and  the  poor.  4.  The  doctrine  of  human  equality  is 
established  by  our  common  inheritance  of  infirmities,  suiTering,  bereavements, 
sorrow,  and  death.  The  same  physical  weakness  enfeebles  rich  and  poor.  They 
are  subject  to  the  same  diseases.  They  experience  the  same  mental  anguish. 
Learn— (1)  To  see  the  mischief— the  sin— of  those  who  endeavour  to  sever,  in 
thought  and  sympathy,  man  from  man.  What  is  specially  needed  now  is  sympathy 
between  the  various  classes  of  society.  (2)  That  this  doctrine  of  human  equality 
supplies  a  basis  for  the  adaptation  of  the  gospel  to  our  needs.  {W.  Walters.) 
Rich  and  poor : — 1.  According  to  the  very  constitution  of  human  nature,  great 
social  distinctions  do  and  must  exist.  While  we  acquiesce  in  this  fact  as  inevitable,  it 
is  important  that  we  take  a  right  view  of  it.  2.  The  rich  and  poor,  with  many  ^"^ 
outward  differences,  meet  together  in  the  possession  of  a  common  nature,  which  is 
greater  than  all  the  circumstances  of  life.    3.  The  rich  and  poor  meet  together  in  /^ 


534  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

a  large  intermediate  class.     The  blending  of  classes  is  not  less  remarkable  than 
their  separation.     4.  The  rich  and  poor  meet  together  in  the  common  enjoyment  of 
all  the  greater  blessings  of  life.     The  most  valuable  blessings  of  Ufe  are  those  which 
are  scattered  broadcast  over  the  world,  and  which  come  to  all  alike,  as  does  the 
bright  shining  of  the  sun.     5,  The  rich  and  poor  meet  together  in  all  the  more 
important  and  deeper  experiences  of  life.     The  great  events,  which  stir  the  deepest 
ieelings  of    man's    heart — birth,    marriage,    death — occur    in    every    household. 
t/Q.  The  rich  and  poor  meet  together  in  that  they  are  all  alike,  and  without  exception, 
sinners,  involved  in  one  common  ruin,  exposed  to  one  common  doom.     This  is  one 
of  the  most  unpalatable  truths  of  the  Bible.     7.  The  rich  and  poor  meet  together 
in  this — they  have  presented  unto  them  a  common  salvation.     There  is  only  one 
"  gospel  for  rich  and  poor.   Social  and  national  distinctions  find  no  place  in  the  gospel 
of  Christ.     K  men  are  to  be  saved  at  all,'_they  can  only  be  saved  in  one  way,  by  the 
exercise  of  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus   Christ,  the  one   Saviour.     (T.  M.  Morris.) 
Rich  and  poor : — I.  Vaeious  ways  in  which  eich  and  poor  cannot  avoid  meeting 
TOGETHER.     1.  They  belong  to  the  same  creation.     They  meet  together,  then,  as 
brethren — "  all  one  Man's  sons,"  who  will  have  His  children  live  together  in  unity. 
2.  They  are  placed  together  by  their  common  Maker  in  the  same  world,  and  in  a 
state  of  necessary  dependence  on  each  other.     3.  Although  there  is  a  wide  separa- 
tion between  rich  and  poor  in  point  of  education,  habits,  and  manners,  yet  these 
outward  differences  are  as  nothing  in  comparison  with  their  common  nature,  to 
which  they  bear  the  same  relation  as  the  clothes  to  the  body.     View  them  in  regard 
to  their  natural  appetites,  bodily  and  mental  capacities,  social  and  domestic  affec- 
tions; in  all  these  things  they  meet  together  as  equals,  and  we  plainly  see  that 
one  "  Lord  is  the  Maker  of  them  all."     4.  If  now,  dismissing  worldly  considera- 
tions, we  contemplate  them  as  they  must  appear  to  their  Maker,  we  shall  see  the 
distance  between  them  absolutely  vanish,  and  nothing  to  prevent  their  meeting 
together  on  a  footing  of  perfect  equality.     All  souls  are  alike,  and  religion  addresses 
itself  to  all  alike.     5.  Eich  and  poor,  thus  meeting  together  in  the  enjoyment  of  the 
same  Christian  privileges,  should  also  meet  together  in  the  exhibition  of  a  renewed 
heart  and  a  gracious  character,  the  fruits  of  a  common  faith.     11.  Exhort  both 
EICH  AND  poor  TO  A  VOLUNTARY  MEETING  OF  EACH  OTHER ;  not  Only  as  being  biought 
together  by  the  appointment  of  Providence,  but  as  seeking  and  making  advances 
towards  each  other.     1,  It  is  not  enough  that  the  rich  should  not  oppress  the  poor ; 
thanks  to  the  equity  of  our  laws,  this  is  not  to  any  serious  extent  in  their  power ; 
nor  that  they  should  not  despise  the  poor,  which  we  hope  is  not  in  their  inclination  ; 
but  the  rich  must  protect  and  assist  and  honour  and  sympathise  with  their  poorer 
brethren.     2.  But  if  it  be  the  duty  of  the  rich  thus  to  meet  the  poor,  it  is  no  less 
incumbent  on  the  poor  to  make  advances  towards  the  rich,  and  "  meet  them  half- 
way."    {J.  H.  Burn,  B.D.)        Social  relations  : — Eich  and  poor  meet  together  in 
their  relation  and  dependence  on  each  other,  as  members  of  society  and  common 
heirs  of  Christ's  salvation.   They  meet  together  in  their  duties.   They  meet  together 
in  their  joint  properties.     They  meet  together  in  their  dearest  interests,  both  of  this 
life  and  of  that  which  is  to  come.     The  rich  man  may  be  reminded  that  the  city 
cannot  be  inhabited  without  the  artisans  and  smiths  and  labours.     The  poor  man 
should  be  told  that  the  capacity  of  his  superiors  is  of  another  order  from  his  own, 
and  that  the  duty  of  different  stations  is  different ;  each  has  his  own  opportunities, 
and  his  own  responsibilities.    Eich  men  are  necessary  to  the  well-being  of  the  poor, 
and  the  poor  are  essential  to  the  existence  of  wealth.     The  necessities  of  all  ranks 
connect  all.     The  wants  of  the  rich  convey  comforts  to  the  poor ;  the  wants  of  the 
poor  minister  to  the  abundance  of  the  rich.     Such  are  the  gracious  dispensations  of 
a  kind  Providence.    Let  us  all  be  thankful  for  what  we  have,  and  not  repine  that 
we  have  no  more.     (G.  D.  Hill,  M.A.)        The  poor  and  the  rich  : — All  through  the 
Scriptures  the  point  of  view  is  God's,  not  man's.     To  understand  any  part  of  the 
Bible  we  must  look  at  it  from  the  Divine  standpoint.     This  applies  to  the  text.    In 
that  day  the  contrast  between  rich  and  poor  was  far  greater  than  now.    If  man  had 
spoken  he  would  have  said,  "  The  rich  and  poor  are  divided  ;  their  interests  are  at 
war,  and  cannot  be  made  to  harmonise."     The  rich  have  manifest  advantages. 
1.  They  have  opportunities  for  improvement  which  the  poor  have  not.     2.  They 
have  means  of  influence  which  the  poor  have  not.     In  other  respects  observe  the 
essential  sameness  of  these  two  classes.     (1)  The  faculties  of  the  mind  in  both  "^ 
rich  and  poor  are  essentially  the  same.     (2)  The  same  moral  natures  are  in  both. 
(3)  They  are  alike  responsible.     (4)  In  the  eye  of  God  they  meet  together  in  their 
destiny.  (5)  They  meet  together  in  their  sinfulness.    (6)  They  are  the  same  in  their 


CHAT.xxn.]  PROVERBS.  635 

relation  to  the  plan  of  salvation.  Both  are  one  at  the  centre.  God  equalises. 
The  differences  are  slight.  The  differences  are  reciprocal  and  transient,  while  the 
points  of  agreement  are  permanent.  Those  who  set  the  one  class  against  the 
other  are  moving  backward  toward  the  feudal  ages,  whether  they  know  it  or  not — a 
time  when  the  poor  was  servant  to  the  rich.  The  glory  of  our  age  is  that  the 
differences  between  the  classes  are  being  obliterated.  They  are  meeting  together. 
Our  souls  are  being  lifted  to  a  comprehension  of  this  exalted  ideal  of  the  Scriptures. 
(R.   S.   Storrs,  D.D.)  The  equality  of  men  : — I.  CLE.i.RLy  state  the  subject. 

II.  Show  that  it  is  the  will  of  God  that  there  should  be  distinctions  of  rich 
AND  poor  in  the  WORLD.  1.  Evident  from  Scriptures.  2.  It  is  not  inconsistent 
with  God's  justice,  and  is  an  argument  for  His  wisdom.  III.  Applications. 
1.  The  rich  should  always  acknowlege  God  in  all  their  enjoyments.  2.  The  poor 
should  be  contented.  3.  Apart  from  riches  and  poverty,  all  men  are  equal — they 
have  the  same  nature,  the  same  care  of  Providence,  the  same  Christian  privileges, 
and  the  same  judgment.  (If.  Grove.)  Ultimate  Divi7ie  impartiality  : — The  idea 
of  ultimate  impartiality  is  what  is  chiefly  suggested  by  the  latter  part  of  this  verse, 
"  the  Lord  is  the  Maker  of  them  aU."  He  is  so  by  creation.  They  alike  owe  to 
Him  their  being,  and  owe  to  Him  every  moment  the  maintenance  of  that  being — 
the  rich  man  and  the  honourable,  as  well  as  the  poorest  and  meanest  on  earth. 
Where  is  the  monarch  on  the  throne  that,  more  than  the  lowest  of  his  subjects,  can 
draw  a  breath  independently  of  God  ?  He  is  so  by  providential  allotment.  The 
Bame  Lord  makes  them  what  they  are,  and  could  at  His  pleasure  reverse  their  con- 
ditions, making  the  rich  the  poor  and  the  poor  the  rich.  The  Lord  being  the  Maker 
of  them  all  implies  also  the  equal  distance  of  them  all,  as  alike  His  creatures,  from 
their  common  Creator  and  Governor.  The  distance  is  the  same.  In  both  it  is 
infinite.  When  God  is  the  object  of  common  comparison,  the  distance  between  the 
highest  and  the  lowest  of  mankind  measures  not  a  hair's  breadth  ;  it  is  annihilated. 
All  the  distinctions  of  which  men  make  so  much  sink  into  nothing  before  His 
infinite  majesty.  {R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  The  true  corrective  of  social  inequalities  : — 
The  text  does  not  mean  that  both  rich  and  poor  are  mingled  in  society,  that  they 
oppose  or  encounter  one  another,  but  rather  that  they  are  alike,  that  with  aU  their 
differences  there  is  still  something  common  to  both.  What  is  this  common  ground, 
the  point  of  contact  and  agreement  ?  Not  an  absolute  identity  or  sameness  of  con- 
dition, but  participation  in  a  certain  good  common  to  both,  and  independent  of 
external  qualities.  The  true  corrective  of  all  social  inequalities,  so  far  as  they  are 
evil,  must  be  furnished,  not  by  human  institutions  and  arrangements,  but  derived 
from  a  higher  and  independent  source.  Consider  how  and  why  the  religion  of  the 
Bible  is  adapted  to  exert  this  influence.  Men's  schemes  for  the  practical  solution  of 
this  great  problem  are  three.  1.  The  idea  of  obliterating  social  inequalities  by  a 
coercive  distribution  of  all  property.  This  method  is  condemned  by  its  violent 
injustice,  by  the  meanness  of  its  aims,  by  the  hypocrisy  of  its  professions.  2.  The 
idea  of  securing  an  equality  of  civil  rights  in  spite  of  personal  and  social  dis- 
advantages. As  a  positive  means  of  correcting  the  effects  of  providential  inequali- 
ties, this  is  as  worthless  as  the  other.  3.  The  idea  of  remedying  the  evil  by  means 
of  intellectual  increase  and  knowledge  and  refinement  of  taste.  The  objection  to  this 
remedy  is  that  when  applied  alone  its  influence  is  not  necessarily  or  wholly  good. 
(1)  Christianity  distinctly  recognises  the  existence  and  necessity  of  some  providential 
inequalities  in  the  external  situation  of  mankind.  (2)  Its  remedy  is  the  direct 
mitigation  of  the  evils  of  society  by  the  change  wrought  in  the  tempers  and 
affections  of  the  parties.  And  true  religion  attaches  to  the  various  degrees  of 
wealth,  refinement,  knowledge,  influence,  and  leisure  their  corresponding  measures 
of  responsibility.  It  makes  each  party,  to  some  extent,  content  with  his  actual 
condition,  aware  of  its  peculiar  obligations,  and  spontaneously  disposed  to  dis- 
charge them.  (3)  By  a  process  of  moral  elevation  men  are  first  taught  to  surmount 
their  disadvantages,  and  then  by  one  of  intellectual  elevation  the  classes  are 
brought  nearer  together.  Impress  the  necessity  for  popular  religious  education, 
not  only  as  the  means  of  personal  improvement  and  salvation,  but  also  as  the 
grand  corrective  and  perhaps  the  sovereign  cure  of  the  disorders  which  now  prey 
upon  society,  and  "  eat  as  doth  a  canker."  Eeligious  education  has  a  social  and 
secular  as  well  as  an  exclusively  religious  use.  The  true  secret  of  the  "  healing  of 
the  nations."  {J.  A.  Alexander,  D.D.)  Relations  of  rich  and  jwor : — The  man  in 
want  murmurs  that  God  has  given  him  so  little  ;  the  man  in  affluence  forgets  that 
God  has  given  him  so  much.  A  want  of  sympathy  arises  between  the  different 
classes ;  they  meet  in  jealousy,  not  in  love.    Differences  ought  to  be  viewed,  not  as 


536  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

specially  hurtful  to  any,  but  as  generally  good  for  all.  One  man  is  not  nearer  God 
or  farther  from  God  than  another.  God  is  not  only  the  maker  of  all  men  as  men, 
He  is  the  maker  of  all  as  rich  and  poor.  He  fixes  their  civil  conditions.  The 
unequal  state  is  the  appointment  of  His  providence.  Men  meet  together  by  nature 
as  equal ;  in  the  eye  of  the  world  as  unequal ;  in  both  cases  for  good.  None  is  in 
prosperity  or  adversity  without  affecting  others.  What,  then,  are  the  duties  which 
each  owes  the  other,  and  which  both  owe  to  God?  (Canon  Harvey,  M.A.) 
Seeing  men  as  God  sees  them  : — How  the  scales  seems  to  fall  away  from  one's  eyes 
directly  we  are  enabled  to  see  things  as  God  sees  them  1  The  sacred  worth  of 
humanity  shines  far  brighter  than  any  of  its  tinsel  happiness.  We  learn  to 
estimate  ourselves  aright,  undisturbed,  and  unabashed  by  the  false  estimates  which 
are  current  in  the  world.  Our  true  distinction  is  that  we  are  men,  that  we  belong 
to  a  race  which  was  made  in  the  image  of  God,  was  dear  to  His  heart,  and  is 
redeemed  by  His  love.  The  equality  we  claim  for  men  is  not  a  levelling  down— it 
is  quite  the  reverse ;  it  is  raising  them  up  to  the  higher  level,  which  they  have 
deserted  and  forgotten.  It  is  giving  men  self-respect  instead  of  self-esteem. 
(R.  F.  Horton,  D.D)         The  common  humanity : — I.  Kich  and  poor  meet  together 

IN  THEIB  ORDINARY   ALLOTMENTS    OF   LIFE.       11.    In   THE    ORDINARY    CHARACTERISTICS    OF 

THEIR  NATURE.  1.  The  body  has  the  same  number  of  bones  and  muscles,  nerves 
and  sinews,  in  any  of  which  disease  may  fasten  and  pain  may  enter.  2.  Nor  is  our 
exposure  any  the  less  in  our  minds.  3.  Our  sensibilities  are  the  same.  HI.  In 
THEIR  DESTINIES  IN  THE  COMMON  HEREAFTER.  1.  We  all  meet  at  the  gravc.  2.  We 
all  meet  at  the  judgment.  3.  We  all  meet  in  eternity.  IV.  In  their  rights  under 
THE  GOSPEL.  1.  There  is  the  same  need  in  the  fallen  nature.  2.  The  same  supply 
furnished  in  the  inexhaustible  mercy  of  a  crucified  Eedeemer.  3.  The  same  clear 
condition  annexed  to  the  call.  4.  The  same  unalterable  pledge  annexed  to  the 
promise.  5.  The  same  fulness  of  fruition  held  out  in  answer  to  every  hope  at 
the  last.  There  is  no  property  qualification  whatsoever  for  citizenship  in  the 
kingdom  of  God.  {Chas.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  The  ordination  of  wealth  and 
poverty  : — God  makes  some  rich  that  they  may  be  charitable  to  the  poor ;  and 
others  poor  that  they  may  be  serviceable  to  the  rich ;  and  they  have  need  of  one 
another.  He  makes  some  poor  to  exercise  their  patience,  and  contentment,  and 
dependence  on  God ;  and  others  rich  to  exercise  their  thankfulness  and  benevo- 
lence. All  stand  upon  the  same  level  before  God.  {Matthew  Henry.)  Diverse 
social  conditions  : — No  dispensation  of  Providence  appears,  at  first  sight,  more 
advantageous  to  mankind  than  the  diversity  of  conditions.  The  prince  has  need 
of  his  people,  and  the  people  have  need  of  their  prince ;  the  politician  has  need  of 
the  soldiers,  and  the  soldiers  have  need  of  the  politician.  This  consciousness  of  the 
need  which  we  have  of  our  fellow-creatures  is  the  strong  tie  which  binds  us  to  them. 
Yet,  by  the  depravity  of  the  human  race,  this  useful  order  has  been  miserably 
abused.  On  one  side  the  great  have  been  dazzled  by  their  own  splendour,  and 
hence  have  become  haughty,  disdainful,  and  oppressive.  On  the  other,  the  low, 
forgetting  the  dignity  which  naturally  cleaves  to  a  reasonable  soul,  have  become 
fawning  and  mean ;  have  bowed  down  to  imaginary  divinities  and  crouched  before 
phantoms  of  grandeur.  Both  parties  have  acquired  their  erroneous  ideas  from 
neglecting  to  consider  themselves  in  a  proper  point  of  view.  The  nature  of  man 
consists  of  a  spirit  united  to  a  body  ;  and  this  description  applies  to  the  whole 
race.  The  soul  of  the  poor  man,  as  well  as  that  of  the  rich,  has  the  power  of  con- 
sidering principles,  of  drawing  consequences,  of  discerning  truth  from  falsehood, 
of  choosing  good  or  evil,  of  seeking  for  the  most  glorious  and  useful  attainments. 
His  body,  too,  bears  the  same  characters  of  skill  and  exquisite  contrivance  :  it  is 
harmonious  in  its  parts,  just  in  its  motions,  and  proportioned  in  its  powers.  As 
their  powers  are  the  same,  so  too  are  their  weaknesses.  The  soul  of  the  rich,  like 
that  of  the  poor,  is  subject  to  the  influence  of  the  passions.  Nor  do  their  privileges 
differ  more ;  for  though  a  poor  man  cannot  exercise  the  authority  of  the  great,  nor 
obtain  the  reputation  of  immortal  heroes,  yet  he  may  aspire  to  honours  infinitely 
greater.  He  has  a  right  of  raising  himself  to  God  by  the  ardour  of  his  prayers; 
and  he  can  assure  himself,  without  danger  or  delusion,  that  the  great  God  will 
regard  and  answer  his  prayers.  Nothing  shows  so  much  the  meanness  of  the 
great  as  the  value  which  they  set  on  exterior  advantages,  for  thus  they  renounce 
their  true  and  proper  grandeur.  The  glory  of  man  consists  not  in  that  he  is  rich, 
noble,  a  lord,  or  a  king,  but  in  that  he  is  a  man,  a  being  formed  after  the  image  of 
God,  and  capable  of  the  sublimest  attainments.  What  are  the  views  of  God  wita 
regard  to  men  ?    What  end  does  He  propose  in  placing  us  on  this  planet,  thirty, 


CHAP,  xxn.]  PROVERBS.  637 

forty,  or  fourscore  years  ?  He  intends  it  as  our  time  of  trial.  On  this  principle, 
what  is  the  most  glorious  condition  ?  It  is  not  that  which  raiseth  us  in  society ; 
nor  that  which  procures  us  the  greatest  honours  and  accommodations  of  life,  for  it 
is  more  glorious  to  he  a  good  subject  than  a  wicked  king,  to  be  a  good  disciple  than 
a  profligate  teacher.  There  is  no  profession  shameful  if  it  is  not  vicious.  There 
is,  indeed,  something  more  noble  in  the  objects  of  some  professions  than  of  others. 
There  is  something  much  greater  in  the  design  of  a  magistrate  making  and 
executing  laws  for  the  good  of  mankind  and  in  that  of  a  mechanic  practising 
the  simplest  arts.  But  God  will  not  determine  our  everlasting  state  according  to 
the  design  of  our  professions,  but  according  to  the  execution ;  in  that  respect  all 
professions  are  equal,  and  all  men  have  the  same  destination.  Mankind,  then,  are 
essentially  equal  in  their  nature,  their  privileges,  and  their  destination.  Above  all 
this,  equality  is  eminently  conspicuous  in  their  end.  We  may  labour  to  acquire  a 
portion  of  honest  fame,  to  augment  our  fortune,  to  establish  our  reputation,  and 
sweeten,  as  far  as  we  can,  the  cares  of  life,  for  this  the  morality  of  the  gospel  does 
not  condemn  ;  but  still  we  must  carry  this  labour  no  farther  than  it  deserves ;  it 
must  not  be  our  chief  care.  God  has  given  to  the  great  ones  of  the  earth  an 
exterior  glory,  transient  and  superficial ;  but  to  the  humble  and  the  patient  He 
has  given  that  glory  which  is  real,  solid,  and  permanent ;  and  what  is  there  diffi- 
cult to  a  wise  man  in  submitting  to  this  order  of  Providence  ?  It  may,  in  some 
respects  indeed,  be  mortifying  to  lurk  in  the  lowest  ranks  of  society  \Chen  one 
feels  sentiments  of  greatness  and  elevation  in  the  soul.  But  those  things  will  soon 
pass  away;  soon  shall  we  enter  on  a  world  where  those  distinctions  shall  be 
abolished,  and  all  that  is  great  in  the  immortal  mind  shine  forth  in  full  splendour. 
(A.  Macdonald.)  The  diversity  of  station  and  outward  prosperity  among  man- 
kind : — I.  The  diveesiti  of  station,  of  power,  of  authority,  of  wealth,  and  the 
LIKE,  IS  INHERENT  IN  THE  NATURE  OF  MAN.  Men  are  divcrse  in  their  natural  capa- 
cities, abilities,  and  inclinations.  But  this  diversity  rests  not  altogether  on  chance 
or  on  injustice  of  mankind,  since  it  originates,  if  not  in  the  very  nature  of  the  soul, 
yet  surely  in  the  constitution  of  the  body  which  it  inhabits,  the  external  objects  by 
which  man  is  environed,  the  early  education  that  he  receives  and  the  climate 
allotted  him  for  his  abode,  and  which  cannot  possibly  be  everywhere  the  same. 
n.  The  proof,  however,  that  the  difference  of  station  is  necessarily  inherent  in  our 
nature  will  not  pacify  the  discontented  man.  He  will  probably  complain  of  this 
necessity,  that  he  is  subjected  to  it  against  his  wiU.  But  will  he  justly  do  so  if  we 
prove  to  him  that  God  in  this  institution  had  the  wisest  and  kindest  designs  in  view, 
and  that  it  is  in  reality  calculated  to  procure  to  every  one  in  particular  and  to  all 
in  general  manifold  and  important  benefits?  1.  Certain  it  is  that  without  the 
diversity  of  estates  and  conditions  of  life,  we  should  be  absolutely  obliged  to  forego 
very  many  of  the  conveniences  which  we  may  enjoy.  We  should  be  more  inde- 
pendent, but  we  should  also  have  less  support  in  weakness,  less  protection  in 
dangers,  less  help  in  misery,  less  relief  in  distress.  And  how  burdensome  would 
life  become  if  every  one  were  obliged  to  provide  himself  necessaries  alone,  every 
one  to  procure  and  prepare  for  himself  whatever  he  wanted  for  his  maintenance, 
for  his  food  and  clothing,  for  his  recreation  and  his  amusement !  2.  By  this 
regulation  established  by  the  Deity  mankind  have  the  best  opportunity  for  employing 
their  several  capacities,  faculties,  and  endowments,  and  of  carrying  them  to  the 
highest  degree  of  perfection  which  they  can  here  attain.  The  difference  of  states 
and  conditions  of  life  introduces  a  great  variety  of  projects  and  designs,  of  occu- 
pations, exertions,  labours,  and  amusements.  3.  By  means  of  this  Divine 
economy  every  species  of  satisfaction  and  pleasure  is  enjoyed  whereof  man- 
kind are  capable,  and  these  satisfactions  and  pleasures,  taken  together,  constitute 
unquestionably  the  greatest  possible  sum  of  happiness  or  of  agreeable  sensations 
that  could  have  place  in  the  present  state  of  man.  How  few  the  species  of 
pleasure  to  which  mankind  would  be  restricted  if  they  were  in  all  respects  equal  I 
4.  This  diversity  of  station  and  outward  prosperity  are  excellent  means  of  exercising 
us  in  virtue,  and  so  of  rendering  us  capable  of  the  perfection  and  happiness  of 
another  life.  Conclusion:  1.  Let  every  one  of  ns  be  contented  with  his  situation. 
Acquire  the  habit  of  viewing  it  on  the  most  agreeable  side — that  God  knows  us. 
far  better  than  we  know  ourselves,  and  is  uniformly  consulting  our  welfare.  2.  Let 
each  of  us  only  act  up  to  his  station  with  all  possible  fidelity  in  every  particular. 
3.  Let  us  with  extraordinary  diligence  strive  after  a  superior  station  in  a  future 
world.  (G.  J.  Zollikofer.)  The  poor  not  to  be  despised  : — Leslie,  the  painter,  tells 
QS  of  his  hearing  the  preference  expressed  by  Eogers  for  seats  in  churches  without 


538  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLTJSTRATOE.  [chap.  xxn. 

pews  opposed  by  a  gentleman  who  preferred  pews,  and  said,  "  If  there  were  seats 
only,  I  might  find  myself  sitting  by  my  coachman."  Sogers  replied,  "  And  perhaps 
you  may  be  glad  to  find  yourself  beside  him  in  the  next  world."     (Francis  Jacox.) 

Ver.  3.  A  prudent  man  foreseeth  the  evil,  and  hideth  himself. — Seen  and  unseen 
evils  of  life  : — The  great  mass  of  mankind  live  at  hazard,  so  far  as  the  final  end  of 
life  is  concerned.     No  certain  destination  is  in  their  view,  nor  is  their  life  guided  by 
any  central  principle.     There  is  a  right  object  at  which  to  aim,  a  high  purpose  that 
should  be  the  centre  of  every  human  hfe,  giving  it  unity  and  strength.      I.  Consider 
THE  NATDEE  OF  PROVIDENCE  IN  THE  CONDUCT  OF  LIFE.      Prudcnce   and  providence 
have  a  close  kinship.     The  word  providence  expresses  the  special  idea  or  parti- 
cular act  of  providing,  while  prudence  denotes  the  foresight  which  shows  itself  in 
habit,  or  the  manner  of  providing.      1.  Here  is  the  lowest  and  basest  kind  of 
prudence  that  stands  in  opposition  to  a  higher  moral  life.     This  is  an  evil  prudence. 
Self  is  at  the  centre  of  it.      2.  Then  there  is  a  prudence  which  might  be  called 
neutral,  and  which  is  not  incompatible  with  spiritual  growth.  3.  There  is  a  prudence 
that  is   subservient   to   the  higher  principle  itself.     True  religion   and   genuine 
prudence  are  allied.     II.  Observe  the  value  of  prudence  in  the  affairs  of  life. 
The  prudent  man  can  look   behind   and   before,  can   estimate  probabilities,  can 
consider  cause  and  effect.     He  decries  the  future,  and  is  warned.     He  needs  his 
prudence  in  the  secular  affairs  of  the  world.     The  moral  fibre  of  a  man  has  much 
more  to  do  with  his  material  surroundings  and  well-being  than  many  persons  seem 
to  think.     The  prudent  man  avoids  temptations  that  may  be  too  much  for  his  moral 
strength.      III.  The   doom   of   thoughtlessness.      Eecklessness  brings  on  ruin. 
Punishment  is  not  arbitrary,  but  necessary.     {Daniel  Jackson.)        Prudent  and 
simple : — I.  The   specification   of  the  persons.     Prudent   and   simple ;  that  is, 
righteous  and  wicked.      Godly  men  are  in  Scripture  described  as  wise  men,  and 
wicked  men  are  spoken  of  as  fools.     That  godly  men  are  truly  wise  appears  in 
those  qualities,  and  actions,  and  principles,  and  properties  which  belong  to  them. 
1.  A  godly  man  hath  the  true  principle  of  wisdom  in  him.     Wisdom  is  not  a  fit  but 
a  habit,  and  implies  a  spring  and  principle  for  the  nourishing  of  it.     The  right 
principle  of  wisdom  is  a  gracious  and  savoury  spirit,  the  work  of  regeneration,  and 
the  new  creature  in  us.     2.  What  a  man  propounds  to  himself  has  its  influence  upon 
his  wisdom.     The  godly  man's  aims  are  heavenly  and  spiritual.      3.  Wisdom  is 
seen  in  regard  to  the  rule  whereby  he  is  led.     It  is  the  part  of  a  wise  man  to  have 
good  rules.     The  Christian's  rule  is  the  Word  of  God.     4.  In  regard  to  the  object 
whereabout  he  is  conversant,  which  is  the  gospel,  the  doctrine  of  wisdom.     II.  The 
DIFFERENT  ACCOUNT  WHICH  IS  GIVEN  TO  EACH.     1.  The  accouut  of  the  prudent.     He  is 
discovered  as  to  his  spiritual  judgment  and  apprehension,  and  spirit  of  discerning. 
"  He  foreseeth  the  evil."    This  foresight  he  has  by  the  dictates  of  the  Word  of  God ; 
by  the  concurrence  of  one  thing  with  another  ;  by  the  inward  hints  and  suggestions 
of  the  Spirit  of  God.     He  is  discovered  in  reference  to  activity  and  practice.     "  And 
hides  himself."     This  is  done  in  the  exercise  of  all  such  graces  as  are  pertinent 
hereunto  :  such  as  meekness,  humility,  repentance,  faith,  charity.      A  godly  man 
hides  himself  in  the  whole  work  of  self-reformation  and  holiness  of  hfe.     2.  The 
account  of  the  foolish.     Their  carriage  :  "  They  pass  on."     This  is  an  expression  of 
security,  and  of  pertinancy  or  progress  in  sin.     Sin  blinds  the  judgment,  carries 
away  the  heart,  and  fills  men  with  vain  hopes.     The  more  deceitful  and  fraudulent 
sin  is,  the  more  watchful  and  vigilant  should  we  be.     2.  Their  miscarriage,  or  ill- 
condition.      They  "  are  punished."      Sin  and  judgment  are  relatives,  and  infer 
one  another.      They  "  pass  on,  and  are  punished."     That  is,  they  are  punished 
because  they  pass  on.     Security  is  the  great  promoter  of  punishment,  in  the  nature 
of  things,  and  in  the  justice  of  God.     [T.  Horion,  D.D.)        Hiding-places  for  the 
prudent .- — One  main  element  of  safety  is  a  just  apprehension  of  danger.     There  are 
encompassing  dangers  and  safe  hiding-places  in  the  several  regions  of  our  secular 
business,  our  moral  conduct,  and  our  religious  hopes.     1.  In  the  ordinary  business 
of  life.      For  example,  when  speculation  is  rife.      2.  In  the  region  of  practical 
morahty.    Frivolous  and  licentious  companions,  theatres.  Sabbath  amusements, 
and  a  multitude  of  cognate  enticements.     3.  The  greatest  evils  he  in  the  world  to 
come,  and  only  the  eye  of  faith  can  foresee  them.     (W.  Arnot,  D.D.)        Good  and 
bad  prudence  : — We  are  not  called  upon  anywhere  in  the  Bible  to  make  little  calcu- 
lations, small  and  selfish  arrangements,  to  build  for  ourselves  little  refuges  that  will 
hold  nobody  else  :  we  are  called  to  far-sightedness,  a  large  conception  of  men  and 
things  and  Divine  purposes,  and  to  saeh  a  calculation  of  the  action  of  the  forces  of 


CHAP,  xiii.]  PROVERBS.  639 

the  universe  as  will  save  us  from  needless  trouble  and  assure  us  of  ultimate  defence 
and  protection.  Foresight  is  everywhere  taught  in  the  Bible,  but  not  a  foresight 
that  is  of  the  nature  of  selfishness.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Contrast  of  prudence  and 
folly  : — A  celebrated  commander  had  returned  from  a  period  of  military  service 
distinguished  by  the  most  important  victories.  After  he  had  retired  from  a  very 
gratifying  reception  at  court,  the  sovereign  was  eloquent  in  his  praise  to  the  sur- 
rounding circle.  "  It  must  be  confessed,"  said  one  of  the  bystanders,  "  that  he  is  a 
lucky  general."  "  He  has  been  too  long  a  lucky  general,  to  be  only  a  lucky  general," 
was  the  apt  reply  of  the  discriminating  monarch.  The  same  judgment  is  continually, 
though  silently,  made  in  the  ordinary  concerns  of  life.  Do  we  see  any  one, 
possessed  of  the  same  external  advantages  and  means  of  wealth  with  those  around 
him,  yet  invariably  involved  in  difficulty,  poverty,  and  want  ?  We  usually  consider 
him  deficient  in  that  prudent  foresight  which  guards  against  loss,  and  in  that  steady 
industry  which  leads  so  commonly  to  success.  The  systematically  unfortunate  very 
commonly  incur  the  blame  of  being  systematically  imprudent.  I.  The  chaeacter 
OF  A  PEUDENT  MAN.  1.  It  is,  then,  one  characteristic  of  the  prudent  man  that  he 
foreseeth  the  evil.  The  faculty  of  combining  present  situation  with  future  prospect, 
and  of  weighing  the  good  or  evil  of  the  one  by  its  effect  and  bearing  upon  the  other, 
is  a  gift  by  which  man  is  broadly  distinguished  from  the  brute  creation  ;  and  by 
which  intellect  and  civilisation,  among  those  of  his  own  species,  assert  their 
superiority  over  the  narrow  views  and  unreflecting  sensuality  of  savage  life.  The 
prudent  man  walks  by  faith,  and  not  by  sight.  Eager  to  avoid  the  evil  and  choose 
the  good ;  anticipating  the  punishment  of  obdurate  sin  or  unreflecting  indifference, 
he  asks  in  the  anxious  solicitude  of  one  who  knows  that  life  and  death  are  on  the 
issue,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  2.  He  foreseeth  the  evil,  and  hideth  himself. 
The  sense  of  danger  leads  him  at  once  to  the  effectual  remedy.  Whither,  then, 
does  the  wise  man  flee  from  impending  danger?  Even  to  the  sure  and  certain  hope 
of  his  Redeemer's  Cross.  II.  The  simple  pass  on,  and  ap.e  punished.  Is  this,  it  may 
be  asked,  that  godly  simplicity  and  sincerity  which  our  Lord;  and  His  apostles,  and 
every  part  of  the  instruction  of  the  Word  of  life  continually  recommend  ?  No :  it  is 
the  simplicity  of  folly,  of  carelessness,  of  prejudice,  of  wilfulness,  of  the  love  of  sin, 
of  unbelief,  of  ignorance,  of  hardness  of  heart,  and  of  contempt  of  the  Word  of  God. 
Promises  animate  not  his  obedience.  Threatenings  arouse  him  not  from  his 
lethargy.  Warnings  awake  him  not  from  his  security.  Expostulation  fails  to 
enkindle  his  shame,  or  to  give  life  to  his  gratitude.  The  simple  "  pass  on."  They 
are  carried  down  the  stream  of  time,  silently  and  surely,  toward  death  and 
judgment.     {R.  P.  Buddicom,  M.A.) 

Yer.  4.  By  humility  and  the  fear  of  the  Lord  are  riches,  and  honour,  and  life. — 

Humility  recommended  .- — Every  being  pursues  its  own  perfection,  and  would  fain 
be  satisfied  in  all  the  capacities  it  understands,  and  in  all  the  importunate  appetites 
it  feels.  God  draws  us  insensibly  to  virtue  and  obedience,  by  annexing  those  good 
things  which  we  all  perceive,  admire,  and  prosecute  to  the  practice  of  those  moral 
duties  which  are  equally  our  happiness,  but  not  so  easily  discerned.  The  text 
encourages  humility,  from  the  consideration  of  the  great  advantages  we  may 
reasonably  expect  from  the  practice  of  it,  even  aU  that  is  good  and  desirable  in  this 
present  world — both  riches,  and  honour,  and  Ufe.  I.  A  duty  recommended. 
Humility,  with  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  The  definition,  nature,  and  principles  of 
humility  in  general.  Humility  is  a  habit  or  temper  of  mind,  proceeding  from  a 
principle  of  religion,  which  subdues  all  lofty,  false  opinions  of  one's  self,  and  disposes 
a  man  to  cheerful  acquiescence  in  all  estates  and  conditions  of  life  that  God  shall 
place  him  in.  It  is  a  habit  of  mind,  a  frame  or  temper  of  soul ;  for  a  virtue  cannot 
be  defined  by  single  actions.  It  is  such  a  habit  of  soul  as  must  be  framed  and 
wrought  by  a  principle  of  religion  or  the  fear  of  God.  Nothing  can  be  a  virtue  in 
us  that  we  have  not  chosen.  Mere  depression  of  mind  is  not  humility.  Christian 
humility  consists  in  a  modest,  just  opinion  of  ourselves,  and  a  cheerful  submission 
to  the  will  of  God.  II.  The  several  parts  and  exercises  op  the  duty  so  defined. 
The  principal  exercises  of  humility  are — 1.  In  our  desires  and  aims.  2.  In  our  looks 
and  gestures.  3.  In  our  garb  and  habit.  But  principally — 4.  In  our  conversation  with 
our  acquaintance,  friends,  and  equals ;  with  our  superiors ;  with  our  inferiors. 
ni.  The  rewards  proposed  to  persuade    and   encourage  the  practice  op   it. 

1.  Riches,  and  honour,  and  life  are  real  blessings,  and  the  proper  matter  of  reward. 

2.  Humility,  with  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  will  certainly  procure  them.  They  that 
seek  God  may  expect  to  attain  these  rewards,  by  a  natural  power  and  efficacy  in  the 


540  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxn. 

virtue  itself.  By  an  efficacy  moral,  there  is  something  in  the  practice  of  humility 
that  disposes  kindly  to  all  those  several  ends.  By  an  efficacy  Divine  and  spiritual, 
the  blessing  of  God  will  assist  and  forward  the  designs  of  the  humble,  and  so  dispose 
and  order  second  causes  that  they  shall  live  in  plenty,  peace,  and  honour,  to  a  good 
old  age.  Set  the  example  of  our  blessed  Saviour  before  your  eyes,  who  humbled 
Himself  to  death  upon  the  Cross  for  us.  (J.  Lambe.)  Humility,  with  fear  : — These 
two  are  naturally  associated.  They  are  indeed  inseparable.  Lowliness  of  spirit  is 
an  indispensable  characteristic  of  a  religious  life.  It  is  in  the  valley  of  humiliation 
that  the  sinner  first  meets  with  God,  and  comes  into  a  state  of  reconciliation  with 
Him.  The  spirit  of  pride  cannot  dwell  in  the  same  heart  with  the  fear  of  the  Lord. 
(E.  Wardlaw,  D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  Train  up  a  child  in  the  way  he  should  go :  and  when  he  is  old,  he  will 
not  depart  from  it. — On  the  education  of  youth  : — A  strict  and  virtuous  education 
of  youth  is  absolutely  necessary  to  a  man's  attainment  of  that  inestimable  blessing, 
that  unspeakable  felicity,  of  being  serviceable  to  his  God,  easy  to  himself  and  useful 
to  others  in  the  whole  course  of  his  following  life.  To  the  proof  of  this,  lay  down 
six  propositions.  1.  That  in  the  present  state  of  nature  there  is  in  every  man  a 
certain  propensity  to  vices,  or  a  corrupt  principle  more  or  less  disposing  him  to  evil, 
which  principle  is  sometimes  called  the  flesh,  sometimes  concupiscence,  sometimes 
sensuality,  and  makes  one  part  of  that  which  we  call  original  sin.  2.  That  the 
forementioned  propensity  of  the  sensual  part,  or  principle,  to  vice,  being  left  to 
itself,  will  certainly  proceed  to  work,  and  to  exert  itself  in  action ;  and  if  not 
hindered  and  counteracted  will  continue  to  do  so,  till  practice  passes  into  custom 
and  habit,  and  so  by  use  and  frequency  comes  to  acquire  a  domineering  strength 
in  a  man's  conversation.  3.  That  all  the  disorders  of  the  world,  and  the  confusions 
that  disturb  persons,  families,  and  whole  societies  or  corporations,  proceed  from 
this  natural  propensity  to  vice  in  particular  persons,  which  being  thus  heightened 
by  habitual  practice,  runs  forth  into  those  several  sorts  of  vice  which  corrupt  and 
spoil  the  manners  of  men.  4.  That  when  the  corruption  of  man's  manners  by  the 
habitual  improvements  of  this  vicious  principle  comes  from  personal  to  be  general 
and  universal,  so  as  to  diffuse  and  spread  itself  over  a  whole  community,  it  naturally 
and  directly  tends  to  the  ruin  and  subversion  of  the  government  where  it  so  prevails. 
5.  That  this  ill  principle  is  to  be  altered  and  corrected  only  by  discipline,  and  the 
infusion  of  such  principles  into  the  rational  and  spiritual  part  of  man  as  may 
powerfully  sway  his  will  and  affections,  by  convincing  his  understanding  that  the 
practice  of  virtue  is  preferable  to  that  of  vice ;  and  that  there  is  a  real  happiness 
and  honesty  in  the  one,  and  a  real  misery,  as  well  as  a  turpitude,  in  the  other ; 
there  being  no  mending  or  working  upon  the  sensual  part,  but  by  well-principling 
the  intellectual.  6.  This  discipline  and  infusion  of  good  principles  into  the  mind, 
which  only  can  and  must  work  this  great  happy  change  upon  a  man's  morals,  by 
counter-working  that  other  sensual  and  vicious  principle,  which  would  corrupt 
them,  can  never  operate  so  kindly,  so  efficaciously,  and  by  consequence,  so  success- 
fully, as  when  applied  to  him  in  his  minority,  while  his  mind  is  ductile  and  tender, 
and  so  ready  for  any  good  impressions.  For  when  he  comes  once  to  be  in  years, 
and  his  mind,  having  been  prepossessed  with  ill-principles,  and  afterwards  hardened 
with  ill  practices,  grows  callous,  and  scarce  penetrable,  his  case  will  be  then  very 
different,  and  the  success  of  such  applications  is  very  doubtful,  if  not  desperate.  It 
is  necessary  that  the  minds  of  youth  should  be  formed  and  seasoned  with  a  strict 
and  virtuous  and  early  and  preventing  education.  On  three  sorts  of  persons  this 
trust  rests— (1)  Parents.  (2)  Schoolmasters.  (3)  The  clergy.  (R.  South.)  The 
education  of  children  : — The  careful,  prudent,  and  religious  education  of  children 
hath  for  the  most  part  a  very  good  influence  upon  the  whole  course  of  their  lives. 
I.  Wherein  doth  the  oood  education  of  childken  consist?  1.  In  the  tender  and 
careful  nursing  of  them.  2.  In  bringing  them  to  be  baptized.  3.  In  a  due  care  to 
inform  and  instruct  them  in  the  whole  compass  of  their  duty  to  God  and  to  their 
neighbour.  4.  In  a  prudent  and  diligent  care  to  form  their  lives  and  manners  to 
religion  and  virtue.  5.  In  giving  them  good  example.  6.  In  wise  restraints  from 
that  which  is  evil,  by  seasonable  reproof  and  correction.  7.  In  bringing  them  to  be 
publicly  catechised.  8.  In  bringing  them  to  be  confirmed.  II.  More  pauticul.vr 
directions  for  the  management  of  this  work.  The  young  have  to  be  trained 
in  the  exercise  of  the  following  graces  and  virtues:  Obedience,  modesty,  diligence, 
sincerity,  tenderness,  pity,  good  government  of  their  passions,  and  of  their  tongues, 
to  speak  truth  and  to  hate  lying  ;  to  piety  and  devotion  towards  God,  sobriety  and 


CHAP,  xxn.]  PROVERBS.  641 

chastity  with  regard  to  themselves,  and  to  justice  and  charity  towards  all  men. 
Endeavour  to  discover  the  particular  temper  and  disposition  of  children,  that  you 
may  suit  and  apply  yourself  to  it.  Endeavour  to  plant  those  principles  of  religion 
and  virtue  which  are  most  substantial  and  likely  to  have  the  best  influence  on  the 
future  government  of  their  lives.  Check  and  discourage  in  them  the  first  begin- 
nings of  sin  and  vice :  as  soon  as  ever  they  appear  pluck  them  up  by  the  roots. 
Take  great  heed  that  the  children  be  not  habituated  and  accustomed  to  any  evil 
course.  Bring  them,  as  soon  as  they  are  capable  of  it,  to  the  public  worship  of 
God.  Put  them  upon  the  exercise  and  practice  of  religion  and  virtue,  in  such 
instances  as  their  understanding  and  age  are  capable  of.  Add  constant  and  earnest 
prayer  to  God  on  behalf  of  your  children.  III.  Some  of  the  more  common  miscae- 
EiAGES  IN  THE  PERFORMANCE  OF  THIS  DUTY.  Thcsc  may  bc  fouud  in  relation  to 
instruction,  example,  and  reproof.  There  often  is  too  great  rigour  and  severity ; 
at  other  times  too  great  laxity.  It  is  always  mischievous  to  punish  while  under  the 
influence  of  passion.  IV.  Show  how  good  education  comes  to  be  of  so  great 
ADVANTAGE.  It  glvcs  religion  and  virtue  the  advantage  of  the  first  possession,  and 
the  further  advantage  of  habit  and  custom.  V.  Stir  up  those  whose  duty  this  is 
TO  discharge  it  with  great  care  and  conscience.  Good  education  is  the  very  best 
inheritance  you  can  leave  your  children.  In  this  way  you  promote  your  own 
comfort  and  happiness.  The  surest  foundation  of  the  public  welfare  and  happiness 
is  laid  in  the  good  education  of  children.  Consider  the  great  evils  consequent  on 
the  neglect  of  this  duty.  {T.  Tillotson,D.D.)  Trainingup  children  to  the prUimry 
virtues  : — Habits  of  virtue  are  of  the  same  nature  with  dexterity  in  the  mechanical 
or  other  arts.  Would  we  acquire  this  dexterity,  we  must  exercise  ourselves  early 
and  constantly  whether  in  the  virtues  or  the  arts.  It  is  necessary  for  us  to  train  up 
children  to  virtue  with  all  possible  care  from  their  earhest  infancy,  and  continually 
to  exercise  them  in  it,  if  we  would  have  them  truly  virtuous  persons.  To  do  this 
we  should  find  out  their  temperament,  and  conduct  ourselves  accordingly  :  we  should 
habituate  them  to  act  from  principle  and  design  ;  we  should  teach  them  to  be 
attentive  to  the  consequences  of  their  actions  ;  we  should  strive  to  make  their  duty 
their  pleasure.  Further  rules  are — 1.  Inure  them  from  their  earliest  infancy  to 
obedience  and  submission.  2.  Inspire  them  with  a  predominant  love  for  truth,  for 
sincerity  and  frankness.  3.  Train  them  to  diligence,  to  method,  and  to  industry  in 
their  affairs.  4.  Be  very  careful  to  bring  them  up  to  humility  and  modesty. 
5.  Endeavour  to  inspire  them  with  a  sincere  affection  and  hearty  good-will  towards 
all  mankind,  without  distinction  of  rank,  of  religion,  of  country,  or  of  outward 
fortune.  6.  Neglect  not  to  train  them  to  compassion  and  benevolence.  7.  Train 
them  to  patience  in  sufferings,  to  fortitude  and  courage  in  misfortune,  to  a  steady 
and  intrepid  behaviour  in  all  situations.  These  qualities  and  virtues  are  in- 
dispensably necessary  to  us  in  our  present  state.  We  must  learn  first  to  practise 
them  in  trivial  matters  if  we  would  do  so  afterwards  in  riper  years  and  more 
important   emergencies.      (G.  J.  Zollikofer.)  Child-training  : — Introduction  : 

1.  Mobility  needed  in  subject  of  training ;  therefore  man  is  born  "  a  child."  Yet  be 
aware,  flexibility  passes,  tendency  to  solidify  soon  creeps  in,  2.  Parents  here 
granted  right  of  loving  dogmatism  :  "  Ln  the  way  they  should  go."  I.  True  train- 
ing embraces  care  and  system.  1.  These  should  touch  each  part  of  child-nature  : 
flesh  and  blood.  Evolution  of  full  manhood  only  reached  thus.  Bodies  are  fed 
and  "trained."  Mystery  is,  the  soul  often  neglected.  No  animal  neglects  its 
young  as  man  does.  "  Every  home  should  be  its  own  Sabbath-school."  2.  Can't 
train  without  a  line  to  go  on — a  faith  that  can  be  taught — a  system.  Trained  child 
not  found  where  father's  mind  is  dark  or  chaotic.  You  like  your  child  to  choose  its 
faith  when  it  can  think  for  itself?  No  child  is  mentally  or  spiritually  free  from 
bias.  Child  has  all  to  learn.  Has  no  standard  of  selection.  First  trainer  has 
greatest  power,  whether  good  or  evil.  Mark  this  :  if  you  don't  bias  it  for  good  a 
thousand  tutors  outside  your  home  will  bias  it  to  its  hurt.     II.  Train  child  to 

DECIDE    MORAL    QUESTIONS    BY   PRINCIPLE,  NOT  BY  FEELING.       1.  A  child  is  COmpOSCd  Of 

appetites  and  moral  sense.  These  aU  glow.  But  appetites  get  two  or  three  years' 
start  of  moral  sense.  You  must  be  swift  in  training,  or  you  won't  get  moral  sense 
to  overtake  appetite.  2.  Every  day  of  life  offer  times  for  moral  decision.  Think 
of  George  Eliot's  Arthur  Donnithorne  ;  sweet  temper,  weak  moral  sense,  strong 
animal  tastes  ;  so  a  standing  peril  to  himself  and  others.  3.  The  one  grand  decid- 
ing principle  for  aU  souls  is  :  "  What  does  Christ  love,  that  is  the  thing  to  be  done." 
It  is  sure :  it  carries  child  to  right  issues.  It  is  safe :  it  imperils  nothing  in  its 
whole  being.    It  is  rapid :  under  it  soulalBtiw  holy  fast.    III.  Train  child  to  judos 


542  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxn, 

Christianity  ^t  best  results.  Much  of  training  given  unwittingly.  Soul-suction 
always  goiiig  <ui  in  "  a  child."  Five  senses  are  five  avenues  to  soul.  Crowds  of 
motley  ideas  g<jup  them* — each  idea  a  teacher.  In  your  home  they  hear  your  views 
of  men  and  acii^fcg.-  Beware !  if  you  condemn  Christianity,  because  of  its  sullied 
specimens,  yop  mlPn  the  child.  Put  religion  in  its  highest  light.  For  its  sake 
ask  :  "  Whatj^re  its  finest  results  ?  "  Show  them  spiritual  splendours.  Show  them 
John,  Paul,  Augustine,  Luther,  Newton,  Hale,  Wesley.  Christian  gallery  not 
wanting  in  fine  portraits.  Show  them  Christ.  Moral  longing  will  awaken  them  ; 
they  will  hunger  and  be  filled  (Matt.  v.  6).  Conclusion  :  1.  All  details  come  under 
these  principles.  2.  Thus  you  will  train  "  a  godly  seed."  {British  Weekly.)  On 
relijioiis  education : — I.  An  exhortation  to  the  discharge  of  an  important  duty. 
The  wisdom  and  propriety  of  the  exhortation  are  founded  on  certain  quaUties 
inherent  in  man.  1.  Man  is  remarkably  prone  to  imitation.  In  private  families 
every  action  of  the  parent  is  imitated  by  the  child.  So  it  happens  in  the  aggregate 
life  of  the  nation.    The  cast  of  general  manners  depends  upon  the  leaders  of  society. 

2.  Children  in  their  infant  years  contend  obstinately  for  the  gratification  of  their 
own  humour.  The  principle  of  seK-will  is  not  in  cases  to  be  reprehended.  "When 
it  makes  us  resolute  in  spurning  compliance  with  mean  conditions,  with  base  pro- 
posals, and  wicked  instigations,  it  is  generous  and  manly,  and  should  be  cherished. 
But  reasonable  accommodation  of  our  own  inclinations  and  our  own  sentiments  to 
the  dispositions  and  opinions  of  others  is  absolutely  necessary  for  the  transacting 
of  human  concerns,  and  consequently  for  the  existence  of  civil  society.  It  should 
therefore  be  taught  to  children,  because  they  are  inexperienced ;  and  enforced  on 
young  persons,  because  their  passions  are  turbulent.  The  training  of  children  in 
the  way  of  subjection  to  discreet  and  moderate  control  is  an  act  of  judicious  kind- 
ness in  every  parent.  3.  When  we  are  born  we  bring  with  us  minds  already 
furnished  with  methodical  principles  ;  but  through  the  sole  gift  of  God  we  are 
endowed  with  capacity  either  for  the  inventing  or  the  learning  of  arts  and  sciences. 
The  extent  to  which  this  capacity  becomes  advantageous  depends  in  a  great 
measure  on  the  degree  and  manner  of  culture  with  which  it  is  improved.  4.  In 
the  generality  of  men  there  is  an  active  spirit  which  is  impatient  of  rest,  and  which 
will  find  itself  employment.  Children  therefore  need  training  in  the  proper 
methods  of  spending  energy  in  labour  and  in  recreation.  5.  There  is  in  man  a 
most  unhappy  tendency  to  do  evil.  Man  finds  it  more  easy  to  indulge  his  appetites 
than  to  raise  his  soul  to  higher  objects.  The  best  friend  of  the  child  is  he  who 
begins  with  the  first  dawn  of  understanding  to  impress  on  the  mind  of  his  child  t^ 
that  there  is  a  God  everywhere  present  in  power  and  knowledge,  and  another  state 

of  existence,  where  goodness  shall  terminate  in  happiness,  but  vice  be  productive  of 
misery.  II.  The  effect  which  will  ensue  from  early  care  employed  in  educa- 
tion. The  mental  faculties  most  distinguishable  in  our  first  years  are  memory 
and  imagination.  If  the  proper  effects  of  right  instruction  are  not  so  visible  as 
might  be  wished  at  every  period  of  our  age,  let  no  one  hastily  conclude  that  there- 
fore the  elements  of  education  are  totally  obliterated.  Good  principle  may  for  some 
years  lie  dormant  in  the  mind.  Unless  in  cases  of  extreme  depravity,  the  good 
principle,  like  the  good  seed,  will  at  last  find  its  way  to  shoot  up,  and  give  a  tenfold 
measure  of  increase  after  its  own  kind.  The  training,  then,  of  children  in  the  way 
they  should  go  is  from  the  nature  of  man  indispensably  necessary.  (G.  J.  Hunting- 
ford,    D.D.)  Of    the    duty    which   parents    owe    to    their   children  : — I.  The 

HEISOUB      NATURE       AND      FATAL      CONSEQUENCES       OF       THE      NEGLECT       OP       PARENTAL 

DUTY.      1.  As  it  appears   in  the   sight  of   God.      2.  As  it  affects  the  children. 

3.  As  it  affects  parents  themselves.  II.  How  parents  should  educate  their 
CHILDREN.  1.  Train  your  children  to  revere  you.  2.  Train  them  to  implicit 
submission  to  your  authority.  Insubordination  in  youth  is  the  certain  inlet  to  all 
that  is  disorderly  in  riper  years.  3.  In  order  to  train  your  children  to  moderation 
in  pleasure,  lead  them,  as  early  as  possible,  to  mark  the  imposture  of  passion,  and 
guard  them  from  aU  intimacy  with  the  loose  and  the  dissipated,  and  interdict  them 
of  all  loose  and  licentious  reading.  4,  Train  them  to  industry  and  frugality. 
Unremitting  application  and  assiduity  are  the  only  means  by  which  pre-eminence 
among  men  can  be  attained.  5.  Train  your  children  to  virtue  and  candour,  and 
justice  and  humanity.  6.  Train  your  children  to  piety.  True  views  of  the 
benignity  of  the  Ruler  of  nature  will  impress  their  susceptible  breast  with  the 
feelings  of  genuine  piety,  and  lead  them  to  love  the  Lord  their  God  with  all  their 
heart  and  strength  and  mind.  (IF.  Thorjguu^  '  The  formation  of  the  minds  of 
children:— I.  Repress  not  their  curiosits^^Bfcr  inquisitiveness.     It  is  in  itself  no 


horjfumj  * 

r 


CHAP,  xxn.]  PROVERBS.  543 

fault.  It  is  rather  a  strong  impulse  and  an  excellent  means  to  become  intelligent 
and  wise.  2.  Accustom  your  children  or  your  pupils  to  the  use  of  their  senses ; 
teach  them  to  apprehend  justly.  3.  Beware  of  giving  them  false  or  not  sufficiently 
precise  ideas  of  any  matter,  though  of  never  so  trifling  import.  4.  Set  them  to  learn 
nothing  which,  either  on  account  of  their  tender  age  or  from  the  want  of  other 
kinds  of  knowledge  necessary  to  that  purpose,  they  cannot  comprehend.  Measure 
not  their  capacities  by  yours.  5.  Endeavour  not  only  to  increase  and  extend  their 
knowledge,  but  likewise  to  render  it  solid  and  sure.  It  is  far  better  for  them  to 
know  a  few  things  thoroughly  than  to  have  only  a  superficial  acquaintance  with 
many.  6.  Guard  them  from  being  hasty  in  forming  conclusions,  and  avail  yourself 
of  all  opportunities  for  leading  them,  by  observations,  to  circumspection  and  pre- 
cision in  their  inferences  and  judgments.  (G.  J.  Zollikofer.)  The  formation  of 
the  hearts  of  children  : — To  form  the  hearts  of  children  means  to  direct  their 
appetites  and  affections  to  the  worthiest  objects,  to  inspire  them  with  a  predominant 
love  for  all  that  is  true  and  right  and  proper,  and  thereby  to  render  the  performance 
of  their  duty  easy  and  pleasant  to  them.  1.  Study  to  fiiid  out  their  temperament, 
and  conduct  yourself  according  to  it.  The  temperament  is,  as  it  were,  the  soil  that 
is  to  be  cultivated,  and  the  diversity  of  this  soil  is  not  so  great  but  it  may  soon  be 
discovered.  More  or  less  vivacity  and  quickness  of  apprehension,  more  or  less 
sensibility  to  good  and  evil,  to  pleasure  and  pain,  more  or  less  vehemence  in  the 
affections,  more  or  less  disposition  to  rest  or  to  activity — in  these  consist  the 
principal  diversity  in  what  may  be  called  the  temperament  of  children.  AU  these 
various  temperaments  may  equally  lead  either  to  the  virtues  or  to  the  vices. 

2.  Accustom  them  to  act  from  principle  and  design,  and  not  by  blind  impulse  or 
mere  self-wiU.  3.  But  be  not  satisfied  with  teaching  them  to  act  from  reason,  as 
rational  creatures  ;  but  teach  them  to  act  upon  the  noblest  principles,  and  in  pure  and 
beneficent  views.  Beware  of  setting  only  their  ambition  in  motion,  and  of  inciting 
them  to  application  and  duty  from  no  other  motive  than  the  idea  of  the  judgment 
that  others  pass  on  them.  4.  Teach  them,  further,  to  attend  to  the  consequences  of 
their  actions  or  of  their  behaviour.  Teach  them  duly  to  prize  that  inward  peace, 
the  satisfaction,  the  cheerfulness  of  mind,  the  health  and  strength  of  body,  and  the 
other  advantages  which  they  have  derived  from  honest  and  proper  conduct.  5.  Strive 
to  make  their  duty  a  pleasure  to  them.  6.  For  facilitating  all  this  to  them,  for 
teaching  them  to  act  upon  principle,  to  act  from  the  best  motives,  and  to  be  attentive 
to  the  consequences  of  their  actions,  you  should  accustom  them  betimes  to  self- 
examination,  which  is  the  most  excellent  means  for  constantly  becoming  more  wise 
and  virtuous.  7.  Teach  them,  in  like  manner,  to  reap  benefit  from  the  conduct  of 
other  persons.  8.  Finally,  to  this  end  caU  history  likewise  to  your  aid.  {Ibid.) 
Advantages  of  good  training  : — They  who  are  weU  educated  generally  behave  well 
for  the  following  reasons:  1.  Early  impressions  are  deep.    2.  Habit  is  strong. 

3.  Early  piety  is  acceptable  to  God.  The  first  love  of  an  innocent  heart  is  a 
sacrifice  of  a  sweet  savour.  (S.  Charters.)  Religious  training ; — A  child  may 
be  said  to  be  taught  when  in  words  we  clearly  convey  to  his  mind  any  truth  or 
enjoin  upon  his  conscience  any  precept.  He  is  trained  when  we  ourselves  so  pass 
before  bdm,  in  practical  illustration  of  the  truth  and  precept,  that  he  is  drawn 
along  after  us  in  the  same  way.  The  principle  applies  peculiarly  to  moral  and 
religious  instruction.  Suppose  you  wish  to  instruct  a  child  in  benevolence  or 
charity.  You  tell  him  what  it  inclines  one  to  do  for  the  needy  and  suffering ;  you 
dilate  upon  the  beautiful  sentiments  which  the  exercise  of  it  incites  in  one's  own 
breast ;  you  refer  to  distinguished  examples  of  it  that  have  blessed  the  world.  All 
this  is  teaching.  But  now,  again,  you  take  your  child  by  the  hand,  and  lead  him 
with  you  into  some  abode  of  poverty  and  want ;  you  let  bim  gee  with  you  the 
necessitous  situation  of  the  inmates  of  that  cold  and  ill-provided  dwelling ;  he 
marks  the  yearning  of  your  heart  towards  them,  and  his  heart  swells  in  sympathy ; 
the  satisfaction  that  exhilarates  your  soul  he  shares  as  you  freely  give  the  needed 
aid  ;  he  witnesses  the  whole  reciprocal  action  of  a  living  bounty  on  your  part  and  a 
returning  gratitude  on  the  spot.  And  this  is  training.  One  such  scene  will  avail 
more  than  many  lectures  to  make  your  child  charitable.  Or  suppose,  again,  you 
would  instruct  your  child  in  devotion,  prayer  to  God.  But  to  what  purpose  if  the 
child  is  not  moreover  trained  to  pray  ? — to  what  purpose  if  the  very  house  he  lives 

<-  in  is  a  prayerless  house  ?  Would  you  instruct  your  child  in  that  cardinal  excellence 
of  truth  ?  You  insist  often,  in  words,  on  its  importance.  But,  more  than  this, 
train  it  to  do  so.  You  rebuke  deception.  It  is  well.  But  practise  not  in  any  way 
what  you  rebuke.    Would  we  instruct  our  children  to  be  ki^d  and  gentle  ?    How  7 


\ 


644  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxn.' 

by  a  command  ?  Not  so  only,  but  more  powerfully  by  the  affectionate  and  pleasant 
bearing  and  tone  of  our  own  speech  and  person.  Parents  and  friends  often  wonder 
that,  after  all  the  pains  taken  with  children,  the  frequent  counsels  and  admoni- 
tions, they  should  yet  afterwards  go  astray.  But  was  the  child  who  has  dis- 
appointed you  trained  as  well  as  taught  ?  Did  you  uniformly  go  before  to  beckon 
and  lead  him  after  in  the  way  you  first  pointed  out?  But  in  the  majority  of  cases 
the  rule  wiU  hold  good :  your  child  will  keep  on  as  he  has  been  trained.  The 
soldier  in  his  age  might  as  soon  forget  the  drill  of  his  early  discipline,  or  the  sailor 
the  first  calculations  by  which,  under  the  rolling  planets,  he  made  his  way  over  the 
uncertain  waves,  as  your  child  the  practical  guidance  to  which  you  have  actually 
used  him  through  a  series  of  years.  He  will  keep  on,  if  you  have  been  his  leader 
and  forerunner,  when  your  feet  stumble  on  the  dark  mountains,  and  wiU  run  the 
race  after  very  much  as  you  have  run  it  before.  The  chief  significance  of  the 
grave  where  you  lie  down  wiU  be  to  fix  the  direction  in  which  you  trained  and 
the  point  at  which  you  left  your  child.  Your  bark  will  disappear  as  it  sails  on 
over  the  misty  horizon;  but  his  bark  shall  hold  the  same  course.  Whither, 
whither  shall  it  be  ?  {G.  A.  Bartol.)  The  education  of  the  young  : — I.  An 
INTEEESTING  OBJECT.  "A  child."  1.  Its  personal  powers  (Job  xxxii.  8),  the 
faculties  of  the  mind.  2.  Its  social  importance.  3.  Its  possible  elevation.  4.  Its 
total  depravity.  Socrates  confessed  of  himself  that  his  natural  inclinations  were 
exceedingly  bad,  but  by  philosophy  he  overruled  them.  5.  Its  immortal 
duration.  II.  An  impoetant  duty.  "  Train  up."  1.  Let  him  be  taught  useful 
learning.  2.  Let  him  be  instructed  in  religious  knowledge.  3.  Let  him  be 
impressed  by  a  consistent  example.     4.  Let  him  be  guided  into  proper  habits. 

5.  Let  him   be   sanctified   by   earnest   prayer.     III.  An    encouraging   pkospect. 

1.  From  the  Divine  appointment  (Deut.  iv.  10,  xxxi.  13  ;  Eph.  vi.  4).  2.  From 
the  Divine  procedure.  {Studies  for  the  Pulpit.)  The  religious  instruction 
of  the  young : — 1.  See  to  it  that  we  present  the  Divine  character  in  a  manner 
calculated  to  encourage  young  hearts.  2.  Distinguish  between  the  way  m 
which  death  affects  the  body  and  the  way  in  which  it  affects  the  spirit. 
3.  Make  it  clear  that  the  religion  of  Christ  is  in  harmony  with  all  innocent 
recreation  and  enjoyment.  4.  Do  all  in  our  power  to  interest  the  young  in  the 
eervices  of  the  sanctuary.  5.  See  that  you  offer  to  the  young  the  truth  which  God 
has  revealed  to  you,  and  of  which  you  have  felt  the  power.  6.  Avoid  all  treatment 
of  the  young  that  is  calculated  to  dispirit  and  discourage.  Be  careful  not  to  exact 
too  much  from  them.  7.  Be  varied  in  your  teaching,  and  do  not  be  depressed 
if  the  attainment  of  your  object  is  delayed.  (S.  D.  Hillman.)  The  necessity 
of  a  wise  and  wholesome  discipline  : — 1.  As  soon  as  children  are  capable  of  reflection 
endeavour  to  make  them  acquainted  with  some  of  the  leading  truths  of  the  gospel. 

2.  Explain  the  duties  of  practical  religion  as  well  as  the  articles  of  belief.  3.  Be 
careful  to  set  before  your  children  an  example  worthy  of  imitation,  for  instructions 
and  exhortations  will  be  invalidated  by  inconsistency.  4.  Discipline,  reproof,  and 
correction  are  necessary  in  the  family  as  well  as  in  the  Church  and  State.  5.  Let 
correction   and  reproof  be  accompanied  with  fervent  and  importunate  prayer. 

6.  Keep  a  watchful  eye  over  them  to  see  what  may  be  the  fruit  of  your  labour. 
To  rightly  perform  parental  duties  we  must  begin  betimes ;  secure  the  affection  of 
the  children ;  keep  them  out  of  the  way  of  temptation ;  and  instruct  them  with 
gentleness.  (B.  Beddome.)  Godly  training :— The  various  branches  of  godly 
training  may  be  thus  enumerated  :  1.  Instruction  in  right  principles— the  principles 
of  God's  Word.     2.  The  inculcation  of  right  practice — the  practice  of  God's  wiU. 

3.  Salutary  admonition  and  restraint,  and  correction.  4.  The  careful  avoidance  of 
exposure  to  evil  company  and  evil  example.  5.  The  exhibition  before  them  of 
a  good  example  in  ourselves.  6.  Constant,  believing,  and  earnest  prayer.  {R. 
Wardlaw,  D.D.)  Education:—!.  Whom  bhoxjld  we  educate?  The  material. 
♦'  A  child."  The  world  teems  with  analogies  both  real  and  obvious,  whereby  the 
moralist  may  enforce  the  duty  of  educating  in  the  comparatively  pliable  period 
of  youth.  II.  The  process  of  education.  "Train  up."  Note  the  distinction 
between  teaching  and  training.  There  may  be  teaching  without  training. 
Moral  training  according  to  a  Divine  standard,  with  the  view  of  moulding  the 
human  being  while  yet  young  and  tender  into  right  principles  and  habits  of 
action,  is  the  only  education  worthy  of  the  name.  The  oldest  training-school 
is  the  best — the  school  at  home ;  sisters  and  brothers  are  the  best  class-fellows, 
and  parents  the  best  masters.  But  formidable  obstacles,  both  intrinsic  and 
•xtrinsic,  prevent   or    impede    parental    training.     lU.  The    aim    and    end    or 


CHAP.  XXII.]  PROVERBS.  545 

EDUCATION.  "In  the  way  he  should  go."  Wisdom  in  choosing  the  proper 
time,  and  skill  in  adopting  the  best  method,  would  be  of  no  avail  if  false 
principles  were  thereby  instilled  into  the  mind  and  evil  habits  ingrafted  on  the 
life.  If  we  do  not  train  the  children  in  truth  and  righteousness  it  would  be  better 
that  we  should  not  train  them  at  all.  [W.  Amot,  D.I).)  The  training  of 
children : — There  are  many  qualifications  necessary  for  carrying  out  this  important 
duty.  I,  Sanctified  love.  This  is  not  mere  instinctive  fondness  which  is  common 
to  man  and  animals,  but — 1.  A  perception  of  the  true  beauty  of  childhood.  2.  A 
realisation  of  the  purity  of  childhood.  3.  A  consciousness  of  the  guileless 
simplicity  of  childhood.  II.  Felt  kesponsibilitt.  1.  Children  are  not  our  own. 
2.  Children  are  the  future  inhabitants  of  the  world.  Hence  the  world  will  be,  to 
a  certain  extent,  what  we  make  the  children.  3.  Children  have  immortal  souls. 
m.  Indibkct  iNiLTjENCE.  To  obtain  this  we  must^l.  Subdue  our  own  passion. 
No  passionate  parent  can  possibly  influence  his  child  for  good.  2.  Set  a  godly 
example.  3.  Cultivate  confidence  and  win  affection.  IV.  Patient  waiting  and 
earnest  PEAYEB.  (HomiUst.)  Childhood  innocence  a  dream : — Here  is  an  asser- 
tion, but  is  not  experience  frequently  at  variance  with  it  ?  The  statement  of  the 
text  is  unqualified.  Adherence  to  the  right  path  is  given  as  the  invariable  result 
of  having  been  trained  up  in  the  right  path.  Can  this  be  established  by  facts  ? 
With  what  restrictions  are  the  words  of  the  wise  man  to  be  understood  ?  It  is 
implied  in  the  text  that  there  is  no  tendency  in  a  child  to  walk  in  the  right 
way,  and  if  we  leave  him  to  himself  he  wUl  be  sure  to  walk  in  the  wrong.  Almost 
from  the  moment  of  the  child's  birth  can  be  discovered  in  the  infant  the  elements 
of  the  proud,  revengeful,  self-willed  man.  There  is  hereditary  guilt  where  there 
cannot  be  absolute.  The  innocency  of  childhood  is  a  dream  and  delusion. 
In  dealing  with  children  we  have  not  to  deal  with  unoccupied  soil,  but  soil 
already  impregnated  with  every  seed  of  moral  evil.  In  what  manner  may  the 
precept  of  the  text  be  best  obeyed  ?  The  great  secret  of  training  lies  in  regarding 
the  child  as  immortal.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Teach  the  youngest : — Dr.  Chalmers, 
in  a  letter  to  his  sister,  Mrs.  Morton,  says  :  "  You  cannot  begin  too  early.  God 
should  be  spoken  of  to  the  very  youngest,  and  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  famUiarised 
to  them ;  and  every  association  of  reverence  and  love  that  the  tone  and  style 
of  the  parents  can  attach  to  the  business  of  religion  should  be  established  in  them. 
Their  consciences  are  wonderfully  soon  at  work."  Childhood  injured  : — Child- 
hood is  like  a  mirror  catching  and  reflecting  images  all  around  it.  Remember  that 
an  impious  thought  uttered  by  a  parent's  lip  may  operate  upon  a  young  heart  like 
a  careless  spray  of  water  thrown  upon  polished  steel,  staining  it  with  rust  which  no 
after-scouring  can  efface.  Teaching  and  training  : — It  is  a  very  important  thing 
to  get  hold  of  the  distinction  between  teaching  and  training,  or,  as  the  margin 
reads  it,  catechising.  Train  up  a  child,  not  merely  lead  a  child.  There  is  a  New 
Testament  text  which  brings  out  the  same  thoughts  where  parents  are  taught 
to  bring  up  their  children  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord.  Observe  the 
distinction  between  nurture  and  admonition.  Admonition  means  teaching,  and 
nurture  means  training — two  very  remote  things.  Eli  was  a  capital  admonisher,  but 
no  trainer.  Eli  admonished  his  sons  very  often.  If  mere  talking  would  have 
answered,  he  would  have  done  well.  He  should  have  been  like  Abraham,  who 
commanded  his  house  after  him.  Do  you  think  you  could  ever  make  good  marks- 
men by  giving  lectures  on  the  science  of  projectiles  ?  Would  that  make  men  good 
shots  ?  If  you  are  to  be  good  shots  you  must  handle  the  rifle  and  actually  shoot. 
(.9.  Coley.)  The  training  of  a  child : — Human  society  is  now  hard  enough,  and 
needs  more  sympathy  in  it  than  one  always  sees ;  but  what  it  would  become  if  the 
hearts  of  men  were  not  kept  in  some  degree  of  softness  and  tenderness  by  the 
affections  which  are  raised  and  developed  by  family  life  it  is  difficult  fully  to 
conceive.  This  text  corrects  the  terrible  and  mischievous  misconception  that  a 
child's  future  is  altogether  a  thing  of  chance.  It  can  be  controlled.  All  life  can 
be  trained.  It  can  be  made  to  take  a  course  different  from  that  which  it  otherwise 
would  take.  The  training  is  within  certain  limits.  Children  will  be  trained  in 
spite  of  us.  How  they  are  trained  depends  largely  on  us.  We  rely  on  this  same 
principle  of  training  in  every  other  relation  which  the  child  sustains.  The  laws  of 
religious  life  are  not  capricious  and  incalculable  laws.  Duty  has  to  be  learned  like 
a  business,  or  a  science,  or  a  profession.  The  ti'aining  of  a  child  consists  in^'— 
1.  Teaching.  2.  Example.  3.  Discipline.  4.  Prayer.  Show  me  a  child  well 
instructed  in  the  truths  of  the  gospel,  living  day  by' day  in  the  presence  of  con- 
sistent and  winning  examples,  and  surroua^gd  with^^ayers,  and  I  do  not  say  that 


546  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  xxn. 

such  an  one  may  not  througli  a  strange  self-will  break  his  way  through  aU  these 
blessed  influences  and  become  a  wreck  and  a  castaway,  but  it  will  be  a  wonder  if 
he  comes  to  such  a  melancholy  end,  and  it  is  easier  to  believe  that  in  such  a  case 
the  training  has  been  faulty  than  that  there  has  been  a  failure  in  the  Divine 
promise  which  connects  the  spring  and  the  autumn.  {Enoch  Mellor,  D.D.)  The 
training  of  children  : — The  whole  human  family  has  descended  from  the  loins 
of  Adam,  and  is  necessarily  tainted  with  his  impurity.  "  By  one  man's  dis- 
obedience many  were  made  sinners."  We  are  aU  under  the  power  of  sin.  This 
tendency  to  sin  is  often  exhibited  in  the  child  long  before  the  dawn  of  consciousness. 
It  is  constitutionally  a  sinner,  and  the  uninterrupted  development  of  its  nature  will 
necessarily  be  a  growth  in  sin.     I.  The  text  does  not  mean  that  this  sinful 

NATURE  IS  to  BE  TRAINED  IN  THE  HOPE  OF  PRODUCING  BLESSED  RESULTS,  BUT  SOME- 
THING HIGHER  AND  BETTER   IS    TO    BE    SUPPLIED    FROM  WITHOUT.       Life    and    giaCG    and 

power  have  been  brought  into  the  service  of  humanity  in  the  person  of  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  and  are  to  be  made  over  to  us  by  the  operation  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  But  this  Divine  life  is  here  only  in  germ,  and  must  be  developed 
in  the  midst  of  certain  conditions,  and  here  is  a  duty  that  God  requires  at  the 
hands  of  parents.  "  I  know  Abraham,  that  he  will  command  his  children  and  his 
household  after  him,  and  that  they  shall  keep  the  way  of  the  Lord  to  do  justice  and 
judgment ;  that  the  Lord  may  bring  upon  Abraham  that  which  He  had  spoken  of 
him."  Here  it  is  expressly  stated  that  Abraham  was  to  do  his  part  in  order  that 
the  Lord  might  verify  to  him  the  blessings  guaranteed  in  the  covenant.    II.  This 

TRAINING  should  BEGIN  AT  THE  VERY  DAWN  OF  THE  CHILD's  EXISTENCE.      When    We  are 

told  to  "  train  up  a  child  in  the  way  that  he  should  go,"  it  is  meant  that  we  should 
do  this ;  not  let  it  first  grow  up  in  sin  and  then  try  to  reclaim  it  afterward  by 
extraordinary  effort.  To  do  that  is  to  give  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil  all 
the  advantage.  The  child  will  not  grow  up  a  Christian  without  the  influence  and 
teaching  of  the  parent.  The  receptive  faculties  of  the  child  must  be  trained  and 
sustained,  and  then  the  Holy  Ghost  will  sanctify  the  life  and  make  it  fruitful 
in  holiness.  During  its  earliest  life  the  child  absorbs  impressions  and  is  com- 
pletely under  parental  influence  and  direction.  Parents  are  also  invested  with 
authority  over  the  child,  and  it  will  need  discipline,  but  this  must  be  exercised 
in  love.  For  the  lack  of  this  spirit  corrections  administered  are  often  of  no  avail. 
Correction  administered  in  a  wrong  spirit  will  do  harm  and  not  good.  It  must  be 
evident,  therefore,  that  properly  to  train  our  children  we  must  not  only  teach  them 
Christian  doctrine,  but  we  must  Uve  the  life  of  a  Christian.    IH.  If  a  child  is 

THUS  NURTURED  AND  TRAINED  IN  THE  DiVINE  LIFE  WE  NEED  NOT  SUPPOSE  THAT  A 
TECHNICAL    EXPERIENCE     OB    SUDDEN     TRANSITION    IS    NECESSARY    TO    CONSTITUTE    IT    A 

Christian.  The  neglect  of  parental  training  cannot  be  made  up  in  any  other  way. 
There  is  no  danger  of  claiming  too  much  for  our  holy  religion.  The  whole  being 
of  man  is  to  be  sanctified  by  it.  The  chief  end  of  our  existence  is  to  glorify  God. 
How  often  it  is  said  of  a  man  who  dies  owning  no  property  that  "  he  left  nothing 
to  his  family  "  1  But  every  child  is  an  heir,  and  his  inheritance  is  indefeasible. 
First  of  all  are  his  memories  of  his  parents  and  his  home.  The  man  who  has 
no  property  to  devise  should  not  be  unhappy.  "I  give  and  bequeath  to  my 
children  a  good  name,  a  Christian  example,  and  a  faithful  training."  Is  not  that 
a  good  start  for  a  last  will  ?  These  are  legacies  over  which  no  heirs  quarrel  and 
that  require  no  probate  outside  of  the  sanctuary  of  the  heart.     {E.  R.  Eschbech,  D.D.) 

Ver.  7.  The  rich  ruletli  over  the  poor,  and  the  borrower  is  servant  to  the 
lender. — The  borrower  servant  to  the  lender: — The  mere  circumstance  of  being  rich 
gives  one  man  superiority  over  another  who  is  poor.  He  who  is  forced  to  borrow 
is  placed  on  that  very  account  in  a  sort  of  relative  inferiority  to  him  whose  position 
enables  him  to  lend.  These  words  may  be  compared  with  those  attributed  to  the 
Lord  Jesus,  "It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive."  I.  The  principle  mat 
BE  UNIVERSALLY  ACKNOWLEDGED  AND  ACTED  UPON.  Though  a  man  may  have  received 
much — a  vigorous  intellect,  a  commanding  judgment,  a  rich  imagination — he  will  be 
miserable  if  he  can  give  nothing.  If  a  man  were  assured  that  he  would  never 
be  permitted  to  tell  what  he  had  done  or  recite  what  he  had  seen,  he  loses  at  once 
the  great  impetus  which  urges  him  to  do  much  or  to  see  much.  A  man  is  not 
satisfied  with  being  rich,  he  must  be  in  circumstances  to  give ;  some  one  mast  be  a 
borrower,  while  he  is  a  lender.  It  is  the  giving  which  makes  the  receiving  of  any 
worth.  What  is  the  reason  of  this  alleged  supremacy  of  giving  over  receiving? 
1.  The  resemblance  which  is  thus  acquired  to  our  Eedeemer  and  Creator.    If  God 


OHAP.  XXII.]  PROVERBS.  547 

be  love,  there  is  no  presumption  in  supposing  that  without  objects  over  which  tha 
love  might  expand  the  Almighty  Himself  would  have  remained  unsatisfied. 
Lending,  not  borrowing,  constitutes  the  happiness  of  God.  And  there  is  more  like- 
mindedness  to  Christ  in  giving  than  in  receiving.  2.  The  giver  or  the  lender  has 
necessarily  an  advantage  over  the  receiver  or  the  borrower,  and  this  explains  how 
the  one  is  the  servant  of  the  other.  In  all  cases  the  giving  seems  to  imply  a 
relative  superiority  and  the  receiving  a  relative  inferiority.  3.  Notice  the  reflex 
character  of  benevolence  which  causes  that  whatever  is  bestowed  is  restored  to  us 
tenfold.  II.  Objections  ueged  against  the  statement  of  the  text.  In  dividing 
society  into  the  lenders  and  the  borrowers  you  would  exclude  the  vast  majority  of 
mankind  from  the  possibility  of  being  charitable.  But  being  charitable  is  not  limited 
to  any  class  of  society.  The  poor  man  may  be  a  giver  as  well  as  the  rich.  God 
has  not  granted  to  the  wealthy  a  monopoly  of  benevolence.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 
A  wholesome  horror  of  debt: — The  venerable  Peter  Cooper  of  New  York,  whose 
philanthropic  efforts  for  the  elevation  of  the  masses  are  well  known  throughout  the 
United  States,  celebrated  his  ninety-first  birthday.  In  conversation  with  a  reporter 
who  congratulated  him,  Mr.  Cooper  referred  to  some  of  the  guiding  principles  to 
which  he  attributed  his  success  in  life.  Among  other  weighty  observations  were 
the  following  remarks  on  the  burden  of  debt  which  are  worthy  the  attention  of  all, 
especially  of  young  men.  Mr.  Cooper  said  :  "  When  I  was  twenty-one  years  old 
my  employer  offered  to  build  me  a  shop  and  set  me  up  in  business,  but  as  I  always 
had  a  horror  of  being  burdened  with  debt,  and  having  no  capital  of  my  own,  I 
declined  his  kind  offer.  He  himself  became  a  bankrupt.  I  have  made  it  a  rule  to 
pay  for  everything  as  I  go.  If,  in  the  course  of  business,  anything  is  due  from  me 
to  any  one  and  the  money  is  not  called  for,  I  make  it  my  duty  on  the  last  Saturday 
before  Christmas  to  take  it  to  his  business  plac^." 

Ver.  8.  He  that  soweth  iniquity  shall  reap  vanity. — The  husbandry  and  harvest 
of  the  wicked: — I.  What  is  it  to  sow  iniquity?  or,  to  "  sow  to  the  flesh  "?  To 
follow  only  such  a  kind  of  life  as  a  man's  own  carnal  and  corrupt  humour  leads 
unto.  It  is  called  "  sowing  "  because — 1.  Before  sowing  goes  the  dressing  and 
manuring  of  the  ground ;  and  men  make  themselves  ready  beforehand  to  do  evil. 
2.  Ploughing  and  sowing  are  accompanied  with  much  industry.  And  great  is  the 
diligence  of  the  ungodly  in  the  furtherance  of  iniquity.  3.  Sowing,  though 
laborious,  is  full  of  contentment.  And  the  ungodly  find  joy  in  doing  naughtily. 
4.  In  sowing  there  go  many  seeds  together,  one  handful  after  another.  In  the 
lives  of  the  wicked  there  are  plenty  of  evils ;  they  never  go  alone — one  maketh  way 
for  another.  5.  After  sowing  the  ground  is  harrowed,  and  the  seed  covered.  So 
when  evil  is  entertained  in  the  heart,  what  policy  there  is  to  secrete  it.  Sowing 
iniquity  is  discerned  by  these  signs  :  1.  A  cherishing  and  encouraging  the  heart  to 
evil.  2.  A  taking  pains  to  do  naughtily.  3.  A  delighting  in  wickedness.  4.  A 
heaping  of  one  sin  on  the  neck  of  another.  5.  A  plotting  for  the  bringing  of  evil 
to  perfection.  6.  A  withstanding  of  all  means  tending  to  recovery.  II.  What  are 
THE  TKOUBLES  WHICH  FOLLOW  ON  THIS  SOWING  OF  INIQUITY  ?  The  affliction  here 
meant  is  either  in  this  life  or  hereafter.  That  which  is  in  this  life  is  either  out- 
ward or  inward.  Diseases,  discredit,  &c.  A  conscience  full  of  inward  vexation ; 
and  sometimes  a  reprobate  mind.  The  term  "  reap  "  indicates  the  fulness  and 
certainty  of  the  affliction.  Two  points  of  doctrine  taught — 1.  The  greatness  of 
God's  patience.  2.  The  certainty  of  His  justice.  {S.  Hieron.)  Wild  oats  : — 
«'  He  that  soweth  iniquity  shall  reap  calamity "  (K.V.).  The  fashion  of  never 
calling  a  spade  a  spade  is  known  as  "  euphemism."  According  to  it  death  is  paying 
the  debt  of  nature,  stealing  is  misappropriation,  lying  is  prevarication.  A  trace  of 
it  is  found  in  the  expression,  "  sowing  one's  wild  oats."  The  phrase  is  intended 
to  comprehend  pretty  much  all  the  vices  of  young  manhood.  We  are  all  sowing 
something  or  other.  Some  sow  the  fine  wheat  of  kindly  lives  and  generous  deeds. 
Others  go  heedlessly  sowing  the  wind.  It  would  be  well,  all  around,  if  there  were 
less  of  sentimentalism  and  more  of  sound  common  sense  with  respect  to  the  follies 
of  our  fast  young  men.  Never  were  two  greater  mistakes  made  than  are  embodied 
in  these  two  excuses,  "  Boys  will  be  boys,"  and  "  He'll  live  it  down  ;  I'm  sure  he'll 
live  it  down."  Paul  directs  our  attention  to  the  two  levels  of  life — the  low  level  of 
the  flesh ;  the  higher  level  of  the  spirit,  where  are  men  who  live  not  for  themselves 
only,  but  for  the  good  of  others  and  the  glory  of  God.  For  all  who  are  building 
character  and  making  their  lives  tell  for  truth  and  righteousness,  there  are  three 
safeguards — conscience,  the  sense  of  honour,  and  faith.     There  is  no  hope  that  the 


648  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

vicious  young  man  will  live  his  evil  down.  Sin  works  a  terrible  damage.  It  rota 
one's  seli-respect ;  it  pollutes  the  memory.  It  indisposes  the  soul  for  better  things. 
It  enslaves  in  the  fetters  of  habit.  It  ruins  the  body.  It  destroys  the  soul.  But 
no  matter  what  the  mistakes  of  our  past  lives  have  been,  if  we  repent  the  Lord  is 
ready  to  forgive.  (D.  J.  Burrell,  D.D.)  Human  life : — I.  The  inevitable 
woKK  OF  HUMAN  LITE.  What  is  the  work  ?  It  is  that  of  moral  agriculture — 
sowing  and  reaping.  Every  man  in  every  act  of  life  is  doing  this.  Every  volition, 
whether  it  takes  the  form  of  a  thought,  a  word,  or  a  muscular  act,  is  a  seed. 
There  is  a  germ  of  imperishable  life  in  it.  What  seeds  men  sow  every  day. 
What  bushels  they  deposit  in  the  moral  soil  of  their  being.  But  they  reap  as  well 
as  sow  every  day.  What  was  sown  yesterday  they  reap  to-day.  "  Men  are  living 
in  the  fruits  of  their  doings."  The  law  of  causation  is  inviolate  and  ever  operative 
within  them.  II.  The  reteibutive  law  of  human  life.  What  you  sow  you'U 
reap.  1.  What  you  sow  in  kind  you  reap.  "  He  that  soweth  iniquity  shall  reap 
vanity."  Job  says,  "They  that  plough  iniquity  and  sow  wickedness  reap  the 
same  "  (Job  iv.  8).  Paul  (Gal.  vi.  7,  8).  God  will  not  reverse  the  law.  2.  What 
you  sow  in  measure  you  snail  reap.  Not  a  grain  will  be  lost.  Sometimes  the  seed 
which  the  husbandman  commits  to  the  soil  rots.  But  not  a  grain  in  the  harvest 
of  life  is  lost.  He  will  reap  the  richest  harvest  of  blessedness  who  is  most  active 
in  deeds  of  love  and  godliness.  The  words  present — III.  The  tekkible  mistake 
OF  HUMAN  LIFE.  What  is  the  mistake  ?  "  Sowing  iniquity."  1.  This  is  a  general 
mistake.  2.  This  is  a  mistake  which  men  are  slow  to  learn.  3.  This  is  a  mistake 
whose  ultimate  consequences  will  be  terrific.  "And  the  rod  of  his  anger  shall 
fail  "  ;  or,  as  in  the  margin,  "  With  the  rod  of  his  anger  shall  he  be  consumed." 
Perhaps  this  expression  refers  to  the  tyrannic  power  exercised  by  wealthy  men,  as 
referred  to  in  the  preceding  verse.  Death  shall  wrest  the  rod  from  his  hands. 
God  shaU  break  it  to  pieces ;  and  his  tyranny  and  iniquity  shall  leave  him  nothing 
but  shame,  remorse,  and  the  fruits  of  Divine  vengeance.  {Homilist)  Sowing 
wild  oats : — In  all  the  wide  range  of  accepted  British  maxims  there  is  none,  take 
it  for  all  in  all,  more  thoroughly  abominable  than  that  "  a  young  man  must  sow 
his  wild  oats."  Look  at  it  on  what  side  you  will,  and  you  can  make  nothing  but  a 
devil's  maxim  of  it.  What  a  man — be  he  young,  old,  or  middle-aged — sows,  that, 
and  nothing  else,  shall  he  reap.  The  one  only  thing  to  do  with  wild  oats  is  to  put 
them  carefully  into  the  hottest  part  of  the  fire,  and  get  them  burnt  to  dust,  every 
seed  of  them.  If  you  sow  them,  no  matter  in  what  ground,  up  they  will  come, 
with  long,  tough  roots  like  couch-grass,  and  luxuriant  stalks  and  leaves,  as  sure  as 
there  is  a  sun  in  heaven — a  crop  which  it  turns  one's  heart  cold  to  think  of.  The 
devil,  too,  whose  special  crop  they  are,  will  see  that  they  thrive ;  and  you,  and 
nobody  else,  will  have  to  reap  them ;  and  no  common  reaping  will  get  them  out  of 
the  soil,  which  must  be  dug  down  deep  again  and  again.  Well  for  you  if,  with  all 
your  care,  you  can  make  the  ground  sweet  again  by  your  dying  day.  "  Boys  will 
be  boys  "  is  not  much  better,  but  that  has  a  true  side  to  it ;  but  this  encourage- 
ment to  the  sowing  of  wild  oats  is  simply  devilish,  for  it  means  that  a  young  man 
is  to  give  way  to  the  temptations  and  follow  the  lusts  of  his  age.  What  are  we  to 
do  with  the  wild  oats  of  manhood  and  old  age — with  ambition,  overreaching,  the 
false  weights,  hardness,  suspicion,  avarice — if  the  wild  oats  of  youth  are  to  be 
sown,  and  not  burnt  ?  What  possible  difference  can  we  draw  between  them  ?  If 
we  may  sow  the  one,  why  not  the  other  ?     (Tom  Hughes.) 

Ver.  9.  He  that  hath  a  bountiful  eye  shall  be  blessed. — The  bountiful  eye : — 
The  passage  before  us  speaks  of  bounty  in  man,  and  blessedness  from  God.  What 
is  a  bountiful  eye,  and  what  is  the  blessing  belonging  to  him  who  possesses  it  ? 
The  eye  is  a  wonderful  part  of  the  curiously  wrought  human  frame.  But  the 
term  is  used  in  Scripture  in  a  moral  point  of  view,  and  describes  a  peculiar  state 
of  the  mind.  Thus  we  read  of  the  blinded  eye,  the  enlightened  eye,  the  single  eye, 
the  evil  eye,  all  of  which  refer  to  the  state  of  the  mind  or  heart ;  and  so  does  the 
term  "  bountiful  eye."  Mind,  it  is  not  said  a  bountiful  tongue — "  most  men  will 
proclaim  every  one  his  own  goodness  "  (chap.  xx.  6)  ;  nor  a  bountiful  hand,  for 
man  may  give  all  his  goods  to  feed  the  poor,  and  lack  charity  (1  Cor.  xiii.  3);  nor  a 
bountiful  head,  for  an  ingenious  mind  may  devise  schemes  of  liberality  for  others 
and  not  be  truly  generous  himself ;  but  "  a  bountiful  eye  " — one  through  which 
the  soul  looks  in  tender  compassion — one  that  "  considers  the  cause  of  the  poor" 
(Psa.  xli.  1) — one  that  compares  and  contrives — one  that  "  affects  the  heart,"  stirs 
it  up  to  feel,  and  moves  the  hand  to  minister.     Such  an  eye  looks  in  the  right 


CHAP,  xxn.]  PSOVERBS.  549 

place  to  find  appropriate  objects.  It  does  not  shun  misery,  "  passing  by  "  {like 
the  priest  and  Levite)  "  on  the  other  side."  It  looks  through  the  right  medium, 
even  the  love  and  compassion  of  God,  and  says,  "  If  God  so  loved  us,  we  ought 
also  to  love  one  another."  "  What  shall  I  render  to  the  Lord  for  all  His  benefits 
toward  me  ?  "  It  looks  to  the  right  end,  even  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of 
man ;  and  looks  for  a  right  reward — not  the  approbation  of  man,  but  to  please 
God.  A  bountiful  eye  does  not  say,  "  How  much  can  I  give  to  save  appearances, 
or  pacify  conscience";  but,  "How  much  can  I  spare  God  and  His  cause?"  A 
bountiful  eye  may  be  considered  in  contrast  with  the  evil  eye.  *'  Eat  not  the  bread 
of  him  that  hath  an  evil  eye"  (chap,  xxiii.  6).  Why  not?  Such  an  one  maketh 
haste  to  be  rich  (chap,  xxviii.  22).  He  attempts  to  serve  God  and  mammon 
(Matt.  vii.  12).  Thus  his  eye  is  evil,  and  his  whole  body  is  full  of  darkness.  Have 
you  a  bountiful  eye  ?  Be  careful  of  it.  The  eye  of  the  body  wants  guarding  ;  so 
does  the  eye  of  the  soul.  It  sometimes  grows  dim.  Covetousness  steals  silent 
marches  even  on  liberal  souls.  Happy  is  he  of  whom  it  can  be  said  spiritually,  as 
of  Moses  literally,  that  his  eye  is  not  dim,  nor  his  spiritual  force  abated.  The  way 
to  strengthen  the  habit  is  to  be  frequent  in  the  act.     (Christian  Treasury.) 

Yer.  10.  Cast  out  the  scomer,  and  contention  shall  go  out;  yea,  strife  and 
reproach  shall  cease. — The  scorner : — The  scorncr  is  a  character  which  Solomon 
has  frequently  called  our  attention  to  in  preceding  chapters.  Few  characters  in 
society  are  more  despicable  in  spirit  or  pernicious  in  influence.  I.  As  a  social 
DiSTDBBER.  "  Cast  out  the  scorner,  and  contention  shall  cease."  1.  He  is  a 
disturber  in  the  family.  2.  He  is  a  disturber  in  the  Church.  3.  He  is  a  disturber 
in  the  nation.  II.  As  a  social  outcast.  "  Cast  out  the  scorner."  Excommu- 
nication is  his  righteous  doom.  If  he  has  gained  great  influence  as  a  pohtician, 
governments  sometimes,  instead  of  casting  him  out,  take  him  into  office,  and  bribe 
him  by  voting  him  a  princely  income.  The  duty,  however,  of  society  towards  the 
scorner  is  to  expel  him.     He  should  be  treated  as  a  social  pest.     {Ho7nilist.) 

Yet.  11.  He  that  loveth  purencss  of  heart,  for  the  grace  of  his  lips  the  king 
shall  be  his  friend. — Purity  : — What  is  purity — this  bright  and  blessed  strength 
of  human  life  ?  The  foundation  of  aU  purity  must  rest  upon  the  body.  Without 
bodily  purity  no  other  form  of  purity  is  possible.  On  this  must  rise  the  structure 
of  mental  and  spiritual  purity.  Our  thoughts  and  words  must  be  not  less  pure 
than  our  actions.  Action  is  ripened  thought,  and  thought  is  germinating  action. 
"  No  man  suddenly  falls."  The  thoughts  have  grown  accustomed  to  dwell  on 
impurity  long  before  the  deed  of  impurity  is  committed.  In  pureness  of  mind  lies 
our  best  defence.  And  purity  of  mind  is  essential  to  clearness  of  spiritual 
vision  and  lofty  exaltation  of  soul.  The  vision  of  the  Invisible  is  impossible  to  the 
impure.  And  the  beatific  vision  of  God  should  be  man's  noblest  ambition. 
Practical  suggestions :  1.  Cleanliness  is  a  strong  defence  of  bodily  purity,  and  with 
this  must  go  good  moral  habits.  2.  Wholesome  environment  and  occupation  are 
strong  aids  to  purity.  When  the  surroundings  of  life  are  not  wholesome,  it  is  a 
struggle  to  keep  life  pure.  3.  Go  not  into  the  way  of  temptation,  and  avoid  the 
companionship  of  the  impure.  4.  Keverence  your  body.  Our  bodies  are  the 
temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  let  us  not  defile  them  with  impurity.  And  whatever 
else  you  leave  undone,  yet  believe  in  pure  and  sacred  love.  Love  that  is  not  pure 
is  not  love.  The  love  of  home  is  a  splendid  defence  against  impurity.  (Canon 
Diggle.)  The  grace  of  the  lips : — I.  Puee-heaetedness.  The  moral  beauty, 
the  moral  affluence  of  it ;  what  it  is  and  what  comes  out  of  it ;  what  is  a  pure- 
hearted  man,  and  how  does  his  pure-heartedness  stand  related  to  his  life  ?  The 
proverb  speaks  of  love  for  pure-heartedness,  a  recognition  of  it,  and  a  joy  in  it,  as 
the  greatest  and  best  of  possessions.  H.  The  outcome  of  puee-heaetedness.  A 
pure-hearted  man  will  be  pure  in  speech  ;  his  conversation  will  be  seasoned  with 
the  salt  of  his  pure  feeling.  Speech  is  the  blossom  of  a  man's  life,  and  is  fair  or 
foul,  fragrant  or  offensive,  according  to  the  character  of  the  tree.  1.  Conversation 
is  the  grace  of  the  lips.  Not  mere  religious  talk ;  not  prudery — the  over-con- 
scientiousness that  detects  wrong  where  no  wrong  is.  Over-sensitiveness  is  not 
delicacy.  2.  Prayer  is  a  grace  of  the  lips  that  springs  from  pure-heartedness. 
3.  The  preaching  of  a  pure-hearted  man  is  a  grace  of  the  lips.  Because  of  this 
grace  of  the  lips  which  springs  from  purity  of  heart,  special  favours  shall  be  won. 
"  The  king  shall  be  his  friend."  Good  men  win  social  confidence  wherever  they 
are,  and  the  favour  of  the  King  of  kings.     (Henry  Allan.)        The  good  man: — 


550  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

This  passage  leads  us  to  consider  the  heart,  the  speech,  the  influence,  and  the 
blessedness  of  a  good  man.  I.  The  heart  of  the  good  man.  "  He  loveth  pure- 
ness  of  heart."  Not  merely  does  he  love  the  pure  in  language,  in  manners  and 
habits,  in  outward  deportment,  but  the  pure  in  heart.  Pureness  of  heart  in  man's 
case  implies — 1.  A  moral  renewal.  2.  An  urgent  necessity.  Without  pureness  of 
heart  there  is  no  true  knowledge  of  God,  or  fellowship  with  Him.  II.  The  speech 
OF  THE  GOOD  MAN.  "  For  the  grace  of  his  lips  the  king  shall  be  his  friend."  By 
"  the  grace  of  his  lips  "  we  are  to  understand  something  more  than  grammatic 
accuracy,  or  elegant  diction — something  more  than  logical  correctness  or  strict 
veracity.  It  means  speech  that  is  morally  pure — pure  in  sentiment,  pure  in  aim. 
It  is  said  of  Christ  that  the  people  wondered  at  the  gracious  words  which  proceeded 
out  of  His  mouth.  The  man  of  a  pure  heart  will  have  lips  of  grace.  "  If  the  tree 
is  made  good,  the  fruit  will  be  good."  HI.  The  influence  of  the  good  man. 
"  The  king  shall  be  his  friend."  Solomon  here  speaks  probably  of  his  own  deter- 
mination. He  meant  to  say  that  he  would  give  his  friendship  to  such  men. 
•'  This,"  says  Mr.  Bridges,  "had  been  his  father's  resolution  "  (Psa.  li.  6,  cxix.  63). 
This  character  smoothed  the  way  to  royal  favour  for  Joseph  (Gen.  xli.  37-45),  for 
Ezra  (Ezra  vii.  21-25),  and  Daniel  (Dan.  vi.  1-3,  28).  Nay,  we  find  godly  Obadiah 
in  the  confidence  of  wicked  Ahab  (1  Kings  xviii.  3,  12  ;  2  Kings  xiii.  14).  So 
powerful  is  the  voice  of  conscience,  even  when  God  and  holiness  are  hated  !  Such 
alone  the  great  King  marks  as  His  friends.  Such  He  embraces  with  His  fatherly 
love  (chap  xv.  9).  Such  He  welcomes  into  His  heavenly  kingdom  (Psa.  xv.  1,  2; 
xxiv.  3,  4).  IV.  The  blessedness  or  a  good  man.  "  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  pre- 
serve knowledge."  Three  different  interpretations  have  been  given  to  the  expres- 
sion. 1.  That  the  Lord  vigilantly  watches  over  His  truth  in  the  world.  This  is  a 
truth,  although  we  are  not  disposed  to  accept  it  as  an  interpretation  of  the  passage. 
2.  That  what  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  see  He  remembers  for  ever,  "  The  eyes  of  the 
Lord  preserve  knowledge."  He  retains  His  knowledge.  We  do  not  preserve  our 
knowledge.  We  forget  far  more  than  we  retain.  But  we  are  not  disposed  to 
accept  this  as  the  idea  of  the  passage.  3.  That  the  Lord  exercises  a  protecting 
superintendence  over  those  who  possess  His  knowledge.  That  it  means,  in  fact, 
the  same  as  the  expression  elsewhere.  "  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  upon  the 
righteous."  This  we  accept  as  the  true  idea.  Whilst  the  Lord  keeps  the  good 
man,  He  overthroweth  the  words  of  the  transgressor.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  13.  Tlie  slothful  man  saith,  There  is  a  lion  without. — One  lion ;  two  lions  ; 
710  lion  at  all : — This  slothful  man  seems  to  cherish  that  one  dread  of  his  about 
the  lions  as  if  it  were  his  favourite  aversion  and  he  felt  it  to  be  too  much  trouble  to 
invent  another  excuse.  Perhaps  he  hugs  it  to  his  soul  aU  the  more  because  it  is  a 
home-born  fear,  conjured  up  by  his  own  imagination.  At  any  rate,  it  serves  him 
as  a  passable  excuse  for  laziness,  and  that  is  what  he  wants.  When  a  man  is 
slothful  as  a  servant  he  is  unjust  to  his  employers  ;  and  when  he  is  in  business  on 
his  own  account,  idleness  is  usually  a  wrong  to  his  wife  and  family.  When  a  man  is 
thoroughly  eaten  up  with  the  dry-rot  of  laziness  he  generally  finds  some  kind  of  excuse, 
though  his  crime  is  really  inexcusable.  We  have  many  spiritual  sluggards,  and 
it  is  to  them  that  I  speak.  They  are  not  sceptics,  or  confirmed  infidels,  or  opposers 
of  the  gospel :  perhaps  their  sluggish  nature  saves  them  from  anything  like  ener- 
getic opposition  to  goodness.  1.  The  sluggard's  tongue  is  not  slothful.  The  man 
who  is  lazy  aU  over  is  generally  busy  with  his  tongue.  There  are  no  people  that 
have  so  much  to  say  as  those  that  have  little  to  do.  2.  His  imagination  also  is 
not  idle.  There  were  no  lions  in  the  streets.  Laziness  is  a  great  lion-maker.  He 
who  does  little  dreams  much.  His  imagination  could  create  a  whole  menagerie  of 
wild  beasts.  3.  He  takes  great  pains  to  escape  from  pains.  This  slothful  man 
had  to  use  his  inventive  ability  to  get  himself  excused  from  doing  his  duty.  It  is 
an  old  proverb  that  lazy  people  generally  take  the  most  trouble,  and  so  they  do ; 
and  when  men  are  unwilling  to  come  to  Christ,  it  is  very  wonderful  what  trouble 
they  will  take  to  keep  away  from  Him.  I.  A  lion.  The  man  means  that  there  is 
a  great  difficulty — a  terrible  difficulty,  quite  too  much  of  a  difficulty  for  him  to 
overcome.  He  has  not  the  strength  to  attack  this  dreadful  enemy ;  the  terrible 
difficulty  which  he  foresees  is  more  than  he  can  face.  The  real  lion  after  all  is 
sluggishness  itself,  aversion  to  the  things  of  God.  IE.  Two  lions.  In  the  second 
text  there  are  two  lions  instead  of  one  (chap.  xxvi.  13).  He  has  waited  because  of 
that  one  lion,  and  now  he  fancies  that  there  are  two.  He  has  made  a  bad  bargain 
of  his  delay.     It  was  inconvenient  then  because  there  was  a  lion.    Is  it  more  con- 


CHAP,  xxn.]  PROVERBS.  651 

venient  now  ?  Procrastination  never  profits ;  difficulties  are  doubled,  dangers 
thicken.  III.  No  lion  at  all.  If  there  be  a  man  who  would  have  Christ, 
there  is  no  lion  in  the  way  to  prevent  his  having  Christ.  "  There  are  a  thousand 
difficulties,"  says  one.  If  thou  desirest  Christ  truly,  there  is  no  effectual  difficulty 
that  can  really  block  thee  from  coming  to  Him.  There  are  no  Uons  except  in  your 
own  imagination.  (C  H.  Spur g eon.)  The  characteristics  of  laziness  : — To 
Solomon  laziness  was  one  of  the  greatest  evils  in  the  character  of  man.  How 
frequently  does  he  depict  it  with  graphic  force  !  How  often  does  he  denounce  it 
with  firm  energy  1  "  Idleness,"  says  Colton,  "  is  the  grand  pacific  ocean  of  life, 
and  in  that  stagnant  abyss,  the  most  salutary  things  produce  no  good,  the  most 
obnoxious  no  evil.  Vice,  indeed,  abstractedly  considered,  may  be,  and  often  is, 
engendered  in  idleness  ;  but  the  moment  it  becomes  sufficiently  vice,  it  must  quit 
its  cradle,  and  cease  to  be  idle."  Two  of  the  evils  connected  with  indolence  are 
suggested  in  the  text.  I.  It  creates  false  excuses.  "  There  is  a  lion  without." 
"  The  lion  in  the  streets  "  is  a  fiction  of  his  own  lazy  brain.  The  slothful  man  is 
ever  acting  thus — 1.  In  the  secular  sphere.  Is  he  a  farmer  ?  He  neglects  the  cul- 
tivation of  his  fields,  because  the  weather  is  too  cold  or  too  hot,  too  cloudy,  too  dry 
or  too  wet.  Is  he  a  tradesman?  He  finds  imaginary  excuses  in  the  condition  of  the 
market.  Commodities  are  too  high  or  too  low.  Is  he  an  artizan  ?  He  finds  diffi- 
culties in  the  place,  the  tools,  or  the  materials.  The  industrious  farmer  finds  no 
difficulties  in  the  weather.  2.  In  the  spiritual  sphere.  When  the  unregenerate 
man  is  urged  to  the  renunciation  of  his  own  principles  and  habits,  and  the  adop- 
tion of  new  spirit  and  methods,  slothfulness  urges  him  to  make  imaginary  excuses. 
Sometimes  he  pleads  the  decrees  of  God,  sometimes  the  greatness  of  his  sins, 
sometimes  the  inconvenience  of  the  season — too  soon  or  too  late.  II.  It  ceeates 
UNMANLY  excuses.  The  very  excuse  he  pleads,  though  imaginary,  if  true  would 
be  a  strong  reason  for  immediate  action.  "  A  lion  in  the  streets  1  "  Why,  if  he 
had  a  spark  of  manhood  in  him,  a  bit  of  the  stuff  that  makes  heroes,  he  should 
rouse  every  power.  There  is  no  heroism  in  the  heart  of  indolence.  To  true  souh 
difficulties  are  a  challenge,  not  a  check  to  action.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  15.  Foolishness  Is  bound  in  the  heart  of  a  child ;  but  the  rod  of  cor- 
rection shall  drive  it  far  from  him. — Foolishness  and  the  remedy : — I.  The  evil 
deploeed.  1.  Of  what  does  this  foolishness  consist  ?  Wrong  wishes,  purposes, 
thoughts,  pride,  sin,  levity,  &c.  2.  Where  does  this  foolishness  lurk?  In  the 
heart.  Deep  in  the  nature,  among  the  affections.  Hidden,  secret,  for  some  time 
unknown.  In  the  heart  of  a  "  child,"  even  of  a  little  child.  3.  How  this  foolish- 
ness is  held  in  the  heart — "  bound."  Children  often  hold  to  their  folly  with  great 
tenacity  ;  bound  with  other  things,  and  spoiling  what  is  good,  like  the  thorns  that 
choked  the  good  seed.  4.  How  this  foolishness  in  the  heart  shows  itself.  In  evil 
tempers,  in  vain  murmurings,  in  ungodly  deeds,  in  wilfulness  and  obstinacy,  &c. 
5.  The  consequences  to  which,  if  uncorrected,  this  foolishness  will  lead.  The 
forming  of  a  character  that  men  will  despise  and  God  hate.  The  embittering  of 
the  present  life  and  the  ruin  of  the  life  to  come.  II.  The  remedy  prescribed. 
1.  As  a  general  rule  correction  is  needed.  2.  Literally,  the  rod  required  is  often 
the  "  whip  for  the  fool's  back."  It  will  often  accomplish  what  words  will  not. 
3.  It  may  stand  for  wholesome  discipline  of  many  kinds.  Learn — (1)  Seek  the 
removal  of  folly  from  the  heart  by  thought  and  prayer.  (2)  In  every  correction, 
remember  that  it  is  for  our  good.  (3)  Consider  that  the  father  who  uses  the  rod 
does  not  willingly  afflict.  (4)  Better  that  folly  be  driven  from  us,  than  that  we 
should  be  banished  from  heaven.     {Handbook  of  S.S.  Addresses.) 

Ver.  16.  He  that  oppresseth  the  poor  to  increase  his  riches  .  .  .  shall  surely 
come  to  want. — Avarice : — I.  Oppression.  "  He  that  oppresseth  the  poor  to 
increase  his  riches"  (B.V.,  "gain").  Everywhere  do  we  see  avarice  working  out 
its  designs,  and  building  up  its  fortunes  by  oppressing  the  poor.  The  poor  have 
necessarily  to  cross  the  seas,  to  delve  in  mines,  to  toil  in  fields,  to  work  inmanu- 
factories,  to  slave  in  shops  and  counting-houses.  But  avarice  cares  nothing  for 
the  health,  the  liberty,  the  pleasures,  the  intellectual  and  social  advancement  of 
the  poor.  Avarice  fattens  on  the  miseries  of  poverty.  The  interest  of  others  is 
nothing  to  the  avaricious  man  in  comparison  with  his  own.  He  would  be  ever 
receptive,  never  communicative.  H.  Sycophancy.  "  He  that  giveth  to  the  rich." 
Avarice,  whilst  tyrannic  to  the  poor,  is  servile  to  the  rich.  The  wealth  it  gets  it 
I  employs  with  a  miserable,  crawling  baseness,  to  win  the  favour  and  command  the 


552  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

smiles  of  the  wealthy  and  the  great.  A  fawning  sycophancy  will  eat  out  the  true 
manhood  of  the  civilised  world.  Souls  bow  down  before  the  glitter  of  wealth  and 
the  pageantry  of  power.     (Homilist. ) 

Vers.  17-21.  Bow  down  thine  ear,  and  hear  the  words  of  the  wise. — Spiritual 
verities : — I.  The  experimental  knowledge  of  them  is  a  transcendent  blessing. 
They  are  "  excellent  things  "  in  themselves — things  that  reveal  a  spiritual  universe, 
a  glorious  Eedeemer,  and  an  ever-blessed  God.  But  the  verses  teach  that  a  know- 
ledge of  them  is  a  transcendent  blessing.  They  teach — 1.  That  such  a  knowledge 
affords  pleasure.  It  is  a  "  pleasant  thing."  What  said  Paul  ?  •'  I  count  all 
things  but  loss  for  the  excellency,"  &c.  2.  That  such  a  knowledge  enriches  speech. 
"  They  shall  withal  be  fitted  in  thy  lips."  3.  That  such  a  knowledge  inspires 
trust  in  God.  "  That  thy  trust  may  be  in  the  Lord."  4.  That  such  a  knowledge 
establishes  the  faith  of  the  soul.  A  man  to  whom  these  spiritual  verities  are  an 
experience  is  not  like  a  feather  tossed  by  every  wind  of  doctrine,  but  like  a  tree,  so 
rooted  and  grounded  in  faith  as  to  stand  firm  amidst  the  fiercest  hurricanes  that 
blow.  Such  a  man's  faith  stands  not  in  the  wisdom  of  man,  but  in  the  power  of 
God.  5.  That  such  a  knowledge  qualifies  for  usefulness.  "  That  thou  mightest 
answer  the  words  of  truth  to  them  that  send  unto  thee."  II.  The  experimental 
knowledge  of  them  is  attainable.  The  method  for  attainment  involves  four 
things.  1.  Communication.  These  spiritual  verities  come  to  the  soul  in  the 
"  words  of  the  wise."  "  Have  not,"  says  the  writer  of  these  verses,  "  I  written  to 
thee  excellent  things  in  counsels  and  knowledge  ?  "  Men  do  not  reach  this  know- 
ledge as  they  reach  a  knowledge  of  scientific  truth — by  their  own  researches  and 
reasonings.  It  is  brought  to  them  in  a  communication — a  communication  from 
holy  men  who  "  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  2.  Attention. 
"  Bow  down  thine  ear,  and  hear  the  words  of  the  wise."  3.  Application  :  "  Apply 
thine  heart  unto  my  knowledge."  4.  Eetention.  "  It  is  a  pleasant  thing  if  thou 
keep  them  within  thee."    {D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Yer.  21.  That  I  might  make  thee  know  the  certainty  of  the  words  of  truth. — 

Certainties  : — This  is  an  age  of  inquiry.  The  ideas  of  the  ancient  world  are  the 
ideas  of  the  childhood  of  the  race.  The  Bible  is  a  human  book,  which  we  reverence 
and  love  as  a  sacred  treasure  on  account  of  the  Divine  spirit  which  pervades  it. 
Do  not  place  the  Bible  on  the  altar  of  superstition  and  imagine  it  to  be  God.  Seek 
God  in  it,  but  with  this  caution — that  all  of  it  is  not  the  actual  Word  of  God.  Why 
should  any  man  seek  by  unfair  means  to  force  another  to  think  as  he  does  ?  Does 
not  Christ  give  us  an  example  of  mental  freedom  ?  He  seeks  the  voluntary  and 
unprejudiced  consent  of  mind,  heart,  and  will.  I.  Know  the  certainty  of  the 
WORDS  OF  truth.  1.  That  God  is  the  heavenly  Father  of  mankind.  2.  Our 
heavenly  Father  is  just,  merciful,  and  loving,  and  every  man  may  have  free  access 
to  the  great  parental  heart.  3.  Never  attempt  to  escape  from  any  penalty  by  doing 
wrong.  II.  Wherever  there  is  a  penitent  soul  there  is  also  a  kind  and 
FORGIVING  God.  Penitence  is  not  perfection.  III.  The  transgressor  must  bear 
the  penalty  of  his  sin.  It  is  a  just  and  merciful  law  of  God  that  the  trans- 
gressor shall  bear  the  penalty.  The  Lord  Jesus  will  not  save  you  from  the  physical 
penalty  of  your  sin  ;  but  He  will  give  you  grace  to  bear  the  thorn  which  your  own 
sin  has  thrust  into  your  life.     [William  Birch.) 

Ver.  28.  Remove  not  the  ancient  landmarks. — The  old  landmarks : — The 
wisdom  of  the  Mosaic  code  is  nowhere  more  manifest  than  in  its  provisions  touch- 
ing the  tenure  of  land.  Every  man  in  Israel  was  a  landowner,  and  he  must  remain 
so.  It  was  customary  to  mark  the  boundaries  of  estates  by  corner-stones.  To 
remove  these  landmarks,  if  an  envious  neighbour  were  so  disposed,  was  an  easy 
matter.  But  it  was  prohibited  under  a  severe  penalty.  We  deal  with  the  spiritual 
inheritance  handed  down  by  our  fathers  as  a  rich  bequest  of  truth  and  virtue.  An 
attempt  to  remove  the  landmarks  of  this  inheritance  is  noted  as  one  of  the  dangerous 
tendencies  of  modern  thought.  1.  One  landmark  is  belief  in  the  supernatural. 
The  hand  reached  forth  to  remove  this  boundary  is  Agnosticism.  2.  Another  is 
Revelation.  By  which  is  meant  the  Holy  Scriptures.  The  enemy  of  Scripture 
to-day  is  Rationalism.  To  the  present  controversy  as  to  the  trustworthiness  of 
Scripture  is  due  loss  of  reverence  and  loss  of  faith.  3.  Another  is  belief  in  Christ. 
The  enemies  are  the  various  forms  of  humanitarianism.  4.  Another  is  tradition. 
There  is  danger  in  clamouring  against  a  thing  because  it  bears  the  seal  of  antiquity. 


CHAP,  rxra]  PROVERBS.  6fi3 

Progress  in  theological  circles  has  come  to  mean  a  reckless  abandonment  of  every- 
thing that  age  has  sanctified.  Dogma  is  objected  to  because  it  has  "  been  handed 
down."  In  fact,  a  dogma  is  nothing  more  nor  less  than  a  formulated  truth  bearing 
the  marks  of  age,  and  of  long  trial,  and  the  warrant  of  venerable  authority.  (D.  J. 
Burrell,  D.D^  Old  lavdmarks : — I.  Some  of  the  landmakks  threatened. 
1.  Those  of  doctrine.  The  deity  of  Christ.  Salvation  by  atonement.  The 
necessity  for  regeneration.  2,  Those  of  Christian  life.  Laxity  in  doctrine  results 
in  laxity  of  life.  II.  Keasons  why  these  landmarks  should  be  left.  Loyalty 
to  God  as  King  forbids  us  from  tampering  with  them,  and  affection  to  Him  as  a 
Father  says,  "Eespect  them."  They  are  the  ramparts  of  the  Church.  They  are 
the  foundations  of  all  true  happiness,  and  the  men  who  have  most  faithfully  stood 
by  them,  and  most  humbly  paid  homage  to  them,  have  been  the  men  who  have 
been  the  glory  of  the  Church.  {Archibald  G.  Broicn.)  Eastern  land-divisions  : — 
Eastern  fields  were  not  divided  by  hedge,  or  wall,  or  ditch,  so  there  was  much 
danger  of  confusing  the  separate  properties  of  individuals.  In  the  East  advantage 
was  taken,  wherever  possible,  of  natural  divisions,  such  as  river-beds,  tributary 
stream-lines,  and  edges  of  valleys.  But  in  the  open  ground  the  separate  properties 
were  only  marked  by  a  deeper  furrow,  or  large  stones  almost  buried  in  the  soil. 
The  injunction  not  to  remove  a  neighbour's  landmarks  was,  therefore,  of  the 
utmost  importance,  as  stealthy  encroachments  might  easily  be  made  by  shifting 
these  stones.     {Biblical  Things  not  Generally  Known. ) 

Ver.  29.  Seest  tbou  a  man  diligent  in  his  business?  be  shall  stand  before 
kings ;  he  shall  not  stand  before  mean  men. — The  Bible  ideal  of  man : — The  Bible 
is  a  history  of  human  life  and  a  picture  of  character  extending  through  many  ages, 
and  embracing  in  its  scope  a  vast  variety  of  the  family  of  man.  There  emerges 
from  this  story  of  life  an  ideal.  There  is  a  moral  purpose  in  aU  the  historical 
Scriptures.  1.  The  Bible  always  recognises  a  basis  of  character  which  is  found  in 
the  natural  endowments  of  a  man.  2.  According  to  the  teaching  of  the  Bible  there 
must  be  a  diligent  use  of  these  natural  powers.  3.  The  diligence  of  life  must  be, 
according  to  the  Scripture  ideal,  accompanied  by  the  virtues  and  purities  of  a  moral 
self-restraint.  4.  This  ideal  man  of  the  Scripture  is  to  be  further  inspired  by  a 
sense  of  the  Divine  presence  and  power.  There  is  one  remark  necessary  to  com- 
plete the  Bible  idea  of  human  life.  There  is  a  condition  which  the  Scriptures  give 
us  as  belonging  to  life,  not  necessary  to  perfection,  but  almost  always  present,  and 
helpful  to  its  development.  The  best  of  men  are  greatly  crossed  and  exercised  by 
the  sorrows  and  oppositions  which  are  incident  to  life.  Trouble  plays  an  important 
part  as  testing  and  strengthening  and  sweetening  life.  {L.  D.  Sevan,  D.D.) 
Diligence  brings  success  in  life  : — I  believe  success  in  life  is  within  the  reach  of  all 
who  set  before  them  an  aim  and  an  ambition  that  is  not  beyond  the  talents  and 
ability  which  God  has  bestowed  upon  them.  "We  should  all  begin  life  with  a, 
determination  to  do  well  whatever  we  take  in  hand,  and  if  that  determination  be 
adhered  to  with  the  pluck  for  which  Englishmen  are  renowned,  success,  according 
to  the  nature  and  quality  of  our  brain  power,  is,  I  think,  a  certainty.  Had  I 
begun  life  as  a  tinker,  my  earnest  endeavour  would  have  been  to  have  made  better 
pots  and  pans  than  my  neighbours ;  and  I  think  I  may  venture  to  say  without  any 
vanity  that,  with  God's  blessing,  I  should  have  been  fairly  successful.  The  first 
step  on  the  ladder  that  leads  to  success  is  the  firm  determination  to  succeed ;  the 
next  is  the  possession  of  that  moral  and  physical  courage  which  wiU  enable  one  to 
mount  up,  rung  after  rung,  until  the  top  is  reached.  The  best  men  make  a  false 
step  now  and  then,  and  some  even  have  very  bad  falls.  The  weak  and  puling  cry 
over  their  misfortunes,  and  seek  for  the  sympathy  of  others,  and  do  nothing  further 
after  their  first  or  second  failure ;  but  the  plucky  and  the  courageous  pick  them- 
selves up  without  a  groan  over  their  broken  bones  or  their  first  failures,  and  set  to 
work  to  mount  the  ladder  again,  fuU  of  confidence  in  themselves,  and  with  faith  in 
the  results  that  always  attend  upon  cheerful  perseverance.    {Lord  Wolseley.) 


OHAPTEB  XXm. 


Yebs.  1-8.  Pat  a  knife  to  thy  throat,  If  thon  be  a  xaan  given  to  appetite. — 

Moderation: — This  virtue  the  people  of  God  ought  to  practise  in  everything. 
They  shoold  exercise  Belf-govemment  in  the  desire,  the  use,  the  enjoyment,  and  the 


554  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxni. 

regret  of  all  that  pertains  to  the  present  world.  Here  is  commended  laying  restraint 
on  the  animal  appetites.  1,  There  are  few  things,  if  any,  more  disgusting  and 
degrading  than  the  studied  and  anxious  indulgence  of  these  appetites.  It  is  parti- 
cularly loathsome  when  the  man  appears  to  catch  with  extraordinary  avidity  the 
occurrence  of  a  feast,  and  to  be  resolved  on  making  the  most  of  his  opportunity. 
2.  There  are  on  such  occasions  temptations  to  over-indulgence  and  excess.  And 
then  our  self-jealousy  and  watchfulness  should  be  proportioned  to  two  things — the 
strength  of  propensity  and  the  amount  of  temptation.  Eat  as  if  a  knife  were  at 
thy  throat.  Eat  in  the  recollection  and  impression  of  thine  imminent  dan.o;er.  Or 
the  expression  may  mean,  "  Otherwise  thou  wilt  put  a  knife  to  thy  throat  if  thine 
appetite  have  the  dominion."  3.  A  man's  conduct  on  such  occasions  is  marked, 
especially  if  he  be  a  religious  professor.  He  may  in  this  way  bring  reproach  upon 
religion,  which  ever  ought,  and  which,  when  genuine  and  duly  felt,  will  impose  a 
restraint  on  such  indulgences.  4.  We  should  also  be  on  our  guard  against  the 
ostentation  of  abstinence  and  plainness — the  affectation  of  extraordinary  abste- 
miousness. 5.  There  should  be  special  vigilance  if  there  be  reason  to  suspect  any 
snare,  any  intended  temptation  for  answering  a  selfish  or  malicious  purpose. 
Worldly  men  sometimes  do,  very  wickedly,  lay  snares  for  the  godly.  (iJ. 
Wardlaw,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  Labour  not  to  be  rich:  cease  from  thine  own  'wisdom. — Mammon: — 
All  the  precepts  of  Scripture  have  their  origin  in  the  benevolence  of  God.  Man 
labours  to  be  rich  because  he  is  voluntarily  ignorant  or  forgetful  of  the  require- 
ments of  his  nature.  I.  Labouring  to  be  bich  implies  the  consecration  of  oub 
POWERS  TO  THAT  ONE  OBJECT  IN  PARTICULAR.  But  this  is  not  the  end  for  which  we 
are  endowed  with  an  intellectual  faculty  and  aU  the  susceptibilities  of  a  moral 
nature.  The  accumulation  of  riches  as  an  end  is  no  more  worthy  the  noble  powers 
of  man  than  building  a  pyramid  of  sand.  Infinitely  beneath  the  dignity  and 
Divine  origin  of  man  is  the  labouring  to  be  rich.     II.  Whatever  tends  to  widen 

THE     distance     BETWEEN     GoD    AND    MAN   MUST   BE   REGARDED    AS   AN    AGGRAVATION    OF 

OUR  FALLEN  AND  RUINED  CONDITION.  Wc  are  SO  coDstitutcd  that  wc  canuot  be 
engrossed  with  the  successful  pursuit  of  two  objects  at  once.  You  cannot  be 
labouring  to  be  rich,  and  to  be  wise  unto  salvation  at  the  same  time.  By  our  own 
wilful  act  to  alienate  the  heart  from  God  must  be  the  most  inconceivable  of  all  mis- 
fortunes, since  the  highest  object  of  man's  existence  is  to  hold  communion  with 
God.  For  this  his  nature  was  originally  framed,  and  in  this  alone  will  his  nature 
ever  find   contentment  or   repose.     HI.  The  ruinous   effects  that  the  passion 

UNDER   notice    OCCASIONS   IN    ALL   THE   MORAL  POWERS  OF  ITS  VICTIM.       PeOplc  imagine 

that  riches  confer  greatness.  A  man  is  honoured  according  to  the  abundance  of 
his  capital.  The  tendency  of  this  is  to  inflate  the  mammon-worshipper  with  per- 
sonal vanity.  But  the  greatness  which  is  the  exclusive  offspring  of  opulence  is  a 
hollow,  spurious,  and  mere  visionary  greatness.  Unsanctified  riches  tend  to  render 
their  possessor  vain,  proud,  impatient  of  restraint,  forgetful  of  the  sources  of  true 
greatness,  and  insensible  to  the  wants  or  respect  that  is  due  to  othets.  And  the 
pursuit  of  riches  always  ends  in  disappointment.  "  Godliness  with  contentment  is 
great  gain."  The  true  riches,  Uke  an  overflowing  stream,  irrigate  the  heart,  and 
make  it  bear  fruit  for  eternity,  but  avarice  of  gold  rushes  like  a  torrent  of  scorching 
lava — it  may  excite  the  wonder  and  attract  the  common  attention  of  mankind,  but 
it  leaves  behind  its  devastating  march  a  solitude,  and  barrenness,  and  ruin,  and 
death.    {W.  H.  Hill,  M.A.) 

Ver.  7.  For  as  he  thinketh  in  his  heart,  so  is  he. — The  importance  of  a  man's 
thonqhts  : — 1.  A  man  is  as  his  thoughts.  2.  A  man  has  control  over  his  thoughts. 
3.  God  helps  him  in  the  exercise  of  that  control.  "  We  are  that  really,  both  to  God 
and  to  man,  which  we  are  inwardly."  {Matthew  Henry.)  Thoughts: — I.  The 
INFINITE  IMPORTANCE  OF  men's  THOUGHTS.  This  tcxt,  in  counsclUng  for  a  particular 
case,  and  bidding  us  test  the  sincerity  of  one  who  invites  us,  asserts  a  principle  of  wide 
application./  You  do  not  know  a  man  until  you  know  his  thoughts.  God  knows 
him  perfectly,  because  He  knows  his  thoughts.  1.  You  cannot  know  a  man  merely 
[  by  listening  to  his  words  or  watching  his  actions.  There  is  always  more,  and 
often  better,  in  men  than  comes  into  expression.  2.  The  revelations  of  close  and 
trustful  friendships  are  revelations  of  the  thoughts.  3.  The  claims  of  God  reach 
beyond  light  action,  and  demand  right  thought.  The  law  of  God  searches  the 
secret  intents  of  the  heart.    4.  The  redemption  that  is  provided  includes  in  ita 


CHAP,  xxiu.]  PROVERBS.  655 

scheme  the  sanctification  of  the  very  thought.  5.  All  sin  is  represented  as  spring- 
ing up  out  of,  and  finding  expression  for,  lust  in  the  sphere  of  thought.  Show,  by 
appeal  to  Christian  experience,  the  difficulty  found  in  the  restraining  of  thought. 
In  the  unrestrainedness  of  thought  often  comes  to  us  the  feeling  and  the  mastery  of 
sin.  II.  The  amount  of  control  man  has  over  his  thoughts.  If  he  had  no 
control  over  them  his  moral  responsibility  would  be  gone.  We  cannot  help  the 
evil  thoughts  coming  to  us.  We  have  control — 1.  Over  the  material  of  our 
thoughts.  The  materials  are  the  sum  of  past  impressions.  Thinking  is  the  com- 
bining, comparing,  and  rearranging  of  the  actual  contents  of  the  mind.  We  can 
direct  ourselves  away  from  the  evil  and  towards  the  good.  We  can  fill  our  minds 
with  good  suggestions  and  associations.  Illustrate  from  going  into  scenes  suggestive 
of  vice  ;  reading  questionable  or  immoral  books,  &c.  2.  Over  the  processes  of 
thought.  There  may  be  the  nourishing  of  the  evil.  There  may  be  the  swaying 
of  the  mind  through  the  power  of  the  renewed  will,  and  with  the  help  of  the 
indwelling  Spirit.  Apply  to  wandering  thoughts  in  the  house  of  God.  Do  we  make 
the  mastery  of  such  evil  the  subject  of  real  effort  ?  III.  The  help  God  renders 
MAN  IN  the  exercise  OF  SUCH  CONTROL.  An  attempt  to  regulate  thoughts  will 
bring  the  conviction  of  human  helplessness.  When  a  man  has  mastered  conduct 
he  cannot  say  that  he  has  mastered  himself.  When  he  thinks  he  has  mastered 
"  thoughts  "  he  will  surely  find  that  he  needs  to  cry  unto  God,  saying,  "  Try  me 
and  know  my  thoughts  .  .  .  and  lead  me  in  the  way  everlasting."  {Robert  Tuck, 
B.A.)  The  thoughts  of  the  heart  the  best  evidence  of  a  man's  spiritual  state: — 
The  knowledge  of  ourselves  is  one  of  the  most  noble  and  excellent  attainments 
in  human  life.  He  that  knows  himself  stands  fair  for  immortal  felicity.  Doctrine : 
The  thoughts  of  men's  hearts  do  evidence  what  their  spiritual  state  is.  These  do 
ordinarily  give  the  best  and  surest  measure  of  the  frame  of  men's  minds.  What 
thoughts,  then,  evidence  the  spiritual  state  of  men?  Not  occasional  thoughts.  Not 
such  as  arise  from  strong  convictions,  that  come  on  us  suddenly.  Not  such  as  arise 
from  apparent  Divine  desertions.  Despairing  thoughts  are  no  sure  evidence  of  the 
condition  of  souls.  Not  such  as  arise  from  violent  temptations.  Not  such  as  arise 
from  men's  particular  calling  and  manner  of  life.  Not  such  as  arise  from  attend- 
ance upon,  and  the  performance  of,  religious  duties.  The  religious  discourse  of 
others  may  produce  pious  thoughts  in  an  unregenerate  person.  A  man  may  read 
God's  Word  and  be  yet  far  from  the  kingdom.  So  he  may  attend  the  preaching  of 
the  Word,  and  even  pray,  without  having  more  than  surface  thoughts.  Answer- 
ing the  question  affirmatively,  mention  may  be  made  of  voluntary  thoughts,  such  as 
the  mind  is  apt  for  and  inclines  towards.  Four  qualifications  must  attend  them  if 
they  are  to  be  a  complete  rule  and  a  perfect  standard  of  trial.  They  must  be 
natural,  numerous,  satisfactory,  and  operative.  Let  us  each  see  to  it  that  our 
thoughts  be  such  as  evidence  us  to  be  holy  persons.  Practise  frequent,  serious, 
and  close  examination.  {Nathanael  Walter.)  The  heart-state  : — The  body  is  not 
the  man.  Our  bodies  die.  Neither  are  a  man's  words  himself.  Words  are  often 
used  to  conceal,  to  misrepresent,  to  counterfeit.  Neither  is  it  possible,  universally, 
to  discern  the  essence  of  character  in  action.  What  good  man  is  there  who  has 
not  again  and  again  failed  to  do  himself  justice  in  his  life  ?  Often,  on  the  other  ,  / 
hand,  actions  are  much  more  beautiful  than  the  thoughts  of  the  heart.  Thetl/ 
essence  of  human  character  is  found  in  the  heart.  It  is  the  disposition,  it  is  the 
heart-state,  which  is  the  true  man.  This  test  of  human  character  is  a  just  one,  ^  / 
for  our  life  is  a  progress,  is  in  the  direction  of  the  reaUsation  of  this  heart-state.  ^/ 
Action  is  but  heart-expression.  The  heart-thought,  or  purpose,  is  the  true  man. 
Not  only  is  human  progress  towards  the  reaUsation  of  this  heart-state,  but  the 
separation  of  the  man  from  this  fuU  expression  and  realisation  of  his  inner  desire 
is  not  a  matter  of  his  own  choice  or  creation,  and  therefore  cannot  enter  as  an 
element  into  his  character.  The  field  open,  covered  by  the  human  choice,  is  only 
this,  present  desire.  It  often  happens  that  a  man  is  to  a  certain  extent  kept 
under  the  power  of  religious  truth  who  is  in  heart  utterly  disloyal  to  the  Divine 
law.  When  the  hfe  differs  from  the  heart  the  latter,  not  the  former,  must  be 
regarded  as  the  true  man.  Sooner  or  later  the  fuU  coincidence  between  the 
external  and  internal  is  inevitable ;  the  full  expression  of  the  heart  is  sure  to  come. 
1.  Tendency  is  everything  in  the  moral  world.  2.  Explain  the  different  destinies 
of  the  Christian  and  un-Christian  life.  3.  Abstain  from  all  judgment  of  your 
fellow-men.  4.  Encourage  those  who  are  true  and  good  at  heart.  {S.  S.  Mitchell, 
D.D.)  Thought  the  index  of  character  : — I.  This  is  the  Hebrew  way  of  telling  us 
in  a  casual  word  about  feasting  that  a  uas'b  inuost  thineino  is  ths  tbtte  insxx 


555  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  rxm.  / 

^ I' 

TO  HIS  CHAKACTER.    Talk  is  Superficial.    The  lip  gives  a  smiling  welcome  whilst  a  '     ■ « 
lofty  disdain  is  in  the  heart.     Mellifluous  speech  often  comes  from  a  malign  spirit,  / 
whilst   "groanings  that  cannot  be  uttered"  are  signs  of  a  yearning  supremely 
Divine.     To  the  perfect  ear  of  God,  who  catches  the  faintest  quiver  of  hypocrisy  in 
our  devotion,  and  the  lightest  tone  of  insincerity  in  our  song,  our  "  words  "  justify 
or  condemn  us  ;  but  to  our  dull  and  insensitive  organs  they  are  unreliable  signs,  , 

and  our  conclusions  from  them  require  to  be  corrected  and  qualified  by  the  study  ^  ^ 
of  other  data.  We  are,  therefore,  driven  back  upon  the  Hebrew  teaching  that  &^_fly 
man  is  built  up  from  within ;  that  as  he  does  his  inward  work — all  his  inwardl*^  f 
work — so  he  is  in  character,  being,  and  power.  He  must  be  a  whole  man  in  hifl 
thinking  in  order  to  be  to  all  intents  and  in  all  respects  a  man ;  for  manly  thinking, 
according  to  our  ancient  Scriptures,  lies  at  the  basis  of  manhood.  H.  Christianity 
accepts  and  endorses  this  inward  and  broad  basis  of  manhood,  and  employs  its 
fact  and  revelation,  impulse  and  inspiration,  to  secuee  a  thorough  regeneration 
OF  man's  inmost  life.  It  seeks  to  re-create  him  as  a  thinker,  refuses  to  look  on 
the  mere  "  scholar "  as  the  full  man,  and  works  on  the  Hebrew  idea,  lately 
re-announced  by  Emerson,  that  the  true  notion  of  manhood  is  "  man  thinking ;  not 
man  the  victim  of  society  and  a  mere  thinker,  or  still  worse,  the  parrot  of  other 
men's  thinking" — but  man,  thinking  " in  his  heart,"  with  all  his  inward  forces, 
conscience  and  will,  fancy  and  emotion,  hope  and  experience — thinking  in  the 
whole  of  him,  and  with  the  whole  of  him,  and  for  the  whole  of  him  and  his  race, 
and  so  making  speech  the  clear,  full,  and  indivisible  echo  of  his  thought,  and 
deed  the  visible  garment  of  his  inward  Ufe.  God  means  us  to  be  men,  and  He 
evokes  the  forces  of  an  inward  Ufe  by  compelling  us  to  wield  the  sword  with  our 
full  strength  against  the  enemy.  For  as  a  man  battles  for  truth  in  his  heart,  so 
is  he.  Cowardly  thinking  makes  a  weak  and  poor  life.  Christ  creates  inward 
courage,  heroic  daring  for  reality  and  right,  and  renews  the  manHness  of  the 
world.  HI.  This  is  a  thinking  age.  The  sluggard  intellect  has  received  an 
unparalleled  awakening,  and  thinking  of  nearly  all  kinds  is  proceeding  with  astonish- 
ing celerity  and  productiveness.  The  manliest  thinking  is  done  with  the  heart, 
i.e.,  with  the  whole  of  the  inner  forces  of  the  life.  IV.  Modern  thinking,  ignoring 
the  BibUeal  rule,  is  smitten  with  the  blight  of  cowardice,  falls  a  victim  to 
unreality,  and  lacks,  notwithstanding  its  pride,  Lutheran  courage,  holy  daring,  and 
self-devotl-n.  Young  men,  do  not  be  misled  by  the  syren  of  a  false  peace.  Truth 
is  a  prize  to  be  won  by  strenuous  battle  with  the  shows  and  pretences  of  error, 
and  the  shock  of  downright  attack  with  the  foes  of  faith  ought  only  to  whet  desire, 
quicken  appetite,  and  concentrate  your  forces  so  that  you  may  become  master  of 
the  situation.  Give  to  your  thinking  the  courage  of  the  heart,  the  force  of  a 
resolute  energy,  the  patience  of  an  inflexible  will,  and  as  sure  as  you  are  true  to 
your  whole  self  God  will  be  found  of  you  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  become  the  sun- 
shine of  your  life  and  the  joy  of  your  heart.  V.  Another  form  of  this  mistake  is 
that  WE  EXPECT  TOO  much  to  be  done  by  mere  thinking.  Science  thinks  every- 
thing out,  and  we  want  to  make  all  life  scientific,  and  so  we  take  out  of  it  our 
personal  trusts,  and  the  subtle  ministry  of  the  reflex  action  of  deeds  on  our  thoughts. 
Convert  thought-out  truth  into  loyalty  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  obedience  to  His  laws. 
Courageous   deed,  following   intrepid   thinking,  made   the  Eeformation.     VI.  No 

THINKING     IS     manly   WHICH     FAILS     TO     TAKE    ADEQUATE    ACCOUNT     OF     THE     FORCE    OF 

INTENSE  MORAL  ENTHususMS.  It  is  piovable  that  only  in  the  white  heat  of  a 
glowing  passion  for  an  ethical  goal  have  we  the  clearest  vision  of  eternal  fact. 
Vn.  Again,  the  thinking  that  is  of  the  brain  only  and  not  of  the  heart  is 
IN  serious  danger  of  passing  over  the  "unseen"  order  and  treating  it  as 
though  it  did  not  exist.  It  ignores  the  invisible  forces  which  somehow  or  other, 
and  from  somewhere  or  other,  undeniably  find,  move,  and  educate  men.  VIII.  But, 
above  all  things,  do  not  let  us  be  alarmed  at  any  of  the  mistakes  and  mis- 
chiefs  THAT   CAUSE   DISOBEDIENCE   TO   THE   CHRISTIAN   LAW   OF   MANLY   THINKING.      We 

need  have  no  misgiving  about  the  future.  Man  is  essentially  a  thinker  and  a  unit, 
and  he  must  think  towards  unity,  and  truth,  and  perfection.  Be  his  mistakes 
numberless,  he  cannot  stop.  He  is  made  for  God.  "  God  is  his  refuge  and  strength, 
a  very  present  help  in  trouble  "  ;  therefore,  after  every  temporary  eclipse,  the  Sun 
of  Bighteousness  will  break  forth  and  reveal  again  the  way  to  the  Father.  {J. 
Clifford,  D.D.\  Thought : — The  capacity  of  thinking  is  a  most  wonderful 
thing.  Here  lies  man's  supremacy  over  all  the  visible  world  about  him.  All 
great  undertakings,  the  glorious  enterprises  of  men  for  men's  salvation,  were  once 
only  thoughts.     The  character  of  a  man's  thoughts  determines  the  character  of 


CHAP,  rxni.]  PROVERBS.  557 

his  life.  His  actions  are  inspired  from  within.  Every  product  of  the  soul,  whether 
it  be  an  action  or  a  purpose,  is  first  a  germ.  Sin  lies  in  the  soul  in  germs — in 
germs  as  well  as  in  actions.  The  moral  success  of  life  consists  in  killing  evil 
thoughts  in  the  germ.  'There  are  few  purer  and  richer  pleasures  in  this  world 
than  the  enjoyment  of  sweet  thoughts,  happy  thoughts,  holy  thoughts.  The  heart 
determines  our  everlasting  destiny.  A  heart  without  holiness  never  shall  see  the 
Lord.     Christ  is  the  only  purifier  of  the  heart.     {Theodore  L.  Cuyler,  D.D.) 

Vers.  10,  11.  Their  Redeemer  is  mighty. — Social  injustice  : — I.  Social  injustice 
INDICATED.  "Eemove  not  the  old  landmarks."  What  are  the  landmarks ?  Therights 
of  man  as  man.  1.  Everyman  has  a  right  to  personal  freedom.  2.  To  the  produce 
of  his  own  labour.  3.  To  freedom  in  religion.  II.  Social  injustice  perpetrated 
ON  the  helpless.  '*  Enter  not  into  the  fields  of  the  fatherless. "  Orphans  have  their 
rights.  There  are  villains  in  society  who  perpetrate  outrages  on  orphans.  1.  This 
is  cowardly.  2.  This  is  cruel.  3.  This  is  common.  III.  Social  injustice  judi- 
cially REGARDED  BY  GoD.  "Their  Eedeemer  is  mighty."  Eedeemer  here  means 
"  next  of  kin."  The  mighty  God  is  the  protector  of  the  helpless.  (D.  Thomas, 
D.D.)  The  fatherless  : — These  are  taken  under  God's  special  protection;  with 
Him  they  not  only  find  mercy  shown  to  them,  but  justice  done  for  them.  He  is 
their  Eedeemer,  their  God,  their  near  kinsman,  that  will  take  their  part,  and  stand 
up  for  them  with  jealousy,  as  taking  Himself  affront  in  the  injuries  done  to  them. 
He  is  mighty — almighty  ;  His  omnipotence  is  engaged  and  employed  for  their  pro- 
tection, and  their  proudest  and  most  powerful  oppressors  will  not  only  find  them- 
selves an  unequal  match  for  this,  but  will  find  that  it  is  at  their  peril  to  contend  with 
it.  Every  man  must  be  careful  not  to  injure  the  fatherless  in  anything,  or  to  invade 
their  rights.  Being  fatherless,  they  have  none  to  redress  their  wrongs,  and,  being 
in  their  childhood,  they  do  not  so  much  as  apprehend  the  wrong  that  is  done  them. 
Sense  of  honour,  and  much  more  the  fear  of  God,  would  restrain  men  from  offering 
any  injury  to  children,  especially  fatherless  children.     {Matthew  Henry.) 

Ver.  12.  Apply  thine  heart  unto  instruction,  and  thine  ears  to  the  words  of 
knowledge. — Spiritual  knowledge  : — I.  Because  of  its  own  worth.  A  knowledge 
of  the  creation,  its  elements,  laws,  objects,  extent,  is  valuable,  but  a  knowledge  of 
the  Creator  is  infinitely  more  valuable.  "  This  is  life  eternal,  to  know  Thee,  the 
only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ,  whom  Thou  hast  sent."  II.  Because  man  is 
PRONE  TO  OVERLOOK  THE  IMPORTANCE  of  tMs  knowledge.  It  is  sad,  that  that  which 
man  requires  most  he  cares  least  for,  that  the  most  priceless  treasure  is  least 
valued.  III.  Because  to  attain  it  there  must  be  personal  application.  "Apply 
thine  heart  unto  instruction."  It  is  a  knowledge  that  cannot  be  imparted  irre- 
spective of  the  use  of  man's  own  faculties.  He  must  apply  persistently,  earnestly, 
devoutly.  (Homilist.)  The  heart  and  the  ears: — Observe  the  connection  between 
the  application  of  the  heart  and  the  ears.  The  heart  open  to  sound  advice  or  moral 
precept  is  yet  shut  to  Christ  and  His  doctrine.  It  is  closed  up  in  unbelief,  prejudice, 
indifference,  and  the  love  of  pleasure.  A  listless  heart,  therefore,  produces  a  careless 
ear.  But  when  the  heart  is  graciously  opened,  softened,  and  enhghtened,  the 
attention  of  the  ear  is  instantly  fixed.  This,  indeed,  is  the  Lord's  creative  work  ; 
yet  wrought  by  a  God  of  order  in  the  use  of  His  own  means.  Awakened  desire 
brings  to  prayer.  Prayer  brings  the  blessing.  And  precious  then  is  every  word  of 
knowledge.     (C  Bridges,  M.A.) 

Ver.  15.  My  son,  if  thine  heart  be  wise,  my  heart  shall  rejoice,  even  mine. — The 

happy  parent : — I.  The  attainment  required.  A  pious  youth  is  said  to  be  wise  in 
heart.  1.  To  show  us  that  reUgion  is  wisdom.  2.  That  this  wisdom  is  not  notional, 
but  consists  principally  in  dispositions  and  actions.  Eeligion  has  to  do  "  with  the 
heart " ;  and  a  knowledge  that  does  not  reach  the  heart,  and  govern  the  heart,  is 
nothing.  II.  The  consequence  anticipated.  Pious  children  afford  their  parents 
pleasure  on  three  principles.  1.  A  principle  of  benevolence.  2.  Of  piety.  God  is 
particularly  pleased  and  glorified  by  the  sacrifices  of  early  religion.  3.  Of  self- 
interest.  Distinguish  between  self-interest  and  selfishness.  The  piety  of  children 
affords  parents  evidence  of  the  answer  of  their  prayers  and  the  success  of  their 
endeavours,  and  so  delights  them.  It  becomes  a  means  of  their  usefulness.  By 
such  children  parents  hope  to  serve  their  generation.  It  ensures  to  parents  a 
proper  return  of  duty.  And  it  will  free  them  from  a  thousand  bitter  anxieties, 
such  as  are  caused  by  children's  removal  from  home  ;  taking  any  important  step  in 


558  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxin. 


life ;  or  being  bereaved  of  their  dearest  relations.  Conclusion :  1.  Address  those 
who,  instead  of  a  joy  to  their  parents,  are  only  a  grief.  2.  Address  parents.  Have 
you  conscientiously  discharged  your  duty  towards  your  children  ?  If  you  have,  and 
nevertheless  find  your  "house  not  so  with  God  "  as  you  desire,  yield  not  to  despair. 
Never  cease  to  pray  and  to  admonish.  Some  shower  of  rain  may  cause  the  seed, 
which  has  long  been  buried  under  the  dryness  of  the  soil,  to  strike  root  and  spring 
up.  (TF.  Jay.)  Religion,  triie  wisdom  : — I.  Why  religion  may  be  desceibed  as 
TRUE  WISDOM.  1.  As  it  iuvolves  the  possession  and  right  application  of  knowledge. 
2.  As  it  gives  the  first  attention  to  the  most  momentous  concerns.  3.  As  it  adopts 
the  most  likely  means  for  securing  these  great  ends.  4.  As  it  secures  the  greatest 
amount  of  good  both  for  the  present  and  the  future.  II.  The  importance  of  this 
TO  YOUNG  PEOPLE.  1.  Bccause  of  their  necessary  inexperience.  2.  Because  of  the 
countless  perils  which  surround  them.  3.  Because  the  future  circumstances  of 
life  depend  much  upon  the  course  adopted  in  youth.  III.  The  certain  means  of 
its  attainment.  1.  There  must  be  a  deep  conviction  of  its  need  and  value.  2.  There 
must  be  the  hearty  and  simple  application  of  faith,  for  its  realisation.  8.  Let 
this  resolution,  and  application  of  devout  earnestness  and  faith,  be  adopted  now. 
In  conclusion,  present  the  subject  to  your  serious  attention — (1)  By  the  evils  of 
neglecting  religion ;  and — (2)  The  moral  loveliness  and  excellency  connected  with 
devout  and  serious  piety.  {J.  Burns,  D.D. )  Parental  wishes  : — Persons  may  form 
a  judgment  of  their  own  dispositions  from  their  wishes  about  their  children. 
Worldly  men  make  it  their  great  work  to  provide  those  .things  for  their  children 
which  they  account  their  own  best  things.  Saints  desire  above  aU  things  that  the 
hearts  of  their  children  may  be  richly  furnished  with  wisdom,  and  that  their  lips 
may  speak  right  things  ;  for  the  heart  is  the  throne  of  Wisdom,  and  by  the  Ups  she 
discovers  her  possession  of  that  throne.     (George  Lawson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  17.  Let  not  thine  heart  envy  sinners :  but  be  thou  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord 
all  the  day  long. — Envy  of  sinners  forbidden,  and  the  fear  of  God  enjoined : — 
I.  Some  of  the  reasons  why  men  very  frequently  are  induced  to  envt 
sinners.  1.  They  perhaps  see  them  possessed  of  wealth,  in  the  enjoyment  of 
many  outward  comforts,  and  encircled  with  the  means  of  gratification ;  and 
these  are  things  after  which  human  nature  hankers.  The  idea  of  happiness 
is  commonly  connected  with  the  possession  of  them.  But,  surely,  to  envy 
these  fleeting  possessions  little  becomes  a  wise  man.  Surely  his  lot  is  not  to 
be  desired  who  lives  here  under  the  Divine  displeasure,  and  who  must  very 
shortly  endure  the  righteous  judgment  of  a  justly  oiiended  God.  2.  But  we 
find  men  sometimes  disposed  to  envy  sinners  on  account  of  the  apparent  freedom 
from  care  and  anxiety  in  which  they  live.  But  that  gay  unconcern  about  eternal 
things  which  is  attributed  to  them  we  ought  to  commiserate  rather  than  envy. 
3.  But  whatever  circumstances  in  the  condition  of  the  sinner  men  may  admire, 
unbelief  is  the  source  from  which  all  envy  of  his  lot  must  proceed.  II.  The  nature 
AND  effects  of  THE  FEAR  OF  THE  LoED.  1.  It  IS  not  a  fear  of  Him  as  an  irre- 
sistible and  implacable  enemy  ;  but  it  is  a  fear  grounded  on  a  just  perception  of 
the  excellency  of  the  Divine  character,  connected  with  love  to  Him,  and  with  an 
expectation  of  the  largest  blessings  from  His  hand.  2.  But  what  are  the  effects 
which  the  fear  of  God  will  produce?  (1)  In  the  first  place,  it  will  lead  to  repentance 
for  sin,  accompanied  by  an  earnest  desire  of  reconciliation  to  God,  and  of  the 
restoration  of  His  favour.  (2)  But  again,  the  fear  of  God  is  the  only  principle 
which  can  lead  a  man  to  an  universal  and  unreserved  obedience  to  His  commands. 
(B.  Scott,  M.A.)  The  cure  for  envy  : — The  cure  for  envy  lies  in  living  under  a 
constant  sense  of  the  Divine  presence,  worshipping  God  and  communing  with  Him 
all  the  day  long,  however  long  the  day  may  seem.  True  religion  lifts  the  soul  into 
a  higher  region,  where  the  judgment  becomes  more  clear,  and  the  desires  are  more 
elevated.  The  more  of  heaven  there  is  in  our  lives,  the  less  of  earth  we  shall  covet. 
The  fear  of  God  casts  out  the  envy  of  men.  The  death-blow  of  envy  is  a  cahn 
consideration  of  the  future.  The  wealth  and  glory  of  the  ungodly  are  a  vain  show. 
This  pompous  appearance  flashes  out  for  an  hour,  and  then  is  extinguished.  What 
is  the  prosperous  sinner  the  better  for  his  prosperity  when  judgment  overtakes 
him  ?  As  for  the  godly  man,  his  end  is  peace  and  blessedness,  and  none  can  rob 
him  of  his  joy ;  wherefore,  let  him  forego  envy,  and  be  filled  with  sweet  content. 
(C.  H.  Spurgcon.)  The  nature  and  advantages  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord  : — 
Scarcely  anything  has  a  more  immediate  influence  upon  our  duty  or  comfort  than 
the  due  government  of  our  passions.     Hence  the  wise  and  virtuous,  in  aU  ages, 


CHAP,  xxiu.]  PROVERBS.  659 

have  employed  themselves  in  fonning  rules  for  their  regulation.  But  it  is  found 
more  easy  to  prescribe,  than  to  reduce  these  rules  to  practice.  The  religion  of  Jesus 
provides  the  assistance  requisite  to  enable  us  to  comply  with  rules.  I.  What  is  it 
TO  BE  IN  THE  TEAK  OF  THE  LoED  ALL  THE  DAT  LONG  ?  Fear  is  a  passiou  of  the  human 
mind,  and  stands  opposed  to  hope.  It  always  has  for  its  object  some  evil,  real  or 
supposed.  Here  its  object  is  the  evil  and  danger  of  sinning  against  God,  and  the 
just  displeasure  of  God,  in  consequence  of  offending  Him.  To  fear  these  is  to  fear 
the  Lord  in  the  best  sense  of  the  phrase.  We  should  live  under  the  habitual 
influence  of  this  holy  temper,  and  carry  it  with  us  into  all  the  duties  of  the  reUgious 
and  social  life.  11.  Why  should  we  study  to  be  in  the  feak  of  the  Loed  all  the 
DAY  long  ?  1.  It  is  an  excellent  guard  against  the  commission  of  sin.  The  man 
cannot  knowingly  and  deliberately  sin  against  God  who  has  a  suitable  sense  of  His 
being,  perfections,  character  and  government.  2.  It  reaUy  assists  us  in  the  right 
performance  of  duty.  It  greatly  tends  to  invigorate  the  graces  of  the  Spirit  in  the 
soul,  and  to  call  them  forth  into  lively  exercise.  3.  It  excites  us  to  the  important 
duty  of  watchfulness,  and  greatly  assists  us  therein.  4.  God  recommends  this  duty 
to  our  study  and  practice,  by  His  Divine  authority.  Then  if  you  would  be  in  the 
fear  of  the  Lord — (1)  Study  to  acquire  more  and  more  of  the  knowledge  of  God  :  the 
knowledge  of  His  perfections,  character,  and  government ;  especially  as  they  are 
manifested  in  and  through  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  (2)  Be  much  frequent  in 
meditating  upon  the  Divine  perfections.  (3)  Be  much  in  the  great  duties  of  prayer 
and  watchfulness.  {John  Rodgers,  D.D.)  Of  the  duty  of  fearing  God  : — The  fear 
of  the  Lord  is  sometimes  the  whole  duty  of  man  ;  sometimes  the  devotional  duties 
of  religion.  I.  The  teue  notion  of  feaeing  God.  1.  It  must  be  such  a  fear  as 
includes  in  it  a  high  degree  of  love.  Then  we  shall  make  a  difficulty  of  nothing 
He  commands.  Then  our  service  of  Him  will  be  rendered  more  acceptable.  2.  It 
includes  it  in  a  generous  hope  and  confidence.     Hope  is  the  spring  of  industry. 

II.    The  influence  this  fear   has    to  SUPPEESS   in    us   all   envious  and    DISQUIETIHa 

THOUGHTS.  By  a  holy  fear  we  secure  to  ourselves  an  interest  in  His  special  pro- 
vidence and  protection  and  grace  here,  and  in  the  promises  of  glory  and  eternal 
life  hereafter.  HI.  Peoper  motives  and  aeguments  to  enfoece  this  duty  op 
feaeing  God.  1.  From  the  consideration  of  His  infinite  power  and  majesty. 
2.  From  His  intimate  knowledge  of  all  our  thoughts,  words,  and  actions,  and  of 
the  secret  springs  of  them.  3.  The  consideration  of  God's  justice.  He  hath 
appointed  a  day  wherein  He  will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness.  This  is  an 
irresistible  argument  to  excite  us  to  the  practice  of  piety.  (R.  Fiddes,  D.D.)  The 
principle  by  which  each  person  is  to  be  perpetually  governed : — Many  mistake  by 
viewing  religion  as  separate  from  common  life,  and  as  hardly  to  be  made  to  accord 
with  it.  I.  The  PRINCIPLE  WHICH  IS  TO  ACTUATE  us.  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord."  The 
fear  attends  the  whole  of  religion.  1.  As  a  quality,  to  temper  the  whole  ;  to  bind 
doctrine  and  knowledge ;  to  keep  confidence  from  growing  up  into  rank  presumption, 
and  liberty  from  degenerating  into  licentiousness.  2.  As  a  quickener,  to  excite 
and  to  enliven  the  whole.  H.  The  extensiveness  op  its  influence.  To  be  in 
the  fear  shows  the  frequency  of  its  exercise,  and  of  its  invariable  constancy. 
See  the  attributes  of  this  fear  as  regards  —  1.  Devotions,  regular  and  ejacu- 
latory.  2.  The  business  of  the  day.  3.  The  trials  of  the  day.  4.  Its  relaxation, 
recreation,  and  refreshment.  5.  The  company  of  the  day.  6.  The  opportunities 
and  occasions  of  the  day.  HI.  The  advantage  op  its  habitualness.  1.  It 
will  render  religion  more  easy  and  pleasant.  2.  It  will  render  your  religion 
more  obvious  and  certain.  It  furnishes  the  best  evidences  of  its  reality.  Then  be 
concerned  to  exercise  diligence.  (1)  All  the  day  long  you  are  in  danger.  (2)  God 
is  all  day  long  doing  you  good.  (3)  All  the  day  long  you  are  observed,  even  by 
your  feUow-creatures,  much  more  than  you  are  aware  of.  (4)  You  are  account- 
able aU  the  day  long.  (W.  Jay.)  The  wicked  not  to  be  envied  : — I.  What  is  it 
m  sinners  that  we  are  apt  to  envy  ?  1.  Many  sinners  have  much  money.  Riches 
are  not  necessary  to  any  man.  Still,  human  nature  is  so  weak  and  so  corrupt  that 
but  few  men  can  look  at  the  wealthy  without  envying  them.  2.  Sometimes  the 
wicked  seem  to  have  a  great  deal  of  pleasure.  Take  their  word  for  it,  and  no  people 
are  so  happy.  Those  who  have  not  health,  or  money,  or  time  thus  to  live  at  ease, 
are  very  apt  to  envy  these  lovers  of  pleasure.  3.  Some  sinners  seem  to  get  many 
of  the  honours  of  life.  They  seek  the  honour  that  cometh  from  man,  and  they 
have  their  reward.  Sniy  people  stand  off  and  admire  and  envy.  4.  Some  envy 
the  wicked  for  their  apparent  freedom  from  restraint.  The  law  of  God  does  not 
bind  them  any  further  than  suits  themselves.    To  a  carnal  mind  this  looks  like  a 


660  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxnx. 

fine  way  of  getting  through  the  world,  and  the  foolish  envy  these  lawless  ones. 
6.  Sometimes  sinners  seem  to  be,  and  for  a  long  time  are,  free  from  afflictions,  which 
so  much  distress  the  righteous.  IT.  There  is  no  good  grottnd  for  preferring  the 
STATE  OF  sinners.  There  is  really  no  Divine  blessing  permanently  resting  on  the 
wicked,  as  there  is  on  the  righteous.  There  is  also  a  sad  amount  of  alloy  mixed 
up  with  all  that  sinners  have.  The  passions  of  sinners  are  at  war  with  each  other 
and  with  mankind.  The  devices  of  the  wicked  will  ruin  them.  The  wicked  are 
not  without  smitings  of  conscience.  All  nature  is  armed  against  the  wicked. 
Instead  of  envying  sinners,  pity  them  and  pray  for  them.  Let  the  righteous 
show  that  they  are  pleased  with  the  choice  which  they  have  made.  (W.  S.  Plumer, 
D.D.)  Divine  providence : — The  text  is  a  persuasive  to  contentment  and  satis- 
faction with  Divine  providence,  which  permits  wicked  men  to  flourish  for  awhile, 
enforced  with  this  reason,  that  there  is  a  reward  laid  up  for  all  such  as  trust 
in  God  and  meekly  submit  to  His  will.  1.  Let  the  times  be  never  so  perilous 
and  dangerous,  yet  God's  providence  ought  not  to  be  questioned  by  us,  whatever 
its  unequal  distributions  be.  Answering  the  objection  that,  if  God's  providence 
governs  all  the  issues  and  events  of  things,  virtue  should  never  go  unrewarded, 
plead  that  there  is  no  man  but  has  grievously  sinned  against  the  Lord.  Therefore 
they  can  have  no  cause  to  question  His  justice  in  their  suffering.  Besides  this,  it 
may  be  urged  that  affliction  is  a  proof  of  God's  tender  love  and  kindness  ;  that  the 
prosperity  of  the  wicked  often  turns  to  their  hurt  and  disadvantage ;  and  that  the 
day  of  judgment  will  set  all  things  right.  2.  Show  how  we  are  to  demean  our- 
selves under  the  actual  oppressions  of  prosperous  wickedness.  The  best  course'for 
a  man  to  take  is  to  hold  himself  to  God,  to  trust  in  Him,  and  order  himself  according 
to  His  will.  3.  We  must  not  go  out  of  the  road  of  duty,  and  do  as  the  wicked  do, 
because  we  see  them  prosper.  4.  The  flourishing  condition  of  the  wicked  is  but 
short-lived,  and  therefore  not  to  be  envied.  5.  There  is  an  assured  reward,  if  ye 
have  patience  awhile,  and  meekly  submit  to  the  will  of  God  in  His  providential 
administrations.  Then  seek  to  live  so  that  God  may  bless  you  with  the  continuance 
of  His  blessings.  {T.Knaggs,M.A.)  All  the  day  long : — I.  The  prescribed  course 
OF  THE  BELIEVER.  "  Be  thou  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  all  the  daylong."  We  must  be 
in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  before  we  can  remain  in  it.  The  fear  is  for  all  the  day,  and 
for  every  day.  Some  have  a  religion  of  show,  others  a  religion  of  spasms.  Ours 
must  never  be  a  religion  that  is  periodic  in  its  flow,  like  certain  intermittent  springs. 
Beware  of  the  godliness  which  varies  with  the  calendar.  Note  the  details  which 
are  comprised  in  this  exhortation.  Kemember  not  merely  to  associate  religion  with 
the  routine  of  life,  but  also  with  special  occasions.  There  are  excellent  reasons 
for  being  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  all  the  day  long.  He  sees  us  all  the  day  long. 
Sin  is  equally  evil  all  the  day  long.  You  always  belong  to  Christ.  You  can  never 
tell  when  or  how  Satan  will  attack  you.  Your  Lord  may  come  at  any  hour. 
n.  The  PROBABLE  INTERRUPTION.  It  has  happened  to  godly  men  in  all  ages  to  see 
the  wicked  prosper,  and  they  have  been  staggered  by  the  sight.  There  is  no  real 
cause  for  envying  the  wicked  ;  and  envying  them  will  do  you  serious  harm.  Envy 
helps  in  no  way,  and  hinders  in  many  ways.  III.  The  helpful  consideration. 
1.  There  is  an  end  of  this  life.  2.  There  is  an  end  of  the  worldling's  prosperity. 
3.  God  has  an  end  in  your  present  trouble  and  exercise.  4.  There  will  be  no 
failure  to  your  expectation.  The  promise  of  God  is  in  itself  a  possession,  and  our 
expectation  of  it  is  in  itself  an  enjoyment.  (C.  H.  Sturgeon.)  A  caution  against 
envy  and  a  call  to  piety : — I.  A  serious  caution.     This   should   be  regarded — 

1.  Because  envy  is  a  disposition  of  mind  whose  influence  can  never  be  justified. 

2.  Because  to  envy  sinners  is  absurd.  U.  The  admonitory  precept.  This  implies 
— 1.  To  be  in  possession  of  correct  and  spiritual  ideas  of  His  holy  and  exalted 
character.  2.  To  cultivate  suitable  dispositions  of  heart  towards  Him.  III.  An 
ENCOURAGING  ASSERTION.  "  For  surely  there  is  an  end,"  &c.  1.  There  is  an  end  to 
that  prosperity  with  which  the  efforts  of  sinners  are  crowned.  2.  There  is  an  end 
to  the  tribulation  of  the  saints.  3.  The  expectation  of  those  who  continue  in  the 
fear  of  the  Lord  shall  not  be  cut  off.  Human  expectations  are  cut  off  by  slothful 
and  indolent  habits,  and  by  unforeseen  occurrences.  Instead  of  envying  sinners, 
saints  should  pity  them,  pray  for  them,  set  them  good  examples,  and  try  to  save 
them.     {Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermons.) 

Ver.  18.  Burely  there  is  an  end. — The  end  .• — ^Let  religion  be  the  very  atmosphere 
in  which  you  live  and  move  and  have  your  being;  and  the  reason  for  this  is,  "surely 
there  is  an  end."    I.  The  solemn  certainty  which  nobody  can  deny.    1.  All  our 


CHAP.  TSUI.]  PROVERBS.  S61 

actions,  thoughts,  feelings,  capabilities,  everything  about  us,  relations'  and  all  the 
rest  of  it,  will  come  to  a  close,  and  leave  behind  them  consequences  that  never  come 
to  a  close.  Behind  everything  something  else  lies,  and  that  afterwards  is  made  by 
the  present,  and  is  an  outcome  of  it.  The  fleeting  events  and  fugitive  thoughts  and 
feelings  and  actions  of  our  daily  life,  that  pass  away  and  are  forgotten,  all  leave 
behind  them  consequences  which  grow  and  grow  for  ever  and  ever.  2.  Everything 
we  do  here  will  mould  our  character  and  help  to  make  ourselves,  and  will  spring 
up  after  many  days.  That  is  true  of  life  and  of  the  great  hereafter  beyond 
life.  n.  The  bright  possrBiiiiTrES  which  go  along  with  this  text.  The 
hereafter  to  which  the  end  of  life  is  the  narrow  portal  shall  more  than  fulfil 
all  thy  expectations.  Take  Christ  for  your  Saviour,  and  Master,  and  then  swift- 
footed  time  may  work  His  will ;  when  this  wide  earth  and  all  its  fleeting  scenes  will 
change,  you  will  be  brought  to  the  fulfilment  of  aU  your  hopes,  receiving  the  end  of 
your  faith,  even  the  salvation  of  your  souls.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Duties  and 
reasons : — The  words  of  the  text  contain — I.  Duties.  1.  The  avoidance  of  envy. 
Envy  is  that  affection  which  causes  grief  at  the  happiness  and  prosperity  of  others. 
It  is  associated  with  maliciousness.  It  is  derived  from  a  Latin  word  signifying  "not 
to  see."  The  name  is  therefore  characteristic.  Why  should  not  sinners  be  envied? 
Because  it  is  foolish  to  do  so.  It  is  a  false  supposition  that  they  are  happy  because 
they  possess  temporal  advantages.  Because  it  is  unjust.  Because  it  is  un-Christian. 
We  are  taught  by  God  to  pity  and  pray  for  sinners.  2.  A  reverence  for  God.  This 
fear  is  not  slavish,  that  urges  us  to  flee  from  danger,  but  filial.  Divinely  wrought  in 
the  soul.  11.  Eeasons.  All  obligations  are  founded  on  reasons.  1.  There  is  an 
end  to  the  sinner's  prosperity.  There  is  an  end  to  every  Christian's  trials.  2.  God 
here  promises  to  realise  the  expectations  of  those  who  fear  Him.  What  do  they 
expect?  Their  temporal  wants  supplied.  Deliverance  from  dangers.  Help  in 
trouble.  Grace  to  restrain  from  sin,  to  sanctify  their  souls,  and  to  prepare  them 
for  heaven.  These  expectations  shall  not  be  cut  off.  (T.  Harland.)  The 
afterwards  and  our  hope : — The  Book  of  Proverbs  seldom  looks  beyond  the  limits  of 
the  temporal,  but  now  and  then  the  mists  lift  and  the  wider  horizon  is  disclosed. 
Our  text  is  am  of  these  exceptional  instances,  and  is  remarkable,  not  only  as 
expressing  confidence  in  the  future,  but  as  expressing  it  in  a  very  striking  way. 
"  Surely  there  is  an  end,"  says  our  Authorised  Version,  substituting  in  the  margin, 
for  end,  "  reward."  The  latter  word  is  placed  in  the  text  of  the  Revised  Version. 
But  neither  "  end  "  nor  "  reward  "  conveys  the  precise  idea.  The  word  so  translated 
literally  means  "  something  that  comes  after."  So  it  is  the  very  opposite  of  "  end  " ; 
it  is  really  that  which  lies  beyond  the  end — the  "  sequel,"  or  the  "  future  " — as  the 
margin  of  the  Eevised  Version  gives  alternately,  or,  more  simply  still,  the  "  After- 
wards." Surely  there  is  an  afterwards  behind  the  end.  And  then  the  proverb  goes 
on  to  specify  one  aspect  of  that  afterwards:  "Thine  expectation" — or,  better, 
because  more  simply,  "  thy  hope" — shall  not  be  cut  off.  And  then,  upon  these  two 
convictions  it  builds  the  plain,  practical  exhortation ;  "  Be  thou  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord 
all  the  day  long."  I.  The  certainty  of  the  hereafter.  My  text,  of  course,  might 
be  watered  down  and  narrowed  so  as  to  point  only  to  sequels  to  deeds  realised  in 
this  life.  And  then  it  would  be  teaching  us  simply  the  very  much-needed  lessons 
that  even  in  this  life  "  whatsoever  a  man  soweth  that  shall  he  also  reap."  But  it 
seems  to  me  that  we  are  entitled  to  see  here,  as  in  one  or  two  other  places  in  the 
Book  of  Proverbs,  a  dim  anticipation  of  a  future  life  beyond  the  grave.  Now,  the 
question  comes  to  be.  Where  did  the  coiners  of  proverbs,  whose  main  interest  was  in 
the  obvious  maxims  of  a  prudential  morality,  get  this  conviction  ?  They  did  not 
get  it  from  any  lofty  experience  of  communion  with  God,  hke  that  which  in  the 
seventy-third  Psahn  marks  the  very  high-water  mark  of  Old  Testament  faith  in 
regard  to  a  future  hfe.  They  did  not  get  it  from  any  clear  definite  revelation,  such 
as  we  have  in  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ,  but  they  got  it  from  thinking  over 
the  facts  of  this  present  life  as  they  appeared  to  them,  looked  at  from  a  standpoint 
of  a  beUef  in  God,  and  in  righteousness.  And  so  they  represent  to  us  the 
impression  that  is  made  upon  a  man's  mind,  if  he  has  the  "  eye  that  has  kept 
watch  o'er  man's  mortality,"  that  is  made  by  the  facts  of  this  earthly  life,  viz., 
that  it  is  so  full  of  onward-looking,  prophetic  aspect,  so  manifestly  and  tragically, 
and  yet  wonderfully  and  hopefully,  incomplete  and  fragmentary  in  itself,  that  there 
must  be  something  beyond  in  order  to  explain,  in  order  to  vindicate  the  life  that 
now  is.  You  sometimes  see  a  row  of  houses,  the  end  one  of  which  has,  in  its  outer 
gable  wall,  bricks  protruding  here  and  there,  and  holes  for  chimney-pieces  that  are 
jet  to  be  put  in.    And  just  as  surely  as  that  external  wall  says  that  the  row  is  half- 

37 


5C2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxm. 

built,  and  there  are  some  more  tenements  to  be  added  to  it,  so  surely  does  the  life 
that  we  now  live  here,  in  all  its  aspects  almost,  bear  upon  itself  the  stamp  that  it, 
too,  is  but  initial  and  preparatory.  You  sometimes  see,  in  the  bookseller's  catalogue, 
a  book  put  down  "  volume  one  ;  all  that  is  published."  That  is  our  present  life — 
volume  one,  all  that  is  published.  Surely  there  is  going  to  be  a  sequel,  volume  two. 
What  is  the  meaning  of  the  fact  that  of  all  the  creatures  on  the  face  of  the  earth 
only  you  and  I,  and  our  brethren  and  sisters,  do  not  find  in  our  environment  enough 
for  our  powers  ?  What  is  the  meaning  of  the  fact  that  lodged  in  men's  natures 
there  lies  that  strange  power  of  painting  to  themselves  things  that  are  not  as  though 
they  were  ?  So  that  minds  and  hearts  go  out  wandering  through  eternity,  and 
having  longings  and  possibilities  which  nothing  beneath  the  stars  can  satisfy,  or 
can  develop?  The  meaning  of  it  is  this  :  "  surely  there  is  a  hereafter."  God  does 
not  so  cruelly  put  into  men  longings  that  have  no  satisfaction,  and  desires  which 
never  can  be  filled,  as  that  there  should  not  be,  beyond  the  gulf,  the  fair  land  of  the 
hereafter.  Every  human  life  obviously  has  in  it,  up  to  the  very  end,  the  capacity 
for  progress.  There  may  be  masters  in  workshops  who  take  apprentices,  and  teach 
them  their  trade  during  the  years  that  are  needed,  and  then  turn  round  and  say, 
"  I  have  no  work  for  you,  so  you  must  go  and  look  for  it  somewhere  else."  That  is 
not  how  God  does.  When  He  has  trained  His  apprentices  He  gives  them  work  to 
do.  "  Surely  there  is  a  hereafter."  But  that  is  only  part  of  what  is  involved  in  this 
thought.  It  is  not  only  a  state  subsequent  to  the  present,  but  it  is  a  state 
consequent  on  the  present,  and  the  outcome  of  it.  To-day  is  the  child  of  all  the 
yesterdays,  and  the  yesterdays  and  to-day  are  the  parent  of  to-morrow.  The  past, 
our  past,  has  made  us  what  we  are  in  the  present,  and  what  we  are  in  the 
present  is  making  us  what  we  shall  be  in  the  future.  And  when  we  pass  out  of  this 
life  we  pass  out,  notwithstanding  all  changes,  the  same  men  as  we  were.  And  so  we 
carry  ourselves  with  us  into  that  future  life,  and  "  what  a  man  soweth  that  shall  he 
also  reap."  "  Oh !  that  they  were  wise,  that  they  understood  this,  that  they  would 
consider  their  '  afterwards.'  "  II.  Now,  secondly,  my  text  suggests  the  immoetalitt 
OF  HOPE.  "  Thine  expectation  " — or  rather,  as  I  said,  "  thy  hope  " — "  shall  not  be 
cut  off."  This  is  a  characteristic  of  that  hereafter.  What  a  wonderful  saying  that 
is  which  also  occurs  in  this  Book  of  Proverbs,  "  The  righteous  hath  hope  in  his 
death  " !  Ah  !  We  all  know  how  swiftly,  as  years  increase,  the  things  to  hope  for 
diminish,  and  how,  as  we  approach  the  end,  less  and  less  do  our  imaginations  go 
out  into  the  possibilities  of  the  sorrowing  future.  And  when  the  end  comes,  if  there 
is  no  afterward,  the  dying  man's  hopes  must  necessarily  die  before  he  does.  If 
when  we  pass  into  the  darkness  we  are  going  into  a  cave  with  no  outlet  at  the  other 
end,  then  there  is  no  hope,  and  you  may  write  over  it  Dante's  grim  word :  "  All  hope 
abandon,  ye  who  enter  here."  "  The  righteous  hath  hope  in  his  death."  "  Thine 
expectation  shall  not  be  cut  off."  But,  further,  that  conviction  of  the  afterward 
opens  up  for  us  a  condition  in  which  imagination  is  surpassed  by  the  wondrous 
reality.  Here,  I  suppose,  nobody  ever  had  all  the  satisfaction  out  of  a  fulfilled  hope 
that  he  expected.  The  fish  is  always  a  great  deal  lai'ger  and  heavier  when  we  see 
it  in  the  water  than  when  it  is  lifted  out  and  scaled.  But  there  does  come  a  time, 
if  you  believe  that  there  is  an  afterwards,  when  all  we  desired  and  painted  to 
ourselves  of  possible  good  for  our  craving  spirits  shall  be  felt  to  be  but  a  pale  reflex 
of  the  reality,  like  the  light  of  some  unrisen  sun  on  the  snowfields,  and  we  shall 
have  to  say  "the  half  was  not  told  to  us."  III.  And  now,  finally,  notice  the 
BEAEiNO  OF  ALL  THIS  ON  THE  DAILY  PRESENT.  "  Be  thou  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  all 
the  day  long."  Why,  if  there  were  no  future,  it  would  be  just  as  wise,  just  as 
blessed,  just  as  incumbent  upon  us  to  "  be  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  all  the  day  long." 
But,  seeing  that  there  is  that  future,  and  seeing  that  only  in  it  will  hope  rise  to  fruition, 
and  yet  subsist  as  longing,  surely  there  comes  to  us  a  solemn  appeal  to  "be  in 
the  fear  of  the  Lord  all  the  day  long,"  which,  being  turned  into  Christian  language, 
is  to  live  by  habitual  faith,  in  communion  with,  and  love  and  obedience  to,  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  Surely,  surely  the  very  climax  of  folly  is  shutting  the 
eyes  to  that  future  that  we  all  have  to  face,  and  to  live  here  ignoring  it  ;i,ul  God, 
and  cribbing,  cabining,  and  confining  all  our  thoughts  within  the  narrow  limits  of 
the  things  p'-esent  and  visible.  "  Surely  there  is  an  afterwards,"  and  if  thou  wilt 
"  be  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  all  the  day  long,"  then  for  evermore  "  thy  hope  shall 
not  be  cut  off."     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Ver.  19.  Hear  thou,  my  son,  and  be  wise,  and  guide  thine  heart  in  the  way. — 
Three  important  precepts : — The   words   are   very  direct   and   personal.     I.  Th» 


CHAP,  xsiii.]  PROVERBS.  563 

PRECEPT  CONTAINED  IN  THE  WORD  "  HEAR."  I  take  it  to  mean,  "Hear  the  gospel." 
"  Take  heed  what  ye  hear."  1.  Take  care  that  you  hear  with  a  view  to  obtaining 
faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  2.  Hear  without  prejudice.  3.  Hear  for  yourself. 
4.  Hear  when  the  sermon  is  done.  5.  Hear  the  gospel  as  the  voice  of  God.  He 
that  hath  an  ear  towards  God  will  find  that  God  hath  an  ear  towards  him. 
n.  The  precept  contained  in  the  words  "be  wise."  1.  Try  to  understand  what 
you  hear.  Try  to  know  saving  truth.  2.  Believe  the  gospel  as  it  comes  from  God. 
This  is  an  age  of  doubt.  But  it  does  not  take  any  great  quantity  of  brain  to  be  a 
doubter.  3.  Be  affected  by  what  you  have  heard.  4.  Take  care  that  you  do  not 
wander  into  evil  company.     5.  Take  care  to  do  what  you  hear.     HI.  The  precept 

CONTAINED     IN    THE    WORDS    "GUIDE    THINE    HEART    IN    THE    WAT."         There    is    but    OUB 

"way."  The  "way"  is  often  described  in  Scripture.  It  is  the  way  of  faith  ;  of 
truth ;  of  holiness  ;  of  peace.  It  is  a  narrow  way.  Then  put  your  heart  into  your 
religion.      (C.   H.   Spurgeon.)  The  self-discipline  suitable  to   certain  mental 

moods  : — In  our  course  through  life  our  minds  are  liable  to  be  placed  in  certain 
states  of  feeling,  strongly  marked,  and  for  the  time  strongly  prevailing.  And  this 
by  causes,  by  influences  and  circumstances,  independent  of  our  wiU.  We  might 
call  them  moods — by  some  they  are  denominated  frames.  These  states  of  feeling 
should  be  carefully  turned  to  a  profitable  account ;  we  should  avail  ourselves  of 
what  there  is  in  them  specially  adapted  to  afford  improvement.  The  states  of 
feeling  to  which  we  refer  are  such  as  are  not  essentially  evil.  They  may  be  called 
a  kind  of  natural  seasons  in  the  soul.  These  varied  feelings  are  of  the  two  great 
classes,  the  pleasing  and  the  unpleasing ;  the  latter  being  felt  oftener  and  more 
sensibly.  Take  the  image  of  a  person  in  a  high  state  of  exhilaration ;  his  soul  over- 
running with  delight,  his  countenance  lighted  up  with  animation.  What  will  be 
the  benefit  of  this  if  he  do  not  exercise  reflection,  if  he  do  not  "  guide  his  heart "  ? 
It  may  lead  to  direct  evil.  At  the  best,  he  will  just  indulge  himself  in  the  fulness 
of  his  satisfaction.  He  will  have  no  use  of  his  delight  but  to  enjoy  it.  One  point 
of  wisdom  in  such  a  case  may  be,  somewhat  to  repress  and^sober  such  an  exhilaration 
of  the  heart.  Some  of  this  exhilaration  should  be  directed  into  the  channel  of 
gratitude  to  God.  It  should  lead  a  man  to  watch  narrowly  to  see  what  kind  of 
nature  he  has  to  be  acted  upon ;  a  sad  nature,  truly,  if  he  finds  that  the  more  its 
wishes  are  gratified  the  worse  it  becomes,  if  left  to  itself.  The  spring  and  energy  of 
apirit  felt  in  these  pleasurable  seasons  of  the  heart  should  be  applied  to  the  use  of 
a  more  spirited  performance  of  the  Christian  duties  in  general,  but  especially  to 
those  that  are  the  most  congenial.  How  much  time  is  passed  by  mankind 
collectively  in  a  state  of  feeling  decidedly  infelicitous,  as  compared  with  their 
experience  of  animated  pleasure !  And  how  small  a  portion  of  this  painful  feeling 
is  turned  to  any  good  account !  There  are  occasional  states  of  darkened,  gloomy 
feehng,  in  which  sensibility  becomes  pensiveness,  and  gravity  sadness.  The 
immediate  cause  may  have  been  some  untoward  turn  of  events ;  some  painful 
disappointment,  or  death  of  friends,  or  constitutional  tendency,  or  defective  health. 
But  this  infeUcitous  season  of  the  soul  may  be  turned  to  lasting  advantage.  When 
the  disorder  is  mainly  due  to  bodily  conditions,  expedients  of  alleviation  may 
properly  be  sought.  But  at  such  times  opportunity  is  given  for  serious  consideration. 
Are  there  no  great  and  solemn  questions  which  you  have  hitherto  left  undecided  ? 
This  is  reasonable  pleading.  It  is  but  requiring  that  a  man  should  not  be  willing 
to  come  out  from  a  temporary  and  special  state  of  feeling  without  having  availed 
himself  of  that  advantage  which  it  has  specially  offered  him.  Apply  to  another 
state  of  feeling — an  indignant  excitement  of  mind  against  human  conduct. 
{John  Foster.) 

Ver.  23.  Buy  the  truth,  and  sell  it  not. — A  domestic  homily  on  Jmying  the  truth : 
When  the  wise  man  counselled  his  pupil  to  "  buy  the  truth,"  he  had  the  whole 
range  of  truth  before  his  mind :  truth  in  history,  in  science,  in  social  economics, 
in  morals,  and  in  religion.  It  is  a  slander  that  revelation,  or  the  religion  which 
accepts  revelation  as  its  guide,  seeks  the  shade  of  ignorance  and  demands  to  lead 
its  devotees  blindfolded  through  the  universe.  Revelation  demands  light,  and  ever 
more  light.  The  words  of  the  text  are  a  warrant  for  aU  investigation  that  has  truth 
for  its  object.  But  it  more  especially  refers  to  moral  and  religious  truth.  I.  The 
TRUTH  IS  AN  EMINENTLY  DESIRABLE  POSSESSION.  Truth  is  Capable  of  bccoming  much 
more  intimately  and  inseparably  the  possession  of  a  man  than  any  of  those  things 
which  men  usually  call  their  possessions.  The  truth  bought  secures  to  men  the 
great  end  of  all  possessions  —  blessedness.    The  truth  restores  conscience  to  an 


664  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xnn. 

active  and  undisputed  sovereignty,  harmonises  the  will  and  the  reason,  and  casts 
out  the  foreign  elements  -which  have  disturbed  the  movements  of  the  inner  life. 
II.  It  is  our  duty  to  secttbe  the  tbtjth  as  our  possession.  "Buy."  Do  not 
stand  chaffering  about  it ;  promptly  make  it  your  own.  1.  We  must  go  in  quest  of 
it.  A  man  must  be  assiduous,  painstaking,  persevering  in  his  search.  And  he 
must  be  cautious.  2.  We  must  approach  Truth,  and  live  with  her,  trustfully.  The 
intellect  may  assent,  while  the  soul  remains  sceptical,  and  stands  aloof.  3.  The 
truth  must  be  obeyed.  She  enters  the  soul  as  a  queen.  She  demands  to  dictate 
every  action,  to  shape  every  plan,  to  control  every  feeling.  There  is,  perhaps,  no 
utterly  conclusive  evidence  of  what  is  strictly  moral  or  religious  truth,  but  that  of 
the  inward  witness,  which  speaks  in  the  soul  of  the  man  who  is  living  in  the  truth  ; 
that  is,  cordially  and  spontaneously  obeying  it.  4.  We  must  be  ready  to  make 
sacrifice  for  the  truth.  Prejudices  must  be  sacrificed.  Tastes,  appetites,  and 
passions,  which  the  truth  cannot  sanction,  must  be  sacrificed.  If  we  are  to  get 
and  hold  the  truth  we  must  search,  trust,  obey,  and  make  sacrifice.  {Alex. 
Hannay,  D.D.)  Buying  the  truth  : — To  be  said  of  all  truths,  but  especially  of 
the  highest.  I.  How  is  truth  bought  ?  In  one  sense  it  is  free  as  air,  but  in 
seeking  and  keeping  it  we  make  surrenders.  Labour  and  search  may  need  to  be 
paid.  Prejudice,  pride  of  heart,  illusions  broken.  Sins  of  heart  and  life  forsaken. 
Esteem  of  friends  and  of  the  world  may  need  to  be  parted  with.  II.  How  teuth 
MAT  BE  SOLD.  Not  wheu  it  is  communicated  ;  thereby  we  buy  more.  But  when  it 
is  not  communicated,  when  it  is  betrayed  from  fear  or  allurement,  when  it  is  held 
in  unrighteousness,  selfishness,  treachery,  inconsistency,  we  sell  the  truth. 
ni.  Why,  when  bought,  it  should  never  be  sold.  It  has  a  value  beyond  all 
you  can  get  for  it.  Its  value  grows  the  longer  you  keep  it.  It  buys  all  other  good 
things  at  last.  When  sold,  it  is  hard  to  be  bought  back.  {John  Ker,  D.D.)  Buy 
the  truth,  sell  it  not : — I.  Inquire  what  truth  is.  Of  truths  there  are  many 
kinds.  1.  Those  proper  to  the  studies  of  great  scholars.  2.  Those  concerning  the 
preservation  of  our  bodies.  3.  Those  concerning  the  making  and  executing  of 
laws.  4.  Those  relating  to  husbandry,  tillage,  and  business.  The  truth  here  is 
«'  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus."  11.  The  nature  and  quality 
or  THIS  MERCHANDISE.  It  contaiueth  all  those  precepts  and  conclusions  that 
concern  the  knowledge  and  service  of  God,  and  that  conduce  to  virtue  and  integrity 
and  uprightness  of  life.  This  truth  is  fit  and  proportionable  to  the  soul  of  man, 
which  is  made  capable  of  it.  As  it  is  fitted  to  aU,  so  it  is  lovely  and  amiable  in  the 
eyes  of  all,  even  of  those  who  will  not  buy  it.  III.  The  truth  must  be  bought. 
It  wUl  not  be  ours  unless  we  lay  out  something  and  purchase  it.  We  do  not  stumble 
on  this  truth  by  chance.  If  men's  faith  cost  them  more,  they  would  make  more 
use  of  it  than  they  do.  IV.  What  is  it  to  buy  the  truth  ?  The  price  is  your- 
selves. Ye  must  lay  down  yourselves  at  the  altar  of  truth,  and  be  offered  up  as  a 
sacrifice  for  it.  You  must  offer  up  your  understandings,  your  wills,  and  your 
affections.  Give  up  your  prejudices.  Cast  away  all  malice  to  the  truth,  all 
distasting  of  it,  all  averseness  to  it.  What  helps  does  the  God  of  truth  afford 
us  for  the  obtaining  of  the  truth?  1.  Meditation,  or  fixing  of  our  thoughts  upon 
the  truth.  2.  Prayer,  which  draweth  down  grace.  3.  Exercise  and  practice  of 
those  truths  we  learn.  {A.  Farindon,  B.D.)  Buying  the  truth: — Truth  is  but 
one,  and  it  is  in  God,  and  of  God ;  nay,  it  is  God  Himself.  This  truth  is  from  Him 
conveyed  into  divers  things,  which  are  therefore  termed  true.  The  Word  is  the 
truth,  because  God  is  the  author  of  it ;  because  inspired  men  wrote  it ;  because 
Christ  confirmed  it ;  and  because  the  Spirit  of  Truth  interprets  it.  Buying  includes 
a  desire  of  the  commodity  ;  a  repairing  to  the  place  where  it  is  set  to  sale  ;  a  skill 
to  discern  and  know  the  goodness  of  it ;  giving  a  price  proportionable  to  the  value 
of  it;  and  a  storing  of  it  up  for  necessary  uses.  {S.  Hieron.)  The  birthright  of 
truth : — 1.  Truth  is  a  matter  of  purchase.  Truth  is,  in  itself,  one,  perfect,  and 
eternal.  To  us  it  is  a  growing  and  increasing  treasure.  The  truth  we  consider  is 
that  which  has  been  delivered  down  to  us  through  the  Scriptures.  We  get  truth  by 
having  the  eye  ever  open  to  observe  it ;  by  reading,  meditation,  and  conversation. 
II.  Truth  must  not  be  sold.  Amongst  other  shrines  at  which  we  shall  be 
tempted  to  sell  the  truth  is — 1.  The  commercial  spirit  of  the  day.  We  are  tempted 
by  the  mode  in  which  the  arrangements  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ  are  compelled  to 
make  way  for  the  arrangements  of  this  world.  This  absorption  of  mind  by  the 
spirit  of  earthly  gain  gives  little  time  for  religious  exercises,  and  breeds  an  inclina- 
tion to  extol  certain  business  virtues.  2.  Men  sacrifice  the  truth  on  the  altar  of  a 
narrow-minded  exclusiveness  in  the  application  of  the  privileges  and  blessings  of 


CHAP,  run.]  PROVERBS.  665 

truth.  Truth  is  lost  in  sectarianism.  3.  There  is  peril  for  truth  in  the  spirit  of 
rationalism  that  is  abroad.  (E.  Monro.)  The  price  of  truth  : — I.  What  it  costs 
TO  zKow  TRUTH.  By  truth  we  mean,  an  agreement  between  an  object  and  our  idea 
of  it.  We  want  to  know,  What  is  moral  truth  ?  What  is  universal  truth  ?  To 
attain  it,  take  seven  precepts.  Be  attentive.  Do  not  be  discouraged  at  labour. 
Suspend  your  judgment.  Let  prejudice  yield  to  reason.  Be  teachable.  Restrain 
your  avidity  of  knowing.  In  order  to  edify  your  mind,  subdue  your  heart.  II.  The 
WORTH  AND  ADVANTAGES  OF  TRUTH.  1.  It  will  Open  to  you  an  infinite  source  of 
pleasure.  2.  It  will  fit  you  for  the  various  employments  to  which  you  may  be 
called  in  society.  3.  It  will  free  you  from  many  disagreeable  doubts  about  religion. 
4.  It  wiU  render  you  intrepid  at  the  approach  of  death.  {Ibid.)  The  sale 
of  truth: — "  Sell  not  the  truth"  means — 1.  Do  not  lose  the  disposition  of  mind, 
the  aptness  to  universal  truth,  when  ye  have  acquired  it.  2.  It  reproves  those 
mercenary  souls  who  trade  with  their  wisdom  and  seU  it,  as  it  were,  by  the  penny. 
3.  By  selling  may  be  understood,  betraying  truth.  To  betray  truth  is,  through  any 
sordid  motive,  to  suppress,  or  to  disguise,  things  of  consequence  to  the  glory  of 
religion,  the  interest  of  a  neighbour,  or  the  good  of  society.  There  are  six  orders 
of  persons  who  may  sell  truth — 1.  The  courtier.  2.  The  indiscreet  zealot.  3.  The 
apostate.  4.  The  judge.  5.  The  politician.  6.  The  pastor.  (Ibid.)  Buy 
the  truth  : — The  meaning  of  the  exhortation  seems  to  be,  that  we  should  endeavour 
to  acquire  that  happy  disposition  of  soul  which  will  make  us  give  to  every  question 
the  time  and  attention  it  deserves  ;  to  every  proof  its  due  force  ;  to  every  diflSculty 
its  full  weight ;  and  to  every  advantage  its  true  value.  But  this  disposition  cannot 
be  had  for  nought ;  it  must  be  acquired  by  attention  and  toil :  it  must  be  bought  by 
the  sacrifice  of  dissipation  and  of  indolence.  We  can  easily  observe  in  what  narrow 
bounds  the  mind  of  man  is  confined ;  how  defective  its  powers  are,  and  how  limited 
their  operations.  If,  therefore,  when  it  is  necessary  to  consider  some  combined 
proposition,  we  do  not  bestow  upon  it  proportionable  attention,  we  shall  infalUbly 
overlook  some  of  its  properties,  and,  consequently,  our  conclusion  will  be  partial 
and  absurd.  This  reasoning  is  confirmed  by  invariable  experience :  for  every  man 
may  remember  some  things  which  have  appeared  false  or  true,  certain  or  doubtful, 
according  to  the  hurry  or  the  attention  with  which  he  examined  them.  To  acquire 
this  habitual  attention  is  commonly  a  toilsome  work,  and  therefore  demands  the 
sacrifice  of  our  indolence.  The  labour  of  the  mind  is  evidently  more  wearisome 
than  that  of  the  body :  for  we  may  see  the  greatest  part  of  mankind  submitting 
without  repugnance  to  the  heaviest  bodily  toil,  rather  than  suffer  that  which  is 
mental.  This  labour,  however,  is  surmountable ;  and,  like  all  others,  by  custom, 
may  be  rendered  easy.  Exercise  is  therefore  necessary  to  acquire  the  faculty  of 
continued  attention,  which,  when  once  acquired,  will  enable  us  to  compare  the 
most  sublime  ideas,  and  to  investigate  the  most  abstruse  parts  of  knowledge.  Then 
shall  we  reckon  as  nothing  the  sacrifices  we  have  made ;  and  the  truth,  when  we 
have  obtained  it,  wiU  never  be  deemed  too  dear.  It  will  open  to  us  a  fruitful 
source  of  pleasures ;  it  wUl  form  us  to  fill  with  propriety  our  different  employments ; 
it  wLU  rid  us  of  all  troublesome  scruples ;  and  render  us  intrepid  at  the  approach 
of  death.  The  placid  and  serene  pleasures  of  the  intellect  are  beyond  comparison 
sweeter  than  those  which  are  excited  merely  by  the  gross  organs  of  sense,  or  by  the 
more  turbulent  passions  of  the  soul.  And  if  the  pleasure  of  advancing  in  human 
knowledge  be  very  great,  as  it  is  universally  allowed  to  be,  what  charms  must 
accompany  the  attainment  of  that  knowledge  which  concerns  the  things  of  immor- 
tality I  It  is  in  retirement  that  our  attention  can  exert  its  fuU  force,  and  consider 
religion  in  all  its  views.  Truth  will  enable  us,  besides,  to  fill  with  propriety  the 
different  employments  to  which  we  are  called  in  society.  A  man  who  has  cultivated 
his  mind  wiU  distinguish  himself  in  every  station ;  and  a  man  whose  way  of  thinking 
is  erroneous  or  futile,  will  in  every  station  be  pitied  or  despised.  Truth  wiU,  more- 
over, free  us  from  every  importunate  and  troublesome  scruple.  "To  be  tossed 
about  with  every  wind  of  doctrine  "  is  a  most  violent  situation ;  and  yet  it  is  a 
situation  which  none  can  avoid,  except  those  who  are  seriously  engaged  in  the 
study  of  truth,  or  those  who  are  utterly  insensible.  Finally,  the  value  of  truth 
appears  in  the  serenity  which  it  procures  at  the  approach  of  death.  The  famous 
story  of  Cato  Uticensis  is  well  known.  Having  resolved  to  quit  this  world,  he 
wished  much  to  be  assured  that  there  was  another.  For  this  purpose  he  read  over 
attentively  Plato's  book  concerning  the  immortaUty  of  the  soul ;  and  the  reasonings 
of  that  philosopher  satisfied  him  so  fuUy,  that  he  died  with  the  greatest  tranquilli^. 
He  saw  beyond  the  grave  another  Bome,  where  tyranny  coold  have  no  dominion. 


56«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxm. 


where  Pompey  could  be  no  more  oppressed,  and  Caesar  could  triumph  no  more.  Sc 
long  as  the  soul  fluctuates  between  light  and  darkness,  between  persuasion  and 
doubt ;  so  long  as  it  has  only  presumptions  and  probabilities  in  favour  of  religion  ; 
it  is  nearly  impossible  to  behold  death  without  dread  ;  but  the  Christian  who  is 
enlightened,  confirmed,  and  strengthened,  being  raised  above  its  power,  is  secure 
from  all  its  terrors.  If  Cato  the  heathen  could  brave  this  terrible  king,  what 
would  not  Cato  the  Christian  have  done?  (A.  Macdonald.)  Buy  the  truth  : — 
I.  The  value  and  importance  of  truth.  "Were  it  a  matter  of  equal  and  unavailing 
indifference  whether  we  embraced  truth  or  error,  what  advantages  could  be  derived 
from  the  culture  of  education,  from  the  progress  of  learning,  or  the  discoveries  of 
knowledge  ?  Were  this  maxim  once  admissible,  the  untutored  heathen,  and  the 
enhghtened  Christian  would  be  completely  on  a  level.  Were  truth  of  no  import- 
ance to  the  security,  the  welfare,  and  the  happiness  of  mankind,  what  occasion  is 
there  for  the  deep  researches  of  philosophers,  for  the  ardent  zeal  of  theologians, 
and  for  the  wearisome  labours  of  the  real  student  ?  But  in  the  awful  concerns  of 
religion,  where  the  salvation  of  the  soul  is  at  stake,  the  value  and  importance  of 
truth  rises  in  an  infinite  proportion !  II.  In  what  manner  we  must  but  it. 
Solomon  does  not  intimate  in  my  text  at  what  rate  we  must  buy  the  truth, 
because  we  cannot  buy  it  too  dear.  We  may  be  said,  then,  to  buy  the  truth  when 
we  devote  our  earthly  riches  to  the  attainment  and  diffusion  of  Christian  knowledge. 
For  it  has  been  well  remarked,  "  Riches  should  be  employed  for  the  getting  know- 
ledge rather  than  knowledge  for  the  getting  riches."  We  also  buy  the  truth  when 
we  pay  attention  to  the  means  of  obtaining  it.  Thus,  when  we  diligently  search 
the  Holy  Scriptures,  and  make  them  our  chief  study,  when  we  pray  to  God  in 
secret,  and  when  we  strictly  regard  the  ordinances  of  the  gospel,  we  then  bestow 
some  pains  to  know  the  truth,  in.  The  danger  and  guilt  of  selling  it.  {John 
Grose,  M.A.)  The  practical  value  of  opinions: — There  is  hardly  anything  so 
plain  in  respect  to  human  duty,  that  a  vsrong  state  of  moral  feeling  may  not  cause 
it  to  be  doubted,  or  even  to  be  denied.  It  is  an  every-day  occurrence  to  hear  the 
value  of  truth  disputed.  The  usual  form  is  this — "It  is  no  matter  what  a  man 
believes  if  his  life  is  only  right."  The  assertion  sounds  familiar  and  trite,  yet  on 
examination  it  will  appear  to  be  one  of  the  most  glaring  and  self-evident  of  false- 
hoods. To  act  right  without  knowledge  is  hardly  less  a  practicable  thing  than  to 
see  without  the  proper  organs.  Consider  what  is  necessary  to  be  done  in  order  to 
prove  the  position  true  that  it  is  no  matter  what  a  man  beheves  on  religious  subjects 
if  his  life  be  right.  It  must  be  shown  either — 1.  That  there  are  no  certain  truths 
pertaining  to  religion  ;  or  else— 2.  That  these  truths  have  no  necessary  connection 
with  the  conduct  of  men ;  or — 3.  That  the  consequences  of  their  conduct,  whether 
right  or  wrong,  will  be  the  same.  Our  conclusion  is,  that  it  is  not  to  be  expected 
that  the  conduct,  the  lives  of  men,  will  be  materially  better  than  their  opinions  ;  by 
opinions  understanding  the  actual  living  convictions  of  their  minds.  It  is  therefore 
an  imperative  duty  to  set  a  high  value  upon  truth  in  our  religious  thinking. 
Eeligious  opinions  should  not  only  be  firmly  fixed;  they  should  also  be  right 
opinions.  [R.  Palmer,  D.I).)  Buy  the  truth,  and  sell  it  not : — In  every  subject 
there  is  a  "truth"  somewhere.  The  original  of  "truth" — the  mould  in  which  it 
is  all  first  cast — must  be  the  mind  of  God.  But,  how  do  these  great  archetypes  of 
the  mind  of  God  reach  and  impress  themselves  upon  the  mind  of  man  ?  First, 
God  has  given  us  revelation  to  be  their  reflector.  But  because  the  most  important 
"truth  "  of  all  truths  to  us  is  how  a  sinner  can  be  saved— how  a  just  God  can 
forgive  a  rebel — therefore,  as  Christians,  we  generally  call  the  gospel  "  the  truth." 
And  well  it  deserves  the  name  I  But  the  teaching  of  one  who  had  a  right  to  speak, 
from  the  largest  experience,  perhaps,  that  any  man  had,  is,  that  "  truth  "  is  hard 
to  get  and  difficult  to  retain.  "Buy  the  truth,  and  sell  it  not."  And  what  is  the 
cost  of  "  truth  "  ?  You  must  get  out  of  the  littlenesses  and  narrownesses  of  party 
feeling.  You  must  go  high  enough  to  have  large  views  of  things.  Next,  you 
must  feel  and  act  as  an  infant  in  intellect,  being  conscious  of  weakness  and 
ignorance — even  in  your  strongest  point;  willing  to  be  taught.  Whatever  your 
talent  may  be,  you  can  never  purchase  "  truth  "  but  by  fag.  There  must  be  a  real 
expenditure  of  hard  work.  And  you  must  build  up  carefully,  accurately,  syste- 
matically; taking  nothing  for  granted.  And  your  prayers  must  not  be  easy, 
common-place  things.  But  now,  I  would  suppose  that  the  contract  is  complete, 
and  that,  with  the  necessary  expenditure — much  effort  and  much  prayer — you  have 
bought  the  "  truth,"— some  "  truth  " — little  it  may  be,  but  real  and  genuine.  Let 
me  give  you  a  caution,     "  Truth  "  is  a  precious  treasure.     But  where  there  is  a 


CHAP,  xxm.]  PROVERBS.  667 

treasure  there  the  robbers  will  come  1  And  they  wiU  come  very  deceptively.  Not 
by  force,  but  by  artifice.  And  they  will  pretend  to  "  buy."  But  the  bargain  is 
ruinous!  For  it  is  one  thing  to  "buy,"  and  it  is  another  thing  to  "sell";  and 
men  often  will  give  us  very  little  for  that  for  which  we  have  given  a  great  deal ! 
It  will  be  a  bad  bargain  if  you  seU  "  truth  "  at  any  price.  But  many  things  will 
lure  you.  It  may  be  a  little  love  of  making  an  excitement,  which  will  tempt  you 
to  exaggerate  the  "  truth  " ;  and  if  you  exaggerate  it,  you  have  weU-nigh  lost  it. 
Or  it  may  be  a  love  of  popularity,  which  makes  you  wish  to  please  every  one  with 
■whom  you  are,  and  therefore  to  accommodate  your  views  to  everybody ;  and  you 
pare  off  a  little  on  the  one  side,  and  you  add  a  little  on  the  other  side,  till  the 
whole  shape  and  character  is  changed,  and  the  "  truth  "  comes  out  no  "  truth  "  at 
all.  Or  it  may  happen  that  "  truth,"  which  you  feel  to  be  "  truth,"  stands  in  the 
way  of  your  worldly  interest,  and  you  are  tempted  to  sacrifice  it  on  the  altar  of 
fame  or  mammon.  Or  the  prejudices  of  your  social  position,  or  your  professional 
ideas,  lead  you  to  view  and  present  "  truth  "  under  such  a  medium  as  shall 
altogether  misrepresent  and  well-nigh  pervert  it.  Or  mere  indolence  may  creep 
over  you,  and  you  may  give  away  to  carelessness  what  you  once  obtained  by  so 
great  an  outlay  !  And  it  often  takes  as  much  to  keep  "  truth  "  as  it  does  to  get  it. 
A  httle  worldliness,  a  little  frittering  of  pleasures,  will  enervate  the  very  fibre  of 
"  truth."  And  still  more  and  more  solemnly,  one  vice  can  emasculate  all  "  truth." 
If  a  man  continue  in  sin,  the  "  truth  "  must  go.  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Bartering 
for  eternity  : — Some  of  the  characteristics  of  a  wise  spiritual  merchant.  1.  He  will 
not  neglect  to  take  an  account  of  stock.  2.  He  will  be  on  his  guard  against 
burglars.  3.  He  wUl  watch  the  state  of  the  markets.  4.  He  wiU  be  careful  to 
get  a  profit  out  of  everything  that  passes  through  his  hands.  5.  He  will  not  take 
any  unnecessary  risks.  (T.  Be  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  The  preciousness  of  the 
truth : — This  statement  is  not  to  be  understood  in  a  literal  or  commercial  sense. 
Following  the  figure  that  is  here  used,  see — I.  That  the  truth  ought  to  be  care- 
fully EXAMINED.  No  wlsc  man  buys  an  article  without  looking  very  closely  into 
it.  There  is  no  good  thing  but  has  its  counterfeits  and  imitations.  The  article 
we  are  here  advised  to  purchase  is  admitted  to  be  the  most  valuable  of  all  things, 
and  it  is  therefore  the  last  thing  that  should  be  taken  on  trust.  That  it  is  liable  to 
be  perverted  and  debased  we  aU  know.  The  great  Teacher  did  not  require  His 
hearers  to  take  His  declarations  upon  trust.  He  courted  and  even  demanded 
inquiry.  The  principle  of  private  judgment  may  be  abused.  H.  The  truth  has 
TO  BE  APPRAISED.  A  carcful  estimate  of  its  value  has  to  be  formed.  It  is  offered 
only  on  one  condition — the  sacrifice,  or  at  least  the  free  surrender  of  all  we  have. 

III.  To    COMPLETE    the     TRANSACTION     WE     MUST     CLOSE     WITH     THE    TERMS    ON    WHICH 

THE  ABTiCLE  IS  OFFERED.  The  truth  is  a  system  of  doctrine  and  discipline,  which 
needs    to    be    carefully   studied,   thoroughly    grasped,   and    diligently  improved. 

IV.  The  truth  can  never  be  sold,  except  at  a  serious  loss.  It  may  be  sold 
or  sacrificed — 1.  From  a  spirit  of  mere  cowardice.  2.  From  a  feeling  of  false 
charity  and  selfish  complaisance.  3.  By  being  accommodated  to  what  is  called 
"the  spirit  of  the  age."  (Walter  M.  Giloray,  D.D.)  The  important  purchase 
and  prohibited  sale  : — I.  The  commodity  recommended.  "  The  truth."  1.  There 
is  doctrinal  truth.  2.  There  is  experimental  truth.  8.  There  is  practical  truth. 
n.  The   counsel   given.      "Buy  the  truth."     To   obtain  the  truth  we  must — ■ 

1.  Come  to  the  mart  of  truth.  2.  Sacrifice  the  hindrances  to  truth.  3.  Employ 
the  means  truth  recommends.  HI.  Let  this  purchase  be  urged  by  several 
considerations.  1.  From  your  absolute  need  of  it.  2.  From  the  free  and  easy 
mode  of  its  acquisition.  3.  From  its  essential  worth.  When  possessed  it  must  be 
retained.     IV.  By  whom  is   the   truth   sold.     1.  By  the  mercenary  minister. 

2.  By  the  temporising  professor.  3.  By  the  false  speaker.  4.  By  the  flatterer. 
6.  By  the  backsUder.  V.  Reasons  why  we  should  not  sell  the  truth.  (J.  Burns, 
D.D.)  The  cost  of  religion  : — The  Bible  contains  the  truth  which  we  have  to 
buy.  He  that  has  a  religion  that  has  cost  him  nothing  has  a  religion  that  is  worth 
nothing.  You  cannot  be  religious  without  some  sacrifice.  It  costs  less  in  early 
than  in  later  Ufe.  [E.  Birch,  M.A.)  The  nature  and  importance  of  truth : — 
I.  What  truth  is.  By  truth,  I  mean  a  right  apprehension  of  all  those  things 
which  tend  to  promote  the  happiness  of  mankind.  This  includes  the  idea  of  aU 
virtuous  and  reUgious  obligations.  Truth,  in  its  utmost  latitude,  relates  to  a  variety 
of  things  which  are  matters  of  mere  speculation  only  ;  and  these  may  afford  some 
pleasure  to  men  of  deep  thought  and  learning.  But  that  truth  which  is  the  object 
of  all  men's  concern  has  a  more  immediate  respect  to  happiness.    And  this  consists 


568  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxm. 

in  a  right  knowledge  of  religion  and  virtue.  This  shines  in  practice  more  than  in 
speculation.  Other  truths  may  please  the  ear,  and  soothe  the  fancy ;  but  this 
improves  the  judgment,  and  mends  the  heart.  II.  We  SHorrLD  tjse  all  pkopeb 
MEANS  TO  OBTAIN  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  TRUTH.  It  is  absolutely  requisite  that  a  man 
should  first  know,  before  he  can  rightly  do,  what  is  good ;  and  therefore  if  the  soul 
of  man  be  ignorant  of  truth,  it  must  at  the  same  time  be  destitute  of  virtue ;  and 
if  it  be  destitute  of  virtue,  it  is  utterly  incapable  of  happiness.  Nor  is  the  search 
after  truth  less  pleasant  than  profitable.  For,  in  the  course  of  our  inquiry,  we 
must  contemplate  God,  nature,  and  ourselves.  In  contemplating  the  Divine  Being, 
what  a  spacious  field  of  pleasure  lies  open  to  the  mind  !  What  noble  transports 
must  the  soul  feel  from  a  view  of  Him,  who  is  the  fountain  of  perfection  ;  in  whom 
dwells  beauty,  knowledge,  truth,  wisdom,  virtue,  and  all  moral  excellence !  In 
the  contemplation  of  nature,  we  see  as  it  were  in  perspective  an  infinite  variety  of 
beautiful  appearances,  and  relations  of  things  to  each  other  ;  all  which  serve  to  fill 
the  mind  with  the  most  pleasing  ideas  of  beauty,  order,  and  harmony.  And  in  the 
survey  of  ourselves  we  may  observe  a  curious  machine  consisting  of  various 
springs  and  movements,  each  of  which  contributes  some  pleasure  or  advantage 
either  to  ourselves  or  others.  Again,  truth  is  the  most  beautiful,  as  well  as 
pleasant.  For  all  "  beauty  is  truth.  Thus,  in  architecture  true  proportions 
make  the  beauty  of  a  building.  In  music,  true  measures  make  the  beauty  of 
harmony ;  and  in  poetry,  which  deals  so  much  in  fable,  truth  still  is  the  founda- 
tion :  for  all  fiction  is  no  longer  pleasing  than  while  it  bears  a  resemblance  with 
truth."  And  so,  in  like  manner,  the  beauty  of  actions,  affections,  and  characters 
arises  from  honesty  and  moral  truth.  For  what  can  be  more  beautiful  than  just 
sentiments,  graceful  actions,  regular  passions,  and  agreeable  behaviour?  Thus 
nature  itself  leads  to  virtue,  and  truth  has  a  kind  of  moral  magic  in  it  which 
charms  irresistibly.  Who,  then,  would  refuse  at  any  rate  to  purchase  the  know- 
ledge of  truth,  which  is  so  pleasant,  so  beautiful,  so  advantageous  ?  But  in  this 
honest  way  of  merchandising  truth,  and  in  all  our  researches  after  it,  great  care 
must  be  taken  that  we  are  not  imposed  upon  either  by  ignorant  or  designing  men. 
Falsehood  often  courts  us  under  the  appearance  of  truth,  as  some  sort  of  glittering 
stones  will  counterfeit  true  diamonds.  Thus,  among  some  professors  of  Christianity, 
superstition  counterfeits  the  name  of  religion,  and  many  idle  ceremonies  pass 
current  instead  of  pure  substantial  virtue.  (To  prevent  this,  we  should  study 
human  nature,  and  the  nature  of  God,  so  far  as  He  is  discovered  to  us  by  the 
light  of  reason  and  revelation.  HI.  When  by  our  faithful  endeavours  we  have 
gained  the  truth  the  text  suggests  to  us,  wb  should  upon  no  consideration  part 
WITH  IT.  "Buy  the  truth,  and  sell  it  not."  If  truth  be  of  so  great  importance  as  to 
have  virtue,  religion,  and  even  happiness  depend  upon  it,  what  wise  man  would 
ever  part  with  it  ?  For  can  any  equivalent  be  given  for  the  loss  of  it  ?  And  why 
should  we  exchange  a  greater  for  a  lesser  good?  In  our  journey  through  this 
world  we  meet  with  many  rugged  ways  and  difficulties.  But  truth  will  lead  us 
safely  through  all  into  the  wished-for  haven.  All  worldly  goods  are  imperfect  and 
of  short  duration ;  but  truth  is  eternal  in  its  original,  and  will  never  fail  to  give 
complete  satisfaction  to  all  who  persevere  in  it.  But  you  will  ask.  When  may  we 
be  said  to  part  with  the  truth  ?  We  part  with  it  whenever  we  let  any  interest, 
prejudice,  or  passion  prevail  over  us,  contrary  to  the  dictates  of  right  reason.  As, 
therefore,  we  value  our  greatest  interest,  let  us  honestly  endeavour  to  know  the 
truth  ;  and  let  us  apply  ourselves  to  all  proper  means  for  this  purpose,  such  as 
reading,  conversation,  and  prayer  to  God.  The  same  honest  diligence  which  is 
used  in  learning  other  arts  and  sciences  will  bring  us  to  the  knowledge  of  all  that 
truth  which  is  necessary  for  any  to  know.  And  God  requires  no  more  of  us  than 
what  our  respective  capacities  and  opportunities  will  allow.  {N.  Ball.)  The 
merchandise  of  truth : — I.  The  valuable  commodity  requisite  for  human  life. 
Truth  is  that  commodity  which  feeds  the  moral  life.  1.  It  is  of  universal  compre- 
hension. 2.  It  is  of  common  necessity  and  fitness.  3.  It  is  a  thing  of  common 
end  in  life.  4.  It  is  the  crown  and  complement  of  life.  H.  The  commerce  of 
truth.  1.  One  compartment  in  the  market  of  truth  is  acquaintance  and  fair 
dealing  with  ourselves.  2.  Communion  with  the  Father  of  our  spirit.  3.  Study 
of  the  works  and  words  of  God.  4.  Acquaintance  with  humanity.  5.  Christian 
means  and  provision.  Truth  is  cheap  at  any  cost.  One  conditlbn  in  the  pursuit 
of  truth  is  a  high  and  holy  motive.  Another  is  right  use  of  our  powors  and  oppor- 
tunities. A  third  is  seeking  and  following  the  best.  A  fourth  is  submission  to  the 
Divine  will.    Another  is  pereeverance ;  and  another  faith.    III.  The  consebvativb 


CHAP,  xxm.]  PROVERBS.  669 

DDTT.  It  is  easy  in  the  sale,  but  difficult  to  buy.  Nothing  can  compensate  for  its 
absence.  The  sale  of  truth  always  means  an  unjust  bargain.  (T.  Hughes.) 
Truth  should  be  purchased,  but  never  sold : — I.  The  tbuth  is  a  peecious  thing. 
"  Buy  the  truth."  What  is  truth  ?  It  is  reality.  In  contradistinction  to  all  that 
is  fictitious  and  false.  1.  Eeality  in  relation  to  the  chief  good.  What  a  number 
of  false  theories  there  are  concerning  human  dignity  and  human  happiness. 
Truth  is  the  reality  of  these.  2.  Eeality  in  relation  to  personal  conduct.  There 
are  hollow  men,  sham  men.  Truth  makes  men  real.  Brings  their  conceptions 
into  perfect  accord  with  eternal  facts,  and  their  personal  conduct  into  perfect 
accord  with  their  conceptions.  Christ  is  embodied  truth.  The  preciousness  of  this 
truth  may  be  estimated  by  the  influence  it  has  exerted  on  the  race.  Intellectual 
truth  is  precious,  moral  ttuth  is  more  precious,  redemptive  truth  is  more  precious 
than  all.  II.  Tkuth  to  be  obtained  must  be  PUP.CHASEr>.  It  can  only  be  purchased 
by — 1.  Study.  2.  Devotion.  3.  Labour.  4.  Self-surrender.  III.  Truth  once 
purchased  should  never  be  sold.  "  Sell  it  not."  Truth  can  be  sold.  Judas  sold 
it.  It  can  be  sold  for  power,  for  fame,  for  worldly  pleasure,  &c.  "  Sell  it  not." 
If  you  sell  it,  you  sell  your  moral  usefulness.  You  sell  your  self-respect.  You  sell 
your  power  of  conscience.  You  sell  your  dignity.  Hold  it  as  Daniel,  Stephen,  and 
Paul  held  it.  (Homilist.)  The  highest  commerce  :  —  I.  The  importance  of 
ACQumiNG  THE  TKUTH.  1.  We  should  make  diligent  search  for  it.  2.  We  should 
be  wiUing  to  sacrifice  and  surrender  all  for  it.  3.  Again,  truth  must  be  obeyed  in 
order  to  be  made  our  own.  II.  The  impobtance  of  eetaining  the  truth.  "  Sell 
it  not."  We  should  not  part  with  it.  1.  Because  of  its  intrinsic  value.  2.  Because 
it  does  not  rise  and  faU  in  value  like  other  things.  The  markets  of  this  world  are 
for  ever  fluctuating,  &c.  Truth  is  ever  the  same.  3.  Because  it  can  be  appro- 
priated or  made  our  own  as  nothing  else  can.  "  A  man's  hfe  (weU-being)  consisteth 
not  in  the  abundance  of  the  things  which  he  possesseth."  Worldly  goods  are  of  no 
value  to  a  man  when  the  last  hour  comes.  But  true  religion  will  go  with  him  into 
adversity,  into  affliction,  and  will  comfort  him  even  in  death.  {D.  Morgan.) 
Truth  cannot  be  disposed  of  without  injury : — Truth  is  not  like  a  watch-seal,  which 
a  man  can  dispose  of  without  any  injury  to  his  character.  It  is  a  vital  element  of 
character,  and  thus  of  happiness ;  and  he  who  barters  it  for  anything  will  soon 
realise  that  he  has  not  only  sacrificed  the  greater  for  the  less,  but  given  up  the 
chief  thing  in  human  nobility  and  joy.     (T.  Carlyle.) 

Yer.  25.  Thy  father  and  thy  mother  shall  be  glad,  and  she  that  bare  thee  shall 
rejoice. — Filial  piety  : — Kespect  and  love  for  parents  are  not,  indeed,  the  motives 
which  operate  with  the  greatest  force  upon  minds  renewed  by  the  Spirit  of  grace 
and  truth.  With  such  the  most  powerful  incentives  to  action  are  those  which 
derive  their  origin  from  the  relation  we  sustain  to  God,  the  author  of  life  and 
salvation.  It  is  sometimes  the  CE^se  that  an  ingenuous  youth  is  more  influenced  by 
the  recollection  of  the  counsels  of  a  departed  father  or  mother  than  he  would  have 
been  by  the  same  counsels  had  that  father  or  mother  not  been  taken  from  him  ; 
and  never,  in  any  circumstances,  does  filial  piety  appear  more  lovely  and  attractive. 
I.  Cultivate  a  reverence  for  parental  counsels  and  authority.  At  no  period  of 
their  lives  are  young  persons  so  tempted  to  disregard  parental  authority  as  when  they 
are  passing  from  boyhood  to  manhood.  They  are  desirous  to  be  thought  independent, 
and  capable  of  directing  themselves.  They  become  impatient  of  restraint,  and  the 
advice  even  of  parents  whom  they  both  reverence  and  love  is  often  irksome. 
Better  show  your  claim  to  be  considered  youths  of  a  truly  noble  and  independent 
spirit  by  always  daring  to  do  what  is  right,  and  by  always  yielding  due  obedience 
to  parental  commands.  Despise  not  a  mother's  fears,  however  unfounded  they  may 
be.  Be  it  your  aim  to  remove  them,  not  by  maintaining  that  there  is  no  ground 
for  them,  but  by  reverently  receiving  her  admonitions,  and  conforming  yourself  to 
them.  II.  Seek  with  all  earnestness  after  truth.  To  how  many  a  father  and 
mother  it  would  be  as  life  from  the  dead  could  they  be  assured  that  you  were  all 
earnestly  seeking  the  pearl  of  great  price,  ready  and  desirous  to  purchase  it  at  any 
cost — at  any  sacrifice  1  But  do  not  be  indifferent  to  other  truth,  truths  of  physical, 
ethical,  or  political  science.  And  always  keep  to  truth  as  opposed  to  falsehood, 
dissimulation,  and  hypocrisy.  The  commands  of  God,  the  social  interests  of  men, 
the  very  existence  of  civil  society,  call  for  an  unwavering  adherence  to  truth. 
Attend  also  to  truth  in  the  sense  of  fidelity,  sincerity,  and  punctuaUty  in  keeping 
promises.  III.  Seek  after  "  wisdom,  instruction,  and  understandinq."  These 
different  terms  were  employed  not  so  much  for  the  purpose  of  exact  discrimination,. 


670  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxin. 

as  to  indicate  the  earnestness  with  which  they  should  be  sought.  Be  it  your  aim  to 
make  all  possible  advances  in  both  human  and  Divine  knowledge,  but  especially  in 
the  latter.     IV.  Seek  the  company  of  the  wise  and  good,  selecting  for  associates 

ONLY  THOSE  WHO  ARE  DISTINGUISHED  FOR  SOBRIETY  OF  CONDUCT.      Tour  ESSOCiatioUS,  of 

whatever  kind  they  be,  cannot  fail  to  exert  an  influence  over  you.  If  your  com- 
panions be  the  wise  and  good,  you  cannot  but  receive  advantage  from  the  connection. 
Y.  Be  CAREFUL  IN  YOUR  CHOICE  OF  BOOKS.  Such  is  the  constitution  of  our  minds 
that  everything  we  read  makes  an  impression  upon  them.  As  is  your  reading  so 
are  you.  VI.  Cherish  virtuous  sentiments  and  virtuous  habits.  That  your 
sentiments  may  be  virtuous,  you  must  give  yourselves  to  the  study  of  virtue. 
(John  Maclean,  D.D.) 

Ver.  26.  My  son,  give  Me  thine  heart. — The  heart  a  gift  for  God : — I.  Love 
PROMPTS  this  request  OF  WISDOM.  1.  Only  love  seeks  after  love.  We  care  not  to 
be  loved  by  those  whom  we  do  not  love.  When  God  asks  human  love  it  is  because 
God  is  love.  It  is  an  instance  of  infinite  condescension  that  God  should  say,  "  My 
son,  give  Me  thine  heart."  The  Great  Benefactor  becomes  Himself  the  petitioner. 
It  must  be  because  of  the  great  love  of  God  that  He  condescends  to  put  Himself  into 
Buch  a  position.  2.  It  can  only  be  supreme  love  which  leads  wisdom  to  seek  after 
the  heart  of  such  poor  things  as  we  are.  Wisdom  must  be  of  a  most  condescending 
kind.  Only  infinite  love  would  come  a-wooing  to  such  hearts  as  ours.  For  what 
has  God  to  gain  ?  He  is  too  great  for  us  to  make  Him  greater,  too  good  for  us  to 
make  Him  better,  too  glorious  for  us  to  make  Him  more  illustrious.  He  can  gain 
nothing — we  gain  everything  by  the  gift.  Yet  He  does  gain  a  son.  II.  Wisdom 
PERSUADES  us  TO  OBEY  THIS  LOVING  REQUEST.  To  take  our  hearts  and  give  them  up 
to  God  is  the  wisest  thing  that  we  can  do.  1.  Many  others  crave  our  hearts,  and 
our  hearts  will  surely  go  one  way  or  the  other.  It  is  well  to  guard  your  heart  with 
all  the  apparatus  that  wisdom  can  provide.  2.  Wisdom  urges  to  immediate 
decision,  because  it  is  well  to  have  a  heart  at  once  occupied  and  taken  up  by  Christ. 
III.  Let  us  be  wise  enough  at  once  to  attend  to  this  admonition  of  wisdom. 
When  ?  At  once.  How  ?  Freely.  Do  it  thoroughly.  You  cannot  give  Christ  a 
piece  of  a  heart,  for  a  heart  that  is  halved  is  killed.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The 
heart  for  God  : — Here  thou  art  a  giver,  God  the  petitioner,  thy  heart  the  gift  which 
He  claimeth  by  the  name  of  a  son.  Once  God  required  offerings  and  sacrifices 
which  men  were  unwilling  to  give,  because  it  was  a  dear  service  of  God ;  but  now 
He  saith  that  the  heart  is  more  than  all  burnt-offerings  and  sacrifices.  Thy  alms 
to  the  poor,  thy  counsel  to  the  simple,  thy  inheritance  to  thy  children,  thy  tribute 
to  Caesar,  but  thy  heart  to  God.  Not  a  piece  of  thy  heart,  not  a  room  in  thy  heart, 
but  thy  heart.  Some  have  a  double  heart,  but  God  acknowledgeth  only  one  heart. 
God  doth  not  require  the  heart  as  though  He  required  no  more  but  the  heart.  The 
heart  carrieth  the  whole  man  with  it.  There  is  much  strife  for  the  possession  of 
man's  heart.  Unless  we  feel  that  we  owe  it  to  God  we  shall  but  give  it  against  our 
will.  The  wise  man,  picking  out  the  heart  for  God,  spake  as  though  he  would  set 
out  the  pleasantest,  and  fairest,  and  easiest  way  to  serve  Hun,  without  any  grudging 
or  toil  or  weariness.  Touch  but  the  first  link,  all  the  rest  will  follow ;  so  set  the 
heart  a-going,  and  it  is  like  the  poise  of  a  clock,  which  turns  all  the  wheels  one  way. 
God's  requiring  the  heart  showeth  that  all  the  things  of  this  world  are  not  worthy 
of  it,  or  even  a  piece  of  it.  We  should  serve  God  for  Himself,  and  not  for  our- 
selves, as  he  which  gives  his  heart  doth  all  for  love.  God  challengeth  the  heart  by 
the  name  of  a  Son.  Therefore  now  ask  your  hearts  whose  they  are,  and  how  they  are 
moved  with  these  words.  What  shall  become  of  hearts  when  He  who  craves  them  now 
shall  judge  them  hereafter?  {H.  Sriiith.)  The  Divine  request: — I.  The  nature 
OF  THIS  REQUEST.  "Heart"  is  another  term  for  "soul,"  or  the  immortal  part  of  man. 
The  soul  of  man  possesses  certain  powers  or  faculties,  by  which  he  is  enabled  to 
reason,  judge,  remember,  choose,  determine,  and  perform  all  the  acts  of  rationality. 
To  render  the  heart  to  God  is — 1.  To  give  the  understanding  to  know  and  con- 
template the  Divine  perfections.  The  understanding  is  the  leading  faculty  in  the 
human  soul.  2.  To  offer  Him  the  wUl.  Every  man  possesses  a  self-determining 
power.  3.  To  surrender  the  affections  to  Him.  This  giving  of  the  heart  must  be 
done,  in  an  entire  dependence  on  Divine  aid  ;  promptly,  cheerfully,  entirely, 
perpetually.  II.  The  reasons  for  complying  with  the  request.  1.  Gratitude. 
2.  Fidelity.  You  have  promised  to  do  it,  resolved  to  do  it.  3.  Justice.  Every 
human  being  is  emphatically  the  property  of  ih  ^  Tost  High.  God  is  th'^  tbsolute, 
unalienable  proprietor  of  all.    In  demanding  youx  heart  He  asks  for  thai,  to  which 


CHAP,  xxm.]  PnOVERBS.  571 

He  alone  has  right.  4.  Safety.  This  depends  on  being  in  the  holy  keeping  of 
God.  5.  Self-interest.  Here  your  duty  and  interest  go  hand  in  hand.  Inferences  : 
(1)  That  nothing  will  be  acceptable  with  God  where  the  heart  is  withheld.  (2)  That 
God  uses  all  conceivable  methods  to  induce  men  to  give  Him  their  hearts. 
(3)  Everything  in  religion,  on  the  part  of  man,  must  be  voluntary.  {R.  Treffry.) 
God's  appeal  to  man  : — I.  The  human  heart  is  not  bt  nature  in  God's  possession. 
This  fact  is  sustained — 1.  By  man's  actions.  Man's  actions  in  his  unregenerated 
state  prove  that  his  heart  is  not  under  the  control  of  the  Divine.  Man  in  this 
condition  has  no  sympathy  with  the  truths,  realities,  principles,  and  pleasures  of 
the  blessed  gospel  of  God.  2.  By  the  experience  of  the  good  of  all  ages.  3.  By 
the  testimony  of  God's  Word.  H.  God  desires  possession  of  the  human  heart. 
This  desire  of  God — 1.  Is  founded  on  judicial  ground.  It  is  only  right  that  God 
should  have  the  heart.  We  are  not  our  own ;  He  who  made  us  has  an  inalienable 
right  to  all  we  have  and  are.  "  He  bought  us  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ." 
2.  Is  founded  on  filial  relation — "My  son,  give  Me  thine  heart."  God  and  man 
are  near  relations ;  man  is  the  offspring  of  the  Divine.  3.  Is  founded  on  God's 
love  to  man.  God's  love  to  man  prompted  Him  to  make  this  appeal.  He  desires 
his  heart  that  He  may  enlighten  it  with  His  Spirit,  cleanse  it  with  the  blood  of  His 
Son.  III.  God  desires  a  willing  possession  of  the  human  heart — "  My  son,  give 
Me  thine  heart. "  God  says, ' '  Give  Me  thine  heart "  wholly,  voluntarily,  unreservedly, 
gratefully,  and  believingly.  1.  That  God  does  not  exercise  compulsion  on  man's 
will — "  Give  Me  thine  heart."  God  recognises  man's  free  agency.  2.  The  dignity 
of  man  recognised  by  God.  Man's  consent  is  necessary.  3.  The  glory  of  the  Divine 
character.  If  God  would  compel  man  to  serve  Him  and  surrender  to  Him  his 
heart,  his  service  would  not  render  any  glory  to  God  ;  the  service  would  be  void  of 
virtue.  (J.  0.  Griffiths.)  God's  request  and  man's  duty  : — Take  the  words  as 
those  of  a  greater  than  Solomon.  I.  Why  does  God  make  ant  request  of  man  ? 
God  loves  a  voluntary  offering,  a  willing  surrender  from  such  a  creature  as  man. 
A  man  is  able  to  disobey.  God  is  pleased  when  man  yields  Him  a  hearty  and 
willing  obedience.  II.  What  is  the  request  God  makes  of  men.  "  Give  Me  thine 
heart."  Heart  is  another  name  for  the  aiiections,  and  the  affections  are  as  essential 
a  part  of  every  man  as  his  intellect  or  his  will.  God  says,  "  Give  Me  thy  supreme 
love."  Here  is  a  demand  which  few  men  comply  with,  which  none  in  their  natural 
state  comply  with.  Men  wiU  give  God  everything  except  their  hearts.  This  is  a 
request  concerning  which  some  people  stand  in  doubt  whether  they  ought  to  comply 
with  it.  III.  Why  does  God  make  this  request  of  man?  1.  Because  the  heart  is  the 
most  valuable  thing  we  have.  2.  Where  the  heart  is  given,  everything  else  will 
follow.  3.  The  heart  can  never  be  happy  until  it  is  given  to  God.  So  that  God 
makes  this  request  not  for  any  selfish  reason,  but  in  the  greatest  goodness,  and  the 
most  God-like  loving-kindness.  IV.  How  does  God  make  this  request  of  man  ? 
In  various  ways.  He  does  it  by  all  the  comforts  of  our  present  life.  He  does  it  by 
experience  of  the  sorrows  of  life.  In  the  Cross  of  Jesus  this  request  is  uttered. 
(Francis  Thicker,  B.A.)  Giving  the  heart: — I.  The  command.  1.  Its  nature. 
"  Thy  heart  "—the  centre  of  thought  and  life.  2.  Its  extent.  Includes  the  will, 
strength,  love.     3.    Its  reasonableness.     II.    The  obstacles.     1.   Its  singularity. 

2.  The  tendency  of  human  nature — to  flee  from,  instead  of  drawing  nigh  to  Him. 

3.  The  world's  temptations.  4.  The  influence  of  Satan.  III.  Encouragements. 
1.  God's  love.  2.  God's  invitation.  3.  Our  desolate  condition.  IV.  Helps. 
1.  Earnestness.  2.  Carefulness.  9.  Jealous  regard.  4.  Prayer,  and  the  means  of 
grace.  {Homilist.)  The  Divine  requisition: — I.  Explain  the  text.  1.  Men  do 
not  naturally  give  their  hearts  to  God.  2.  God  will  not  force  us  to  comply  with 
the  demand.  3.  To  give  the  heart  implies — (1)  That  we  heartily  renounce  all  that 
God  has  forbidden,  (2)  A  hearty  belief  in  the  fulfilment  of  all  the  promises. 
(.3)  That  we  seek  and  cleave  to  God  constantly  as  our  portion.  II.  Enforce  the 
text.  1.  It  is  just  and  right.  2.  Our  interest  requires  it.  III.  Now,  what  answer 
will  you  give  my  Lord  to  the  text  ?  1.  "  Oh,"  say  some,  "  I  gave  it  long  since.  I  am 
only  sorry  I  did  not  give  it  before,  and  sorry  I  have  so  often  backslidden  in  heart ; 
but  to  whom  shall  I  go  ?  "  2.  "Yes,"  says  another,  "  I  desire  and  endeavour  to  do  it ; 
but  what  a  struggle  for  life  !  "  Do  not  despair ;  lift  it  up  as  thou  art  able,  and  "  if 
darkness  endure  for  a  night,  joy  shall  come  in  the  morning  " ;  the  Lord  is  nigh 
thee ;  He  can  loosen  thy  heart.  Look  up — the  day  of  redemption  draweth  nigh. 
3.  "  Yes,"  says  another — "  my  heart  ?  Do  you  desire  that  ?  Ask  for  my  money,  my 
tongue,  my  voice,  my  feet,  my  hands,  anything  and  everything  but  that.  It  is 
otherwise  engaged."    My  Master  has  not  left  a  power  in  my  commission  to  com- 


572  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxiii. 

promise  it ;  He  will  not  take  aught  else.  4.  "  Yes,"  says  another,  "  by  His  help  I  will ; 
it  is  right.  I  cannot  be  safe  without,  and  it  is  kind  He  seeks  it.  But  when  ?  To- 
morrow— to-night  is  impossible;  in  a  very  short  time  I  will."  I  doubt  thou  wilt 
perish  for  ever !  {J.  Summerjield,  3I.A.)  The  surrender  of  the  heart  to  God  : — 
I.  The  reason  why  the  buerender  of  the  heart  is  indispensably  required. 
1.  Nothing  less  is  worthy  the  acceptance  of  Him  who  knows  the  most  hidden 
purposes  of  the  mind.  2.  God  alone  can  satisfy  the  heart.  3.  None  but  God  can 
renew  or  sanctify  the  heart,  and  thereby  prepare  it  for  the  holiness  of  heaven. 
n.  In  what  manner  this  necessary  command  can  be  complied  with.     III.  The 

HAPPY  effects   that  WILL  FOLLOW   FROM    A    PROMPT    AND    UNIVERSAL  OBEDIENCE.       The 

morality  of  the  gospel  is  founded  on  the  basis  of  gratitude  and  the  eflScacious 
principle  of  love  to  God.  A  sense  of  His  pardoning  love  and  favour  will  be  the 
completion  of  our  wishes,  the  source  of  our  joys,  and  the  very  foretaste  of  heaven. 
{John  Grose,  M.A.)  On  giving  the  heart  to  God  : — I.  What  is  meant  by  giving 
God  our  heart.  "  Give  Me  all  thine  affections.  Let  Me  be  their  object,  let  Me  be 
the  centre  where  they  all  meet.  Give  Me  thy  hope,  thy  fear,  thy  joy,  thy  desire, 
thy  love,  thy  delight.  Hate  that  which  I  hate  ;  love  what  I  command ;  desire 
what  I  promise.  Rejoice  in  hope  of  My  favour ;  fear  My  wrath  ;  delight  to  do  My 
will.  Let  aU  the  powers  of  thy  mind,  under  the  influence  of  these  affections,  be 
given  to  Me.  Let  thine  understanding  be  employed  in  comprehending  and 
admiring  My  works,  and  ways ;  thy  conscience  in  approving  and  disapproving 
according  to  My  holy  will ;  thy  will  in  yielding  an  implicit  conformity  to  Mine ; 
thy  memory  in  retaining  the  instructions  and  consolations  of  My  Word."  II.  How 
REASONABLE  IT  IS  TO  GIVE  GoD  OUR  HEART.  If  a  fellow-creature  is  entitled  to  our 
affections  because  of  his  moral  excellences,  how  much  more  God,  who  possesses 
these  excellences  in  infinite  perfection  !     IH.  How  blessed  it  is  to  give  God  our 

HEART.       IV.    How    IMPORTANT    IT    IS    TO    GIVE    GOD    OUR  HEART.       Without  giving  the 

heart  to  God  all  our  works  are  only  varnished  sins,  splendid  vices,  pleasing 
abominations.  And  further,  it  is  the  giving  of  the  heart  to  God  that  prepares  us 
for  a  better  world.  V.  How  we  may  be  enabled  to  give  God  our  heart.  {Miles 
Jackson.)  The  surrender  of  the  heart  to  God  : — God  is  to  exercise  lordship  over 
all  the  capacities  and  volitions  of  the  soul ;  over  all  our  spiritual,  moral,  and 
intellectual  powers.  I.  The  nature,  extent,  and  reasonableness  of  this  com- 
mand. It  implies  a  clear  and  enlightened  understanding  of  the  things  of  God, 
especially  the  gospel  method  of  salvation.  The  command  is  reasonable  in  view  of 
the  relations  of  God  to  us.  JI.  Difficulties  in  making  this  surrender.  Such  as 
affect  the  young.  Temptations  of  young  manhood.  Trials  and  evils  of  school 
experience.  Entering  business.  Forms  of  recreation.  Directions :  1.  Be  in 
earnest.  2.  If  you  have  given  God  your  heart  take  care  what  goes  in  and  what 
comes  out  of  it,  3.  Look  well  to  whom  beside  you  give  any  share  of  your  heart. 
4.  Beware  of  carelessness  in  secret  devotion.  5.  Keep  up  attendance  on  holy 
ordinances.  {Daniel  Moore,  M.A.)  The  gift  of  the  heart  to  God  (to  young  men) : — 
The  heart  is  never  truly  ours  until  we  have  given  it  away.  Until  we  have  put 
it  in  some  hand,  or  laid  it  upon  some  altar,  we  never  fully  realise  its  possession, 
never  feel  its  power,  never  know  its  capacities,  never  understand  how  profound  are 
its  wants,  nor  how  sublime  are  its  aspirations.  No  man  can  live  an  earnest,  social, 
or  spiritual  life,  and  keep  his  heart  unto  himself.  And  sooner  or  later  the  heart 
will  be  given  either  to  some  purpose,  or  to  some  object,  or  to  some  idol,  or  to  God. 
Because  of  this  necessity  in  the  heart  to  belong  to  some  object,  the  clamour  for  it  is 
great.  The  applicants  positively  throng  up  the  path  of  life.  Fashion  is  there,  and 
Pleasure  is  there,  and  Fame  is  there,  and  Knowledge  is  there,  and  all  that  fascination 
and  subtlety  and  loud-sounding  promises  can  do  they  import  into  their  appeals. 
But  a  voice  of  tenderness  and  authority  speaks  to  us  from  above,  "  My  son,  give  Me 
thine  heart."  This  appeals  to  us  by  the  simple  majesty  of  right.  God's  right  to  the 
heart  lies  in  this — 1.  He  created  that  heart.  And  His  request  tells  us  at  once  of 
God's  right  and  of  man's  freedom.  2.  He  has  bestowed,  and  is  bestowing,  con- 
tinually upon  it  His  care.  Home  and  friendships,  and  the  myriad  bright  hopes  of 
life,  testify  that  we  have  a  Father  in  our  God.  God  has  been  watching  over  your 
life,  arranging  with  His  wisdom  and  forethought  and  love  the  interests  of  your 
soul,  and  for  all  this  care  and  anxious  fatherhood,  He  asks  this  return,  "  My  son, 
give  Me  thine  heart."  3.  He  has  provided  redemption  for  it.  We  are  not  our  own, 
we  are  bought  with  a  price.  In  asking  for  the  heart  God  asks  for  that  which 
controls  the  life — for  your  love,  your  supreme  love,  your  undivided  love.  God  does 
not  want  your  service  without  your  heart.    Reasons  why  your  heart  should  be  given 


OHAP.  rsni.]  PROVERBS.  673 

to  God  now:  (1)  Because  God  alone  can  justify  it.  (2)  Because  of  the  ten 
thousand  snares  which  it  will  save  you.  (3)  Because  the  longer  the  gift  is  delayed 
the  less  probable  is  it  that  it  will  be  ever  given  at  all.  Let  it  be  a  definite  act ;  on 
your  part  a  solemn  consecration.     (Henry  Wonnacott.)         God  requires  the  heart : — 

1.  The  relation.  "  My  son."  He  speaks  here,  and  not  to  a  stranger — to  a  son 
(Eph.  ii.  19).  A  son,  not  a  slave.  A  son  ;  thou  wert  not  always  so  (Eph.  ii.  1-4, 13  ; 
1  John  iii.  2).  A  son ;  therefore,  in  a  way  of  gratitude  and  mutual  affection, 
give  thy  heart  to  thy  Father.  II.  The  manner  of  yielding  up  the  heart  to  God. 
It  is  here  expressed   by  a  way  of  giving.     1.  Give  it  cheerfully  (2  Cor.  ix.  7). 

2.  Presently  (2  Cor.  vi.  2 ;  Heb.  iv.  7).  3.  Give  it ;  do  not  lend  it  only.  Many 
lend  their  hearts  under  a  sermon,  like  those  in  Ezek.  xxxiii.  32.  God  is  pleased  to 
call  that  a  gift  which  indeed  is  a  debt  (Kom.  viii.  12,  xii.  1).  III.  To  whom  the 
heart  must  be  given.  1.  Not  to  the  creature  (Matt.  x.  37).  2.  Not  to  the  world 
(2  Tim.  iv.  10 ;  1  John.  ii.  15).  3.  Not  to  Satan  (Eph.  ii.  2).  4.  Not  to  sin 
(chap.  i.  10).  5.  Give  it  to  Him  who  gave  Himself  for  thee  (Gal.  ii.  20).  IV.  The 
GIFT  itself.  •'  The  heart."  1.  Not  the  outward  man  only,  not  the  body  only : 
God  dwells  not  so  much  in  these  temples  as  in  broken  and  contrite  spirits.  He 
doth  not  here  ask  for  the  shell,  but  the  kernel ;  not  for  the  casket,  but  for  the  jewel. 
2.  Not  in  appearance,  but  in  reality.  3.  Not  a  part,  but  the  whole.  God  is  like 
the  true  mother  (1  Kings  iii.  26).  4.  Give  thine  heart,  i.e.,  all  the  powers  and 
faculties  of  thy  soul.  To  conclude :  1.  Because  it  is  His  due.  He  is  the  maker, 
the  purchaser  (1  Cor.  vi.  20);  the  spouse  (Hos.  ii.  19).  2.  It  is  pleasing  and 
acceptable  to  Him.  He  asks  it ;  it  is  all  thou  canst  give  Him.  It  is  a  compre- 
hensive gift.  He  that  gives  the  heart  will  give  all  things  (Kom.  viii.  32) .  3.  All 
performances  without  the  heart  will  be  rejected  (Amos  v.  21,  22).  4.  Give  thine 
heart  to  God :  if  it  be  a  hard  heart.  He  will  make  it  new  (Deut.  xxx.  6 ;  Ezek. 
xxxvi.  26).  (T.  Hannam.)  First  give  the  heart  to  God,  and  then  delight  will 
follow  : — Would  it  not  be  much  more  natural  to  reverse  the  order  ?  First,  learn  to 
delight  in  God's  ways,  and  the  more  we  rejoice  in  them  the  more  easily  we  may 
learn  to  love  Him,  to  give  Him  our  heart.  So  it  would  seem  love  will  grow  out  of 
delight.  But  how  wise  is  God's  order !  First  the  heart,  then  delight.  For  the 
second  is,  in  reality,  only  possible  when  the  first  has  been  accomplished.  Thousands 
strive  to  find  pleasure  in  the  ways  of  God,  but  because  they  have  not  yet  given  their 
heart  to  Him,  because  they  still  go  their  own  ways,  and  God  crosses  those  ways 
again  and  again,  they  only  get  as  far  as  to  bow  their  heads  in  a  kind  of  dull 
resignation  under  some  Divine  visitation ;  but  they  never  delight  in  all  God's  ways ; 
they  never  attain  to  a  comforting  hope  which  even  in  dark  days  does  not  cast  away 
its  confidence,  and  which  has  so  great  a  reward.  Oh,  examine  thyself,  whence 
comes  it  that  thou  hast  so  often  murmured  at  God's  ways,  hast  felt  thyself  hardly 
dealt  with,  and  couldst  not  forgive  Him  that  He  did  not  lead  thee  by  another  way, 
that  He  took  this  away  from  thee  and  left  that,  when  thou  wouldst  have  chosen  the 
contrary  ?  It  comes  from  this— thou  hast  not  given  thy  whole  heart  to  God  !  Only 
when  thy  heart  shall  rest  in  Him,  and  in  His  peace,  will  it  be  contented  with  all 
His  dispensations.  [T.  Christlieb,  D.D.)  Giving  the  heart  to  God  a  reasonable 
duty  : — Mankind  are  reasonable  creatures,  and  the  religion  which  God  enjoins  upon 
them  is  a  reasonable  service.  But  it  has  always  been  found  extremely  difficult  to 
reason  with  men  upon  religious  subjects.  God  here  speaks  with  paternal  affection 
and  authority.  I.  Explain  the  precept  in  the  text.  1.  It  implies  the  exercising 
of  love  to  God.  To  love,  and  to  give  the  heart,  signify  the  same  thing.  2.  It 
implies  loving  God  for  what  He  is  in  Himself.  Men  may  love  God  for  His 
favours,  without  loving  His  true  character.  3.  It  implies  loving  God  supremely. 
He  is  the  Supreme  Being,  He  possesses  supreme  natural  and  moral  excel- 
lences ;  and  to  love  Him  for  these  is  to  love  Him  supremely.  11.  The  reason- 
ableness OF  complying  with  this  DrviNE  injunction.  Consider — 1.  That  we 
are  the  offspring  of  God.  2.  He  is  infinitely  worthy  of  the  love  of  all  man- 
kind. 3.  The  conduct,  as  well  as  the  character,  of  God  makes  giving  Him  our 
hearts  reasonable.  4.  This  will  afford  us  the  highest  happiness  that  we  are  capable 
of  enjoying.  5.  There  is  really  nothing  to  hinder  us  from  thus  giving  our  hearts. 
Improvement:  (1)  It  is  reasonable  that  all  men  should  be  really  religious.  (2)  Not 
reasonable  to  think  hardly  of  God  if  He  rejects  services  when  hearts  are  withheld. 

(3)  It  is  reasonable  to  exhort  men  to  exercise  supreme  love  to  God  immediately. 

(4)  Every  scheme  of  religion  which  keeps  hearts  from  God  is  unreasonable.  (5)  It 
is  most  unreasonable  to  withdraw  hearts  from  God  when  they  have  once  been  given. 
{N.  Emvions,  D.D.)        The  hearts  of  young  people  demanded  for  God : — The  subject 


574  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxni. 

to  consider  is  not  the  giving  of  your  hearts  to  God,  in  opposition  to  hypocrisy  and 
mere  devotion,  but  the  giving  your  hearts,  that  is,  yourselves,  to  Him,  preferably  to 
aU  other  competitors  for  your  affection.  Many  will  be  courting  your  youthful 
affections,  and  endeavouring  to  engage  your  hearts  to  them — the  world,  the  flesh, 
the  devil,  vain  and  wicked  companions.  I.  Who  has  the  greatest  claim  to  your 
HEARTS?  Consider  the  equity  and  reasonableness  of  the  demands  of  God,  your 
Creator  and  Kedeemer.  Contrast  with  the  pretensions  of  the  devil,  the  world  or 
the  flesh.     II.  Where  mat  tou  bestow  tour  hearts  with  the  greatest  advantage? 

1.  Suppose  that  the  world  and  the  flesh  are  able,  at  present,  to  make  good  their 
specious  promises,  what  will  come  when  the  transitory  pleasures  are  passed  away  ? 

2.  Even  with  regard  to  this  life,  the  advantage  is  far  from  being  so  much  on  their 
side  as  they  would  make  you  believe.  The  insinuations  that  religion  will  make 
you  unhappy  are  mere  calumnies  that  stand  confuted  by  a  thousand  experiences  to 
the  contrary.  The  devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh  promise  you  indeed  riches, 
honour,  and  abundance  of  pleasures,  but  they  promise  what  it  is  not  in  their  power 
to  give.     Motives  urging  to  the  immediate  surrender  of  the  heart  to  God  are — 

1.  This  will  be  particularly  acceptable  to  God  and  the  Eedeemer.  2.  It  will  be 
singularly  comfortable  and  advantageous  to  yourselves.  3.  If  you  refuse  God  your 
hearts  now,  perhaps  hereafter  it  will  be  too  late  to  offer  them.  4.  Consider  what 
the  refusal  of  your  hearts  to  God  implies  in  it.  5.  Think  how  you  wiU  answer  your 
refusal  at  the  great  day.  [John  Oakes.)  The  gift  of  the  heart: — If  we  would 
have  any  of  our  offerings  find  favour  in  the  eyes  of  God  our  hearts  must  go  with 
them.  It  is  the  heart  which  is  challenged  and  demanded  ;  withhold  that,  and  you 
withhold  all.  The  wise  man  uses  the  word  "  heart  "  in  its  fullest  sense.  Some- 
times it  only  denotes  some  one  particular  faculty  of  the  soul,  the  understanding  or 
the  will  or  the  affections.  Here  it  includes  the  whole  mind,  spirit,  and  soul.  All 
these  the  Lord  claims.  This  is  a  very  comprehensive  claim.  The  best  way  to 
comply  with  it  is  to  identify  God  with  everything  which  will  bear  contact  with 
Him.  Nothing  will  bear  this  contact  but  what  He  has  constructed  and  ordained. 
A  life  thus  controlled  and  regulated  would  be  indeed  a  blessed  and  a  model  life. 
Nothing  could  take  one  whose  life  was  thus  regulated  by  surprise.  God  demands 
your  heart  that  He  may  enlighten,  convince,  pardon,  sanctify,  keep,  dignify,  and 
save  you.  We  press  for  this  surrender  on  the  ground  of  right,  for  your  heart 
belongs  to  Him  who  challenges  the  surrender  ;  on  the  ground  of  reason,  for  your 
heart  was  formed  for  Him  who  claims  it ;  on  the  ground  of  gratitude,  for  no  other 
has  such  claims  on  you.  We  might  press  it  on  the  ground  of  self-interest,  God  is 
ready  to  take  possession  if  you  are  ready  to  yield.  Then  give  your  heart  to  Him 
humbly,  beUevingly,  unreservedly,  cheerfully,  irrevocably.  (A.  Mursell.)  The 
gift  for  God  (to  the  young) : — I.  What  it  means  to  give  God  our  hearts.  II.  Why 
WE  should  give  oub  hearts  to  God.     1.  Because  He  has  the  best  right  to  them. 

2.  Because  He  can  make  the  best  use  of  them.  He  can  make  them  new.  He  can 
make  them  clean.  He  can  make  them  happy,  (R.  Neivton,  D.D.)  A  gift  God 
asks  (to  the  young) : — I.  God  asking  something.  God  who  is  continually  giving  to 
us  all,  is  here  asking  for  something.  II.  From  whom  He  asks  it.  Not  from  any 
one  great,  but  from  us.  HI.  What  He  asks.  We  could  not  give  Him  the  things 
Ave  have,  for  they  are  His  already.  He  asks  for  yourself.  IV,  Why  He  asks  it. 
This  you  may  learn  from  the  name  He  gives  you,  "  My  son,"  Tou  are  even  by 
nature  precious  to  God,  (C  A.  Salmond,  3I.A.)  Heart  in  religion  : — In  this  text 
God  speaks  to  man  and  asks  for  his  heart.  I.  The  Divine  request.  1.  Sincerity. 
A  man  is  said  to  be  sincere  when  he  engages  his  heart  in  any  work.  And  God  asks 
for  sincerity.  He  will  not  be  satisfied  with  a  bare  profession.  2.  Earnestness. 
When  a  man  is  in  earnest  about  anything  we  say  his  heart  is  in  it.  So  when  God 
asks  for  the  heart  He  means  us  to  be  in  earnest.  He  hates  indifference.  3.  Entire 
devotion.  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,"  &c.  4,  Delight. 
Whatever  a  man  engages  his  heart  in  he  is  said  to  delight  in.  Some  men  set  their 
heart  upon  earthly  things,  and  find  in  them  their  chief  delight.  H.  The  natuiub 
OF  THE  request.  "  My  son,  give  Me."  1.  It  is  an  affectionate  request.  All  God's 
wooing  breathes  forth  an  air  of  affectionate  regard  for  the  welfare  of  maa  2.  It  is 
a  reasonable  request.  (Homilist.)  Characteristics  of  a  great  love  : — 1.  It  likes 
to  be  with  the  object  of  its  affection.  2,  There  is  the  presence  of  a  desire  to  serve 
the  object  of  its  affection.  Love  is  tireless  in  ministry.  It  is  always  giving  itself 
away.  3.  It  desires  union  with  its  object  in  thought,  if  not  in  body.  Love  never 
journeys  unaccompanied  by  love.  4.  The  chief  characteristic  of  love  is  its  unsel- 
fishness.    Is  your  love  for  God  unselfish,  or  do  you  love  Him  only  as  a  means  ol 


CHAP,  xxin.]  PROVERBS.  675 

securing  His  favour  ?  Your  duty  is  to  set  yourself  to  apprehend  God.  To  know 
Him  is  to  love  Him,  and  your  not  loving  Him  shows  that  you  do  not  know  Him. 
The  question  which  concerns  your  highest  happiness,  here  and  hereafter,  is  not 
touching  technicalities  of  creed,  of  ceremony,  of  intellectual  interpretation  of  selected 
passages  out  of  God's  Word.  The  supreme  question  is,  Do  you  love  God?  (TF.  H. 
H.  Murray.)  The  heart  given  to  God  : — I.  Consider  the  question  of  eight  akd 
JUSTICE.  God  demands  you  for  Himself ;  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  claims  your  heart. 
In  opposition  to  them  are  ranged  sin  and  Satan,  the  world  and  the  flesh,  the  vain, 
the  worldly,  and  the  profligate.  Can  you  hesitate  as  to  the  justice  of  these  opposing 
claims  ?  "  Behold,"  saith  God,  "  My  hands  have  made  thee  and  fashioned  thee. 
My  visitation  hath  since  preserved  thy  soul  in  life.  Thou  hast  lived  on  the  provisions 
of  My  bounty.  Thou  hast  indeed  provoked  Me  with  thy  sins,  yet  have  I  borne  with 
thee.  Nay,  I  have  sent  My  only  begotten  Son  to  redeem  and  save  thee."  Hear, 
also,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  urge  His  claim  upon  you.  "  I  left  the  bosom  of  My 
Father,  and  united  Myself  to  flesh  and  blood,  that  I  might  suffer  and  die  for  thee, 
when  thou  wast  lost  beyond  recovery  by  any  human  power."  And  now  what  are 
the  pretensions  which  the  devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh  can  make  to  your  affections 
that  will  admit  for  one  moment  to  be  set  against  these  powerful  claims  ?  What 
have  they  done ;  what  can  they  do  for  you  ?  They  deceive,  they  ensnare,  they 
corrupt,  they  defile,  they  trouble,  they  ruin  you ;  but  they  neither  wiU  nor  can 
promote  your  real  good.  H.  Consides  on  whom  tou  mat  bestow  them  with  the 
GREATEST  ADVANTAGE.  And  here  I  must  confess  that  the  world  and  the  flesh  have 
-  more  to  say  for  themselves  than  under  the  former  head.  Eight  and  title  they  have 
none  at  all ;  but  they  promise  you  much  in  the  way  of  interest  and  advantage. 
Under  their  guidance,  they  tell  you,  you  wiU  enjoy  a  life  of  pleasure  and  ease,  free 
from  the  restraints  of  religion ;  you  will  have  unbounded  liberty  of  conduct,  and 
withhold  your  eyes  from  no  joy;  whereas  religion  is  an  irksome  and  melancholy 
service.  1.  I  will  suppose,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  that  the  world  and  the  flesh 
are  able  to  make  good  all  their  promises.  Delightful  prospect  1  Yes,  but  how  long 
is  it  to  last  ?  You  are  to  enter  into  another  world,  and  to  appear  at  the  bar  of  God, 
there  to  give  an  account  of  your  conduct.  Had  you  given  your  hearts  to  God,  He 
would  now  have  opened  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  you,  and  given  you  a  share  in 
its  everlasting  pleasures.  Your  choice  has  been  different,  and  you  now  reap  the 
fruits  of  it.  Is  it,  then,  worth  whUe  to  purchase  the  short-lived  pleasures  of  sin  at 
60  dear  a  rate  as  this  ?  2.  Supposing,  therefore,  that  the  world  and  the  flesh  were 
able  to  make  good  those  promises  by  which  they  estrange  your  hearts  from  God, 
even  then  it  would  be  the  height  of  madness  to  listen  to  them.  But  this  is  far  from 
being  the  case.  On  the  contrary,  the  ways  of  religion  will  be  found  to  be  eminently 
ways  of  pleasantness,  as  well  as  its  end  peace.  There  is  nothing  truly  desirable, 
even  in  this  life  which  the  servants  of  God  are  not  as  likely  to  partake  of  as  any 
other  persons  whatsoever.  Eeligion  is  friendly  to  health,  and,  generally  speaking, 
to  reputation.  The  idea,  therefore,  that  religion  tends  to  make  men  unhappy  is  a 
mere  calumny.  The  truth  is,  the  devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh  promise  you  what 
it  is  not  in  their  power  to  give.  For  even  the  good  things  of  this  life  are  distributed 
by  the  providence  of  God,  and  without  His  leave  you  cannot  enjoy  the  meanest 
comfort.  But  if  you  give  your  hearts  to  God,  He  will  certainly  bestow  as  much  of 
those  things  upon  you  as  His  wisdom  knows  to  be  best  for  you.  Since,  then,  the 
cause  of  piety  has  thus  plainly  the  advantage,  you  will  be  inexcusably  bUnd  to  your 
own  interest  if  you  give  not  your  hearts  to  God.  Thus,  if  God  spare  your  lives, 
you  wiU  be  fitted  to  be  eminently  useful  in  the  world ;  or  if  you  die  at  an  early  age, 
you  will  be  prepared  to  meet  death,  and  to  bid  it  welcome.  Consider  what  the  refusal 
of  your  hearts  to  God  implies.  You  in  effect  say,  "  I  dislike  His  service  ;  I  disown  His 
title  to  me ;  I  can  place  my  affections  on  better  objects ;  I  desire  to  have  nothing  to 
do  with  God."  This  is  the  plain  language  of  your  conduct.  {Christian  Observer.) 
And  let  thine  eyes  observe  My  ways. — Observation : — Observation  is  the  earliest 
preceptor  of  infants,  and  the  grown-up  man's  every-day  guide.  The  infant  learns 
to  prattle,  and  to  utter  those  sounds  so  endearing  to  its  parents,  by  hearing  those 
around  it  repeat  them ;  it  observes  the  sounds,  and  imitates  them.  We  cannot 
learn  from  nature  except  by  observation.  She  has  indeed  a  voice  which  speaks 
loudly  and  continuously  to  the  ears  of  all  who  will  listen.  She  has  a  school  in 
which  all  who  will  may  learn.  It  was  observation  in  Newton  which  led  to  the 
discovery  of  the  laws  of  gravitation.  He  observed  the  apple  fall,  and  reasoned  on 
it.  But,  had  he  not  observed  the  falling  body,  he  might  never  have  discovered  what 
is  so  useful  for  us  to  know.     It  was  observation  on  the  part  of  Galvani's  wife  which 


576  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxm. 

led  to  the  knowledge  of  galvanism  and  electricity.  She  observed  the  legs  of  some 
frogs  to  twitch,  on  which  her  husband  was  experimenting.  She  marked  the  fact 
and  the  result  was  the  discovery  of  that  useful  and  all-pervading  agency,  electricity. 
The  value  of  the  discovery  has  of  late  been  more  forcibly  impressed  on  us  by  the 
successful  laying  of  the  Atlantic  telegraph,  by  which  distant  countries,  separated  by 
seas  of  vast  extent  and  great  depth,  are  brought  into  almost  momentary  connection. 
It  was  observation  which  led  to  the  discovery  of  glass.  Sand  and  flint  were 
accidentally  melted  together  on  the  seashore,  and  the  result  was  a  transparent 
substance  which  we  caU  glass,  and  which  in  cold  countries  like  our  own  is  so 
invaluable  in  lighting  our  homes,  while  the  chilly  air  is  kept  outside.  It  was 
observation  on  the  part  of  the  architect,  Smeaton,  which  led  to  the  successful 
building  of  the  Eddystone  lighthouse.  Two  buildings  had  been  previously  erected 
on  that  fatal  rock ;  the  one  was  burnt,  and  the  other  blown  down.  He  observed 
that  the  form  of  the  oak-tree  seemed  the  strongest  in  nature.  He  acted  on  this,  and 
built  the  lighthouse  after  the  model  of  an  oak-tree's  trunk.  Its  continuance  for  so 
many  years  proves  the  truth  of  his  deduction.     [Church  of  England  Magazine.) 

Vers.  29-35.  They  that  tarry  long'  at  the  wine;  they  that  go  to  seek  mixed 
wine. — The  tvoes  of  the  drunkard  : — The  ugly  sketch  given  here  should  be  enough 
to  warn  all  young  people  against  tampering  with  a  vice  which  may  make  it  a 
portrait  of  them.  The  questions,  six  in  number,  fall  into  three  pairs,  which  deal 
respectively  with  the  man's  feelings  of  discomfort,  his  relations  with  others,  and 
his  physical  sufferings.  Who  is  the  original  of  this  foul  picture  of  degradation 
and  misery  ?  The  answer  is  keenly  sarcastic.  It  is  the  man  who  "  lingers  long 
over  the  wine."  The  loss  of  the  power  of  self-control  is  indicated  in  the  term.  If 
we  would  only  realise  the  "  afterwards  "  of  any  vice,  we  should  turn  from  it  with 
dread.  The  misfortune  is,  that  we  do  not  look  an  inch  beyond  the  present  pleasure. 
Note  three  degrading  effects  of  drunkenness.  1.  The  effect  in  deceiving  the  senses 
and  lowering  the  moral  tone.  2.  The  common  sense,  the  instinct  of  self-preservation, 
ordinary  prudence,  and  the  sense  of  the  fitness  of  things,  are  suspended.  3.  The  last 
piece  of  degradation  is  given,  for  greater  liveliness  of  impression,  in  the  form  of  the 
drunkard's  own  soliloquy.  He  feels  himself  all  over  as  he  begins  to  rouse  from 
his  tipsy  sleep,  and  pities  himself  that  he  has  been  so  badly  handled.  He  is  waking, 
but  he  is  not  yet  himself.  As  he  staggers  back  into  consciousness,  the  first  thing 
that  he  thinks  of  is  a  renewal  of  his  debauch.  The  awful  tyranny  of  the  evil  habit, 
which  has  become  a  diseased  second  nature,  is  only  too  well  known.  (A.  Maclaren, 
D.D.)  Returning  from  evil  ways  : — The  first  difficulty  in  the  way  of  return  for  the 
intemperate,  who  have  got  on  the  wrong  tack,  is  the  force  of  moral  gravitation. 
It  is  easier  to  go  down  than  it  is  to  go  up.  The  next  thing  is  the  power  of  evil 
habit.  If  a  man  wants  to  return  from  evil  practices,  society  repulses  him.  How- 
may  these  obstacles  be  overcome  ?  1.  Throw  yourself  on  God.  2.  Quit  all  your  bad 
associations.  3.  Seek  Christian  advice.  If  you  have  a  Christian  friend,  go  to  him. 
(T.  Be  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  Against  intemperance : — As  implied  in  this  passage 
this  indicates  the  tendency  of  human  nature.  1.  The  moral  degradation  of 
intemperance.  It  is  the  destruction  of  everything  manly  and  noble  in  human 
nature.  2.  The  physical  degradation.  Corruption  in  the  heart  works  out  its  marks 
upon  the  face  and  in  the  manners.  A  distinguished  German  authority  has  given 
the  scientific  degradation  resulting  upon  the  generations  succeeding  the  victim  of 
the  drink  habit.  3.  The  social  degradation.  Intemperance  as  an  evil  reaches  the 
state.  Nine-tenths  of  the  crimes  of  society  result  from,  or  are  abetted  by,  drink. 
This  theme  is  a  warning.  Directly  and  indirectly,  the  appeal  is  made  to  aU  who 
come  within  the  sound  of  its  voice.     (D.  0.  Mears.)  Drunkenness  : — I.  The 

EVILS  OF  DRUNKENNESS.  1.  Sorrow  (vcr.  29).  Drink  has  probably  broken  more 
hearts  than  any  other  thing.  It  is  taken  to  drown  sorrow,  but,  alas !  it  creates  it. 
2.  Folly.  "  Babbling  " — a  profanation  of  the  sacred  gift  of  speech,  and  as  such  is 
to  be  avoided  (1  Tim.  vi.  20).  3.  Disease.  "  Wounds."  Look  in  at  the  hospitals. 
Bead  the  medical  reports.  4.  Disfigurement.  "Redness  of  the  eyes."  5,  Waste 
of  time.  "Tarry  long."  6.  Dissatisfaction.  "Yet  again"  (ver.  35).  Drink 
creates  an  insatiable  appetite  for  itself.  7.  Insensibility.  "Felt  it  not"  (ver.  35). 
The  nerves  of  the  drunkard  are  benumbed,  and  nature's  monitors  are  impaired. 
Physical  insensibility  is  followed  by  moral  insensibility  (Eph.  iv.  19).  8.  Unclean- 
ness.  Drink  fires  the  passions,  and  gives  the  "strange  women"  (ver.  33)  their 
best  opportunities.  9.  Exposure  to  danger  (ver.  34).  H.  The  remedy  fob 
DBDWKBNNBSS  (vei  31).    It  13  Very  simple.    Abstain  from  strong  drink — don't  even 


CHAP,  xxni.]  PROVEBBS.  577 

look  at  it.  Temptation  sometimes  enters  through  the  eye.  But  beyond  and  above 
all  look  to  Jesus  for  deliverance  from  this  and  every  other  form  of  evil.  (H.  Thome.) 
Pleasant  vices  dangerous  : — Gas  is  a  great  spoiler  of  the  air ;  but  it  has  the  merit 
of  giving  timely  warning  of  the  danger  by  the  horrible  smell  which  accompanies  its 
escape.  This  smell  is  perceptible  when  there  is  only  one  part  in  a  thousand  parts 
of  air ;  becomes  very  offensive  when  the  proportion  is  ^-^  or  ^^,  and  is  almost 
insupportable  as  the  proportion  increases.  If  the  gas  has  escaped  from  a  crack  in 
the  pipes,  and  been  allowed  to  mingle  with  the  air  in  which  a  free  circulation  by 
ventilation  is  possible,  so  that  the  proportion  of  gas  amounts  to  ^r,  it  explodes  on 
the  introduction  of  a  candle.  But  the  reason  why  this  catastrophe  so  seldom 
occurs  is  because  the  smell  of  gas  is  so  utterly  offensive  that  the  evil  demands  and 
receives  proper  attention  long  before  it  reaches  danger  point.  This  fact  illustrates 
very  well  a  great  truth  in  the  moral  world,  namely,  that  when  evil  is  offensive  in 
itself  its  danger  to  the  community  is  slight.  In  exact  ratio  to  the  pleasn,ntness  of 
vice  is  the  danger  to  be  apprehended  from  it.  (Scientific  Illustrations.)  A 
temperance  topic  : — 1.  The  use  of  intoxicating  drinks  is  financially  unbusiness- 
like. It  keeps  men  in  poverty,  and  they  keep  their  families  in  the  deepest  want. 
2.  It  destroys  self-respect.  3.  It  defiles  the  body.  4.  It  destroys  life.  5.  It 
enfeebles  the  mind.  6.  It  breaks  down  the  will.  7.  It  obliterates  heart  and 
conscience.  8.  It  destroys  souls.  Let  us  use  our  every  influence  to  correct  this 
evil.  (G.  B.  F.  Hallcock.)  On  the  siii  of  drunlicnness  : — I.  The  causes  which 
LEAD  TO  IT.  1.  Example.  Seeing  others  in  this  state,  and  imitating  them  without 
being  aware  of  the  results  which  wiU  follow.  2.  Evil  associations.  We  cannot 
be  too  careful  in  selecting  our  associates.  3.  Afflictions  of  a  peculiar  kind,  especially 
mental,  and  those  produced  by  disappointment.  4.  The  ease  with  which  liquor  is 
procured.  II.  Some  of  the  evils  attendant  upon  drunkenness.  1.  Babbling. 
Owing  to  temporary  deprivation  of  the  use  of  reason.  2.  Contentions.  The  man 
acts  like  a  madman.  3.  Wounds  without  cause.  4.  Eedness  of  eyes.  III.  The 
consequences  resulting  from  this  sin.  Woe  and  sorrow.  1.  From  the  con- 
sumption of  his  property.  2.  From  the  loss  of  his  reputation.  3.  From  the  decay 
of  his  health.  4.  From  the  injury  done  to  his  family.  5.  From  the  loss  of  his 
immortal  soul.  IV.  The  duty  of  avoiding  the  sin  of  d::unkenness.  Think 
not  that  it  will  do  you  good,  but  reflect  on  the  consequences  to  which  it  leads,  so 
abominable  in  the  sight  of  God,  so  injurious  to  yourselves  and  those  around  you, 
and  so  hateful  in  the  estimation  of  all  those  who  truly  reflect.  {E.  Miller,  M.A.) 
Drunkenness  : — The  Bible  considers  intemperance  in  all  its  phases,  and  shows  that, 
with  all  other  sins,  it  springs  from  a  sinfulness  which  is  common  to  mankind,  and 
shows  that  the  true  remedy  for  it,  as  for  all  sins,  lies  in  the  deliverance  Divinely 
provided  for  the  sinfulness  which  is  their  root.  I.  The  drunkard's  condition  is 
DESCRIBED.  Woes  and  sorrows,  strifes  and  anxieties,  wounds  and  diseases, 
deadened  perceptions  and  a  destroyed  wiU,  mingle  in  this  awful  picture.  Here 
is  disclosed  a  general  wreck  of  manhood.  1.  Physical  evils.  Alcohol  vitiates  the 
blood  and  fiUs  it  with  poisonous  humour.  The  changes  produce  gross  and  enfeebled 
bodies,  diseases  of  the  heart,  lungs,  and  other  organs,  and  a  constant  waste  of 
physical  powers.  2.  Mental  evils.  Alcohol  directly  affects  the  brain.  It  creates 
an  unnatural  brilliancy  of  intellect.  But  this  brief  advantage  is  purchased  at  the 
cost  of  the  mind  itself.  Other  effects  on  the  mind  seriously  deteriorate  a  man's 
progeny.  Drink  destroys  not  only  the  mind  of  the  drunkard,  but  also  the  mind  of 
his  offspring.  3.  Moral  and  spiritual  evils.  Drunkenness  inflames  the  passions. 
It  leads  to  contentions.  It  is  the  great  cause  of  crime.  It  destroys  self-control 
and  thus  overthrows  the  citadel  of  manhood.  II.  The  steps  bt  which  jeen  become 
DRUNKARDS.  Alcohol  is  first  taken  in  its  simplest,  as  wine,  beer,  cider.  At  first  it 
is  taken  only  occasionally,  and  at  the  invitation  of  others.  Literature  lends  its 
voice  to  enticing  temptations.  Those  who  aUow  themselves  to  acquire  the  habit  of 
drinking  make  that  which  they  hate  a  part  of  themselves.  III.  The  way  to  avoid 
being  a  DRUNKARD.  Let  alcohol  alone.  Keep  in  view  that  the  woes  of  drink  come 
from  an  indulgence  that  was  moderate  in  the  beginning.  No  temptation  to  drink 
is  more  dangerous  than  that  which  makes  it  a  sign  of  good-fellowship.  Total 
abstinence  is  the  only  safe  ground  to  stand  upon.  But  the  Christian  will  do  more 
than  hold  himself  in  safety.  The  Christian  must  give  all  the  weight  of  his 
influence,  by  example,  word,  and  action,  as  a  Christian,  a  neighbour,  and  a  citizen, 
against  this  evil.  {Monday  Club  Sermons.)  Against  intemperance : — I.  The 
DBLUsrvENESS  OP  THIS  SIN.  Call  no  pleasure  pleasurable  until  you  have  asked  what 
the  cost  is  to  be.    n.  The  tbaits  of  disposition  besulting  from  wiNE-DRiNKiNCk 

38 


578  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxiu. 

1.  The  drunkard  is  contentious.  2.  He  is  a  discontented  man.  3.  He  loses  his 
mind.  4.  He  is  a  reckless  man.  III.  The  results  of  drinking  are  in  part 
SUGGESTED.  1.  The  speech  of  the  drunkard  is  bad.  2.  The  body  is  harmed  by 
drink.  3.  The  drunkard  tends  to  become  possessed  of  all  evil  desires.  IV.  This 
WAY  OF  LIVING  BECOMES  PERMANENT.  In  its  Origin  druukeuness  is  but  an  episode ;  in 
its  conclusion  it  is  a  character.  What  a  man  does  once  he  tends  to  do  again. 
1.  This  permanence  is  shown  in  the  deliberateness  of  the  drunkard's  full-grown 
folly.  2.  And  so  the  habit  fastens  itself  more  and  more  firmly  upon  him,  until  at 
last,  even  when  he  is  grovelling  in  the  lowest  depths,  he  still  calls  ever  for  more  of 
that  which  has  brought  him  there.  The  more  a  man  drinks,  the  more  he  does  not 
want  to  stop.  (D.  J.  Burrell.)  The  woes  of  the  drunkard  : — Is  it  not  Shakespeare 
himself  who  says,  by  the  mouth  of  the  disgraced  and  ruined  Cassio,  "  0  thou 
invisible  spirit  of  wine,  if  thou  hast  no  name  to  be  known  by,  let  us  call  thee 
Devil "  ?  What  does  drink  cost  in  human  misery  ?  Ah,  how  can  I  tell  you  ?  Can 
I  count  the  leaves  of  the  forest,  or  the  sands  upon  the  shore  ?  And  the  sounds  of 
this  misery  are  like  the  sighing  of  the  leaves  of  illimitable  forests,  and  the  plashing 
on  the  shores  of  unfathomable  seas.  For  it  is  the  horrible  fact  that  the  drink 
which  we,  as  a  nation,  are  drinking,  not  from  the  necessities  of  thirst,  but  from  the 
mere  luxuries  of  appetite — drink  often  adulterated  with  the  vilest  and  most 
maddening  ingredients — yes,  this  rubied  and  Circean  cup  which  we  sip,  and  smile 
while  it  is  converting  thousands  of  our  brethren  into  swine — this  subtle,  serpentine, 
insidious  thing  which  we  cherish  in  our  bosoms,  and  laugh  and  play  with  its 
brightness,  while  it  is  stinging  thousands  of  our  brothers  into  raging  madness — 
costs  us  millions  of  money,  myriads  of  criminals,  thousands  of  paupers,  thousands 
of  ruined  women,  hundreds  and  thousands  of  men  and  women  goaded  by  misery, 
into  suicide  and  madness,  with  every  blossom  in  what  might  have  been  the  garland 
of  their  lives  blighted  as  by  a  fury's  breath.  (DeanFarrar.)  Safety  imperceptibly 
passed  by  the  drinker : — Who  can  detect  the  line  of  demarcation  that  separates  the 
colours  of  the  rainbow,  where  the  yellow  tint  blends  into  the  deep  orange  colour, 
and  that  deep  orange  colour  into  the  deeper  red  1  What  mind,  however  disciplined 
or  practised,  can  tell  the  line  of  demarcation  that  shades  off  the  varying  sentiments 
of  men,  and  separates  the  schools  of  theological  opinion  ?  And  if  the  human  eye, 
aided  by  the  most  powerful  lenses,  cannot  discern  any  line  of  demarcation  in  the 
tints  of  the  rainbow,  and  the  skilled  theologian  cannot  pronounce  as  to  where  or 
what  is  the  dividing  line  between  one  school  of  theology  and  another,  how  can  we 
expect  the  dulled,  darkened,  blunted  brain  of  the  drinker  to  be  able  to  detect  that 
imperceptible  line  in  his  progress,  at  one  side  of  which  is  safety,  and  beyond  it 
danger?  Or,  suppose  he  could,  would  it  be  ethically  right  for  a  man  to  push 
forward  designedly  to  the  furthest  verge  where  he  supposed  that  moral  innocence 
merged  into  guilt  and  sin  ?  The  rainbow  tints  may  indeed  thus  meet  and  blend ; 
phases  of  thought  and  opinion  may  shade  off  into  each  other  ;  but  it  surely  can 
never  be  that  moral  innocence  and  moral  guilt  could  ever  stand  in  such  close 
proximity  together  as  that  the  one  should  merge  into  the  other.  {R.  Maguire.) 
The  warning  against  intemperance : — We  should  mind  this  warning  against  the 
serpent  of  intemperance,  because — I.  Its  sting  is  a  costly  sting.  II.  Its  sting  is 
AN  injurious  sting.  HI.  Its  sting  is  a  disgraceful  sting.  [R.  Neioton,  D.D.) 
The  drink  serpent : — Drink  is  like  the  serpent — I.  Because  it  is  poisonous. 
Alcohol  is  primarily  a  brain-poison,  but  there  is  not  a  tissue  nor  an  organ  of  the 
body  which  it  does  not  injure.  H.  Because  it  is  subtle  (Gen.  iii.  1).  As  a  rule 
men  glide  into  drunkenness  unconsciously  to  themselves.  Probably  the  drunkard 
is  the  last  person  to  know  that  he  has  become  such.  III.  Because  it  is  like  the 
DEVTL.  In  the  Scriptures  the  serpent  is  the  symbol  of  Satan.  Drink,  hke  the 
devil,  leads  men  into  all  kinds  of  sin.  The  connection  of  drink  with  unchastity  is 
set  forth  in  this  passage.  [G.  A.  Bennetts,  B.A.)  Description  of  drunkenness  : — 
An  inferior  master  in  the  art  of  moral  painting  gives  us  a  just  picture  of  drunken- 
ness in  these  words.  "  Drunkenness  is  a  distemper  of  the  head,  a  subversion  of 
the  senses,  a  tempest  of  the  tongue,  a  storm  in  the  body,  the  shipwreck  of  virtue, 
the  loss  of  time,  a  wilful  madness,  a  pleasant  devil,  a  sugared  poison,  a  sweet  sin, 
which  he  that  has,  has  not  himself,  and  he  that  commits  it,  doth  not  only  commit 
sin,  but  is  himself  altogether  sin."  (George  Lawson,  D.D.)  The  drunkard^s 
picture  : — 1.  His  sensual  indulgence.  2.  His  offensive  garrulousness.  3.  His 
bloodshot  face.  The  habits  of  the  man  come  to  be  marked  by  their  effects  upon 
his  looks.  4.  His  wretched  condition.  5.  His  easy  temptability.  He  is  ripe  for 
the  orimes  of  adultery,  falsehood,  blasphemy,  and  other  enormities.    6.  His  reck- 


CHAJP.  xxni.]  PROVERBS.  679 

less  stupidity.  7.  His  unconquerable  thirst.  However  bitter  his  reflections  upon 
his  awaking,  and  his  remorse,  his  thirst  remains  unquenched.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
Woes  of  intemperance : — The  Assyrians  had  a  fancy  that,  if  a  demon  saw  his  own 
face  in  a  mirror,  he  could  not  bear  the  ugly  sight,  and  would  vanish.  Unfortu- 
nately, vicious  men  are  not  so  easily  frightened,  for  many  a  drunkard  knows 
perfectly  what  a  degraded  creature  he  has  made  himself,  and  yet  is  not  restrained. 
But  the  photograph  may  deter  others  from  beginning  so  suicidal  a  course.  The 
appeal  to  consequences  may  not  be  the  highest,  but  it  is  legitimate,  and  ought  to 
be  powerful  with  aU  rational  beings.  The  consequences  here  appealed  to  are 
exclusively  personal  ones,  there  being  no  reference  to  the  drunkards'  miserable 
homes,  to  wrecked  family  blessings,  nor  even  to  blasted  prospects,  and  the  havoc 
wrought  by  drink  in  pauperising  and  bringing  to  rags.  What  it  does  to  the  man 
himself  in  body  and  soul  is  the  portrait  painter's  theme  here.  The  torrent  of 
questions  with  which  he  begins  brings  out  the  mental  discomfort  and  bodily 
mischief  consequent  on  intoxication.  The  two  questions  in  verse  29b  repeat  the 
substance  of  the  three  in  a.  "Complaining"  seems  to  include  "woe"  and 
"  sorrow,"  and  "  wounds  without  cause  "  are  the  natural  results  of  the  "  conten- 
tions "  equally  without  cause.  According  to  the  best  and  most  recent  authorities, 
the  bodily  symptom  here  noticed  is  duhiess,  not  "  redness,"  of  eyes,  the  glazed, 
unperceiving  stare  so  sadly  well  known  as  a  sign  of  intoxication.  There  are  far 
more  grave  physical  consequences  of  the  habit  than  that — shattered  nerves,  shaking 
hands,  knotted  livers — but  the  painter  here  is  thinking  rather  of  the  act  than  of 
the  habit.  His  answer  to  his  questions  comes  with  emphasis,  and  has  a  dash  of 
sad  irony  in  it.  What  an  epitaph  for  a  man  :  "  He  was  a  connoisseur  in  wines; 
he  did  not  know  much  about  science  or  history  or  philosophy  or  theology  or  art  or 
commerce  or  morality,  but  he  was  a  perfect  master  at  blending  whisky !  "  A 
solemn  warning  follows  the  etching  of  the  drunkard,  which  is  bitten  in  on  the  plate 
with  acid.  The  wine  appeals  to  the  sense  of  sight,  as  it  gleams  in  golden  cup  or 
crystal  goblet,  and  it  appeals  also  to  the  sense  of  taste  as  "it  goeth  down  smoothly." 
But  it  is  not  done  with  when  it  is  swallowed,  and,  like  all  delights  of  sense,  it  has 
an  "  afterwards  "  which  is  not  delightful.  "  Violent  delights  have  violent  ends." 
In  verse  33  we  see  him  in  the  height  of  his  excitement ;  in  verse  34,  in  the  stupor 
that  foUows ;  in  verse  35,  in  his  waking.  The  first  stage  is  marked  by  halluci- 
nations and  a  torrent  of  vile  speech.  "  Thine  eyes  shall  behold  strange  things," 
by  which  are  meant  the  absurd  delusions  of  the  drunkard.  Imagination  is  stimu- 
lated, and  the  senses  befooled,  by  the  fumes  ;  the  man  reels  about  in  a  world  of  his 
own  creating,  which  has  nothing  corresponding  to  it  in  reality.  There  is  a  still 
more  terrible  meaning  possible  to  this  part  of  the  picture,  though  probably  not  the 
one  intended — namely,  the  frightful  visions  accompanying  dehrium  tremens,  which 
dog  the  drunkard's  steps,  and  drive  him  into  paroxysms  of  terror.  Further,  his 
loss  of  self-control  is  signalised  by  the  loose  speech  in  which  the  rank  heart  pours 
itself  out  in  "  perverse  things."  There  is  a  strange  and  awful  connection  between 
intoxication  and  foul  words  from  the  depths  of  the  "  evil  treasure  "  of  the  heart. 
The  second  stage  is  that  of  collapse  and  stupor.  The  excitement,  of  course,  ends 
in  that,  and  the  drunkard  flings  himself  down  anywhere,  utterly  careless  of  danger, 
and  utterly  unconscious  of  his  surroundings.  He  is  like  a  man  that  "  lieth  down 
in  the  midst  of  the  sea,"  neither  a  comfortable  nor  a  safe  bed,  "  or  as  he  that  lieth 
upon  the  top  of  a  mast,"  where  there  is  neither  room  to  lie,  nor  security  as  the 
ship  rolls,  and  the  uneasy  couch  roUs  still  more.  He  sleeps  out  his  heavy 
slumbers,  and,  when  he  does,  he  discovers  for  the  first  time  the  bruises  and  wounds 
which  he  has  received.  But  these  do  not  curb  the  tyrannous  appetite  which 
brought  them  on  him.  Undeterred  by  them,  he  wishes  for  the  complete  return 
of  sober  consciousness,  only  that  he  may  renew  his  debauch.  Christ's  solemn 
saying,  "Whoso  committeth  sin  is  the  slave  of  sin,"  has  no  more  tragical  exempli- 
fication than  in  the  miserable  drunkard,  who  can  no  more  resist  the  craving  for 
drink  than  he  can  stop  Niagara.    {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Ver.  35.  They  have  beaten  me  and  I  felt  it  not :  when  shall  I  awake  7  I  will  seek 
It  yet  again. — Satan's  ancesthetic : — 1.  The  application  of  anaesthetics  to  surgery 
is  one  of  the  most  beneficent  discoveries  of  the  present  age.  One  shudders  at  the 
very  thought  of  the  surgical  operations  of  the  olden  days,  executed  without  the 
merciful  drug  that  makes  the  patient  unconscious  of  his  agony.  But  almost  every 
good  thing  in  the  kingdom  of  God  is  travestied  in  the  kingdom  of  Satan.  Satan 
has  therefore  his  own  anodyne  which  he  uses  to  the  ruin  of  the  bodies  and  soula 


580  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxiv. 

of  men.     It  is  evident  from  the  proverb  that  alcohol  was  known  to  be  an  anaesthetic 
three  thousand  years  ago.     Modern  science  corroborates  the  ancient  saying.     Most 
people  know  that  a  man  in  liquor  often  appears  insensible  to  wounds  which  other- 
wise would   cause   intense  pain.     Medical   men  occasionally  use   alcohol   as  an 
ansBsthetic  when  chloroform  is  inadmissible.     The  practical  result  of  this  property 
of  alcohol  is  that  the  intemperate  man — and  many  a  regular  "  moderate  "  drinker, 
too— is  unconscious  of  the  gradual  deterioration  of  his  bodQy  frame.     The  vital 
organs  are  becoming  diseased  and  their  functions  deranged ;  but  meanwhile  the 
process  is  most  rapidly  going  on  in  the  brain.    Hence  all  the  perceptions  are  dulled, 
and  the  painful  sensations,  that  otherwise  would  give  timely  warning  of  the  growing 
mischief,  are  to  some  extent  unfelt.      One  of  the  purposes  of  pain  is  to  sound 
a   warning  note,  to   give  a   signal  that  something  is  wrong,  that  some  part  of 
the   complex  mechanism  of  the  body  is  out  of  gear.     Our  duty  is,  therefore, 
not  to  be  contented  with  allaying  the  pain,  but  if  possible  to  cure  the  disease 
which    causes    the    pain.      2.  The   moral   anaasthesia    to    which    alcohol   gives 
rise  is  even  more  terrible  than  the  physical.      Acting  as  a  subtle   brain-poison, 
it  works   sad  havoc  with   the  moral  perceptions.      AU  delicacy  of    conscience 
is   quickly    lost,    the   distinctions    between    right    and    wrong    become    blurred, 
and  the  man  once  honoured  and  trusted  becomes  a  liar,  a  thief,  and  an  ingrate. 
The  loving,  dutiful  son  becomes  selfish,  morose,  and   attacks   his  mother  with 
murderous   violence.     Now,  in   such  cases   as  these  (which   are,  alas  !  only  too 
common)   we   cannot  believe  that  the  honest  man  wilfully  takes  to   lying,  the 
affectionate  father  wilfully  becomes  the  savage  brute,  or  the  dutiful  son  is  filled 
wilfully  with  a  fierce  hatred  of  his  mother.     Evidently  the  mind,  conscience,  and 
will  become  diseased.     Alcohol  not  only  dulls  the  sense  of  pain  in  the  physical 
system ;  it  is  an  anaesthetic  that  dulls  the  mind  so  as  to  produce  unconsciousness 
of  the  moral  havoc  that  is  being  made.     The  unhappy  being  loses  his  power  of 
truthfulness,  and  yet  is  hardly  conscious  that  he  is  a  liar.    It  should  be  remembered 
that  absolute  drunkenness  is  not  always  necessary  to  produce  such  results.     The 
free  and  regular  use  of  alcoholic  beverages,  though  stopping  short  of  intoxication, 
will  assuredly  produce  more  or  less  injury  to  the  body  and  degradation  of  the  mind 
and  will,  both  in  the  drinker  and  in  his  children.     Let  us  beware  lest  we  even  iu 
the  least  degree  impair  these  God-like  qualities  with  which  we  have  been  endowed. 
3.  The  last  words  of  the  text  express  what  we  are  accustomed  to  call  the  "  drink 
crave."     When  intoxication  is  over,  and  all  the  misery  and  depression  that  are  the 
after-results  of  excess  are  felt,  then  the  unhappy  victim  of  the  drink-habit  says  in 
effect,  if  not  in  the  actual  words  of  the  text,  "  I  will  seek  it  yet  again."     The  man 
who  is  always  strictly  moderate  in  his  use  of  alcohol  then  steps  in  and  says,  "  But 
why  are  you  so  foolish  as  to  seek  it  again  ?     Has  it  not  done  you  enough  harm 
already?    Why  not  leave  it  alone?  "     But  if  he  knew  into  what  a  state  the  poor 
drunkard  had  fallen — a  state  of  both  physical  and  mental  degradation — he  would 
not  talk  so  glibly.     First  of  all,  the  drink-crave  has  a  physical  basis.     Certain  of 
the  vital  organs  are  so  affected  and  in  such  distress  that  the  overpowering  crave 
for  drink  is  as  natural,  under  the  circumstances,  as  the  craving  of  an  excessively 
hungry  man  for  food.     Inebriety  becomes,  in  fact,  an  actual  and  terrible  bodily 
disease,  not  easily  to  be  cured.     Further  than  that,  the  mind  of  the  inebriate  is  so 
obscured  that  he  does  not  realise  his  fall  as  do  those  about  him.     The  horror  of 
his  position  does  not  appear  to  him.     Strange  and  sad  to  say,  this  mental  blindness, 
often  extends  to  the  near  relatives.     4.  Probably  many  moderate  drinkers  would 
agree  with  what  has  been  said,  and  would  give  thanks  that  they  are  not  as  other 
men  are.    Yes,  by  all  means  let  them  give  thanks  for  God's  protecting  grace.     But 
let  them  also  ask  themselves  whether  their  example  as  moderate  drinkers  is  helpful 
to  their  family  and  friends,  whether  the  edifying  spectacle  of  their  self-restraint  is 
likely  to  diminish  the  number  of  drunkards  or  to  lessen  the  peril  to  which  so  many 
are  exposed.     {J.  E.  Crawshaw.) 


CHAPTER    XXIV. 


Ver.  1.  Be  not  thou  envious  against  evil  men,  neither  desire  to  be  with  them. — 
Evil  men  7iot  to  be  envied  : — The  first  verse  of  this  chapter  is  very  naturally  con- 
nected with  the  close  of  the  chapter  preceding.  There  is  little  room  for  "  envy  "  of 
guch  characters  as  the  one  there  so  graphically  depicted,  and  of  all  men  on  earth 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  PROVERBS.  581 

they  will  be  the  last  whose  company  will  be  "  desired  "  by  the  wise  and  good.  But 
the  counsel  before  us  may  be  taken  more  generally.  Far  be  it  that  "  evil  men  "  of 
any  stamp  should  be  envied — either  for  their  boasted  freedom  or  their  apparent 
prosperity.  Their  freedom  is  but  the  semblance  of  the  blessing.  It  is  the  reaUty 
of  bondage.  They  promise  liberty,  and  are  themselves  the  slaves  of  corruption. 
And  their  prosperity  1  Oh,  deem  it  not  a  mark  of  God's  favour !  It  is  all  deceitful. 
It  ends  in  ruin.  '•  Desire  not  to  be  with  them."  How  oft-repeated  is  this  counsel ! 
How  often  is  the  warning  enforced  by  similar  reasons  !  "  For  their  heart  studieth 
destruction,  and  their  lips  talk  of  mischief."  Their  designs  of  evil  fully  matured 
find  utterance.  They  communicate  their  projects  to  others  like-minded  with  them- 
selves— projects  of  fraud,  peculation,  robbery ;  or  if  on  such  matters  there  be  a 
sense  of  social  honour,  and  an  adherence  to  the  conventional  morality  of  the  world, 
there  may  be  projects  of  impurity — of  lewdness  and  seduction,  of  drunken  frolic 
and  revel,  of  the  snares  of  temptation  for  some  simple  but  sober  youth,  whom  it 
will  be  so  excellent  a  joke  to  induce  to  join  them  in  sin.  All  this,  under  what 
palliative  epithets  soever  it  may  pass  in  the  world,  is  "  mischief "  and  "  destruction." 
(R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.) 

Vers.  3,  4.  Through  wisdom  is  an  house  builded. — The  spiritual  edifice  : — The 
subject  is  wisdom,  with  its  enlargements  of  understanding  and  knowledge — terms 
probably  used  to  denote  the  expansions  of  the  master  principle,  and  the  ramifica- 
tions into  which  it  extends,  as  it  sways  and  develops  the  faculties  of  the  mind. 
Distinguish  between  the  "  wisdom  of  this  world  "  and  the  "  wisdom  of  God."  They 
who  embrace  the  wisdom  of  God  beckon  the  other  wisdom  with  it.     They  who 
embrace  the  latter  usually  repel  the  invitation,  and  continue  their  warfare  in  the 
pride  and   scorn  of  seK-satisfied   security,  which  ultimately  terminates  in  their 
destruction.     I.  Wisdom  is  the  foundation  on  which  a  house  must  be  built.     It 
is  the  great  principle  on  which  all  other  principles  must  be  founded.     But  what  is 
this  wisdom?     Solomon  says,  "  the  fear  of  the  Lord."     True  religion.     Consisting, 
not  in  a  mere  external  or  intellectual  acknowledgment  of  an  overruling  Deity,  much 
less  in  any  amount  of  mere  intellectual  knowledge,  but  in  an  actual  going  to 
Wisdom  as  to  a  personage,  not  merely  in  possessing  a  certain  quality  or  disposition 
of  mind,  but  in  really  going  to  God  by  faith,  and  so  accepting  and  following  the 
terms  of  His  covenant  that  the  quaUties  and  dispositions  of  mind,  which  manifest 
the  being  buUt  on  wisdom,  spring  from  that  source,  coming  down  from  God  to  man 
as  the  gifts  of  His  grace,  not  going  up  from  man  towards  God.     11.  The  stkength, 
supeestkuctuee,  and  oenament  of  the  spieitual  edifice.     The  active  duties  of 
our  profession  are  implied  in  carrying  out  the  obligations  and  requirements  of  a 
true  and  heart-born  faith.     Store  your  minds  with  knowledge ;  only  see  that  first 
of  all  you  possess  the  knowledge  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.     {R.  H.  Davies,  B.A.) 
The  wise  life-builder : — Here  evil  is  contrasted  with  wisdom :  evil  throws  down, 
wisdom  builds  up  ;  evil  brings  darkness,  wisdom  brings  light.     Wisdom  is  repre- 
sented as  a  buUder ;  one  who  builds  with  a  plan,  not  merely  putting  stone  upon  stone 
for  the  sake  of  building  a  high  tower  without  purpose  or  utility,  but  building  a 
house,  signifying  arrangement,  commodiousness,  security,  hospitality  :  a  very  home 
that  should  have  in  it  the  elements  of  a  school,  the  beginning  of  a  sanctuary,  and  a 
hint  of  heaven  itself.     True  building  is  not  to  be  hurried.     Sometimes  the  builder 
rests  from  his  labours,  that  he  may  give  the  wall  time  to  settle,  lest  by  overpowering 
the  foundation  he  bring  the  work  to  destruction.     True  life-building  means  that  a 
plan  and  a  specification  has  been  provided,  whereby  the  work  as  to  its  scope  and 
purpose  is  clearly  indicated,  and  the  materials  with  which  the  work  is  to  be  executed 
are  named  one  by  one,  as  to  their  quality  and  their  proportions.     It  is  not  to  be 
supposed  that  men  go  forth  into  the  open  field  and  begin  to  build  as  on  the  spur  of 
the  moment.     Every  building  will  speak  for  itself.     If  the  perpendicular  has  been 
broken,  if  the  horizontal  line  is  out  of  course,  if  doors  and  windows  are  out  of  pro- 
portion, even  the  fool  can  see  how  abortive  has  been  the  labours  of  the  builder. 
Where  everything  expresses  thoughtfulness,  experience,  and  skill,  the  trained  eye 
will  approve  the  figure  of  the  building,  and  all  men  will  feel  that  no  encroachment 
has  been  made  upon  the  propriety  of  life.     Every  duly  considered  and  well-built 
house  comes  into  existence  as  if  by  right ;  it  establishes  its  own  claim  to  abide 
among  the  homes  of  men.     So  it  is  with  a  heart-house,  a  life-house,  a  house  repre- 
senting character  and  action  and  purpose ;  there  is  nothing  violent  about  the 
building,  and  when  it  is  set  forth  in  all  its  proportions  it  needs  no  vindication,  for 
its  strength  is  a  defence,  and  its  beauty  is  an  explanation.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 


582  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxiy. 

Ver.  5.  A  wise  man  is  strong ;  yea,  a  man  of  knowledge  increaseth  streng:th. — 

Wisdom  the  strength  of  the  mind  : — The  changes  of  life  often  have  unhappy  effects 
on  the  temper  of  our  minds.  A  defence  against  these  evils  would  be  very  desirable. 
Who  would  not  possess  a  constant  equanimity,  an  uniform  peace  and  steady  reso- 
lution of  soul  ?  Solomon  says  this  is  to  be  gained  through  wisdom,  or  religious 
virtue.  I.  The  diseased  and  feeble  state  of  mind  against  which  wisdom  is  the 
PROPER  REMEDY.  It  seemeth  to  consist  in  an  indisposition  for  the  due  exercise  of 
its  powers.  The  body  is  then  distem.pered  and  weak,  and  so  the  mind  is  rendered 
incapable  of  the  offices  which  become  such  a  being.  The  weakness  principally 
appeareth  in  the  prevalence  of  passions  which  are  excited  by  them,  and  are  summed 
up  in  aversion ;  that  is,  in  the  prevalence  of  fear  and  sorrow  and  anger.  Reason 
and  moral  conscience  is  the  man ;  in  its  vigour  and  authority  over  the  inferior 
springs  of  action  our  strength  lieth.  1.  Fear  is  an  infirmity  natural  to  man, 
which  very  often  hath  pernicious  effects,  and  in  itself,  abstracting  from  its 
effects,  is  very  uncomfortable.  Every  living  creature,  according  to  its  measure 
of  perfection,  hath  a  self-enjoyment,  and  findeth  ease  and  satisfaction  in  its 
sound  and  healthy  state.  But  it  was  wisely  provided  that  such  of  them  as  are 
liable  to  dangers  and  annoyances  from  abroad  should  have  a  painful  apprehension 
of  them,  in  order  to  their  being  put  upon  the  speediest  methods  for  avoiding  them. 
This  is  the  end  of  fear  in  their  constitution.  Man  is  made  with  a  larger  compre- 
hension, and  with  the  privilege  of  foresight,  by  which  he  discovereth  a  variety  of 
dangers,  and  seeth  them  at  a  great  distance  ;  and  this  certainly  was  not  originally 
intended  to  be  his  torment,  but,  if  it  be  so  in  event,  it  must  be  by  way  of  penal 
infliction  for  his  faults,  or  a  distemper  of  his  mind  against  which  there  is  a  proper 
remedy  provided.  2.  Grief.  This  is  not  equal  in  all  men.  Some  spirits  can 
sustain  their  infirmity  better  than  others.  But  all  find  it  requires  a  force  above 
that  of  mere  unimproved  and  uncultivated  nature  to  support  it.  It  requireth 
religious  wisdom.  3.  Anger.  Felt  when  the  disagreeable  event  is  considered  an 
injury,  and  as  befalling  us  by  the  injustice  or  ill-will  of  a  voluntary  agent.  Now  con- 
sider the  symptoms  of  this  natural  weakness.  During  the  prevalence  of  these 
passions  the  understanding  is  obscured  ;  at  least,  we  have  not  the  due  use  of  it.  It 
seems  to  be  the  natural  tendency  of  pain  to  arrest  the  thoughts.  The  counsels  of 
the  mind  are  at  such  times  full  of  perplexity,  which  often  produce  irresolution, 
instability,  and  fatal  precipitation.  II.  Wherein  the  strength  of  the  wise  man 
lieth.  How  wisdom,  or  religious  virtue,  is  the  cure  of  our  weakness  and  its 
symptoms.  1.  It  is  a  defence  against  fear,  because  it  represents  uncomfortable 
events  as  too  inconsiderable  to  affect  our  main  interests.  The  good  "  man  is  satis- 
fied from  himself " ;  his  integrity  is  his  chief  treasure.  Virtue  is  a  greater  good 
than  riches,  worldly  honours,  and  carnal  pleasure.  2.  The  testimony  of  our 
conscience  is  an  effectual  preservative  against  immoderate  dejecting  fears,  as  it 
gives  us  confidence  towards  God  and  assurance  of  His  favour.  3.  The  wise  man  is 
strong  against  fear,  because  his  confidence  is  in  the  Divine  all-sufficiency,  love,  and 
faithfulness.  Chance  and  necessity,  as  the  cause  of  events,  are  the  refuge  of 
ignorant  minds.  Faith  controls  the  fears  of  a  religious  mind,  for  it  represents  an 
intelligent,  powerful,  and  gracious  Providence  as  superintending  all  affairs  and 
directing  all  events  irresistibly.  4.  The  wise  man  is  strengthened  by  the  Christian 
hope  of  immortality.  The  same  principles  and  sentiments  restrain  immoderate 
anger.  So  religious  wisdom  delivers  us  from  the  symptoms  of  weakness  arising 
from  the  passions  ;  ignorance  and  confusion ;  the  darkened  understanding.  True 
wisdom  openeth  the  eyes.  There  is  an  admirable  simplicity  in  religion.  A  man 
of  knowledge  increaseth  strength  against  irresolution,  unsteadiness,  and  pre- 
cipitancy ;  his  behaviour  is  consistent  and  uniform,  because  it  is  conducted  by  one 
invariable  principle.  The  wise  and  virtuous  perform  their  good  works  with  vigour 
and  alacrity.  And  this  spiritual  strength  is  ever  increasing,  and  a  constant  source 
of  pleasure  to  the  man  himself.  Then  let  us  examine  ourselves,  and  try  what 
equanimity  we  maintain  in  the  changes  of  life.  (J.  Abernethy,  M.A.)  Fixed 
religious  principles  .•^"  A  wise  man  is  strong."  That  is,  a  true  man ;  one  who 
fears  God.  We  shall  seek  to  show  the  infinite  importance  of  fixed  principles — 
I.  In  relation  to  the  duties  of  life.     II.  In  regard  to  the  relationships  of 

MFE.      III.    In   relation   to   the  trials  of  life.      IV.   As  A  SAFEGOABD  AGAINST  THB 

temptations  of  life.     (F.  Wagstaff.) 

Ver.  9.  The  thought  of  foolishness  la  sin. — The  nature  of  evil  thoughts : — 
1.  What  is  meant  by  the  "thought  of  foolishness  "?     Folly  and  sin  signify  the 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  PROVERBS.  683 

same  thing  in  Scripture.  We  are  not  to  understand  thoughts  of  pure  speculation 
as  simple  acts  of  the  understanding ;  nor  even  a  thought  of  sudden  and  transient 
inclination  towards  sin,  which  arises  in  our  minds  before  we  are  aware  and  which 
we  endeavour  to  stifle.  Though  such  thoughts  are  sinful  in  their  first  rise  and 
tendency,  when  the  imagination  has  been  long  heated  or  their  hearts  corrupted  by 
any  criminal  excess  or  disorder.  We  are  to  understand  by  a  thought  of  foolish- 
ness one  of  complacency.  Such  a  thought  as  the  will  not  only  consents  to  entertain, 
but  which  the  mind  delights  to  dwell  and  dilate  itself  upon.  These  evil  thoughts 
proceed  from  some  vicious  reigning  passion,  or  perhaps  presumptuous  sin.  To  give 
way  to  such  vain  and  foolish  thoughts  is  an  argument  of  a  mind  very  much  turned 
and  estranged  from  God.  Such  impure  and  loose  thoughts  are  directly  contrary  to 
the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  and  to  those  precepts  of  Holy  Scripture  which  require  us  to 
be  spiritually-minded.  Many  mistakenly  think  there  is  no  sin  in  dwelling  on  evil 
thoughts,  so  long  as  they  abstain  from  gross  external  acts  of  sin.     II.  Eules  and 

DIRECTIONS  FOB  THE  BETTER  REGULATION  OF  OUR  THOUGHTS.      1.   Take  CarC  tO  be  alwayS 

usefully  or  at  least  innocently  employed.  2.  Carefully  examine  what  those  things 
are  which  have  been  most  apt  to  excite  evil  thoughts  in  us.  And  refrain  from 
company,  books,  and  circumstances  which  influence  us  for  evil.  3.  Evil  thoughts 
frequently  arise  from  prevailing  natural  temper.  4.  Live  under  a  constant  sense  of 
God's  presence  and  inspection  over  us.  5.  AU  rules  and  directions  will  avail  but 
little  toward  the  better  government  of  our  thoughts  without  the  illuminating  and 
sanctifying  graces  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  (jR.  Fiddes,  D.D.)  And  the  scomer  is 
an  abomination  to  men. — The  scomer  : — I.  A  description  of  the  scorner.  1.  He 
is  one  who  runs  counter  to  the  general  reason  and  maxims  whereby  the  rest  of 
mankind  govern  themselves.  He  places  his  greatest  glory  in  those  disorders  which 
the  rest  of  mankind  are  most  ashamed  of.  2.  He  is  one  who  delights  to  walk  in 
the  way  of  sinners.  3.  He  would  be  thought  of  as  believing  that  there  is  no  God. 
4.  He  delights  in  ridiculing  those  persons  or  things  which  have  a  more  immediate 
relation  to  God.  5.  The  greatest  effort  of  the  scorner  is  against  that  order  of  men 
whose  peculiar  office  it  is  to  minister  in  things  pertaining  to  God.  6.  He  makes  it 
his  business  to  confound  the  distinction  of  virtue  and  vice,  to  call  evil  good  and 
good  evil.  n.  His  rendering  himself  an  abomination  to  men.  This  he  does  by — 
1.  His  common  swearing.  2.  His  profaneness.  3.  His  confounding  the  distinction 
of  virtue  and  vice.  HI.  Useful  improvements.  1.  Men  generally  entertain  a 
secret  esteem  and  veneration  for  religion.  2.  Take  care  to  keep  ourselves  at  as  far 
a  distance  as  possible  from  the  profane  temper  of  mind  of  the  scorner.  Never  think 
of  God,  or  speak  of  Him,  save  with  reverence.  Be  careful  not  to  obstruct  the 
influence  of  religious  considerations  on  our  hearts.     {R.  Fiddes,  D.D.) 

Ver.  10.  If  thou  faint  in  the  day  of  adversity,  thy  stren^h  is  small. — The 
Christian  failing  in  business  : — There  are  such  failures.  Christianity  does  not 
secure  its  disciples  against  misfortune  and  calamity.  It  has  need  of  trouble. 
While  it  could  not  help  it  always  without  a  constant  miracle,  it  does  not  always 
help  it  when  it  can.  There  is  a  tendency  in  religion  to  promote  worldly  prosperity. 
Most  of  the  conditions  of  secular  success  are  improved  by  the  principles  and  habits 
of  spirituality.  It  quickens  the  intellect,  gives  calmness  and  self-possession  to  the 
feelings,  fosters  industry  and  diligence,  creates  character  and  credit.  Many  a  man 
may  be  found  who  has  been  made,  in  this  sense,  by  godliness.  Some  Christians 
never  get  on.  They  try  many  schemes,  with  one  sorrowful  result.  I.  Christianity 
should  preserve  from  despondency  in  failure.  There  is  a  tendency  in  trouble  to 
dispirit.  It  may  be  checked  by  the  force  of  natural  energy  of  heart.  The  greater 
number  of  men  are  apt  to  sink  under  disappointment.  Many  cannot  row  against 
the  tide.  The  evil  of  this  depression  is  great.  In  relation  to  the  worldly  business. 
The  man  is  as  one  possessed  with  a  spirit  of  defeat.  There  is  no  ingenuity  to  plan ; 
no  vigorous  employment  of  offered  opportunities.  This  despondency  affects  other 
things.  Begun  in  business,  it  extends  to  all  departments  of  feeling  and  activity. 
Christianity  tends  to  check  this,  because  it  limits  the  sphere  of  failure.  It  also 
changes  its  character.  It  teaches  us  that  if  we  fail  it  may  be  the  means  of  our 
greater  success.  The  prostration,  the  sorrow,  the  want,  may  be  the  discipline  of 
life  everlasting.  Sometimes  the  faUure  may  be  traced  to  the  Christian's  own  fault. 
Then  these  considerations  are  inapplicable.  But  then  the  evil  may  be  overruled  for 
good.  n.  Cheistianity  should  preserve  from  irritation  in  failure.  If  the 
timid  are  most  in  danger  of  despondency,  the  proud  are  most  in  danger  of 
exasperation.    And  who  is  so  free  from  pride  as  not  to  be  in  danger  of  this? 


584  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxiv. 

Failure  may  easily  excite  the  evil  passions  of  the  soul,  sour  the  temper,  and  arouse 
to  anger  and  to  wrath.     If  a  man  were  only  irritated  against  himself,  there  might 
not  be  much  amiss.     But  the  danger  is  nearly  all  the  other  way.     The  faiUng  man 
is  often  found  cherishing  a  wrong  temper  towards  his  fellows.     To  check  this  evil 
Christianity  begets  humility,  and  produces  a  spirit  of   benevolence.     III.  Chris- 
tianity SHOULD  PRESERVE  FROM  DISHONESTY  IN  FAILURE.     Want  is  a  temptation  to 
dishonesty.     It  is  not  an  excuse  for  it.     Many  who  never  had  a  thought  that  was 
not  honourable  have  fallen  into  sin  when  they  fell  into  trouble.     And  even  when 
the  trouble  has  been  much  less  than  entire  failure.     There  is  temptation  to  do 
wrong  in  order  to  evade,  or  conceal,  or  repair  misfortune.     Making  us  to  love  truth 
and  equity,  Christianity  connects  our  self-respect  with  these  principles.    And,  as 
Christians,  we  should  be  supremely  concerned  for  the  moral  honour  of  Christianity. 
{A.  J.  Morris.)        Small  strength: — I.  The  occasion  referred  to.     "  The  day  of 
adversity."     1.  Reverse  of  fortune — poverty  and  want.     2.  Bereavement.    3.  Sick- 
ness.   4.  Persecution.    5.  Temptation.    II.  The  action  reproved.    "  If  thou  faint. " 
Not  the  suffering  of  pain  or  the  feeling  of  sorrow,  but  the  excess  of  an  allowable 
feeling.     1.  When  we  yield  to  impatience,  entertain  hard  thoughts  of   God,  and 
distrust  His  goodness.     2.  When  we  are  so  absorbed  by  adversity  as  to  forget  past 
prosperity.     3.  When  we  yield  to  sorrow  bo  far  as  to  preclude  necessary  exertion. 
4.  When  it  causes  us  to  yield  to  unholy  methods  in  order  to  extricate  ourselves  from 
the  difficulty.     The  Jews  appealed  to  Egypt.     III.  The  fault  explained.     "  Thy 
strength  is   small."     1.   Bodily.     2.    Morally.     3.  Spiritually.     (1)   Smallness   of 
faith.     (2)   Weakness   of   hope.     (3)  Deficiency  of  love.      (4)   Lack  of   courage. 
(5)  Want  of  humility.     IV.  The  remedy.     1.  Call  into  exercise  the  strength  you 
have.     "  To  him  that  hath,"  &c.     2.  Cherish  higher  thoughts  of  God.     3.  Wait 
at  the  throne  of  grace.     (J.  Bunting.)        Susceptible  character  : — The  wych-elm 
manifests  the  approach  of  winter  earlier  than  any  other  tree.    It  becomes  ruined 
and  denuded  by  a  touch  of  the  frosty  air,  and  contributes  no  splendour,  no  beauty 
to  our  autumnal  scenery,  as  its  leaves  curl  up,  become  brown,  and  flutter  from  their 
sprays,  as  early,  when  growing  in  exposed  situations,  as  the  middle  of  September. 
This  character  of  itself  marks  a  difference  from  the  common  elm,  which  preserves 
its  verdure,  except  from  accidental  causes,  long  after  this  period,  and  with  a  fine 
mellow  yellow  hue,  contributing  a  full  share  with  other  trees  to  the  character  and 
splendour  of   autumn.     The  wych-elm  is   an  emblem  of   the  susceptible,  tender 
human  character.     The  soul  of   such  a  man   is  highly  sensitive  to  all  external 
impressions.     The  first  frosty  touch  of  a  great  sorrow  shakes  his  life  to  its  centre. 
Men  of   a  more   robust  type  are   chastened   by   sad   events ;  and,   mellowed   by 
chequered  experiences,  live  on  to  the  tranquil  maturity  of  their  existence.     But 
he,  unfortunately,  cannot  face  the  rough  blasts  of  adversity,  and  perishes  at  once 
under  their  cruel,  chilling  influence.     Even  the  cold  breath  of  slander  sometimes 
bears  for  him  a  sentence  of  death.     (Scientific  Illustrations.)        Flourishing  upon 
the  unpromising  : — Humming-birds,  colibris,  and  their  brothers  of  every  hue,  live 
with  impunity  in  the  fearful  forests  where  tropical  nature,  under  forms  oftentimes 
of  great  beauty,  wages  her  keenest  strife  in  those  gleaming  solitudes  where  danger 
lurks  on  every  side — among  the  most  venomous  insects,  and  upon  those  most 
mournful  plants  whose  every  shade  kills.     One  of  them  (crested,  green,  and  blue), 
in  the  Antilles,  suspends  his  nest  to  the  most  terrible  and  fatal  of  trees,  to  the 
spectre  whose  fatal  glance  seems  to  freeze  your  blood  for  ever,  to  the  deadly 
manchineal.     It  is  this  parroquet,  which  boldly  crops  the  fruits  of  the  fearful  tree, 
feeds  upon  them,  assumes  their  livery,  and   appears,  from  its  sinister  green,  to 
draw  the  metallic  lustre  of  its  triumphant  wings.     Nature  endows  the  birds,  as  she 
also  endows  men,  with  a  marvellous  capacity  for  accommodation  to  circumstances. 
Beautiful  birds  are  not  made  out  of  what  we  should  consider  wholesome  food,  and 
beautiful  characters  are  not  made  out  of  the  choice  events  of  history.     Nature 
supplies  us  with  an  appropriative  power  whereby  we  transmute  everything  to  the 
purposes  which  she  intends  to  serve.     We  know  to  what  splendid  purposes  genius 
has  been  able  to  turn  poverty,  jails,  cruelty,  persecution.     Some  of  the  finest 
characters  in  history  have  been  formed  by  and  flourished  upon  these  unpromising 
elements.     The  bird  does  not  take  the  poison  and  submit  to  death  ;  it  transmutes 
it  into  life  and  beauty.    The  hero  does  not  let  circumstances  subdue  him  ;  he  makes 
circumstances  subserve  the  growth  of  his  character.     (Ihid.)        The  culture  that 
gives  strength : — If  you  were  to  hear  some  men's  experience,  you  would  think  that 
they  grow  as  the  white  pine  grows,  with  straight  grain,  and  easUy  split;  for  I  notice 
that  all  that  grow  easy,  split  easy.    But  there  are  some  that  grow  as  the  mahogany 


CHAP,  xxiv.]  PROVERBS.  685 


grows,  with  veneering  knots,  and  all  quirls  and  contortions  of  grain.  That  is  the 
best  timber  of  the  forest  which  has  the  most  knots.  Everybody  seeks  it,  because, 
being  hard  to  grow,  it  is  hard  to  wear  out.  And  when  knots  have  been  sawn  and 
polished,  how  beautiful  they  are.  There  are  many  who  are  content  to  grow 
straight,  like  weeds  on  a  dunghill ;  but  there  are  many  others  who  want  to  be  stal- 
wart and  strong  like  the  monarchs  of  the  forest,  and  yet,  when  God  sends  winds 
of  adversity  to  sing  a  lullaby  in  their  branches,  they  do  not  hke  to  grow  in  that 
way.  They  dread  the  culture  that  is  reaUy  giving  toughness  to  their  soul  and 
strength  to  its  fibre.    {H.  W.  Beecher.) 

Vers.  11,  12.  If  thou  forbear  to  deliver  them  that  are  drawn  unto  death.^ 

The  claim  of  our  brother's  need  : — 1.  It  is  supposed  that  there  is  an  allusion  here  to 
what  is  understood  to  have  been  a  custom  among  the  Jews.  When  a  man  was 
being  led  to  execution  a  sort  of  crier  or  herald  went  with  the  procession,  publicly 
proclaiming  that  if  any  man  hath  "  anything  to  offer  even  yet  to  show  the  innocence 
of  the  accused,  or  any  circumstances  of  extenuation  to  present,  or  testimony  to 
give  to  his  character,  let  him  now  declare  it ;  the  judges  are  sitting ;  the  procession 
to  the  place  of  execution  shall  be  arrested  ;  anything  new  in  the  form  of  evidence 
or  testimony  shall  be  heard,  and  thus  execution  shall  be  stayed."  It  is  supposed 
here  that  a  man  is  in  danger  of  death.  It  is  supposed  that  he  is  innocent.  It  is 
supposed  that  there  is  a  man  who  can  help  him,  even  now,  to  prove  his  innocence. 
If  that  man  withholds  his  testimony,  he  is  guilty  of  murder,  and  comes  into  the 
judgment  of  God.  2.  Illustrations  of  the  principle  embodied  in  the  text.  Indi- 
viduals may  be  exposed  to  great  suffering  by  no  fault  of  their  own.  Many  have  to 
suffer  in  consequence  of  the  operation  of  general  laws  over  which  they  have  no 
control.  Where  there  is  suffering,  peril,  or  destitution  on  one  side,  there  is  some- 
where on  the  other  the  power  to  help  ;  somebody  has  the  ability  to  interpose.  Those 
that  have  the  power  may  neglect  it,  and  endeavour  to  find  miserable  apologies  and 
excuses  for  their  neglect.  There  may  be  perfectly  honest  and  sufficient  reasons  in 
any  case  why  an  individual  may  not  help  or  take  part  in  affording  relief,  but  in 
every  case  a  man  must  be  perfectly  honest  with  himself,  and  not  make  his  personal 
indulgence  take  shape  as  pecuniary  inability  to  help  others.  (T.  Binney.)  Help 
for  the  heathen  world : — As  descriptive,  the  words  of  the  text  draw  our  attention  to 
the  heathen,  and  give  us  a  very  affecting  representation  of  their  state.  As  impera- 
tive, they  turn  our  attention  to  ourselves,  and  point  out  the  work  which  God  has 
given  us  to  do — to  use  every  possible  effort  to  rescue  our  perishing  neighbours  from 
the  state  of  perU  and  danger  in  which  they  are  placed.  I,  The  state  of  the 
HEATHEN  woELD.  As  described  in  the  text,  "  drawn  unto  death,"  and  "  ready  to  be 
slain."  1.  As  respects  this  world.  In  Hindustan  there  are  four  modes  whereby 
men  and  women  are  "  drawn  unto  death  " — women  by  being  burnt  alive  on  the 
funeral  pile  of  their  husbands,  and  by  being  buried  aUve  in  the  same  grave ; 
men  by  being  crushed  beneath  the  wheels  of  the  ponderous  car  of  Juggernaut,  and 
by  being  drowned  in  the  river  Ganges.  2.  As  respects  the  next  world.  Look  at 
their  never-dying  souls ;  think  of  the  everlasting  importance  of  the  world  to  come. 
They  are  drawn  to  the  pains  of  eternal  death  by  their  numerous  and  enormous 
iniquities  ;  by  the  god  of  this  -world ;  and  by  the  almighty  arm  of  a  holy  and 
righteous  God.  II.  The  imperative  featuke  of  the  text.  We  must  look  at 
ourselves.  1.  Our  duty  is  clearly  pointed  out.  We  are  to  preach  the  everlasting 
gospel.  Who  will  go  ?  To  whom  can  we  look  with  so  much  propriety  as  to  those 
who  are  already  ordained  to  preach  the  gospel  ?  But  some  may  plead,  ' '  I  am 
already  useful  and  acceptable  at  home";  or  "If  I  go  to  preach  abroad,  I  shall 
inflict  an  injury  on  my  own  country";  or  "  I  am  not  competent  ;  I  do  not  possess 
the  requisite  qualifications  :  and  if  I  were  to  make  the  attempt  I  should  fail "  ;  or 
"  We  cannot  see  it  to  be  our  duty  to  embark  in  this  work  at  once,  and  for  life  "  ; 
or  "  I  am  already  comfortable  at  home,  and  I  do  not  like  to  give  up  my  delights." 
2.  We  are  to  present  fervent  supplication  to  the  throne  of  grace.  We  must  pray  as 
well  as  preach.  3.  Another  means  to  be  employed  is,  liberal  contributions  to 
defray  the  expenses  of  so  great  an  undertaking.  God  will  not  hold  him  guiltless 
who  neglects  this  duty.  (Henry  Townley.)  Drawn  unto  death,  and  ready  to  be 
slain : — I.  A  statement  of  a  certain  condition.  The  natural  world  is  in  this 
state.  It  is  so  with  reference  to  its  original  and  to  its  actual  guilt.  A  man,  as  a 
sin  agent,  is  evermore  superadding  sin  to  sin.  II.  The  moral  causes  which  con- 
TBiBUTE  TO  IT.  1.  Education  conducted  on  false  estimates  and  erroneous  prin- 
ciples.    2.  Example.    Actions  affix  a  deeper  stamp  and  stronger  impressions  than 


586  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxtv. 

■words.  3.  Habit,  which  is  said  to  be  a  second  natnre.  It  exercises  a  sort  of 
moral  omnipotency  over  us.  4.  Self-complacency  of  a  nominal  religion.  5.  Pride, 
when  it  makes  a  man  virtually  deny  the  value  of  a  revelation  by  Christ.  6.  Sloth, 
which  lulls  a  man  into  a  pleasing  dream,  from  which  he  would  not  be  awakened. 
7.  The  fear  of  the  world,  which  has  its  branding-irons.  8.  Love  of  sin.  Its  indul- 
gence makes  up  the  pleasure  of  their  life.  III.  The  solemn  duty  to  be  performed. 
The  deliverance  is  not  in  the  power  of  man.  A  sinner  must  see  himself  as  ha 
really  is,  in  the  blackness  of  his  guilt  before  God.  For  this  he  must  seek  the 
animation  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  must  repent ;  and  by  faith  look  up  to  the  Lord 
Jesus.  These  things  must  be  told  men  plainly,  and  pressed  upon  them  earnestly. 
(T.  J.  Judkin,  M.A.)  Vain  excuses: — It  is  the  universal  characteristic  of  fallen 
man  that  he  endeavours  to  extenuate  what  may  be  wrong  in  his  conduct,  and  invent 
excuses.  Are  the  pleas  by  which  you  might  think  to  justify  yourselves  in  regard 
to  your  known  duties  such  as  would  bear  being  submitted  to  God  ?  Men  will  often 
admit  an  excuse  without  close  examination  ;  not  so  God.  We  may  examine  into 
an  excuse,  and  nevertheless  not  detect  its  worthlessness ;  not  so  God.  Men,  even 
when  satisfied  that  blame  attaches  to  the  individual  who  oif ers  the  excuse,  are  often 
forced  to  let  him  pass  without  punishment ;  not  so  God.  Groundless  excuses  can 
be  of  no  avail  as  made  to  God,  because,  in  the  first  place,  He  is  a  being  who  con- 
siders everything.  In  the  second  place,  He  knows  everything.  And  in  the  third, 
He  rewards  everything.  {H.  Melvill,  D.D.)  To  magistrates  : — This  text  im- 
presses this  upon  us — it  is  the  duty  of  every  one  of  us  to  use  our  best  strength 
to  deliver  the  oppressed,  but  our  sin  is  we  faint  and  forbear  to  do  so.  1.  Reasons 
for  this  duty  in  respect  of  God.  We  have  His  command  and  His  example.  2.  In 
respect  of  ourselves.  What  power  we  have  and  what  need  we  may  have.  Our 
natural  powers  and  faculties  all  have  their  several  uses  and  opportunities.  We 
have  power  to  relieve  the  necessities  of  the  poor.  The  world  is  full  of  changes  and 
chances,  and  those  who  now  have  power  presently  come  to  have  need.  The  rule  of 
equity  is,  "  Do  as  thou  wouldst  be  done  to."  3.  Reasons  on  consideration  of  the  poor 
and  oppressed.  Consider  the  greatness  of  their  distress,  the  scarcity  of  their  friends, 
and  the  righteousness  of  their  cause.  That  which  you  are  to  do  for  the  poor  is 
this,  seek  first  to  be  well  assured  that  their  cause  is  just.  Then  you  must  not 
forsake  or  despise  him  because  he  is  poor.  4.  Reasons  from  the  effects  of  the  duty 
itself.  It  will  gain  us  honour  and  estimation,  purchase  for  us  the  blessings  of  the 
poor,  and  bring  down  on  us  the  blessings  of  God.  We  want  charity,  but  abound 
with  self-love.  Our  defect  in  that  appeareth  by  our  backwardness  to  perform  our 
duties  to  our  brethren ;  and  our  excess  in  this,  by  our  readiness  to  frame  excuses 
for  ourselves.  Consider  these  excuses,  such  as — (1)  We  never  heard  of  their  matters. 
(2)  We  had  no  clear  evidence  that  their  cause  was  right  and  good.  (3)  We  did  not 
see  how  we  could  relieve  them.  God's  response  to  such  excuses  is  assured.  Doth 
not  He  consider  ?    Doth  not  He  know  ?    Will  not  He  render  ?    (Bp.  Sanderson.) 

Vers.  13,  14.  So  shall  the  knowledge  of  wisdom  be  unto  thy  soul. — Spiritual 
knowledge: — I.  It  is  wholesome.  "  My  son,  eat  thou  honey,  because  it  is  good." 
Honey  was  one  of  the  choice  productions  of  Canaan.  It  was  used  by  its  in- 
habitants as  an  article  of  diet;  it  was  not  only  delicious  to  the  palate,  but 
strengthening  to  the  frame.  Divine  knowledge  is  the  aliment  for  man's  spiritual 
nature  ;  without  it  there  is  no  moral  strength ;  our  faculties  require  God  Himself 
to  feed  upon.  Without  God  it  starves.  He  is  the  food  of  the  intellect,  the  affec- 
tions, the  imagination,  the  conscience.  11.  It  is  delectable.  "And  the  honey- 
comb, which  is  sweet  to  the  taste."  God's  goodness  in  nature  appears  in  this  as 
well  as  in  all  other  things  :  that  the  provisions  essential  to  man's  strength  He  has 
made  palatable  to  the  taste.  Honey  is  not  only  strengthening,  but  "  sweet."  The 
pleasures  of  spiritual  knowledge  are  of  the  most  exquisite  kind.  III.  It  is 
SATISFYING.  "  When  thou  hast  found  it,  then  there  shall  be  a  reward,  and  thy 
expectation  shall  not  be  cut  off."  There  shall  be  a  reward.  Goodness  is  its  own 
reward,  and  the  reward  is  equal  to  the  highest  "expectation."  (D.  Thomas, 
D.D.) 

Vers.  17,  18.  Rejoice  not  when  thine  enemy  faMeth.— Revenge :— Johnson  makes 
a  distinction  between  vengeance  and  revenge.  Injuries,  he  says,  are  revenged  ; 
crimes  are  avenged.  The  former  is  an  act  of  passion,  the  latter  of  justice. 
I.  The  OBJECT  of  revenge.  "  Thine  enemy."  Men  are  enemies  to  men.  Humanity 
is  not   as   it  came  from  the  hand  of   the  Great  Father  of   mankind.     Sin  haa 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  PROVERBS.  687 

made  the  brother  a  foe.  If  man  had  no  enemy,  he  would  have  no  revenge.  In 
heaven  no  such  passion  burns.  II.  The  GKATiricATioN  of  revenge.  "  Let  not 
thine  heart  be  glad  when  he  stumbleth."  The  fall,  the  ruin  of  the  enemy,  is  bliss 
to  the  revenging  soul.  But  if  unmanly,  still  more  un-Ghristian.  What  said 
Christ?  "If  thine  enemy  hunger,  feed  him;  if  he  thirst,  give  him  drink,"  &c. 
in.  The  Avenger  of  revenge.  "Lest  the  Lord  see  it,  and  it  displeaseth  Him, 
and  he  turn  away  His  wrath  from  him."  1.  Man's  revenge  is  displeasing  to  God. 
It  is  opposed  to  the  benevolence  of  His  nature ;  it  is  contrary  to  the  teachings  of 
His  Word.  2.  Man's  revenge  may  cause  God  to  interpose,  and  relieve  its  victim. 
"He  turn  away  His  wrath  from  him."  Coverdale  renders  the  words  thus,  "Lest 
the  Lord  be  angry,  and  turn  His  wrath  from  him  to  thee."  Thus  it  was  with  the 
enemies  of  Samson  (Judg,  xvi.  25-30).     {Homilist.) 

Ver.  21.  My  son,  fear  thou  the  Lord  and  the  kins'. — Duty  to  God  and  the  king : — 
I.  A  DOUBLE  DUTY  LAID  DOWN.  Or  rather,  a  single  duty,  one  included  and  com- 
prehended in  the  other.  Fear  here  is  a  comprehensive  notion  to  contain  in  it  all 
those  duties  which  we  owe  to  God  principally,  and  to  the  king  subordinately. 
1.  To  fear  God  is  to  have  awful  apprehensions  of  Him  in  our  thoughts,  and  to 
walk  carefully  before  Him  in  our  actions.  This  fear  is  the  bottom  of  all  true 
spiritual  wisdom ;  the  security  against  all  other  fears ;  a  preservative  against  all 
sin  and  wilful  offence  ;  and  a  good  preparative  for  the  peace  and  welfare  of  society, 
by  restraining  people's  minds  within  the  due  limits  of  their  subjection,  that  we 
may  lead  quiet  and  peaceable  lives  in  all  godliness  and  honesty.  2.  To  fear  the 
king  we  stand  obliged  both  in  conscience  to  God  and  out  of  interest  to  ourselves, 
seeing  that  he  is  the  public  guardian,  upon  whose  well-doing  the  welfare  of  the 
whole  community  depends.  3.  The  sum  of  all  religion  is  to  be  as  pure  in  holiness, 
so  peaceable  in  righteousness,  when  we  order  ourselves  piously  to  God  and 
obediently  to  the  magistrate.  The  interests  of  religion  and  policy  are  so  nearly 
twisted  and  woven  together  that  they  cannot  be  severed  from  one  another  without 
the  utmost  hazard  to  both.  Kebellion  and  schism  are  wont  to  go  hand  in  hand 
together.  H.  The  caution.  1.  As  an  expedient  for  the  duty.  The  way  to  keep 
in  the  fear  of  God  and  the  king  is  to  forbear  the  company  of  these  restless  folk,  to 
keep  at  a  distance  from  them,  and  have  nothing  to  do  with  them.  2.  As  a  con- 
sequent of  this  duty.  He  that  hath  any  fear  of  God  and  the  king  will  keep  him- 
self within  compass.  A  pious  soul,  a  loyal  heart,  will  admit  of  nothing  that  may 
shake  or  call  in  question  its  fidelity.  As  to  these  changers — 1.  Inquire  who  they 
are.  Iterantes,  men  who  go  over  things  again  and  never  have  done.  Variantes, 
who  vary  their  course  through  all  points  of  the  compass.  Detractors,  that  speak 
evil  of  dignities,  both  temporal  and  spiritual.  Declinantes,  stragglers,  who  go  out 
of  God's  and  the  king's  highway.  2.  What  is  it  not  to  meddle  with  them  ?  It  is 
to  mark  these  men,  and  observe  the  dangerous  mixture  of  their  fine  parts  and  foul 
designs.  Consider  well  the  tendency  and  drift  of  such  principles  as  theirs. 
3.  The  reasons  why  such  men  are  not  to  be  meddled  with.  There  is  no  knowing 
how  far  they  may  lead  you.  Though  you  may  be  innocent,  you  may  get  wrapped 
up  in  others'  guilt.  If  you  escape  now,  you  will  suffer  one  day,  in  the  peace  of 
thy  conscience.  And  thou  dost  endanger  the  eternal  safety  of  thy  soul.  Since  it 
is  so,  let  us  take  heed  to  ourselves,  and  establish  our  spirits  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord 
and  the  king,  and  as  we  wish  well  to  our  own  persons  and  to  our  posterity  after  us, 
let  us  have  nothing  to  do  with  these  changers.  (Adam  Littleton,  D.D.)  Our 
duty  to  God  and  man  : — Civil  government  is  the  great  comprehensive  worldly 
blessing  ;  for  it  is  the  foundation  of  peace  and  quiet,  the  spring  and  fountain  of  all 
those  inestimable  advantages  which  adorn  and  felicitate  human  societies.  I.  The 
DUTIES  WHICH  WE  OWE  TO  GoD  AND  THE  KING.  The  fear  of  God  is  oftentimes  put 
for  the  whole  sum  of  religion.  We  are  also  to  fear  the  king,  and  though  there  is 
not  an  equal  reason,  yet  there  is  a  sufficient  one  for  this  fear.  The  king  is  God's 
vicegerent  and  representative.  And  there  must  be  something  to  work  upon  men's 
fears  as  well  as  to  convince  their  understandings,  before  they  will  learn  or  practise 
the  duty  of  subjection.  Eeligion  and  loyalty  have  a  close  dependence  on  each 
other,  and  a  strict  connection  with  each  other.  No  man  can  be  truly  religious  who 
is  not  a  good  subject.  No  man  can  be  steadily  and  immovably  loyal  who  is  not 
truly  and  sincerely  religious.  II.  A  proper  means  prescribed  for  securing  and 
PRESERVING  US  IN  OUR  DUTT.  Bewaie  of  those  who  are  given  to  changes,  e.g.,  the 
atheist,  the  restless,  the  rebellious.  (William  Stainforth.)  Religion  in  national 
life : — I.   The    perfections    which    render    God    the    object    of    oub    fear. 


688  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiiv. 

II.  The  peak  of  God  and  the  king  is  the  best  peeservative  against  the  dis- 

TUEBERS    OF   THE   PEACE    AND    QUIET    OF    ALL     GOVERNMENT.       It    is    the    foundation    Of 

all  those  virtues  from  which  the  peace  and  happiness  of  governments  must  arise, 
and  the  most  effectual  restraint  upon  the  vicious  appetites  and  passions  of  men. 
Those  in  whom  this  principle  rules  cannot  help  looking  upon  others  as  the  ser- 
vants of  one  Sovereign  Master,  and  this  consideration  must  dispose  them  to  have 
the  tenderest  regard  for  their  welfare,  and  tie  them  together  by  the  strictest  bands 
of  fraternal  love  and  friendship.     And  this  principle  must  naturally  contribute  to 
the  regulating  and  composing  those  disorderly  affections  and  passions  which  are 
the  great  enemies  and  disturbers  of  the  peace  of  mankind.     Kehgion  fixes  that 
levity  and  weakness  of  mind  which  is  so  natural  to  man ;  it  unites  his  actions  and 
resolutions  to  one  great  end,  and  makes  them  consistent  and  regular  ;  and  is  the 
best  cure  of  that  restlessness  of  mind  which  closely  adheres  to  our  very  natures, 
and  renders  us  dissatisfied  with  what  we  are,  or  what  we  at  present  possess  or 
enjoy  ;  and  too  often  disposes  us  wantonly  to  desire  changes  for  the  very  sake  of 
changing.     {John  Wilcox,  D.D.)        Religious  loyalty  : — The  possession  of  power 
is  one  thing  ;  guidance  how  to  use  it  is  another.     The  sacred  writings  contemplated 
your  present  as  well  as  your  future.     The  present,  what  is  it  but  the  future  begun  ? 
The  future,  what  is  it  but  the  present  completed  ?     He  will  most  enjoy  the  glories 
of  the  future  whose  life  of  practical  holiness  best  attests  the  work  of  grace  within 
him  now.     The  whole  power  of  this  verse  consists  in  its  unity.     It  is  not,  "  My  son, 
fear  thou  the  Lord,"  and  then,  "  My  son,  fear  thou  the  king  "  ;  but,  "  My  son,  fear 
thou  the  Lord  and  the  king."     I.  The  remarkable  command.     There   is    much 
force  in  that  word,  "fear  thou."    Be  unmoved  by  any  motives,  or  influences,  or 
examples,  which  may  press  you  to  do  otherwise  than  thus.     If  all  around  you  are 
wrong,  "  fear  thou."     Multitudes  do  not  prove  a  matter  to  be  right.     Act  for  your- 
self, and  do  not  fear  to  stand  alone.     The  command  here  is,  fear  both  God  and  the 
king.     You  must  do  the  latter  if  the  former  be  regarded.     The  fear  of  God  brings 
with  it  a  principle  of  obedience,  which  will  influence  your  conduct  in  aU  things. 
The  two  things  are  united  morally,  and  so  a  true  Christian  must  be  a  good  subject. 
II.  The  danger  of  forgetting  this  command.     The   antithesis  is  very  striking. 
"  Meddle  not  with  them  that  are  given  to  change."    But  change  must  not  be  con- 
fused with  progress  and  improvement.     Change  means  things  that  imperil  primary 
principles  of   righteousness.     III.  The    results   of   neglecting   this   command. 
"  Their  calamity  shall  come  suddenly."     Apply — To  serve  your  generation  by  the 
wiU  of  God  is  one  of  the  duties  and  privileges  of  your  present  state.     You  will  do  it 
if  you  fear  "  both  God  and  the  king."    {George  Venables.)       Advice  and  penalty  : — 
I.  The  advice.     The  commendation  "  My  son"  stands  first.     This  is  such  a  coun- 
sel as  a  father  would  give  a  son.    And  that  it  is  no  evil  one  we  may  be  sure.    There 
is  in  this  counsel  a  single  act—"  fear  " — and  a  double  object — "  God  and  the  king." 
The  main  drift  of  the  advice  is,  a  resentive  against  meddling  with  certain  persons. 
It  consists  of  two  counter  points.     Do  this  and  eschew  that.     Follow  one,  fly  the 
other.     II.  The  penalty.     It  is  punishment  enough  for  a  man  not  to  follow  good 
counsel  when  it  is  given  him.     Yet  God  hath  so  ordered,  as  there  goeth  ever  some 
further  evil  with  the  contempt  of  good  counsel.     The  penalty  is  no  less  than 
destruction  and  ruin  ;  a  sudden  destruction,  an  unknown  ruin.     Solomon  sits  here 
as   a  counsellor  and  as  a  judge — a  counsellor  to  advise,  a  judge  to  pronounce. 
Hear  his  counsel,  then  ;  if  not,  hear  your  sentence.     Choose  which  verse  you  will 
be  in.     In  one  of  them  we  must  be.     In  the  verse  of  counsel,  "  Fear  God  and  the 
king,"  or  in  the  verse  of  penalty,  "  For  their  destruction,"  &c.     (Bp.  Lancelot 
Andrewes.)        Fear  God  and  king  : — The  word  "fear"  expresses  the  general  idea 
of  reverence,  or  of  holding  in  awe.     God  is  to  be  feared  according  to  the  nature 
and  authority  of  His  government,  kings  according  to  the  nature  and  authority  of 
theirs  ;  God  supremely,  kings  subordinately  ;  God  as  the  source  of  all  power,  kings 
as  holding  theirs  of  God,  and  responsible  to  Him  for  the  use  they  make  of  it.     God 
for  His  character  ;  kings  simply  as  the  representatives  of  power.     God  with  a  fear 
ever  associated  with  the  love  of  complacency ;  kings  with  as  much  love  as  their 
personal  character  admits  of.     {R,  Wardlaw,  D.D.)        Loyalty  of  the  Christian 
spirit : — Dr.  Biichsel,  speaking  of  the  conventicles  in  Germany,  early  in  the  cen- 
tury, in  which  evangehcal  piety,  which  had  no  voice  in   the   Churches,  found 
refuge,  says:  "  I  noticed  that  all  of  this  way  of  thinking,  however  much  they  sus- 
pected regularly  ordained  ministers  and  Church  authorities,  yet  appeared  to  place 
heartfelt   confidence    in    the   king.    They  were   universally  persuaded  that   his 
majesty  personally  was  well  inclined  towards  them.    The  king  was  invariably 


CHAP,  xxiT.]  PROVERBS.  689 

prayed  for  with  the  utmost  affection."  {J.  F.  B.  Tinling,  B.A.)  And  meddle 
not  with  them  that  are  given  to  change. — Given  to  change : — Harmony  and 
order  preserve  societies,  when  all  men  that  are  in  a  subordinate  state  do  readily 
yield  to  him  who  is  the  supreme  according  to  God's  law.  Maximus  Tyrius,  the 
Platonist,  speaks  of  three  sorts  of  government — monarchy,  aristocracy,  and  demo- 
cracy. One  end  of  religion  is  to  be  serviceable  even  to  the  political  and  civil 
interests  of  mankind ;  and  because  there  can  be  no  temporal  felicity  without  peace, 
nor  peace  without  loyal  and  dutiful  submission,  the  text  calls  on  all  such  as  would 
be  truly  happy  to  "fear  God  and  the  king."  I.  An  affjrmative  command.  That 
we  express  that  humble  and  universal  fear  which  is  due  to  God's  majesty,  and  that 
becoming  reverence  which  is  due  to  the  king's  majesty  for  God's  sake.  (This 
subject  not  now  treated  fully.)  II.  A  negative  precept.  That  we  have  nothing 
to  do  with  those  who,  when  things  are  well,  under  pretence  of  mending  would 
fain  mar  aU,  and  alter  everything,  whether  it  be  religion,  or  laws,  or  government, 
that  heth  in  their  way.  Some  render  the  verse  thus,  "Meddle  not  with  them  that 
act  their  iniquities  over  again ;  them  that  are  disobedient  and  disloyal  afresh ; 
them  that  repeat  their  old  sins  against  the  king  and  his  regalities;  them  that  are 
for  a  change,  but  not  of  their  own  principles  and  courses."  Solomon's  own 
experience  led  him  to  warn  his  son  against  intractable  and  ungrateful  men.  Other 
expositors  do  not  so  restrain  the  sense  of  the  text,  but  interpret  it  generally  of  all 
that  are  given  to  change,  though  some  of  them  for  a  considerable  time  may  have 
kept  touch  with  the  government :  "  Meddle  not  with  them  that  change  their  good 
principles ;  with  them  that  warp  their  obedience ;  with  them  that  are  unsteady 
and  inconsistent  with  themselves,  and  observe  the  pulse  of  the  times."  Men  should 
be  quiet  and  dutiful,  and  contented  with  their  lot  when  things  are  well  and  in  their 
right  channel,  and  not  abet  the  practices  of  those  who  cannot  be  at  ease  until  the 
mire  be  stirred,  and  the  wheel  be  turned  upside  down.  Keasons  for  this  advice  of 
the  text :  1.  A  retinue  of  the  most  mischievous  concomitants  and  effects,  as  war, 
bloodshed,  confusion,  rapine,  the  subversion  of  laws,  and  ruin  of  families,  follow 
upon  these  restless  changes,  these  evils  of  innovation.  2.  Change  of  government 
is  rarely  attempted  but  under  some  cleanly  disguise  and  popular  pretence.  Popular 
states  have  been  erected  by  the  popular  tricks  of  men.  Kecommend  three  practical 
things — 1.  The  fear  of  the  Lord.  No  confidence  can  be  placed  but  in  men  who 
act  upon  the  right  principles  of  religion  and  honesty.  2.  The  fear  of  the  king  is 
coercive  of  obedience.  3.  Avoid  the  company  of  restless  spirits ;  have  no  fellow- 
ship with  them.  {Edioard  Felling.)  The  fewer  changes  the  better  : — Man's 
power  of  adapting  himself  to  new  spheres  and  work  is  placed  within  such  strict 
limitations,  that  the  fewer  changes  he  makes  in  life  the  better.  There  is  a  law  of 
limitation  for  animals  and  men.  And  the  facts  respecting  the  limited  range 
enjoyed  by  some  animals  are  not  more  noteworthy  than  are  those  respecting  the 
limited  range  of  some  men.  There  are  some  persons  who  do  weU  enough  in  the 
duU  dreary  region  of  a  cold  official  life,  whose  existence  is  unendurable  in 
the  midst  of  the  associations  of  wit  and  romance.  The  red-tape  species  die  if 
brought  away  from  the  frigid  regions  of  officialism  and  formality ;  and  there  are 
many  poor  men  who  live  honest,  useful  lives  in  the  scenes  of  indigence  who,  when 
fortune  unexpectedly  transports  them  into  the  luxuriant  scenes  of  opulence  and 
gaiety,  die  from  some  one  or  other  of  the  results  of  the  change  for  which  they  were 
not  constituted.  Many  attempts  have  been  made  to  remove  very  good  men  from 
one  position  to  another,  and  the  result  has  been  a  termination  of  their  usefulness, 
and  often  of  their  life.  The  notion  that  men  can  adapt  themselves  to  anything  is 
an  error  arising  from  want  of  observation.  There  is  a  sphere  for  every  man ;  and, 
as  a  rule,  the  removal  of  him  when  he  is  fairly  acclimatised  either  renders  him 
useless  altogether,  or  makes  it  necessary  that  he  should  be  sustained  by  artificial 
inventions,  and  in  that  case  he  cannot  lead  that  natural  life  which  is  necessary  in 
the  full  development  of  his  powers.  It  wiU  also  be  found  that  these  difficulties  in 
adapting  men  to  great  changes  of  position  increase  with  their  age.  (R.  J.  Graves, 
F.R.S.)  Improvement  justifies  change : — To  oppose  all  changes  is  to  set  up  a  plea 
of  perfection.  Every  improvement  (and  where  is  there  not  need  for  improvement?) 
is  a  change.  But  public  evils  are  not  to  be  mended  by  railing.  To  be  "  given  to 
change  "  ;  to  alter  for  the  sake  of  altering ;  to  be  weary  of  the  old  and  captivated 
with  the  new,  however  untried  ;  to  make  experiments  upon  modes  of  government, 
is  a  fearful  hazard.  It  is  losing  the  substance  of  real  good  in  the  dream  of 
imaginary  improvements ;  as  if  we  must  undo  everything  rather  than  be  idle. 
(C.  Bridges,  M.A.) 


590  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxit. 

Vers.  23-26.  These  things  also  belong  to  the  wise. — Social  conduct : — I.  Here  is 
PARTIALITY  OF  JUDGMENT  ;  that  Is  bad.  "  It  is  no  good  to  have  respect  of  persons 
in  judgment."  The  principle  of  impartiality  is  enjoined  both  in  the  Old  and  the 
Kew  Testament.  In  the  Old,  "  Ye  shall  do  no  unrighteousness  in  judgment;  thou 
shalt  not  respect  the  person  of  the  poor,  nor  honour  the  person  of  the  mighty ;  but 
in  righteousness  shalt  thou  judge  thy  neighbour."  In  the  New  Testament  we  have 
these  words,  "  My  brethren,  have  not  the  faith  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Lord 
of  glory,  with  respect  of  persons,"  &c.  (Jas.  ii.  1-9).  II.  Here  is  flattery  of  the 
WICKED,  which  is  execrable.  "  He  that  saith  unto  the  wicked.  Thou  art  righteous, 
him  shall  the  people  curse ;  nations  shall  abhor  him."  If  the  wicked  man  be  great 
in  wealth,  exalted  in  social  influence  and  political  power,  there  is  a  wondrous 
tendency  in  all  the  grades  below  to  flatter  him  as  a  "  righteous  "  man."  III.  Here 
is  REPROVING  OF  THE  WRONG,  which  is  blesscd.  "  But  to  them  that  rebuke  him  shall 
be  delight,"  &c.  1.  There  is  a  delight  in  such  work.  *'  To  them  that  rebuke 
him  shall  be  delight."  "What  is  the  delight?  The  delight  of  an  approving 
conscience.  2.  There  is  Divine  favour  in  such  work.  "  A  good  blessing  shall  come 
upon  you."  God  will  express  His  favour  to  such  a  man  in  many  ways.  3.  There 
is  social  approbation  in  such  work.  "  Every  man  shall  kiss  his  lips  that  giveth  the 
right  answer."    {Homilist.) 

Ver.  25.  To  them  that  rebuke  him  shall  be  delight,  and  a  good  blessing  shall 
come  upon  them. — The  duty  of  rebukmg  the  wicked: — I.  The  duty  and  its 
OBLIGATION.  By  "  robukc  "  we  may  understand  either  that  friendly  office  exercised 
by  private  persons  towards  their  trespassing  brethren,  with  a  design  and  hope  of 
reclaiming  them  from  their  evil  ways,  or  else  that  severer  method  of  proceeding  by 
public  censures  and  legal  punishments,  inflicted  by  persons  in  authority,  with  the 
same  charitable  end  in  view.  Private  Christians  have  a  call  and  authority  suffi- 
cient to  admonish  and  reprove,  where  it  can  be  done  prudently  and  seasonably. 
"We  must  not  think  ourselves  at  liberty  to  suffer  sin  and  wickedness,  committed  in 
our  sight  and  hearing,  to  pass  without  correction.  The  aid  of  the  civil  magistrate 
may  be  needed  for  those  who  will  not  be  reformed  and  reclaimed  from  an  evil 
course  by  arguments  fetched  from  another  world,  but  may  be  forced  into  better 
manners  by  temporal  punishments.  "When  these  punishments  have  no  fitness 
in  them  to  make  men  better,  they  are  of  great  use  to  prevent  their  growing  worse 
and  more  hardened  in  their  sins.  The  infliction  of  legal  penalties  is  also  necessary 
to  prevent  the  contagion  of  bad  example,  that  the  venom  spread  no  further,  to  taint 
the  sound  members,  and  corrupt  those  who  are  well  disposed.  II.  The  motives 
WHICH  excite  to  THE  PERFORMANCE  OF  THIS  DUTY.  1.  Delight,  or  an  inward  joy  and 
satisfaction,  flowing  from  the  testimony  of  a  good  conscience,  which  is  the  most 
agreeable  of  all  comforts.  The  thought  of  good  done  lies  easy  in  men's  minds,  and 
the  reflection  upon  it  doth  ever  after  minister  comfort  and  delight  to  them.  The 
greatest  good  one  man  can  possibly  do  another  is  to  assist  and  further  him  in  the 
way  of  salvation  ;  to  keep  him  within  the  lines  of  duty ;  and  to  reclaim  him  to  a 
better  course.  2.  A  good  blessing.  A  just  God  will  not  let  this  labour  of  love  pass 
without  reward.  He  will  consider  it  in  proportion  to  the  measure  of  good  that  is 
done  by  it,  and  the  discouragements  and  difficulties  with  which  it  is  usually 
attended.  The  good  blessing  includes  the  blessing  of  men.  Every  man  who 
rebukes  evil  without  fear  or  favour  shall,  for  his  integrity,  wisdom,  and  courage, 
be  had  in  universal  esteem.  A  good  magistrate  is  respected  and  honoured  by 
those  who  have  no  great  regard  to  religion,  for  reasons  of  state.  How  much  more 
may  such  expect  honour  and  veneration  from  those  who  are  concerned  for  religion 
and  the  glory  of  God.  {John  Waugh,  D.I).)  The  delight  of  the  rebuker  of  evil : — 
"Whence  comes  this  delight?  1.  From  the  consciousness  of  having  done  rightly. 
2.  From  the  possession  of  public  approbation,  affection,  and  confidence.  8.  From 
a  sense  of  Divine  approbation.  4.  From  the  affection  and  complacency  of  all  good 
men,  and  the  grateful  acknowledgments  of  those  whose  causes  have  been  carefully, 
disinterestedly,  and  righteously  investigated  and  determined ;  even  those  who  fail 
having,  notwithstanding,  a  testimony  in  their  consciences  to  the  soundness  of 
principle,  and  the  sincerity  of  the  desire  to  do  right,  with  which  all  has  been  con- 
ducted.    (R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.) 

Ver.  27.  Prepare  thy  work  without,  and  make  it  lit  for  thyself  in  the  Held ;  and 
afterwards  build  thine  house. — Preparation;  its  nature,  obligations,  and  blessings : — 
God  loves  preparations.     God  gives  little  but  to  preparations.    All  His  own  great 


CHAP,  rsiv.]  PROVERBS.  591 

works  He  has  done  preparedly.  Creation  was  not  done  without  great  forethought 
(chap.  viii.  27-31).  And  redemption  was  no  sudden  after-thought,  for  before  the 
foundation  of  the  earth  was  laid  redemption  was  cast  in  the  mind  of  God.  And 
every  event  that  happens  to  every  man,  it  was  planned  ages  before  the  man  wag 
born.  And  the  children  of  Israel  did  not  enter  Canaan  till  they  had  gone  through 
a  preparatory  discipline.  Neither  did  prophets,  nor  apostles,  nor  Jesus  Himself, 
begin  work  without  an  interval  of  solitude  and  discipline  for  perfect  readiness. 
The  preparation  of  Jesus  was  marvellous.  Ten-elevenths  of  that  life,  of  which 
every  moment  was  gold — ten-elevenths  given  to  preparation.  Eightly  viewed, 
everything  this  side  heaven,  and  perhaps  we  need  not  draw  the  limit  line  even 
there — everything  is  preparation.  Within  the  compass  of  this  present  world  every- 
thing is  placed  in  the  state  and  order  that  it  is,  to  fit  us  for  another  thing  which  ia 
coming  afterwards.  Just  as  in  a  good  education  every  rule  leads  up  to  a  higher 
rule,  and  every  new  piece  of  knowledge  is  the  basis  of  another  piece,  so  that  the 
mind  is  always  being  made  ready  for  something  beyond  it,  so  it  is  in  God's  dis- 
pensations. A  joy  may  be  a  prelude  to  a  sorrow,  or  a  sorrow  may  be  a  prelude  to  a 
joy,  or  a  joy  to  a  higher  joy,  or  a  sorrow  to  a  still  deeper  sorrow.  Nothing  is 
isolated.  It  is  not  isolated  joy  ;  it  is  not  isolated  sorrow.  The  great  thing  we 
have  to  do  is  to  be  careful  that  we  treat  everything  as  preparatively.  We  should 
always  be  asking,  when  joy  and  sorrow  comes,  "Of  what  is  this  the  precursor? 
what  is  God  going  to  do  with  me  next  ?  "  You  cannot  always  be  doing  duties,  but 
you  can  always  be  preparing  for  them.  And  remember,  preparations  are  the  long 
things  ;  works  are  the  short  things.  Let  the  preparation  suit  what  you  are  going 
to  do — a  general  preparation  for  general  duty — but  a  special  preparation  for 
things  special.  The  materials  you  gather  in  the  "  field "  must  be  suited  to 
the  particular  "house"  which  you  are  going  to  "build."  Always  make  a  stop 
upon  the  eve,  and  search  into  your  own  heart,  and  say,  "Am  I  ready?  has  God 
given  me  a  true  preparation  ? "  If  not,  as  far  as  you  can,  stop  a  little  longer 
before  you  take  another  step.  Whatever  else  you  do,  secure  preparation  before 
you  begin.  There  is  a  frame  of  mind  which  is  a  continual  preparedness.  It 
is  the  "  Here  I  am  !  "  of  the  patriarchs.  It  is  a  high,  blessed  state.  (J.  Vaughan, 
M.A.)  Preparation  for  life's  duties,  sorrows,  and  joys  : — I  should  place  first 
among  preparations — the  Sunday.  A  Sunday  will  be  a  preparation,  if  you  view  it 
as  preparatory.  It  does  not  much  matter  whether  you  look  upon  it  as  the  day  for 
laying  in  the  mind's  food  for  the  week,  or  as  the  day  for  raising  the  mind  to  its 
true  tone  and  level  for  the  week,  or  as  the  day  to  hallow  anything  to  which  you 
are  looking,  by  bringing  it  out  especially  before  God  that  day.  It  is  a  very  good 
thing  to  use  the  Sunday  for  laying  before  God,  and  so  solenmly  consecrating, 
and  obtaining  strength  and  wisdom  for,  anything  that  you  are  planning  or 
expecting  in  the  course  of  the  coming  week.  But  if  you  wiU  thus  spend  your 
Sunday  as  a  ground,  apart  from  the  world,  and  in  loftier  ranges  of  thought,  you 
are  "  preparing  your  work  without,  and  making  it  fit  for  yourself  in  the  field  ;  and 
afterwards  build  thine  house."  What  is  true  of  the  Sunday  is  certainly  true  also 
of  aU  private  exercises  of  the  soul ;  and  most  of  all,  our  morning  devotions.  Our 
morning  devotions  should  have  a  distinct,  preparatory  character.  You  will  find  it 
a  good  rule  never  to  open  your  Bible  without  a  little  secret  prayer.  Certainly, 
whatever  it  is  worth  while  for  a  Christian  to  do  at  all,  it  is  worth  while  to  do 
measuredly  and  deUberately.  Better  to  do  a  few  things  so  than  multitudes  lightly. 
And  the  God  of  order  and  of  forethought  will  Himself  bless  what  most  honours 
Him,  by  holy  premeditation  and  religious  accuracy,  in  which  He  sees,  therefore,  the 
most  of  His  own  image.  Map  your  day  before  you  go  out ;  plan  carefully ;  lay  all 
beginnings  in  God  :  "  Prepare  thy  work  without,  and  make  it  fit  for  thyself  in  the 
field ;  and  afterwards  build  thine  house."  But  you  say,  "  What  is  this  preparation? 
I  cannot  so  prepare."  Then  what  does  that  show,  but  that  before  the  beginning 
there  is  another  beginning,  and  that  the  preparation  itself  needs  to  be  prepared  ? 
But  if  you  ask,  "  What  is  the  right  preparation  for  sorrow?  "  I  answer,  first,  not  to 
anticipate  sorrow,  for  that  is  not  filial  nor  childlike,  but  to  have  it  well  laid  in  your 
mind  that  sorrow  must  come,  and  to  know  its  nature,  what  it  is.  For  the  danger 
of  sorrow  is,  lest  it  come  upon  us  overwhelmingly,  and  paralyse  our  powers. 
Therefore,  be  in  a  state  of  mind  which  cannot  be  surprised — not  ignorant  of  what 
sorrow  is  when  it  comes.  Is  not  it  a  needful  discipline  ?  To  prepare  for  joys  the 
rule  is  opposite.  The  preparation  there  lies  in  the  fact  of  the  anticipation.  You 
cannot  expect  too  much.  For  one  of  the  perils  of  a  joy  is  its  throwing  the  mind 
from  its  equilibrium  by  the  rush  of  its  novelty.     But  he  who  has  dealt  much  with 


692  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiir. 

the  great  undertakings  of  God's  love  and  promise  will  scarcely  be  surprised  at  any 
happiness  that  ever  comes.  Is  he  not  loved?  So  the  joy  will  not  come  disturbingly 
to  the  mind.     {Ibid.) 

Vers.  28,  29.  Be  not  a  witness  against  thy  neighbour  without  cause. — The 
nature  and  extent  of  false  witness  : — There  is  nothing  more  dear  and  valuable  to 
men  than  their  reputation  or  good  name.  It  is  a  mark  of  an  abandoned  spirit  to 
have  no  regard  to  it.  Men  have  always  been  very  tender  in  preserving  it  in  them- 
selves, and  they  ought  to  make  great  conscience  of  taking  it  wrongfully  from  others. 
So  much  reputation  is  so  much  power,  and  according  to  men's  esteem  and  credit  in 
the  world,  so  much  proportionably  is  their  influence  and  the  weight  they  have  in  it. 
For  the  same  reasons  that  we  are  obliged  not  to  injure  our  neighbour  in  his  person 
or  property,  we  ought  to  be  very  tender  of  his  good  name  and  reputation.  Then 
always  have  a  just  regard  to  truth  and  charity,  and  the  benefit  and  advantage  of 
the  public.  Our  neighbour  is  whomsoever  it  happens  at  any  time  to  be  in  our 
power  either  to  injure  or  do  kindness  to ;  whosoever  can,  in  any  respect,  become 
the  better  or  the  worse,  or  receive  any  hurt  or  any  benefit,  by  our  behaviour  towards 
them.  The  word  which  we  render  "  deceive  "  signifies  in  the  original,  any  damage 
or  inconvenience  brought  upon  a  man  in  the  way  of  slander,  calumny,  backbiting, 
or  any  other  injurious  ihanner  of  presenting  him.  I.  The  natube  and  extent  op 
THE  SIN  HEBE  FOBBiDDEN.  The  highest  form  of  the  sin  is  deliberately  giving  false 
evidence  in  judicial  matters.  Another  degree  of  the  vice  is  when  men  bear  false 
testimony  against  their  brethren,  after  a  secret  manner,  in  private  conversation. 
Whether  revenge,  or  anything  else,  be  the  temptation  to  the  practice,  the  nature  of 
the  sin  itself  is  of  the  deepest  dye.  There  are  still  lower  degrees  of  the  fault. 
The  careless  and  rash  custom  of  spreading  censorious  reports  to  the  disadvantage 
of  our  neighbour,  without  caring  to  inquire  into  the  truth  of  the  accusation. 
Under  this  head  come  innumerable  sorts  of  calumny,  detraction,  slander,  evil- 
speaking,  backbiting,  tale-bearing,  rash  judgment,  &c.  Men  in  such  matters  are 
often  faulty  through  negligence  and  want  of  care  and  attention.  That  person  is  a 
very  perfect  man  indeed  who  can  be  continually  upon  his  guard  against  this  error. 
The  lowest  degree  of  this  fault  is  when  men  are  censorious  towards  their  brethren, 
spreading  abroad  things  that  are  true  needlessly,  and  contrary  to  the  laws  of 
charity.  It  is  a  breach  of  Christian  charity  to  take  delight  in  spreading  even  true 
reports  needlessly,  to  the  damage,  or  disadvantage,  of  our  neighbour.  II.  Eeasons 
OB  motives  which  ought  to  influence  oub  peactice  in  this  matter.  From  the 
nature  and  constitution  of  human  society  there  arises  a  strong  argument  why  men 
ought  to  govern  their  words  as  well  as  actions.  By  injurious  speech,  mutual  trust 
and  good-will  are  destroyed,  on  which  depends  the  welfare  and  happiness  of 
mankind.  Mischief  comes  to  the  man  himself.  The  natural  punishment  of  a 
licentious  and  unbridled  tongue  is  the  inconveniences  it  is  very  apt  to  bring,  in 
the  course  of  things,  upon  the  person  himself.  But  worse  is  the  secret  damage 
done  to  others.  Slander  and  uncharitable  defamation  is  "  a  pestilence  that  walketh 
in  darkness."  Another  motive  obliging  men  to  restrain  licentious  speech  is  the 
consideration  of  the  inconsistency  of  it  with  a  due  sense  of  religion.  A  principal 
part  of  pure  religion  is  that  men  approve  themselves  by  a  good  conversation,  with 
meekness  of  wisdom.  Another  argument  against  calumny  is  the  consideration 
that  we  are  ourselves  subject  to  error.  He  that  is  infallibly  secured  against  all 
errors  himself,  let  him  be  as  censorious  as  he  pleases  upon  the  mistakes  of 
others.  Our  Saviour  forbids  this  censoriousness  towards  others,  under  the  penalty 
of  being  more  strictly  judged  ourselves.  {S.  Clarke,  D.D.)  Wrong  testimony 
against  neighbours : — The  verses  suggest  three  kinds  of  wrong  testimony.  I.  A 
CAUSELESS  ONE.  "  Be  Hot  a  witness  against  thy  neighbour  without  cause." 
There  are  those  who  are,  for  no  service,  either  to  themselves  or  to  society, 
testifying  of  the  defects  and  infirmities  of  their  neighbours.  II.  A  false 
OME.  "  And  deceive  not  with  thy  lips."  III.  A  eevengeful  one.  "  Say  not,  I  will 
do  so  to  him  as  he  hath  done  to  me :  I  will  render  to  the  man  according  to  his 
work."  {Homilist.)  Revenging  injuries : — These  words  are  a  direct  prohibition 
of  revenging  injuries  and  recompensing  evil  for  evil,  and  give  us  a  rule  of  duty  in 
case  of  wrong  done  to  us.  I.  Was  revenge  allowed  to  the  Jews  ?  In  Lev.  lix.  18 
it  is  said,  "  Thou  shalt  not  avenge  or  bear  any  grudge  against  the  children  of  thy 
people."  This  has  been  taken  to  imply  that  a  Jew  might  kill  a  stranger,  and 
consequently  take  any  inferior  degree  of  revenge  on  him.  But  compare  the 
injunctions  respecting  the  treatment  of  the  stranger  in  Ezod.  zxii.  and  xziii. ; 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  PROVERBS.  593 

Lev.  xix.  9,  10;  Deut.  x.,  &c.  As  to  the  retaliation  granted  (Exod.  xxi.  24),  this 
allowance  was  not  made  to  the  party  injured,  so  that  he  might  satisfy  and  distribute 
justice  to  himself ;  but  to  the  judge,  so  that  he  might  allot  compensation  for  the 
wrong  done.  II.  Enforce  the  geeat  duty  of  forgiveness.  1.  From  the  reason- 
ableness of  this  duty  in  itself.  Seasonable  men  must  allow  its  force  and  truth. 
By  corrupt  and  undisciplined  natures  only  is  revenge  counted  as  a  mark  of  a  noble 
and  brave  spirit.  But  it  is  a  sign  of  superiority  of  mind  to  forgive  the  trespass. 
We  ought  to  make  our  forgiveness  as  useful  to  the  trespasser  as  possibly  we  can. 
Prudence  should  arrest  the  forwardness  of  charity  in  granting  pardons.  2.  The 
great  weight  our  Saviour  lays  upon  our  forgiving  others,  in  order  to  our  title  to  our 
own  forgiveness.  There  is  no  proportion  in  number  betwixt  our  offences  against 
God  and  those  of  the  most  offensive  of  our  brethren  against  us.  3.  We  have 
great  reason  to  forgive  them,  because  of  the  good  use  and  advantage  wc  may  make 
of  our  enemies.     Charity  is  the  greatest  manager  in  the  world.     III.  Mistakes 

WHICH  MISLEAD  MEN  IN  THEIR  JUDGMENTS  CONCERNING  THEIR  OWN  FORGIVENESS.     1.  The 

mistake  of  those  who  think  they  have  paid  a  fair  obedience  to  the  law  of  charity, 
when  they  strike  the  offender  only  with  the  impartial  hand  of  that  of  the  law. 
2.  The  mistake  of  those  who  think  they  may  consign  the  trespasser  to  the  judgment 
of  God.  3.  The  mistake  of  judging  the  truth  of  our  forgiveness  on  a  principle  of  sloth. 
Some  men  are  too  ready  to  move  themselves  to  resentment.  4.  The  mistake  of 
thinking  we  have  forgiven,  when  the  fact  is  that  the  impressions  have  only 
worn  off  our  minds.  This  is  forgetting,  not  forgiving,  since  forgiveness  is  properly 
our  own  work,  and  not  one  of  time.  {George  Wallis,  D.D.)  Retaliation 
repudiated : — An  incident  weU  worth  relating  is  told  of  General  Kobert  Lee,  the 
Confederate  officer  during  the  American  Civil  War.  Jefferson  Davis  once  asked 
him  what  he  thought  of  a  certain  officer  in  the  army,  as  he  had  an  important  place 
he  wanted  fiUed  by  a  trustworthy  man.  Lee  gave  the  officer  an  excellent  recom- 
mendation, and  he  was  immediately  promoted  to  the  position.  Some  of  Lee's 
friends  told  him  that  the  officer  had  said  some  very  bitter  things  against  him,  and 
were  surprised  at  the  General's  recommendation.  "I  was  not  asked,"  said  Lee, 
"for  the  officer's  opinion  of  me,  but  my  opinion  of  him."  Only  a  noble  heart 
could  prompt  such  action.  In  praying,  we  are  told  to  love  our  enemies,  but  in 
our  every-day  life  we  too  often  love  only  those  who  love  us. 

Vers.  30-34.  I  went  by  the  field  of  the  slothful. — The  moral  sluggard : — Take 
these  words  as  a  pointed  reproof  of  the  negligent  and  immoral  head  of  a  family. 
The  cause  of  prevailing  irreligion  is  the  deplorable  negligence  of  masters  and  heads 
of  families,  in  cultivating  that  field  which  is  more  immediately  placed  under  their 
inspection  and  care.  1.  The  fatal  consequences  of  irreligious  sloth  and  negligence 
in  those  whom  Providence  hath  raised  up  to  be  the  heads  of  families.  Families 
are  the  nurseries  of  the  Church  and  state  :  it  is  from  them  that  every  department 
of  life  is  fiUed  up.  Who  is  the  slothful  man  ?  It  is  the  moral  sluggard  whom  the 
inspired  writer  has  in  view — the  man  who  shows  his  children  and  servants,  by  all 
his  pursuits,  that  this  world  is  all  for  which  they  need  to  care.  He  neglects  the 
important  seasons  and  opportunities  for  moral  culture.  He  does  not  teach  them  the 
duties  which  they  owe  to  one  another  and  to  society.  He  may  permit  them  to  be 
instructed  by  others,  but  he  does  not  support  the  instruction  by  his  own  influence 
and  example.  See  the  consequences  of  this  negligence  illustrated  in  the  sluggard's 
garden.  Being  destitute  of  rule,  management,  or  control,  his  children  absorb 
every  wrong  sentiment  with  their  earliest  sense,  and  are  more  and  more  corrupted 
with  every  breath  they  draw.  There  is  no  order,  calmness,  moderation,  or  self- 
command  among  the  members  of  his  family.  2.  The  futility  of  such  apologies  as 
are  usually  made  for  this  negligence.  They  have  not  time  ;  they  have  not  capacity ; 
or  they  do  not  feel  under  obligation  in  this  direction.  {James  Somerville.)  The 
sluggard's  farm  : — On  one  occasion  Solomon  looked  over  the  broken  waU  of  a  little 
estate  which  belonged  to  a  farmer  of  his  country.  It  consisted  of  a  piece  of  ploughed 
land  and  a  vineyard.  One  glance  showed  him  that  it  was  owned  by  a  sluggard, 
who  neglected  it ;  for  the  weeds  had  grown  right  plentifully,  and  covered  all  the 
face  of  the  ground.  From  this  Solomon  gathered  instruction.  Men  generally 
learn  wisdom  if  they  have  wisdom.  Some  look  only  at  the  surface,  while  others 
see  not  only  the  outside  shell  but  the  living  kernel  of  truth  which  is  hidden  in  all 
outward  things.  We  may  find  instruction  everywhere.  We  may  gather  rare 
lessons  from  things  that  we  do  not  like.  I.  The  description  of  a  slothful  man. 
Solomon  was  right  when  he  called  him  "  a  man  void  of  understanding."     Not 

39 


594  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  xxiv. 


only  does  he  not  understand  anything,  but  he  has  no  understanding  to  understand 
•with.     He  is  empty-headed  if  he  is  a  sluggard.     As  a  rule  we  may  measure  a  man's 
understanding  by  his  useful  activities.     Certain  persons  call  themselves  "  cultured," 
and  yet  they  cultivate  nothing.     If  knowledge,  culture,  education  do  not  lead  to 
practical  service  of   God,  we  cannot  have  learned  what  Solomon  calls  wisdom. 
True  wisdom   is  practical ;    boastful  culture   vapours   and  theorises.      Wisdom 
ploughs  its  field,  hoes  its  vineyard,  looks  to  its  crops,  tries  to  make  the  best  of 
everything ;  and  he  who  does  not  do  so,  whatever  may  be  his  knowledge  of  this,  of 
that,  of  the  other,  is  "  a  man  void  of  understanding."     1.  Because  he  has  oppor- 
tunities which  he  does  not  use.     2.  Because  being  bound  to  the  performance  of 
certain  duties  he  did  not  fulfil  them.     3.  Because  he  has  capacities  which  he  does 
not  employ.     4.  Because  he  trifles  with  matters  which  demand  his  most  earnest 
heed.     The  Christian  who  is  slothful  in  his  Master's  service  has  no  idea  what  he  is 
losing.     II.  Look  at  the  sluggard's  land.      1.  Land   wUl  produce   something ; 
some  kind  of  fruit,  good  or  bad.     If  you  are  idle  in  God's  work  you  are  active  in 
the  devil's  work.     2.  If  the  soul  be  not  farmed  for  God,  it  will  yield  its  natural 
produce.     What  is  the  natural  produce  of  land  when  left  to  itself  ?     3.  If  we  are 
slothful,  the  natural  produce  of  our  heart  and  of  our  sphere  will  be  most  inconve- 
nient and  unpleasant  to  ourselves.     4.  In  many  instances  there  will  be  a  great  deal 
of  this  evil  produce.     III.  Thebe  must  be  some  lesson  in  all  this.     1.  Unaided 
nature  will  always  produce  thorns  and  nettles,  and  nothing  else.     2.  See  the  little 
value  of  natural  good  intentions.     This  man,  who  left  his  field  and  his  vineyard  to 
be  overgrown,  always  meant  to  work  hard  one  of  these  fine  days.     Probably  the 
worst  people  in  the  world  are  those  who  have  the  best  intentions  but  never  carry 
them  out.     Take  heed  of  little  delays  and  short  puttings-off.     You  have  wasted 
time  enough  already;  come  to  the  point  at  once  before  the  clock  strikes  again. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)         The  broken  fence  : — The  slothful  man  did  no  hurt  to  his 
fellow-men.     He  was  not  grossly  vicious ;  he  had  not  energy  enough  to  care  for 
that.     He  always  let  well  alone,  and  for  the  matter  of  that,  he  let  ill  alone.     Yet 
he  always  meant  to  be  right.     I.  Look  at  this  broken  fence.     In  the  beginning 
it  was  a  good  fence,  a  stone  wall.     Mention  some  of  the  stone  walls  that  men  permit 
to  be  broken  down  when  they  backslide.     1.  Sound  principles  instilled  in  youth. 
2.    Solid   doctrines    which    have    been    learned.      3.  Good    habits   once  formed. 
4.  Week-night  services  are  a  stone  wall.    5.  So  is  Bible-reading.     6.  So  is  a  public 
profession  of  faith.     7.  So  is  firmness  of  character.     II.  The  consequences  of  a 
bkoken-down  fence.     1.  The  boundary  has  gone.     He  does  not  know  which  is  his 
Lord's  property,  and  which  remains  an  open  common.     2.  The  protection  is  gone. 
When  a  man's  heart  has  its  wall  broken  all  his  thoughts  will  go  astray,  and  wander 
upon  the  mountains  of  vanity.    Nor  is  this  all,  for  as  good  things  go  out,  so  bad 
things  come  in.     3.  The  land  itself  will  go  away.     In  many  parts  of  Palestine  the 
land  is  all  ups  and  downs  on  the  sides  of  the  hills,  and  every  bit  of  ground  is 
terraced,  and  kept  up  by  walls.     When  the  walls  fall  the  soil  slips  over  terrace 
upon  terrace,  and  the  vines  and  trees  go  down  with  it ;  then  the  rain  comes  and 
washes  the  soil  away,  and  nothing  is  left  but  barren  crag  which  would  starve  a  lark. 
Then  I  charge  you,  be  sternly  true  to  yourselves  and  God.    Stand  to  your  principles 
in   this   evil    and    wicked    day.      (Ibid.)         The    sluggard's   field :  —  The  royal 
philosopher  has  his  attention  drawn  to  a  field  and  a  vineyard  in  ruins.     1.  Each 
man  has  a  field  and  a  vineyard  entrusted  to  his  care— the  immortal  soul.     2.  He  is 
provided  with  various  implements  of  husbandry,  with  good  seed,  sure  directions, 
and  animating  promises.     3.  See  the  soul,  the  vineyard  of  such  a  labourer.     The 
effects  will  generally  be  commensurate  with  the  means  used.     As  we  sow  we  reap. 
4.  Observe  the  deplorable  condition  of  the  soul  described  in  the  text.     Here  is  a 
desolate  and  neglected  soul  which  once  was  cultivated — the  backslider.     W^hence 
the  cause  of  this   sad  change?      What   is  the   miserable  end  to   be  dreaded? 
(F.  Close,  M.A)        The  field  of  the  sluggard  : —  The  passage  is   an  exquisite 
picture     The  moral  of  it  might  have  been  set  boldly  in  unimaginative  prose. 
Many  persons  have  eyes  to  see  things,  but  they  do  not  think  about  whal  I'ney  see. 
If  a  really  good  man  sets  his  heart  within  him  to  search  through  those  things  that 
his  eyes  show  him,  he  is  bound  to  see  God.     The  man  who  saw  this  neglected  vine- 
yard with  his  inner  eyes  saw  all  that  physical  ruin  and  loss  and  mischief  sprang 
from  moral  causes.     Suffering  in  our  physical   and  eternal   life  generally  does 
spring  from  something  wrong  in  our  moral  character.     This  vineyard  had  gone 
to  ruin  because  its  master  was  not  man  enough  ;  he  was  a  sluggard,  an  indolent 
fellow.     It  is  a  bad  thing  for  a  man  to  be  too  much  his  own  master.     That  ruined 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  PROVERBS.  595 

vineyard  had  the  roots  of  its  ruin  in  that  man's  character.  He  began  to  be  too 
fond  of  ease,  indulgence,  and  bodily  comfort ;  he  began  to  lose  the  pluck  and  spirit 
and  enterprise  that  make  a  man  take  his  pleasure  out  of  his  work.  If  you  have 
not  eyes  to  see  what  lies  in  your  drudgery  and  toil,  you  will  not  come  to  much  in 
this  world.  The  progress  of  becoming  a  sluggard  was  a  gradual  one,  and  the 
progress  of  damage  was  slow  but  sure.  The  man  might  have  taken  warning,  but 
there  was  a  process  of  dilapidation  going  on  in  his  character.  That  was  the 
mischief.  You  cannot  scamp  your  outside  work  without  ruining  your  character. 
And  it  was  Uttle  bit  by  little  bit.  Learn  it  is  a  very  difficult  thing  rightly  and 
wisely  to  see  your  neighbour's  faults ;  but  it  is  a  much  more  difficult  thing, 
though  a  much  more  necessary  thing,  to  see  your  own.  {W.  E.  Elvislie,  D.D.) 
Character : — These  words  illustrate  that  field  which  every  man  has  to  cultivate — 
the  field  of  character.  We  do  not  start  life  with  characters  ready  made.  What 
we  have  at  the  outset  are  but  germs  and  possibilities.  Until  we  have  developed 
these  germs  for  ourselves,  their  full  value  is  not  obtained.  God  has  given  life, 
powers,  opportunities  ;  out  of  these  character  is  formed.  This  is  a  man's  own 
property,  whether  it  is  good  or  bad.  Character  is  the  true  gauge  of  a  man's  worth. 
Character  is  the  only  property  we  can  take  with  us  when  we  leave  this  world. 
Some  men's  fields  are  partly  neglected.  1.  There  is  no  fence.  2.  There  is  no 
fruit.  How  comes  this  waste  of  precious  ground  ?  Traced  to  one  source — self- 
indulgence.  This  reveals  itself  in  various  ways.  In  procrastination.  In  an  easy 
assent  to  the  popular  misrepresentations  of  Christianity.  In  taking  up  doubts  at 
second-hand,  and  parading  them  as  though  proof  of  their  superior  wisdom.  But 
self-indulgence  in  every  form  will  bring  ruin.  And  the  ruin  of  self-indulgence  is 
fast  approaching.  "  Thy  poverty  shall  come  as  one  that  travelleth."  There  may 
be  seeming  delay  about  its  arrival ;  but  there  is  also  certainty.  It  is  even  now 
upon  the  road.  {J.  Jackson  Goadby.)  The  sluggard's  garden : — The  owner  of 
this  miserable  garden  was  a  sluggard.  He  would  not  work.  So  the  deterioration 
went  on  unchecked,  until  what  was  once  a  beautiful,  productive,  cleanly-kept 
garden  became  a  place  of  the  rankest  weeds.  Here,  in  this  text,  is  an  important 
principle.  People  are  always  complaining  that  they  possess  few  opportunities  for 
their  improvement.  Wise  men  can  go  to  school  anywhere.  We  may  learn  by 
other  men's  mistakes.  There  are  many  sluggards.  1.  The  home  sluggard. 
Usually  a  woman.  Neglected  homes  lie  at  the  root  of  much  of  the  misery,  sin, 
and  unhappiness  of  the  world  to-day.  2.  The  sluggard  in  the  battle  of  life.  A 
good-for-nothing — a  waster  of  time,  money,  and  precious  opportunities.  God  has 
not  given  us  life  to  idle  away.  Maybe  that  something  of  this  sluggish  disposition 
lies  within  us  all,  and  must  be  continually  struggled  with.  The  men  who  have 
done  most  in  life,  achieved  the  greatest  fame,  and  gained  its  best  prizes,  have  all 
been  steady  workers,  diligent  plodders.  3.  The  sluggard  in  the  field  of  conscience. 
Weeds  always  grow  quickly,  though  imperceptibly.  There  is  a  law  of  degeneration. 
It  may  be  stated  in  this  way  :  "  Let  a  thing  alone,  and  it  is  certain  to  deteriorate." 
It  is  thus  in  the  realm  of  conscience.  There  is  nothing  more  dangerous  than 
procrastination  in  the  affairs  of  the  soul  and  conscience.  Many  a  man  is  aware 
of  evil  habits,  and  intends  to  give  them  up  by  and  by.  They  never  are  given  up 
in  that  way.  Let  your  life  alone,  and  you  will  awaken  some  day  in  awful 
astonishment  at  the  depths  to  which  you  have  sunk.  Give  up  indolence  and 
procrastination,  then.  (TFm.  Hay,  B.D.)  Idleness  :  —  I.  It  is  foolish. 
Solomon  characterises  this  indolent  man  as  one  "  void  of  understanding." 
Wherein  do  you  see  this  man's  folly?  In  the  flagrant  neglect  of  his  own 
interests.  You  may  cultivate  your  field  by  proxy,  but  you  can  only  cultivate 
your  soul  yourself.  II.  It  is  procrastinating.  III.  It  is  rtjinous.  1.  Consider 
the  wretched  condition  to  which  his  estate  was  reduced.  "  Lo,  it  was  aU  grown 
over  with  thorns,"  &c.  It  might  have  waved  in  golden  grain.  Two  things 
suggested  by  the  words.  1.  That  the  ruin  is  gradual  in  its  approach.  It  does 
not  burst  on  you  at  once,  like  a  thunder-storm.  2.  The  ruin  is  terrible  in  its 
consummation.  "As  an  armed  man."  It  will  seize  you  as  with  the  grasp  of  an 
indignant  warrior.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  sluggard's  vineyard  : — I.  Survey 
THIS  WASTE  viNETARD.  1.  We  Can  sce  nothing  but  weeds.  The  outgrowths  of 
the  depraved  heart  yield  ho  real  revenue  to  man.  Covetousness,  malice,  vain 
thoughts,  evil  desires,  unbelief.  2.  How  luxuriantly  they  grow  I  Our  evil  pro- 
pensities must,  if  unchecked  by  grace,  increase.  3.  There  are  various  kinds  of 
growth.  "  Thorns  and  nettles."  There  may  be  a  man  of  one  book,  business, 
virtue — but  not  of  one  evil  propensity.    4.  They  are  aU  harmful.     •'Thorns"  to 


696  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxiv. 

lacerate  ;  "  nettles  "  to  sting.  5.  The  wall  is  broken.  Anybody  might  sow  there, 
or  water  the  unprofitable  crop — except  the  good  sower,  and  he  must  enter  by  the 
door.  God  saves  us  from  our  sluggishness,  not  in  it.  II.  Why  it  remains  in  this 
DEPLORABLE  CONDITION.  Iguorauce  that  wiU  not  learn,  and  slothfulness  that  will 
not  work.  III.  Expostulate  with  the  sli:gg.\rd.  1.  The  vineyard  is  not  your 
own.  2.  Think  what  this  vineyard  might  produce.  Grapes  for  the  cup  of  the 
King — fruit  for  days  of  sickness — refreshment  for  old  age.  3.  In  its  present  state 
it  is  harmful  to  your  neighbours.  The  thistle-down  will  float  far  and  wide. 
rV.  In  CONCLUSION,  SOME  WORDS  OF  EARNEST  COUNSEL.  1,  Come  forth  from  your 
couch  of  indifference  and  resolutely  inspect  this  desolate  scene.  2.  Do  not  seek 
to  satisfy  conscience  by  pulling  a  weed  here  and  there.  It  must  be  thoroughly 
delved ;  ploughed  up.  "  Ye  must  be  born  again."  3.  Do  not  be  content  with 
showing  a  few  wild  grapes.  {R.  A.  Griffin.)  The  vineyard  of  the  sluggard  : — 
Some  preachers  teach  morality  without  snowing  its  vital  connection  with  the 
gospel.  Some  fall  into  the  opposite  error,  and  fail  to  exhibit  the  ethical  side  of 
the  gospel.  I.  The  field  of  the  sluggard  teaches  that  it  is  wrong  to  abuse 
WHAT  WE  regard  AS  OUR  OWN.  The  sluggaid  might  contend  that  the  garden  was 
his  own.  The  assumption  is  unfounded,  and  even  blasphemous.  1.  It  is  a  sign  of 
gross  disloyalty  to  God,  who  prefers  an  absolute  claim  to  our  life  and  service. 

2.  It  involves  a  serious  loss  to  our  fellow-creatures,  because  the  wind  carries  the 
seeds  of  our  neglect  into  our  neighbour's  garden.  Apply  to  moral  influence. 
II.  The  possession  of  advantages,  so  far  from  absolving  us  from  the  neces- 
sity OF  labour  and  self-culture,  benders  them  more  necessary.  The  area  of 
our  responsibility  coincides  with  the  area  of  our  possessions.  1.  The  cultivation 
of  the  body  is  a  sacred  obligation.  2.  The  mind  is  a  vineyard  that  ought  to  be 
cultivated.     3.  There  is,  too,  the  vineyard  of  the  heart.     III.  Neglect,  as  well  as 

WILFUL    wickedness,    MOVE    IN    THE    DIRECTION    OF    DESTRUCTION.        ObseiVC    that    HOt 

only  was  the  soil  covered  with  noxious  growths,  but  the  means  of  protection  were 
destroyed.  IV.  Good  men  will  learn  from  the  follies  and  miseries  of  w^cKED 
MEN.  Such  instruction  is  gathered  by  observation  and  reflection.  The  two  principal 
methods  of  acquiring  wisdom.  Observation  collects  facts,  reflection  arranges  and 
applies  them,  converting  them  into  solid  nutriment  for  mind  and  heart. 
(Preacher's  Magazine.)  The  slothful  pastor  : — 1.  To  every  minister  of  God 
there  is  entrusted  a  field  and  a  vineyard.  2.  God  supplies  his  labourer  with 
various  implements  of  husbandry,  with  good  seed  and  providential  opportunities. 

3.  God  makes  special  promises  to  every  devoted  husbandman.  4.  What  a  blessed 
sight  is  the  field  and  vineyard  of  such  a  labourer !  5.  But  consider  the  different 
picture  drawn  in  the  text.  What  is  so  affecting  as  the  contemplation  of  a  neglected 
parish  ?  How  is  this  to  be  accounted  for?  "  This  is  the  field  of  the  slothful,  and 
the  vineyard  of  the  man  void  of  understanding."  What  is  the  people's  duty,  in 
the  consideration  of  such  a  subject  as  this  ?  1.  Let  us  all  be  anxious  to  avail 
ourselves  of  the  religious  privileges  which  we  possess.  2.  If  it  is  our  misfortune 
to  have  a  slothful  husbandman,  let  us  not  desert  the  Church,  but  unite  in  prayer  for 
him  and  wait  on  God  in  meek  submission  to  His  will.  [F.  Close,  BI.A.)  The 
fooVs  vineyard  : — In  every  age  the  sluggard  and  the  fool  have  had  their  place,  as 
well  as  the  labourer  and  the  wise  man.     I.  The  scene  shows  us  that  if  we  will 

NOT  HAVE  flowers  AND  FRUITS  WE  SHALL  CERTAINLY  HAVE  THORNS  AND  NETTLES. 

We  cannot  set  aside  the  laws  of  nature.  There  is  a  law  of  growth  in  the  very 
ground.  It  is  the  same  with  the  character  of  man.  We  cannot  simply  do  nothing. 
Life  has  its  laws.  We  may  pay  them  no  heed,  but  they  will  assert  themselves 
notwithstanding.  1.  A  man  may  resolve  not  to  cultivate  his  mind.  What  then? 
The  weeds  of  false  notions,  the  thorns  and  nettles  of  prejudice,  will  prove  his 
intellectual  indolence.  2.  A  man  may  neglect  to  cultivate  his  moral  nature.  He 
will  have  nothing  to  do  with  religion.  What  then  ?  Look  at  his  false  ideas,  his 
superstition,  his  narrowness,  his  want  of  veneration,  his  superficial  judgments,  the 
weeds  that  have  grown  up.  II.  The  sluggard  and  the  fool  cannot  hide  the 
RESULTS  OF  THEiB  NEGLECT.  1.  We  caunot  confiue  the  results  of  a  wasted  life 
within  our  own  bounds.  2.  This  being  the  case,  we  have  not  a  right  to  do  wilh 
what  we  call  our  own  as  we  please.  There  is  nothing  which  we  can  strictly  call 
our  own.     Society  will  not  allow  us  to  do  what  we  please  with  our  own.     III.  It  is 

PO.SSIBLE     TO     BE     RIGHT     IN     SOME     PARTICULARS     AND     TO     BE    GRIEVOUSLY    WRONG    IN 

OTHERS.  The  legal  right  of  the  slothful  man  to  the  possession  of  the  field  might 
be  undisputed.  The  vineyard  might  have  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  fool  by 
strict  lawful  descent.     So  far  so  good.     The  case  is  on  this  side  perfectly  sound. 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  PROVERBS.  697 

Yet  possession  was  not  followed  by  cultivation.  It  is  not  enough  to  possess ;  we 
must  increase.  You  ought  not  to  allow  even  a  house  to  fall  into  decay.  There  is 
no  right  of  abuse.  You  have  not  a  right  to  be  dirty,  to  be  ignorant,  to  be  careless 
of  hfe  ;  on  that  line  no  rights  have  ever  been  established.     IV.  The  scene  shows 

THAT   EVEN   THE   WOEST   ABUSES   MAY   BE   TURNED   TO   GOOD   ACCOUNT.      The    gOOd    man 

is  an  example ;  the  bad  man  is  a  warning.  1.  You  will  see  that  the  finest 
possessions  may  be  wasted ;  property,  talent,  influence,  opportunity.  2.  You  will 
see  that  wickedness  always  moves  in  the  direction  of  destruction.  It  must  do  so. 
All  indolence  must  go  down.  All  sin  forces  itself  in  the  direction  of  perdition. 
How  did  the  wise  man  know  that  the  man  was  void  of  understanding  ?  By  the 
state  of  his  vineyard.  Know  a  man  by  his  surroundings,  know  him  by  his  habits  ; 
there  is  character  in  everything.  (<7.  Parker,  D.D.)  Mental  cultivation  essential 
to  the  soul's  salvation : — The  immortal  soul,  although  one  and  indivisible  as  its 
Author,  yet,  like  a  large  estate,  is  divided  into  various  sections,  as  the  under- 
standing, the  memory,  and  the  affections.  1.  The  intellectual  faculty  is  the 
understanding.  If  not  cultivated,  it  will  produce  an  attendant  crop  of  evil  thoughts 
and  vain  imaginations,  which,  Uke  thorns  and  nettles,  will  injuriously  affect  the 
soul.  2.  Another  property  of  the  soul  to  be  cultivated  is  the  memory,  and  unless 
that  is  attended  to,  all  the  other  would  be  like  casting  seed  by  the  wayside. 
3.  Another  section  of  the  soul  is  that  of  the  affections  which  are  ever  disposed  to 
run  wild,  and  want  continual  pruning  and  training,  to  guide  them  in  a  right 
direction.  The  heart  is  hable  to  alight  upon  objects  that  may  pierce  it  with  many 
sorrows,  to  prevent  which  the  most  efficient  remedy  is  to  have  the  mind  occupied 
as  much  as  possible  in  contemplation  of  eternal  blessings.  If  the  mind  were  to 
dweU  on  the  attributes  of  the  Deity,  especially  as  the  God  of  love,  it  would  expand 
with  delight  as  the  blossom  to  the  sun.  (William  Neville,  M.A.)  Practical  views 
of  human  life  : — How  much  have  we  profited,  in  the  character  of  servants  of  God, 
by  what  we  have  seen  of  men  ?  How  much  more  wise  in  the  best  sense, 
conscientious,  apt,  effectually  warned  ?  The  world  should  be  regarded  as  an 
extensive  outer  department  of  the  great  school  of  religion.  The  things  which  the 
servant  of  God  is  taught  in  the  inner  school  he  is  to  observe  illustrated,  exempli- 
fied, proved,  and  enforced  in  this  wide,  outer  department.  When  the  learner  in 
God's  peculiar  school  goes  out  to  observe  mankind  he  will  think  of  the  manner 
and  cautions  and  rules  for  turning  what  he  sees  to  the  most  beneficial  account, 
and  the  most  instructive  points  to  fix  his  attention  upon.  An  obvious  one  is,  let 
not  his  observing  be  merely  of  the  nature  of  speculation,  not  simply  a  seeing  and 
judging  what  men  are.  Our  knowledge  of  men  must  be  diligently  applied  to  a 
salutary  use,  especially  for  ourselves.  Another  point  of  admonition  is — against 
prejudice  and  arrogance  in  observing  and  judging.  Men  often  have  some  prepos- 
session, and  everything  is  forced  into  conformity  to  that.  Or  they  have  a  set  of 
judgments,  estimates,  shaped  ready  in  their  minds,  and  upon  the  slightest 
ch-cumstance  they  will  instantly  fix  one  of  them  on  a  fellow-mortal.  Some 
men  assume  to  have  an  infallible  insight,  and  perfect  comprehension  on  all 
occasions;  and  pronounce  as  if  there  could  be  no  appeal.  Another  warning  is, 
beware  of  taking  pleasure  in  perceiving  and  ascertaining  what  is  wrong  in  man. 
Another  rule  is,  take  care  that  observations  on  other  men  are  not  suffered  to  go  to 
the  effect  of  our  being  better  pleased  with  ourselves.  There  is  a  strange  tendency 
to  a  gratified  pride  in  our  own  supposed  virtues;  and  to  a  most  indulgent  judgment 
of  the  things  which  even  the  grossest  self-love  cannot  wholly  approve.  Our  whole 
system  and  practice  in  the  observation  of  the  world  should  be  resolutely  formed  on 
this  principle,  that  our  own  correction  is  the  grand  object  to  be  faithfully  and 
constantly  kept  in  view.  Some  more  special  observations  may  be  given.  Think 
of  the  probable  difference  between  our  judgments  of  the  persons  we  look  upon  and 
their  own  judgments  of  themselves.  In  observing  mankind  we  perceive,  to  a  great 
extent,  a  sad  deficiency  or  depravation  of  conscience  ;  what  a  trifle  they  can  make 
of  many  most  important  discriminations  between  good  and  evil.  From  this  sight 
should  not  a  solemn  admonition  come  to  us?  One  of  the  most  conspicuous 
things  to  be  noticed  in  looking  on  mankind  is — how  temptation  operates  and 
prevails.  From  this  there  should  be  an  instructed  vigilance  for  ourselves  and 
appropriate  prayers.  A  mournful  thing  to  notice  will  be  the  great  errors,  the 
lapses,  of  good  men.  Reflect  how  unsafe  any  man,  every  man,  is,  but  as 
God  preserves  him.  Observe,  too,  the  effect  of  situation  and  circumstance. 
How  much  they  form  men's  notions,  consciences,  and  habits  as  to  good  and 
eviL    Observe  errors  of  judgment — opinions ;   how  they  arise,  become  fixed,  or 


598  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxiT. 

are  perverted.  Take  note  of  all  worthier  things,  exemplary  virtues,  graces, 
wisdom.  It  is  delightful  to  turn  for  instruction  to  these.  (John  Foster.) 
The  sluggard's  garden : — The  scene  is  familiar  in  Syria,  where  the  intense  heat 
and  frequent  rains  so  stimulate  aU  wild  and  natural  growths  that  a  few  months  of 
neglect  suffice  to  convert  even  the  most  carefully  tilled  plot  and  the  most  carefully 
tended  vineyard  into  a  scene  of  desolation.  Under  the  pressure  of  an  Eastern 
climate  noxious  weeds  and  brambles  suck  the  soil's  fertility  from  wholesome  plants 
and  flowers  with  an  astonishing  and  alarming  rapidity.  Not  that  similar  catas- 
trophes are  unknown  even  in  England ;  but,  with  us,  it  takes  longer  to  produce 
them.  Most  of  us  must  have  seen  plots  where  once  a  fair  garden  grew,  which,  in 
the  course  of  a  few  years'  neglect,  were  all  overrun  with  coltsfoot,  dock,  nettles, 
groundsel,  and  other  foul  weeds.  It  is  not  simply,  as  a  careful  observer  has 
pointed  out,  that  land  once  under  the  plough  or  the  spade  loses,  when  it  is  left 
untended,  the  special  and  wholesome  growth  with  which  it  has  been  planted.  The 
deterioration  goes  farther  than  that.  For  "  the  flora  which  follows  the  plough,"  or 
the  spade,  "is  much  more  varied  and  delicate  and  beautiful "  than  that  of  the 
unbroken  land.  And  when  tilled  land  is  suffered  to  faU  back  into  the  hands  of 
Nature,  all  these  naore  delicate  and  beautiful  wild  flowers  are  supplanted  by  gorse 
and  bramble,  nettle  and  dock,  and,  above  all,  by  the  close,  wiry  grass  which  usurps 
and  covers  so  many  of  our  commons.  Even  where  the  plants  in  a  neglected 
garden  are  not  altogether  supplanted  and  dispossessed,  an  ominous  process  of 
degeneration  sets  in.  The  flowers,  once  tended  with  so  much  care  and  grown  to 
such  perfection,  revert  to  an  earlier  and  inferior  type;  they  lose  form,  colour, 
perfume ;  the  large  "  voluptuous  garden  roses,"  with  their  infinite  variety  and 
infinite  wealth  of  hue,  sink  back  into  the  primitive  dog-rose  of  our  hedges,  and  the 
whole  race  of  choice,  cultivated  geraniums  into  the  cranesbill  of  the  copse  and  the 
wayside.  This,  then,  is  the  parable.  Neglect  a  garden,  and  it  soon  loses  all  its  value, 
all  its  distinction.  It  is  either  overrun  with  wilder  and  less  worthy  growths,  or  the 
plants  which  once  either  gave  it  beauty  or  ministered  to  the  wants  of  man  degenerate 
into  a  baser  type,  and  no  longer  yield  fruit  that  he  cares  to  eat  or  flowers  that  he 
cares  to  pluck.  And  the  moral  is  as  simple  and  direct  as  it  well  can  be  (vers.  33,  34). 
It  is  a  warning  to  the  man  void  of  understanding  and  energy,  that  an  utter  destitu- 
tion, a  shameful  misery,  is  the  proper  and  inevitable  result  of  his  folly  and  sloth. 
We  need  not  go  far  to  find  facts  which  prove  the  truth  of  this  warning,  and  the 
need  for  it.  If  we  go  into  the  nearest  workhouse  ward,  it  is  not  too  much  to  say 
that  half  the  miserable  paupers  we  meet  there  ought  not  to  be  there  ;  they  have 
sunk  into  pauperism  not  by  sheer  misfortune,  not  by  the  pressure  of  accidents  they 
were  unable  to  resist,  but  by  a  creeping  indolence,  by  self-neglect,  by  vice,  by  the 
failure  of  speculations  to  which  they  were  driven  by  their  impatience  of  honest 
labour  with  its  slow  rewards,  by  a  love  of  pleasure  or  self-indulgence  which  held 
them  back  from  that  whole-hearted  industry  and  devotion  to  daily  toil  by  which 
alone  men  can  thrive.  If  we  go  to  any  dock  or  labour  yard  in  which  men  earn  a 
miserable  pittance  by  unskilled  and  precarious  labour,  again  we  are  well  within  the 
mark  if  we  reckon  that  half  the  men  we  find  there  ought  never  to  have  been  there, 
and  would  not  have  been  there  had  they  diligently  availed  themselves  of  the  oppor- 
tunities of  the  several  positions  from  which  they  have  fallen.  If  we  go  into  any 
family,  shall  we  not  find  in  it  a  lad  who  has  no  decided  leaning  to  any  vocation, 
who  "  doesn't  much  care  what  he  does,"  and  who  in  his  heart  of  hearts  would 
rather  do  nothing  at  all,  whether  for  himself  or  for  the  world,  if  only  he  could  live 
by  it  ?  If  we  go  into  any  school  or  college,  shall  we  not  be  still  more  fortunate  if, 
for  one  boy  or  man  bent  on  study,  bent  on  learning  and  acquiring  as  much  as  he 
may,  and  so  cultivating  all  the  good  growths  and  habits  of  the  soul,  we  find  no 
more  than  one  who  is  content  to  scramble  through  his  work  anyhow,  who  will 
not  learn  a  jot  more  than  he  can  help,  who  throws  away  opportunity  after 
opportunity,  and  is  throwing  away,  with  his  opportunities,  his  chances  of  service 
and  distinction  ?  No  thoughtful  observer  of  human  life  will  for  a  moment 
admit  that  laziness  is  a  defunct  sin,  or  that  the  sluggard  is  rapidly  becoming 
extinct.  He  is  everywhere ;  and,  wherever  he  is,  the  process  of  degeneration 
has  set  in  and  needs  to  be  checked.  And  how  shall  it  be  checked,  how  shall 
the  man  "void  of  understanding  "  be  recovered  to  a  useful  and  diligent  life,  if  not 
by  the  warning  that,  by  the  very  course  and  constitution  of  his  nature,  indolence 
breeds  its  own  punishment  ?  The  moral,  then,  is  by  no  means  tame  or  impertinent 
to  the  present  conditions  of  men.  But  we  need  not  confine  ourselves  to  the 
Hebrew  poet's  point  of  view.    As  we  stand  by  his  side,  and  look  with  him  over  the 


CHAP.  3TV.]  PROVERBS.  599 

wall  of  the  once  fair  garden,  now  all  overgi-own  with  nettles  that  sting  and  thorns 
that  tear,  we  may  raise  the  law  of  which  he  speaks  to  its  highest  plane,  and  view 
it  in  its  more  directly  spiritual  aspect.  "  Emphatic  as  is  the  direct  teaching  "  of 
this  proverb,  says  Dr.  Plump tre,  "  it  may  be  taken  as  a  parable  of  something  yet 
deeper.  The  field  and  the  vineyard  are  more  than  the  man's  earthly  possessions. 
His  neglect  brings  barrenness  or  desolation  in  the  garden  of  the  soul."  Nor  is  it  in 
the  least  difficult  to  trace  the  working  of  this  law  in  "  the  garden  of  the  soul."  It 
is  not  enough  that  we  once  believed  and  obeyed.  It  is  not  enough  that  we  once 
waged  open  war  against  evil,  and  ardently  pursued  that  which  is  good.  If  we 
have  settled  down  into  a  quiet  and  easy  enjoyment  of  our  very  religion  ;  if  we  are 
not  watchful  and  diligent,  "resolute  and  untiring";  if  we  cannot  work  in  all 
weathers  ;  if  we  shrink  from  every  call  to  do  something  for  God  and  man,  or  begin 
to  calculate  how  little  we  can  do,  instead  of  how  much ;  if  we  make  no  sacrifice  for 
the  sake  of  truth  and  righteousness,  or  mourn  and  complain  over  every  sacrifice  we 
are  compelled  to  make ;  if  we  cease  to  strive  vigorously,  with  clear  and  firm  deter- 
mination, against  the  evil  forces  and  inclinations  by  which  we  are  constantly  beset ; 
if  we  no  longer  care  to  learn  any  new  truth  that  may  break  forth  from  God's  holy 
Word  or  from  the  patient  researches  of  men  ;  if,  instead  of  recognising  and  rejoicing 
in  any  new  aspect  of  duty,  any  new  form  of  service,  we  are  growing  lax  and 
indifferent  even  in  the  discharge  of  duties  we  once  loved — sluggardliness  is 
beginning  to  eat  into  our  heart,  our  faith,  our  life ;  the  good  growths  of  the  soul 
are  beginning  to  deteriorate  and  decay,  and  its  evil  growths  to  wax  bold  and 
masterful.  If  nothing  less  will  rouse  and  arrest  us,  let  us  remember  that,  by  the 
very  course  and  constitution  of  nature,  by  a  law  which  admits  of  no  exception, 
mere  indolence,  mere  neglect,  merely  being  quiet  and  at  ease,  mere  failure  to  grow 
and  make  increase  to  ourselves  in  good  thoughts,  good  feeling,  good  deeds,  is  to 
sink  toward  the  evils  we  most  dread,  from  which  we  have  been  redeemed,  and 
which  ought  not  therefore  any  longer  to  have  power  over  us.  It  is  to  revert  to  our 
original  and  inferior  type ;  and  to  revert  to  that  wUl  only  too  surely  be  the  first 
step  toward  sinking  to  a  type  still  lower  and  more  hopeless.  A  little  more  sleep,  a 
little  more  slumber,  a  little  more  folding  of  the  hands  to  rest  when  they  ought  to 
be  lifted  up  for  the  labour  which  is  prayer,  and  our  poverty  may  come  on  us  apace, 
and  our  want — the  lack  and  destitution  natural  and  inevitable  to  our  sinking  and 
neglected  condition — may  spring  upon  us  like  an  armed  man.    {S.  Cox,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XXV. 


Veb.  2.  It  Is  the  glory  of  God  to  conceal  a  thing. — The  glory  of  God  in  conceal- 
ing : — If  God  were  to  conceal  everything  from  our  view,  it  would  be  impossible 
that  any  glory  could  result  to  Him  from  the  sentiments  and  actions  of  His 
creatures.  It  is  by  a  partial  communication  of  Himself  that  He  has,  in  the 
highest  degree,  consulted  His  honour  and  manifested  His  wisdom.  A  temperature 
of  mingled  light  and  obscurity,  a  combination  of  discovery  and  concealment,  is 
calculated  to  produce  the  most  suitable  impressions  of  the  Divine  excellence  on  the 
minds  of  fallen  creatures.  I.  The  Divine  Being  is  accustomed  to  conceal  much. 
Specify  some  instances.  1.  In  relation  to  His  own  nature,  and  the  manner  of  His 
existence.  His  essence  is  altogether  hidden  from  the  most  profound  investigation, 
the  most  laborious  research,  the  most  subtle  penetration,  of  His  creatures.  We 
ascribe  to  Him  attributes  and  virtues ;  but  how  He  exists,  in  an  essential  and  eternal 
nature  of  His  own,  no  man  can  know.  His  perfections  are  impressed  on  the  works  of 
nature,  but  in  such  a  manner  that  we  learn  them  only  by  inference.  2.  In  relation 
to  the  structure  and  constitution  of  His  works.  The  scenes  of  nature  lie  open  to 
our  view.  But  the  mysteries  of  nature,  with  regard  to  the  essences  of  things,  and 
indeed  to  a  multitude  of  subtle  operations,  are  kept  in  a  kind  of  sacred  reserve, 
and  elude  the  utmost  efforts  of  philosophy  to  surprise  them  in  their  concealments, 
and  bring  them  to  light.  Those  that  have  devoted  themselves  to  an  investigation 
of  the  laws  of  nature  perceive  that  the  meanest  work  of  God  is  inexhaustible  ; 
contains  secrets  which  the  wisdom  of  man  will  never  be  able  to  penetrate.  3.  In 
the  dispensations  of  His  providence.  By  which  is  meant  that  series  of  actions 
which  the  Divine  Being  is  continually  carrying  on  in  the  government  of  the  world 


600  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

which  He  has  made.  There  exists  such  a  decided  connection  between  well-doing 
and  happiness  on  the  one  hand,  and  between  wickedness  and  misery  on  the  other, 
as  sufficiently  to  show,  even  independently  of  revelation,  that  the  Divine  Being  is 
the  patron  of  rectitude  and  the  enemy  of  vice.  But  the  natural  course  of  things  is 
frequently  interrupted  and  suspended  by  incidental  causes ;  so  that  particular 
exceptions  are  continually  occurring  to  the  ordinary  rule.  God  conceals  the 
design  for  which  many  events  are  permitted  to  take  place.  And  He  is  accustomed 
to  throw  much  obscurity  over  the  future.  The  most  important  events  of  human 
life,  on  which  our  happiness  greatly  depends,  are,  for  the  most  part,  concealed  from 
our  view.  4.  In  the  economy  of  grace  and  redemption.  The  revelation  contained 
in  the  Scriptures  extends  only  to  facts,  not  to  the  theory  of  those  facts,  or  their 
original  causes.  The  most  important  truths  are  communicated  in  a  dogmatic,  not 
a  theoretic,  maimer.     II.  The  Divtne  Being  promotes  His  qloey,  by  such  a 

TEMPEBATUEE  OF  LIGHT  AND  SHADE  AS  THAT  VJ^HICH  DISTINGUISHES  AT.T.  HiS  DISCOVERIEa 

OF  Himself,  and  His  dispensations  towards  His  creatures.  1.  The  concealment 
of  things  tends  to  glorify  Him,  as  it  is,  in  part,  the  necessary  consequence  of  Hia 
infinite  superiority  to  all  finite  beings  in  wisdom  and  understanding.  Hia 
purposes  and  designs  cannot  be  adequately  scanned  by  the  wisdom  of  men.  2.  It 
evinces  His  entire  independence  of  the  wisdom,  counsel,  or  co-operation  of  any  or 
all  of  His  creatures.  He  may,  with  infinite  safety  and  propriety,  retire  within  Him- 
self, into  the  secret  recesses  of  His  own  essence.  3.  Such  a  degree  of  obscurity  as 
attends  the  partial  manifestation  of  the  Divine  will,  the  progressive  development  of 
the  Divine  purposes,  is  eminently  adapted  to  the  state,  exigency,  and  condition  of 
men.  The  prophetic  parts  of  Scripture  are  proverbially  obscure.  By  not  explaining 
His  doings,  God  trains  us  to  submission,  and  cultures  humility  and  vigilance,  while 
at  the  same  time  exciting  to  diligence  and  exertion.  While  there  are  many  things 
which  God  conceals,  and  thereby  advances  His  glory.  He  has  made  manifest  all 
that  it  is  essential  for  man  to  know.  And  among  the  things  fully  revealed  is  the 
placability  of  God,  His  readiness  to  receive  the  chief  of  sinners  who  repent  of  their 
sins  and  beheve  the  gospel.  (Robert  Hall,  M:A.)  God  glorified  hy  mystery  :— 
In  our  dealing  with  our  fellow-men  we  resent  reserve,  secrecy,  isolation,  almost  as 
sharply  as  though  they  were  moral  transgressions.  We  are  attracted  by  frankness. 
The  best  hated  men  the  world  has  had  in  it  have  always  been  men  of  silence. 
Mystery  is  one  of  the  arts  of  crafty  ambition,  for  the  silly  world  is  generally  ready 
to  accept  silence  for  wisdom.  Men  cultivate  the  habit  of  concealment,  so  that  they 
may  pass  themselves  off  for  better  than  they  really  are.  But  reserve  is  not  always 
ignoble.  Strong,  and  noble,  and  unselfish  qualities  sometimes  determine  a  man's 
silence.  The  welfare  of  an  empire  may  sometimes  turn  upon  the  power  a  states- 
man has  of  keeping  the  counsel  of  a  department.  There  are  reservations  in  the 
knowledge  that  God  has  given  us  of  His  own  nature,  purpose,  and  government ;  but 
these  reservations  always  rest  upon  motives  that  are  pure,  noble,  and  holy,  and  are 
identified  with  the  highest  glory  of  the  Divine  character.  No  mystery  is  meant  to 
alienate  us  from  God,  but  to  attach  us  in  closer  bonds.  It  is  needless  to  define  the 
area  of  mystery,  if  indeed  that  were  possible.  It  starts  in  God,  and  covers  the  last 
outlying  atom  of  His  dominion.  1.  There  are  mysteries  in  the  Divine  nature  and 
government  that  bear  direct  witness  to  the  glory  of  God's  person.  The  silence  He  '"^ 
maintains  is  a  sign  of  His  self-sufficiency.  As  a  matter  of  privilege,  God  may  per- 
mit us  to  enter  into  sympathy  and  co-operation  with  Himself  and  His  work. 
But  He  does  not  need  our  help,  and  by  the  stern  reserve  in  His  revelations  He  ' 
asserts  the  separateness  and  the  sufficiency  of  His  own  mighty  power.  If  He 
employ  us  at  all,  it  is  for  our  good.  His  power  is  separate,  sufficient,  solitary.  ^ 
God  conceals  many  things,  to  remind  us  of  the  gulf  that  separates  the  glory  of  His  ^ 
nature  from  the  dimness  of  all  finite  natures.  Man  is  destined  to  more  exalted 
and  intimate  communion  with  his  Maker  than  any  other  being  in  the  universe,  and 
yet  there  are  hmitations  upon  his  privilege  necessitated  by  the  very  supremacy  of 
God.  There  are  secrets  we  cannot  enter,  counsels  we  cannot  share,  age-long 
problems,  the  solution  of  which  we  are  not  permitted  to  see.  God  conceals  many 
things,  so  that  throughout  the  successive  stages  of  our  destiny  He  may  bring  into 
our  contemplation  of  His  nature  and  works  elements  of  inexhaustible  freshness. 
Reservations  that  are  determined  by  motives  of  this  type  have  an  intimate  relation 
to  the  glory  of  the  Divine  name.  The  revelations  of  the  life  to  come  will  be 
gradual  and  progressive.  If  God's  revelation  were  a  revelation  of  exhaustive 
fulness,  a  revelation  with  no  reserved  questions  in  it,  the  very  enchantment  of  God's 
nature  would  be  gone.    2.  God  is  glorified  by  mystery,  because  mystery  has  its 


CHAP.  XXV.]  PROVERBS.  601 

place  in  the  discipline  and  exaltation  of  human  character.  The  veiled  truth  some- 
times calls  out  a  higher  faith,  a  more  chastened  resignation,  a  more  childlike 
obedience  in  God's  people,  than  the  truth  that  is  unveiled.  God  conceals  many 
things,  so  that  He  may  be  magnified  through  His  people's  trust  in  darkness  and 
uncertainty.  No  genuine  spirit  of  trust  can  spring  up  in  ignorance.  In  God'g 
dealings  with  us,  profound  silence  and  ringing  oracle,  the  hidden  and  the  revealed,  the 
mystery  and  the  defined  truth,  alway  alternate  with  each  other.  It  is  "  the  glory 
of  God  to  conceal  a  thing,"  because  by  the  very  shadows  in  which  He  hides  it  we 
are  cast  with  a  more  pathetic  dependence  upon  His  sympathy  and  care,  and  come 
into  truer  and  more  childlike  contact  with  His  spirit.  God  conceals  many  things, 
so  that  He  may  protect  us  from  needless  pain  and  fear,  and  magnify  His  own 
gentleness.  Many  a  thing  must  be  hidden  from  a  child,  and  the  more  sensitive  he 
is,  the  stricter  must  be  the  concealment.  God  conceals  some  things  from  us  to 
excite  us  to  nobler  and  more  strenuous  endeavour  in  our  search  after  the  truth. 
There  are  truths  that  we  shall  come  to  know  through  our  own  thought  and  struggle, 
and  deepening  spirituality  of  life,  temporary  mysteries  that  it  is  best  for  us  to 
know  through  conflict,  experience,  sustained  contemplation.  God  hides  many 
things  from  the  world,  so  that  He  may  have  secrets  with  the  custody  of  which  He 
can  honour  His  ovm  chosen  servants.  And  He  conceals  some  things  from  us,  so 
that  He  may  impress  us  with  the  solemnities  of  the  unknown.  God  never  conceals 
what  may  be  necessary  to  furnish  His  people  for  the  work  and  service  of  life.  Let 
the  revelation  inspire  your  faith,  and  let  the  mystery  awaken  your  awe.  (Thomas 
G.  Selby.)         The  glory  of  God  and  the  honour  of  kings  : — I.  The  meakino  of  the 

PASSAGE   IS    SUPPOSED    TO    BE    THAT    GOD    CONCEALS  MUCH,  AKD  THAT  IT  18  HiS  GLORY  TO 

DO  SO.  There  is  a  truth  in  this.  We  often  try  to  find  out  God.  God  is  the 
profoundest  mystery  in  the  universe,  and  yet  all  is  mystery  without  Him.  No 
creature  knows  God.  There  is  much  concealed  in  nature.  It  is  not  wonderful 
that  there  should  be  much  in  God's  providential  procedure  that  is  concealed  from 
us.  God's  ways  are  not  our  ways.  If  He  has  not  given  us  light,  it  is  better  for  ua 
to  be  in  darkness.  II.  The  gbeat  PKrNcrPLE  contained  in  the  text.  The  text  ia 
a  whole.  One  part  must  be  taken  with  reference  to  the  other.  The  wise  man  says 
it  is  the  glory  of  God  to  do  that  which  is  not  the  glory  of  kings  to  do.  Government 
is  necessary  to  the  very  existence  of  society.  There  can  be  no  government  without 
law.  It  is  the  glory  of  aU  governments  to  frame  wise  and  salutary  laws  for  the 
weU-being  and  true  happiness  of  society,  to  guard  these  by  sanctions,  and  by  all 
the  majesty  of  power.  Governments  do  not  originate  that  which  is  moral  in  law. 
They  do  not  create  the  distinctions  between  right  and  wrong,  good  and  evil. 
Magistrates  are  the  representatives  of  law.  They  are  to  see  that  it  is  respected  and 
maintained,  and  they  are  to  punish  law-breakers;  if  not,  it  is  because  offenders 
baffle  pursuit,  and  hide  themselves.  If  kings  do  not  search  out  a  matter,  it  is 
because  they  are  indifferent  to  the  conduct  of  their  subjects,  and  care  not  whether 
they  are  virtuous  or  vicious  ;  and  then  the  hour  of  revolution  is  at  hand  ;  the  king- 
dom will  fall.  The  glory  of  God  is  the  very  opposite  to  the  honour  of  kings.  God 
is  a  law-giver.  His  will  is  the  law  of  all  morals.  His  being  is  the  foundation  of 
all  law.  And  yet  He  has  made  provision  for  pardoning  men.  He  hides,  He  con- 
ceals their  sins.  He  does  this  by  an  atonement.  It  is  the  glory  of  God  to  save  men 
by  the  death  of  Christ,  because  by  saving  them  thus  He  may  magnify  His  own 
law,  and  honour  His  own  government.  Governments  have  no  gospel  for  criminals. 
God  forgives  sins.  {H.  J.  Bevis.)  Man's  knowledge  suited  to  his  circumstances  ;— 
You  know  as  much  as  is  good  for  you,  for  it  is  with  the  mind  as  with  the  senses. 
A  greater  degree  of  hearing  would  incommode  us ;  and  a  nicer  degree  of  seeing 
would  terrify  us.  If  our  eyes  could  see  things  microscopically,  we  should  be 
afraid  to  move.  Thus  our  knowledge  is  suited  to  our  situation  and  circumstances. 
Were  we  informed  more  fuUy  beforehand  of  the  good  things  prepared  for  us  by 
Providence,  from  that  moment  we  should  cease  to  enjoy  the  good  we  possess, 
become  indifferent  to  present  duties,  and  be  filled  with  restless  impatience.  Or 
suppose  the  things  foreknown  were  gloomy  and  adverse  ;  what  dismay  and  des- 
pondency would  be  the  consequence  of  the  discovery ;  and  how  many  times  should 
we  suffer  in  imagination  what  we  now  only  endure  once  in  reality !  Who  would 
wish  to  draw  back  a  veil  which  saves  them  from  so  many  disquietudes  ?  If  some 
of  you  had  formerly  known  the  troubles  through  which  you  have  since  waded,  you 
would  have  fainted  under  the  prospect.  But  what  we  know  not  now  we  shall 
know  hereafter.  {H.  G.  Salter.)  The  concealed  processes  of  Providence:— 
Machinery  boxed   in    goes    round  and  accomplishes  its  work   as  well  as  if    it 


602  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

were  all  exposed  to  view.  At  one  extremity  the  raw  material  goes  in,  and  at 
another  the  manufactured  article  comes  out.  This  is  all  that  the  visitor  sees. 
For  once,  and  to  instruct  a  stranger,  the  master  may  take  the  covering  off,  and 
lay  bare  the  intricate  accumulation  of  cylinders  and  wheels ;  but  soon  he  shuts 
the  door  again.  Thus  has  the  Author  of  salvation  in  the  case  of  some  opened 
up  in  the  processes  of  Hia  providence,  which  are  usually  conducted  in  secret. 
{W.  Arnot,  D.D.) 

Vers.  4,  5.  Take  away  the  dross  from  the  silver,  and  there  shall  come  forth  a 
vessel  for  the  finer. — Purifying  fires  : — No  text  in  Scripture  brings  out  with  equal 
distinctness  the  higher  office  of  affliction,  i.e.,  to  develop  in  us  preparation  for  a 
true  usefulness.  The  object  of  furnace  fires  is  not  to  melt  the  precious  metal,  or 
even  to  release  the  dross,  but  to  make  the  metal  ready  for  the  purposes  of  manu- 
facture. Not  the  silver  ingot,  however,  but  the  silver  vessel,  is  the  object  of  the 
assayer.  When  God  tries  His  children,  it  is  not  simply  that  they  shall  "  come  forth 
as  gold,"  glorious  as  is  purity  of  character,  but  that  they  may  be  both  ready  to  be 
shaped  for  His  purposes  and  capable  of  being  used  to  fulfil  His  will.  Paul  seems  to 
refer  to  this  proverb  in  2  Tim.  ii.  19-21,  the  only  other  passage  in  which  the  same 
truth  is  taught  by  the  same  figure.  {Homiletic  Beview.)  Take  away  the  wicked 
from  before  the  king. — The  removal  of  wicked  men  from  influential  j)ositions : — 
This  shows  that  the  vigorous  endeavour  of  a  prince  to  suppress  vice,  and  reform 
the  manners  of  his  people  is  the  most  effectual  way  to  support  his  government. 
I.  What  the  duty  of  magistbatks  is.  To  "  take  away  the  wicked  "  ;  to  use  their 
power  for  the  terror  of  evil  works  and  evil-workers,  to  banish  those  from  the 
court  who  are  vicious  and  profane,  and  to  frighten  them,  and  restrain  them  from 
spreading  the  infection  of  their  wickedness  among  the  people.  Wicked  people  are 
the  dross  of  a  nation.  II.  The  advantage  of  doing  this  duty.  1.  It  will  be  the 
bettering  of  their  subjects.  They  shall  be  made  like  silver  refined  ;  fit  to  be  made 
vessels  of  honour.  2.  It  will  be  the  settling  of  the  prince.  "  His  throne  shall  be 
established  in  this  righteousness,"  for  God  will  bless  his  government,  the  people 
will  be  pliable  to  it,  and  so  it  will  become  durable.     {Matthew  Henry.) 

Vers.  8-10.  Go  not  forth  hastily  to  strive. — The  worst  and  best  ways  of  treating 
social  dissensions  : — The  social  dissensions  that  are  rife  in  our  world  are  incontest- 
able proofs  that  humanity  has  fallen  from  its  normal  condition.  There  is  society 
in  heaven,  but  no  social  differences  or  strifes.  The  text  indicates  the  best  and  the 
worst  way  of  treating  such  dissensions.  I.  The  wobst  way.  "  Go  not  forth  hastily 
to  strive."  1.  Precipitant  strife  is  bad  in  itself.  Men  should  never  be  hasty  in 
yielding  to  a  passion.  They  should  make  the  passion,  however  strong  and  tumul- 
tuous for  the  moment,  the  subject  of  thought,  and  by  thought  should  subdue,  purify, 
and  direct  it.  2.  Precipitant  strife  exposes  to  shame.  "  Lest  thou  know  not  what 
to  do  in  the  end  thereof,  when  thy  neighbour  hath  put  thee  to  shame."  II.  The 
best  way.  "  Debate  thy  cause  with  thy  neighbour  himself,"  &c.  The  direction 
here  seems  to  imply  three  things— 1.  That  an  interview  is  to  be  obtained  at  once 
with  the  offender.  "Debate  thy  cause  with  thy  neighbour  himself."  2.  That  an 
interview  is  to  be  obtained  in  order  to  talk  the  offence  over.  "  Debate  thy  cause." 
3.  That  the  offence  must  be  thus  debated  before  the  secret  is  divulged  to  another. 
"Discover  not  a  secret  to  another."  4.  That  should  the  secret  be  divulged  to 
another  the  pacific  objects  of  the  interview  might  be  nullified.  "Lest  he  that 
heareth  it,"  &c,     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  11.  A  word  fitly  spoken  is  like  apples  of  gold  in  pictures  of  silver.— T/i« 

lessons  of  the  orange-tree: — "Apples  of  gold"  is  a  poetic  name  for  the  orange  in 
more  than  one  Eastern  tongue.  "Pictures  of  silver"  may  be  a  figure  for  the 
creamy-white  blossoms  of  the  orange-tree.  No  one  who  has  seen  orange-trees  in 
f uU  blossom  and  full  bearing  can  have  failed  to  notice  how  the  beauty  of  the  golden 
fruit  is  set  off  by  its  framework  of  white  fragrant  blossoms.  "  Fitly  spoken  "  is 
in  the  margin  "a  word  spoken  in  season" — a  timely,  opportune  word.  Delitzsch 
renders,  "  according  to  circumstances,"  by  which  is  meant  a  good  woi-d  adapted  to 
time  and  audience  and  to  all  the  conditions  of  the  time.  Most  of  us  can  remember 
$ome  word  spoken  in  the  very  nick  of  time  anil  so  happily  adapted  to  our  conditions 
at  the  moment  that  it  largely  inlluenced  our  whole  subsequent  career.  But  perhaps 
the  meaning  is  a  word  which  was  the  fittest,  the  most  perfect  and  beautiful  expres- 
sion of  the  thought  which  had  to  be  uttered.     "A  word  spoken  on  its  wheels." 


CHAP.  XXV.]  PROVERBS.  603 

Every  kind  of  thought  has  its  appropriate  expression  in  language.  What  the  wise 
man  bids  us  admire  is  those  weighty  and  happy  sentences  which  embody  a  noble 
thought  in  words  of  answering  nobleness.  1.  This  is  the  first  lesson  of  the  orange- 
tree — that  a  happy,  a  fair  and  noble  utterance  of  a  wise  thought  gives  it  a  new 
charm,  a  new  and  victorious  energy.  Distinction  of  style  is  almost  as  potent — if 
indeed  it  is  not  even  more  potent — on  the  life  and  fame  of  a  book  as  depth  or 
originality  of  thought.  2.  All  force  becomes  most  forcible  when  it  is  smoothly  and 
easily  exerted.  It  is  not  effort,  strain,  violence  which  tell  in  action  any  more  than 
in  language,  but  gentleness,  calmness,  a  gracious  mastery  and  smiling  ease.  The 
wiser  you  are  the  less  passionate,  the  less  vehement,  the  less  overbearing  you  will 
be.  Great  forces  are  calm  and  gentle  because  they  are  irresistible.  Calmness, 
composure,  gentleness  are  signs  of  strength.  3.  Keligion  is  most  potent  when  it  is 
clothed  with  grace.  A  genial  and  friendly  godliness  is  like  the  ruddy  fruit  of  the 
orange-tree  encircled  and  set  off  by  its  wealth  of  white,  odorous  blooms.  There 
was  much  that  was  admirable  in  the  Puritan  conception  of  religion  ;  but  though 
its  heart  was  sound  its  face  wore  a  frown.  And  in  many  of  us  religion  still  wears 
a  sour  and  forbidding  face.  Some  there  are  who  still  suspect  beauty,  culture, 
scholarship,  mirth,  and  even  devotion  to  God  and  man,  if  it  take  any  form  other 
than  that  which  they  approve  and  prefer.  Such  people  do  not  render  religion 
attractive.  Let  us  learn  the  lesson  of  the  orange-tree,  and  the  greatest  lesson  of 
all — the  lesson  of  charity.  (Samuel  Cox,  D.D.)  Apples  of  gold  in  pictures  of 
silver  : — The  term  translated  "fitly"  is  a  very  curious  one  in  the  original  Hebrew. 
It  signifies  "  wheels,"  and  the  marginal  reading  is  "  a  word  spoken  on  his  wheels," 
which  means  a  word  that  rolled  smoothly  and  pleasantly  from  the  lips  of  the 
speaker  to  the  ears  of  the  hearer.  In  ancient  times  the  carts  had  no  wheels,  and 
most  things  were  carried  on  horseback.  There  were  no  roads,  and  the  carts  were 
put  on  long  shafts,  the  two  ends  of  which  rested  on  the  ground,  and  were  dragged 
along  by  the  horse  with  great  difficulty,  making  deep  ruts  in  the  ground.  The  first 
wheels  that  were  used  in  our  country  were  very  clumsy  and  rough.  Modern  wheels 
are  light,  and  turn  easily.  The  wise  man  says  that  each  of  your  words  should  be 
like  a  vehicle  on  easy-going  wheels,  so  smooth  and  courteous  that  it  would  produce 
no  jar  or  shock  to  either  speaker  or  hearer ;  not  hurt  by  any  harshness  or  roughness, 
or  leave  a  painful  rut  behind  in  the  memory.  People  in  the  East  are  remarkable 
for  the  grace  and  courtesy  of  their  speech.  They  carry  this  sometimes  too  far,  and 
are  guilty  of  insincerity  and  exaggeration.  We  are  apt  to  err  in  the  other  direction, 
and  make  our  speech  too  rough  and  harsh,  fancying  that  we  cannot  be  true  and 
sincere  if  we  are  polite.  We  are  not  so  careful  of  our  words  as  we  ought  to  be. 
The  text  directs  our  thoughts  to  the  surpassing  excellence  of  gentle  and  kindly 
speech.  Cultivated  society  is  so  pleasant  to  live  in,  because  the  people  who  move 
in  it  have  learned  to  control  their  tempers,  are  polite  and  forbearing  to  each  other, 
and  do  not  say  things  that  grate  upon  the  feelings  and  leave  a  sting  behind.  But 
while  good  society  gives  an  outward  and  artificial  poUteness,  the  religion  of  the 
meek  and  lowly  Jesus  gives  true  inward  refinement  and  civiUty.  It  enables  us  to 
be  truly  considerate,  bearing  with  the  failings  of  some,  overlooking  the  weaknesses 
of  others,  and  having  a  good  word  to  say  of  every  one.  It  puts  a  wheel  on  every 
one  of  your  words,  so  that  it  may  glide  smoothly.  There  are  persons  who  grudge 
to  say  a  word  of  praise  to  others,  however  deserving.  Frankly  praise  what  is 
worthy  of  praise,  and  your  words  will  be  sweet  and  pleasant  to  yourselves  as  well 
as  to  others.  There  is  a  temptation  to  be  clever  and  say  smart  things,  and  to  use 
words  of  sarcasm  or  ridicule  at  the  expense  of  those  who  are  not  so  quick-witted  as 
yourselves.  Be  very  careful  in  finding  fault  with  people,  lest  you  should  make  the 
offender  an  enemy.  In  the  text  "  apples  "  probably  should  be  "  oranges,"  and  this 
fruit  gives  a  more  suggestive  figure.  The  flowers  and  fruit  may  be  found  together 
on  the  orange-tree  throughout  the  whole  year.  The  leaves  are  evergreen  and  of  a 
cheerful,  glossy  green,  and  the  flowers  of  a  brilliant  white,  with  a  most  delicious 
scent.  So  is  the  exceeding  comeliness  of  a  wise  and  gentle  employment  of  your 
words.  A  word  fitly  spoken  can  administer  an  aU-round  delight  in  the  same  way. 
We  speak  about  the  language  of  flowers  and  of  flowery  language.  It  would  be 
well  if  there  was  more  of  this  attractiveness  in  our  speech.  The  old  Athenian  laws 
requu'ed  that  a  newly-married  couple,  when  they  were  alone,  should  first  eat  a 
quince  together,  in  token,  as  this  fruit  was  the  symbol  of  good-will,  that  their 
conversation  should  be  mutually  pleasant.  And  so  your  religion  requires,  in  all 
your  intercourse  with  one  another,  that  you  should  first  eat  the  quince  of  good-will, 
and  be  careful  in  choosing  smooth  words  that  have  no  sharp  edges  to  cut  and 


604  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  lChap.  xxv. 

wound,  that  roll  easily  and  pleasantly  on  wheels  without  making  any  jars  or  ruts. 
Over  against  all  apples  of  discord  that  cause  alienation  and  strife  and  misfortune 
set  the  golden  apples  of  gentle,  kind,  considerate  words  that  will  win  all  hearts 
around  you  and  sweeten  the  air  and  smooth  all  the  rough  things  of  the  world. 
(Hugh  Macmillan,  D.D.)  The  excellency  of  fitly -spoken  words  : — The  comparison 
here  has  undoubtedly  an  allusion  to  some  old  domestic  ornament.  "The  idea," 
says  Stuart,  "  is  that  of  a  garment  of  precious  stuff,  on  which  are  embroidered 
golden  apples  among  picture  work  of  silver.  Costly  and  precious  was  such  a 
garment  held  to  be  :  for  besides  the  ornaments  upon  it,  the  material  itself  was  of 
high  value."  Others  think  that  the  allusion  is  to  a  kind  of  table  ornament,  con- 
structed of  a  silver  basket  of  delicate  lattice-work,  containing  gold  in  the  form  of 
apples.  The  basket  would,  of  course,  be  so  constructed  as  to  show  off  with 
advantage  its  precious  treasure,  the  apple  of  gold.  The  ancient  Easterns  were 
men  of  taste  and  men  of  art ;  they  loved  the  beautiful,  and  they  had  their  orna- 
ments :  and  some  of  their  ornaments  were  as  exquisitely  constructed  as  those  of 
any  scenes  or  times.  I.  Words  fitly  spoken  must  be  words  fitted  to  exhibit  the 
TRUTH  TO  THE  BEST  ADVANTAGE.  They  must  be  to  the  truth  what  the  basket  was 
to  the  apples  of  gold — an  instrument  for  showing  them  off  to  the  best  advantage. 
There  are  words  that  hide  the  truth  ;  they  are  so  pi-ofuse  and  luxuriant  that  they 
bury  the  priceless  flower  in  their  wilderness.  There  are  words  that  disgrace  the 
truth  ;  they  are  ill-chosen,  mean,  suggestive  of  low  and  degrading  associations. 
II.  Words  fitly  spoken  must  be  words  adapted  to  the  mental  mood  of  the  heaeeb. 
1.  Different  men  have  different  mental  moods.  Some  are  naturally  sombre, 
imaginative,  and  practical ;  others  are  gay,  poetic,  and  speculative.  Words  fitly 
spoken  must  be  adapted  to  each  particular  mood  :  the  form  in  which  truth  would 
suit  one  mood  would  be  inapt  to  another.  2.  The  same  man  has  different  moods 
at  different  times.  Circumstances  modify  the  condition  of  the  soul.  Hence  "  a 
word  fitly  spoken"  must  be  a  word  presenting  truth  adr.pted  to  the  soul  in  its 
existing  mood.  It  must  be  a  word  in  due  season.  III.  Words  fitly  spoken  should 
be  words  spoken  in  the  right  spirit.  IV.  Naturally-flowing  words.  "  Spoken 
upon  his  wheels."  Not  forced  or  dragged  words.  Let  us  all  endeavour  to  use  the 
right  words  in  the  family,  in  the  market,  in  the  schools,  in  the  debate,  in  the  pulpit, 
on  the  platform,  and  in  the  press.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Api^les  of  gold  : — Things 
of  rare  worth  and  beauty  are  words  "fitly  spoken,"  words  that  fit  the  case  and 
match  the  opportunity.  The  human  voice  can  do  what  nothing  else  can.  Of  some 
men's  words  we  are  sure  that  they  are  "apples  of  gold."  Such  are  the  words  of 
the  prophets  who  come  with  messages  of  hope  and  warning.  Among  words  of 
truth  and  beauty  are — 1.  Words  of  comfort.  Wc^have  no  distance  to  go  to  find  a 
human  life  that  needs  a  consoling  word.  On  the  next  foot  of  land  to  yours  stands 
a  man  who  craves  for  comfort.  There  are  times  in  life  when  the  word  of  instruc- 
tion would  be  an  injury  and  the  elaborated  argument  a  great  hurt,  as  neither  would 
minister  to  the  mind  diseased ;  but  simple,  earnest,  heartfelt  words,  born  of 
sympathy,  are  veritable  "  apples  of  gold."  2.  Words  of  counsel.  These  are  not 
always  welcome.  Our  independent  spirit  will  not  permit  us  to  invite  or  accept 
them.  Yet  many  a  man  traces  the  turning-point  of  his  career  to  the  time  when  he 
acted  on  some  word  of  good  counsel.  The  word  of  experience  is  often  the  word 
wanted.  3.  Words  of  encouragement.  The  world  will  never  know  what  it  owes  to 
those  people  who  have  encouraged  others.  To  encourage  a  man  is  to  help  him  to 
turn  some  of  the  possibilities  within  him  into  actual  achievements.  Let  us  give 
God  thanks  for  all  those  winsome  servants  of  His  who  walk  their  appointed  ways 
across  His  world,  speaking  as  they  go  the  encouraging  word.  (Albert  J.  Shorthouse.) 
Words  on  tvheels  : — A  wonderful  deal  of  good  often  comes  from  what  Solomon  calls 
"a  word  fitly  spoken."  The  Hebrew  for  "fitly  spoken"  here  means  "set  on 
wheels."  All  our  words  are  set  on  wheels.  If  they  are  good  words,  they  are 
wheeling  on  for  good.  If  they  are  evil  words,  they  go  wheeling  on  for  evil. 
Remember  this.  A  word  fitly  spoken : — A  certain  Baptist  merchant  of  Richmond 
became  seriously  embarrassed  in  his  business.  The  report  went  out  that  he  had 
failed,  and  caused  much  painful  surprise.  A  few  days  after  the  suspension  of  his 
business  Dr.  Jeter,  in  passing  down  the  aisle  of  the  church  one  Sunday  morning, 
met  him.  He  grasped  him  by  the  hand  with  unwonted  warmth,  and  said,  "  How 
are  you,  brother?  I  have  heard  fine  news  about  you."  Just  about  that  time  the 
sad  brother  was  feeling  that  all  the  news  concerning  him  was  of  the  worst  sort. 
With  mingled  surprise  and  curiosity  he  asked  the  doctor  what  he  had  heard. 
"  Why,  I  heard  that  yoa  had  failed  in  business,  and  failed  honestly.    It  is  nothing. 


CHAP.  XXV.]  PROVERBS.  605 

to  lose  your  money  if  you  have  been  able  to  retain  your  integrity."  The  kind 
word  went  far  to  reconcile  the  brother  to  his  misfortunes.  He  did  "  fail  honestly," 
and  not  long  after  started  again,  and  rose  to  high  prosperity.  (From  ^^  Life  of 
Dr.  Jeter.") 

Ver.  13.  As  the  cold  of  snow  in  the  time  of  harvest,  so  Is  a  faithful  messenger 
to  them  that  send  him. — The  value  of  a  good  messenger  to  his  employers  : — It  is  not 
necessary  to  imagine  that  Solomon  here  indicates  the  occurrence  in  Judea  of  snow 
in  the  time  of  harvest.  It  is  very  improbable  that  a  snowstorm  ever  happened  in 
that  country  during  that  period.  The  ancients  in  the  East  did  as  we  do,  preserve 
the  ice  and  snow  of  winter  in  order  to  cool  our  summer  beverages.  A  cold  draught 
on  a  hot  summer's  day  was  there,  as  here,  most  refreshing.  What  such  a  beverage 
was  to  the  thirsty  man  in  the  heat  of  a  tropical  summer,  is  a  faithful  messenger 
to  the  soul  of  his  master.  Our  subject  is  the  value  of  a  good  messenger  to  his 
employer.  I.  His  character  is  refreshing  to  his  master.  What  more  pleasing  to 
an  employer  than  the  development  of  fidelity  in  his  servants  ?  To  see  them  faithful, 
not  only  to  their  engagements,  but  faithful  to  moral  truth  and  to  God.  Even  the 
Eternal  Master  of  us  all  is  pleased  with  the  fidelity  of  His  servants.  II.  His 
INFLUENCE  is  refreshing  to  his  master.  1.  His  service  will  be  likely  to  inspire  his 
master  with  confidence  in  him.  He  calmly  relies  upon  his  representative.  2.  His 
service  will  be  likely  to  awaken  general  respect  for  his  master.  A  "  faithful  mes- 
senger "  can  scarcely  fail  to  bring  honour  to  his  master.     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  15.  By  long  forbearing  is  a  prince  persuaded,  and  a  soft  tongue  breaketh 
the  bone. — The  power  of  gentleness  : — In  the  government  of  our  words,  mildness, 
or  meekness,  is  specially  commendable.  The  right  disposition  includes  meekness, 
gentleness,  courteousness,  kindness.  These  are  the  virtues  of  a  soft  tongue.  The 
opposites  are  hardness,  roughness,  sharpness,  bitterness,  clamour,  brawling.  By 
the  term  "breaking"  is  meant  persuading,  pacifying,  convincing,  appeasing,  pre- 
vailing with.  A  meek  and  gentle  way  of  discourse  is  the  most  effectual  means  to 
overcome  the  fiercest  passions  and  most  obdurate,  cruel  dispositions.  A  calm  and 
gentle  way  in  vindicating  ourselves  is  the  most  effectual  means  to  work  confusion 
in  such  as  would  calumniate  and  reproach  us.  This  truth  may  be  confirmed  by 
two  considerations.  1.  The  nature  of  these  fierce  passions  and  this  obduracy  or 
hardness  of  temper,  which  are  increased  by  opposition,  and  consequently  must  be 
abated  by  gentleness  and  yielding.  2.  From  the  nature  of  lenity  and  gentleness, 
whose  property  it  is  to  insinuate  itself  into  the  hardest  things.  It  is  compared 
with  oil.  How  does  this  doctrine  consist  with  the  imprecations  of  Scripture? 
Explain  that  some  of  them,  though  pronounced  optatively,  are  to  be  understood 
declaratively,  as  descriptive  of  the  true  state  and  condition  of  such  parties.  Those 
who  used  these  imprecations  were  inspired  for  a  particular  purpose.  They  spoke  in 
their  zeal  for  God.  It  may  be  right  to  wish  evil  to  come  to  persons  for  the  sake  of 
its  disciplinary  mission.  How  does  this  doctrine  consist  with  the  severe  impreca- 
tions of  Scripture?  Our  Saviour  called  the  Pharisees  "vipers,"  Herod  a  "  fox." 
The  apostle  calls  some  people  "  dogs."  To  this  it  may  be  said,  those  who  have  an. 
extraordinary  power  of  discerning  may  use  such  hard  terms.  And  those  in  public 
stations  may  thus  severely  chide  and  reprehend.  How  does  this  doctrine  consist 
with  the  duties  of  zeal  and  reproving,  which  sometimes  must  be  done  with  severity? 
A  man  may  sometimes  sin  in  not  being  angry.  True  "  meekness  of  wisdom  "  directs 
a  man  how  to  order  his  zeal  and  rebukes.  Learn — 1.  That  if  soft  words  be  of  such 
a  prevailing  eiiicacy,  soft  and  gentle  actions  must  be  so  too.  2.  The  folly  and  sin- 
fulness of  hard  speeches,  whereby  others  may  be  provoked  to  anger  and  offence. 
3.  The  lawfulness  and  fitness  of  giving  men  the  reverence  and  honour  due  to  their 
proper  titles.  4.  Bitter  and  provoking  words  are  unmanly,  as  being  against  the 
rules  of  morality  and  very  un-Christian,  as  being  against  the  precepts  of  the  gospel. 
(Bp.  John  Wilkins.)  The  manifestation  and  mightiness  of  moral  power  : — There 
are  three  kinds  of  power — material,  mental,  and  moral.  I.  The  manifestation  of 
moral  power.  The  words  indicate  a  threefold  manifestation.  1.  Stillness.  "By 
long  forbearing  is  a  prince  persuaded."  Forbearance  implies  calm  endurance — a 
patience  like  that  which  the  Great  Heavenly  Exemplar  exhibited  under  insults  and 
persecutions.  2.  Speech.  "  A  soft  tongue  breaketh  the  bone."  "  A  soft  tongue  " — 
not  a  simpering  tongue,  not  a  silly  tongue,  not  a  sycophantic  tongue,  but  the  "  soft 
tongue"  of  tender  love  and  forbearing  kindness.  Such  a  tongue  is  might:  it 
"breaketh  the    bone."     This    somewhat    paradoxical    expression   expresses    the 


606  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

cimazing  power  of  kind  words;  they  break  the  bone,  the  ossified  heart  of  the 
enemy.  Another  manifestation  of  power  here  is— 3.  Service.  "  If  thine  enemy  be 
hungry,  give  him  bread  to  eat;  and  if  he  be  thirsty,  give  him  water  to  drink,"  &c. 
"  In  the  smelting  of  metals,"  says  Arnot,  "whether  on  a  large  or  small  scale,  it  is 
necessary  that  the  burning  coals  should  be  above  the  ore  as  well  as  beneath  it. 
The  melting  fuel  and  the  rude  stones  to  be  melted  are  mingled  together  and  brought 
into  contact,  particle  by  particle,  throughout  the  mass.  It  is  thus  that  the  resist- 
ance of  the  stubborn  material  is  overcome,  and  the  precious  separated  from  the 
vile."  There  are  but  few  hearts  so  obdurate  as  not  to  melt  under  the  fires  of  love 
that  blaze  over  and  under  them.  These  words  direct  our  attention  to — II.  The 
MIGHTINESS  of  moral  power.  1.  Persuading.  "By  long  forbearing  is  a  prince 
persuaded."  Thus  David  brought  down  Saul  (1  Sam.  xxiv.  8-20,  xxvi.  3-20). 
2.  Breaking.  "  A  soft  tongue  breaketh  the  bone."  Loving  words  can  molUfy  the 
roughest  natures.  Gideon,  with  a  kind  word,  pacified  the  Ephraimites,  and  Abigail 
turned  David's  wrath  away.  3.  Melting.  "  Thou  shalt  heap  coals  of  fire  on  his 
head."  "  The  Americans  have  a  tract  on  this  subject,  entitled,  '  The  Man  who 
Killed  his  Neighbours.'  It  contains,  in  the  form  of  a  narrative,  many  useful,  prac- 
tical suggestions  on  the  art  of  overcoming  evil  with  good.  It  is  with  kindness — 
modest,  thoughtful,  generous,  persevering,  unwearied  kindness — that  the  benevolent 
co'untryman  killed  his  churlish  neighbour  :  and  it  is  only  the  old  evil  man  that  he 
kills,  leaving  the  new  man  to  lead  a  very  different  life  in  the  same  village,  after  the 
dross  has  been  purged  away."  How  sublimely  elevated  is  the  moral  legislation  of 
the  Bible!  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  poicer  of  Christian  kiiidncss  : — There  is  a 
tremendous  power  in  a  kind  word.  1.  Kindness  as  a  means  of  defence.  Have  you 
ever  known  acerbity  and  acrimonious  dispute  settle  a  quarrel  ?  I  have  seen 
men  moving  amid  the  annoyances,  and  vexations,  and  assaults  of  life  in  such  calm 
Christian  deliberation  that  all  the  buzzing  around  about  their  soul  amounted  to 
nothing.  They  conquered  them,  and,  above  all,  conquered  themselves.  2.  Kind- 
ness as  a  means  of  usefulness.  In  all  communities  you  find  sceptical  men.  How 
shall  you  capture  them  for  God  ?  Sharp  argument  and  sarcastic  retort  never  yet 
won  a  single  soul  from  scepticism  to  the  Christian  religion.  When  such  are 
brought  in,  it  is  through  the  charm  of  some  genial  soul,  and  not  by  argument  at 
all.  Men  are  not  saved  through  the  head  ;  they  are  saved  through  the  heart.  The 
same  thing  is  true  in  the  reclamation  of  the  openly  vicious.  Was  ever  a  drunkard 
saved  through  the  caricature  of  a  drunkard  ?  You  can  never  drive  man,  woman, 
or  child  into  the  kingdom  of  God.     (T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.) 

Yer.  16.  Hast  thou  found  honey  ?  eat  so  much  as  is  sufficient  for  thee,  lest 
thou  he  filled  therewith,  and  vomit  it. — Religion  and  pleasure  : — It  is  a  mistaken 
notion  that  religion  is  a  melancholy  business,  and  the  enemy  of  pleasure.  Chris- 
tianity is  supposed  to  be  synonymous  with  inanity,  and  to  impose  a  weariness  alike 
on  flesh  and  spirit  that  stifles  the  freedom,  represses  the  elasticity,  and  dulls  the 
brightness  which  are  the  natural  and  precious  heritage  of  youth.  But  this  is  as 
false  as  the  devil  who  coined  it.  I  stand  here  as  the  messenger  of  God,  as  the 
champion  of  pleasure,  the  advocate  of  hilarity,  the  apostle  of  enjoyment,  the 
prophet  of  light-heartedness.  Pleasure  is  a  necessity  of  our  nature.  The  good- 
ness of  God  has  made  bountiful  provision  for  full  satisfaction  and  delight.  The 
body  is  endowed  with  senses  capable  of  exquisite  sensations  of  delight.  When  you 
talk  of  the  melancholy  of  religion  you  become  the  Pharisaic  boaster,  and  not  I, 
You  thank  your  God  that  you  are  not  as  other  men.  If  the  intellect  seeks  pleasure 
in  the  study  of  the  physical  universe,  does  the  Christian  philosopher  discover  less 
to  charm  his  mind  than  do  his  scientific  comrades  of  less  assured  belief  ?  But 
ours  is  a  triple  manhood.  There  is  the  moral  and  spiritual  man.  Surely  there 
is  honey  in  doing  right ;  there  is  pleasure  in  goodness  and  truth.  As  to  the  honey 
of  life  to  be  found  in  a  good  conscience,  in  doing  right,  in  walking  uprightly, 
according  to  the  universally  recognised  laws  of  morality,  surely  the  Christian  has 
a  better  chance  than  the  ordinary  man.  What  does  religion  allow,  or  rather 
enjoin,  in  the  way  of  pleasant  recreations?  1.  They  must  do  me  no  harm  ;  neither 
enfeeble  my  body,  rob  my  brain  of  its  vital  energy,  or  disturb  my  inward  sense  of 
right.  2.  They  must  recreate  my  body;  brace  it  up,  and  leave  me  readier  for 
after-service.  3.  They  must  refresh  my  mind  ;  not  make  it  sluggish,  heavy, 
depressed,  and  ill  at  ease.  4.  They  must  cheer  my  heart — in  their  present 
influence,  in  their  results,  and  in  their  memory.  {J.  Jackson  Wraij.)  The  use 
of  honey ;— 1.  The  Bible  does  not  prohibit  pleasure.     It  does  not  say  to  the  man 


OTAP.  XXT.]  PROVEBBS.  607 

who  has  found  honey,  "  Eat  it  not !  "  but  "  Eat  so  much  as  is  sufficient  for  thee." 
What  the  Bible  forbids  is  excess.  2.  In  prohibiting  such  pleasures,  the  Bible  pro- 
ceeds upon  a  principle  of  benevolence.  "  Eat  no  more  than  is  sufficient  for  thee  !  " 
Why  ?  Not  because  pleasure  is  grudged,  but  because  pain  is  deprecated.  3.  The 
principle  upon  which  the  Bible  proceeds  in  this  matter  is  a  benevolent  one,  because 
it  accords  with  the  constitution  of  our  nature.  There  is  a  point  at  which  pleasure 
becomes  pain.  It  is  the  law  of  our  being,  that  if  pleasure  is  to  remain  pleasure,  it 
must  be  enjoyed  moderately  and  intermittently.  {Homiletic  Beview.)  Pleasure  : — 
I.  The  permission.  1.  Pleasure  is  a  necessity  of  our  nature,  (ij  A  necessity  of 
its  complex  constitution.  We  are  made  to  enjoy.  We  have  capacity  for — 
(a)  Animal  pleasure ;  (b)  intellectual  pleasure ;  (c)  moral  pleasure ;  (d)  religious 
pleasure  ;  (e)  social  pleasure.  (2)  A  necessity  of  its  instinctive  desires.  We  have 
an  intense  craving  for  enjoyment.  "  Who  will  show  us  any  good  ?  "  This  yearning 
for  enjoyment,  found  alite  amid  the  refinements  of  civilisation  as  amid  the  rude- 
ness of  barbarism,  alike  in  the  mansion  of  the  rich  as  in  the  cottage  of  the  poor, 
alike  by  the  learned  philosopher  as  by  the  illiterate  peasant.  (3)  A  necessity  of  its 
perfect  development.  2.  Pleasure  is  a  possibility  of  our  condition.  God,  the  all- 
wise  and  aU-kind,  has  not  only  made  us  for  pleasure  and  given  us  a  strong  desire 
for  it,  but  has  also  bountifully  surrounded  us  with  its  sources.  (1)  For  the  animal 
faculties.  There  is  light  for  the  eye,  music  for  the  ear,  fragrance  for  the  smell. 
(2)  For  the  intellectual.  The  universe  is  a  problem  for  our  study.  (3)  For  the 
moral.  The  true  and  good  are  around  us,  in  the  character  of  God,  the  actions  of 
the  good,  &c.  (4)  For  the  religious.  God  in  Christ  is  revealed  as  the  Object  of 
worship.  (5)  For  the  social.  There  is  society,  with  its  varied  life.  3.  Pleasure  is 
an  element  of  our  religion.  Christianity  is  not  a  morbid,  ascetic  system.  "  Eejoice 
in  the  Lord  alway."  II.  The  limitation  :  "  Eat  so  much  as  is  sufficient  for  thee." 
Pleasure  is  not  to  be  indulged  indiscriminately  and  unlimitedly.  We  must  indulge 
in  such  pleasures  only  as  are — 1.  Dignified  in  their  nature.  We  must  remember 
the  spirituality  of  our  nature  and  the  immortality  of  our  being.  We  are  not 
animals.  Let  us  not  make  the  mistake  of  the  rich  fool.  We  are  made  in  God's 
image,  and  are  capable  of  high  and  noble  joys.  2.  Beneficial  in  their  influence. 
Pleasure  must  not  be  sought  and  indulged  in  on  its  own  account,  but  as  a  means 
toward  the  attainment  of  a  higher  end.  The  objects  of  pleasure  are — to  recreate 
the  body ;  to  refresh  the  mind ;  to  cheer  the  heart ;  to  fit  us  for  the  work  of  life. 
3.  Christian  in  their  sanction.  4.  Proportionate  in  their  degree.  Pleasure  must 
not  be  the  end  of  life.  It  must  not  be  pastime.  Time  is  too  valuable  to  be  frittered 
away.     {Thomas  Baron.)        The  world^s   honey : — I.  The  world  has  its  honey. 

I.  It  has  a  gastric  honey.  What  pleasures  can  be  derived  from  a  participation  in 
the  precious  fruits  of  the  earth!  2.  It  has  a  gregarious  honey.  How  great  the 
pleasure  men  have  in  mingling  with  their  kind,  merely  as  social  animals ;  the 
pleasure  of  mates,  parents,  children.  3.  It  has  a  secular  honey.  Pursuit,  accumu- 
lation, and  use  of  wealth.  4.  It  has  sesthetic  honey.  The  beautiful  in  nature,  art, 
music.  5.  It  has  intellectual  honey.  Inquiry  into,  and  discovery  of,  the  Divine 
ideas  that  underlie  all  the  forms,  and  ring  through  all  the  sounds  of  nature. 

II.  The  world's  honey  mat  be  abused.  1.  Some  eat  too  much  of  the  gastric  honey, 
and  become  gourmands,  epicures,  voluptuaries.  2.  Some  eat  too  much  of  the  gre- 
garious honey,  and  become  profligate  debauchees,  bloated  animals.  3.  Some  eat 
too  much  of  the  secular  honey,  and  become  wretched  misers,  haunted  with  a 
thousand  suspicions.  4.  Some  eat  too  much  of  the  aesthetic  honey,  and  grow  in- 
different to  everything  but  what  they  consider  the  beautiful  and  harmonious. 
5.  Some  eat  too  much  of  the  intellectual  honey,  and  they  have  no  life  but  in  that 
of  observatories,  laboratories,  and  libraries.  III.  The  world's  honey  abused  pro- 
duces NAUSEA.  Over-indulgence  in  any  worldly  pleasure  issues  in  a  moral  sickness 
and  disgust.  There  is  what  the  French  call  the  ennui  that  comes  out  of  it — "  that 
awful  yawn,"  says  Byron,  "  which  sleep  cannot  abate."  The  intemperate  use  of 
this  honey  often  makes  life  an  intolerable  burden.  Conclusion :  Take  care  how 
you  use  the  world.  You  may  have  too  much  of  a  good  thing.  There  is  a  honey, 
thank  God  !  of  which  you  cannot  take  too  much,  which  will  never  surfeit  or  sicken 
— that  is,  the  honey  of  spiritual  enjoyment ;  the  enjoyment  of  studying,  imitating, 
worshipping  Him  in  whose  presence  there  is  fulness  of  joy,  &c.    (D.  Thomas,  B.B.) 

Vers.  17-20.  Withdraw  thy  foot  ftova.  thy  neighbour's  house. — Bad  neighhoun : — 
Here  are  four  kinds.  I.  The  intrusive.  It  is  pleasant  to  be  visited  by  a  neighbour 
whose  interest  is  genuine.    Two  evils  accrue  to  those  neighbours  whose  visits  are 


608  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxr. 

intrusive.  1.  They  become  tiresome.  There  is  nothing  fresh  about  them.  2.  They 
become  disliked.  The  natural  consequence  of  irksomeness.  Be  not  too  intimate 
with  any.  Livy  remarks  "  that  the  perfection  of  good  behaviour  is  for  a  man  to 
retain  his  dignity  without  intruding  on  the  liberty  of  another."  Another  bad 
neighbour  here  indicated  is — II.  The  slandeeous.  "A  man  that  beareth  false 
witness  against  his  neighbour  is  a  maul,  and  a  sword,  and  a  sharp  arrow."  1.  A 
maul.  This  old  English  word,  which  is  now  obsolete,  signifies  a  hammer  or  a  club, 
an  implement  used  in  the  rough  warfare  of  fighting  men  in  old  times.  2.  A  sword. 
Another  deadly  implement,  that  by  which  millions  of  men  have  been  cut  down  in 
all  ages.  3.  A  sharp  arrow.  Another  weapon  of  destruction.  A  slanderous  neigh- 
bour is  as  mischievous  as  any  or  all  of  these  murderous  weapons.  He  knocks,  he 
cuts,  he  pierces ;  he  destroys  you  by  his  tongue.  Not  your  body,  but  your  plans, 
your  prosperity,  your  reputation,  your  happiness.  Another  bad  neighbour  here 
indicated  is — III.  The  faithless.  "  Confidence  in  an  unfaithful  man,  in  time  of 
trouble,  is  like  a  broken  tooth,  and  a  foot  out  of  joint."  1.  That  the  unfaithful 
man  fails.  Like  the  "  broken  tooth  "  and  the  "  foot  out  of  joint,"  he  fails  to  fulfil 
what  is  required  of  him.  Just  when  you  want  to  eat,  you  find  that  the  tooth  is 
broken  and  useless ;  just  when  you  rise  to  walk,  you  find  that  your  foot  is  out  of 
joint.  Just  so  with  the  faithless  man.  All  his  old  promises  of  friendship  prove  to 
be  lies,  nothing  less.  2.  The  unfaithful  man  pains  you.  In  the  use  of  the  broken 
tooth  and  the  disjointed  foot  when  you  try  them,  there  is  not  only  disappoint- 
ment, but  torture.  Such  is  the  mental  distress  which  is  caused  by  the  failure  of 
confidence,  in  proportion  to  the  degree  in  which  you  had  cherished  it.  Especially 
is  this  felt  "  in  time  of  trouble,"  when  help  is  so  particularly  needed.  To  trust  and 
be  deceived  is  at  any  time  a  bitter  trial.  IV.  The  injudicious.  "As  he  that 
taketh  away  a  garment  in  cold  weather,  and  as  vinegar  upon  nitre,  so  is  he  that 
singeth  songs  to  an  heavy  heart."  When  you  are  in  trouble  there  are  neighbours 
whose  attempt  to  comfort  you  is  as  absurd  and  as  ineffective  as  the  taking  away 
from  a  man  his  garment  in  cold  weather,  and  as  giving  to  a  thirsty  man  vinegar 
upon  nitre  to  drink.  1.  The  injudicious  comforter  is  one  who  presents  incongruous 
subjects.  Sometimes  he  will  talk  on  worldly  subjects,  subjects  of  gain,  fashion, 
and  amusement,  when  the  distressed  mind  is  sorely  agitated  with  serious  thoughts. 
2.  The  injudicious  comforter  is  one  who  presents  proper  subjects  in  an  incongruous 
spirit.  He  talks  of  the  right  things,  but  talks  of  them  with  a  spirit  unsympathetic, 
sometimes  undevout,  canting,  cold,  and  dogmatic.  Such  a  man's  comfort  is  indeed 
vinegar  on  nitre,  conflicting,  irritating,  and  painful.     (Ihid  ) 

Ver.  19.  Confidence  in  an  unfaithful  man  in  time  of  trouble  is  like  a  broken 
tooth,  and  a  foot  out  of  joint. — Man  trusting  in  man  : — This  is  sometimes  a  great 
evil.  To  trust  in  man  and  disregard  God,  or  to  repose  in  man  the  confidence  that 
rightly  belongs  to  God  alone,  is  sinful  and  ruinous.  But  in  some  respects  it  is 
natural  and  right  to  trust  our  fellow-men.  We  are  social  beings.  There  can  be  no 
friendship  without  trust.  It  is  right  to  trust  our  friends — 1.  For  sympathy  in  joy 
or  sorrow.  2.  For  help  in  time  of  need.  3.  For  honourable  fidelity  in  all  con- 
fidences. I.  The  test  of  man  as  an  object  of  trust.  The  "  time  of  trouble  "  tests 
the  faithfulness  of  those  in  whom  we  confide.  Prosperity  brings  friends  ;  adversity 
tests  them.  Three  kinds  of  trouble  test  man  as  an  object  of  trust — 1.  Trouble  in 
our  circumstances,  or  loss  and  poverty.  2.  Trouble  in  our  reputation,  or  misrepre- 
sentation and  slander.  3.  Trouble  in  our  character,  or  sin.  For  a  truly  Christian 
man  may  faU  into  grievous  sin.  II.  The  failuee  of  man  as  an  object  of  teust. 
1.  The  unfaithful  man  in  time  of  trial  fails  those  who  trust  him.  2.  The  failure  of 
the  unfaithful  man  in  time  of  trial  is  painful  to  those  who  trust  him.  The  attempt 
to  use  the  broken  tooth  or  dislocated  joint  causes  suffering.  Some  of  the  keenest 
anguish  of  human  souls  is  caused  by  the  failure  of  those  in  whom  they  trusted. 
Learn — (1)  To  be  faithful  to  every  trust  reposed  in  us.  (2)  To  be  careful  in  whom 
we  repose  confidence.  (3)  To  prize  those  whose  trustworthiness  we  have  proved. 
(4)  To  place  our  supreme  trust  in  God.     {William  Jones.) 

Ver.  23.  The  north  wind  dxiveth  away  rain :  so  doth  an  angry  countenance  a 
backbiting  tongue. — Righteous  anger: — The  marginal  reading,  which  is,  "  The 
north  wind  bringeth  forth  rain :  so  doth  a  backbiting  tongue  an  angry  counten- 
ance," gives  quite  the  opposite  sense.  In  Arabia  the  north  wind  blew  over  a  long 
tract  of  dry  land,  and  therefore  usually  brought  dry  weather  (Job  xxvii.  21) ;  but  in 
Judea  the  north  wind,  including  all  the  winds  between  the  aorth  and  north-west, 


CHAP.  xxT.]  PROVERBS.  609 

blew  from  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  and  therefore  commonly  brought  rain.  Accepting 
the  marginal  version,  the  idea  is,  that  as  the  north  wind  brings  forth  rain,  a  back- 
biting tongue  brings  forth  an  angry  countenance.  But  our  version,  which  we  think 
equally  faithful  to  the  original,  gives  an  idea  equally  good  and  important ;  it  is, 
that  an  expression  of  displeasure  in  the  listener  will  silence  the  tongue  of  the  back- 
biter. The  anger  referred  to  here  is  a  righteous  anger  ;  its  object  is  legitimate,  its 
expression  is  natural,  its  influence  is  useful.  I.  Its  object  is  legitimate.  It  is 
directed  against  "  a  backbiting  tongue."  A  backbiter  is  a  clandestine  traducer  of 
character.  His  speech  goes  to  damage  another's  reputation  behind  his  back.  He 
does  it  sometimes  by  telling  truth  as  well  as  falsehood.  A  man  need  not  tell  lies 
to  be  a  backbiter ;  he  can  do  it  by  parading  damaging  facts,  and  such  damaging 
facts  may  be  found  in  the  chapters  of  every  man's  life.  He  does  it  sometimes  un- 
maliciously.  He  may  be  prompted  by  vanity  ;  he  may  disparage  another  in  order 
to  set  himself  off  to  better  advantage.  He  may  do  it  from  greed  :  his  object  may 
be  to  rob  the  subject  of  his  talk  of  some  share  of  his  patronage  and  support. 
II.  Its  expression  is  natural.  "  An  angry  countenance."  The  countenance  is  a 
fuller,  more  faithful,  and  forceful  revealer  of  the  soul  than  the  tongue.  An 
admiring  look  has  often  won  hearts  which  no  words  could  enlist.  A  couragteous 
look  in  the  leaders  of  campaigns  wakes  the  invincible  in  battalions.  A  reproving 
look  has  broken  hearts,  as  Christ's  broke  the  heart  of  Peter.  An  angry  look,  not  a 
mere  peevish,  petulant  look,  but  a  look  of  right  down  honest  anger,  directed  to  a 
backbiter,  would  send  him  in  mute  confusion  from  your  presence.  III.  Its 
influence  is  useful.  "  The  north  wind  driveth  away  rain,  so  doth  an  angry 
countenance  a  backbiting  tongue."     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  25.  As  cold  waters  to  a  thirsty  soul,  so  is  good  news  from  a  far  country. — 

Good  news  from  a  far  country  : — We  live  in  a  little  world.  It  is  simply  that  we 
are  a  part  of  it  that  it  seems  to  us  so  great.  By  the  multiplying  of  our  interests  in 
these  days  of  change  and  travel,  there  is  many  a  far  country  from  which  good  news 
comes  to  us  as  cold  waters  to  a  thirsty  soul.  Think  of  that  far  country,  heaven, 
and  the  soul's  yearning  for  good  news  thence.  Every  righteous  thought,  every 
pure,  simple,  generous  purpose,  every  lowly  resolve,  every  warning  of  conscience 
within  condemning  wrong,  every  conception  that  seems  to  be  wooing  to  holiness 
and  sincerity,  is  a  message  from  that  far  country.  Well  is  it  when  they  come  to 
thirsting  souls.  There  are  many  difficulties  about  a  revelation  from  God.  If  we 
should  be  compelled  to  let  miracles  go,  how  simple  is  righteousness,  how  plain  is 
love,  how  clear  is  purity !  Who  shall  say  that  there  are  no  messages  from  the 
far  country  ?  There  may  be  uncertainties  about  many  things,  but  there  cannot  be 
uncertainties  here.  It  must  be  right  that  I  love  right,  that  I  do  right.  God  cares 
for  His  child — cares  that  its  life  shall  be  right  and  true  and  holy;  that  its  sins 
shall  be  blotted  out.  All  revelation  is  not  in  the  Bible.  It  is  rather  a  record  of 
a  revelation.  Such  records,  too,  are  elsewhere.  I  lift  my  eyes  to  the  nightly 
heaven,  and  the  record  is  there.  I  look  upon  the  new-born  spring,  and  the  record 
is  there.  I  look  into  the  heart  of  a  little  child,  and  the  record  is  there.  What  is 
the  sum  of  all  revelations  ;  what  is  the  revelation  ?  Just  Christ,  the  dear  Saviour — 
His  compassions.  His  infinite  redemption,  the  great  message ;  He  Himself  the 
living  Message-bearer  from  the  far  country.  All  other  good  news  is  gathered  about 
this.  We  cannot  separate  redeeming  love  from  any  other  gift  of  our  Father's  care. 
Common  news  from  a  far  country  will  often,  in  this  world  of  change,  cheer  you 
and  me.  We  live  in  a  world  of  separations  and  farewells.  Our  paths,  with  most 
of  us,  are  together  only  for  a  little  while.  Countries  far  apart  separate  the  members 
of  the  one  family  of  God.  But  nowhere  can  they  be  where  God  is  not.  And  members 
of  the  one  family  shall  cheer  each  other's  heart  with  news  from  a  far  country. 
The  news  shall  tell  how  God  is  leading  all  by  different  paths,  the  right  way  for 
each,  to  the  one  city  of  habitation.  [T.  Gasquoine,  B.A.)  Tidivrjs  from  a  far 
country  : — Our  interest  in  tidings  from  a  far  country  may  be  based  on  many  con- 
siderations. 1.  We  may  be  interested  in  the  novelty  and  the  strangeness  of  the 
information  which  reaches  us  about  a  foreign  country,  and  the  more  so  if  any  of 
our  friends  have  been  engaged  in  the  exploration — e.g. ,  Columbus  returning  from 
America,  or  Captain  Cook  from  the  South  Seas.  2.  If  we  have  received  any  great 
possessions  from  that  country  :  as  Solomon  hearing  about  India  and  China,  when 
his  merchants  returned  with  gold,  &c.,  from  that  country.  3.  If  any  great  stranger 
or  dear  friend  has  come  from  it — e.g.,  Solomon,  hearing  about  Sheba  or  Egypt ;  or  the 
English  a-bout  Sardinia,  when  the  king  came  over.     4.  If  any  of  our  friends  are 

40 


610  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

there  now — e.g.,  as  news  from  Australia,  America,  or  any  other  country,  where  we 
have  friends.  If  it  be  good  news,  how  it  revives  and  cheers  us !  Perhaps  oof 
friends  are  doing  business  for  us  successfully.  (The  Congregational  Pulpit.) 
Good  neios  from  a  far  country  : — The  traveller  on  a  hot  summer's  day,  parched  witn 
thirst,  can  easily  understand  the  allusion,  "cold  waters  to  a  thirsty  soul."  They 
are  cooling,  refreshing,  and  invigorating,  and  enable  him  to  pursue  his  journey 
with  "  strength  renewed."  Not  unfrequently  they  have  been  the  means  of  saving  life 
— e.g.,  Hagar  in  the  wilderness  (Gen.  xxi.  14-20) ;  Samson  after  slaying  the  Philis- 
tines (Judg.  XV.  18,  19).  But  the  comparison  is  with  good  news.  Who  does  not 
love  to  hear  good  news  ?  How  exhilarating  the  news  brought  to  old  Jacob  respecting 
his  son  Joseph  (Gen.  xlv.  26-21) ;  how  joyful  the  tidings  brought  by  messengers 
relating  to  the  restoration  of  the  Jews  (Isa.  lii.  7) ;  how  jubilant  the  feelings  of  the 
apostle,  when  bound  at  Rome,  on  hearing  favourable  reports  of  the  Colossian  and 
Philippian  converts !  He  again  "thanked  God  and  took  courage."  1.  The  first 
piece  of  good  news  is  this,  that  the  treaty  of  peace  has  been  signed.  "  Unto  you 
is  bom  a  Saviour."  2.  So  fascinating  is  that  country  that  there  will  be  no  fear  of 
disappointment  when  we  visit  it,  no  wanting  to  return  again  on  earth.  3.  That 
country  has  very  great  attractions.  It  is — (1)  A  land  of  plenty.  Failure  and  star- 
vation, known,  alas  !  often  bitterly  here.  (2)  A  land  of  perfection.  Failure  of 
ideals  here.  (3)  A  land  of  victory.  (4)  A  land  of  friendships.  [G.  P.  Story.) 
Good  news  : — I.  What  this  good  news  is.  It  is  an  assurance  of  the  most 
stupendous  and  amazing  love  of  the  greatest  of  all  Beings.  1.  It  consists  in  pardon 
and  peace.  2.  It  is  the  means  of  conveying  everlasting  joy.  3.  It  is  the  revelation 
of  God  to  the  soul.  4.  It  is  the  knowledge  of  sin  atoned  for  ;  of  the  law  fulfilled ; 
of  Satan  conquered ;  of  death  vanquished  ;  and  of  heaven  opened.    II.  This'glorious 

NEWS    INFORMS    US   OF    THE    STUPENDOUS   WAT     WHEREBY    THIS     BLESSED     INTELLIGENCE 

IS  CONVEYED.    It  is  couvcyed  through  Christ  as  the  author  of  salvation.     III.  We 

MUST  FIRST  BECOME  ACQUAINTED  WITH  THE  PERSON  SENDING,  AND  COUNTRY  FROM 
WHENCE,    AS   WELL    AS   THE     COMMUNICATION    SENT,    BEFORE    WE     SHALL     ESTEEM    IT    AS 

GOOD  NEWS.  1.  The  Spirit  of  God  must  open  and  shine  into  our  minds.  2.  He 
must  subdue  our  worldly  affections.  3.  He  must  conquer  our  stubborn  wills. 
4.  And  daily  read  this  good  news  to  our  souls.     (T.  B.  Baker.)        Echoes  from 

afar : 1.  It  is  a  far  country,  possibly,  as  measured  by  distance,  this  heaven  that 

we  talk  about.  I  prefer  to  believe  that  the  dwelling-place  of  Deity  is  near  at  hand, 
that  the  sainted  dead  are  separated  from  us  only  by  the  thick,  dense,  fleshly  veil 
which  envelops  our  free  soul,  so  that  we  can  neither  feel,  nor  hear,  nor  see.  Heaven 
lies  near  to  the  habitations  of  the  just.  2.  But  heaven  is  a  "  far  country,"  as  being 
far  away  beyond  our  comprehension.  It  is  so  utterly  far  beyond  our  experience, 
so  surpasses  our  comprehension,  so  outstrips  our  thought  and  conception,  that  even 
the  aid  of  revelation  does  give  us  dim  glimpses  of  the  distant  splendours.  3.  Heaven 
is  a  "  far  country,"  because  we  are  by  nature  so  disqualified  from  inhabiting  it. 
We  speak  of  the  fall  of  man,  and  this  is  the  measure  of  it — a  fall  from  paradise  to 
perdition—  a  fall  that  only  power  Divine  can  span.  From  this  "  far  country  "  good 
news  has  come.  News  from  a  far  country  is  interesting  to  us,  if  it  is  from  a  strange 
land,  unlike  our  own.  If  we  have  those  who  are  near  and  dear  to  us  dwelling  in 
it.  if  we  hope,  or  intend,  to  live  in  it  by  and  by.  Good  news  has  come  from  this 
far  country,  the  best  and  most  glorious  news  that  can  fall  on  mortal  ear.  Angels 
have  brought  it.  Jesus  has  brought  it.  The  Holy  Spirit  has  brought  it.  Holy  men, 
moved  by  Him,  have  written  and  spoken  it.  Subtle,  gracious,  secret  good  news  is 
brought  from  the  far  country  still.     (J.  Jackson  Wray.) 

Ver.  27.  It  is  not  good  to  eat  much  honey. — Natural  desires  running  too  fan— 
Man  is  a  creature  of  manifold  desires.  These  desires  may  be  divided  into  two 
grand  classes— 1.  Those  that  can  never  go  too  far.  Such  are  the  desires  for 
knowledge,  holiness,  assimilation  to  God.  2.  Those  that  often  run  too  far.  Such 
are  the  desires  for  wealth ;  the  desire  for  power,  which  often  runs  into  tyranny  ;  the 
desire  for  pleasure,  which  often  runs  into  licentiousness.  Here  isrunniiv;  loo  far — 
I.  The  desire  for  animal  pleasure.  "It  is  not  good  to  eat  much  honey."  It  is 
not  good  for  the  body.  li  is  not  good  for  the  intellect.  The  rise  of  the  animal  is 
the  fall  of  the  mental.  It  is  not  good  for  the  soul.  The  pampering  of  the  senses 
is  the  death  of  the  soul.  "  It  is  not  good  to  eat  much  honey."  Here  we  have 
running  too  far — II.  The  desire  for  human  praise.  "  So  for  men  to  search  their 
own  glory  is  not  glory."  The  word  "  not,"  which  is  here  in  italics,  is  not  in  the 
original ;  it  has  been  suppUed  by  our  translators.     In  doing  so  they  have  evidently 


CHAP.  XXV.]  PROVERBS.  611 

expressed  the  idea  intended.  A  desire  for  the  praise  of  our  fellow-men  is  natural, 
innocent,  and  useful.  It  is  very  true  that  the  praise  of  corrupt  society  is  seldom  of 
much  worth,  and  often  indeed  contemptible.  There  are  men  whose  desire  for 
human  praise  becomes  a  passion ;  popularity  is  the  god  at  whose  shrine  they  are 
always  paying  their  devotions.  Be  master  of  your  desires.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
Pleasure  and  glory : — The  ordinary  mind  consents  to  this  statement  unwillingly. 
There  is  a  natural  reluctance  to  stop  short  in  the  pursuit  of  enjoyment.  What 
glory  can  there  be  in  getting  a  man  to  limit  his  own  glory  ?    I.  Oub  best  interests 

ARE   NOT    SERVED    BY   LIVING    CHIEFLY     ON     EARTHLY    PLEASURES.       OuT    highest     being 

cannot  be  nourished  by  giving  the  chief  place  to  earthly  distinction  and  attainments. 
Life  is  not  intended  to  be  made  up  entirely  of  bank  holidays  and  national  festivals. 
Observe  the  point  of  emphasis  in  this  verse.  "  It  is  not  good  to  eat  much  honey." 
A  little  is  all  very  well.  The  question  of  recreation  and  amusement  resolves  itself 
into  a  question  about  the  desires  and  impulses  which  are  allowed  to  rule  men's 
lives.  Let  a  man  understand  his  true  position  He  is  face  to  face  with  a  long 
history  of  good  and  evil  principles  working  on  the  one  hand  sublimity,  and  on  the 
other  disaster,  in  the  lives  of  millions.  He  has  to  take  his  place — carefully  dis- 
covering his  right  place — in  a  world  that  is  darkened  by  the  shadow  of  the  crime 
and  ignorance  of  ages,  and  torn  to  the  heart's  depth  by  the  cruel  wails  of  passion, 
and  avarice,  and  remorse.  II.  God  has  something  better  for  us  to  do,  and 
SOMETHING  NOBLER  FOR  US  TO  ENJOY.  He  has  Called  to  US  to  Seek  the  knowledge 
of  Himself ;  to  grow  up  into  this  knowledge  of  Himself ;  and  to  use  the  knowledge  of 
Him,  as  it  comes  to  us,  for  the  benefit  of  the  world.  Learn  to  think  soberly  and 
proportionately  of  all  the  pleasures  and  distinctions  of  this  life  ;  ever  having  "  respect 
unto  the  recompense  of  the  reward."     {W.  H.  Jackson.) 

Ver.  28.  He  that  hath  no  rule  over  his  own  spirit  is  liie  a  city  broken  down, 
and  without  walls. — Self-government  essential  to  wisdom : — Here  is  shown  the 
ruinous  condition  of  the  person  who  has  no  rule  over  his  own  spirit.  What 
can  concern  a  man  more  than  the  art  of  self-government  ?  It  is  inexcusable  for  a 
man  to  be  a  stranger  to  himself,  and  not  to  know  how  to  make  the  best  of  his  own 
natural  powers  and  affections.  I.  What  is  it  to  have  rule  over  our  own  spirits  ? 
We  ought  to  consider  the  entire  constitution  of  our  minds.  There  is  something  in 
the  spirit  which  has  a  right  to  dominion,  as  being  in  its  nature  superior  ;  there  are 
other  parts  which  hold  an  inferior  place,  and  ought  to  be  in  subjection.  There  is 
conscience,  a  sense  of  duty  and  sin,  and  of  moral  good  and  evil ;  a  necessary  self 
approbation  arising  from  the  one,  and  reproach  and  condemnation  from  the  other. 
And  there  are  propensities  in  our  minds  arising  on  particular  occasions  of  life. 
These  have  been  conquered,  and  may  be.  II.  Where  is  the  proper  authority 
LODGED  ?  Some  things  are  necessary  effects  of  laws  of  nature,  and  in  relation  to 
them  man  has  no  rule.  A  man  can  inquire  and  deliberate.  The  active  powers 
may  be  suspended  while  we  dehberate.  To  have  rule  over  our  own  spirits  is  to 
keep  the  passions  under  an  exact  discipline.  And  there  are  natural  desires  in  men 
of  very  unequal  moment  which  often  rise  to  passions.  The  true  end  of  self- 
government  is  that  the  superior  powers  of  the  mind  may  be  preserved  in  their  due 
exercise.  (J.  Abernethy,  M.A.)  The  diversity  of  men's  natural  tempers: — The 
spirit  sometimes  means  a  temper,  disposition,  or  turn  of  mind,  in  general :  thus 
we  read  of  "an  haughty  spirit"  and  of  "an  humble  spirit."  This  is,  perhaps, 
the  meaning  of  the  expression  in  my  text :  by  him  that  hath  no  rule  over  his  own 
spirit  may  be  meant  the  person  who  hath  no  government  of  his  passions.  But  the 
expression  may,  without  any  impropriety,  be  taken  for  a  man's  particular  temper 
or  predominant  turn  of  mind.  God  delights  in  variety  throughout  all  His  works. 
The  same  God  is  the  Father  of  our  spirits  ;  and  He  has  formed  them  also  with 
considerable  variety.  AU  matter  has  the  same  essential  properties  ;  yet  the  forms 
into  which  God  has  moulded  it,  and  the  purposes  to  which  He  has  applied  the 
several  parts  of  it,  are  infinitely  different.  In  like  manner  the  souls  of  all  men 
are  indued  with  the  same  faculties  ;  but  from  the  degrees  in  which  they  possess 
these  faculties,  and  from  the  proportions  in  which  they  are  combined,  there  results 
an  endless  diversity  of  characters  in  the  human  species.  When  the  malevolent 
passions  have  a  tendency  to  predominate  in  the  soul,  they  occasion  aU  those 
diversities  of  temper  to  which  we  apply  the  epithets  sour,  sullen,  morose,  severe, 
captious,  peevish,  passionate,  ill-humoured,  and  the  like.  On  the  contrary,  the 
prevalence  of  the  benevolent  affections  of  the  heart  produces  a  great  variety  of 
tempers,  some  of  which  we  term  the  sweet,  the  gentle,  the  mild,  the  soft,  the 


612  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxr. 

courteous,  the  tender,  the  sympathising,  the  affectionate,  the  generous.  We  may 
observe  further  that  very  great  diversities  of  temper  may  proceed  from  the  same 
passion,  only  by  its  being  predominant  in  diiferent  manners.  The  passionate 
temper  and  the  peevish  are  extremely  different ;  yet  they  both  proceed  from  the 
predominance  of  the  very  same  principle — sudden  anger.  Deliberate  anger 
produces  in  those  who  have  a  propensity  to  it  many  distinctions  of  temper 
unlike  to  both  these.  It  may  be  remarked  likewise  that  some  tempers  proceed 
from  the  weakness  of  a  particular  disposition  more  properly  than  from  a  predomi- 
nance of  the  contrary.  Courage,  so  far  as  it  is  constitutional,  proceeds  merely 
from  the  absence  of  fear.  Impudence  is  not  the  prevalence  of  any  positive 
affection,  but  only  the  want  of  shame.  A  want  or  a  relative  weakness  in  any  one 
of  the  numerous  parts  of  a  clock  affects  the  soundness  of  the  whole  machine. 
The  several  passions  and  affections  are,  in  different  men,  combined  in  an  infinite 
variety  of  ways,  and  every  particular  combination  of  them  produces  a  distinct 
temper.  Perhaps  every  temper,  when  it  is  analysed,  will  be  found  not  to  arise 
from  the  prevalence  of  a  single  affection,  but  to  derive  its  form  in  some  degree 
from  the  union  of  several.  Thus  in  a  compounded  colour  different  ingredients  are 
mixed,  and  may  be  observed  on  attention,  though  one  be  so  much  predominant  as 
to  give  it  its  common  denomination.  But  it  is  not  only  by  the  prevalence  of  some 
of  them  in  comparison  with  the  rest  that  the  passions  produce  diversities  of  temper 
among  mankind :  the  general  tone  also  of  all  the  passions  occasions  a  suitable 
peculiarity.  A  musical  instrument  acquires  different  tones  by  having  all  its  strings 
wound  up  to  different  keys.  The  passions  of  different  persons  are  as  it  were 
wound  up  to  a  variety  of  keys,  and  thence  their  souls  derive  distinct  tones  of 
temper.  Though  the  passions  be  the  most  immediate  causes  of  the  varieties  of 
temper,  and  though  on  that  account  they  required  our  principal  notice  in  explaining 
these  varieties,  yet  it  must  be  observed  that  some  peculiarities^of  temper  are 
occasioned  almost  wholly  by  the  form  of  the  intellectual  powers.  When  the 
understanding  is  clear  and  decisive  it  lays  the  foundation  of  a  firm  and  determined 
temper  ;  an  inability  to  form  a  clear  opinion  produces  fickleness  and  inconsistency. 
The  same  temper  may,  in  different  men,  proceed  from  different  causes.  The  source 
of  fickleness  and  inconstancy  is  sometimes  weakness  of  judgment;  sometimes 
timidity ;  and  sometimes  the  keenness  of  all  the  passions,  hurrying  a  man  con- 
tinually into  new  pursuits  according  as  they  happen  to  be  excited  in  their  turns. 
A  temper  of  rashness  may  proceed  from  an  improvident  judgment,  from  the 
absence  of  fear  and  caution,  or  from  the  violence  of  any  passion.  As  similar 
tempers  may  proceed  from  dissimilar  causes,  so  even  opposite  tempers  may 
proceed  from  the  same  cause.  The  sceptical  temper  and  the  credulous  may 
ultimately  be  resolved  into  the  same  imbecility  of  understanding,  an  inability  of 
clearly  discerning  the  real  force  of  evidence.  This  inability  likewise  gives  rise  to 
an  obstinate  temper  in  some,  to  a  wavering  temper  in  others :  one  is  immovable  in 
all  his  designs,  because  he  is  incapable  of  discerning  the  strength  of  those  reasons 
which  should  persuade  him  to  alter  them  ;  another  is  fickle  in  them  all,  because  he 
cannot  see  the  weakness  of  the  reasons  which  are  produced  against  them.  Such 
are  the  general  causes  of  the  diversity  of  tempers  among  mankind.  As  no  two 
plants  are  exactly  alike,  as  no  two  human  faces  are  absolutely  undistinguishable, 
so  no  two  tempers  are  perfectly  the  same.  Every  man  has  "  his  own  spirit,"  his 
peculiar  temper,  by  which  he  differs  from  every  other  man.  1.  Each  of  us  should 
study  to  know  his  own  particular  temper.  The  knowledge  of  our  natural  temper  is 
one  important  part  of  the  knowledge  of  ourselves.  2.  A  proper  sense  of  the  endless 
variety  of  tempers  in  the  human  species  would  lead  us  to  make  greater  allowance 
for  the  sentiments  and  conduct  of  others  than  we  often  do.  3.  The  amazing 
diversity  of  tempers  in  the  human  species  is  a  striking  instance  of  the  contrivance 
and  wisdom  of  the  God  who  made  us.  Variety,  combined  with  uniformity,  may 
be  considered  as  the  very  characteristic  of  design  ;  a  perfect  combination  of  them 
is  an  indication  of  perfect  wisdom.  {Alex.  Gerard,  D.D.)  The  necessity  of 
governing  the  natural  temper : — Is  it,  then,  needful  to  evince  the  necessity  of  a 
man  governing  his  own  temper  ?  Every  man  acknowledges  that  all  others  ought 
to  govern  their  tempers,  and  complains  of  them  when  they  do  not.  That  we  may 
perceive  how  much  it  is  the  duty  of  every  one  of  us  to  govern  his  own  temper,  let 
ns  attend  to  the  ill  effects  of  neglecting  to  govern  it.  They  are  pointed  out  by  an 
expressive  figure  in  the  text:  "He  that  hath  no  rule  over  his  own  spirit  is  like  a 
city  that  is  broken  down  and  without  walls  " ;  he  has  no  security  against  abandoning 
himself  to  every  vice.     Need  I  point  out  minutely  the  vices  to  which  the  indulgence 


CHAP.  XXV.]  PROVERBS.  613 

of  a  contracted  and  selfish  temper  naturally  leads?  The  selfish  affections  are 
various ;  they  turn  to  different  objects ;  but  it  requires  the  strictest  government 
to  prevent  a  temper  founded  on  the  prevalence  of  any  of  them  from  degenerating 
into  the  correspondent  vice,  ambition,  or  vanity,  or  avarice,  or  sensuality,  and 
the  love  of  pleasure.  It  is  still  less  necessary  to  enter  into  a  long  detail  of  the 
detestable  vices  which  spring  from  a  temper  founded  in  a  propensity  to  any  of 
the  malevolent  passions.  They  lead  to  vices  which  spread  misery  through  society, 
and  which  overwhelm  the  person  himself  with  greater  misery  than  he  brings  upon 
those  around  him.  Habitual  peevishness,  producing  fretfulness  on  every,  the 
sUghtest,  occasion,  putting  one  out  of  humour  with  every  person  and  every 
thing,  creating  incessant  uneasiness  to  those  who  are  connected  with  him, 
eating  out  the  enjoyment  of  life,  is  the  natural  effect  of  a  temper  founded  on  a 
propensity  to  anger,  though  accompanied  with  the  weakest  tone  of  passion.  In 
whatever  way  our  temper  most  disposes  the  several  passions  and  affections  to 
exert  themselves,  it  will,  without  regulation,  prove  the  source  of  peculiar  vices. 
When  the  propensity  to  desire  renders  the  temper  keen  and  eager,  if  we  lay  it 
under  no  restraint,  it  must  engage  us  in  trifling  and  vicious  pursuits ;  in  respect 
of  the  object  of  our  pursuit,  whether  pleasure,  profit,  or  power,  it  must  render 
us  craving  and  insatiable,  ever  unsatisfied  with  what  we  have  obtained,  wishing 
and  plotting  for  more  ;  and  in  respect  of  the  means  of  prosecution,  it  must 
render  us  impetuous  and  violent,  regardless  of  the  bounds  of  right,  impatient 
of  every  delay  and  opposition.  Is  the  opposite  propensity  to  aversion  indulged  ? 
Everything  wears  a  gloomy  aspect,  and  is  viewed  on  its  darkest  side  :  we  act  as  if 
we  were  resolved  never  to  be  pleased ;  we  search  for  occasions  of  disgust,  regret, 
and  uneasiness,  and  we  find  them  in  every  object ;  every  gentle  affection  is  banished 
from  the  breast ;  discontent,  fretfulness,  and  ill-humour  become  habitual.  The 
same  temper,  it  may  be  further  observed,  will  lead  a  man,  with  equal  readiness, 
into  opposite  vices  in  opposite  situations.  The  same  littleness  of  mind  renders 
a  man  insolent  in  prosperity  and  abject  in  adversity.  That  vice,  be  it 
what  it  will,  to  which  our  particular  temper  directly  leads  us,  is  an  enemy 
already  advanced  to  the  gates  of  the  heart;  and  if  it  finds  the  heart  "like  a 
city  without  walls,"  it  enters  at  its  pleasure  ;  we  can  make  no  resistance.  But  this 
is  very  far  from  being  the  whole  effect  of  our  neglecting  to  govern  our  natural 
temper  :  the  man  who  ruleth  not  his  spirit  does  not  merely  become  enslaved  to  one 
vice;  in  consequence  of  this  he  is  open  to  every  vice.  Every  ruling  sin  will 
require  from  the  man  who  lives  in  the  indulgence  of  it  the  commission  of  many 
others  for  its  support,  for  its  gratification,  or  for  disguising  and  concealing  it. 
But  it  deserves  to  be  particularly  remarked  that  as  soon  as  the  misgovernment 
of  natural  temper  has  subjected  a  man  to  one  ruling  vice,  he  is  no  longer  proof 
against  even  such  vices  as  are  in  themselves  most  opposite  to  that  very  temper. 
Every  one's  observation  will  supply  him  with  instances  of  persons  who,  being 
engaged  in  one  vicious  course,  have  by  it  been  led  into  sins  most  contrary  to  their 
nature ;  with  instances  of  the  soft  and  gentle  being  brought  to  act  with  cruelty  ;  of 
the  benevolent  and  kind-hearted  labouring  to  bring  ruin  upon  those  who  happened 
to  stand  in  the  way  of  some  unlawful  project ;  of  the  generous,  in  the  prosecution 
of  some  bad  design,  stooping  to  the  most  sordid  actions ;  of  the  candid  and  open 
betraj'ed  into  schemes  of  artifice,  dissimulation,  and  falsehood ;  of  the  timid 
rushing  forward  into  the  most  dangerous  crimes.  Thus  the  man  who  abandons 
himself  to  that  one  vice  which  arises  from  the  corruption  of  his  natural  temper  is 
from  that  moment  in  danger  of  every  sin.  Every  predominant  vice  requires  as 
great  a  number  of  other  vices  to  be  subservient  to  it  in  the  course  of  a  wicked 
life  as  the  ministers  whom  any  tyrant  can  stand  in  need  of  to  be  the  instruments 
of  his  cruelty,  rapacity,  and  lusts.  By  being  "like  a  city  without  walls,"  destitute 
of  defence  against  any  sin,  he  becomes  "  like  a  city  broken  down,"  reduced  to 
ruins,  desolated,  uninhabited,  and  uninhabitable.  Can  you  think  without  terror 
of  the  accumulated  guilt  of  all  these  vices,  and  of  the  punishment  to  which 
they  must  expose  you?  Possessed  and  actuated  by  these  emotions,  be  roused 
to  every  exertion  for  removing  the  faulty  propensity  of  your  nature.  While 
you  neglect  to  govern  your  natural  temper,  all  your  endeavours  to  avoid  or  to 
mortify  the  vices  which  spring  from  it  will  be  but  like  lopping  off  a  few  twigs, 
which  the  vigour  of  the  root  will  enable  quickly  to  grow  again,  perhaps  stronger 
and  more  luxuriant  than  before :  it  is  only  by  setting  yourselves  at  once  to  govern 
it,  to  rectify  all  its  perversities,  that  you  can  lay  the  axe  to  the  root  of  the  tree,  and 
effectually  kill  all  the  branches.    Uhid.)        The  manner  of  governing  the  natural 


614  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

temper  : — To  extirpate  one's  natural  temper  is  impossible.     It  is  a  distinguishing 

character,  impressed  on  every  soul  by  the  hand  of  the  Almighty,  which  the  power 

of  man  can  no  more  erase  than  it  can  efface  the  distinctive  characters  of  the  several 

kinds  of  plants  and  animals,  and  reduce  them  all  to  one  kind.     If  it  were  possible 

for  a  man  to  destroy  his  peculiar  temper,  it  would  not  be  necessary ;  it  would  be 

even  pernicious.     Among  all  the  varieties  of  temper  which  men  possess  there  is  not 

one  inconsistent  with  virtue,  there  is  not  one  which  duty  requires  us  to  endeavour 

to  extirpate.      But  though  it  be  neither  possible   nor  necessary  to  extirpate  the 

natural  temper,  it  is  both  possible  and  necessary  to  govern  it.     We  every  day  meet 

with  persons  who,  from  good  breeding,  or  from  prudence,  can  disguise  their  temper 

and  keep  it  from  showing  itself,  not  on  one  occasion,  but  on  many  occasions  and 

through  a  long  course  of  time ;  could  not,  then,  better  principles  enable  them  to 

correct  it?     A  physiognomist  pretended  to  discover   by  his   art  that  the  great 

Athenian  philosopher  Socrates  was  addicted  to   vices  so   opposite  to   his   whole 

conduct  and  character,  that  all  who   knew   him   were   disposed   to   ridicule  the 

pretensions  of  the  physiognomist  as  absurd ;  but,  to  their  astonishment,  Socrates 

declared  that  he  was,  by  his  constitutional  bias,  prone  to  all  the  vices  which  had 

been  imputed  to  him,  and  that  it  was  only  by  philosophy  that  he  had  got  the  better 

of  them.     Would  it  not  be  shameful  if  many  Christians  could  not  make  a  similar 

declaration?     1.  The  first  object  of  a  man's  care,  in  ruling  his  own  spirit,  is  to 

refrain  his  natural  bias,  so  that  it  may  not  become  vicious,  or  lead  him  into  sin. 

Every  passion  and  affection  is  weak  and  pliable  in  the  moment  of  its  birth.     Had 

we  always  recollection  enough  to  observe,  and  resolution  enough  to  check  its  first 

tendency  to  irregularity,  our  victory  over  it  would  be  easy.    But  if  we  let  slip  this 

favourable   moment,  it  will   soon   be  able   to  carry  us  wherever  it  pleases.      If, 

therefore,  we  would  refrain  our  predominant  passion,  we  must  be  at  the  greatest 

pains  to  avoid  the  objects,  the  opinions,  the  imaginations,  which  are  favourable  to 

its  growth.     In  order  to  restrain  our  ruling  passion  it  will  often  be   necessary 

studiously  to  turn  our  attention  to  such  objects,  and  to  accustom  ourselves  to  such 

actions  as  are  most  contradictory  to  it.     When  a  twig  has  long  been  bent  one  way 

it  cannot  be  made  straight  without  being  for  some  time  bent  the  contrary  way.    The 

vices  to  which  the  natural  temper  gives  us  a  propensity  are  those  which  we  shall 

find  the  greatest  difficulty  in  conquering,  and  which,  after  many  defeats,  wiU  most 

frequently  revolt.     The  last  vices  which  a  good  man  is  able  to  subdue  are  his 

constitutional  vices.     2.  It  implies  that  every  man  render  his  temper  subservient  to 

the  practice   of  virtue  and  holiness.      As  every  natural  temper,  even  the  most 

amiable,  may  degenerate  into  vice,  so,  on  the  contrary,  every  temper,  even  that 

which  becomes  most  disagreeable  by  the  smallest  corruption  of  it,  may  be  made  to 

contribute  to  the  virtue  of  the  heart.      Some  turns  of  temper  are  naturally  and 

strongly  allied  to  virtue.     All  the  tempers  which  are  founded  in  a  predominance  of 

the  kind  affections  are  directly  favourable   to  the  love  of  mankind,  to   all  the 

important  virtues  of  benevolence  and  charity,  and  render  the  practice  of  every 

social  duty  easy  and  pleasant ;  or  that  they  introduce  a  habit  of  soul  congruous  to 

the  love  of  God,  as  well  as  to  that  inward  serenity  which  characterises  every  grace, 

and  renders  it  doubly  amiable.      Other  turns  of  temper  are,  as  it  were,  neutral 

between  virtue  and  vice :  in  perceiving  how  these  may  be  rendered  serviceable  to 

virtue  there  is  little  difficulty.     The  keen  and  eager  temper  in  which  desire  is  the 

chief  ingredient,  when  directed  to  holiness  as  its  object,  will  render  a  man  spirited 

in  the  practice  of  it,  and  susceptible  of  a  strong  impulse  from  its  joys  and  rewards. 

The  contrary  temper  in  which  aversion  prevails,  tends  to  cherish  a  deep  abhorrence 

of  sin,  which  is  one  of  the  strongest  securities  against  the  indulgence  of  it.     Both 

these  tempers  may  become  equally  conducive  to  holiness  by  prompting  us,  the  one 

to  avoid  evil,  the  other  to  do  good.    A  high  tone  of  passion,  a  sensibility,  ardour, 

or  activity  of  spirit,  prepares  the  soul  for  entering  into  the  raptures  of  devotion,  for 

feeling  the  fervours  of  godly  zeal,  for  showing  eminent  alacrity  in  every  duty.     A 

temper  opposite  to  this   may  be   improved   into  a  settled   composure  and  calm 

equability  in  the  love  and  practice  of  holiness.    It  is  more  needful  to  observe, 

because  it  is  not  so  obvious,  that  even  those  turns  of  temper  which  are  most  nearly 

allied  to  vice,  and  which  are  with  the  greatest  difficulty  kept  from  running  into  it, 

may  notwithstanding  be  rendered  subservient  to  virtue.     Pride,  for  instance,  may 

be  improved  into  true  dignity  of  character,  into  a  noble  and  habitual  disdain  of 

every  thought  and  action  that  is  mean  or  base.    An  ambitious  temper  needs  only  to 

be  fixed  upon  its  properest  objects  in  order  to  animate  us  in  the  indefatigable 

pursuits  of  that  genuine  honour  which  results  from  the  approbation  of  God  and 


CHAP.XXT.]  PROVERBS.  615 

from  the  glories  of  heaven,  and  which  will  be  bestowed  only  on  the  righteous,  and 
in  proportion  to  their  righteousness.  A  temper  whioh,  by  being  neglected,  would 
become  blameably  selfish  and  contracted,  will,  by  being  governed,  become  eminently 
conducive  to  prudence,  and  an  incitement  to  diligence  in  that  course  of  holiness 
which  is  our  real  wisdom  and  our  best  interest.  Even  that  temper  in  which  the 
malevolent  affections  tend  to  preponderate,  the  sour,  the  morose,  the  irascible,  may 
be  rendered  subservient  to  our  virtue  and  improvement :  if  it  be  curbed  so  strongly 
as  not  to  lead  us  to  hurt  others,  or  to  wish  for  their  hurt,  it  will  exert  itself  in  a 
keen  indignation  against  vice,  a  rigorous  purity  of  heart,  a  blameless  severity  of 
manners ;  and  it  will  make  us  inaccessible  to  many  temptations  which  have  great 
power  over  soft  and  gentle  and  social  minds.  3.  We  ought  not  only  to  render  our 
peculiar  temper  subservient  to  vuiue,  but  also  to  incorporate  it  with  all  our  virtues. 
AU  the  good  men  whose  lives  the  Scripture  has  recorded  display  different  forms  of 
holiness  derived  from  their  dissimilar  tempers.  Job  is  characterised  by  patience  ; 
Moses  by  meekness  ;  David  is  high-spirited,  his  devotion  is  fervent,  his  virtues  are 
all  heroic ;  John  and  Paul  are  both  warm,  fervent,  and  affectionate,  but  the  warmth 
of  the  former  is  sweet  and  gentle,  that  of  the  latter  bold  and  enterprising.  As  every 
man  thus  derives  from  nature  a  distinct  personal  character,  he  ought  to  adhere  to 
it,  and  to  preserve  its  peculiar  decorum.  He  can  preserve  it  only  by  maintaining 
his  own  natural  temper  so  far  as  it  is  innocent,  and  acting  always  in  conformity  to 
it.  To  conclude :  If  we  would  rule  our  own  spirit,  if  we  would  govern  our  natural 
temper,  let  us  restrain  it  from  degenerating  into  vice,  or  leading  us  into  sin.  The 
means  of  governing  our  peculiar  temper  are  the  same  with  the  means  of  performing 
every  other  duty,  resolution,  congruous  exercises,  watchfulness  and  prayer.  But 
all  these  means  we  must  in  this  case  employ  with  peculiar  care  and  diligence, 
because  it  is  a  matter  of  peculiar  difficulty  to  control  and  regulate  our  predominant 
disposition.  Its  importance  is,  however,  in  proportion  to  its  difficulty.  If  we  can 
effectually  accomplish  this,  it  will  render  it  the  easier  to  subdue  all  our  other 
irregular  passions.  They  act  in  subordination  to  it,  and  derive  a  great  part  of  their 
strength  from  it ;  and  to  subdue  it  is  like  cutting  off  the  general  who  was  the  spirit 
of  the  battle,  and  on  whose  fall  the  army  breaks  and  takes  to  flight.  (Ibid.) 
Self-government : — No  man  can  be  said  to  have  attained  complete  rule  over  his  own 
spu-it  who  has  not  under  his  habitual  control  the  tenor  of  his  thoughts,  the 
language  of  his  lips,  and  motions  of  lust  and  appetite,  and  the  energy  of  his  passion. 
This  shows  you  at  once  the  extent,  and  the  division  of  our  subject.  I.  The 
GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  THOUGHTS.  After  all  that  has  been  written  on  the  subject  of 
self-command,  the  regulation  of  the  thoughts  has  seldom  drawn  the  attention  of 
moralists.  On  the  authority  of  silly  maxims  like  these,  that  thought  is  free  as  air, 
that  no  one  can  help  what  he  thinks,  innumerable  hours  are  wasted  in  idle  reveries 
without  the  suspicion  of  blame.  The  time  which  we  fondly  supposed  to  be  merely 
wasted  in  doing  nothing  may  have  been  easily  employed  in  mischievous 
imaginations,  and  thus  what  was  considered  as  lost  simply  is  found  to  be  abused. 
When  we  reflect  also  that  every  licentious  principle,  every  criminal  project,  and 
every  atrocious  deed  is  the  fruit  of  a  distempered  fancy,  whose  rovings  were 
originally  unchecked  till  thoughts  grew  into  desires,  desires  ripened  into  resolves, 
and  resolves  terminated  in  execution,  well  may  we  tremble  at  discovering  how 
feeble  is  the  control  over  our  imaginations  which  we  have  hitherto  acquired.  We 
do  not  say  that  Caesar,  brooding  over  his  schemes  of  ambition  in  his  tent,  was  as 
guilty  as  Csesar  passing  the  Eubicon  and  turning  his  arms  against  his  country ; 
but  we  do  say  that  licentiousness  of  thought  ever  precedes  licentiousness  of  conduct ; 
and  that  many  a  crime  which  stains  human  nature  was  generated  in  the  retirement 
of  the  closet,  in  the  hours  of  idle  and  listless  thought,  perhaps  over  the  pages  of  a 
poisonous  book,  or  during  the  contemplation  of  a  hcentious  picture.  II.  The 
GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  TONGUE.  "  If  any  man  offend  not  in  word,  the  same  is  a  perfect 
man."  This  will  not  appear  an  extravagant  assertion  when  we  consider  how 
numerous  are  the  vices  in  which  this  little  member  takes  an  active  part.  If  we 
consider  these  vices  of  the  tongue  in  the  order  of  their  enormity,  we  shall  see  how 
easily  one  generates  another.  Talkativeness,  the  venial  offspring  of  a  lively,  not  to 
say  an  unrestrained,  fancy,  hardly  rises  to  a  fault  till  it  is  found  that  he  who  talks 
incessantly  must  often  talk  foolishly,  and  that  the  prattle  of  a  vain  and  itching  tongue 
degenerates  rapidly  into  that  foolish  talking  and  jesting  which,  as  an  apostle  says, 
are  not  convenient.  If  for  every  idle,  unprofitable,  false  or  calumniating  word 
which  men  shall  speak  they  shall  give  an  account  in  the  day  of  judgment,  what 
account  shall  those  men  render  whose  conversation  first  polluted  the  pure  ear  of 


616  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxyi. 


childhood,  first  soiled  the  chastity  and  whiteness  of  the  young  imagination,  whose 
habitual  oaths  first  taught  the  child  to  pronounce  the  name  of  God  without 
reverence,  or  to  imprecate  curses  on  his  mates  with  all  the  thoughtlessness  of  youth, 
but  with  all  the  passion  and  boldness  of  manhood  ?  III.  The  government  of  the 
ANnvTATi  APPETITES.  "  Dearly  beloved,  I  beseech  you,  abstain  from  fleshly  lusts  which 
war  against  the  soul."  For  how  humiliating  is  the  consideration,  enough,  indeed, 
to  make  us  weep  with  shame,  that  man,  the  noblest  work  of  God  on  earth,  the  lord 
of  this  lower  world,  that  this  noble  creature  should  suffer  himself  to  fall  into  the 
hands  of  the  grovelling  mob  of  appetites,  and  to  be  fettered  by  base  lusts  which 
ought  to  be  his  slaves — that  this  ethereal  spirit  should  be  wasted  in  the  service  of 
sensuality,  and  this  intelligence,  capable  of  mounting  to  heaven,  be  sunk  and  buried 
in  the  slime  and  pollution  of  gross  and  brutal  pleasures  1  IV.  The  government  of 
THE  PASSIONS.  Not  to  be  in  a  passion  is  generally  the  amount  of  the  notion  which 
the  world  entertains  of  self-command.  In  the  broad  scheme  of  gospel  ethics,  the 
opposite  to  anger  is  meekness ;  and  meekness  is  no  narrow  or  superficial  virtue. 
The  meek  man  of  the  gospel  is  the  very  reverse  of  those  who  act  the  most  bustling 
and  noisy  part  on  the  theatre  of  human  life.  He  finds  himself  in  a  world  where  he 
will  be  oftener  called  to  suffer  than  to  act.  He  is  not  ambitious,  because  he  sees 
little  here  worth  ambition.  Humility  is  the  gentle  and  secret  stream  which  runs 
through  his  life  and  waters  all  his  virtues.  To  the  government  of  the  passions 
the  principal  prerequisite  is  the  restriction  of  the  desires ;  therefore,  as  he  expects 
little  from  the  world  he  will  not  often  quarrel  with  it  for  the  treatment  he  receives. 
{J.    S.  Buckminster.)  Self-control: — I.  What  is  meant    by  not   having   rule 

OVER  ouB  own  spirit  ?  1.  Intemperance  of  feeling,  especially  angry  feeling. 
2.  Extravagance  of  speech.  3.  Rashness  of  conduct.  4.  Hence  the  formation  of 
pernicious  habits.  II.  The  evil  of  lacking  self-control.  It  destroys  the  walls 
of  our  city,  and  exposes  us — 1.  To  the  inroads  of  sin;  and  is  itself  sin.  2.  To 
iasult  and  dishonour.  3.  To  the  machinations  of  foes.  4.  To  utter  destitution 
and  ruin.  III.  The  means  of  promoting  self-control.  1.  Habitual  efforts  of  the 
will.  2.  Avoidance  of  temptation.  3.  Prayerful  dependence  on  God's  Spirit. 
4.  A  serious  and  thoughtful  habit  of  mind.  IV.  Reasons  and  encouragements. 
1.  Self-control  is  an  essential  part  of  our  salvation.  2.  The  example  of  God's 
forbearance.  3.  The  example  of  Christ's  meekness.  4.  Its  connection  with  our 
usefulness.  5.  Self-control  gives  real  increase  of  power.  V.  Applications.  1.  To 
the  Christians  in  their  family  and  friendly  intercourse.  2.  To  Christians  in  Church 
deliberation  and  action.  3.  To  Christians  in  secular  business  and  general  inter- 
course with  the  world.  In  conclusion,  distinguish  between  self-control  and  apathy ; 
and  show  its  consistency  with  being  zealously  affected  in  a  good  cause.  {The 
Congregational  Pulpit.) 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 


Vers.  1-8.  As  snow  in  summer,  and  as  rain  in  harvest,  so  honour  is  not  seemly 
for  a  fooL — Honour  paid  to  the  wicked  unseemly  and  perniciotis  : — The  respect 
which  man  pays  his  fellow  is  often  grounded  on  reasons  immoral  and  absurd. 
Sometimes  man  is  respected  on  the  ground  of  his  personal  appearance,  sometimes 
on  the  ground  of  his  mental  abilities,  sometimes  on  the  ground  of  his  worldly 
possessions,  sometimes  on  the  ground  of  his  lineage  and  social  position ;  but 
respect  for  men  on  any  of  these  grounds  alone  is  very  questionable  in  morality. 
The  true  and  Divinely  authorised  ground  of  respect  for  man  is  moral  goodness. 
The  man  who  is  morally  good,  however  deficient  in  other  things,  has  a  Divine  claim 
to  our  honour.  I.  Honour  paid  to  the  wicked  is  unseemly.  It  is  like  "  snow  in 
summer  and  rain  in  harvest."  It  is  unseasonable  and  incongruous.  How  un- 
seemly nature  would  appear  in  August  with  snow  mantling  our  cornfields !  Souls 
are  morally  constituted  to  reverence  the  good;  to  abhor  the  morally  bad,  wherever 
it  is  seen,  whether  in  connection  with  lordly  possessions,  kingly  power,  or,  what  is 
higher  still, mental  genius.  II.  Honour  paid  to  the  wicked  is  pernicious.  "Snow 
in  summer  and  rain  in  harvest"  are  in  nature  mischievous  elements.  Their 
tendency  is  to  rob  the  agriculturist  of  the  rewards  of  his  labour,  and  to  bring  on 
a  famine  in  the  land.  Far  more  mischievous  is  it  when  the  people  of  a  country 
sink  so  morally  low  as  to  render  honour  to  men  who  are  destitute  of  moral  good- 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  PROVERBS.  617 

ness.  The  perniciousness  is  also  expressed  by  another  figure  in  the  text,  "  As  he 
that  bindeth  a  stone  in  a  sling,  so  is  he  that  giveth  honour  to  a  fool."  The  word 
translated  "sling"  means  a  heap  of  stones,  and  the  -word  "stone"  a  precious 
stone.  Hence  the  margin  reads,  "As  he  that  putteth  a  precious  stone  in  an  heap 
of  stones,  so  is  he  that  giveth  honour  to  a  fool."  The  idea  evidently  is,  as  a 
precious  stone  amongst  rubbish,  so  is  honour  given  to  a  fool.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  As  the  bird  by  wandering,  as  the  swallow  by  fl3ring:,  so  the  curse 
causeless  shall  not  come. — Human  anathemai  : — Another,  and  perhaps  a  better, 
translation  is  this,  "  Unsteady  as  the  sparrow,  as  the  flight  of  the  swallow,  is  a 
causeless  curse  ;  it  cometh  not  to  pass."  "  There  is  a  difficulty  here,"  says  Ward- 
law,  "  in  settling  the  precise  point  in  the  comparison.  The  ordinary  interpretation 
explains  it  with  reference  to  curses  pronounced  by  men  without  cause — imprecations, 
anathemas,  that  are  unmerited — and  the  meaning  is  understood  to  be — as  the  bird 
or  sparrow,  by  wandering,  and  as  the  swallow,  or  wood-pigeon,  by  flying,  shall  not 
come — that  is,  shall  not  reach  us  or  come  upon  us  in  the  way  of  injury — so  is  it 
with  the  causeless  curse.  It  will  "  do  no  more  harm  than  the  bird  that  flies  over- 
head, than  Goliath's  curses  on  David."  And  it  might  be  added  that,  as  these  birds 
return  to  their  own  place,  to  the  nests  whence  they  came,  so  will  such  gratuitous 
maledictions  come  back  upon  the  persons  by  whom  they  are  uttered.  I.  Men  abb 
FREQUENTLY  THE  VICTIMS  OF  HUMAN  IMPRECATIONS.  Few  men  pass  through  the 
world  without  creating  enemies,  either  intentionally  or  otherwise.  Men  vent  their 
hatred  in  various  ways.  II.  That  human  imprecations  are  sometimes  undeserved. 
The  curse  is  "  causeless."  Sometimes  the  curses  of  men  are  deserved.  There  are 
two  classes  of  causeless  curses — 1.  Those  that  are  hurled  at  us  because  we  have 
done  the  right  thing.  When  you  are  cursed  for  reproving  evil,  for  proclaiming  an- 
unpopular  truth,  or  pursuing  a  righteous  course  which  clashes  with  men's  pre- 
judices or  interests,  the  curse  is  causeless.  2.  Those  that  are  uttered  without 
reason  or  feeling.  There  are  men  who  are  so  in  the  habit  of  using  profane 
language  that  it  almost  flows  from  their  lips  without  malice  or  meaning.  The 
greatest  men  in  history  have  been  cursed,  and  some  of  them  have  died  under  a 
copious  shower  of  human  imprecations.  III.  Undeserved  imprecations  are 
ALWAYS  HARMLESS.  "  The  greatest  curse  causeless  shall  not  come."  Was  David 
the  worse  for  Shimei's  curse  ?  or  Jeremiah  for  the  curse  of  his  persecutors  ?  "  He 
that  is  cursed  without  a  cause,"  says  Matthew  Henry,  "  whether  by  furious  impre- 
cations or  solemn  anathemas,  the  curse  will  do  him  no  more  harm  than  the 
sparrow  that  flies  over  his  head.  It  wiU  fly  away  like  the  sparrow  or  the  wild 
swallow,  which  go  nobody  knows  where,  until  they  return  to  their  proper  place,  as 
the  curse  will  at  length  return  to  him  that  uttered  it."  "Cursing,"  says  Shake- 
speare, "  ne'er  hurts  him,  nor  profits  you  a  jot.  Forbear  it,  therefore, — give  your 
cause  to  heaven."  But  if  the  curse  be  not  causeless,  it  will  come.  Jotham's 
righteous  curse  came  upon  Abimelech  and  the  men  of  Shechem  (Judg.  ix.  56,  57).. 
Elisha's  curse  fearfully  came  to  the  young  mockers  of  Bethel  (2  Kings  ii.  24). 
*'  The  curse  abides  on  Jericho  from  generation  to  generation."     {Homilist.) 

Vers.  3-11.  A  whip  for  the  horse,  a  bridle  for  the  ass,  and  a  rod  for  the  fool's 
back. — Aspects  of  a  fool : — Sin  is  folly.  It  sacrifices  the  spiritual  for  the  material, 
the  temporal  for  the  eternal,  the  pure  joys  of  immortality  for  the  gratification  of 
an  hour.  I.  He  appears  here  as  a  servant.  "A  whip  for  the  horse,  a  bridle  for 
the  ass,  and  a  rod  for  the  fool's  back."  This  proverb  inverts  our  ideas.  We 
should  have  said,  "A  bridle  for  the  horse,"  and  "  a  whip  for  the  ass."  But  the 
Eastern  asses  have  much  of  the  fire  of  our  blood  horses,  while  the  horses  are  often 
heavy  and  dull.  Therefore  the  ass  there  requires  the  bridle,  and  the  horse  the 
whip — the  one  to  accelerate,  the  other  to  restrain  and  guide  activity.  As  the  horse 
and  the  ass,  in  order  to  be  used  as  the  servants  of  man,  require  the  application  of 
force,  so  does  the  fool.  "A  rod  for  the  fool's  back."  If  a  stubborn  sinner  is  to  be 
made  the  servant  of  society,  coercion  must  be  employed.  Argument,  persuasion, 
example ;  these  moral  appliances  will  affect  him  but  little.  II.  He  appears  here 
AS  A  DEBATER.  "Auswer  not  a  fool  according  to  his  folly,  lest  thou  be  like 
unto  him.  Answer  a  fool  according  to  his  folly,  lest  he  be  wise  in  his  own 
conceit."  There  is  an  apparent  contradiction  here,  but  it  is  only  apparent. 
The  negative  means,  we  are  not  to  debate  with  him  in  his  style  and  spirit,  and  thus 
become  like  him.  We  are  not  to  descend  to  his  level  of  speech  and  temper.  The 
positive  means,  that  we  are  to  answer  him  as  his  folly  deserves.    It  may  be  by 


618  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

silence  as  well  as  speech.  The  fool  talks ;  he  is  often  a  great  debater.  III.  He 
APPEAES  HERE  AS  A  MEssENGEB.  The  meaning  of  this  is,  "  He  who  would  trust 
a  fool  with  a  message  might  as  well  cut  off  his  feet,  for  he  will  have  vexation  and 
maybe  damage."  How  careful  should  we  be  to  entrust  important  business  to 
trustworthy  persons!  Solomon  himself  drank  damage,  by  employing  an  "in- 
dustrious "  servant,  but  a  fool  in  wickedness,  who  "  lifted  up  his  hand  against  the 
king,"  and  spoiled  his  son  of  ten  parts  of  his  kingdom  (1  Kings  xi.  26-40). 
Benhadad  drank  damage  by  sending  a  message  by  the  hands  of  Hazael,  who 
murdered  his  master  when  the  way  was  opened  for  his  own  selfish  purposes 
(2  Kings  viii.  8-15).  Much  of  the  business  of  life  is  carried  on  by  messengers  or 
agents.  How  much  a  mercantile  firm  suffers  by  improper  representatives  1  IV.  He 
APPEARS  here  AS  A  TEACHER.  "The  Icgs  of  the  lame  are  not  equal,  so  is  a 
parable  in  the  mouth  of  fools."  It  is  not  very  uncommon  to  find  fools  sustaining 
the  office  and  performing  the  functions  of  teachers.  "  They  have  a  parable  in 
their  mouth."  The  verses  suggest  two  things  concerning  them  as  teachers — 
1.  That  they  appear  very  ridiculous.  "  The  legs  of  the  lame  are  not  equal,  so  is  a 
parable  in  the  hands  of  fools."  The  idea  seems  to  be,  as  the  cripple  who  desires  to 
appear  nimble  and  agile  appears  ridiculous  in  his  lame  efforts  to  walk,  so  the  fool 
appears  ridiculous  in  his  efforts  to  teach.  2.  As  teachers,  they  are  generally  very 
mischievous.  "  As  a  thorn  goeth  up  into  the  hand  of  the  drunkard,  so  is  a  parable 
in  the  mouth  of  fools."  The  idea  is,  that  a  fool  handling  the  doctrines  of  wisdom 
is  like  a  drunken  man  handling  thorns.  The  besotted  inebriate,  not  knowing  what 
he  is  about,  lays  hold  of  the  thorn  and  perforates  his  own  nerves.  The  wise 
sayings  in  the  mouth  of  a  stupid  man  are  self-condemnatory.  V.  He  appe.ve3 
HERE  AS  A  commissioner.  "The  great  God  that  formed  all  things  both  rewardeth 
the  fool  and  rewardeth  transgressors."  The  word  "  God  "  is  not  in  the  original. 
The  margin  is  the  more  faithful  translation — "A  great  man  giveth  all,  and  he 
hireth  the  fool ;  he  hireth  also  transgressors."  The  idea  seems  to  be,  that  when 
worldly  princes  employ  fools  for  the  public  service  it  is  a  source  of  anxiety  and 
trouble  to  all  good  citizens.  "  The  lesson  has  application  from  the  throne  down- 
wards, through  all  the  descriptions  of  subsidiary  trusts.  Extensive  proprietors, 
■who  employ  overseers  of  their  tenants,  or  of  those  engaged  in  their  manufactories, 
X)T  mines,  or  whatever  else  be  the  description  of  their  property,  should  see  to  the 
character  of  these  overseers.  Their  power  may  be  abused,  and  multitudes  of 
workmen  suffer,  when  the  owner — the  master — knows  nothing  of  what  is  going  on. 
But  he  ought  to  know.  Many  complainings  and  strikes,  well  or  ill-founded,  have 
their  origin  here."  VI.  He  appears  here  as  a  reprobate.  The  emblem  here  is 
disgusting,  but  the  thing  signified  is  infinitely  more  so.  Peter  quotes  this  proverb 
(2  Pet.  ii.  20-22).  The  wicked  man  often  sickens  at  his  wickedness,  and  then 
returns  to  it  again.  Thus  Pharaoh  returned  from  his  momentary  conviction 
(Exod.  viii.  8-15) ;  Ahab  from  his  pretended  repentance  (1  Kings  xxi.) ;  Herod 
from  his  partial  amendment  (Mark  vi.  20-27).     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Vers.  4,  5.  Answer  not  a  fool  according  to  his  folly,  lest  thou  also  be  like  unto 
him. — Answering  a  fool  according  to  his  folly  : — -The  ambiguity  in  these  verses  lies 
in  the  connecting  words  "  according  to,"  which  are  here  used  in  two  different 
senses.  "Answer  not  a  fool  according  to,"  i.e.,  not  in  a  manner  agreeing  with  his 
foUy,  lest  thou  become  as  foolish  and  perverse  as  he.  "  Answer  him  according  to," 
i.e.,  according  to  the  nature  and  desert  of  his  folly;  so  as  best  to  meet  and  refute 
it.  (E.  Fond,  D.D.)  The  treatment  of  a  fool : — There  are  many  cases  in  which 
a  fool  is  to  be  heard,  and  not  answered  at  all.  When  a  scorner  reviles  us,  it  is 
needless  to  reprove  him  for  it.  Our  Lord  often  kept  silence  when  impertinent 
questions  were  asked  Him.  But  silence  cannot  be  the  rule  in  every  case.  In  many 
cases  it  is  proper  that  a  fool's  words  should  be  answered,  only  you  must  take  care 
in  answering  not  to  imitate  him.  If  he  speaks  unreasonable,  profane,  peevish,  or 
passionate  words,  you  must  not  answer  him  in  his  own  style.  You  are  angry  at 
him  for  his  folly,  and  reprove  him  for  the  extravagance  of  his  behaviour,  and 
therefore  you  cannot  but  confess  that  yourselves  are  worthy  of  a  very  sharp 
reproof,  if  you  behave  like  him  at  the  very  time  that  you  are  testifying  yonr 
displeasure  at  his  conduct.  It  becomes  not  the  followers  of  Jesus  to  return  railing 
lor  railing,  or  one  angry  reflection  for  another,  but  in  whatever  manner  others  talk, 
our  tongues  ought  still  to  be  governed  by  the  law  of  meekness  and  charity. 
(Oeorge  Lawson,  D.D.)  The  scorner  answered  : — A  certain  preacher  had  wrought 
his  best  to  benefit  his  audience  ;  but  one  of  them  came  to  him,  and  somewhat 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  PBOVERBS.  619 

rudely  remarked,  '•  Your  preaching  is  of  no  use  to  me.  I  do  not  believe  that  I 
have  a  soul ;  I  don't  want  to  be  talked  to  about  an  imaginary  hereafter.  I  shall 
die  like  a  dog."  The  minister  calmly  replied,  "  Sir,  I  have  evidently  failed  through 
misapprehension.  I  did  my  best  for  the  good  of  all  my  hearers ;  but  I  prepared 
the  entertainment  under  the  notion  that  I  was  catering  for  men  with  souls.  Had  I 
known  there  were  creatures  present  who  had  no  souls,  and  would  die  like  dogs,  I 
would  have  provided  a  good  supply  of  bones  for  them."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Reply  to  scoffers : — It  is  stated  by  one  of  the  biographers  of  John  Wesley  that 
while  he  was  staying  at  an  hotel  at  Oxford  for  a  few  hours,  some  wild  young  men, 
who  were  aware  of  the  fact,  took  occasion  to  play  a  joke  upon  him.  Coming 
suddenly  into  the  room  where  he  was  sitting,  they  exclaimed,  "  Oh,  Mr.  Wesley, 
the  devil's  dead  ! "  The  aged  saint  arose,  and  placing  his  hands  upon  the  heads  of 
two  of  the  young  men,  he  said,  with  a  voice  fuU  of  pity,  "  My  poor  fatherless 
children,  what  wUl  you  do  ?  " 

Ver.  8.  As  lie  that  bindeth  a  stone  in  a  sling,  so  Is  he  that  giveth  honour  to  a 
fooL — Throwing  a  stone  at  an  idol : — The  words  should  be  translated,  as  Colonel 
Conder  was  the  first  to  point  out :  "As  he  that  throweth  a  stone  at  an  idol,  so  is 
he  that  giveth  honour  to  a  fool."  The  comparison  refers  to  the  universal  custom, 
in  ancient  times,  among  Pagan  nations  of  throwing  a  stone  at  an  idolatrous  shrine, 
not  in  execration  of  it,  like  the  stones  thrown  to  this  day  by  the  Jews  at  Absalom's 
pillar  at  Jerusalem,  but  in  honour  of  it.  At  the  foot  of  some  sacred  tree,  or  some 
pillar  consecrated  to  idolatrous  worship,  a  cairn  or  heap  of  stones  is  generally 
found ;  each  stone  testifying  of  a  visit  paid  to  the  spot  by  some  votary ;  and  the 
larger  the  heap  the  greater  the  veneration  shown.  In  Greece,  the  worship  of 
Hermes  or  Mercury  consisted  in  throwing  a  stone  at  his  image,  set  up  as  a  mark 
by  the  wayside  to  protect  travellers  on  a  journey.  In  Palestine,  amongst  the 
primitive  Canaanite  inhabitants  that  still  survived,  idolatry  was  widely  practised  ; 
and  in  early  times  it  was  a  common  sight,  on  rising  spots  among  the  hills  of  Judea 
and  Galilee,  to  come  upon  a  menhir,  or  dolmen,  in  which  the  object  of  worship  was 
a  rude  stone  image,  forming  the  nucleus  of  a  cairn  or  heap  of  stones  which  had 
gradually  grown  around  it,  in  remembrance  of  the  visits  paid  by  worshippers.  In 
Scotland  many  cairns  are  made  of  the  stones  thrown  at  a  rude  stone  monument,  or 
cromlech,  as  an  act  of  worship  ;  and,  perhaps,  many  of  the  cairns  of  remembrance 
raised  to  the  dead  may  have  originated  from  this  act  of  worship.  The  old  saying, 
•'  I  will  add  a  stone  to  your  cairn,"  was  the  highest  expression  of  reverence  and 
regard  that  could  be  offered  to  a  friend.  With  this  explanation  the  comparison 
used  in  the  Scripture  proverb  becomes  plain  and  forcible.  The  proverb  could  only 
have  been  used  by  an  iconoclast ;  and  very  probably  came  into  existence  in  the  days 
of  Hezekiah,  after  the  wholesale  destruction,  by  this  pious  and  zealous  monarch,  of 
the  altars  and  stone  monuments  of  the  Canaanite  idolaters  which  had  corrupted 
Israel.  Hezekiah  was  bent  on  the  work  of  national  reformation,  and  the  purifica- 
tion and  consecration  of  the  temple  by  a  perfect  ceremonial  was  accompanied  by 
the  overthrow  of  all  the  "  high  places  "  and  the  idolatrous  images  and  rites  con- 
nected with  them,  as  antagonistic  to  the  holiness  of  the  land  as  God's  heritage. 
And,  therefore,  the  proverb  of  the  text  would  have  a  deep  force  and  meaning  in  his 
day.  Like  one  who  continued  the  old  practice  of  throwing  a  stone  at  an  idolatrous 
monument,  in  token  of  worship,  a  practice  now  forbidden  and  proved  to  be  vain  and 
useless,  so  was  he  who  gave  honour  to  a  fool.  A  fool  was  as  unworthy  of  honour 
as  an  idol  is  of  worship.  In  the  one  case  there  is  no  reason  for  the  honour  ;  and 
in  the  other  case  the  worship  is  a  mere  empty  foolish  superstition.  An  idol  is 
nothing,  and  a  fool  is  a  negation.     {H.  Macmillan,  D.D.) 

Ver.  11.  As  a  dog  retumeth  to  his  vomit,  so  a  fool  retumeth  to  his  folly. — 

The  accustomed  coiir.te  resumed : — Dost  thou  ever  raise  thy  little  dam  across  the 
streamlet,  and  think  to  dry  the  bed  below?  Hast  thou  accomplished  thy  work, 
and  stood  watching  awhile  thy  success  ?  Hast  thou  seen  the  water  above  deepen 
and  widen,  and  gather  strength,  and  at  length,  impatient  of  restraint,  push 
through  thy  yielding  barrier,  and  resume  its  accustomed  course  ?  But  couldst 
thou  have  turned  the  stream  into  another  channel  thou  hadst  triumphed,  and  the 
former  bed  had  been  left  dry.  So  thou  hast  attempted,  perhaps,  to  confine  thy 
sinful  will  by  the  barrier  of  good  resolutions.  Thou  hast  seemed  for  awhile  to 
gain  thy  point,  and  sin  was  at  a  stand.  Alas !  thou  hast  found  that  it  but  gained 
force  by  restraint ;  ere  awhile  the  inclination  has  burst  through  all  thy  well-formed 


r,20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xivi. 

resolves,  and  hath  rushed  more  impetuously  than  ever  to  the  forbidden  object. 
No  ;  the  wiU  and  affections  must  be  turned  into  another  course — towards  God  and 
heaven,  and  things  spiritual;  and  then  shall  they  cease  to  flow  through  the 
tempting  vanities  of  this  evil  world.  "  This  I  say,  then.  Walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  ye 
shaU  not  fulfil  the  lust  of  the  flesh  "  (Gal,  v.  16.)    (if.  G.  Salter.) 

Ver.  12.  Seest  thou  a  man  wise  in  his  own  conceit  ?  there  is  more  hope  of  a 
fool  than  of  Mm. — The  folly  of  self-conceit: — The  Scriptures  are  full  of  denuncia- 
tions  against  the   self-sufficiency  of   man.     The  writings  of   Solomon  are   con- 
spicuous for  expressions  which  stigmatise  the  absurdity  and  the  guUt  of  a  self-willed, 
self-sufficient  spirit.     Here  he  says  that  when  a  man  is  wise  in  his  own  conceit, 
there   is   so  little  hope  of  his   reformation  that  even  a  fool  would    be  a  more 
promising  subject  for  moral  and  intellectual  discipline.     Teachable  and  honest 
mediocrity  is  always  attended  with  a  fair  hope  of  improvement.     But  that  very 
quality  which  may  preserve,  even  to  dulness  itself,  the  chance  of  amelioration,  is 
necessarily  wanting  to  him  who  is  wise  in  his  own  conceit,  namely,  a  tractable  and 
docile  temper.     Whenever  a  feeling  of  self-sufficiency  takes  possession  of  a  mind, 
even   of   more  than   ordinary  strength,  there   is   danger  of  its  shutting  out  all 
prospect  of  effectual  improvement.    What  exertions  will  be  made  by  one  who  is 
content  with  his  acquisitions  ?     To  him  who  knows  better  than  the  rest  of  man- 
kind,  instruction   or  advice  must  needs   appear   impertinent.     This   guUty  and 
miserable  habit  locks  up  from  the  use  of  aU  who  are  under  its  dominion  those 
riches  without  which  the  fairest  intellect  must  ever  remain  poor  indeed — the 
wisdom  of  other  ages,  and  the  resources  and  experiences  of  other  minds.     It  is 
dismal  to  reflect  on  the  number  of  characters  which  have  been  ruined  by  this 
unhappy  delusion.     When  once  this  fatal  sorcery  has  suspended  in  the  mind  all 
aspirations  after  higher  attainments,  from   that  moment  the  movement  of  the 
character  becomes  infallibly  retrograde.     By  the  known  constitution  of  things  it  is 
impossible  that  the  intellectual  or  moral  powers  can  be  for  a  moment  stationary. 
There  is,  in  man's  faculties,  a  constant  tendency  towards  relapse  and  decay,  which 
must  be  encountered  by  perpetual  exertion.     It  is  a  sadder  condition  when  the  two 
characters  in  the  text  happen  to  coincide ;    when  imbecility  and   arrogance  go 
together;  when  the  fool  is  wise  in  his  own  conceit.     The  language  of  the   text 
applies  to  cases  of  great  excess.    But  all  cases  have  a  tendency  towards  excess, 
and  caution  is  useful  in  the  earliest  stages.     The  predominance  of  self-conceit  is  in 
most  instances  the  result  of  negligent  or  injudicious  culture.     Self-will  enters 
largely  into  the  composition  of  every  human  character.     It  shows  itself  with  the 
earliest  dawn  of  the  faculties.     There  is  no  instinctive  impulse  which  prompts 
a  child  to  the  salutary  but  painful  exercise  of  exploring  his  own  insufficiency.    The 
feehng  of  self-sufficiency  is  strengthened  by  the  habit  of  comparing  ourselves  with 
low  and  imperfect  characters,   and  by  fixing  ourselves  in  the  centre  of  a  very 
contracted  circle.     The  mind  should   be  elevated  by  the   contemplation  of  the 
noblest  forms  of  excellence,  both  intellectual  and  moral.     Christianity  is  irrecon- 
cilably at  war  with  every  vice  or  infirmity  which  belongs  to  the  family  of  pride. 
{C.  W.  Le  Bas,  M.A.)        Description  and  danger  of  religious  self-conceit : — Nothing 
renders  a  man  so  unmanageable,  in  the  common  concerns  of  life  as  self-conceit. 
But  show  the  application  of  this  passage  in  a  spiritual  sense.     I.  Explain  the 
STATEMENT  OF  THE  TEXT.     Wisdom  in  this  book  is  another  name  for  religion. 
Foolishness  is  irreligion.     Then  the  man  who  is  "  wise  in  his  own  conceit "  is 
religious  in  his  own  conceits.     All  men  are  naturally  subject  to  pride  and  vanity. 
A  supposed   superiority  in  religion  will  furnish  ground  for  the  exercise  of   this 
disposition  as  readily  as  any  other  fancied  distinction.    A  man  may  be  vain  of  his 
religion.     Such  persons  very  possibly  have  knowledge,  and  feeling,  and  what  they 
call  religious  attainments.    But  they  are  destitute  of  self-knowledge :  they  have  no 
real  humiUation  of  heart,  and  they  are   greatly  wanting  in  charity  as  to  their 
judgment  of  the  reUgious  state  and  character  of  others.     They  have  no  notion  of 
rendering  to  God  a  spiritual  service.     There  is  more  hope  of  a  fool,  an  irreligious 
person,  than  of  such  an  one.     II.  Show  the  grounds  and  reasons  of  the  text. 
Such  persons  as  described  totally  mistake  the  nature  of  true   religion.     To  be 
religious  is  to  be  spiritually-minded.     To  advance  in  religion  is  to  grow  in  grace. 
They  pervert  the  very  design  and  end  of  religion.     It  is  designed  to  make  men 
humble ;  it  makes  these  persons  proud.    They  have  closed  up  the  door  to  their  own 
improvement.     Use  this  subject  for  self-examination.     By  it  try  our  own  religion, 
end  see  what  is  our  own  spiritual  state,     {E.  Cooper.) 


CHAP.  Txvi.]  PROVERBS.  621 

Ver.  13.  The  slothful  man  saith,  There  is  a  lion  in  the  way ;  a  lion  is  in  the 
streets. — A  lion  in  the  way : — The  reprehensible  sloth  of  the  coward  does  not 
appear  in  what  he  says,  but  in  what  he  leaves  unsaid.  He  means,  but  is  ashamed 
to  say,  "Because  there  is  a  lion  in  the  way,  I  will  shirk  my  duty."  The  brave 
man  says,  "  Though  a  lion  is  in  the  way,  I  will  slay  it ;  anyway  I  will  fight  with  it 
and  wound  it."  1.  "  There  is  a  lion  in  the  way."  In  what  way?  In  the  way  of 
life — of  every  life.  Life,  if  it  is  to  be  a  true  life,  is  not  an  easy  thing.  There  is, 
indeed,  such  a  thing  as  a  life  which  is  no  true  life,  only  a  living  death.  Sloth, 
self-indulgence,  self-abandonment  to  a  besetting  sin,  caring  for  nothing  but  self, 
and  the  keeping  one's  self  miserably  alive,  to  live  at  ease,  to  live  selfishly,  to  live 
for  pleasure,  all  this  is  to  be  dead  while  we  live.  If  you  live  thus  you  may  for  a 
time  live  at  home  quite  secure,  fearless  of  the  only  lions  you  dread.  If,  on  the 
other  hand,  you  mean  to  live  for  nobler  objects  than  those  of  shameless  selfishness, 
you  too,  like  Saul,  will  have  to  fi;.  ht  with  wild  beasts  at  Ephesus  or  elsewhere. 
There  will  be  needed  the  girded  loin  and  the  burning  lamp,  the  swift  foot,  and  the 
sharp  sword,  and  the  stout  heart,  and  the  strong  arm ;  faith  and  prayer,  and  the 
battle,  and  the  Cross.  2.  There  are  many  lions,  and  not  one  only.  True  courage 
does  not  consist  in  the  absence  of  any  sense  of  fear — that  may  only  be  due  to  brute 
apathy — but  it  is  to  feel  fear  and  to  overcome  it.  I.  Fob  the  brave,  true  man 
THERE  IS  THE  LION  OF  THE  WORLD.  We  live  in  days  of  wonderful,  and  for  some 
men,  pleasant  compromises.  Eeligion  walks  in  silver  slippers.  Good  and  evil  lie 
flat  together,  side  by  side,  in  amiable  neutrality.  You  may  take  your  choice.  If 
what  you  are  content  with  is  compromise  and  conventionality,  and  the  broad  beaten 
road,  and  success  and  popularity,  you  may  have  it  for  the  asking  :  it  is  quite  easy 
to  offend  nobody.  But  if  you  would  have  any  of  the  nobleness,  any  of  the  useful- 
ness, of  the  prophet  or  the  reformer,  boldly  rebuke  vice,  denounce  a  fashionable 
iniquity,  fling  away  from  you  a  theological  falsehood,  run  counter  to  a  general 
delusion,  deal  vigorously  with  the  "  lion  in  the  way."  The  lion  of  the  world's 
hatred  and  opposition  may  be  avoided.  It  is  avoided  by  thousands  of  sleek 
and  prosperous  men.  II.  But  there  is  another  lion  which  each  man  must 
meet,  the  lion  of  his  own  fleshly  nature,  of  his  own  physical  and  mental 
PASSIONS.  Plato  describes  each  man  as  consisting,  so  to  speak,  of  three  beings  in 
one :  a  lion,  a  many-headed  monster,  and  a  man.  Of  these  the  man  represents 
the  controlling  reason  ;  the  lion  the  fierce  and  irascible  temper ;  the  many-headed 
monster  the  low  and  animal  passions.  The  man,  the  reason,  must  absolutely  rule  ; 
the  irascible  impulses  must  not  be  crushed,  indeed,  but  controlled ;  the  monster  of 
fleshly  lusts  must  be  utterly  subdued.  By  every  one  of  us  that  lion,  that  multi- 
tudinous and  many-headed  monster,  must  be  fought.  III.  Another  lion  is  he 
WHO  "goeth  about,  seeking  whom  he  may  devour."  Each  of  us  knows  by  expe- 
rience that  there  are  some  tendencies  and  temptations— to  pride,  to  falsity,  to 
blaspheming  thoughts,  to  causeless  hatred — which  often  come  upon  a  man  with 
fierce  and  unlooked-for  suddenness,  and  we  know  not  whence  or  where  the  tempting 
opportunity  suddenly  meets  the  susceptible  disposition.  "  Eesist  the  devil,  and  he 
will  flee  from  you."  Remember  that  he  can  be  fought  face  to  face,  but  the 
Christian  has  no  armour  for  the  back.  IV.  Consider  the  duty  of  facing  these 
LIONS  in  our  outward  LIFE.  Everywhere  individual  license  invades  public  rights. 
The  slothful  man  (and  the  slothful  man  is  the  epitome  of  the  slothful  nation)  is 
ingenious  in  excuses.  Happily  every  now  and  then  God-strengthened,  God- 
inspired,  good,  brave,  unsophisticated  men,  have  torn  their  way  through  these 
thorny  hedges  of  indolence,  greed,  and  opposition ;  have  faced  the  wild  beast  of 
demoralised  public  opinion,  in  spite  of  its  erect  mane  and  flaming  eye.     V.  The 

SLOTHFUL   MAN    PLEADS   THAT    MANY    HAVE    BEEN    SLAIN     BY     THIS    "  LION   IN   THE    WAY." 

Yes,  it  is  quite  true.  But  to  them,  as  to  their  Lord,  through  death,  and  after 
death,  if  not  in  life,  hath  come  the  glory  and  the  victory.  Slain  :  yet  no  harm  has 
come  to  them.  Better  a  thousand  times  their  death  than  the  life  of  the  selfish  and 
the  base.  There  is  one  way  in  which  a  man  can  die  even  better  than  this.  It  is 
when,  homeless,  landless,  wifeless,  childless,  without  even  a  hope  of  earthly 
things,  he  faces  those  fearful  odds,  not  for  his  own  wealth  or  his  own  comfort,  but 
for  his  brother  man  ;  faces  them  for  the  sake  of  simple  duty,  faces  them  for  the 
common  love  of  humanity,  faces  them  because,  if  God  wills  it,  he,  too,  is  ready  to 
die  for  those  for  whom  Christ  died.  Take  courage,  then,  all  ye  who  are  fearless 
enough  and  noble  enough  to  care  for  any  righteous  cause.  (Bean  Farrar.)  Tlia 
slothful  man  : — Man  is  made  up  of  contradictions.  A  strong  propensity  to  indo- 
lence, and  a  principle  which  prompts  to  action.    There  is  a  charm  in  the  exercise 


622  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvi. 

of  those  physical  and  intellectual  powers  with  which  man  is  endowed.  With  many 
indolence  diffuses  its  benumbing  influence  through  all  their  faculties  and  powers. 
It  becomes  a  disease,  which  strengthens  itself  by  continuance.  Habit  is  equally 
efficient  in  generating  and  confirming  evil  and  good  qualities.  Extraordinary 
changes  of  moral  character  from  bad  to  good  have  occurred  in  every  age ;  but  we 
have  no  right  to  calculate  on  them,  so  as  to  become  indifferent  to  the  ordinary 
growth  of  good  or  evU  disposition.  Indolence  of  character  proceeds  from  a  torpid 
state  of  the  affections,  or  coldness  of  heart,  in  some  partly  natural,  in  most  persons 
however,  acquired  by  habit.  In  the  state  of  indolence,  the  spellbound  slumberer 
avails  himself  of  every  pretext  for  continuing  to  doze.  The  text  gives  one  of  his 
frivolous  and  groundless  excuses.  Consider  some  of  the  sluggard's  formidable 
discouragements  and  obstacles  in  the  way  of  exertion — such  as  that  labour  is 
painful ;  that  self-denial  is  against  nature ;  and  that  there  is  no  certain  prospect 
of  success,  and  that  God,  being  all  mercy,  is  ready  to  forgive  at  any  time.  You 
cannot  question  or  dispute  the  evils,  the  misery  and  ruin  to  which  indolence  leads 
in  this  world ;  or  the  moral  ruin  to  which  the  sin  of  lukewarmness,  or  indifference 
to  your  religious  obligations,  will  lead  you  in  the  world  to  come.  (James  Flint, 
D.D.)  Seeing  with  our  prejudices  : — We  see  not  so  much  with  our  eyes  as  with 
our  prejudices.  "  The  wish  is  father  to  the  thought."  Some  men  look  at  the 
religious  life,  and  see  in  it  nothing  but  what  is  narrow  and  bigoted,  gloomy  and 
morose.  They  do  not  want  to  see  anything  else.  Some  professing  Christians  look 
on  the  world's  amusements  and  discern  no  evil  in  them.  It  is  to  be  feared  they 
have  no  special  desire  to  be  convinced  of  any.  There  are  members  of  Churches 
who  look  at  Christian  work  in  its  varied  departments  and  with  its  paramount 
claims,  yet  cannot  be  brought  to  discover  their  own  qualifications  to  engage  in  it. 
The  reason  is,  they  have  no  wish  to.  "  The  slothful  man  saith,  There  is  a  lion  in 
the  streets."  And  when  anything  in  the  shape  of  self-denying  service  is  proposed 
to  certain  persons,  this  lion  assumes  most  portentous  dimensions,  and  rivals  the 
thunder  with  his  roar.     (J.  Halsey.) 

Vers.  17-22.  He  that  passeth  by,  and  meddleth  with  strife. — Mischievous 
citizens: — I.  The  mem^lee  (ver.  17).  1.  His  conduct  defined.  2.  His  mischief 
indicated.  Eenders  himself  liable  to  the  anger  of  one,  if  not  both,  of  the  contend- 
ing parties.  II.  The  liar  (vers.  18,  19).  1.  By  his  false  representations  he 
involves  his  neighbour  in  some  embarrassment,  contention,  or  pain,  and  then 
excuses  himself  by  saying,  "  It  is  in  sport."  A  lie  is  no  less  a  lie  because  spoken  in 
the  spirit  of  frolic  and  jest.  2.  Many  a  practical  jester  does  the  maniac's  mischief 
without  the  maniac's  excuse.  III.  The  querulous  (ver.  21).  He  is  a  social 
incendiary.  IV.  The  talebearer  (ver.  22).  1.  He  maintains  strife.  As  the 
microscopic  sting  of  a  little  insect  sometimes  poisons  the  blood  and  influences  the 
body  of  a  strong  man,  the  mere  whisper  of  a  talebearer  will  kindle  the  fire  of 
discord  in  a  whole  community.  2.  He  infects  with  poison ;  his  words  destroy 
the  mental  peace  of  him  to  whom  they  are  uttered,  the  reputation  of  him  of  whom 
they  are  uttered,  and  the  social  happiness  of  both.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  23.  Burning  lips  and  a  wicked  heart  are  like  a  potsherd  covered  with 
silver  dross. — Putrefaction phosphorescoit  :■ — The  illuminating  power  of  phosphorus 
appears  due  to  an  extremely  slow  chemical  reaction,  and  it  is  affirmed  that  vege- 
table and  animal  substances  may  grow  phosphorescent  at  a  certain  stage  of 
decomposition,  or  even  without  any  appearance  of  putrefaction.  Accredited 
authorities  cite  a  host  of  examples  of  fresh  or  stale  meats  which  have  been  seen  to 
shine  during  the  night  with  a  more  or  less  vivid  clearness.  Fish,  and  especially 
salt-water  fish,  when  no  longer  fresh,  acquire  a  phosphorescence  which  brightens 
during  the  first  period  of  putrefaction.  Leave  for  two  or  three  days  dead  salt- 
water fish  in  non-luminous  sea-water  ;  at  the  end  of  that  time  the  water  will  be 
covered  with  a  thin  pellicle  of  fatty  matter,  and  will  soon  become  phosphorescent. 
But  it  is  not  only  in  material  nature  that  we  thus  find  brightness  in  combination 
with  impurity.  Genius  itself  has  been  found  shining  amidst  moral  putrefaction. 
(Scientific  Illustrations.)  A  xcickcd  heart  disguising  itself: — This  may  be  meant 
either — 1.  Of  a  wicked  heart  showing  itself  in  burning  lips,  furious,  passionate, 
outrageous  words,  burning  in  malice,  and  presenting  those  to  whom,  or  of  whom, 
they  are  spoken.  Ill-words  and  ill-wiU  agree  together  as  well  as  a  potsherd  and 
the  dross  of  silver,  which,  now  that  the  pot  is  broken,  and  the  dross  separated  from 
the  silver,  are  fit  to  be  thrown  together  to  the  dunghill.     2.  Or  of  a  wicked  heart 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  PROVERBS.  623 

disguising  itself,  with  burning  lips,  burning  witb  the  professions  of  love  and  friend- 
ship, and  even  persecuting  a  man  with  flatteries ;  this  is  like  a  potsherd  covered 
with  the  scum  or  dross  of  silver,  with  which  one  that  is  weak  may  be  imposed 
upon,  as  if  it  were  of  some  value,  but  a  wise  man  is  soon  aware  of  the  cheat.  This 
sense  agrees  with  the  following  verses.     {Matthew  Henry.) 

Vers.  24-27.  He  that  hateth  dissembleth  with  his  lips. — Clandestine  hatred : — 
I.  It  is  often  greatly  disguised.  "  Burning  lips  and  a  wicked  heart  are  like  a 
potsherd  covered  with  silver  dross.  II.  It  is  excessivelt  cokrtjpt.  "When  he 
speaketh  fair,  believe  him  not :  for  there  are  seven  abominations  in  his  heart." 
The  word  number  "  seven,"  in  Scripture,  denotes  "  fulness  "  or  "  completeness." 
The  idea  here  is,  that  such  a  man's  heart  is  fuU  of  abominations.  III.  It  is 
liable  to  exposure.  "  Whose  hatred  is  covered  by  deceit,  his  wickedness  shall 
be  shewed  before  the  whole  congregation."  Dissembling  never  answers  in  the  end. 
The  Providence  of  God  brings  dark  deeds  to  light.  All  sin  will  one  day  be  stripped 
of  its  mask,  and  laid  bare  in  all  its  putrescent  hideousness  to  the  open  eye  of  the 
universe.  IV.  It  is  self-euinous.  "Whoso  diggeth  a  pit  shall  fall  therein." 
Evil  is  a  hard  worker.  It  digs  pits  and  rolls  stones.  And  what  is  worse,  all  its 
hard  work  is  self -ruinous.  Into  the  pit  which  they  have  dug  they  shall  tumble. 
Those  who  plot  mischief  for  others  will  be  overwhelmed  with  it  themselves. 
Moab,  in  attempting  to  curse  Israel,  fell  himself  under  the  curse  of  God.  Haman's 
gallows  for  Mordecai  was  his  own  "  promotion  of  shame."  The  enemies  of  Daniel 
were  devoured  in  the  ruin  which  they  plotted  against  him.  Thus  does  God  "  take 
the  wise  in  his  craftiness,  the  wicked  in  his  wickedness."  The  malice  that  medi- 
tates the  evil  is  often  the  cause  of  its  own  overthrow.  V.  It  is  socially  perni- 
cious. "A  lying  tongue  hateth  those  that  are  afflicted  by  it;  and  a  flattering 
mouth  worketh  ruin."  1.  It  injures  by  its  slanders.  "A  lying  tongue  hateth 
those  that  are  afflicted  by  it."  2.  It  injures  by  its  flatteries.  Flattery  is 
a  social  curse.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  By  injuring  others  we  are  ourselves  often 
the  greatest  sufferers  : — The  wasp's  sting  is  provided  with  a  barb,  and  when 
he  feels  particularly  vicious,  and  drives  the  sting  into  the  flesh,  it  becomes  so 
firmly  imbedded  that  the  only  way  for  him  to  escape  is  to  leave  the  sting  behind. 
This,  however,  is  sure  to  cause  his  death.  He  receives  himself  such  a  wound  that 
he  cannot  recover.  We  sometimes  forget  that  when  we  hurt  others  by  stinging 
words  and  treacherous  acts,  we  ourselves,  in  the  long  run,  are  generally  the  greatest 
sufferers.     (W.  Judson.) 

Ver.  28.  A  flattering  mouth  worketh  ruin. — How  may  we  best  cure  the  love  of 
being  flattered  ? — I.  What  flattery  is.  Solomon  calls  it  "  a  mouth  that  flatters." 
All  that  comes  from  the  flatterer  is  complaisant,  only  heartiness  and  sincerity  are 
wanting.  All  that  appears  is  "  a  fair  semblance,"  but  very  falsehood.  The  actor 
in  this  tragedy  never  forgets  himself  and  his  own  advantage,  stripping  the  novice 
he  hath  coaxed,  and  living  on  him  whom  he  deceived.  There  are  two  kinds  of 
flattery  :  a  self-flattery,  and  a  flattery  from  others.  As  to  the  qualities  of  flattery, 
it  may  be  helhsh,  revengeful,  servile,  cowardly,  covetous,  or  envious.  Love  to  be 
flattered  is  a  disease  of  human  nature.  It  is  an  immoderate  desire  of  praise. 
When  this  desire  prevails,  we  believe  what  the  flatterer  saith  ;  set  the  value  on  our- 
selves by  what  such  affirm  of  us.  Another  branch  of  love  to  be  flattered  is  an 
affected  seeking  to  ourselves,  or  giving  unto  others  unnecessary  occasions  of  setting 
forth  the  worth  of  our  persons,  actions,  and  qualifications,  according  to  the 
standard  of  flatterers ;  a  well-pleasedness  to  hear  the  great  and  good  things  by 
dissembling  flatterers  ascribed  to  us  which  either  we  never  did,  or  did  in  manner 
much  below  what  they  report  them.  But — II.  Love  of  undue  praise  is  perni- 
cious. It  destroys  virtuous  principles,  natural  inclinations  to  good,  estates, 
reputation,  safety  and  life,  the  soul  and  its  happiness.  III.  What  may  best 
EFFECT  ITS  CURE  ?  1.  Consider  the  bad  name  that  flattery  hath  ever  had.  2.  View 
the  deplorable  miseries  it  hath  filled  the  world  with.  3.  Suspect  all  who  come  to 
you  with  undue  praise.  4.  Eeject  the  friendship  of  the  man  who  turns  due  praises 
into  flattery.  5.  Look  on  flattery,  and  your  love  for  it,  as  diametrically  opposed  to 
God  in  the  truth  of  all  His  Word.  6.  Cultivate  generous  and  pure  love  to  all  that 
is  good.  7.  Get  and  keep  the  humble  frame  of  heart.  Undue  love  of  the  praise 
of  men  is  sacrilegious  robbery  of  God.  {Henry  Hurst,  M.A.)  The  flatterer: — 
As  to  the  flatterer,  he  is  the  most  dangerous  of  characters.  He  attacks  at  points 
where  men  are  naturally  most  successfully  assailable ;  where  they  are  most  in 


624  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHir.  xxvn. 

danger  of  being  thrown  off  their  guard  and  giving  him  admission.  And  when  by 
his  flatteries  he  has  thus  got  the  mastery,  then  follows  the  execution  of  the  end  for 
Trhich  they  were  employed — "  worketh  ruin."  The  expression  is  strong,  but  not 
stronger  than  experience  justifies.  It  even  works  ruin  to  the  most  interesting 
characters — characters  admired  and  worthy  of  the  admiration — by  infusing  a 
principle  that  spoils  the  whole,  the  principle  of  vanity  and  self-conceit.  They  thus 
lose  their  loveliest  and  most  engaging  attraction.  And  whatever  be  the  selfish 
object  of  the  flatterer,  his  selfishness  obtains  its  gratification  by  the  ruin  of  him 
whom  his  flatteries  have  deceived.  {R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  Flattery  worketh 
ruin : — The  stem  of  the  ivy  is  furnished  with  root-like  suckers  which  insinuate 
their  spurs  into  the  bark  of  trees  or  on  the  surface  of  a  wall.  Who  has  not  seen 
with  regret  some  noble  ash-tree  covered  with  ivy,  in  whose  embrace  it  rapidly  yields 
up  its  life  ?  Surely  the  root  is  draining  the  tree  of  its  sap,  and  transferring  it  to 
its  own  veins.  Thus  does  a  sycophant  gradually  extend  his  influence  over  a  patron 
until  the  manliness  of  that  patron  succumbs  to  his  ascendancy.  The  hero  is 
ruined,  and  the  flatterer  flourishes  in  his  place.  Beware  of  the  insinuating  apti- 
tudes of  the  parasite  I  Let  him,  like  ivy  on  a  wall,  keep  his  proper  situation. 
Protect  a  noble  nature  from  his  advances.  {Scientijic  Illustrations.)  Flattery 
cannot  compensate  for  the  damage  it  works  : — Parasitic  plants  send  their  roots  into 
the  substance  of  another  plant,  and  derive  their  food  from  its  juices  ;  but  though, 
like  some  of  the  human  kind,  they  live  upon  their  neighbour's  bounty,  it  must  be 
admitted  that  they  sometimes  reward  their  benefactor  by  adorning  it  with  their 
beautiful  flowers.  The  Eafflesia  Arnoldi,  for  example,  whose  flower  is  three  feet 
across,  and  whose  cup  will  contain  several  pints  of  fluid,  grows  attached  to  the  stem 
of  a  climbing  cistus  in  Sumatra.  The  mistletoe  also,  whose  silvery  berries  adorn 
the  oak.  Whether  these  offerings  of  the  parasite  bear  any  reasonable  proportion 
to  the  amount  of  damage  done  by  it  must  be  a  question  open  to  doubt.  Certain  it 
is  that  the  offerings  of  the  social  parasite  to  his  benefactor,  consisting  as  they  do 
of  subservience,  flattery,  and  petty  traits,  are  no  real  benefit  to  anybody ;  whilst, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  injury  which  the  parasite  does  to  honesty  and  manliness  ia 
most  unmistakable.  On  the  whole,  we  are  inclined  to  think  that  all  the  pro- 
ductions of  parasites,  whether  vegetable  or  human,  are  not  sufficient  to  make  aa 
Talue  the  producers  very  highly.     (Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  XXVIL 


Ver.  1.  Boast  not  thyself  of  to-morrow ;  for  thou  knowest  not  what  a  day  may 
bring  forth. — On  the  conduct  to  be  held  with  regard  to  future  events : — It  is 
needless  to  prove  the  change  and  mutability  of  our  present  state,  or  the  fact  that 
the  changes  cannot  be  foreseen  by  us.  Obvious  as  they  are,  it  would  be  well  if  the 
thoughts  of  men  dwelt  on  them  more.  But  by  a  strange  and  prevailing  deception, 
almost  every  one  thinks  his  own  case  an  exception  from  the  general  law  ;  and  that 
he  may  build  plans  with  as  much  confidence  on  his  present  situation  as  if  some 
assurance  were  given  him  that  it  were  never  to  change.  It  has  been  so  contrived 
by  Providence  that  there  should  be  no  permanent  stability  to  man's  condition  on 
earth.  The  seeds  of  alteration  are  everywhere  sown.  And  think  on  what  small 
and  inconsiderable  causes  changes  depend.  In  the  midst  of  all  these  contingencies 
plans  and  designs  for  the  future  are  every  day  formed.  And  this  is  fit  and  proper. 
Rules  and  precautions  may  be  indicated.  I.  Boast  not  thyself  of  to-moreow 
Never  presume  arrogantly  on  futurity.  Beware  of  pride  and  vanity.  In  the  day 
of  prosperity  rejoice  with  trembling.  II.  Despaik  not  of  to-mourow.  Adverse 
situations  fill  many  with  fears  and  alarms  of  what  is  to  come.  The  day  may  bring 
forth  some  unforeseen  relief,  and  therefore  we  should  hope  under  distress.  The 
doctrine  which  the  changes  of  the  world  perpetually  inculcate  is  that  no  state  of 
external  things  should  appear  so  important,  or  should  so  affect  and  agitate  our 
spirits,  as  to  deprive  us  of  a  calm,  an  equal,  and  a  steady  mind.  Anxiety,  when  it 
seizes  the  heart,  is  a  dangerous  disease,  productive  both  of  much  sin  and  much 
misery.  HI.  Delay  not  till  to-morbow  what  is  proper  to  be  done  to-dat. 
Thou  art  not  the  lord  of  to-morrow.  Procrastination  has,  throughout  every  age, 
been  the  ruin  of  mankind.     Many  of  the  misfortunes  which  befall  men  in  their 


CHAP,  xxvn.]  PROVERBS.  623 

worldly  concerns  are  a  consequence  of  delay.  To-morrow,  being  loaded  with  the  ; 
concerns  of  to-day,  in  addition  to  its  own,  is  clogged  and  embarrassed.  Evils  of 
the  same  kind,  arising  from  the  same  cause,  overtake  men  in  their  moral  and 
spiritual  interests.  IV.  Be  every  day  pbepaked  for  what  to-mokbow  may  brino 
roRTH.  The  best  preparation  for  aU  the  uncertainties  of  futurity  consists  in  a  well- 
ordered  mind,  a  good  conscience,  and  a  cheerful  submission  to  the  will  of  heaven. 
If  to-morrow  bring  you  any  unexpected  good,  prepare  to  receive  it  with  gratitude, 
temperance,  and  modesty.  If  it  shall  bring  forth  evU,  prepare  to  receive  it  with 
manly  fortitude.     V.  Build  your  hopes  of  happiness  on  somewhat  more  solid  and  \ 

LASTING  THAN  WHAT  EITHER  TO-DAY  OR  TO-MORROW  ARE  LIKELY   TO    PRODUCE.       He  who 

rests  wholly  upon  this  world  builds  his  house  upon  the  sand.  We  are  begotten 
again  unto  a  "  lively  hope."  Here  is  the  object  to  which  a  wise  man  wiU  bend  his 
chief  attention,  that,  having  acted  his  part  on  earth  with  fidelity  and  honour,  he 
may  be  enabled,  through  the  merits  of  his  Saviour,  to  look  for  a  place  in  the 
mansions  of  eternal  and  untroubled  peace.  This  prospect  is  the  great  corrective 
of  the  present  vanity  of  human  life.  {Hugh  Blair,  D.D.)  Boasting  : — Man's 
nature  inclines  to  boasting,  to  glorifying  in  something,  and  this  ariseth  from  some 
apprehended  excellency  or  advantage,  and  so  is  originated  in  the  understanding 
power  of  man.  There  is  a  glorying  and  boasting  which  is  good,  especially  a  boast- 
ing in  God.  It  is  the  apprehended  personal  interest  in  a  thing  which  makes  it 
become  a  subject  of  boasting.  Nothing  is  truly  the  soul's  own  but  that  which 
survives  all  changes,  and  is  inseparable  from  it.  There  may  be  a  lawful  glorying 
in  the  works  of  God.  Oftentimes  men  are  found  glorying  in  that  which  is  their 
shame.  The  object  of  degenerate  and  vicious  boasting  is  presented  in  this  text. 
"  Boast  not  thyself,"  or  of  thyself.  Self  is  the  centre  of  man's  affections  and 
motions.  This  is  the  great  "  Diana  "  that  the  heart  worships.  Men's  affections 
part  themselves  into  three  great  heads  of  created  things.  1.  The  goods  or  per- 
fections of  the  mind.  2.  The  goods  or  advantages  of  the  body.  3.  The  things 
that  are  without  us,  bona  fortunce,  riches  and  honour.  There  is  also  a  strong 
inclination  in  man  towards  the  time  to  come ;  he  has  an  immortal  appetite.  If 
the  soul  of  man  were  in  the  primitive  integrity,  this  providence  of  the  soul  would 
reach  to  eternity,  which  is  the  only  just  measure  of  the  endurance  of  any  immortal 
spirit.  But  since  man's  understanding  is  darkened,  he  can  see  nothing  further 
than  "  to-morrow."  But  confidence  in  to-morrow  is  folly,  because  of  the  instability 
of  aU  outward  things,  and  because  of  our  ignorance  of  future  events.  Of  aE 
boastings  the  most  irrational  and  groundless  is  that  which  arises  from  presumption 
of  future  things,  which  are  so  uncertain  both  in  themselves  and  to  us.  Self  is  the 
great  and  ultimate  object  of  man's  glorying.  No  man's  present  possession  satisfies 
him,  without  the  addition  of  hope  and  expectation  for  the  future.  Our  present 
revenue  will  not  content  the  heart.  Therefore  the  soul,  as  it  were,  anticipates  and 
forestalls  the  morrow.  But  consider — 1.  How  independent  all  things  are  of  us 
and  of  our  choice.  2.  The  inconstancy  of  all  material  things.  There  is  nothing 
certain  but  that  all  things  are  uncertain.  3.  Our  ignorance  concerning  coming 
changes.  All  things  proclaim  the  foUy  and  madness  of  that  which  the  heart  of 
man  is  set  upon.  "The  counsel  of  the  Lord,"  that  alone  shall  "stand." 
{H.  Binning. )  The  necessity  of  a  present  repentance  : — It  is  not  the  doctrine 
of  repentance  men  scruple  to  acknowledge,  but  the  time  for  doing  it.  They  say, 
"  To-morrow  will  be  time  enough."  And  they  say  this,  again  and  again,  through  all 
the  stages  of  life.  Press  on  attention  the  absolute  necessity  of  our  present  per- 
formance   of   this  great  work  of  repentance.     I.  Show  this  by  the  dangerous 

UNCBRTAINTrES   WHICH   ALL   DELAYING   MEN   HAVE   TO   DEPEND  UPON.      There  is  nO  SUch 

thing  hinted  at  in  Scripture  as  future  repentance.  There  is  no  ground  for  hoping 
that  a  late  repentance  will  avail  men  who  knowingly  and  wilfully  defer  that  repen- 
tance which  is  the  duty  of  the  present.  1.  What  certainty  can  there  be  in  that 
which  depends  upon  so  uncertain  a  foundation  as  the  life  of  man  ?  Who  can 
ensure  a  hereafter  to  repent  in  ?  2.  As  life  is  uncertain,  so  is  the  continuance  of 
God's  grace  uncertain  also.    II.  How  improper  the  times  resolved  on  by  such 

MEN  to  BEPENT  in  WILL  BE  FOB  THE  WORK  OF  THEIR  REPENTANCE.   Such  aS  the 

time  of  sickness,  or  of  old  age,  or  of  death.    HI.  Every  excuse  which  men  may 

MAKE    IN   TAVOUB   OE   THEIB  DELAYS    MUST,    IE   SERIOUSLY   CONSIDERED,   OBLIGE     THEM 

TO  HASTEN  THEIB  BBPENTANCE.  1.  Excusc — their  sins  are  SO  small ;  they  can  be 
easily  cast  off  at  pleasure.  2.  Sins  are  so  great ;  it  is  too  difficult  to  repent. 
3.  Life  is  just  now  too  full  of  other  things.  Consider  that  every  moment  consumes 
somewhat  of  the  thread  of  life ;  and  that  of  aU  business  and  employments  none  can 

41 


C26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvn. 

possibly  be  more  requisite  than  our  making  our  peace  with  God.  (William 
Bramston.)  To-morrow  :■ — Some  are  hindered  by  doubts,  or  blinded  by  definite 
unbelief ;  others  are  repelled  from  the  gospel  by  prejudices  of  early  education ; 
others  by  worldly  influences,  others  by  the  love  of  sin  ;  and  some  by  a  coward  fear 
of  the  possible  consequences  of  decision.  The  chief  hindrance,  however,  is  the 
habit  of  procrastination.  The  fault  is  a  common  one  even  in  worldly  matters. 
There  are  things  that  must  be  done  at  once,  and  things  which  may  be  left.  These 
latter  have  a  very  good  chance  of  never  being  done  at  all.  There  are  few  who 
have  not  a  lurking  intention  of  thinking  about  religious  matters  sooner  or  later. 
Many  are  indisposed  to  prompt  action,  because  they  fear  religion  may  interfere 
with  their  manner  of  life,  their  commercial  prosperity,  and  their  social  enjoyments. 
By  and  by,  when  other  matters  are  not  so  urgent,  they  may  find  a  convenient 
season.  This  habit  of  procrastination  grows  upon  us  until  it  becomes  a  sort  of 
second  nature,  and  at  last,  even  should  we  wish  to  act  promptly,  we  seem  almost 
to  have  lost  the  power.  For  one  who  doubts  the  Bible,  there  are  a  hundred  who 
simply  put  off  for  the  present.  The  Holy  Ghost  says,  "  To-day";  they  still  say, 
"  To-morrow."  How  can  we  best  counteract  this  disposition  towards  procrasti- 
nation ?  The  nominally  Christian  world  is  pervaded  by  the  radically  false  notion 
that  religion  has  mainly  to  do  with  the  future  rather  than  with  the  present.  This 
notion  is  encouraged  by  the  use  of  the  word  "  salvation."  Men  do  not  see  that 
they  need  to  be  saved  now.  True  religion  is  a  matter  of  present  urgency.  Keli- 
gion  is  the  one  secret  of  true  enjoyment  in  life.  Another  cause  of  procrastination 
is  a  false  idea  of  the  relative  importance  of  things  temporal  and  things  spiritual. 
Eeligion  is  regarded  as  distinct  from  the  practical  purposes  of  life.  This  is  an 
inverted  estimate  of  the  relative  importance  of  things.  Why  should  we  say  to-day 
rather  than  to-morrow  ?  Because,  of  all  our  life,  only  to-day  is  really  ours.  To- 
morrow belongs  to  God.  Every  to-morrow  that  God  allots  you,  when  it  gets  to 
you  is  a  to-day.  The  to-morrow  that  we  think  will  do  so  much  for  us  never  comes. 
To-day  may  ensure  our  best  interests ;  to-morrow  they  may  have  passed  from  us, 
and  be  forfeited  for  ever.  Moreover,  we  have  a  great  work  to  do,  and  only  a 
limited  time  to  do  it  in.  And  we  are  living  in  a  perishing  world,  and  men  and 
women  are  dying  unprepared  every  day  that  passes.  By  religious  decision,  how 
much  happiness  we  may  confer  upon  others  by  our  personal  example  and  influence. 
In  this  world  of  changes  and  uncertainties,  no  man  can  be  sure  that  he  will  have 
any  to-morrow.  Think,  too,  how  you  are  treating  your  Lord  when,  from  day  to 
day,  you  still  continue  to  say,  "  To-morrow."  To-day  again  He  proffers  the  unspeak- 
able gift.  His  time  is  now.  Another  to-morrow,  and  He  may  be  constrained 
reluctantly  to  depart,  wearied  out  at  last  by  your  heartless  indifference.  Oh,  take  ■ 
shame  to  yourself  that,  hitherto,  He  has  had  nothing  from  you  but  "to-morrow."^ 
{TV.  H.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  The  folly  and  danger  of  boasting  of  the  morrow  : — 
No  truth  is  more  obvious  than  that  of  the  instability  of  human  life,  and  the 
uncertainty  of  all  earthly  things  ;  and  yet  there  is  none  which  produces  a  less 
abiding  impression  on  the  mind,  or  a  less  practical  effect  on  the  conduct.  It  seems 
to  be  a  truth  so  trite  as  to  be  beneath  our  notice.  All  our  courses  of  action,  all  our 
habits  of  thought,  imply  that  we  have  a  longer  continuance,  and  a  firmer  interest, 
in  the  things  around  us,  than  a  full  conviction  of  their  vanity  and  their  uncertainty 
appear  to  warrant.  We  are  willing  to  allow,  as  a  general  rule,  that  all  below  is 
fleeting  and  uncertain,  but  in  our  own  case  we  are  anxious  to  find  a  fortunate 
exception.  This,  at  least,  lies  in  the  bottom  of  our  hearts,  springing  up  indistinctly 
in  our  thoughts,  and  whispering  peace  and  safety,  where  neither  of  them  are 
discoverable  by  the  eye  of  reason.  A  knowledge  of  the  fate  of  others  can  never 
entirely  remove  this  error,  because  it  is  deeply  seated  in  the  heart.  By  boasting  of 
to-morrow  is  meant  a  confident  expectation  of  its  arrival,  and  an  undoubting 
calculation  of  the  enjoyments  which  it  may  be  expected  to  bring  along  with  it ; 
such  a  fancied  assurance  of  possessing  it,  as  may  lead  us  to  defer  what  ought  now 
to  be  done  till  that  imaginary  period.  The  greatest  evil  to  which  this  leads  is  the 
postponement  of  a  religious  life  to  some  future  period  of  our  existence,  it  is  too 
common  for  man  to  look  upon  rehgion  as  something  totally  incompatible  with 
the  pursuits  and  enjoyments  of  the  present  world.  He  therefore  relies  upon  the 
possibility  that  the  morrow  may  be  extended  to  him,  and  to  that  uncertain  period 
he  commits  the  serious  task  of  shaking  off  the  evil  habits  which  he  has  contracted, 
and  curbing  the  corrupt  passions  which  he  has  hitherto  indulged,  and  of  culti- 
vating the  Christian  graces.  Too  often  in  the  short  and  anxious  hour  of  our 
ifclosiu^'  existence  all  the  more  serious  work  of  life  has  to  be  done.     Let  it  be  our 


CHAP.  XXVII,]  PROVERBS.  627 

aim,  then,  to  look  upon  religion,  not  as  a  task  which  we  are  commanded  to  perform, 
but  as  a  privilege  which  we  are  invited  to  share.     For  most  of  the  iUs  of  life 
religion  is  an  effectual  remedy,  and  in  all  it  is  a  cheering  alleviation.     1.  There 
are  many  miseries  which  the  morrow  is  continually  bringing  forth,  that  are  the 
direct  consequence  of    our  own  imprudent  conduct  or   our  own  vicious  habits. 
They  spring  from  a  want  of  religion ;  and  the  possession  of  it  would  of  course 
relieve  them.     2.  Suffering  also  belongs  to  us  as  the  sons  of  mortality ;  such  as 
pain,  sickness,  infirmity,  age.     Eeligion  cannot  altogether  remove  such  woes,  but  it 
can  very  materially  mitigate  and  relieve  them.     And,  at  least,  it  enables  us  to  look 
rightly  upon  them.     3.  There  is  a  class  of  disappointments  to  which  irreligious 
men  are  subject,  but  from  which  the  true  Christian  is  altogether  free.     The  worldly ^ 
man  is  entirely  immersed  in  the  things  of  this  life,  its  pleasures  and  its  cares,-# 
When  the  changeful  morrow  comes,  and  these  are  swept  away,  he  is  ruined.     The 
happiness  of  the  religious  man  is  not  dependent   on  such   accidents   as  these. 
{R.  Parkinson,  B.D.)        To-morrow  : — I.  The  abuse  of  to-mobrow.     "  Boast  not " 
— 1.  Because  it  is  extremely  foolish  to  boast  at  all.     Boasting  never  makes  a  man 
any  the  greater  in  the  esteem  of  others,  nor  does  it  improve  the  real  estate  either 
of  his  body  or  his  soul.     Morrows  come  from  God  ;  thou  hast  no  right  to  glory  in 
them.     2.  Because  to-morrow  is  one  of  the  frailest  things  in  creation,  and  therefore 
the  least  to  be  boasted  of.    Boast  not  of  to-morrow — thou  hast  it  not.    Boast  not 
of  to-morrow — thou  mayest  never  have  it.    Boast  not  of  to-morrow — if  thou  hadst 
it,  it  would  deceive  thee.    Boast  not  of  to-morrow,  for  to-morrow  thou  mayest  be ) 
where  morrows  will  be  dreadful  things,  to  tremble  at.     3.  Because  it  is  exceedingly 
hurtful  to  boast.     It  is  hurtful  now.     Some  men  are  led  into  extraordinary  extra- 
vagance from  their  hopes  of  the  future.     It  is  hurtful  to-morrow  also.     Because 
you  will  be  disappointed  with  to-morrow  if  you  boast  about  it   before  it  comes. 
The  over-confident  not  only  entail  great  sorrow  upon  themselves  but  upon  others 
also.    II.  The  abuse  of  the   spmiTUAL   to-mokkow.     Never  boast  of  to-morrow 
with  regard  to  your  soul's  salvation.     Those  do  who  think  it  will  be  easier  for  them 
to  repent  to-morrow  than  it  is  to-day.     Those  do  who  suppose  they  shall  have 
plenty  of  time  to  repent  and  return  to  God.     Those  do  who  boast  in  a  way  of 
resolves  to  do   better.   "III.  If  to-mokrows  are  not  to  be  boasted  of,  are  they 
GOOD  for  nothing  ?     Nay  ;  we  may  look  forward  to  them  with  confidence  and  joy, 
and  we  may  seek  in  wise  ways  to  provide  for  to-morrow.     (C.   H.   Spurgeon.) 
The  folly  and  danger  of  delays  in  religion : — I.  Men  are  naturally  inclined  to 
boast  of  something.    II.  Men  are  apt  to  delay  religion  as  long  as  they  can. 
They  boast  of  to-morrow.     III.  It  is  base  and  sinful  to  put  off  the  concerns  op 
religion  till  to-morrow.     IV.  God   alone   snows  what  is  to  come.     The  Jews 
of  Christ's  time  were  dreaming  of  future  prosperity,  but  He  foresaw  their  ruin  and 
destruction  as  at  hand.     We,  like  them,  lay  plans  for  futurity,  and  invade  the 
province  of  the  Most  High.     We  perhaps  anticipate  wealth,  honour.     V.  Great 
CHANGES  HAPPEN  IN  A  SHORT  TIME.     "  For  thou  kuowest  not  what  a  day  may  bring 
forth."     Since  the  introduction  of  sin,  the  creature  at  its  best  estate  is  altogether 
vanity.     (Christian  Recorder.)         The  danger  of  trusting  to  the  future  : — I.  In  this 
passage  it  is  very  plainly  insinuated  that  we  are  too  apt  to  boast  of  to-morrow. 
The   young  hope  to  live  to  old   age  ;  the  middle-aged,  having  passed  the  most 
critical  stages  of  infancy  and  childhood,  reckon,  with  too  much  security,  on  grey 
hairs  ;  while  the  old  look  around  them  for  examples,  a  few  of  which  they  can  glean 
of  extreme  age,  and  hope  they  themselves  shall  add  to  the  number  of  extraordinary 
cases  of  longevity.     Boasting  of  to-morrow  likewise  appears  in  framing  worldly 
schemes  of  future  ease  and  aggrandisement.     He  who  proposes  it  as  his  object  to 
make  up  a  sum  at  all  hazards,  that  he  may,  by  a  certain  time,  execute  a  plan  of  a 
great  mansion,  suited  to  the  fortune,  and  then  to  enjoy  himself.     See  where  the 
evil  lies ;  not  in  thinking  of  to-morrow,  in  the  way  of  making  wise  and  prudent 
preparation,  always  taking  along  with  us,  "  If  the  Lord  will  "  ;  but  the  evil  is  that 
boasting  of  to-morrow  which  involves  in  sinful,  at  any  rate  in  worldly  and  pre- 
sumptuous plans,  in  reference  to  some  future  period,  or  that  kind  of  reference 
to  to-morrow  which  is  a  substitute  for  attention,  immediate  and  serious,  to  our 
most  important,  even  our  eternal  interests.     II.  That  it  is  foolish  to  boast  of 
TO-MORROW.     "  We  are  young."     Granted  ;  but  the  young  droop  oftentimes.     The 
green  leaf  often  is  seen  f aUing,  nipped  by  frost,  or  shaken  by  the  wind.     The  young  I 
and  strong  have  been  called  hence  by  disease  or  accident,  the  majority  were  young.  ' 
"But  we  have  stood  already  many  trials  of  our  constitution,  and  many  attacks, 
and  are  yet  vigorous."    The  last,  however,  will  come,  and  the  very  next  may  be 


628  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chai  .  xxvn. 

fatal.  "But  we  are  a  long-lived  race.  Father  and  mother,  yea  grandfather,  and 
many  relatives,  lived  to  a  great  age."  You  forget  the  exceptions.  "  But  we  have 
somehow  this  persuasion,  that  we  shall  live  long,  and  at  any  rate  we  will  not 
indulge  in  gloomy  presage  of  an  early  tomb."  This  is  very  delusive — it  is  foolish 
— you  can  give  no  reason  for  it — you  may  soon  find  you  were  deceiving  yourselves. 
in.  That  there  is  much  danger  in  indulging  this  disposition.  1.  It  fosters 
irreligion  and  atheism.  Leaving  out  of  calculation  your  own  weak  and  dependent 
state,  the  uncertainty  of  time,  and  your  ignorance  of  futurity,  you  form  your  plans 
without  any  reference  to  the  Divine  Disposer.  You  erect  many  high  towering 
schemes,  which  savour  at  once  of  impiety  and  folly.  2.  It  is  found  to  foster  some  of 
the  worst  passions  of  the  human  heart.  The  ambitious  reason  thus  :  A  few  steps 
more,  and  I  shall  rise  to  the  very  top  of  my  profession,  or  of  my  rank  in  society, 
and  that  in  the  regular  course  of  events,  which  supposes  the  removal  of  others  by 
the  stroke  of  mortaUty,  as  the  means  of  elevation.  The  covetous  man  adds  heap 
to  heap,  with  desires  more  and  more  insatiable,  forgetful  of  his  latter  end,  and  of 
that  country  to  which  he  goes,  where  his  wealth  will  be  of  no  benefit.  A  due 
consideration  of  this  might,  by  the  Divine  blessing,  cut  up  by  the  roots  this  grovel- 
ling and  idolatrous  propensity,  and  give  the  soul  a  heavenward  direction.  A  day 
may  bring  forth  many  most  unexpected  events,  casting  a  dark  cloud  over  the  most 
flattering  prospects.  This  present  day  improved  may  be  the  hapi)y  means  of 
arresting  the  evil  which  the  presumption  of  to-morrow  tends  so  much  to  foster. 
3.  The  boast  of  to-morrow  is  most  prejudicial  to  spiritual  and  eternal  concerns. 
It  is  the  most  successful  of  all  Satan's  devices,  and  the  easiest  mode  of  compassing 
his  designs.  [W.  Burns.)  Ignorance  of  the  future  : — I.  To  what  the  words 
OF  the  text  will  apply.  On  some  things  we  can  calculate  with  a  degree  of 
certainty.  Apply  text — 1.  With  regard  to  ourselves.  And  it  will  apply  to  both 
good  and  evil.  The  text  seems  to  have  in  view  evil.  2.  To  the  dispensations  of 
Providence.  3.  This  uncertainty  regards  our  lives.  Some  are  cut  off  in  the  midst 
of  sin.  Some  in  the  midst  of  religious  declensions.  II.  What  reasons  can  be 
GIVEN  FOR  THIS  IGNORANCE  OF  FUTURITY.  It  never  was  designed  that  man  should 
know  the  future.  Even  the  angels  in  heaven  have  not  this  knowledge.  Would 
such  knowledge  add  to  our  happiness  ?  or  improve  our  religious  character  ? 
This  arrangement  keeps  us  fully  dependent  on  God.  By  this  means  He  keeps  the 
world  in  awe.  III.  Apply  the  fact  to  some  useful  purposes.  1.  It  should 
check  vain  curiosity.  2.  It  teaches  us  to  hope  for  the  best.  3.  It  is  good  to 
be  prepared  for  the  worst.  4.  Learn  the  importance  of  real  religion.  {Charles 
Hyatt.)  Man's  ignorance  of  futurity  : — I.  The  sentiment  contained  in  the 
text.  No  man  will  attempt  to  controvert  the  assertion  it  makes.  1.  We  are 
ignorant  of  the  future  as  to  our  circumstances.  2.  We  cannot  tell  what  a 
day  may  bring  forth  as  to  the  state  of  our  bodies  and  our  minds.  3.  We  are 
ignorant  of  the  future  as  to  our  families  and  connections.  4.  We  are  totally 
ignorant  of  futurity,  as  to  the  continuance  of  our  lives.  II.  Some  lessons  of 
practical  instruction.  1.  Learn  the  importance  of  a  life  of  faith  and  dependence 
on  God.  Man  was  never  designed  to  be  independent.  2.  Learn  to  cultivate  a 
spirit  of  holy  resignation  to  the  Divine  will.  3.  Learn  to  cultivate  a  spirit 
of  cautious  moderation  as  to  the  things  of  this  present  life.  4.  Learn  to  cultivate 
a  spirit  of  humihty.  (R.  Cameron.)  Ignorance  of  the  future : — Mr.  D.  L. 
Moody  says  :  "  To  recall  the  following  act  I  would  give  my  right  hand.  On  the 
night  when  the  Court  House  bell  of  Chicago  was  sounding  an  alarm  of  fire,  my 
sermon  was  upon  '  What  shall  I  do  with  Jesus  ?  '  And  I  said  to  the  audience, 
•  I  want  you  to  decide  this  question  by  next  Sunday.'  What  a  mistake  1  That 
night  I  saw  the  glare  of  flames,  and  knew  that  Chicago  was  doomed.  I  never  saw 
that  audience  again." 

Ver.  2.  Let  another  man  praise  thee,  and  not  thine  own  mouth. — Self-boasting : — 
Self-boasting  is  always  a  source  of  weakness  as  well  as  a  revelation  of  vanity.  In 
vanity  there  is  no  substance  ;  it  is  idle  breath,  it  is  foolish  vapour.  When  a  man  is 
left  to  praise  himself  it  is  evident  that  he  has  lived  an  inverted  life,  not  a  life  full  of 
blessedness  and  comfort  in  relation  to  other  men.  The  sun  does  not  praise  himself, 
but  under  his  splendour  and  warmth  men  look  up  and  say  how  pleasing  a  thing  it 
is  for  the  eyes  to  behold  the  light.  On  the  other  hand,  we  must  beware  of  a  very 
common  and  perilous  deceit.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  every  man  ought  to  be  able 
to  praise  himself ;  otherwise  the  applause  of  the  public  will  be  left  by  him  to  be  a 
mockery  and  a  lie.     Our  own  heart  should  not  condemn  us.     The  psalmist  was 


CHAP,  xxvn.]  PROVERBS.  629 

wont  to  glory  in  his  integrity,  and  to  point  to  it  as  his  refuge  in  the  time  of  mis- 
understanding.    {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  Sand  weighty. — The  weight  of  sand : — ^By  a  fool  this  book  means,  not 
so  much  intellectual  feebleness  as  moral  and  religious  obliquity,  which  are  the 
stupidest  things  that  a  man  can  be  guilty  of.  The  proverb-maker  compares  two 
heavy  things,  stones  and  sand,  and  says  that  they  are  feathers  in  comparison  with 
the  lead-like  weight  of  such  a  man's  wrath.  I  want  to  make  a  parable  out  of  the 
text.  What  is  lighter  than  a  grain  of  sand  ?  What  is  heavier  than  a  bagful  of  it  ? 
The  accumulation  of  light  things  is  overwhelmingly  ponderous.  Is  there  anything  in 
our  lives  like  that  ?  I.  This  eeminds  us  of  the  supreme  importance  of  trifles.  The 
small  things  make  life,  and  if  they  are  small,  then  it  is.  We  are  poor  judges  of  what  is 
great  or  small.  We  have  a  very  vulgar  estimate  of  noise,  notoriety,  and  bigness. 
We  think  the  quiet  things  are  the  small  ones.  The  most  trivial  actions  have  a 
knack  of  leading  on  to  large  results,  beyond  what  could  have  been  expected.  These 
trivial  actions  make  character.  Men  are  not  made  by  crises.  The  crises  reveal 
what  we  have  made  ourselves  by  the  trifles.  We  shape  ourselves  by  the  way  we  do 
small  things.  II.  The  overwhelming  weight  of  small  sins.  The  accumulated 
pressure  upon  a  man  of  a  multitude  of  perfectly  trivial  faults  and  transgressions 
makes  up  a  tremendous  aggregate  that  weighs  upon  him.  The  words  "  great "  and 
"  small  "  should  not  be  applied  in  reference  to  things  about  which  "  right  "  and 
"  wrong "  are  the  proper  words  to  employ.  Acts  make  crimes,  but  motives  make 
sins.  To  talk  about  magnitude,  in  regard  to  sins,  is  rather  to  introduce  an  irrelevant 
consideration.  Small  sins,  by  reason  of  their  numerousness,  have  a  terribly 
accumulative  power ;  a  tremendous  capacity  for  reproduction.  All  our  evil  doings 
have  a  strange  affinity  with  one  another.  To  go  wrong  in  one  direction  leads  to  a 
whole  series  of  consequential  transgressions  of  one  sort  or  another.  Every  sin 
makes  us  more  accessible  to  the  assaults  of  every  other.  If  we  indulge  in  slight 
acts  of  transgression,  be  sure  of  this,  that  we  shall  pass  from  them  to  far  greater 
ones.  An  overwhelming  weight  of  guilt  results  from  the  accumulation  of  little  sins. 
ni.  Plain,  practical  issues  of  these  thoughts.  1.  The  absolute  necessity  for  all- 
round  and  ev^r-wakef ul  watchfulness  of  ourselves.  2.  This  thought  may  take  down 
our  easy  and  self -complacent  estimate  of  ourselves.  3.  Should  we  not  turn  ourselves 
with  lowly  hearts  to  Him  who  alone  can  deliver  us  from  the  habit  and  power  of  these 
accumulated  faults,  and  who  alone  can  lift  the  burden  of  guilt  and  responsibility 
from  off  our  shoulders  ?     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  Wrath  is  cruel,  and  anger  is  outrageous;  but  who  is  able  to  stand 
before  envy  ? — Anger  and  envy : — I.  The  evil  principles  indicated  in  the  text 
ARE  extensively  AND  DANGEROUSLY  PREVALENT.  To  be  irritated  and  out  of  temper 
is  one  of  the  common  tendencies  of  our  nature,  manifested  even  in  childhood.  The 
root  is  wrath,  anger.  This  pernicious  root  grows  differently  in  different  natures, 
and  with  more  or  less  vigour.  This  vicious  principle  is  generally  regarded  too 
complacently,  as  though  it  were  a  necessary  part  of  our  nature.  Wrath  is  dangerous. 
Its  tendency  is  to  increase.  The  spark  will  rise  into  a  flame.  The  intensity  of 
anger  depends  upon  external  circumstances,  and  also  upon  the  condition  of  our 
health.  The  external  exciting  causes  are  continually  changing.  The  foolish  vice 
of  irritating  the  temper  of  others  is  too  common.  Some  like  to  torment  the 
susceptible.  Others  are  perpetually  fault-finding  and  sneering.  Envy  is  the 
condition  of  one  who  looks  upon  the  happiness  of  another  and  longs  to  possess  it. 
Envy  generally  seeks  to  conceal  itself,  and  to  work  in  secret  and  in  darkness. 
Passion  would  strike  down  its  victim  in  the  public  market-place,  whilst  envy  would 
carefully  weigh  out  and  mix  the  poison  for  its  victim  to  consume  unconsciously  in 
his  food.  This  dangerous  and  deadly  principle  has  extensive  existence.  Envy  is 
the  development  of  germs  which  are  universally  diffused.  Then  search  into  the 
very  depths  of  your  nature  after  the  most  minute  germs  of  this  evil.     II.  Whereiu 

LIES  our  safety  AGAINST  THE  GROWTH  AND  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THESE  PRINCIPLES?     There 

may  be  lurking  in  our  nature  forces  which  need  to  be  held  in  check  by  a  stronger 
power  than  mere  intellectual  culture.  Our  higher  civilisation  too  often  only  gilds 
crime,  and  throws  its  mantle  over  it.  A  formal  profession  of  religion  may  cover  the 
vilest  lusts  of  humanity.  There  is  a  higher  power.  Christianity  offers  a  Divine 
power  by  which  the  evil  nature  may  be  purified  and  every  evil  passion  brought  into 
subjection.  Our  safety,  our  only  safety,  lies  in  the  renewal  and  sanctification  of 
our  nature  by  the  Holy  Ghost.     Separated  from  the  conscious  presence  of  Christ, 


630  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxm. 

and  destitute  of  His  renewing  grace  and  protecting  providence,  who  can  tell  into 
what  mischief  we  may  fall !  (Robert  Ann.)  The  sin  of  envy  : — The  envious  man 
is  far  blacker  than  the  passionate  man  ;  for  the  outrageous  behaviour  of  an  angry 
person  sounds  an  alarm  to  his  neighbour  to  be  on  his  guard,  but  the  envious  man 
conceals  his  malignity  till  he  has  a  fit  opportunity  to  strike  a  mortal  blow  without 
danger  of  missing  his  aim.  The  one  is  a  dog,  that  barks  before  he  bites,  the  other 
is  an  adder  in  the  grass,  that  stings  the  traveller  when  he  is  dreading  no  hurt ;  for 
the  malice  of  the  envious  man  is  generally  unsuspected,  because  no  occasion  was 
given  for  it.  It  is  the  good  and  happiness  of  the  envied  object  that  excited  his 
malignity,  and  he  does  not  so  much  as  pretend  that  he  has  received  any  provocation. 
(George  Lawson,  D.D.)  The  nature  and  mischief  of  envy : — The  wise  man 
compares  envy  with  two  very  exorbitant  commotions  of  man's  mind,  wrath  and 
anger.  Worse  than  these,  more  unkind  and  uncharitable,  more  unjust,  violent  and 
mischievous,  is  envy.  There  is  neither  any  goodness,  nor  yet  any  strength,  that  is 
a  sufficient  guard  against  it.  1.  There  is  no  man's  innocency,  no  man's  virtue, 
that  can  secure  him  from  the  direful  strokes  of  envy.  Sometimes  a  man's  goodness 
actually  inflames  the  hearts  of  the  envious.  See  case  of  Cain  and  Abel ;  of  Esau  ; 
of  the  brethren  of  Joseph ;  of  Saul,  &c.  The  greatest  instance  of  all  is  the  envy  of 
Scribes  and  Pharisees  against  our  Saviour.  2.  There  is  no  man  so  great  and 
powerful,  or  of  so  secure  an  estate  or  fortune,  but  the  violence  of  envy  hath  been 
capable  of  overthrowing  him.  Illustrate  case  of  Abner.  I.  A  just  desceiption  of 
ENVT.  It  is  a  displeasure  or  trouble  arising  in  a  man's  mind  from  the  sight  or 
knowledge  of  another  man's  prosperity,  and  causing  a  man  to  hate  such  person,  and 
try  to  ruin  him.  It  commonly  arises  on  the  sight  of  the  prosperity  of  inferiors  or 
equals .  Men  envy  that  to  others  which  they  think  themselves  as  well  or  better  to 
deserve.  They  seldom  envy  things  or  persons  that  are  much  above  them.  Distin- 
guish envy  from  emulation.  Illustrate  by  these  two  qualities  in  Saul  and  Jonathan, 
on  the  occasion  of  David's  killing  Goliath.  Emulation  is  a  great  and  noble  virtue, 
envy  a  poor  and  sneaking  vice.  It  is  always  hiding  itself.  No  man  will  own 
himself  to  be  envious.  He  disguises  it  under  a  mighty  pretended  zeal  for  the  truth; 
or  a  great  love  for  the  public  welfare  ;  or  a  charitable  concern  for  the  credit  of  his 
neighbour.  How  few  men  are  wholly  free  from  this  vice.  II.  The  MiscnrEvous 
EFFECTS  PEODUCED  BY  ENVY.  See  thcse,  that  we  may  be  more  set  against  it ;  that  we 
may  avoid  it  ourselves ;  that  we  may  beware  of  it  in  others  ;  that  we  may  use  our 
utmost  endeavours  to  quench  this  flame.  Disturbances  in  the  state,  schism  in  the 
Church,  and  trouble  in  a  neighbourhood,  or  in  a  private  family,  are  generally 
traceable  to  envy.  To  what  end  is  all  this  evil  done  by  envious  men  ?  What  do 
they  get  by  it  ?  Envy  is  its  own  punishment.  No  man  can  find  a  greater  torment 
for  an  envious  man  than  he  inflicts  upon  himself.  Even  if  it  succeeds  in  pulling 
down  a  man,  it  very  rarely  gets  into  his  place.  How  is  it  that  God  endures,  and 
seems  to  leave  alone,  these  mischief-making,  envious  men  ?  They  are  agents  in 
doing  His  disciplinary  work  in  His  people.  It  makes  men  self- watchful.  The  envious 
quickly  light  upon  and  show  up  faults  that  we  might  have  passed  over.  The  envious 
calumniate  failings,  not  virtues.  Remedies  are — 1.  Aright  apprehension  of  the 
things  of  this  world.  2.  A  due  submission  to  the  will  of  God.  3.  A  true  humility. 
4.  A  Christian  charity.  This  last  plucks  it  up  by  the  very  roots  ;  and  plants  in  our 
hearts  what  is  most  contrary  thereto.     (Jonathan  Blagrave,  D.D.) 

Vers.  5,  6.  Open  rebuke  is  better  than  secret  love. — Charitable  reproof: — Self- 
love  is  so  natural  to  us,  that  as  it  makes  us  apt  to  flatter  ourselves  on  all  occasions, 
BO  it  inclines  us  to  accept  too  easily  of  the  flatteries  of  all  others.  Our  unwilling- 
ness to  know  our  own  faults,  or  to  be  humbled  under  the  sense  of  them,  makes  us 
uneasy  when  any  venture  on  the  most  charitable,  but  often  the  most  unacceptable, 
act  of  friendship,  the  telling  us  of  our  faults.  But  so  long  as  we  have  faults  it  is  very 
fit  that  we  be  made  acquainted  with  them.  And  since  we  are  too  much  blinded  in 
our  own  favour,  it  is  a  great  happiness  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  such  friends  as  will 
not  spare  us.  ISTo  man  can  perform  this  act  of  friendship  without  some  force  put 
upon  himself.  Few  love  to  touch  a  tender  part,  or  to  grieve  a  person  who  is  dear 
to  them.  Friends  see  faults  while  they  are  yet  secret,  before  they  break  out  into 
open  observation  ;  so  by  the  kind  severity  of  their  rebukes,  they  save  from  the 
shame  which  the  discoveries  that  envy  will  soon  make  may  bring.  Friendship 
that  carries  a  man  to  rebuke  another  plainly  and  roundly  is  better  than  secret 
love,  or  silent,  indulgent,  blind  love.  Such  reproofs  may  be  as  wounds,  and  give  a 
very  painful  uneasiness  ;  but  even  that  will  be  medicinal     The  first  and  necessary 


CHAP.xxvn.]  PROVERBS.  631 

rule  in  managing  our  reproofs  is,  that  no  man  should  offer  to  reprove  another,  who 
is  eminently  and  notoriously  faulty  himself.  Another  is,  reprove  in  such  a  manner 
that  it  may  appear  we  are  their  friends  whom  we  reprove,  and  that  we  correct  them 
for  their  own  good.  So  much  depends  on  the  temper  in  which  reproof  is  given. 
The  most  comprehensive  rule  is  to  order  our  reproofs  with  discretion  and 
prudence.  The  things  of  which  we  find  fault  should  be  things  of  importance. 
Junior  and  inferior  persons  should  not  usually  reprove  their  elders  and  superiors. 
And  a  wise  and  prudent  time  should  be  chosen.  Take  care  that  it  is  not  a  mere 
finding  fault  upon  some  general  and  popular  notions.  Illustrate  such  things  as 
lewd  conversation,  swearing,  &c.  {Bp.  Gilbert.)  False  love  : — The  contrast  is 
not  between  "open  reproof"  and  love  that  is  not  real,  but  only  affected,  and 
assuming  the  garb  and  manner  of  what  is  real,  flatters  and  unposes  upon  its 
object.  This  could  not,  with  propriety,  be  called  "  secret  love."  It  is  professed 
love  hiding  enmity  or  indifference.  "  Secret  love  "  is  love  which  is  indeed  real,  but 
which  fails  to  speak  out  faithfully  when  it  ought — when  the  good  of  its  object  calls 
for  such  fideUty ;  which  shrinks  from  doing  so  because  it  is  unwilling  to  inflict 
present  pain ;  which  thus  connives  at  existing  evils — silently  allowing  them  to  pass 
when  they  are  such  as  ought  to  be  noticed  and  reprehended.  This  is  a  false  love, 
which  really  injures  its  object.     (R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  Faithful  are  the  wounds  of  a  friend ;  but  the  kisses  of  an  enemy  are 
deceitfuL — God's  friendship  and  Satan's  enmity  : — True  friends  are  scarce.  The 
old  cynic  who  went  about  in  broad  daylight  with  a  lighted  lantern  in  search  of  "  a 
man  "  would  have  had  Uke  difficulty  in  finding  a  true  friend.  True  friendship  often 
assumes  a  rough  garb  ;  enmity  may  clothe  itself  in  the  stolen  dress  of  love.  Men 
like  flattery  better  than  the  rebuke  of  the  faithful  friend.  The  truth-speaker  often 
inflicts  pain.  I.  God's  fbiendship  ever  brings  sorrow  with  it.  Out  of  the 
depths  of  His  loving  heart,  God  summonses  the  prodigal  sinner  to  return.  If  he 
returns  he  must  expect  a  weary  journey.  It  is  a  toilsome  path,  that  rugged  one  of 
repentance.  II.  Satan's  enmity  is  often  disguised  by  means  of  deceitful  offers 
OF  JOT.  An  enemy,  he  deals  in  pretences  of  love,  and  deceives  with  a  kiss.  When 
Satan  tempted  Christ,  he  came  as  it  were  with  kisses — that  is,  with  bribes.  Is  it 
not  ever  so  ?  Sin  wears  the  garb  of  friendship  without  its  reality,  and  men  are 
slaves  to  appearances.  The  truly  wise  man  best  shows  his  wisdom  by  detecting  the 
embraces  of  an  enemy,  the  false  promise,  the  lying  lips.     {Homilist.) 

Ver.  7.  The  full  soul  loatheth  an  honeycomh. — Spiritual  appetite : — It  is  a  great 
blessing  when  food  and  appetite  meet  together.  Sometimes  men  have  been  so 
luxuriously  fed  that  appetite  has  departed  from  them  altogether.  The  rules  which 
apply  to  bodily  appetite  equally  hold  true  of  the  mind.  We  easily  lose  our  taste  for 
anything  of  which  we  have  our  fill.  Men  in  the  things  of  God  have  not  always  an 
appetite  for  the  sweetest  and  most  precious  truth.  I.  Jesus  Christ  is  Himself 
sweeter  than  the  honeycomb.  This  is  clear  if  we  consider  who  He  is,  and  what 
He  gives  and  does.  Our  Lord  is  the  incarnation  of  Divine  love.  The  love  of  God 
is  sweet,  and  Jesus  is  that  love  made  manifest.  Jesus  is  in  Himself  the  embodi- 
ment of  boundless  mercy  to  sinners  as  well  as  love  to  creatures.  Jesus  must  be 
sweet,  for  He  meets  all  our  wants  as  sinners.  He  breathes  into  our  hearts  the 
sweetness  of  abounding  peace.  His  very  name  is  redolent  of  celestial  hope  to 
believers.  Jesus  is  sweet  to  God  Himself,  and  to  the  angels  in  heaven.  It  is  His 
presence  that  makes  heaven  what  it  is.  II.  There  are  those  who  loathe  the 
sweetness  of  our  Lord.  Some  loathe  Him  so  as  to  trample  on  Him.  Others 
are  always  murmuring  at  Him.  Some  are  utterly  indifferent  to  Him.  The  loath- 
ing manifests  itself  by  little  signs.  It  comes  of  a  soul's  being  full — of  the  world  ; 
of  outward  religiousness ;  or  of  pride.  III.  There  are  some  who  do  appreciate 
THE  sweetness  OF  Christ.  Pray  for  a  good  appetite  for  Christ,  and  when  you  have 
it,  keep  it.  Do  not  waste  a  good  appetite  upon  anything  less  sweet  than  the  true 
honeycomb.  When  you  have  the  appetite,  indulge  it.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  An 
appetite  for  good  things  essential  for  their  evjoijment : — To  appreciate  a  thing  you 
nu;3t  first  feel  its  want.  This  applies  to — I.  Corporeal  good.  It  is  appetite  that 
makes  bodily  food  sweet  and  enjoyable.  Delicious  was  the  manna  to  the  Israelites 
at  first.  Which  of  the  two  is  the  more  blest,  the  man  who  has  the  abundance  of 
the  enjoyable  without  the  power  of  enjoying  or  he  who  has  the  scarcest  and 
humblest  fare  with  the  full  relish  of  the  hungry  soul?  II.  Intellectual 
GOOD.    A  man  may  have  an  immense  library,  and  no  appetite  for  books.     To  him 


632  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvn. 

the  priceless  library  is  worse  than  worthless.  I'd  rather  be  the  man  of  one  book, 
nay,  of  no  book  at  all  but  the  book  of  my  own  soul — the  book  of  nature — with  an 
appetite  for  truth,  than  the  owner  of  the  choicest  library  of  the  world  with  no 
desire  for  knowledge.    III.  Spiritual  good.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Yer.  8.  As  a  bird  that  wandereth  from  her  nest,  so  is  a  man  that  wandereth  from 
his  place. — The  iiiconvenience  and  danger  of  persons  being  long  absent  from  home  : — 
Nothing  that  affects  our  religious  interests  can,  properly  speaking,  be  called  little. 
Everything  that  can  influence  the  present  temper  and  future  state  of  the  soul  is 
weighty  and  important.  This  text  is  a  caution  against  a  rambling  spirit  in  general. 
"A  bird  that  wandereth  from  her  nest  "  leaves  her  eggs  unhatched,  or  starves  her 
young  ones,  or  exposes  them  to  peril.  The  evil  consequences  of  restless  and 
prolonged  wanderings  from  home  are — 1.  They  who  wander  lose  many  relative 
comforts.  A  heathen  philosopher  observes  that  "wanderers  about  have  many 
acquaintances,  but  few  friends."  2.  The  domestic  affairs  of  wanderers  greatly 
suffer.  Their  work  either  stands  still,  or  goes  on  very  indifferently.  3.  Precious 
time  is  lost  in  wandering  from  home.  Many  whose  lawful  business  leads  them 
abroad  stay  much  longer  than  is  needful.  They  trifle  at  every  place  where  they 
come,  and  must  chat  with  every  person  who  hath  as  little  prudence  as  themselves. 
4.  Wanderers  are  exposed  to  many  temptations  which  ought  to  be  avoided.  5.  This 
habit  is  a  great  hindrance  to  family  religion.  Apply  these  thoughts  to  ourselves, 
and  inquire  how  far  we  are  concerned  in  this  admonition.  It  is  important  for 
young  people  to  cultivate  a  habit  of  staying  at  home.  It  is  peculiarly  bad  in 
servants  to  wander  from  their  place.  Relations  should  endeavour  xo  make  home 
agreeable  to  one  another.  It  is  especially  bad  to  wander  from  the  house  of  God. 
(J.   Orton)  Wandering  birds  : — Some   people  are  always  restless  ;  they  must 

move  about.  They  are  like  wandering  birds.  Such  people  do  not  know  that  the 
right  place  is  always  the  best  place  for  them.  Whatever  is  our  calling  in  life,  let  us 
not  be  in  a  hurry  to  leave  it.  Depend  upon  it,  where  God  has  placed  us  is  the  best 
for  us  after  all.  The  right  place  for  us  all  is  where  we  can  best  serve  Jesus,  and 
where  we  can  glorify  Him.  A  bird  that  wanders  from  its  nest  is  one  that  will  get 
into  danger  and  trouble.  A  bird  that  wanders  from  its  nest  will  lose  its  nest. 
Three  counsels — 1.  Love  your  own  nest,  and  stay  in  it.  2.  Keep  the  nest  clean, 
and  make  your  home  happy.  3.  No  nest  is  so  good  for  you  as  your  own,  and  there- 
fore do  not  seek  to  change  it.  (J.  J.  Ellis.)  The  wanderer  : — I.  As  the  bird  has 
ITS  NEST,  so  MAN  HAS  HIS  PLACE.  And  both  are  of  Divine  appointment.  Behind 
the  instinct  of  the  bird  and  the  social  nature  of  man  we  must  recognise  the  purpose 
of  God.  Man's  place  is  in — 1.  The  home.  "  God  setteth  the  solitary  in  families." 
2.  In  society.  "Let  every  soul  be  subject  to  the  higher  powers,  for  the  powers 
that  be  are  ordained  of  God."     3.  In  the  Church,  its  fellowship,  worship,  work. 

II.  As  THE  BIRD  NEEDS  THE  NEST,  SO  THE  MAN  NEEDS  THE  PLACE.  III.  As  THE  NEST 
NEEDS  THE  BIRD,  SO  THE  PLACE  NEEDS  THE  MAN.  IV.  "  WANDERING."  V.  ThE 
CONSEQUENCES    OF  WANDERING.       VI.  ApPEAL    TO    WANDERERS.       ComC  back  !    the  place 

waits  for  you.  Tour  own  heart  echoes  its  cry.  (Homiletic Review.)  Unnatural- 
ness  : — Sin  reverses  Divine  arrangements.  It  is  consequently  the  most  unnatural 
thing  in  God's  universe.  We  speak  of  "  natural  depravity  "  ;  it  is,  properly  speak- 
ing, un-natural  depravity.  Sin  is  earth's  exotic ;  the  soul's  nightshade  ;  it  has 
"  turned  the  world  upside  down,"  and  thrust  man  out  of  his  proper  place.  I.  Man 
IN  HIS  WRONG  PLACE.  Hcic  Called  "a  wanderer."  "Where  art  thou?"  God 
asked  Adam  ;  intimating  that  he  was  not  where  he  ought  to  have  been.  Sin  had 
turned  him  out  of  his  place.  Some  things  concerning  man's  original  state — the 
place  from  which  he  had  wandered.  1.  It  was  a  state  of  conscious  Divine  approval. 
Conscience  was  at  rest.  2.  A  state  of  Divine  illumination.  The  creature  enjoyed 
the  high  privilege  of  companionship  with  his  Creator.  Sin  has  both  stained  the 
conscience  and  darkened  the  understanding.  3.  A  state  of  Divine  sympathies.  His 
supreme  affections  were  centred  in  his  Maker.  Towards  Him  his  emotions  moved 
like  bright  constellations  round  the  sun.  The  fatal  mistake  sin  has  introduced 
into  the  hearts  of  men  is  the  vain  attempt  to  meet  the  wants  of  the  spiritual  in  the 
supplies  of  the  material.  II.  Man  in  his  right  place.  "  Man  is  as  his  heart  is." 
The  evils  which  have  been  enumerated  arise  from  the  moral  derangement  of  the 
affections.  The  gospel  comes  to  restore  the  forfeited  "  place  "  by  restoring  lost 
confidence.  It  does  so  by  revealing  God  in  such  a  way  as  to  inspire  confidence. 
The  gospel  is  the  revelation  of  Divine  love  putting  away  sin,  and  bringing  the  sinner 
near  to  Himself.     The  soul's  resting-place  is  faith  and  love.     (G.  Hunt  Jackson.) 


CHAP,  xxvn.]  PBOVEBBS.  633 

The  wandering  bird  : — Persons  of  the  vagrant  kind  seldom,  if  ever,  prosper.  1.  In 
the  common  affairs  of  life  Solomon  was  correct.  The  unrest  of  that  man's  mind, 
and  the  instability  of  his  conduct,  who  is  constantly  making  a  change  of  his 
position  and  purpose,  augurs  no  success  for  any  of  his  adventures.  See  cases  of 
eagerness  to  leave  the  native  country ;  changing  occupation ;  changing  situation 
and  acquaintance.  And  it  is  certainly  true  in  changing  one's  religious  service  in 
the  cause  of  God.  2.  In  spiritual  things.  There  is  a  tendency  in  us  all  to  be 
looking  for  evidences,  signs,  marks,  experiences,  graces,  and  coincidences  of  one 
kind  or  another.  When  a  Christian  wanders  from  his  place — from  the  simphcity 
of  his  faith  in  Jesus — that  moment  he  departs  from  his  safe  shelter  in  the  solid 
rock.  Many  believers  wander  out  of  their  place.  A  believer's  place  is  in  the  bosom 
of  his  Lord,  or  at  the  right  hand  of  his  Master,  or  sitting  at  His  feet  with  Mary. 
Wandering  habits  imply  a  lack  of  watchfulness.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  wander- 
ing bird  : — The  teaching  of  the  proverb  may  be,  that  a  man  who  leaves  his  own 
home,  his  own  proper  sphere,  situation,  calling,  is  strange,  awkward,  lonely, 
exposed — he  has  got  away  from  duty  and  into  danger,  and  is  forlorn  as  a  lost  bird 
that  has  got  away  from  its  nest  and  cannot  find  its  way  back.  Our  subject  is  that 
men,  institutions.  Churches,  are  most  useful  when  faithful  to  their  own  particular 
calling,  and  when  true  to  their  own  distinctive  characteristics.  There  is  some 
danger  lest  Christian  Churches  should  wander  from  their  place.  Far  be  it  from  me 
to  depreciate  the  importance  of  social  questions  and  social  work.  But  we  are  told 
that  we  are  strong  in  the  degree  in  which  we  take  in  hand  social  questions,  and 
play  the  part  of  social  reformers.  But  our  work  is  supremely  spiritual ;  our  work 
is  to  the  soul  of  man.  To  us,  the  main  cause  of  the  misery  which  is  in  this  world 
is  to  be  found  in  the  spiritual  condition  of  men,  in  their  alienation  from  God.  The 
Church  of  Christ  is  not  to  be  a  food-supply  association,  nor  a  banking  company, 
nor  a  society  for  the  reform  of  manners.  Our  work  is  to  bring  men  to  God.  The 
monition  of  the  text  may  be  applied  to  individuals.  There  are  few  things  more 
common  than  for  men  to  forsake  the  sphere  in  which  their  own  pecuhar  powers 
have  ample  scope  for  a  sphere  in  which  those  powers  are  scarcely  required  at  all. 
An  infatuation  sometimes  leads  men  to  seek  positions  to  which  they  are  not  called, 
and  for  which  they  are  manifestly  unfit.  Some  of  us  are  not  allowed  to  remain  in 
one  place.  We  are  compelled  to  be  wanderers  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  The 
determination  to  abide  in  one's  own  lot,  and  to  be  true  to  one's  own  gifts  and 
aptitudes,  is  the  secret  of  power.  If  a  man  will  prove  his  own  work,  he  shall  have 
rejoicing  in  himself.  Cultivate  a  vivid  sense  of  personality  and  a  solemn  conviction 
of  our  own  individual  significance.  You  will  not  best  serve  your  generation  by 
becoming  a  washed-out  reproduction  of  some  stronger  character.  If  a  man  honestly 
does  the  best  with  his  own  powers  in  his  own  place,  he  will  not  live  in  vain.  We 
cannot  escape  from  our  personal  limitations,  but  we  may  do  good  work,  and 
minister  much  blessing  notwithstanding.  We  also  wander  from  our  place  when  we 
neglect  the  things  that  are  about  us,  and  strain  after  strange  and  distant  things, 
for  satisfaction.  The  highest  and  best  things  are  possible  to  us  where  we  are.  In 
our  own  place  the  highest  culture  of  character  is  possible.  Our  place  has  no 
limitations  for  spiritual  growth.  We  can  be  men  in  Christ  Jesus  where  we  are.  So 
let  there  be  no  repining  and  no  wandering.  He  orders  our  lot ;  let  us  stand  in  it.. 
{James  Lewis.) 

Ver.  10.  Better  is  a  neighbour  that  is  near  than  a  brother  far  oS— Sociability : — 
This  proverb  points  out  that  when  assistance  is  needed  the  near  neighbour,  though 
he  may  love  less,  is  more  useful  than  the  brother  who  is  far  away.  Society  is 
absolutely  necessary  for  human  existence.  Companionship  forces  us  to  think  and 
feel  in  common.  A  large-hearted  sociability  corrects  irrational  prejudices.  As  no 
two  minds  are  exactly  alike,  so  no  two  can  see  any  subject  from  exactly  the  same 
standpoint.  The  greater  number  of  minds  we  can  bring  to  bear  on  any  aspect  of 
truth,  the  nearer  shall  we  be  to  the  aspect  that  is  right.  It  may  be  objected  that 
many  think  erroneously,  and  therefore  companionship  with  them  would  lead  us 
from,  and  not  towards,  the  truth.  It  would  if  we  adopted  their  opinions,  but  not 
if,  by  sifting  and  searching  them,  we  grasped  our  own  more  firmly.  The  same  holds 
true  in  the  realm  of  Christian  experience.  Sociability  is,  then,  a  duty  we  all  owe  to 
society,  one  which  we  ought  scrupulously  to  pay  according  to  our  means  and  our 
opportunities.  About  the  nature  of  true  sociability  great  mistakes  are  made. 
Amusement  is  not  the  first  purpose  of  society.  To  be  truly  sociable  we  must  be 
able  to  make  society  more  Christian  than  it  was ;  to  infuse  into  it  something  more* 


634  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxrn. 

however  little,  of  the  spirit  of  sympathy,  truth,  purity,  and  love  than  it  had.  But 
to  do  this  we  must  have  the  spirit  ourselves.  We  ought  also  to  be  able  to  make  it 
more  intellectual,  by  adding  information,  giving  ideas,  and  stimulating  to  mental 
effort.  Then  we  cannot  always  be  in  society.  It  is  in  solitude  we  gather  those 
germs  of  thought  that  we  are  afterwards  to  scatter.  The  power  we  have  of 
influencing  society  by  our  words  is  one  whose  value  we  cannot  over-estimate,  one 
that  ought  to  be  cultivated  to  the  very  highest  pitch.  The  benefit  derived  from 
companionship  must  depend  on  the  persons  with  whom  we  associate.  Bad  com- 
panions have  led  many  to  ruin.  Sociability  has  a  tendency  to  produce  hypocrisy, 
and  subsequent  self-deception  in  certain  characters.  Conversation  in  society  is, 
too  often,  neither  true  nor  edifying.  By  insensible  degrees  the  vapid  talker 
becomes  the  idle  gossip,  and  the  gossip  sinks  into  the  envenomed  slanderer.  It  is, 
then,  in  our  power  to  influence  society  for  good  or  ill.  Sociability  must  be  either 
a  curse  or  a  blessing  as  we  use  it.  (.7.  McCann,  D.D.)  Friendship  : — The  Lord 
Jesus  found  strength  and  consolation  in  the  love  of  human  friends.  That  He 
should  not  only  have  pitied  men,  and  loved  them,  but  should  have  found  here  and 
there  men  and  women  whose  presence  and  affection  were  a  relief  to  Him,  under  the 
burden  of  His  griefs ;  men  and  women  who  gave  Him  rest  when  He  was  weary, 
and  joy  when  He  was  troubled ;  this  may  seem  surprising  to  us.  Christ  Himself, 
the  Son  of  the  Eternal,  had  His  human  friends.  He  loved  all  men  well  enough  to  die 
for  them,  but  there  were  some  whom  He  loved  more  than  others.  1.  Some  men  are 
so  happy  as  to  inherit  friends  from  their  fathers.  The  love  of  our  father's  friend 
is  worth  having.  If  he  is  a  good  man,  there  will  be  a  certain  power  in  him  that 
will  be  a  restraint  to  keep  now  in  the  good  way  your  father  would  have  approved. 
Tour  father's  experience  of  life  survives  in  him  to  give  you  counsel.  If  he  should 
ever  be  in  trouble,  pay  your  father's  debts  in  friendly  attention  to  him.  2.  "  Thine 
own  friend  forsake  not."  There  are  friends  and  friends.  Most  of  our  friends  are 
acquaintances,  and  nothing  more.  Friendships  of  the  perfect  and  ideal  sort  are 
necessarily  rare.  By  friends  we  mean  those  for  whom  we  have  a  strong  affection, 
and  who  have  a  strong  affection  for  us.  A  wise  man  said,  "  I  want  my  friends  to 
stand  by  me  when  I  am  wrong ;  other  people  will  stand  by  me  when  I  am  right." 
When  you  have  friends  of  that  sort,  forsake  them  not.  Keep  them  when  you  have 
them.  3.  Friendships  which  fall  far  short  of  this  ideal  are  also  worth  keeping. 
For  the  most  part  our  friends  must  be  people  whose  circumstances  and  education 
and  history  are  very  much  Hke  our  own.  There  are  people  who  drop  a  whole  set 
of  their  "  friends"  whenever  they  get  a  considerable  rise  in  their  income.  For  the 
most  part,  close  and  real  friendships  must  be  formed  early  in  life.  When  close 
friendships  are  formed  after  a  man  has  passed  middle  life,  it  is  usually  with  much 
younger  persons.  4.  Of  the  place  and  power  of  friendship  in  life,  only  those 
who  have  had  and  retained  loyal  and  worthy  friends,  can  have  any  real  know- 
ledge. Bacon  says,  "Friendship  redoubleth  joys  and  cutteth  grief  in  halves." 
Friendships  assist  to  check  and  to  subdue  that  selfish  absorption  in  our  own 
successes  and  in  our  own  sorrows  which  poison  the  very  springs  of  life  and  brings 
paralysis  on  aU  its  nobler  powers.  Our  confidence  in  their  goodness  and  our 
delight  in  their  affection  save  us  from  cynicism.  We  think  the  better  of  the  human 
race  because  we  think  so  well  of  them.  When  we  do  not  absolutely  accept  the 
judgment  of  a  friend,  it  clears  our  mind  to  discuss  a  difficult  question  with  him. 
Our  friends  take  the  side  of  all  that  is  best  in  us  against  whatever  is  mean  and 
cowardly  and  dangerous ;  they  serve  the  purpose  of  an  external  conscience.  Our 
friends  see  us,  not  merely  as  we  are,  but  as  we  might  be.  5.  The  Christian  will 
form  his  closest  friendships  with  men  who  share  his  faith  in  Christ  and  his  hope 
of  immortality.  Such  friends  will  continue  to  be  our  friends  in  the  realms  that  lie 
beyond    death.      (R.  JV.  Dale,  LL.D.)  Genuine  friendship  : — I.  Friendship   is 

BASED  ON  TKUE  LOVE.  Coucord  of  Sentiment,  agreement  of  taste,  unity  of  purpose, 
frequent  companionship,  are  not  enough.  These  may  exist  without  the  binding 
together  of  hearts.  Love  is  the  essential  element  of  true  friendship.  "  For  my 
friend  first,  and  then  for  myself,"  is  the  spirit  of  true  friendship.  The  idea  of 
sacrifice  is  in  friendship,  and  sacrifice  is  in  the  very  nature  of  love.  II.  Friend- 
ship IS  reciprocal  in  its  growth  and  preservation.  It  cannot  be  a  one-sided 
thing.  Seneca  said,  "  Love  if  you  wish  to  be  loved."  The  atmosphere  of 
suspicion  or  distrust  is  fatal  to  real  friendship.  III.  Genuine  friendship 
strength liNS  IN  the  TIME  Or  TRIAL.  Thcic  is  nothing  like  adversity  to  test  life's 
attachments.  See  some  points  of  duty  in  true  friendship.  Do  not  encourage  your 
friend  to  your  secrets.    If  they  are  disclosed,  see  that  you  never  betray  them. 


CHAP,  xxvn.]  PROVERBS.  635 

There  is  a  becoming  reticence  and  dignity  even  in  friendship.  Do  not  think  you 
can  treat  your  friend  anyhow  because  he  is  your  friend.  The  dearest  friendships 
cannot  dispense  with  thoughtfulness,  kindness,  and  politeness.  Do  not  allow  any 
trivial  matter  to  interfere  with  your  friendship.  Do  not  forget  to  pray  for,  and 
seek,  the  spiritual  welfare  of  your  friend.  As  you  believe  in  the  power  of  prayer, 
pray  for  your  friend.  Cultivate  close  and  endearing  fellowship  with  the  best  Friend — 
the  Friend  of  Sinners.  {J.  Hiles  Hitchens,  D.D.)  On  friendship  : — Whatever 
relates  to  the  behaviour  of  men  in  their  social  character  is  of  great  importance  in 
religion.  The  duties  which  spring  from  that  character  form  many  branches  of  the 
great  law  of  charity.  True  piety  is  not  less  friendly  to  men  than  zealous  for  the 
honour  of  God.  Deal  with  the  nature  and  duties  of  virtuous  friendship,  as  closely 
connected  with  the  true  spirit  of  religion.  Among  mankind,  friendships  or  con- 
nections are  of  different  kinds.  Some  so-called  friendships  would  better  be  called 
conspiracies.  Some  are  but  the  connections  of  political  parties.  Private  friend- 
ships flow  from  similarity  of  disposition,  corresponding  harmony  of  minds. 
Sincere  and  affectionate  friendships  form  some  of  the  greatest  blessings  of  human 
life.  The  fundamental  duties  of  true  friendship  are  constancy  and  fidelity.  1.  Do 
not  expect  perfection  in  any  with  whom  you  contract  friendship.  If  we  do,  we 
shall  be  sure  to  meet  with  disappointments.  Young  people  are  apt  to  cherish 
romantic  ideas,  and  to  form  impossible  expectations.  In  the  best  persons,  great 
and  solid  qualities  counterbalance  the  common  infirmities.  To  these  qualities  you 
should  look  in  forming  friendships ;  to  good-sense  and  prudence  ;  virtue,  good- 
temper  and  steadiness  of  affection.  2.  Do  not  be  huii  by  differences  of  opinion 
arising  in  intercourse  with  your  friends.  These  are  sure  to  occur.  Perpetual 
uniformity  of  thought  would  become  monotonous  and  insipid.  3.  Cultivate  open- 
ness of  temper  and  manners.  Nothing  more  certainly  dissolves  friendship  than  the 
jealousy  which  arises  from  darkness  and  concealment.  4.  Cultivate  gentle  and 
obliging  manners.  It  is  a  common  error  that  familiar  intimacy  supersedes 
attention  to  the  lesser  duties  of  behaviour.  Let  no  harshness,  no  appearance  of 
neglect,  no  supercilious  affectation  of  superiority,  occur  in  the  intercourse  of  friends. 
A  tart  reply,  a  proneness  to  rebuke,  a  captious  and  contradictious  spirit,  are  often 
known  to  embitter  domestic  life  and  to  set  friends  at  variance.  5.  Do  not  rashly 
hsten  to  evU  reports  against  your  friends.  Be  slow  of  believing  anything  against 
the  friend  whom  you  have  chosen.  Suffer  not  the  poison  of  jealousy  easily  to  taint 
your  mind  and  break  your  peace.  6.  Do  not  desert  your  friend  in  danger  or 
distress.  "When  your  friend  is  calumniated,  then  is  the  time  openly  and  boldly  to 
espouse  his  cause.  The  honourable  zeal  of  friendship  has,  in  every  age,  attracted 
the  veneration  of  mankind.  (Hugh  Blair,  D.D.)  Reasons  for  valuing  true 
friendship  : — 1.  Because  of  the  pleasure  of  it.  There  is  a  great  deal  of  sweetness  in 
consulting  and  conversing  with  a  cordial  friend.  The  sweetness  of  friendship  lies 
not  in  hearty  mirth,  but  in  hearty  counsel,  faithful  advice,  sincerely  given,  and 
without  flattery.  2.  Because  of  the  profit  and  advantage  of  it,  especially  in  a  day 
of  calamity.  Don't  expect  relief  from  a  kinsman  for  kinsman's  sake,  but  apply 
yourselves  to  your  neighbours,  who  are  at  hand,  and  will  be  ready  to  help  us  at  an 
exigence.  (Matthew  Henry.)  The  friendship  of  God  towards  man,  and  man 
toicards  God  : — There  is  no  friend  like  an  old  friend.  It  is  the  heat  of  a  whole  life 
that  has  melted  together  the  hearts  of  those  who  have  walked  together  the  long 
walk  of  life  as  friends.  It  is  possible  for  any  who  seek  the  Lord  and  His  will  to  be 
reckoned  among  His  friends.  God  is  the  Friend  of  man ;  and  man  is  admitted  to  be 
the  friend  of  God.  What  are  the  terms  on  which  we  should  stand  towards  a  friend  ? 
In  hollow  friendships  two  things  are  wanting,  faith  and  love.  But  in  the  friend- 
ship we  are  permitted  to  cherish  towards  God  these  are  the  very  corner-stones,  an 
enlightened  lively  faith  and  a  glowing  active  love.  Are  we  enjoying  the  heavenly 
sunshine  of  this  Divine  fatherly  friendship  ?  If  so,  we  shall  show  it  in  our  own 
faithful,  affectionate  life,  as  friends  of  God.  Of  all  living  agencies  a  friend  is  the 
most  alive,  the  most  alert.  (Archdeacon  Mildmay.)  Near  and  far  off: — The 
antithetical  phrases,  "  at  hand  "  and  "  far  off,"  have  evident  reference  here,  not  to 
locality,  but  to  disposition.  A  friendly  and  kindly-disposed  neighbour,  who  bears 
no  relation  to  us  save  that  of  neighbourhood,  is  greatly  preferable  to  a  brother — to 
any  relation  whatever — who  is  cold,  distant,  and  alienated.  Even  natural  affection 
requires  to  be  exercised  with  discretion.  When  appealed  to  injudiciously,  at 
improper  times,  in  improper  circumstances,  and  with  improper  frequency,  it 
may  be  cooled,  it  may  be  lost,  it  may  be  turned  to  dislike.  {R.  Wardlaw, 
D.D.) 


636  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOE.  [chap.  xxvn. 

Ver.  12.  A  prudent  man  foreseeth  ttie  evil,  and  hideth  himself ;  but  the  simple 
pass  on,  and  are  punished. — Eyes  and  no  eyes : — The  distinction  is  not  between 
"  goodness  "  and  "  wickedness,"  but  between  strength  and  weakness,  wisdom  and 
folly.  The  "seeing"  and  the  "acting"  man  victoriously  compels  circumstances 
to  further  his  own  ends.  The  "blind"  and  the  "  drifting"  man  is  conquered  by 
the  force  of  circumstances,  and  suffers  penalty  and  loss.  The  proverb  is  applicable 
to  every  sphere  of  human  life  and  effort,  and  becomes  more  and  more  rigidly  and 
absolutely  true  the  higher  we  ascend.  In  the  lower  spheres  of  action  there  may 
appear  evils  which  the  most  prudent  man  cannot  avoid;  and  the  "simple  "may 
sometimes  escape  disaster  by  a  fortunate  combination  of  circumstances.  But  these 
are  exceptions.  When  we  ascend  to  the  sphere  of  moral  and  spiritual  efforts,  even 
the  exceptions  vanish,  and  the  principle  becomes  absolute.  1.  Man's  life  and 
destiny  are  determined,  not  by  an  inexorable  and  eternal  fate,  but  by  his  free 
manhood.  Circumstances  are  the  material  out  of  which  he  has  to  weave  the 
garment  of  his  life,  and  it  depends  upon  himself  whether  it  shall  be  a  garment 
for  honour  or  dishonour.  2.  The  radical  distinction  between  men  lies  in  the 
possession  of  true  vision.  The  true  man  sees  the  realities  of  things,  gazes  into 
the  truer  and  eternal.  The  unspiritual  man  sees  only  the  show  and  appearance  of 
things.  This  true  vision,  being  an  essential  characteristic  of  the  spiritual  man,  is 
more  than  intellectual  apprehension.  It  is  a  perception  in  which  the  whole  being 
is  exercised.  3.  True  vision  determines  true  action.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  a 
man  may  "  see,"  and  yet  follow  his  evil  passions  rather  than  his  nobler  knowledge. 
But  in  such  cases  there  is  something  perilously  defective  in  the  vision.  It  has 
lacked  depth  and  splendour,  and  divineness.  4.  "  Vision "  and  "  action " 
determine  destiny.  "Drifting"  is  fatal;  to  "pass  on"  in  the  unresisted 
current  of  circumstances  is  "to  suffer."  For  lack  of  the  "true  vision"  that 
creates  true  action  empires  have  perished,  and  individuals  are  subject  to  the 
same  law.  Spiritual  blindness  is  death.  (John  Thomas,  M.A.)  The  foresight 
of  prudence : — A  good  husband  will  repair  his  house  while  the  weather  is  fair,  not 
put  it  off  till  winter  ;  a  careful  pilot  wiU  take  advantage  of  wind  and  tide,  and  so 
put  out  to  sea,  not  stay  till  a  storm  arise.  The  traveller  will  take  his  time  in  his 
journey,  and  mind  his  pace  when  the  night  comes  on,  lest  darkness  overtake  him; 
the  smith  will  strike  while  the  iron  is  hot,  lest  it  grow  cool,  and  so  he  lose  his 
labour  ;  so  we  ought  to  make  every  day  the  day  of  our  repentance  ;  to  make  use  of 
the  present  time,  that  when  we  come  to  die  we  may  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  die, 
for  there  wiU  be  a  time  when  there  will  be  no  place  for  repentance,  when  time  wiU 
be  no  more ;  when  the  door  will  be  shut,  when  there  will  be  no  entrance  at  all, 
(J.  Spencer.) 

Ver.  14.  He  that  blesseth  his  friend  with  a  loud  voice,  rising  early  in  the 
morning,  it  shall  be  counted  a  curse  to  him.  —  The  curse  of  ostentatious 
flattery  : — Flattery  is  a  species  of  conduct  generally  most  pleasing,  always  most 
pernicious.  The  flattery  in  the  text  is  a  loud  vaunting.  It  intrudes  itself  on  all 
occasions;  it  is  busy  and  demonstrative.  I.  It  is  a  cubse  to  its  author.  He 
who  practises  sycophancy  inflicts  an  incalculable  injury  on  his  own  spiritual 
nature.  The  spirit  of  independence,  the  feeling  of  honest  manhood,  give  way  to 
a  crawling,  creeping  instinct ;  it  is  a  sneaking  art  used  to  cajole  and  soften  fools. 
II.  It  is  a  cuese  to  its  victim.  Perhaps  this  is  what  Solomon  means  when  he 
says  "it  shall  be  counted  a  curse  to  him,"  i.e.,  the  object  of  it.  "Of  all  wild 
beasts,"  says  Johnson,  "  preserve  me  from  a  flatterer."     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  17.  Iron  sharpeneth  iron ;  so  a  man  sharpeneth  the  countenance  of  his 
friend. — Friendship  : — Scripture  instances  of  friendship  are  David  and  Jonathan  ; 
lluth  and  Naomi ;  Paul  and  Timotheus ;  and  our  Lord  and  the  Bethany  sisters. 
In  classical  literature  we  see  that  friendship  had  a  great  part,  both  in  the  govern- 
ment of  states  and  the  lives  of  individuals.  It  is  an  aspect  of  politics  and  of 
human  nature,  and  of  all  virtue.  Partly  owing  to  the  different  character  of 
domestic  life,  the  tie  of  friendship  seems  to  have  exercised  a  greater  influence 
amongst  the  Greeks  and  Eomans  than  among  ourselves ;  and  although  these 
attachments  may  sometimes  have  degenerated  into  evil,  we  cannot  doubt  that 
much  that  was  noble  in  the  old  life  was  also  pure.  See  cases  of  Achilles  and 
Patroclus,  and  of  Pylades  and  Orestes.  The  school  of  Socrates  was  as  much  a 
circle  of  friends  as  a  band  of  disciples.  Boman  friendships  are  illustrated  in  Scipio 
and   Loelius,   and   in   Cicero   and  Atticus.      Shakespeare  gives  several   types   of 


CHAP,  xxvn,]  PROVERBS.  637 

friendship.  In  youth,  when  life  is  opening  before  us,  we  easily  form  friend- 
ships. A  young  man,  even  if  he  be  poor  in  worldly  goods,  may  reasonably 
hope  to  be  rich  in  friends.  Like  draws  towards  like,  and  youth  rejoices  in 
youth.  We  cannot  make  friendships  exactly  as  we  please.  Friendships  are  not 
made,  but  grow  out  of  similar  tastes,  out  of  mutual  respect,  from  the  discovery  of 
some  hitherto  unsuspected  vein  of  sympathy.  They  depend  also  on  our  own 
power  of  inspiring  friendship  in  others.  Yet  neither  is  the  choice  of  friends 
altogether  independent  of  ourselves.  A  man  may  properly  seek  for  friends.  He 
gets  good,  or  he  gets  harm,  out  of  the  companionship  of  those  with  whom  he  lives. 
Such  as  they  are  he  will  be  in  some  degree.  I.  The  character  of  true  friendship. 
It  should  be  simple,  manly,  unreserved  ;  not  weak,  or  fond,  or  extravagant,  nor  yet 
exacting  more  than  human  nature  can  fairly  give ;  nor  intrusive  into  the  secrets  of 
another's  soul,  or  curious  about  his  circumstances.  The  gi'eatest  element  in 
friendship  is  faithfulness.  Friends  learn  from  one  another ;  they  form  the 
characters  of  one  another ;  they  bear  one  another's  burdens ;  they  make  up  for 
each  other's  defects.  The  ancients  spoke  of  three  kinds  of  friendship — one  for  the 
Bake  of  the  useful,  one  for  the  sake  of  the  pleasant,  and  a  third  for  the  sake  of  the 
good  or  noble.  The  first  is  a  contradiction  in  terms.  It  is  a  partnership,  not  a 
friendship.  Every  one  knows  the  delight  of  having  a  friend.  Is  there  a  friendship 
for  the  sake  of  the  noble  and  the  good  ?  Mankind  are  dependent  beings,  and  we 
cannot  help  seeing  how  much,  when  connected  together,  they  may  do  for  the 
elevation  of  one  another's  character  and  for  the  improvement  of  mankind. 
n.  Changing  friendships.  Like  the  other  goods  of  life,  friendship  is  commonly 
mixed  and  imperfect,  and  Hable  to  be  interrupted  by  changing  circumstances  or 
the  tempers  of  men.  Few  have  the  same  friends  in  youth  as  in  age.  Some 
youthful  friendships  are  too  violent  to  last ;  they  have  in  them  some  element  of 
weakness  or  sentimentalism,  and  the  feelings  pass  away.  Or,  at  some  critical  time 
of  life,  a  friend  has  failed  to  stand  by  us,  and  then  our  love  to  him  grows  cold. 
But  there  are  duties  we  owe  to  an  extinct  friend.  We  should  never  speak  against 
him,  or  make  use  of  our  knowledge  about  him.  A  passing  word  should  not  be 
suffered  to  interrupt  the  friendship  of  years.  It  is  a  curious  observation,  that  the 
most  sensitive  natures  are  also  the  most  liable  to  pain  the  feelings  of  others. 
III.  Christian  friendship.  The  spirit  of  a  man's  life  may  be  more  or  less 
consciously  Christian.  Friendship  may  be  based  on  religious  motives,  and  may 
flow  out  of  a  religious  principle.  Human  friendships  constantly  require  to  be 
purified  and  raised  from  earth  to  heaven.  And  yet  they  should  not  lose  themselves 
in  spiritual  emotion  or  in  unreal  words.  Better  that  friendship  should  have  no 
element  of  religion  than  that  it  should  degenerate  into  cant  and  insincerity.  All  of 
us  may  sometimes  think  of  ourselves  and  our  friends  as  living  to  God,  and  of 
human  love  as  bearing  the  image  of  the  Divine.  There  are  some  among  us  who 
have  known  what  it  is  to  lose  a  friend.  Death  is  a  gracious  teacher.  Who  that 
has  lost  a  friend  would  not  wish  to  have  done  more  for  him  now  that  he  is  taken 
away?  The  memory  of  them  is  still  consecrated  and  elevating  for  our  lives. 
(Professor  Jowett.)  Friendship  : — This  is  what  one  friend  should  be  to  another ; 
a  whetstone,  to  give  keenness  to  the  edge  of  his  energy.  A  friend  can  encourage 
his  friend  when  duty  is  difiicult,  or  wearisome,  or  painful ;  can  comfort,  can  advise. 
But  friendship  is  too  often  made  the  stepping-stone  to  the  worst  falls ;  and  many  a 
Binner  has  his  friends  to  thank  for  his  having  fallen  into  sins  which,  left  to  himself, 
he  would  have  shrunk  from  with  horror.  God  has  mercifully  hedged  round  most 
8in3  with  many  barriers — the  barrier  of  ignorance,  of  shame,  and  of  affection. 
This  latter,  in  a  personal  friend,  may  be  especially  helpful.  A  friend  may  aid  us 
in  both  the  right  and  the  wrong.  It  is  sometimes  the  duty  of  a  true  friend  openly 
to  find  fault  with  a  friend.  But  the  occasion  is  very  rare.  In  most  cases  all  that 
is  wanted  is  to  hold  to  the  right,  and  you  wiU  do  more  towards  holding  your  friend 
to  the  right  than  by  all  manner  of  exhortations.  Few  things  can  give  acuter  pain 
to  the  soul  in  after-years  than  the  memory  of  friends  misled  by  our  friendship. 
Friendship,  and  sympathy,  and  cheerful  example  ought  to  help  us  more  than 
anything  else  to  grow  up  soldiers  and  servants  of  Christ,  and  to  fight  His  battle 
when  we  are  grown  up.  Iron  cannot  sharpen  iron  more  than  we  might  sharpen 
each  other.  The  very  differences  in  our  character  might  be  such  a  help  to  us  in 
making  friendship  valuable,  because  when  one  friend  is  much  tempted  the  other  is 
strong,  and  can  uphold  him,  and  yet,  when  another  kind  of  temptation  comes,  will 
receive  back  as  much  support  as  he  gave.  {Frederick  Temple,  D.D.)  '■'•A  fricwi 
in  need  is  a  friend  indeed": — Bacon  says,  "To  be  without  friends  is  to  find  the 


G38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  sxvu. 

•world  a  wilderness."  It  is  only  a  mean  man  that  can  be  contented  alone.  A 
trusty  friend  is  one  of  earth's  greatest  blessings.  Alas,  for  the  dire  contagion  of 
evil  friendships  !  Washington  said,  "Be  courteous  to  all,  intimate  with  few,  and 
let  those  few  be  well  tried  before  you  give  them  your  confidence."  Stick  to  your 
friend.  He  can  never  have  any  true  friends  who  is  often  changing  them.  Bring 
your  friend  to  a  proper  understanding  of  himself.  Persuade  him  of  his  follies. 
Phocion  said  truly  to  Antipater,  "I  cannot  be  both  your  friend  and  flatterer." 
True  friendship  cannot  exist  between  bad  men.  True  friendship  is  tested  in  the 
hour  of  adversity.  Wait  until  you  are  in  trouble,  and  many  a  professed  friend  will 
be  shy  of  you  and  give  you  the  dead  cut.  Many  people  expect  too  much  from 
their  friends.  There  is  an  old  saying  that  "  Friends,  like  fiddle-strings,  must  not 
be  screwed  too  tight."  Friendships  are  often  productive  of  mischief  because  they 
are  not  governed  by  wisdom  and  prudence.  He  is  our  best  friend  who  is  a  friend 
to  our  soul.  Give  a  wide  berth  to  the  sneering  sceptic.  Have  for  your  bosom 
friends  men  who  will  "  strengthen  your  hand  in  God,"  who  will  foster  your  piety 
and  make  you  wiser,  better,  and  holier  men.  In  Christ  alone  the  proverb  at  the 
heading  of  this  outline  finds  its  fullest  verification.  {31.  C.  Peters.)  Friendly 
converse : — This  proverb  is  described  by  Edward  Irving  as  forcibly  expressing  the 
effect  of  religious  converse  and  communion  by  a  beautiful  figure,  which  also  not 
inaptly  represents  the  way  in  which  the  effect  is  produced.  Iron  sharpeneth  iron 
by  removing  the  rust  which  has  been  contracted  from  their  lying  apart ;  so  inter- 
course between  friend  and  friend  rubs  down  the  prejudices  which  they  have 
contracted  in  their  separate  state.  And  as  the  iron,  having  removed  the  rust 
which  entered  into  the  good  stuff  of  the  blade,  and  hindered  its  employment  for 
husbandry  or  war,  straightway  applies  itself  to  the  metallic  substance,  brings  it  to 
a  polish  and  to  an  edge,  shows  its  proper  temper,  and  fits  it  for  its  proper  use,  so 
the  intercourse  of  friends  having  removed  the  prejudices  which  were  foreign  to  the 
nature  and  good  conditions  of  each,  proceeds,  in  the  next  place,  to  bring  out  the 
slumbering  spirit  which  lay  hid,  to  kindle  each  other  into  brightness,  and  prepare 
each  other  for  action.  (Francis  Jacox.)  The  sharpening  influence  of  religious 
intercourse : — We  are  all  well  acquainted  with  the  every-day  fact  that  "  iron 
sharpeneth  iron  "  ;  we  have  all  seen  steel  used  to  sharpen  a  blade,  to  give  it 
an  edge,  and  make  it  fit  to  do  its  work.  We  are  also  well  aware  that  the 
blade,  when  sharpened,  may  be  used  for  a  good  purpose,  or  abused  for  a  bad 
one.  The  axe  may  be  used  to  fell  the  timber  of  the  temple,  or  to  break  down 
all  the  carved  work  thereof.  The  steel  or  the  whetstone  to  sharpen,  fits  the  blade 
for  doing  good  or  doing  evil,  according  to  circumstances.  The  act  of  sharpening 
increases  its  power,  whether  for  good  or  evil ;  and  so  is  it  with  regard  to  a  man's 
friends — they  stir  him  up,  they  excite  him,  but  it  is  to  good  or  to  evil,  according  as 
they  themselves  are  good  or  evil.  We  must  take  care  who  our  friends  are,  lest  we 
receive  mischief  ;  take  care  what  kind  of  friends  we  are,  lest  we  impart  it.  Those 
who  countenance  what  is  wrong  are  answerable  for  much  of  the  evil  their 
countenance  leads  to.  For  instance,  all  persons  should  take  great  care  to  what 
they  are  led  by  the  countenance  and  encouragement  of  friends  on  occasions  of 
public  festivity  or  show.  Many  on  such  occasions  have  their  countenances 
sharpened  as  they  are  not  on  other  days.  They  are  encouraged  to  say,  to  do, 
to  boast,  to  indulge,  as  they  never  would  do,  and  never  do,  when  sitting  at  home 
in  their  own  houses.  It  is  a  pleasing  thought,  however,  that  the  man  whose  heart 
is  right  with  God  "sharpeneth"  for  good  "the  countenance  of  his  friend." 
There  is  nothing  more  false  upon  true  religion  than  to  imagine  that  it  stunts  our 
minds,  that  its  design  is  to  withdraw  them  from  the  genial  warmth  of  social  life, 
where  it  may  blossom — where,  like  a  healthy  plant,  it  may  open  and  expand,  and 
place  them  alone,  to  become  proud  and  selfish.  True  religion,  like  every  other 
good  sentiment,  requires  society  to  bring  it  to  perfection.  Now,  if  there  be  some- 
thing so  valuable  in  the  intercourse  of  true  Christians,  they  should  seek  it  in  the 
spirit  best  calculated  to  profit  by  such  communion.  They  should  seek  it  in 
Christian  friendship.  They  should  constantly  be  on  the  look-out  for  those  who 
are  willing  to  drink  deep  with  them  at  the  fountain  of  Divine  truth.  But  our 
expectations  from  this  truth  are  not  to  be  limited  to  the  exercise  of  private 
friendship.  We  cannot  all  be  bound  together  by  such  ties,  desirable  as  they  are  ; 
but  then,  again,  all  real  Christians  are  real  friends.  They  may  never  have  spoken; 
they  may  want  introduction  one  to  another ;  distance  of  situation  may  keep  them 
apart ;  circumstances  may  keep  them  unacquainted  though  near  in  point  of 
neighbourhood ;  yet  have  they,  being  all  partakers  of  the  same  Spirit,  that  which 


CHAP,  xxvn.]  PROVERBS.  639 

is  calculated,  under  altered  circumstances,  to  make  and  keep  them  friends.  AH 
Christians,  I  repeat,  are  friends ;  and,  therefore,  we  may  expect  many  circum- 
stances, short  of  strict  and  intimate  friendship,  calculated  to  bring  into  play  the 
principle  upon  which  I  have  been  dwelling.  I  shall  mention  two  circumstances 
under  which  this  may  happen.  1.  I  would  recommend  all  persons  to  seek  this 
means  of  improvement  in  their  families.  With  his  family  is  every  Christian 
bound  to  share,  and  by  sharing  to  increase,  his  devout  affections.  There  are 
innumerable  degrees  of  life  among  the  members  of  our  Lord :  there  are  all  the 
stages  from  simple  consecration  to  Him,  in  baptism  and  profession,  to  the  fullest 
union.  To  be  helpers  of  each  other's  faith  throughout  these  several  stages— to 
become  by  mutual  communication  joint  partakers  of  one  common  Spirit — is  one  of 
the  most  effectual  means  of  spiritual  growth.  "  He  that  watereth  may  hope  to  be 
watered  also  himseK."  2.  But  this  is  not  all :  he  is  in  the  way  to  have  his  own 
"countenance  sharpened,"  his  own  motives  quickened,  his  own  soul  stirred  up  to 
watchfulness,  love,  zeal,  diligence,  and  an  endeavour  at  being  consistent.  If  we 
know  ourselves,  we  know  that  we  want  every  kind  of  motive,  every  sort  of  help. 
Then  let  every  Christian  try  the  power  of  meeting  each  morning  and  evening  to 
pray  together  with  his  family.  But,  if  so,  how  ^uch  more  should  we  thank  God 
for  those  further  helps  which  He  affords  to  us  in  the  public  assemblies  of  the 
congregation.  Here  especially  the  fellowship  of  kindred  minds  is  like  to  that 
above.  If  we  came  to  His  house  expecting  much,  imploring  much,  desiring  much, 
we  should  gain  much.  Our  God  would  enrich  us,  and  that  partly  through  the 
channel  of  our  "fellowship  one  with  another."     (J.  H.  A.  Walsh,  M.A.) 

Yer.  18.  So  he  that  waiteth  on  his  master  shall  be  honoured. — The  way  to 

honour : — If  a  man  in  Palestine  carefully  watched  his  fig-tree,  and  kept  it  in 
proper  condition,  he  was  sure  to  be  abundantly  rewarded  in  due  season.  So  good 
servants  obtain  honour  as  the  fruit  of  diligent  service.  I.  The  relation  which 
SUBSISTS  BETWEEN  ODKSELVES  AND  ouB  LoED — He  IS  OUR  MASTER.  You  are  men, 
and  naturally  moved  by  all  which  moves  other  men,  but  still  the  master  motive 
power  with  you  who  are  Christians  is  the  supremacy  of  Christ.  He  has  a  right  to 
be  our  Master  from  the  very  dignity  of  His  character.  We  yield  Him  service 
because  of  His  love  to  us.  And  our  position  of  servants  is  an  irreversible  one. 
II.  There  is  a  conduct  consistent  with  being  servants  of  Jesus.  A  servant 
should — 1.  Own  himself  to  be  his  Master's.  2.  Have  no  time  at  his  own  dis- 
posal. 3.  Be  always  about  his  Master's  business.  As  servants  it  is  our  duty  to 
learn  our  Master's  will,  and  to  do  it  when  we  know  it.  It  is  ours  also  to  obey  the 
Master  willingly,  and  for  love  of  His  person.  The  waiting  upon  the  Master  is  to 
be  performed  personally  by  the  servant.  It  is  ours,  in  waiting,  to  abide  near  to 
Christ,  in.  The  reward  which  surely  comes  to  faithful  servants.  He  finds 
his  honour  in  waiting  upon  his  Master.  Every  faithful  servant  of  Christ  is 
honoured  in  his  Master's  honour.  He  is  honoured  with  his  Master's  approval. 
He  is  honoured  by  having  more  given  him  to  do.  He  is  honoured  in  the  eyes  of 
his  fellow-servants.  But  the  chief  honour  of  the  faithful  servant  comes  from  the 
blessed  Trinity.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  reicard  of  God^s  servants  : — He  who 
tends  the  fig-tree  has  figs  for  his  pains,  and  he  who  waits  on  a  good  master  has 
honour  as  his  reward.  Truly  the  Lord  Jesus  is  the  very  best  of  masters,  and  it  is 
an  honour  to  be  allowed  to  do  the  least  act  for  His  sake.  To  serve  some  lords  is  to 
watch  over  a  crab-tree  and  eat  the  crabs  as  one's  wages ;  but  to  serve  my  Lord 
Jesus  is  to  keep  a  fig-tree  of  the  sweetest  figs.  His  service  is  in  itself  delight ; 
continuance  in  it  is  promotion ;  success  in  it  is  blessedness  below ;  and  the  reward 
for  it  is  glory  above.  Our  greatest  honours  will  be  gathered  in  that  season  when 
the  figs  will  be  ripe,  even  in  the  next  world.  Angels  who  are  now  our  servitors  will 
bear  us  home  when  our  day's  work  is  done.  Heaven,  where  Jesus  is,  will  be  our 
honourable  mansion,  eternal  bliss  our  honourable  portion,  and  the  Lord  Himself 
our  honourable  companion.  (Hid.)  An  honoured  servant : — Melancthon's  friends 
were  astonished  at  his  hberality,  and  wondered  how,  with  his  small  means,  he 
could  afford  to  give  so  much  in  charity.  It  was  principally  owing  to  the  good 
management  of  a  faithful  servant  named  John.  The  whole  duty  of  providing  for 
the  family  was  entrusted  to  this  domestic,  whose  care  and  prudence  amply  justified 
the  confidence  reposed  in  him.  He  avoided  all  needless  expenditure,  and  watched 
with  a  jealous  eye  his  master's  property.  He  was  also  the  first  instructor  of  the 
children  during  their  infancy.  John  grew  old  in  his  master's  service,  and  expired 
in  his  house,  regretted  by  all.    Daring  a  service  of  thirty-four  years  how  much 


640  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xivn. 

usefulness  was  effected  by  honest  John,  and  by  his  master,  through  his  instru- 
mentality! Melancthon  invited  the  students  of  the  university  to  attend  the 
funeral  of  his  faithful  servant ;  delivered  an  oration  over  his  grave ;  and  composed 
a  Latin  epitaph  for  his  tombstone. 

Ver.  19.  As  in  water  face  answereth  to  face,  bo  the  heart  of  man  to  man. — 
Mirror  of  human  nature  : — As  a  man  looking  into  the  water  (used  anciently  as  a 
mirror)  sees  an  exact  transcript  of  his  own  countenance,  so  every  heart  has,  by 
nature,  precisely  the  same  moral  character  with  every  other  unsanctified  heart. 
Every  child  of  Adam,  till  renewed  by  Divine  grace,  has,  in  view  of  Omnipotence 
and  Omniscience,  the  same  moral  aspect.  Notice  some  of  the  circumstances  which 
have  contributed  to  make  men  differ  in  their  conduct  who  have  by  nature  the  same 
moral  character.  Grace  has  made  a  wide  difference  in  men  who  were  by  nature 
alike.  Difference  in  instinctive  passions  and  affections  makes  men  differ  in  their 
conduct.  Some  have  not  the  talents  for  doing  mischief  that  others  have.  Others 
have  not  the  opportunities.  One  man  may  achieve  less  mischief  than  another 
because  more  restrained.  1.  That  all  men  have  naturally  the  same  moral 
character  might  be  inferred  from  the  similarity  of  origin,  aspect,  and  general 
habits  that  belong  to  all  ages  and  all  nations  of  men.  2.  We  can  hardly  fix  our 
eye  on  any  individual  or  community  of  antiquity  but  we  can  find  its  exact  resem- 
blance in  some  individual  or  community  with  whose  character  we  are  familiar.  Of 
this  take  as  Scriptural  examples  the  family  of  Adam  and  of  Jacob  ;  the  characters 
of  Balaam,  and  of  Shimei,  and  of  Joab,  and  of  Jezebel.  3.  There  have  prevailed 
in  all  ages  and  nations  the  same  crimes,  calling  for  the  restraining  influence  of  the 
same  laws.  Men  have  been  at  all  times  inclined  to  wrong  their  fellow-men  of  their 
property.  The  descriptions  of  depravity  which  applied  to  Israel,  Babylon,  Egypt, 
Syria,  Sidon,  and  even  Edom,  apply  with  equal  propriety  to  the  men  of  this  land. 
4.  Argue  from  the  fact  that  the  Bible  has  never  become  obsolete.  It  describes  men 
of  other  periods,  and  the  description  suits  the  present  generation.  Remarks  :  (1)  We 
see  one  source  of  those  corruptions  of  doctrine  with  which  the  world  is  filled. 
Men  have  determined  that  human  nature  has  grown  better.  Having  settled  this 
point,  they  infer  that  the  same  Bible  will  not  suit  the  different  ages  and  nations. 

(2)  This  subject  justifies  a  kind  of  preaching  as  plain  and  pointed  as  anything 
found  in  the  law  of  God,  or  in  the  communications  of  Christ  and  His  apostles. 

(3)  The  subject  furnishes  ungodly  men  with  the  means  of  knowing  their  own 
characters.  (4)  We  may  argue,  from  this  subject,  that  men  must  all  pass  the 
same  second  birth  to  fit  them  for  the  kingdom  of  God.  (5)  We  see  v,-hy  there  need 
be  but  one  place  of  destiny  in  the  coming  world  for  all  the  unregenerate.  The 
little  shades  of  difference  that  now  appear  in  the  ungodly  are  too  insignificant  to 
mark  them  out  for  distinct  worlds.  {D.  A.  Clark.)  They  who  are  our  associates 
in  this  world  will  most  probably  be  our  associates  in  the  next : — Bishop  Patrick 
explains  this  proverb  thus  :  "A  man  may  see  himself,  while  he  looks  upon  other 
men,  as  well  as  know  other  men,  by  considering  his  own  inclinations."  Bishop 
Hall  says  :  "  He  that  looks  into  his  friend's  heart  sees  there  his  own."  The  most 
mysterious  thing  in  God's  work  is  the  heart  of  man.  The  Eden  of  the  human 
heart  has  been  transformed  into  a  wilderness  of  vile  passions.  Some  restrain 
themselves  more  than  others,  and  therefore  there  are  different  degrees  of  depravity 
in  the  world ;  and  perhaps,  by  looking  around  us,  we  may  find  what  rank  we 
properly  belong  to,  and  what  chance  we  have  of  escaping  the  wrath  of  God. 
1.  Let  us  ask  ourselves  who  are  our  intimate  friends  and  associates?  2.  Let  us 
compare  ourselves  with  the  dying.     {John  Collinson.) 

Ver.  21.  So  is  a  man  to  his  praise. — The  influence  of  applause : — The  various 
passions  implanted  in  human  nature  are  necessary  to  animate  the  soul  in  the 
service  of  God  and  our  generation.  The  poet  sung,  "  Love  of  fame,  the  universal 
passion."  The  wise  man  beheld  this  principle  in  human  nature  ;  he  saw  the  effect 
of  praise  upon  mankind.  The  text  is  a  rule,  grounded  upon  the  observable  effect 
of  it  upon  man ;  a  refined  rule  for  trial  of  our  true  moral  character  or  religious 
state.  It  is,  literally,  "  A  fining-pot  for  silver  and  a  furnace  for  gold  ;  and  a  man 
to  the  mouth  of  his  praise."  The  conduct  of  men,  in  regard  to  their  praise,  may 
be  as  sure  a  trial  of  their  moral  and  religious  character  as  the  fining-pot  is  of 
silver  and  the  furnace  of  gold.  By  praise  we  should  understand,  not  the  plaudit 
of  individuals  or  of  the  multitude,  spoken  in  a  tone  of  sarcastic  irony ;  nor  that 
given  by  mistake,  as  when  another's  conduct  is  innocently  ascribed  to  us,  with  the 


OHAP.  xxTii.]  PROVERBS.  641 

praise  of  his  commendable  behaviour.  By  a  man's  praise  we  understand  real, 
unfeigned  praise,  bestowed  for  actions  or  conduct  commendable  in  the  sight  of 
men,  useful  to  the  community.  Such  praise  answers  valuable  purposes.  To 
observe  how  a  man  is  to  his  praise  is  a  matter  of  serious  importance  to  every  soul 
of  man.  His  praise  refines  one  man,  renders  him  thankful  to  God  for  a  good  name 
among  men.  Praise  to  a  righteous  soul  renders  it  seriously  inquisitive,  whether  its 
conduct  really  deserves  praise — the  praise  not  of  men,  but  of  God  also.  Praise 
renders  the  righteous  respectful  to  those  who  bestow  it ;  and  they  become  more 
diligent  to  improve  in  well-doing.  Praise  to  a  righteous  man  is  a  fiery  trial,  where 
he  needs  humility  and  sober  thoughts.  Praise  bestowed  on  the  ungodly  man 
renders  him  vain,  self-confident,  and  self-conceited.  He  becomes  haughty  and 
insolent.  Jealous  of  his  honour,  he  is  impatient  to  hear  another  praised.  Persons 
of  this  chai-iicter  become  careless — regardless  of  the  praise  of  God.  Tlie  reason  of 
the  different  effects  of  praise  is  the  different  state  in  the  inner  man  of  the  heart. 
The  reason  of  the  different  effects  of  the  fining-pot  and  furnace  upon  metals  is  the 
different  nature  and  quality  of  the  metals  cast  into  them.  The  natural  improve- 
ment of  this  subject  is  to  determine  our  moral  and  religious  character  by  the  effect 
which  the  praise  of  men  has  upon  us.  (John  Devotion,  M.A.)  Popularity  the 
most  trying  test  of  character  : — Men,  in  ancient  times  as  well  as  in  modern,  submit 
precious  metals,  such  as  silver  and  gold,  to  the  test  of  the  fire.  Fire  revealed  their 
impurity,  and  made  them  appear  in  their  true  character.  What  fire  is  to  these 
metals,  Solomon  says,  popularity  or  applause  is  to  man's  character — it  tests  him. 
I.  Popularity  reveals  the  vanity  of  the  proud  man.  How  did  Absolom  appear  in 
the  blaze  of  popularity?  (2  Sam.  xxv.  22).  How  did  Herod  appear?  Amidst  the 
shouts  of  his  flatterers  he  assumed  to  be  a  god.  II.  Popularity  reveals  the 
HUMILITY  OF  A  TRUE  MAN.  A  ti'ue  man  shrinks  from  popular  applause,  and  feels 
humbled  amidst  its  shouts.  Dr.  Payson,  a  careful  self-observer,  mentions  among 
his  trials  "well-meant  but  injudicious  commendations."  "Every  one  here,"  he 
writes  to  his  mother,  "  whether  friends  or  enemies,  are  conspiring  to  ruin  me. 
Satan  and  my  own  heart,  of  course,  will  lend  a  hand,  and  if  you  join  too,  I  fear 
all  the  cold  water  which  Christ  can  throw  upon  my  pride  will  not  prevent  it  from 
breaking  out  in  a  destructive  flame.  As  certainly  as  anybody  flatters  and  caresses 
me,  my  Father  has  to  scourge  me  for  it,  and  an  unspeakable  mercy  it  is  that  He 
condescends  to  do  it."  Popularity  is  indeed  to  character  what  the  "  fining-pot  is 
for  silver  and  the  furnace  for  gold."  Few  things  in  life  show  us  the  stuff  of  which 
men  are  made  more  than  this.  Little  men  court  this  fire,  but  cannot  stand  it. 
{Homilist.) 

Yer.  23.  Be  tbou  diligent  to  know  the  state  of  thy  flocks,  and  look  well  to  thy 
herds. — Kindness  to  animals  : — We  live  in  an  age  when  great  regard  is  paid  to  the 
comfort  and  well-being  of  every  class  of  the  community,  and  when  efforts  are  made 
to  promote  the  general  happiness.  When  so  much  is  being  done  to  add  to  the 
happiness  of  the  human  family  we  should  not  be  forgetful  of  the  dumb  animals, 
to  which,  for  our  comfort,  we  are  so  largely  indebted.  It  is  always  a  good  sign  of 
a  man  when  he  takes  a  kindly  interest  in  the  brutes.  A  man  who  can  roughly 
treat  a  horse  or  a  dog  can  never  be  one  in  whom  his  own  family  find  much  to  love. 
The  days  are  gone  of  cruel  and  disgusting  sports,  in  which  men  found  their  pleasure 
in  watching  the  sufferings  of  the  lower  creatures.  But  a  good  deal  of  pain  is  still 
caused  through  mere  thoughtlessness.  See  Bible  notices  of  animals.  1.  The  fact 
of  their  creation  by  God.  They  were  brought  upon  the  earth  before  man  was,  and 
have,  by  priority,  a  right  to  such  comforts  as  it  affords.  2.  Their  being  named  by 
Adam.  "This  indicated  his  lordship  over  them,  and  the  interest  God  would  have 
hun  take  in  them.  3.  When  man  had  sinned,  by  the  slaughter  of  innocent  animals 
he  was  impressively  taught,  and  continually  reminded  of,  the  only  way  of  salva- 
tion. 4.  In  the  time  of  the  Flood  the  animals  were  carefully  preserved.  5.  In  the 
Mosaic  economy  laws  were  enacted  for  the  protection  and  well-being  of  the 
creatures.  Many  make  the  mistake  of  thinking  that  animals  must  be  frightened 
into  obedience.  A  kind  and  gentle  treatment,  as  it  is  the  most  humane,  is  also  the 
most  successful.  They  are  fond  of  being  praised  and  encouraged  :  a  kind  word 
or  affectionate  stroke  makes  them  wonderfully  happy,  and  even  the  expression 
of  countenance  they  learn  to  understand.  Kemember  it  is  said  of  God,  "  With 
the  merciful  man  Thou  wilt  show  Thyself  merciful."  His  eye  is  upon  us,  and  He 
will  call  us  to  account  for  every  act  of  cruelty  done  to  the  creatures  He  has  made. 
Strive,  then,  to  be  like  Him  in  kindness  and  in  gentleness.    (J.  Thain  Davidson ,  D.D.) 

42 


642  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvm. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

Ver.  1.  The  wicked  flee  when  no  man  pursueth :  tout  the  righteous  are  bold  as 
a  lion. — Christian  boldness : — In  all  ages  courage  has  been  regarded  as  a  mark  of 
honour  and  magnanimity,  and  cowardice  has  been  considered  a  proof  of  pusillanimity 
and  baseness.  There  is  something  base  in  cowardice.  There  is  something  noble 
in  courage.  A  name  descriptive  of  a  virtue  ought  never  to  be  applied  to  what  is 
equivocal  or  culpable.  Yet  such  is  the  native  dignity  of  courage,  such  the  value  it 
ever  commands,  that  in  its  most  suspicious  forms  it  possesses  a  charm  which  is 
almost  irresistible.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  for  Christian  men  to  judge  of 
timidity  as  the  world  judges.  There  is  much  that  the  world  accounts  cowardly 
which  we  regard  as  noble  and  magnanimous.  The  real  coward  is  the  slave  of  his 
fear,  and  mankind  are  right  in  branding  cowardice  as  vile  and  contemptible.  The 
brave  man  is  tranquil,  firm,  concentrated.  He  is  the  real  master  of  what  belongs 
to  him,  because  he  is  master  of  himself.  The  text  charges  cowardice  upon  sin, 
and  claims  for  holiness  the  honours  of  courage.  There  is  nothing  more  wonderful  in 
man  than  the  moral  faculty  which  we  call  conscience.  But  it  may  be  injured  and 
weakened.  There  is  even  the  possibility  that  it  may  be  destroyed.  Ajnong  the 
instruments  of  torture  with  which  conscience  afflicts  the  soul  of  the  sinner  is  fear. 
Sin  is  immediately  followed  by  fear — by  the  fear  of  detection,  of  exposure,  of  punish- 
ment. Under  a  sense  of  sin  the  bravest  man  becomes  a  coward.  Sin  is  more 
especially  followed  by  a  fear  at  the  Divine  displeasure.  Sin  is  a  thing  of  darkness. 
It  shuns  the  light.  When  a  man  has  sinned,  his  chief  care  is,  that  his  sin  should 
not  be  known  to  others.  This  becomes  a  supreme  fear.  Even  when  the  sinner  has 
no  reason  to  fear  man  at  all,  he  is  not  free  from  feelings  of  terror.  Conscience 
allows  them  no  peace.  They  are  restless,  unsettled,  miserable.  Changing  the 
picture,  the  text  presents  the  righteous  as  "  bold  as  a  lion."  The  courage  of  the 
lion,  though  by  no  means  a  certain  thing,  has  passed  into  a  proverb,  and  the 
highest  degree  of  intrepidity  is  implied  by  this  comparison.  We  must  not  forget 
to  make  the  distinction  between  physical  and  moral  timidity.  There  is  a  timidity 
which  is  strictly  a  bodily  infirmity.  Where  there  is  uprightness  of  conduct  there 
is  no  place  for  fear.  He  who  has  done  nothing  to  be  ashamed  of  cannot  dread 
detection  and  exposure.  He  who  acts  from  principle,  who  does  what  he  does  in 
the  fear  of  God,  will  not  be  afraid  of  the  consequences  of  his  actions,  because  he  is 
well  assured  that  all  those  consequences  are  in  the  hands  of  the  great  Disposer.  In 
the  discharge  of  duty  "the  righteous  are  bold  as  a  lion."  Theirs  is  not  presump- 
tion, for  they  are  trusting  on  Him  who  is  infinite.  It  is  not  desperation,  for  they 
can  rely  on  innumerable  promises.  They  present  a  bold  front  to  the  enemy ;  they 
feel  their  superiority.  But  before  Him  with  whom  they  have  to  do,  their  Father  in 
heaven,  there  is  nought  of  self-confidence.  Trusting  in  God,  they  cannot  fail. 
They  may  bid  farewell  to  doubt  and  insecurity.  Their  foundation  is  a  rock  ;  their 
hope  is  sure  and  steadfast.  (J.  G.  Bowling,  M. A.)  Sources  of  courage  :— The 
two  ingredients  that  go  into  the  composition  of  a  good  soldier  are  courage  and  good 
conduct.  Here  cowardice  and  courage  are  resolved  into  their  first  principles.  All 
mankind  are  distinguished,  by  their  proper  characters,  into  two  sorts — wicked  and 
righteous.  The  wicked  are  of  such  base  and  timorous  spirits  that  they  are  ready 
to  run  away  from  the  least  shadow  of  danger ;  being  haunted  with  an  ill-boding 
mind,  they  flee  before  the  spectres  of  their  own  fancies.  Every  wicked  man  is  not 
actually  a  coward,  for  that  contradicts  experience.  There  is  a  sort  of  valour  which 
naturally  springs  out  of  the  very  temper  of  men's  bodies,  which  is  nothing  else  but 
a  certain  impetus,  or  brisk  fermentation  of  the  blood  and  spirits,  and  this  is  common 
to  bad  men  as  with  good.  By  the  term  "  righteous  "  the  Scripture  is  wont  to  express 
all  good  men,  because  all  instances  of  goodness  are  acts  of  righteousness,  either  to 
God,  or  to  ourselves,  or  to  our  neighbours.  Of  this  sort  of  men  the  proper  character 
is  "  bold  as  a  lion."  At  least  their  righteousness  tends  to  make  them  so.  Illustrate 
this  proposition:  that  wickedness  naturally  tends  to  dishearten  and  cowardize 
men,  but  righteousness  and  goodness  to  encourage  and  embolden  them.  The 
things  which  naturally  contribute  to  make  men  courageous.  1.  That  they  be 
free,  and  within  their  own  command.  2.  That  they  be  well  hardened  to  endure 
difficulties  and  inconveniences.  3.  That  they  be  well  satisfied  in  the  nature  of 
their  actions  and  undertakings.  4.  That  they  have  a  hopeful  prospect  of  being 
well  secondt  d.  5.  That  they  have  a  probable  security  of  good  success.  6.  That 
ihey  be  Idne  up  with  the  expectation  of  a  glorious  reward.     All  these  causes  of 


CHAP,  xsvin.]  PROVEEBS.  643 

courage  are  to  be  found  in  righteousness,  and  their  direct  contraries  in  a  sinful  and 
wicked  course  of  life.  {John  Scott.)  Moral  cowardice  : — This  is  a  fact  that  may 
be  accounted  for  on  moral  grounds.     Conscience  is  the  tormentor  of  the  bad  man. 

I.  Then  the  finest  faculties  of  men  may  become  terrible  scourges,  2.  Then  no 
dependence  is  to  be  placed  on  the  wicked  in  the  time  of  danger.  3.  Then  the 
wicked  are  always  making  fools  of  themselves.  4.  Then  the  wicked  cannot  bear 
the  judgment  of  man  ;  how  can  they  endure  the  vengeance  of  God  ?  5.  Then  man 
may  come  to  be  regarded  as  the  enemy  of  man.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  differ- 
ence between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  in  respect  of  courage  and  confidence  : 

Scarcely  is  there  anything  more  consistent  and  regular  in  the  course  of  natural 
productions  than  that  fear  and  remorse  are  the  offspring  of  guilt,  and  religious 
courage  and  undauntedness  the  attendants  of  integrity.  The  most  striking  instance 
may  be  found  in  the  behaviour  of  our  primitive  parents.  I.  Consider  this  case 
WITH  RESPECT  TO  THE  WICKED.  1.  One  rcasou  why  they  are  so  liable  to  be  alarmed 
and  put  into  disorder  is  shame.  Those  who  do  evil  wish  to  conceal  their  doings. 
Darkness  is  not  only  the  principle  from  which  evil  deeds  flow,  but  the  proper  region 
and  retirement  where  they  strive  for  ever  to  conceal  them.  2.  Another  cause  is 
fear.  That  fear  gives  wings  to  the  transgressor  is  observed  even  to  a  proverb. 
They  who  sin  can  have  no  real  peace  or  satisfaction  of  mind.  Fear  naturally  arises 
from  the  apprehension  of  present  or  future  ill.  Some  indeed  there  are  who  have 
so  effectually  dosed  and  qualified  their  consciences  as  to  pass  over  a  crime  with  as 
much  indifference  as  they  before  committed  it.  But  there  is  little  tranquillity  within, 
though  outwardly  they  seem  so  airy  and  serene.  11.  How  the  righteous  man 
ACQUITS  himself.  The  upright  man  wants  no  refuge :  as  he  is  free  from  guile  and 
deceit,  so  he  is  frank  and  open  in  his  whole  conversation.  His  integrity  is  dearer 
to  him  than  the  most  pompous  acquisitions,  and  the  security  of  his  soul  than  the 
gain  of  the  universe.  Through  the  perverse  opposition  of  a  censorious  and  malig- 
nant world,  the  most  circumspect  cannot  always  escape  despiteful  usage.  But, 
confident  in  God,  the  good  man  maintains  his  ground,  stands  upon  his  defence,  and 
is  no  more  to  be  stormed  by  assault  than  perverted  by  interest.  Innocence  is  the 
best  armour  he  can  put  on.  Since  the  difference  appears  so  considerable  and 
important,  it  cannot  be  a  matter  of  doubt  to  any  one  that  calls  himself  rational  to 
which  side  his  choice  ought  to  be  determined.  (James  Roe,  M.A.)  Frights  and 
securities : — 1.  What  continual  frights  those  are  subject  to  that  go  on  in  wicked 
ways !  Guilt  in  the  conscience  makes  men  a  terror  to  themselves,  so  that  they  are 
ready  to  flee  when  no  man  pursueth  ;  like  one  that  absconds  for  debt,  who  thinks 
every  one  he  meets  a  bailiff.  Though  they  pretend  to  be  easy,  there  are  secret 
fears  which  haunt  them  wherever  they  go,  so  that  they  fear  where  no  present  or 
imminent  danger  is.  Those  that  have  made  God  their  enemy,  and  know  it,  cannot 
but  see  the  whole  creation  at  war  with  them,  and  therefore  can  have  no  true  enjoy- 
ment of  themselves,  no  confidence,  no  courage,  but  a  fearful  looking  for  of  judg- 
ment. Sin  makes  men  cowards.  2.  What  a  holy  security  and  serenity  of  mind 
those  enjoy  who  keep  conscience  void  of  offence,  and  so  keep  themselves  in  the  love 
of  God.  In  the  greatest  dangers  the  righteous  have  a  God  of  almighty  power  to 
trust  to.  Whatever  difficulties  they  meet  with  in  the  way  of  their  duty,  they  are 
not  daunted  by  them.  {Matthew  Henry.)  Lion-like  boldness  of  the  righteous  : — 
The  righteous  are  those  who  do  right.  Saxon  of  righteous  is  "  right  wise."  Before 
man  had  fallen  the  righteous  were  those  who  were  conformed,  in  all  respects,  to 
the  known  will  of  God.  Now,  as  fallen  creatures,  none  can  claim  to  be  righteous, 
according  to  the  strict  requirements  of  the  law.  Some,  however,  may  be  spoken  of, 
in  a  comparative  sense,  as  righteous.  The  eleventh  article  says,  "  We  are  accounted 
righteous  before  God,  only  for  the  merit  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  by 
iaith."  A  certain  quality  is  ascribed  to  such  persons  :  they  are  "  bold  as  a  lion." 
This  is  a  proverbial  expression  from  ancient  times.  I.  Boldness  is  indispensable 
AT  THE  VERY  BEGINNING  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  COURSE.  Does  it  require  no  boldness  to 
obey  the  gospel  call  ?  Let  those  answer  who  have  gone  through  with  the  painful 
struggle  which   it  costs   before   the   mind   can   be   brought  to   a   decided  stand. 

II.  Boldness  is  required  in  the  discharge  of  the  duties  which  must  be  met  day 
BY  day.  What  bright  examples  of  courage  have  been  placed  before  us  in  the  lives 
of  the  saints  of  God — Moses,  Caleb  and  Joshua,  David,  Elijah,  &c. ;  and  in  the 
history  of  the  martyrs  and  confessors  of  the  Church — e.g.,  Athanasius,  Eidley,  and 
Latimer.  Those  brave  souls  are  now  acting  the  same  noble  part  who,  in  these  days 
of  blasphemy  and  rebuke,  are  not  afraid  to  show  favour  to  God's  children  who 
may  be  under  a  cloud  of  reproach  and  trodden  underfoot  by  the  mighty.     In  more 


C44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ixvin. 

ordinary  matters,  the  same  boldness  is  indispensable.  HI  The  boldness  of  thh 
RIGHTEOUS  IS  MANIFESTED  AT  THE  APPEOACH  OF  DEATH.  There  is  Something  in 
human  nature  which  instinctively  shrinks  back  at  the  thought  of  dissolution. 
But  when  the  righteous  man  actually  draws  near  the  border-line,  the  fear  of  death 
is  gone.  Then  let  us  all  cultivate  the  decision,  the  boldness,  and  the  endurance, 
which  our  profession  demands.  {John  N.  Norto7i.)  Conscience  : — Pursuit  and 
flight  are  in  nature  correlatives,  and  constitute  an  inseparable  pair.  A  swift  foot 
does  not  avail  the  man  who  is  fleeing  from  himself.  When  they  escape  from  man, 
God  is  the  pursuer  of  the  guilty.  A  reflector  fixed  in  the  human  constitution 
points  ever  to  its  author,  as  the  magnet  points  to  its  pole,  whatever  the  windings 
of  life  may  be.  In  effect,  God  is  present  in  every  human  breast.  Conscience 
within  a  man  is  one  extremity  of  an  electric  wire  whose  other  extremity  is  fastened 
to  the  judgment-seat.  This  apparatus  brings  the  Judge  and  the  criminal  terribly 
near  to  each  other.  Conscience  is  in  many  respects  the  most  wonderful  element  in 
the  constitution  of  man.  It  is  the  point  of  closest  contact  and  most  intimate  com- 
munion between  us  and  the  Father  of  our  spirits.  Thereby  chiefly  God  apprehends 
us,  thereby  chiefly  we  apprehend  God.  Who  shall  settle  the  controversy  between 
an  unclean  conscience  and  a  just  God  ?  The  question  points,  as  John  did,  to  the 
Lamb  of  God  who  taketh  sin  away.  There  is  one  Mediator  between  God  and  man. 
Terrors  are  sent  as  messages  of  mercy  to  arouse  loiterers,  and  compel  them  to  flee. 
It  is  better  to  be  roughly  awakened  to  safety  than  to  perish  asleep.    (TV.  Arnot,  D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  Better  is  the  poor  that  walketh  in  his  uprightness,  than  he  that  ia 
perverse  in  his  ways,  though  he  be  rich. — Christianity,  the  health  of  a  people. — 
The  poor  man  who  walks  in  his  integrity,  must  be  supposed  to  possess  that 
practical  wisdom  so  much  spoken  of  in  this  book.  The  rich  man  who  is  perverse 
in  his  ways  is  destitute  of  this  wisdom.  The  presumed  difference  between  the  poor 
man  and  the  rich  is  in  the  possession  of  true  religious  principle.    I.  The  influence 

WHICH  TRUE  religion  EXERTS  IN  REFERENCE  TO  THE  DUTIES  OF  LIFE.       There  haS  been 

a  tendency  to  speak  of  useful  knowledge  as  if  it  did  not  include  religious  know- 
ledge. Useful  knowledge  must  be  that  which  equips  man  for  immortality.  If  a 
man  is  imbued  with  the  fear  of  God,  he  has  a  principle  which  must  accompany 
him  into  all  the  intercourse  of  life,  and  exert  an  influence  over  each  portion  of  his 
conduct.  II.  The  influence  which  true  religion  exerts  in  reference  to  the 
TRIALS  OF  LIFE.  The  poor  cottager  finds  in  the  promises  of  Scripture  a  mighty 
counterpoise  to  all  the  troubles  by  which  he  is  oppressed.  Christianity  does  not 
diminish  labour  or  prevent  sorrow  or  death,  but  it  does  give  strength,  and  cheer, 
and  hope.  Eeligion  has  such  a  power  of  softening  what  is  rugged,  enlightening 
what  is  dark,  sustaining  under  the  heaviest  pressure,  and  encouraging  in  the  most 
perplexed  circumstances,  that  as  nothing  can  supply  its  place,  so  its  possession  more 
than  compensates  every  other  want.     (H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 

Ver.  8.  He  that  by  usury  and  unjust  gain  increaseth  his  substance,  he  shall 
gather  it  for  him  that  will  pity  the  poor. — Dishonesty. — A  matter-of-fact  English- 
man, writing  about  the  uselessness  of  abstract  preaching,  says  that,  during  ten 
years'  residence  in  a  country  parish,  he  became  well  acquainted  with  the  character- 
istic temptations,  failings,  tricks  and  vices,  and  crimes  of  the  people,  and  he 
longed  to  hear  something  from  the  pulpit  calculated  to  meet  the  emergencies  of  the 
case.  Ten  long  years  the  drowsy  pulpit  poured  forth  its  dull  platitudes ;  the 
clergyman  never  coming  down  from  the  clouds  long  enough  to  let  the  dishonest, 
the  cruel,  and  the  dissipated  understand  that  they  know  nothing  practically  con- 
cerning the  imitation  of  Christ  until  they  have  asked  themselves  how  He  would 
have  acted  if  He  had  vegetables  to  sell  or  horses  to  drive.  Wealth,  in  days  of 
undefiled  English,  meant  well-being,  and  is  now  used  to  describe  money — money 
more  than  all  beside ;  and  worth,  or  worthiness,  has  degenerated  into  a  term  to 
express  how  much  of  "  filthy  lucre  "  that  one  has  contrived  to  get  hold  of.  The 
cool  contempt  of  money  which  some  old  cynics  and  philosophers  expressed  was 
httle  more  than  affectation.  Had  they  been  lucky  enough  to  have  any,  their 
estimate  of  it  might  have  been  different.  A  man  of  wealth,  who  behaves  himself 
properly,  and  puts  on  no  airs,  is  as  much  to  be  respected  as  his  poorest  neighbours. 
Let  this  be  remembered,  however,  it  must  be  wealth  honestly  come  by.  When 
greed  of  gain  has  secured  a  lodgment  in  the  heart,  it  imperiously  demands  satisfac- 
tion. In  countries  where  civilisation  is  unknown  it  turns  freebooter,  and  leagues 
with  bands  of  kindred  spirits ;  while  in  Christian  lands  it  puts  on  more  respectable 


CHAP,  xxvin.]  PROVERBS.  645 

shapes,  not  so  shocking  to  the  casual  observer.  The  rude  robber  stops  his  victim  on 
the  highway,  and  holds  midnight  revels  on  the  spoil ;  and  the  cunning  accountant 
defrauds  his  creditors,  and  rides  in  his  carriage.  Does  a  just  God  see  much 
difference  between  them  ?  Christian  integrity  will,  in  the  end,  always  receive  its 
merited  reward.  Instead  of  worldly  maxims,  based  on  low  and  unworthy  principles, 
let  the  solemn  question  of  our  Lord  keep  us  from  evil  ways — "  What  shall  it  profit 
a  man,  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  world  and  lose  his  own  soul  ?  "  {John  N.  Norton.) 
Usury : — Usury  is  here  to  be  understood  of  every  description  of  oppressive, 
unrighteous,  and  rigorous  exaction.  The  providence  of  a  just  and  merciful  God  is 
evidently  here  referred  to.  That  providence  transfers  wealth  from  the  hand  of 
grasping  and  griping  selfishness  to  that  of  humanity  and  generous  kindness,  to  that 
of  the  man  who  "pities  the  poor."  Men  may  not  mark  the  Divine  hand  in 
occurrences  of  this  kind  ;  and  it  is  always  a  delicate  matter  for  us — one  to  which 
we  are  hardly  equal — to  interpret  providence  judicially.  But  there  are  cases  at 
times  in  which  the  transference  is  so  striking  that  it  would  be  impiety  not  to  see 
and  own  God  in  it.     {R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.) 

Ver.  9.  He  that  tumeth  away  Ills  ear  £rom  hearing  the  law,  even  his  prayer 
shall  be  an  abomination. — The  prayer  of  the  disobedient. — The  duty  of  rendering 
his  best  obedience  to  the  Divine  precepts  is  one  which  man  has  perpetually  been 
called  to  recognise,  under  both  dispensations.  Man,  as  a  fallen  being,  with 
alienated  affections,  debased  tendencies,  and  distorted  views,  required  precise 
directions  as  to  his  future  course.  The  Divine  claims  to  obedience  were  in  no  way 
relaxed ;  but  the  power  of  exhibiting  that  obedience,  and  even  an  adequate 
knowledge  of  its  requirements,  were  wanting.  If  we  are  dependent  creatures — 
unable  to  support  ourselves,  it  is  manifestly  the  part  of  wisdom  to  secure  the  con- 
tinual support  of  Him  who  has  promised  that  the  rays  of  His  favour  shall  evermore 
be  reflected  on  His  followers.  Be  careful  to  take  a  sufficiently  comprehensive  view 
of  the  demands  thus  made  upon  you.  You  are  not  to  imagine  that  by  scrupulous 
attention  to  one  department  of  Christian  duty  you  may  obtain  a  virtual  absolution 
for  the  neglect  of  another.  It  is  not  through  the  regular  use  of  words  of  supplica- 
tion or  thanksgiving  that  everything  can  be  accomplished.  In  what  spirit  have 
they  prostrated  themselves  before  the  Divine  footstool  ?  Has  it  been  with  the  sincere 
resolution  of  striving,  in  all  time  to  come,  to  do  the  will  of  their  Father  which  is  in 
heaven  ?  Has  it  been  with  the  determination  of  henceforward  applying  themselves 
with  aU  diligence  to  ascertain  and  observe  His  sacred  statutes  ?  The  reason  for 
not  receiving  gracious  answers  to  prayer  may  be  that  the  heart  has  never  been  sur- 
rendered to  God  ;  there  has  been  a  lamentable  and  utter  absence  of  true  faith  and 
love.  The  object  of  the  inspired  writer,  in  our  text,  is  to  set  forth,  in  the  most 
striking  point  of  view,  the  heinousness  and  dire  consequences  of  neglecting 
practically  to  honour  the  Divine  statutes.  There  are  those  who,  while  with  their 
lips  they  show  forth  God's  praise,  are  yet  statedly  and  deliberately  neglecting  some 
duty,  indulging  in  some  sin,  pursuing  some  course  of  which  the  "  end  is  death." 
If  you  would  profit  by  His  clemency,  you  must  strive  to  obey  His  laws.  If  you  would 
obtain  His  blessings,  you  must  zealously  and  perseveringly  devote  yourselves  to  His 
service.  (Hugh  B.  Moffat,  M.A.)  Conditions  of  communion  icith  God  : — 1.  It  is 
by  the  Word  of  God  and  prayer  that  our  communion  with  God  is  kept  up.  God 
speaks  to  us  by  His  law,  and  expects  we  should  hear  Him  and  heed  Him  ;  we 
speak  to  Him  by  prayer,  to  which  we  wait  for  an  answer  of  peace.  2.  If  God's 
Word  be  not  regarded  by  us,  our  prayers  shall  not  only  not  be  acceptable  to  God, 
but  they  shall  be  an  abomination  to  Him ;  not  only  our  sacrifices,  which  were 
ceremonial  appointments,  but  even  our  prayers,  which  are  moral  duties,  and  which, 
when  they  are  put  up  by  the  upright,  are  so  much  His  delight.  The  sinner  whose 
prayers  God  is  thus  angry  at  is  one  who  wilfully  and  obstinately  refuses  to  obey 
God's  commandments,  who  will  not  so  much  as  give  them  the  bearing,  but  causes 
his  ear  to  decline  the  law,  and  refuses  when  God  calls.  God  will  therefore  justly 
refuse  him  when  he  calls.     {Matthew  Henry.) 

Ver.  10.  Whoso  causeth  the  righteous  to  go  astray  in  an  evil  way,  he  shall  fall 
himself  into  his  own  pit. — Opposite  characters  and  opposite  destinies  : — I.  Here  are 
the  OPPOSITE  CHARACTEES— the  perverse  and  the  upright.  1.  Notice  the  perverse. 
Who  are  the  perverse  ?  "  Whoso  causeth  the  righteous  to  go  astray  in  an  evil  way." 
Two  things  are  observable  here.  (1)  A  sad  possibility  that  the- wrfiteons  should 
"  go  astray. "    This  possibility  is  implied  in  moral  responsihiltty,  .  ,^^?te  it  rmpQssibls^ 


646  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvin. 

for  the  righteous  to  go  astray,  they  would  be  mere  machines,  not  moral  agents ; 
there  would  be  no  virtue  in  their  obedience,  no  guilt  in  their  transgression.  Moral 
beings  are  like  planets,  bound  ever  to  roll  in  the  orbits  in  which  they  were  first 
placed,  and  move  with  the  same  speed  and  regularity  ;  they  can  bound  into  another, 
and  move  at  what  rate  they  please.  This  possibility  is  demonstrated  in  facts. 
Eighteous  angels  have  fallen.  Kighteous  men  have  fallen  (Adam,  Lot,  David, 
Peter).  This  possibility  is  assumed  in  the  appeals  of  Scripture.  (2)  An  infernal 
attempt.  The  attempt  is  to  "  cause  the  righteous  to  go  astray."  Wicked  men  are 
constantly  making  the  attempt  in  a  thousand  different  ways.  By  suggesting  doubts 
as  to  the  existence  of  God,  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  the  truth  of  the  Bible,  &c., 
&c. ;  and  by  insidious  but  potent  appeals  to  those  elements  of  depravity  which  linger 
to  a  greater  or  less  degree  in  the  souls  of  even  the  best  men  to  the  end  of  life. 
Society  abounds  with  tempters.  2.  The  upright.  The  upright  here  stand  in  con- 
trast to  those  who  tempt  the  righteous  to  go  astray.  Who  are  the  upright  ?  The 
men  of  incorruptible  truth,  inflexible  rectitude ;  the  men,  in  one  word,  who  "  do 
justice,  love  mercy,  and  walk  humbly  with  their  God."  Job  was  an  upright  man, 
one  that  feared  God  and  eschewed  evil.  II.  Opposite  destinies.  1.  The  destiny  of 
the  one  is  self -ruin.  "  Shall  fall  himself  into  his  own  pit."  2.  The  destiny  of  the 
other  is  a  blessed  inheritance.  '*  The  upright  shall  have  good  things  in  posses- 
sion."    (Homilist.) 

Vcr.  13.  He  that  covereth  his  sins  shall  not  prosper  :  but  whoso  confesseth  and 
forsaketh  them  shall  have  mercy. — The  danger  of  covering  our  sins : — I.  The 
DANGEK.  1.  In  respect  of  God.  Sin  cannot  be  covered,  cannot  admit  of  excuse. 
So  far  as  sin  may  be  covered  or  excused,  so  far  it  is  not  sin,  at  least  not  liable 
to  punishment.  Notice  the  difference  betwixt  moral  and  commercial  laws. 
Ceremonies  are  arbitrary ;  laws,  as  a  rule  of  life,  are  real  and  eternal. 
Those  sins  which  break  moral  laws  receive  no  cover  or  palliation.  To  imagine 
that  God  will  admit  of  excuse  for  the  breach  of  such  law  as  is  eternal  were 
to  turn  His  justice  into  iniquity,  and  His  wisdom  into  folly.  The  two  attributes 
of  God,  His  wisdom  and  His  power,  are  the  highest  attributes  which  He  hath. 
God  is  more  jealous  of  His  wisdom  than  of  His  power.  He  that  committeth  sin 
daUieth  with  His  power  ;  but  he  that  covereth  and  paUiateth  sin  playeth  with  His 
wisdom.  God  forgiveth  the  greatest  sins  when  they  are  laid  open  and  confessed, 
but  casteth  an  angry  look  and  layeth  a  heavy  hand  upon  those  sins  which  would 
hide  and  cover  themselves  with  excuses.  What  a  dangerous  thing  it  is  to  study  to 
cover  a  sin !  "  That  must  needs  be  the  greatest  sin  which  maketh  every  sin 
greater."  In  denial  and  concealment,  though  we  deny  the  fact,  yet  we  acknow- 
ledge it  to  be  evil.  2.  In  respect  of  ourselves.  There  is  no  sin  to  which  our 
nature  more  strongly  inclineth  us  than  this  of  covering  and  excusing  our  sin.  It 
is  the  very  nature  of  sin,  not  only  to  infect  the  soul,  but  to  bewitch  it,  that  it 
shall  either  not  feel  it  or  not  be  willing  to  evaporate  and  expel  it.  Though  God 
hath  set  up  a  tribunal  in  our  hearts,  and  made  every  man  a  judge  of  his  own 
actions,  yet  there  is  no  tribunal  on  earth  so  much  corrupted  and  swayed  from  its 
power  and  jurisdiction  as  this.  No  man  is  so  well  pleased  with  any  cheat  as  that 
which  he  putteth  upon  himself.  Our  conscience  checketh  us,  and  we  silence  it ; 
sin  appeareth,  and  we  cover  it.  This  covering  of  sin  is  more  natural  than  any  sin 
beside.  We  cannot  name  any  that  agreeth  with  all  natures  and  complexions  as 
this  doth.  Excuse,  as  a  servant,  waiteth  upon  all,  and  is  officious  to  offer  attend- 
ance on  the  foulest.  God  hath  imprinted  upon  man  a  natural  shame  of  sin.  God 
left  this  impression  of  shame  upon  us  to  keep  us  within  compass,  that  we  should 
not  commit  sin.  But,  too  often,  what  was  made  as  a  means  to  prevent  sin  is 
made  a  cloak  to  cover  it.  Shame  is  a  good  buckler  to  oppose  against  sin.  II.  Thb 
REMEDY.  Penitential  confession  reaching  even  to  the  mercy-seat.  Sin  is  never  less 
deformed  in  the  eye  of  God  than  when  it  is  in  its  own  shape.  Sin  is  never  more 
sin,  hath  never  more  in  it,  than  when  it  is  covered.  He  that  confesseth  his  sin 
hath  found  a  plaster  for  it.  (A.  Farindon,  B.D.)  Covering  sins:— Men's  sins 
are  often  well  known,  when  they  flatter  themselves  that  they  are  unknown,  and 
the  attempt  to  conceal  deceives  none  but  themselves.  Sin  is  in  itself  too  odious  to 
appear  without  some  disguise,  and  most  men  wish  to  be  thought  better  than  they 
are ;  but  the  policy  is  both  weak  and  dangerous.  To  attempt  to  hide  our  sins  from 
the  eye  of  God  is  atheistical  and  vain.  The  mantle  of  Divine  love  is  sufficient  to 
cover  all  iniquity,  and  the  interposing  blood  of  atonement  to  secure  from  the 
iuiiiciiuus  of  eteiual  wrath.     There  is  also  a  love  among  brethren  which  covers 


CHAP,  xxvin.]  PROVERBS.  647 

a  multitude  of  sins,  and  forms  an  amiable  part  of  the  Christian  character.  A 
truly  good  man  will  be  tender  towards  every  one's  failings  but  his  own.  The 
charity  we  exercise  towards  others  is,  however,  very  different  from  those  excuses 
which  we  are  too  apt  to  form  for  ourselves.  I.  Who  ake  they  who  mat  be  said  to 
covEB  THEIR  SINS  ?  1.  Those  who  endeavour  to  conceal  themselves  under  false- 
hood, as  did  the  servant  of  Ehsha.  2.  Those  who  palliate  and  excuse  themselves 
in  sin,  by  endeavouring  to  shift  the  blame  on  others,  belong  to  the  same  class. 
3.  The  attempt  to  dissemble  and  disguise  sin,  by  specious  pretences,  is  another  way 
of  covering  it.  4.  There  are  some  who  even  justify  and  plead  for  sin,  and  these 
certainly  can  need  but  little  disguise.  5.  Sin  is  sometimes  covered  by  vain  and 
ineffectual  endeavour  to  satisfy  and  atone  for  it.  II.  Considee  the  folly  and 
DANGEB  OF  EVERY  FALSE  DISGUISE.  "Shall  Hot  prosper."  1.  His  hopcs  shall  be 
disappointed,  and  the  end  he  had  in  view  defeated.  It  is  of  no  use  to  deny,  to 
palliate,  or  in  any  other  way  to  hide  our  sins,  for  God  hath  set  them  all  in  the 
light  of  His  countenance.  2.  Artifice  and  disguise  shall  not  prosper,  even  as  to 
our  temporal  interests.  3.  Those  who  indulge  in  any  manner  of  deceit  shaU  be 
utter  strangers  to  spiritual  prosperity.  Sin  is  the  distemper  of  the  soul ;  and 
covering  it  with  false  disguises  only  tends  to  increase  the  evU,  and  make  it  more 
dangerous.  4.  A  course  of  dissimulation  will  end  in  utter  ruin  and  despair.  God 
will  neither  be  deceived  nor  mocked.  Learn — (1)  How  carefully  we  should  avoid 
what  will  be  attended  with  such  tremendous  consequences.  (2)  As  we  are  not  to 
cover  our  own  sins,  so  neither  should  we  cover  the  sins  of  others,  any  farther  than 
prudence  directs  or  Christian  charity  allows.  (3)  That  we  may  not  be  tempted  to 
use  any  other  coverings,  let  us  seek  after  those  which  are  recommended  to  us  in 
the  gospel.  {B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  Covering  sin: — Certain  great  iron  castings 
have  been  ordered  for  a  railway-bridge.  The  thickness  has  been  calculated 
according  to  the  extent  of  the  span  and  the  weight  of  the  load.  The  contractor 
constructs  his  moulds  according  to  the  specification,  and  when  all  is  ready,  pours 
in  the  molten  metal.  In  the  process  of  casting,  through  some  defect  in  the  mould, 
portions  of  air  lurk  in  the  heart  of  the  iron,  and  cavities  like  those  of  a  honey- 
comb are  formed  in  the  interior  of  the  beam ;  but  all  defects  are  hid,  and  flaws 
are  effectually  concealed.  The  artisan  has  covered  his  fault,  but  he  will  not 
prosper.  As  soon  as  it  is  subjected  to  a  strain  the  beam  gives  way.  Sin  covered 
becomes  a  rotten  hoUow  in  a  human  soul,  and  when  the  strain  comes  the  false 
gives  way.  (W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  A  false  covering  and  a  safe  refuge : — I.  The 
FALSE  AND  DECEPTIVE  REFUGE.     "He  that  covereth  his  sins   shall  not  prosper." 

I.  This  is  the  course  which  men  usually  adopt  when  they  enter  on  a  course  of  sin. 
They  are  conscious  that  they  are  doing  wrong,  and  they  try  to  cover  and  conceal 
what  they  are  doing.  They  resort  to  a  variety  of  expedients.  Some  flatly  deny 
them.  Others  cover  their  sins  by  evasion,  or  they  shift  the  blame  off  upon 
others.  Some  plead  their  weakness,  and  the  circumstances  in  which  they  were 
placed.  Many  plead  the  practice  of  others.  It  is  the  custom  of  the  trade.  The 
vilest  class  attempt  to  cover  their  sins  by  glorying  in  them.  2.  Note  the  folly  of 
such  conduct.  Such  a  man  shall  not  succeed  in  the  attempt  to  cover  his  sins. 
And  he  shall  not  escape  from  the  consequences  of  his  sins,  however  he  attempts  to 
conceal  them.     Sin   brings  its  own   punishments  to  the  man  who   commits  it. 

II.  The  moke  excellent  way  which  is  here  commended.  1.  The  condition  of  for- 
giveness. We  must  confess  our  sins.  We  must  forsake  them.  2.  These  conditions 
are  not  the  only  ground  of  forgiveness.  In  God  there  is  not  only  provision  made 
for  forgiveness,  but  also  for  our  help  to  resist  sin,  and  escape  from  it.  {A.  Clark.) 
The  consequences  of  covering  sin: — I.  In  reference  to  others.  He  who  covers 
sin  is  a  hypocrite,  who  always  wears  a  mask.  He  conceals  bad  principles  under  an 
avowed  zeal  for  good  ones ;  bad  purposes  under  a  noisy  reprobation  of  such 
purposes ;  and  a  bad  system  of  iniquity  under  the  mask  of  extraordinary  purity 
and  piety.  II.  In  reference  to  ourselves.  Man  possesses  the  astonishing,  but 
awful  power  of  practising  deceit  upon  himself,  and  concealing  his  sins  from  his 
own  view.  This  he  does — 1.  By  decreasing  their  number.  This  is  done  by 
rejecting  the  Divine  law  as  the  standard,  and  by  adopting  as  the  standard  the  lax 
notions  of  worldly  and  irreligious  men.  2.  By  dimmishing  their  enormity.  This 
is  done  by  pleading  the  impetuosity  of  the  passions ;  the  strength  of  temptation ; 
as  a  set-off  against  bad  works  the  multitude  of  good  ones.  But  he  who  hides  his 
sins  from  others  shall  not  eventually  prosper.  And  he  who  hides  his  sins  from 
himself  cannot  prosper.  Now,  consider  the  nature  and  advantage  of  confessing 
and  forsaking  sin.    1,  Our  confession  must  be  spiritual.    2.  Our  sin  must  be 


648  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rsvm. 

confessed  as  a  great  evil.  3.  Our  sin  must  be  confessed  as  deserving  special 
punishment.  From  hence  we  learn  that  the  prospect  of  those  who  cover  their  sins, 
either  from  themselves  or  others,  is  most  appalling ;  that  no  sinner,  however 
guilty,  and  depraved,  and  miserable,  need  despair,  for  he  may  yet  be  saved. 
{Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermons.)  Sin  covered  or  confessed: — I.  Covered 
SIN  AND  NO  PBosPERiTY.  1.  What  is  the  meaning  of  covering  sin?  2.  How  do 
men  cover  sin  ?  (1)  By  palliation.  (2)  By  dissembling.  (3)  By  practising  sin  in 
secret.  (4)  By  self -righteousness.  3.  Covered  sin  a  failure.  "  Shall  not  prosper." 
This  does  not  refer  to  temporal,  but  spiritual  prosperity.  This  is  not  an  arbitrary 
arrangement.  The  same  power  by  which  night  and  day  succeed  each  other  has 
promulgated,  and  will  enforce  the  law  that  says,  "  Bad  lives,  unpardoned,  shall  be 
punished."  Sin  cannot  be  successfully  cloaked,  but  will  be  discovered  and  punished. 
II.  Confessed  and  forsaken  sin  and  merct.  1.  "  Whoso  confesseth  and  forsaketh 
them."  Prompt  confession,  followed  by  prompt  forgiveness.  Confession  involving 
forsaking.  Profession  attended  with  consistent  practice.  The  reform  of  the 
outward  life,  and  the  healing  of  the  soul.  2.  "  Shall  have  mercy."  This  is  not 
a  subject  of  doubt.  It  was  the  experience  of  the  psalmist  (Psa.  xxxii.  5).  The 
apostle  believed  and  taught  it  (Piom.  iv.  5).  John  has  put  it  beyond  speculation 
(1  John  i.  8,  9).  Mercy  is  yours  if  you  will  fulfil  the  conditions.  (J.  E.  Hargreaves.) 
Man''s  treatment  of  his  own  sins  : — 1,  All  men  have  sins.  2.  All  men  have  some- 
thing to  do  with  their  sins.  3.  All  men  deal  with  their  sins  either  foolishly  or 
wisely.  I.  The  foolish  treatment  of  our  sins.  "  He  that  covereth  his  sins." 
1.  By  denying  them.  Thus  Cain,  Eachel,  Joseph's  brethren,  Peter,  Ananias  and 
Sapphira,  endeavoured  to  hide  their  sin.  2.  By  extenuating  them.  Men  plead 
excuses.  3.  By  forgetting  them.  They  endeavour  to  sweep  them  from  the 
memory  by  revelry,  by  sensuality,  worldliness,  and  intemperance.  Sins  must 
reveal  themselves  sooner  or  later.  II.  The  wise  treatment  of  our  sins.  "  Whoso 
confesseth  and  forsaketh  them  shall  have  mercy."  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  A  serious 
contrast : — I.  Man's  covering,  and  its  failure.  There  are  many  ways  in  which 
men  try  to  cover  their  sins.  Excuse-making  is  the  commonest  trade  under  heaven. 
Some  cover  by  secrecy  and  some  by  falsehood.  Some  think  their  sin  has  been 
hidden  away  by  lapse  of  time.  II.  God's  covering,  and  its  success.  By  the 
atoning  sacrifice  which  was  presented  by  the  Lord  Jesus.  Before  God  covers  sins 
He  unveils  them.  The  covering  is  as  broad  as  the  sin ;  it  completely  covers,  and 
for  ever  covers.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  14.  Happy  is  the  man  that  feareth  alway. — The  happiness  of  fearing 
alway  : — He  who  sincerely  confesses  and  forsakes  his  sins  wiU  be  afraid  of  sin  for 
the  future,  having  felt  the  smart  of  it.  I.  What  is  the  fear  that  men  ought 
to  maintain  alway  ?  It  is  a  fear  of  God  for  Himself,  and  a  fear  of  other  things  for 
God,  or  in  reference  to  Him.  We  ought  to  entertain— 1,  A  filial  and  reverential 
fear  of  God.  Slavish  fear  will  never  make  a  man  happy.  Slavish  fear  is  mixed 
with  hatred  of  God  ;  filial  fear  with  love  to  Him.  2.  We  must  entertain  a  fear  of 
jealousy  over  ourselves.  3.  A  fear  of  caution  and  circumspection.  This  makes  a 
man  walk  warily.  11.  Some  things  in  relation  to  which  we  should  entertain 
THIS  holy  fear.  1.  With  respect  to  himself.  Happy  is  the  man  who  keeps  a 
jealous  eye  over  himself.  Be  jealous  over  your  principles,  your  hearts,  your 
tongues,  and  your  senses.  2.  With  respect  to  our  lusts  and  corruptions.  He  is 
happy  who  can  say  he  fears  nothing  so  much  as  sin.  Fear  the  sin  of  your  nature  ; 
sins  by  which  you  have  been  formerly  led  astray.  These  forsaken  lovers  will 
again  make  suit  to  you,  and  will  get  in  upon  you,  if  you  grow  secure.  Fear  little 
sins.  There  is  no  sin  really  little,  but  many  most  dangerous  ones  that  are  little  in 
man's  esteem.  3.  With  respect  to  our  graces.  Grace  is  a  gift  to  be  stirred  up.  It 
is  in  hazard  of  decay,  though  not  of  death.  The  way  to  keep  the  treasure  is  to 
fear.  4.  With  respect  to  our  duties.  The  whole  worship  and  service  of  God  is 
called  fear ;  so  necessary  is  our  fear  in  approaching  Him.  5.  With  respect  to  our 
attainments.  They  are  in  hazard  of  being  lost.  III.  The  necessary  qualification 
of  this  duty.  "  Alway."  This  fear  must  be  our  habitual  and  constant  work. 
This  fear  should  season  all  we  do,  and  be  with  us  at  all  times,  cases,  conditions, 
places,  and  companies.  Because — 1.  We  have  always  the  enemy  within  our  walls. 
While  a  body  of  sin  remains  within  us,  temptations  will  always  be  presenting 
themselves.  2.  Because  there  are  snares  for  us  in  all  places  and  in  all  circum- 
stances. There  are  snares  in  our  lawful  enjoyments ;  snares  at  home,  in  the 
field,  waking,  and  at  table.      Many  ditches  are  in  our  way,  and  many  of  these 


CHAP,  xxvin.]  PROVERBS.  649 

are  so  concealed  that  we  may  fall  completely  into  them  before  we  are  aware. 
At  all  times  we  are  beset.  IV.  The  advantage  attending  this  duty.  "  Happy." 
For — 1.  This  prevents  much  sin,  and  advanceth  holiness  of  heart  and  life. 
He  that  fears  to  offend  God  is  most  likely  to  keep  His  way.  2.  It  prevents 
strokes  from  the  Lord's  hand.  Where  sin  dines  judgment  will  sup.  Holy  fear 
prevents  falls.  3.  This  fear  carries  the  soul  out  of  itself  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
the  fountain  of  light,  life,  and  strength.  Improvement:  (1)  You  who  are  in  a 
joyful  frame,  join  trembling  with  your  mirth.  (2)  You  that  are  in  a  mourning 
frame,  fear  alway.  (3)  You  that  have  not  met  with  Christ ;  what  shall  I  say  to 
you  ?  Fear  lest  your  sharing  in  Christian  privileges  leave  your  affections  more 
deadened,  and  your  consciences  more  seared.  To  all  of  you  I  say,  "  Fear  alway." 
(T.  Boston,  D.D.)  A  holy  fear  : — What  is  this  Bible-enjoined  fearing  ?  It  is 
not  the  paralysis  of  terror,  the  shrinking  and  subsiding  into  nothingness  of  the 
craven  spirit  within.  It  is  the  ballast  of  the  soul.  Calm  cautiousness.  It  is  our 
Scotch  maxim,  "  Ca'  canny !  "  Ketrospective,  introspective,  perspective,  circum- 
spective. Nervousness  of  experience,  caution,  cannyness  of  reflection,  the  fearing 
here  embodies.  I.  The  action.  "  Feareth."  It  is  evangelical  fear,  for  only  the 
gospel  can  bring  it.  It  is  three-faced.  The  first  outlook  of  it  is  towards  God.  The 
fiear  of  God  is  not  that  turbulent  tornado  of  terror  that  tears  up  and  destroys ;  it  is 
the  gentle  fall  of  the  summer  rain  on  the  thirsty  soil ;  it  is  the  soft  dew-descent  of 
the  Holy  Ghost ;  it  is  the  fear  of  God  for  himself.  It  is  the  holy  hush  in  His 
almighty  presence,  the  calm  instinct  of  regeneration  that  gives  sympathetic 
dignity  to  the  soul.  It  is  the  "  strength  of  the  Lord."  Another  outlook  of  this 
fear  is  towards  yourself.  Your  worst  enemy  is  your  next-door  neighbour,  and  on 
his  gate  is  your  own  name.  He  is  yourself.  To  draw  illustration  from  mining, 
your  heart  is  full  of  inflammable  gas.  Sin  fills  every  chink,  and  it  is  all  ready  for 
the  tempting  flame.  Another  outlook  of  this  fear  is  towards  your  surroundings. 
Look  up,  look  in,  but  also  look  round.  The  world  is  an  intertwined  network  of 
devildom.  Take  care,  beware  !  II.  The  time  for  this  action.  The  longest  day 
has  a  nightfall.  In  this  activity  of  the  soul  no  swinging  bell  heralds  a  release ; 
without  a  break  or  gap  the  night-shift  succeeds  to  day,  and  the  day-shift  to  night,. 
and  the  same  worker  is  in  both.  "Happy  is  the  man  that  feareth  alway."  At 
all  times,  in  aU  circumstances,  in  all  companies,  you  are  in  danger  of  going  to  the 
bottom.  Alway  fearing  is  alway  safe.  III.  The  consequence  of  it.  "  Happy  is 
the  man."  Because  for  time  and  eternity  he  is  ready.  It  is  never  waste  of  wind  or 
time  to  keep  to  the  path,  even  though  it  wind  and  wind  like  an  eternal  corkscrew. 
He  is  happy  because  this  fear  saves  him  from  the  fear  of  man.  That  fear  ever 
bringeth  a  snare.  The  Christian  filled  with  the  gospel  fear  of  God  is  happy,  too, 
because  it  empties  the  soul.  You  and  I  are  unblessed  to-day  because  we  are  too 
full.  {John  Robertson.)  The  happy  influence  of  fear  .--—He  is  not  an  unhappy 
man  whose  heart  is  continually  governed  by  this  fear.  It  has  a  happy  influence 
upon  his  soul,  to  guard  it  from  the  temptations  of  Satan  and  the  world,  and  to 
keep  it  close  to  the  Eedeemer.  It  tends  not  to  obstruct  but  to  promote  the  exercise 
of  faith  and  hope  and  joy  in  the  Lord.  Thus  fear  is  a  fruit  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and 
a  blessed  means  of  establishing  the  heart  in  the  love  of  God.  It  is  a  happy  sign 
of  an  interest  in  the  everlasting  covenant  of  mercy,  and  in  that  special  favour  of 
God  which  is  the  source  of  all  our  joys.  But  wretched  is  the  man  who  is  not; 
afraid  to  sin  against  his  Maker  and  Judge.  His  heart  is  hard  as  the  nether  mill- 
stone. {George  Lawson,  D.D.)  Holy  fear : — Holy  fear  is  a  searching  the  camp 
that  there  be  no  enemy  within  our  bosom  to  betray  us,  and  seeing  that  all  be  fast 
and  sure.  For  I  see  many  leaky  vessels  fair  before  the  wind,  and  professors  who 
take  their  conversion  upon  trust,  and  they  go  on  securely,  and  see  not  the  under 
water  till  a  storm  sink  them.  {H.  G.  Salter.)  But  he  that  hardeneth  his 
heart  shall  fall  into  mischief. — Hardening  the  heart : — The  whole  system  of  moral 
and  religious  duty  is  expressed  as  the  "  fear  of  God."  The  religion  which  makes 
fear  the  great  principle  of  action,  implicitly  condemns  all  self-confidence,  all  pre- 
sumptuous security ;  and  enjoins  a  constant  state  of  vigilance  and  caution,  a 
perpetual  distrust  of  our  own  hearts,  a  full  conviction  of  our  natural  weakness,  and 
an  earnest  solicitude  for  Divine  assistance.  I.  What  he  is  to  feae,  whose  fear 
WILL  make  him  happy.  The  primary  object  of  fear  is  sin.  The  dread  of  sin 
produces  the  dread  of  temptation.  The  continual  recurrence  of  temptation  and 
the  imbecility  of  nature  make  many  doubtful  of  the  possibility  of  salvation.  In 
fear  many  have  fled  from  possibilities  of  temptation  into  deserts  and  monasteries. 
But  this  is  not  the  worthy  way  of  meeting  fear.    And  in  cloisters  men  do  not 


650  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xivra, 

escape  from  themselves.  True  fear  is  a  constant  sense  of  the  Divine  presence, 
and  dread  of  the  Divine  displeasure.  True  fear  inspires  prayer.  II.  What  is 
MEANT  BY  HARDNESS  OF  HEART.  Hardness  of  heart  is  a  thoughtless  neglect  of  the 
Divine  law  :  such  an  acquiescence  in  the  pleasures  of  sense,  and  such  delight  in 
the  pride  of  life,  as  leaves  no  place  in  the  mind  for  meditation  on  higher  things. 
To  such  men  Providence  is  seldom  wholly  inattentive.  They  are  often  called  to 
the  remembrance  of  their  Creator,  both  by  blessings  and  afflictions ;  by  recoveries 
from  sickness,  by  deliverances  from  danger,  by  loss  of  friends,  and  by  mis- 
carriage of  transactions.  As  these  calls  are  neglected,  the  hardness  is  increased, 
and  there  is  danger  lest  He  whom  they  have  refused  to  hear  should  call 
them    no    more.      This   state   of    dereliction   is   the    highest  degree  of    misery. 

III.    How,    OR    BY    WHAT    CAUSES,    THE    HEART    IS    HARDENED.         The    mOSt     dangCrOUS 

hardness  proceeds  from  some  enormous  wickedness,  of  which  the  criminal  dreads 
the  recollection,  and  finding  a  temporal  ease  in  negligence  and  forgetfulness,  by 
degrees  confirms  himself  in  stubborn  impenitence.  A  less  dangerous  hardness 
consists,  not  in  the  perversion  of  the  will,  but  in  the  alienation  of  the  thoughts : 
by  such  hearts  God  is  not  defied ;  He  is  only  forgotten.  Of  this  forgetfulness  the 
general  causes  are  worldly  cares  and  sensual  pleasures.  Such  men  are  usually 
either  stupidly  or  profanely  negligent  of  these  external  duties  of  religion,  which 
are  instituted  to  excite  and  preserve  the  fear  of  God.  A  great  part  of  them 
whose  hearts  are  thus  hardened  may  justly  impute  that  insensibility  to  the 
violation  of  the  Sabbath.  Many  enjoyments,  innocent  in  themselves,  may  become 
dangerous  by  too  much  frequency.  Whatever  tends  to  diminish  the  fear  of  God,  or 
abate  the  tenderness  of  conscience,  must  be  diligently  avoided.  IV.  The  conse- 
quence OF  HARDNESS  OF  HEART.  "  Shall  fall  into  mischief " — both  into  wickedness 
and  misery.  He  that  hardeneth  his  heart  shall  surely  become  both  wicked  and 
miserable.     (S.  Johnson,  LL.D.) 

Vers.  20,  22.  He  that  maketh  haste  to  be  rich  shall  not  be  innocent. — Haste 
to  be  rich  : — Nowhere  does  the  Bible  denounce  riches.  It  tells  men  very  plainly 
what  the  dangers  are.  1+.  denounces  very  strongly  the  conduct  of  rich  men.  But 
the  motive  to  good  conciuct,  in  the  Old  Testament  period,  was  the  promise  of 
secular  prosperity — abundance.  The  Bible  asserts  that  riches  are  a  great  blessing ; 
and  poverty  a  great  misfortune.  It  is  the  method  of  God's  development  and 
education  of  the  race  to  bring  men  up  to  higher  levels  by  those  processes  by  which 
men  develop  larger  means,  various  riches,  and  the  comforts  of  life,  and  give  to  the 
household  broader  foundations,  ampler  powers.  It  goes  against  the  educated 
religious  feeling  of  men  for  one  to  say  that  the  way  of  riches  was  meant  to  be  the 
way  of  religion  ;  yet  it  is  true.  All  barbarous  nations  are  poor.  The  Bible  speaks 
the  sentiment  of  universal  mankind  when  it  regards  riches  held  in  the  hand  of 
virtue  as  being  an  eminent  blessing  from  God.  I.  Kiches  may  either  be  pro- 
duced OR  collected.  The  foundation  of  all  prosperity  is  production.  He  increases 
the  riches  of  a  society  that  applies  his  reason  and  skill  to  the  raw  material  of 
the  globe,  or  that  brings  it  from  inertness  to  positive  service,  and  gives  to  matter 
the  power  of  serving  man.  He  produces  wealth.  Then  comes  the  man  who 
utilises  it ;  creates  it  into  garments,  houses,  utensils,  &c.  The  foundation  of  all 
value  is  not  what  a  thing  costs  in  making  it,  but  what  is  inherent  in  it  of  thought 
and  skill.  What  part  of  man  was  used  in  producing  it ;  and  to  what  part  of  a 
man  is  such  properly  addressed  ?  The  man  who  produces  wealth  is  the  founda- 
tion man.  It  is  the  law  of  the  production  of  wealth  that  a  man  should  render 
an  equivalent  for  every  stage  of  value.  Sudden  wealth  is  not  hasty  wealth, 
necessarily.  II.  The  production  of  wealth  connects  itself  with  benevolence, 
WITH  SYMPATHY.  The  man  who  is  developing  property,  as  distinguished  from 
money,  is  actually  increasing  the  common  wealth.  It  is  a  sad  thing,  but  in  the 
main  true,  that  the  producers  of  wealth  are  obliged  to  eat  up  the  larger  part  of 
their  product  in  order  to  have  strength  to  work.  But  every  man  that  is  developing 
or  producing  riches  is,  at  the  same  time,  educating  himself  in  morals,  or  should  be. 
Patience  is  a  moral  quality ;  another  name  for  self-control.  The  man  who  gets 
■wealth  legitimately  is  usually  himself  built  up  in  inward  riches  fully  as  much  as  he 
builds  up  his  estate  in  outward  wealth.     IH.  Haste  to  be  rich  is  a  giieat  danger 

TO  MEN,  because  IT  TEMPTS   THEM    TO   EMPLOY   ILLEGITIMATE  ME.*.NS.       Sleights,  CraftS, 

disingenuous  ways,  greed,  violations  of  honesty.  Haste  runs  along  the  edge  of  so 
many  dangers,  that  a  man's  head  must  be  peculiarly  well  set  on  his  shoulders,  and 
his  brain  must  be  very  solid  and  sober,  if  he  does  not  topi^le  over  into  them.     A 


CHAP.  XXVIII.]  PROVERBS.  651 

man  that  is  making  haste  to  be  rich  is  tempted  to  ostentation.  But  ostentation  is 
expensive,  and  men  are  easily  tempted  to  devise  schemes  to  maintain  it.  Men 
having  sudden  wealth  are  apt  to  become  cruel  through  indifference  to  other 
men's  rights.     Haste  is  apt  to  change  into  idolatry.     {H.  W.  Beecher.) 

Ver.  23.  He  that  rebuketh  a  man. — Reproof : — I.  Eeoabd  ebproof  as  a  duty. 

I.  Speaking  generally,  we  may  be  bound  to  administer  reproof  out  of  regard 
to  the  individuals  to  whom  we  may  address  ourselves.  An  obligation  rests 
upon  us  to  love  our  neighbours  as  ourselves.  This  obligation  requires  us,  of 
course,  to  study  to  promote  their  welfare.  If  we  saw  a  man  thoughtlessly 
going  near  the  heel  of  a  horse  that  was  likely  to  kick  at  him,  and  to  imperU 
his  life,  we  should  instinctively  caution  him  to  avoid  the  danger.  If  we  knew 
a  friend  about  to  take  in  hand  a  business  which,  from  our  knowledge  and 
experience,  we  were  quite  sure  would  prove  his  ruin,  we  should  certainly  give 
him  the  benefit  of  our  opinion.  Much  more,  therefore,  when  we  see  him  doing 
anything  or  neglecting  to  do  anything  to  the  injury  of  his  character,  his  usefulness, 
his  happiness,  or  his  eternal  well-being,  shall  we  go  and  faithfully  acquaint 
him  with  our  opinion  of  his  conduct.  2.  Another  reason  why  we  should  give 
reproof  may  be  the  regard  we  have,  not  simply  to  the  individuals  to  whom  we 
may  address  ourselves,  but  to  the  interests  of  society.  3.  There  is  only  one  other 
reason  which  we  would  touch  upon — we  mean,  the  mind  of  God  upon  the  matter, 
as  it  is  revealed  in  Holy  Scripture  (Lev.  xix.  17).  Let  us  now  notice  some 
particular  classes  of  persons  upon  whom  this  duty  devolves.  (1)  First,  upon 
ministers.  (2)  The  same  duty  rests  upon  masters.  They  are  monarchs  in  the 
smaU  kingdom  of  the  household,  and  are  bound  to  see  that  nothing  is  allowed 
therein  that  is  in  any  way  to  be  condemned.     (3)  It  rests  also   upon  parents. 

II.  The  spieit  and  manner  in  which  kepeoof  ought  to  be  administered.  1.  It 
should  be  given  in  a  spirit  of  prayer.  There  are  differences  of  natural  constitution, 
and  differences  of  natural  judgment,  which  may  affect  a  person's  fitness  to 
discharge  the  duty  ;  but  no  man  ought  to  set  about  such  a  work  without  lifting  up 
his  heart  to  God,  that  his  words  may  be  uttered  with  wisdom,  that  the  opening  of 
his  lips  may  be  with  grace.  2.  A  spirit  of  love  ought,  also,  to  influence  us.  We 
should  be  most  watchful  lest  a  feeling  of  anger,  wrath,  or  malice  should  prompt 
us,  and  the  hatred  of  the  offence  should  be  lost  in  the  indulgence  of  our  ill-temper 
and  pride,  3.  Our  reproof,  also,  should  vary  in  its  mode,  according  to  the 
disposition  of  the  person  to  be  reproved.  4.  Eeproofs,  though  deserved,  should  be 
administered  with  a  sparing  hand.  Incessant  finding  fault  defeats  its  own  end. 
It  only  irritates  the  reproved.  5.  In  rebuking,  take  care  not  to  overstate  the  fault. 
The  offender  is  generally  prejudiced  in  his  own  favour.  He  wiU  be  apt  to  think 
that  even  a  fair  statement  is  excessive ;  much  more  will  he  detect  injustice,  if  he  be 
unfairly  charged.  III.  The  effects  which  eepeoof  is  calculated  to  produce. 
It  should  produce,  of  course,  always  the  fruit  of  righteousness.  The  life  of  the 
reproved  ought  to  be  amended ;  the  good  advice  ought  to  be  taken  in  a  thankful 
and  obedient  spirit.  This  is  not  unfrequently  the  case,  but  oftentimes  it  is  the 
contrary.  1.  Some  men  are  scornful,  and  obstinately  wicked.  It  is  likely  to  prove 
discouraging,  to  use  no  stronger  word,  to  attempt  to  bring  them  out  of  their  faults 
and  errors.  There  is  little  good  to  be  got  by  reproving  the  confirmed  sinner. 
Your  reward  will  be,  probably,  that  he  will  hatch  up  some  slanderous  report  to 
blacken  or  blot  your  character.  2.  We  may  indulge  a  hope,  however,  although 
this  be  so  in  bad  and  extreme  cases,  that  a  happier  consequence  may  oftentimes 
be  looked  for.  This  our  text  encourages  us  to  expect.  It  la  written,  "  He  that 
rebuketh  a  man  afterwards  shall  find  more  favour  than  he  that  flattereth  with  his 
tongue."  Even  men  who  are  wise  and  good  may  be  irritated,  annoyed,  and  for  a 
season  be  offended  with  us ;  but,  when  the  disturbance  in  the  atmosphere  shall 
have  subsided,  it  shall  be  more  clear  and  healthy  than  it  was  before.  The  man's 
good-sense,  assisted  or  produced  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  will  triumph  over  his 
passion ;  and  he  will  feel  no  disposition  to  complain  of  the  bitter  medicine  that  was 
administered  to  him.  The  reproof  which  has  been  given  him  will  send  him  to  his 
knees.  It  wiU  lead  him  to  pray  that  he  may  see  his  errors,  and  that  he  may  have 
grace  to  overcome  them.     (T.  W.  Thompson,  M.A.) 

Ver.  26.  He  that  trusteth  In  his  own  heart  is  a  fool. — The  folly  of  trusting  inovAr 
own  heart!  : — I.  What  is  meant  by  a  man  teusting  his  heart.  It  is — 1.  To  com- 
mit and  resign  up  the  entire  conduct  of  his  life  and  actions  to  the  directions  of  it,  a3 


652  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvin. 

of  a  guide.     A  guide  should  be  able  to  lead  and  direct  him ;   and  a  guide  should 
faithfully  give  the  best  directions.      II.  Wheeein  the  foolishness  of  it  consists. 
Two  things  render  a  trust  foolish.     1.  The  thing  which  we  commit  to  a  trust.      We 
commit  three  things  to  the  mercy   of  this  trust — the  honour  of   God ;  our  own 
felicity  here ;  the  eternal  concernments  of  our  soul  hereafter.     The  honour  of  God 
as  Creator,  Governor,  Saviour,  and  gracious  Father ;   our  happiness  in  this  world, 
both  temporal  and  spiritual.     Is  the  heart  worthy  of  such  trust  ?     Nay,  it  is  weak, 
and  so  cannot  make  good  a  trust.     In  point  of  apprehension,  it  cannot  perceive  and 
understand  certainly  what  is  good.      In  point  of  election,   it  cannot  choose  and 
embrace  it.     Moreover,   it  is   deceitful,  and  so  will  not  make  good  a  trust.     The 
delusions  of  the  heart  relate  to  the  commission  of  sin  ;  the  performance  of  duty  ;  a 
man's  conversion  or  change  of  his  spiritual  estate.     The  heart  of  man  will  draw 
him  on  to  sin  by  persuading  him  he  can  keep  it  in  bounds  ;  by  leading  him  into 
occasions  of  sin ;  by  lessening  and  extenuating  it  in  his  esteem.     A  man's  heart 
will  persuade  him  that  a  cessation  from  sin  is  a  plenary  conquest  and  mortification 
of  sin.     (R.  South.)         Strange  self-deception  : — By  what  sophistry,  what  perversity 
of  the  understanding,  what  negligence  it  is,  that  the  tremendous  prospect  of  eternity 
and  judgment  has  really  so  little  to  do  with  the  formation  of  our  opinions,  and  the 
regulation  of  our  conduct.     Two  propositions  may  be  established  by  this  inquiry. 
1.  From  the  deficient  practice  of  those  calling  themselves  Christians,  we  are  by  no 
means  justified  in  the  inference  that  their  judgments  are  not  therefore  convinced  of 
the  truth  of  the  doctrines  they  profess  to  believe.     2.  If,  in  defiance  of  incalculable 
hopes  and  terrors  of  another  world,  man  is  still  unable  to  keep  that  guard  over  the 
inclinations  of  his  heart  which  may  secure  his  innocence,  the  entire  removal  of  so 
potent  a  check  could  surely  have  no  other  tendency  than  to  complete  the  degrada- 
tion of  his  nature,  and  to  dislocate  the  whole  fabric  of  society.     With  regard  to  the 
question  before  us — 1.  Although  the  highest  achievement  of  a  course  of  moral  and 
religious  discipline  be,  to  subject  our  every  thought  and  action  to  the  control  of 
conscience  and  religion  only,  yet  in  every  stage  short  of  this  highest  exaltation  of 
character  it  is  to  far  inferior  impulses  that  even  our  most  plausible  actions  owe 
their  birth.     In  his  natural  state  passion,  not  principle,  forms  the  mainspring  of 
action.    As  moral  education  advances,  impulses  ripen  into  knowledge.    Where  he 
once  only  felt,  he  now  reasons.    But  it  will  be  long  ere  his  original  constitution 
wiU  change  its  bias.      In  this  intermediate  state  of  moral  improvement  our  convic- 
tion may  indeed  be  sincere,  but  our  conduct  will  stiU  be  defective.     With  the  greater 
part  of  mankind  action  almost  invariably  outruns  reflection.     If  the  want  of  union 
between  reason  and  appetite  be  the  first  source  of  sin,  our  amendment  must  depend 
upon  establishing  their  connection.  One  cause  of  that  strange  indifference  on  the  sub- 
ject of  religion  manifested  by  many  may  be  traced  to  that  callousness  of  mind,  that 
apathy  arising  from  satiety,   which  all  of  us  have  felt  when  our  minds  for  a  long 
period  together  have  been  occupied  with  one  predominant  idea,  however  originally 
interesting.     The  only  remedy   we  can   apply  is  still   the  same   calculating  and 
systematic  counteraction  produced  by  habitual  meditation  and  discipline  which  we 
have  already  recommended.     A  last  inducement  to  sin  is  that  natural  tendency  of 
our  constitution,  whether  intellectual  or  physical,  to  adapt  itself  to  the  medium  in 
which  it  is  placed,  and  to  vary  its  own  habits  and  propensities  and  feelings  accord- 
ing to  the  accidental  association  of  external  circumstances.     (P.  N.  Siiuttleicorth, 
D.D.)         The  height  of  folly : — Let  me  ask  you  to  look  at  the  closing  clause  of  the 
previous  verse,  for  it  appears  to  me  to  have  a  very  immediate  relation  to  our  text. 
"  He  that  putteth  his  trust  in  the  Lord  shall  be  made  fat.     He  that  trusteth  in  his 
own  heart  is  a  fool."     On  the  one  hand  is  Jehovah,  all  strong,  all  wise;  and  on 
the  other  one's  evilly  disposed,  vacillating  heart.   In  whom  dost  thou  trust  ?    Those 
who  trust  Jehovah  become  fat  and  flourishing  ;  He  honours  their  faith,  He  prospers 
the  work  of  their  hands ;  but  leanness  of  soul  and  lack  of  real  blessing  must  be  the 
result  of  trusting  to  one's  inner  consciousness,  or  past  experience,  or  anything  of 
self.     I.  "He  that  trusteth  in  his  own  heart  is  a  fool,"  because  of  the  Divine 
VEKDicT   OK   THE  HUMAN  HEART.     It  la  not  as  though  we   were  left  to  our  own 
estimate  of  the  natural  heart.     If  we  were,  since  it  is  natural  to  us  to  think  well  of 
ourselves,  we  could  hardly  be  called  fools  for  trusting  in  these  hearts  of  ours.     We 
have  a  higher  verdict ;  One  who  knows,  far  better  than  we  can,  has  published  the 
innate  character  of  the  human  heart.     We  need  not  be  in  ignorance  as  to  what 
God  thinks  of  us.     He  is  the  authority  on  this  matter.     He  made  the  heart.     True, 
He  did  not  make  it  sinful  or  foolish  ;  He  made  it  pure  and  holy,  prepared  for  every 
good  word  and  work.    But,  knowing  as  He  does  how  beautiful  it  was  at  the  outset, 


CHAP,  xxvra.]  PROVERBS.  6Z3 

He  can  best  judge  of  the  marring  of  it.  He  knows,  too,  that  the  more  beautiful 
and  glorious  it  was  at  first,  the  greater  is  its  wreck  and  ruin.  We  are  aware  of  the 
fact  that  those  things  which  are  most  finely  constructed,  when  they  do  suffer 
damage  suffer  very  materially.  The  wreck  is  all  the  greater,  and  repair  is  more 
difficult  because  of  the  delicacy  of  construction.  Well,  God  knew  how  pure  the 
human  heart  was  made,  what  capabilities  it  possessed,  what  possibilities  lay  latent 
there.  He  knows,  too,  the  damage  sin  has  done.  God  does  not  look  upon  the  fall 
as  a  slight  accident  which  could  be  easily  remedied.  What  does  He  say  of  the 
human  heart  as  it  is,  by  reason  of  its  sin  ?  He  says,  "  Every  imagination  of  the 
thoughts  of  his  heart  was  only  evil  continually."  Moreover,  God  in  another  place 
has  plainly  wi-itten,  "  The  heart  of  men  is  fully  set  in  them  to  do  evU. "  Have  you 
forgotten  that  striking  word  from  Jeremiah,  "  The  heart  is  deceitful  above  all 
things,  and  desperately  wicked "  ?  Well  may  we  say,  with  the  writer  of  this 
proverb,  "He  that  tiusteth  in  his  own  heart  is  a  fool,"  for  he  is  trusting  a  deceiver  ; 
nay,  he  is  trusting  the  arch-deceiver,  the  very  chief  among  the  deceivers.  Are  you 
going  to  trust  in  this  heart  of  yours?  Your  feelings,  your  capabilities,  your 
faculties — everything  that  you  like  to  include  in  this  comprehensive  word,  are  all 
affected,  more  or  less,  by  the  fall,  and  yet  you  are  prepared  to  trust  in  this  rotten 
reed,  this  broken  staff.  When  I  hear  some  excuse  themselves  or  their  fellows  by 
saying,  "  Oh,  well  you  know,  but  they  are  good  at  heart,"  I  feel  like  saying, 
"  Wherever  else  they  are  good,  they  are  not  good  there,  for  God  Himself  declares, 
'  There  is  none  righteous,  no,  not  one.'  "  So,  then,  we  have  got  God's  verdict  con- 
cerning the  human  heart,  and  it  is  so  emphatic,  and  so  unflattering,  that  we  say 
with  the  author  of  the  proverb,  "  He  that  trusteth  in  his  own  heart  is  a  fool." 
n.  Secondly,  experience  warns  us  in  the  same  direction.  Vv'e  can  see  for  our- 
selves, if  we  open  our  eyes,  that  those  who  trust  their  own  hearts  are  fools.  Should 
we  not  learn  lessons  from  the  falls  and  follies  of  others?  Let  me  ask  you  who  have 
been  vigilant.  Have  you  noticed  the  result  of  self-confidence  in  others  ?  Whether  it 
be  in  business  matters,  or  social  affairs,  or  political  questions,  or  spiritual  concerns, 
to  what  has  unbounded  self-confidence  led  men  ?  They  may  have  run  well  for 
awhile.  It  proved  to  be  only  a  nine-day's  wonder.  It  was  as  the  crackling  of 
thorns  under  a  pot :  there  was  great  flare  and  flame,  but  it  ended  in  smoke  and 
ashes.  I  have  met  with  instances,  not  a  few,  in  which  men  have  thus  overrun 
themselves,  and  become  filled  with  their  own  ways.  It  seems  to  me  as  if  a  Nemesis 
followed  them.  God  virtually  says  to  them,  "  Well,  you  believe  in  yourself;  I  will 
leave  you  to  yourself  ;  you  trust  your  own  heart,  you  can  do  without  Me  ;  you  ask 
for  independence — you  shall  have  it."  These  men  have  not  succeeded — they  have 
come  to  grief  ;  their  supposed  righteousness  and  self -merit  did  not  provide  them 
with  shelter  in  the  day  of  storm ;  it  was  a  refuge  of  lies.  Are  you  going  to  follow 
their  example  ?  Are  you  likely  to  succeed  where  they  have  failed  ?  Such  matters 
are  influenced  by  certain  inexorable  laws.  A  Nemesis  pursues  those  who  proudly 
trust  their  native  strength.  Besides,  you  have  had  some  experience  of  your  own, 
have  you  not  ?  Is  there  anybody  here  who  has  not  had  a  try  at  trusting  his  own 
heart  ?  III.  I  must  point  out  to  you  that  self-trust  is  quite  unnecessary.  I  can 
conceive  that,  if  we  were  shut  up  to  trusting  our  own  hearts,  we  might  be  excused 
for  doing  it.  God  knows  we  must  trust  somebody  or  something  I  Is  there  not  in  us 
all  the  clinging  tendency,  a  desire  to  get  hold  of  somebody  or  something,  a  craving  for 
sympathy  ?  If  there  were  no  outside  helper,  stronger  than  ourselves,  what  else 
could  we  rely  on  but  our  experiences  and  our  feelings  ?  But  there  is  something  else 
infinitely  better  to  trust  to.  We  have  no  excuse  for  such  folly  as  this  ;  we  are  not 
shut  up  to  self-confidence ;  there  is  an  alternative.  If  I  saw  one  on  the  shore  launch- 
ing a  leaky  boat  upon  a  troubled  sea,  I  should  say  to  him,  "  Fool  that  thou  art,  to 
go  to  sea  in  such  a  sieve  as  that!"  "Well,  but,"  says  he,  "I  must  go  to  sea, 
necessity  is  laid  upon  me — and  there  is  no  boat  but  this."  In  that  case  I  could  only 
pity  him  :  it  he  must  embark,  what  can  the  poor  fellow  do  but  take  his  chance  in  the 
leaky  cockleshell  ?  Ah,  but  this  is  not  our  case  at  aU.  You  must  go  to  sea,  and  it 
is  stormy,  too,  but  you  need  not  embark  in  this  leaky  craft  of  your  own  heart.  God's 
own  lifeboat  stands  alongside  you ;  nay,  it  is  already  launched.  You  have  but  to  leap 
into  it ;  it  will  outride  the  roughest  sea,  and  weather  every  storm.  I  do  not  know 
how  it  is  that  some  people  wUl  not  trust  God  till  they  are  obliged  to.  You  who 
have  not  yet  got  rid  of  sin  and  of  its  condemnation,  why  not  trust  Jehovah  ?  Why 
not  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  be  saved  ?  I  know  you  are  trusting  to  your 
own  heart.  You  say  to  yourself,  "  I  do  not  think  it  is  so  bad  after  all.  Sometime';  it 
is  really  first-rate."    Another  says,  "  Well,  my  heart  is  not  up  to  the  mark,  I  know, 


654  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvm. 

but  it  is  better  than  it  was !  "    Well,  really,  friend,  I  am  glad  to  hear  that ;  but  when 
it  is  at  its  best  it  is,  by  no  means,  reliable.     I  pray  you  do  not  say,  "  I  think  it  will 
come  all  right  at  last."     It  is  folly  thus  to  talk.      Look  away  to  Jesus  ;    trust  not 
your  own  heart,  but   in   the  living  God.     And  you,  who  have  been  brought  out 
of  darkness  into  His  marvellous  light,  surely  you  are  not  going  to  play  the  fool  by 
trusting  your  own  heart.    You,  you  of  all  men,  ought  to  know  better.    You  are  going 
back  to  where  you  were  at  first,  to  self -righteousness,  and  self-trust !     Well,  I  leave 
this  question  with  you ;  are  you  able,  despite  all  the  experience  you  have  had,  to 
steer  your  craft  across   life's  trackless  sea,  and  how  can   you   hope  to  outride  the 
breakers   of  judgment  that  break  upon  the  further  shore?     (Thomas  Spurgeon.) 
Folly  of  self-confidence  : — I.  The  evil  the  text  kefeks  to.     The  heart  here  signi- 
fies the  whole  soul.     Trusting  in  it  means  to  rest  on  its  sufficiency  ;  to  depend  upon 
it   in  the   various  circumstances  in  which  we  may  be  placed.     It  includes — 1.  A 
reliance  upon  our  own  wisdom  in  the  concerns  of  life.   2.  To  adopt  our  own  schemes 
of  religion.     By  affirming  the  sufficiency  of  nature  and  reason.     By  admitting  into 
his  creed  nothing  but  what  his  imperfect  mind  can  understand.     By  placing  all  his 
hopes  on  excited  feelings  and  warm  emotions.     By  adding  to,  or  diminishing  from, 
Christ's  holy  doctrines,  ordinances,  or  commands.     3.  To   confide  in   the  moral 
goodness  of  our  own  hearts.      The  Christian  also  trusts  in  his  own  heart  when — 
4.  He  rehes  upon  his  own   skill  or  power  in  temptation  and  trouble.     11.  The 
declakation  made  concerning  this  evil.     "Is  a  fool."     This  is  obvious — 1.  If  we 
appeal  to  reason.   2.  To  the  heart  itself.   3.  To  examples.   4.  To  our  own  experience. 
(J.  Burns,  D.D.)        Self-sufficiency  and  godly  confidence : — I.    Self-sufficienct. 
Seen  as  pride,  and  as  self-trust.     Two  things  indicated.    It  is  mischievous.     It  is 
fooUsh.     II.  Godly  confidence.     Trust  in  God  implies  a  knowledge  of  Him,  an 
appreciation  of  His  transcendent  excellences,  and  a  consciousness  of  His  willing- 
ness and  ability  to  sustain  us.     This  trust  leads  to  prosperity.     (Homilist.)        The 
folly    of    self-trust : — 1.  This  maxim    is    justified     by    the    description    which 
Jeremiah  gives  :  "  The  heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things  and  desperately  wicked  ; 
who  can  know  it?  "    For  if  it  be  indeed  such  as  it  is  there  represented,  assuredly 
the  heart  cannot  be  trustworthy.    And  that  the  prophet's  description  is  but  too 
correct  must  appear  abundantly  evident  to  all  who  have  ever  sincerely  and  seriously 
engaged  in  the  difficult  task  of  self-examination.     The  very  diSiculty  of  the  task 
proves  how  full  the  heart  which  is  the  subject  of  it  must  be  of  treachery  and  of  secret 
vice.      2.  This  maxim  is   also  abundantly  justified  and  confirmed   by  universal 
experience,  and  may  be  illustrated  experimentally.     I.  One  striking  proof  we  have 
in  OUR  proneness  to  relapse  into  sins  of  which  we  fancied,  perhaps,  that  we  had 
LONG  AGO  FAIRLY  REPENTED.     He  makes  at  once  his  prompt  yet  firm  choice  between 
God  and  the  world.    But  soon  his  evil  heart  of  unbelief  tempts  him  again  to  depart 
from  the  living  God.     II.  Another  practical  and  experimental  proof  of  the  wise 
man's  assertion  we  have  in  the  various  turns  of  the  believer's  struggle  with 
INDWELLING  SIN.     III.  We  pass  from  the  Christian's  continual  struggle  with  the  sin 
that  dwelleth  in  him  to  the  resolute  stand  which  he  is  called  upon  to  make 
AGAINST  the  EVIL  THAT  IS  IN  THE  WORLD.     Confessing  that  our  corrupt  inclinations 
still  long  for  certain  forbidden  indulgences,  we  yet  heedlessly  loiter  still  within  sight 
and  within  reach  of  the  glittering  prize,  though  we  feel  our  longing  becoming  daily 
more  intense,  and  our  power  to  resist  it  daily  giving  way.    IV.  One  other  instance  of 
this  folly  we  may  mention :  cub  proneness  to  rely  on  the  amount  of  our  attainments, 
the  sufficiency  and  the  stability  of  our  own  conscious  and  confirmed  integrity. 
We  easily  forget  the  imperfection  which  adheres  to  our  best  services  and  our  best 
qualities,  and  please   ourselves  with  the  idea  that   some  one  favourite  Christian 
virtue,  at  least,  is  now  strong  enough  for  any  emergency.      And  from  the   very 
instant  in  which  such  an  idea  begins  to  prevail  between  us,  that  particular  virtue 
may  be  pronounced  the  feeblest  and  most  precarious  of  all  that  we  liave.    A  slight 
change  of  circumstances — some  very  trifling  accident,  unforeseen  and  unexpected — 
a  new  temptation  suddenly  assailing  us — may  lay  the  proud  structure  in  the  dust, 
and  teach  us  how  vain  it  is  to  trust  in  any  degree  of  excellence,  in  any  height  of 
Christian  perfection.     (R.   S.   Candlish,  D.D.)         Self-deceit: — Whosoever  trusts 
his  own  heart  as  his  light,  adviser,  and  guide,  in  the  complex  ways  and  actings  of 
life,  is  a  fool.     Half  the  wisdom  of  the  wise  is  in  the  choice  of  their  advisers.    Wise 
men  discern  wisdom  in  others,  and  call  them  to  council ;  the  wisest  man  is  he  who 
least  trusts  himself  alone.     He  knows  the  difficulties  of  life  and  its  intricacies,  and 
gathers  all  the  lights  he  can  and  casts  them  upon  his  own  case.     He  must  in  the 
end  act  on  his  own  responsibility ;  but  he  seeks  all  counsellors,  the  experienced  and 


CHAP.  XXVIII.]  PROVERBS.  655 

impartial,  sometimes  the  opposed  and  unfriendly,  that  he  may  be  aware  on  all 
sides ;  for  "  in  the  multitude  of  counsellors  is  safety."  But  it  may  be  asked,  Is  not 
the  heart  God's  creation  and  God's  gift  ?  Did  He  not  plant  eyes  in  it,  and  give  to 
it  light  and  discernment  to  guide  our  ways  ?  Is  it  not  our  truest  personal  guide, 
given  to  each  one  of  us  by  God  Himself  ?  Why  must  a  man  who  trusts  his  own 
heart  be  a  fool  ?  1.  Because  our  hearts — that  is,  we  ourselves — are  ignorant  of 
ourselves.  If  we  knew  ourselves,  we  should  not  trust  ourselves  ;  we  do  so  because 
we  do  not  know  what  we  are.  We  are  by  nature,  and  still  more  by  personal  act, 
sinners.  And  sin  blinds  the  heart :  so  that  the  more  sinful  the  less  it  knows  its 
sinfulness ;  for  like  death,  which  is  most  evidently  perceived  by  the  living,  not  at  all 
by  the  dead,  and  by  the  dying  only  in  the  measure  in  which  their  living  conscious- 
ness is  still  retained,  so  it  is  with  sin  dwelling  in  us.  Where  is  the  worldly  man 
who  in  matters  of  honour  and  dishonour,  right  and  wrong,  sin  and  duty,  wisdom 
and  folly,  religion  and  faith,  death  and  judgment,  heaven  and  hell,  does  not  with 
confident  assurance  trust  his  own  heart  ?  But  in  the  sight  of  God  such  a  man  is  a 
"  fool."  2.  Not  only  is  the  heart  ignorant  of  itself,  but  it  deceives  itself.  Of  course 
these  cannot  be  altogether  separated.  Every  one  who  is  ignorant  is,  in  one  sense, 
a  self-deceiver ;  and  yet  it  may  not  be  with  any  laboured  illusion.  Ignorance  is 
absence  of  light ;  self-deceivers  have  light,  and  visions  in  that  light ;  but  those 
visions  are  illusions.  Ignorance  is  the  danger  of  unawakened  minds ;  self-deceit  of 
the  awakened.  (1)  What  is  more  common  than  to  see  men  characteristically 
marked  by  one  sin  which  they  pointedly  censure  in  others,  and  from  which  they 
believe  themselves  to  be  absolutely  free?  These  unsuspected  sins  are  almost 
universally  the  faults  of  childhood  and  early  youth,  which  have  become  habitual 
and  unconscious ;  for  instance,  personal  vanity,  selfishness,  a  difficult  and 
disputatious  temper,  impatience,  resentment,  unreality,  or  the  like.  And  they  who 
have  these  faults  in  them  by  long  habit  generally  excuse  themselves  by  ascribing 
the  same  to  others  on  whom  they  have  inflicted  them ;  as  if  the  wind  should  chide 
the  roughness  of  the  sea  for  disturbing  its  repose,  all  the  while  believing  itself  to 
be  at  rest.  (2)  The  same  effect  which  appears  in  casual  temptations  is  more 
dangerously  produced  in  deliberate  motives  and  lines  of  conduct.  An  early  habit 
of  personal  vanity,  or  desire  of  wealth,  sometimes  unconsciously  governs  a  person's 
whole  life.  The  same  is  true  of  worse  passions,  such  as  jealousy,  envy,  resentment, 
&c.  (3)  The  gravest  part  still  remains  ;  I  mean  the  deceit  we  practise  upon 
ourselves  as  to  our  state  before  God.  The  same  unconsciousness  which  conceals 
from  us  our  habitual  sins,  such  as  anger  or  envy,  conceals  also  the  impatience  and 
stiffness  of  our  will  towards  God,  and  our  want  of  gratitude  and  love,  our  undevotion 
and  sluggishness  in  the  spiritual  life.  All  these,  having  been  upon  us  from  our 
earliest  memory,  have  become  our  natural,  our  normal  state.  Such  a  heart 
becomes,  at  last  swathed  in  its  own  self -trust ;  and  we  watch  it  as  we  do  the  rash 
motions  of  a  man  who  walks  blindfold,  reeling  in  the  midst  of  dangers,  which 
might  sometimes  for  a  moment  provoke  our  mirth,  if  it  did  not  always  excite 
alarm.  2.  Another  reason  why  to  trust  our  own  hearts  is  a  note  of  folly  is  because 
they  flatter  us.  How  long  have  we  gone  on  persuading  ourselves  that  we  are  meek, 
poor  in  spirit,  makers  of  peace,  merciful,  patient,  and  the  like,  because  we  assent 
in  desire  and  will  to  the  Beatitudes,  and  would  fain  share  in  their  benedictions  ! 
How  long  have  we  persuaded  ourselves  that  we  pray  both  often  and  enough, 
earnestly,  and  with  devotion ;  that  we  love  God  above  all,  and  above  all  desire  so  to 
love  Him ;  that  our  life  is,  on  the  whole,  not  unlike  the  great  Example  of  humility ; 
and  that  we  know  our  own  hearts  better  than  any  one  can  tell  us  I  And  yet  what 
does  this  last  persuasion  show  ?  Why  are  we  so  sensitive  under  a  reproof  ?  Why 
do  we  accuse  ourselves  freely  of  all  faults  but  the  one  imputed  ?  Why  are  we  never 
guilty  in  the  point  suspected  ?  Why  do  we  wholly  guide  ourselves,  and  feel  so 
great  security  in  our  own  direction  ?  but  because  we  trust  our  own  hearts.  Out  of 
this  proceeds  our  visions  of  devotion,  our  imaginations  of  sanctity.  It  is  a  forge 
never  cold,  always  at  work,  forming  and  fashioning  devices  which  please  us  by 
their  fair  and  shapely  forms,  and  flatter  us  because  they  are  a  homage  to  ourselves. 
Lessons  :  1.  The  greatest  security  against  deceiving  ourselves  by  trusting  our  own 
hearts  is  a  careful  information  of  conscience.  But  this  plainly  runs  beyond  the 
period  of  our  responsibility  into  the  account  of  those  to  whom  our  childhood  was 
subject.  Our  chief  difficulty  is  in  the  attempt  to  analyse  the  confused  and  hardened 
mass  of  self,  neglected  for  twenty,  thirty,  half  a  hundred  years ;  to  unravel  a  world 
of  knots  and  entanglements ;  to  find  the  beginning  of  the  clue.  Self-examination 
begun  late  in  life  mast  remand  the  chief  part  of  its  discoveries  to  the  day  of 


656  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xiix. 


judgment.  2.  The  other  security  is  the  only  one  which  remains  to  those  who  have 
never  enjoyed  the  first ;  and  that  is  to  take  the  judgment  of  some  other  person, 
instead  of  trusting  in  themselves.  It  will  be,  no  doubt,  painful  and  distressing ; 
it  will  bring  shame  and  burning  of  face.  But  is  not  the  stake  worth  the  cost  ? 
(Archdeacon  Manning.) 


CHAPTER   XXIX. 


Ver.  1.  He  that,  being  often  reproved,  hardeneth  his  necTi.— The  doom  of  the 
incorrigible  sinner : — This  proverb  may  be  accommodated  to  all  the  affairs  of  life. 
In  whatever  course  a  man  blunders  on,  headstrong  and  regardless  of  advice  and 
admonition,  it  will  ruin  him  at  last,  as  far  as  the  matter  is  capable  of  working  hia 
ruin.  But  here  principal  reference  is  to  religion.  Often  reproved — this  is  un- 
doubtedly our  character.  Eeproved  by  men  from  all  quarters.  The  Word  of  God 
has  reproved  us.  God  has  reproved  us  by  His  providence  in  private  and  publio 
calamities.  God  has  reproved  us  more  immediately  by  His  Spirit.  We  have  also 
been  our  own  monitors.  Conscience  has  often  pronounced  our  doom.  Even  the 
irrational  creatures  and  infernal  spirits  may  have  been  our  monitors.  Solomon 
assumes  that  a  man  may  be  often  reproved,  and  yet  harden  his  neck  ;  that  is, 
obstinately  refuse  submission  and  reformation.  Nothing  but  a  sullen  and  senseless 
beast  can  represent  the  stupid,  unreasonable  conduct  of  that  man  who  hardens 
himself  in  sin,  against  the  strongest  dissuasion  and  reproofs  from  God  and  His 
creatures.  The  stifi  neck  that  will  not  bend  to  the  yoke  of  obedience  must  be 
broken,  and  its  own  stiffness  renders  it  the  more  easily  broken.  It  may  harden 
itself  into  insensibility  under  reproof,  but  it  cannot  harden  itself  into  insensibility 
under  Divine  judgments.  He  shall  be  suddenly  destroyed.  Sudden  ruin  ia 
aggravated  because  it  strikes  a  man  into  a  consternation.  There  is  dreadful  reason 
to  fear  that  you  will  always  continue  in  your  present  condition  if  you  persist  in 
being  proof  against  aU  admonition.  {S.  Davies,  M.A.)  The  duty  of  reprovert 
and  persons  reproved  : — The  verse  may  be  read,  "  He  that  reproveth  another,  and 
hardeneth  his  own  neck."  The  Hebrew  is,  "  A  man  of  reproofs,  that  hardens  his 
own  neck."  1.  Such  a  reprover  of  sin  does  it  against  his  o£6ce.  The  office  of  a 
reprover  binds  him  to  be  blameless.  2.  Such  a  reprover  can  never  reprove  to  a 
right  end.  It  is  not  because  he  hates  sin  ;  if  he  did  he  would  put  it  away  from 
himself.  3.  Such  a  reprover  can  never  do  it  in  a  right  manner.  As  long  as  a  man 
has  a  beam  in  his  own  eye  he  cannot  rightly  deal  with  the  mote  in  his  brother's. 
4.  Such  a  reprover  is  a  hypocrite.  5.  Such  a  reprover  is  inexcusable.  His 
reproving  another  man's  sin  makes  himself  inexcusable  of  his  own.  6.  Such  a 
reprover  is  an  absurd  and  impudent  person.  Such  a  man  both  wrongs  his  own 
soul  and  dishonours  God.  But  the  verse  may  be  read,  "  He  that,  being  often 
reproved,  hardeneth  his  neck."  Hebrew  is,  "  Hardens  his  own  neck."  A  "  man  of 
reproofs  "  equals  a  man  often  reproved.  The  Lord  does  not  destroy  a  man  nakedly, 
but  upon  consideration  of  sin.  What  a  great  sin  it  is,  what  a  great  ill  it  is,  for  a 
man  to  sin  against  his  reproofs.  The  greatness  of  the  ill  is  set  down  in  two  ways. 
1.  By  the  great  sinfulness  of  the  thing.  It  is  called  the  hardening  of  a  man's  own 
neck.  2.  By  the  greatness  of  the  punishment  that  God  inflicts  upon  this  sin. 
When  God  reproves  a  man  of  sin,  the  reproof  primarily  comes  out  of  love.  The 
end  of  reproof  is  to  bring  a  man  to  good,  to  reduce  him  into  a  right  way,  to  convert 
a  man,  and  save  his  soul.  There  is  no  reason  in  the  world  why  reproof  should  be 
taken  otherwise  than  with  all  willingness  and  thankfulness  and  cheerfulness. 
First  use  of  this :  See  here  what  an  infinite  punishment  God  is  bringing  upon  a 
kingdom  when  He  is  taking  away  reprovers  from  them.  The  second  use  makes 
against  those  that  despise  the  reproof  of  the  wise.  "Ye  despise  not  men,  but 
God."  The  Lord  proportions  punishments  to  men's  sins.  1.  Because  hereby  a 
man's  punishment  appears  to  be  so  much  the  more  equal  and  worthy.  2.  Because 
this  stops  a  man's  mouth  ;  it  convinceth  a  man's  conscience.  3.  All  the  standera- 
by  see  the  equity  of  it.  Consider  and  see  how  God  proportions  punishments  to  sins 
in  kind,  quantity,  quality,  time,  and  place.  (William  Fenner.)  The  certain  doom 
of  the  impenitent : — I.  The  true  idea,  of  bepboof.  Whatever  is  calculated  in  its 
gwu  ualuic  or  relations  to  arrest  the  attention  of  the  mind,  and  call  men  to  see 


CHAP.  XXIX.]  PROVERBS.  657 

their  neglect  of  duty,  or  the  obligation  they  owe  to  God,  involves  the  true  idea  of 
reproof.      II.  Thk  ways  in  which   God   administkks   beproof.      God  exercises  a 
universal  providence.    By  judgments  God  ofttimes  administers  reproof.    The  Holy 
Spirit  reproves  by  convincing  the  sinner  of  his  sins  and  producing  in  his  mind 
visitations  of  remorse.     III.  The  design  of  bepboof.      To  effect  a  reformation. 
He  means  to  secure  this  end  by  forbearance.     When  He  finds  thajt  will  not  do,  then 
He  uses  the  rod.     IV,  The  meaning  of  haedening  the  neck.     The  figure  is  that 
of  a  bullock  working  with  a  yoke  upon  his  neck.     The  neck  becomes  callous  with 
the  pressure  of  the  yoke.     Men  are  represented  as  pushing  against  God's  provi- 
dence, and  thus  making  their  necks  hard.     The  conscience  of  the  sinner  becomes 
quite  callous  under  reproof  if  he  does  not  yield  to  it.     V.  The  meaning  of  being 
suddenly  desteoyed.     Opposition  and  destruction  will  always  go  together.     The 
conscience  becomes  so  stupefied  that  men  lose  the  sense  of  danger.     The  danger  of 
men  is  great,  just  in  proportion  as  they  cease  to  be  affected  by  a  sense  of  it ;  when 
men  feel  the  most  secure,  if  they  are  living  in  sin,  then  destruction  is  most  certain ; 
and  when  it  comes  it  wiU  be  sudden,  because  they  do  not  expect  it  at  all.     This  is 
not  arbitrary  on  the  part  of  God ;    it  is  a  natural  consequence  of  the  sinner's 
conduct.     (C  G.  Finney.)        Hardening  perilous  : — I.  A  case  supposed.     1.  You 
have  often  been  reproved  by  kind  and  judicious  parents.     2.  Or  by  some  faithful 
friend  who  has   seen  your  tendency  to  evil,  and  has  stepped  in  to  prevent  the 
destruction  which  he  saw  was  on  its  way.     3.  A  still  larger  class  among  us  God 
has  counselled  and  reproved  by  His  ministering  servants.      4.  Many  have  been 
reproved  by  afflictions  of  various  kinds.      11.  The  sevebe   judgment    hebe   de- 
nounced.    The  threat  of  the  text  is  only  against  those  who  persevere  in  iniquity 
amidst  aU  their  religious  privileges,  who  wiU  not  be  warned  nor  instructed,  who 
reject  all  advice  and  admonition,  all  offers  of  grace  and  mercy.    Keflect  on  the 
suddenness,   the  greatness,  and  the  eternity  of    the    destruction    which   awaits 
impenitent  offenders.     But  we   only  preach   destruction  that  we  may  make  you 
feel  your  need  of  salvation ;  and  then,  when  we  have  awakened  your  fears,  how 
gladly  do  we  point  you  to  the  refuge  and  the  remedy.     (-S.  Bridge,  M.A.)        A 
solemn   warning  : — I.    God's   lingering   long-suffebinq.      He  reproves.      Why  ? 
That  we  may  turn  and  live.     He  reproves  often.     Why?    Because  "He  is  not 
willing  that  any  should  perish."     II.  Man's   insane   infatuation.     "Hardeneth 
his  neck."     Too  many  "  reject  the  Word  of  the  Lord."     1.  How  terrible  the  power 
of  sin !     2.  How  deceitful  the  heart  of  man !     3.  How  inexcusable  and  suicidal 
the  sinner !      IH.  The   tebeible   threatening.      God's   long-suffering   will    not 
always  last.     1.  "The  sinner   shall   be    destroyed;   his   destruction  is   certain." 
2.  Be  destroyed ;  his  destruction  fearful.     3.  Shall  suddenly  ;  we  know  not  what 
a  day  may  bring  forth.     IV.  The  awful  appendix.     "  And  that  without  remedy." 
There  is  a  remedy  here  and  now,  however  sinful  we  have  been,  but  there  will  be 
none  hereafter.      {David  Jamison,  B.A.)         Often  reproved  :—I.  The  character 
implied,    n.  The  reproof  given.     "  Often  reproved."    III.  The  reproof  rejected. 
"  Hardeneth  his  neck."     Setteth  himself  against  taking  the  reproof,  as  a  stubborn 
ox  against  taking  the  yoke.     Indifferent  to  it.    Laughs  at  it.     Becomes  worse. 
Obstinate  in  doing  evil  and  in  resisting  good.     "  Mind  your  own  business."     "  I 
am  my  own  master."     Throws   off   all  restraint.     Becomes  sceptical,   perhaps 
atheistic ;  scorns  at  religion  and  religious  people.     IV.  The  punishment  threatened. 
"  Shall  suddenly,"  &c.    He  shall  be  cut  off  from  hope ;  from  friends ;  from  honour ; 
from  happiness ;  from  all  liis  desirable  possessions — suddenly ;  prematurely  cut 
off ;  unexpectedly :   apoplexy  ;   disaster  in  travelling,  &c.    Irretrievable ;  eternal. 
Conclusion :  1.  A  limit  to  God's  long-suffering.     2.  To  live  against  Divine  reproofs 
is  perilous.    3.  Divine  reproofs  are  Divine  mercies.     4.  Exhort  sinners.     (John 
Bate.) 

Ver.  2.  Wlien  the  righteous  are  in  authority,  the  people  rejoice. — The  happiness 
ofthepeople  : — Man  is,  for  the  most  part,  equally  unhappy  when  subjected,  without 
redress,  to  the  passions  of  another,  or  left,  without  control,  to  the  dominion  of  his 
own.  Government  is  necessary  to  the  safety  of  particular  men  and  the  happiness 
of  society.  The  people  cannot  rejoice  except  the  righteous  are  in  authority. 
L  The  duty  of  those  in  authobity  to  pbomote  the  happiness  of  the  people. 
No  man  is  bom  merely  for  his  own  sake,  to  consult  his  own  advantage  or 
pleasure,  and  unconnected  with  the  good  of  others.  This  is  more  evidently  true 
of  those  who  are  exalted  into  high  rank,  dignified  with  honours,  and  vested  with 
authority.     He  who  wears  the  honours  and  receives  the  revenues  of  an  exalted 

4«> 


658  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.xxix. 

Btation,  without  attending  to  the  duties  of  his  post,  is,  in  a  very  high  degree, 
criminal,  both  in  the  eye  of  God  and  man.  II.  By  what  me.a.ns  the  happiness  o» 
THE  PEOPLE  MAT  BE  MOST  EFFECTUALLY  PBOMOTED.  The  Only  Uniform  and  per- 
petual cause  of  public  happiness  is  public  virtue.  Without  virtue  nothing  can  be 
securely  possessed  or  properly  enjoyed.  In  a  country  like  ours  the  great  demand  is 
for  the  security  of  property,  the  confirmation  of  liberty,  and  the  extension  of  com- 
merce. If  riches  and  liberty  could  make  us  happy,  it  would  remain  to  be  considered 
how  riches  and  liberty  can  be  secured.  Human  laws  must  be  limited  in  their  effects. 
The  deficiencies  in  civil  life  can  be  supplied  only  by  religion.  The  first  duty  of  a 
governor  is  therefore  to  diffuse  through  the  community  a  spirit  of  religion.  To  this 
end  it  is  necessary  that  the  external  order  of  religion  be  diligently  maintained,  that  the 
solemnities  of  worship  be  duly  observed,  and  a  proper  reverence  preserved  for  the 
times  and  places  appropriated  to  piety.  And  governors  must  co-operate  with  their 
laws  by  their  own  examples.  III.  How  the  people  are  to  assist  and  further  the 
ENDEAVOURS  OF  THEIR  GOVERNORS.  Natious  caunot  be  governed  but  by  their  own 
consent.  The  first  duty  of  subjects  is  obedience  to  the  laws.  No  man  thinks  laws 
unnecessary  for  others ;  and  no  man,  if  he  considers  his  own  inherent  frailty,  can 
justly  think  them  unnecessary  for  himself.  Even  the  errors  and  deficiencies  of 
authority  must  be  treated  with  respect.  All  institutions  are  defective  by  their 
nature,  and  all  rulers  have  their  imperfections,  like  other  men.  As  government  is 
difficult  to  be  administered,  so  it  is  difficult  to  be  understood  ;  and  where  very  few 
have  capacity  to  judge,  very  few  have  a  right  to  censure.  The  laws  will  be  easily 
obeyed  by  him  who  adds  to  human  sanctions  the  obligations  of  conscience  ;  and  he 
will  not  easily  be  disposed  to  censure  his  superiors  whom  religion  has  made 
acquainted  with  his  own  failings.  {John  Taylor.)  A  righteous  government : — 
I.  Some  of  the  chief  advantages  that  people  enjoy  under  a  righteous 
government.  1.  The  laws  are  duly  executed.  This  keeps  all  the  springs  of  the 
body  politic  in  their  right  tone,  and  gives  life  and  vigour  to  their  motion.  2.  True 
merit  finds  protection  and  encouragement  under  it.  This  enlivens  people's  spirits 
and  makes  them  study  to  be  serviceable  upon  a  right  principle.  3.  Such  a  govern- 
ment appears  abroad  with  weight  and  authority.  Bighteousness  exalteth  a  nation 
and  spreads  its  fame  and  reputation  in  countries  far  remote.  4.  Such  a  govern- 
ment is  attended  with  the  blessing  of  God.  II.  How  ought  people  to  express 
their  joy  when  the  righteous  are  in  authority?  1.  By  a  ready  and  cheerful 
obedience  to  authority.  2.  By  grateful  acknowledgments  to  God  for  so  great  a 
blessing.  3.  The  people  should  express  their  joy  by  their  gratitude  to  such  rulers. 
(Bp.  John  Hough.) 

Ver.  5.  A  man  that  flattereth  his  neighbour  spreadeth  a  net  for  his  feet — 

Hattery. — I.  What  flattery  is.  The  nature  and  property  of  it  is  to  put  on  all 
forms  and  shapes,  according  to  the  exigence  of  the  occasion.  He  that  would  paint 
flattery  must  draw  a  picture  of  all  colours,  and  frame  a  universal  face,  indifferent 
to  any  particular  aspect  whatever.  It  shows  itself — 1.  In  concealing  or  dissembling 
of  the  defects  and  vices  of  any  person.  It  will  pretend  not  to  see  faults,  and  if  it  does, 
it  will  be  sure  not  to  reprove  them.  All  people  are  not  called  to  reprove  others. 
(1)  Who  are  they  that  are  concerned  to  speak  in  this  case  ?  Such  as  are  entrusted 
with  the  government  of  others.  Those  who  are  entrusted  with  the  guidance  and 
direction  of  others.  Those  that  profess  friendship.  (2)  In  what  spirit  are  these 
reprehensions  to  be  managed  ?  Let  the  reproof,  if  possible,  be  given  in  secret.  Let 
it  be  managed  with  due  respect  to  and  distinction  of  the  condition  of  the  person 
that  is  to  be  reproved.  Let  him  that  reproves  a  vice  do  it  with  words  of  meekness 
and  consideration ;  without  superciliousness  or  spiritual  arrogance.  A  reproof 
should  not  be  continued  or  repeated  after  amendment  of  that  which  occasioned 
the  reproof.  2.  In  praising  or  defending  the  defects  or  vices  of  any  person.  If  to 
persuade  men  out  of  the  acknowledgment  of  the  evil  and  unlawfulness  of  their 
actions  be  flattery,  then  none  are  so  deeply  chargeable  with  flattery  as  these  two 
sorts  of  men — such  as,  upon  principles  of  enthusiasm,  assure  persons  of  e  ainence 
and  high  place  that  those  transgressions  of  the  Divine  law  are  allowable  in  them 
that  are  absolutely  prohibited  and  condemned  in  others,  and  the  Roman  casuists, 
who  have  made  it  their  greatest  study  to  put  a  new  face  upon  sin.  This  kind  of 
flattery  is  of  very  easy  effect,  by  reason  of  the  nature  of  man,  and  the  nature  of  vice 
itself.  From  these  two  considerations  we  may  easily  gather  how  open  the  hearts 
of  most  men  lie,  to  drink  in  the  fawning  suggestions  of  any  sycophant  that  shall 
endeavour  to  relieve  their  disturbed  consciences  by  gilding  their  villainies  with  the 


CHAP,  ixn.]  PROVERBS.  659 

name  of  virtues.  3.  In  imitating  any  one's  defects  or  vices.  Actions  are  much 
more  considerable  than  words  or  discourses.  To  any  generous  and  free  spirit  it  is 
really  a  very  nauseous  and  fulsome  thing  to  see  some  prostitute  their  tongues  and 
their  judgments,  by  saying  as  others  say,  commending  what  they  commend,  and 
framing  themselves  to  any  absurd  gesture  or  motion  that  they  observe  in  them. 
Every  kind  of  imitation  speaks  the  person  that  imitates  him  inferior  to  whom  he 
imitates,  as  the  copy  is  to  the  original.  4.  An  overvaluing  those  virtues  and  per- 
fections that  are  really  laudable  in  any  person.  This  is  more  modest  and  tolerable, 
there  being  some  groundwork  of  desert.  II.  The  grounds  and  occasions  op 
TLATTEEY.  1.  Grcatucss  of  place  and  condition.  Men  consider  the  great  danger  of 
speaking  freely  to  great  persons  what  they  are  not  willing  to  hear.  It  may  enrage, 
and  make  them  mortal  enemies.  2.  An  angry,  passionate  disposition  This  also 
frights  and  deters  men  from  doing  the  office  of  friends,  in  a  faithful  reprehension. 
3.  A  proud  and  vainglorious  disposition.  To  tell  a  proud  person  of  his  faults  is 
to  tell  infallibility  that  it  is  in  an  error,  and  to  spy  out  something  amiss  in  perfec- 
tion, m.  The  ends  and  designs  of  it  on  his  pakt  that  flatters.  Every  flatterer 
is  actuated  and  influenced  by  these  two  grand  purposes — to  serve  himself,  and  to 
undermine  him  whom  he  flatters,  and  thereby  to  effect  his  ruin.  For  he  deceives 
him,  and  grossly  abuses  and  perverts  his  judgment,  which  should  be  the  guide  and 
director  of  all  his  actions.  He  that  is  thoroughly  deceived  is  in  the  very  next  dis- 
position to  be  ruined ;  for  cast  but  a  mist  before  a  man's  eyes,  and  whither  may 
you  not  lead  him  ?  And  he  undermines,  and  perhaps  in  the  issue  ruins,  him  whom 
he  flatters,  by  bringing  him  to  shame  and  a  general  contempt.  Moreover,  by  his 
flattery  and  its  consequences,  he  renders  his  recovery  and  amendment  impossible. 
Every  fault  in  a  man  shuts  the  door  upon  virtue,  but  flattery  is  the  thing  that  seals 
it.  (R.  South.)  The  tendency  of  flattery  : — In  this  verse  Solomon  does  not  refer 
solely  to  the  intention  of  the  flatterer ;  he  refers  also  to  the  tendency  of  the 
flattery.  The  latter  may  be  far  from  harmless,  even  although  to  a  greater  degree 
the  former  may.  Injury  may  be  done,  and  many  a  time  is  done,  when  no  harm  is 
meant  to  the  party,  and  when  there  is  no  interest  of  our  own  to  serve.  And  there 
is  no  little  guilt  on  the  part  of  those  who,  seeing  vanity  to  be  a  man's  failing,  set 
themselves  on  purpose  to  feed  it,  pouring  into  the  ear,  merely  in  the  way  of  an 
amusing  experiment,  every  description  of  fulsome  adulation,  trying  how  much  and 
in  what  variety  it  will  be  taken  in.  {R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  Flattery : — The  weak- 
ness of  the  human  heart  exposeth  it  to  innumerable  dangers.  Constant  attention 
is  necessary  to  preserve  it  secure,  because  it  is  often  assailed  on  the  most  unsus- 
pected side.  The  conceit  and  vanity,  which  all  men  have  in  some  degree,  renders 
troth  itself  often  dangerous.  It  is  the  prerogative  of  God  alone  to  receive  praise 
without  danger.  He  hears,  and  is  pleased  to  hear,  the  endless  hymns  of  His  angels. 
He  hears  the  voice  of  praise  ascending  from  all  nature:  the  infinite  variety  of 
beings  celebrating  Him  as  the  great,  the  just,  the  merciful  God.  He  receives  those 
truths  without  prejudice  to  His  holiness  ;  because,  being  in  HimseK  essentially  holy 
and  true,  these  attributes  can  never  jar,  nor  harm  each  other.  It  is  far  otherwise 
with  us :  unstable  ourselves  as  water,  our  very  virtues  partake  of  this  instability  ; 
whence  ariseth  the  necessity  of  our  suspecting  everything  that  flatters  us,  because 
there  is  nothing  in  general  more  seductive  and  deceitful ;  and  of  all  delusions,  there 
is  none  more  shameful  and  pernicious  than  that  which,  by  the  suggestions  of  self- 
love,  makes  us  take  falsehood  for  truth,  and  think  of  ourselves  more  highly  than  we 
ought  to  think.  People  teU  us  what  we  ought  to  be  rather  than  what  we  are,  and 
we,  by  a  pitiable  blindness  of  running  into  the  snare  that  is  spread  for  us,  believe 
ourselves  to  be  indeed  what  adulation  represents  us.  In  this  manner  it  often 
happens  that  a  man  who  is  naturally  modest,  and  who  would  be  humble  if  he 
knew  himself,  intoxicated  with  this  vain  incense,  thinks  himself  possessed  of  merits 
which  he  never  possessed ;  thanks  God  for  graces  which  God  never  gave  him ; 
acknowledgeth  the  reception  of  talents  which  he  never  received ;  ascribes  to  himself 
successes  which  he  never  had;  and  enjoys  himself  secretly,  while  he  is  openly 
despised.  Some  learned  men  have  very  plausibly  ascribed  the  origin  of  those 
idolatrous  superstitions  that  prevailed  so  long  in  the  world  to  that  inclination 
which  men  have  of  believing  what  is  advantageous,  however  incredible  it  may  really 
be.  Certain  men  were  told  that  they  were  gods  ;  and,  by  often  hearing  this  told 
them,  they  became  accustomed  to  be  honoured  and  treated  as  gods.  Those  who 
first  held  that  language  to  them  knew  very  well  that  it  was  false  ;  yet,  from  a  spirit 
of  flattery,  they  performed  every  action  that  they  would  otherwise  have  done  from 
a  spirit  of  sincerity  had  they  been  convinced  that  what  they  spoke  was  true.    \Ya 


660  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ixn. 

dare  not  say  that  this  error  is  entirely  destroyed  even  by  Christianity  :  vestiges  of 
it  remain  everywhere,  and  a  species  of  idolatry  is  established  by  the  custom  of  the 
•world.  We  tell  the  rich  and  the  great  no  more  that  they  are  gods,  but  we  tell  them 
that  they  are  not  as  other  men  are  ;  that  they  want  those  weaknesses  which  others 
have,  and  possess  those  qualities  which  others  want :  we  separate  them  so  from  the 
rest  of  mankind  that,  forgetting  what  they  are,  they  think  themselves  gods ;  not 
considering  that  their  admirers  are  interested  persons,  determined  to  please  them,  or 
rather  determined  to  deceive  them.  Nor  may  we  confine  ourselves  to  the  great  and 
powerful  ones  of  the  world  to  justify  this  observation :  the  idolatry  I  speak  of  reigns 
equally  in  the  lower  conditions,  and  produceth  there  proportionable  effects.  Thus  a 
woman  is  idolised  by  interested  and  designing  men,  till  she  knows  herself  no  more ; 
and,  though  marked  with  a  thousand  faults  and  imperfections,  yet  thinks  of  cor- 
recting none  of  them  ;  believing  herself  a  subject  every  way  accomplished,  the  joy 
and  admiration  of  the  whole  world,  because  such  phrases  are  constantly  employed 
for  her  seduction  and  ruin.  The  contradiction  is,  that  in  the  midst  of  all  this,  those 
men,  so  vain  and  so  passionate  for  glory,  never  cease  to  protest  that  the  thing  they 
abhor  most  is  to  be  deceived ;  in  the  meantime  they  wish  to  be  praised,  flattered, 
and  admired,  as  if  flattery  and  delusion  could  possibly  be  separated.  What 
resolution,  then,  can  we  take  to  avoid  these  errors  ?  We  must  resolve  to  distrust 
even  truth,  when  it  seems  to  flatter  us ;  because  there  is  no  appearance  of  truth 
which  approacheth  so  near  to  falsehood,  and  consequently,  there  is  none  so  much 
exposed  to  the  dangers  of  falsehood.  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  who,  according  to  the 
Scripture,  was  the  firm  and  immovable  Kock,  to  whom  the  praises  of  the  universe 
were  due,  as  the  tribute  of  His  supreme  grandeur  and  adorable  perfections,  yet 
while  on  earth  would  not  suffer  those  truths  which  made  for  His  honour  and 
glory.  He  wrought  wonders ;  He  cured  the  blind  and  the  deaf ;  He  raised  the 
dead  ;  yet  when  the  people  began  to  celebrate  His  name  for  this,  and  to  cry  that  He 
was  the  prophet  of  God,  He  enjoined  them  silence,  and  seemed  upon  the  whole 
extremely  impatient  of  applause.  {A.  Macdonald.)  Flattery  a  web  : — I.  Vari- 
ously WROUGHT.  Woven  of  many  threads,  and  of  various",  hues.  Some  are  coarse 
as  a  rope,  others  as  fine  as  a  gossamer  web  ;  all  are  suited  to  the  character  of  the 
prey  to  be  caught.     II.  Widely  spread.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  8.  Scornful  men  bring  a  city  into  a  snare. — The  snares  of  the  metropolis  : — 
As  residents  in  London  we  ask.  Is  there  as  much  wickedness  here  as  in  other  great 
cities  ?  Are  there  snares  and  temptations  of  a  peculiar  character,  and  highly 
dangerous  to  the  rising  youth  of  the  age  ?  1.  One  of  the  snares  is  the  spirit  of  the 
world — the  spirit  of  competition  and  a  low  tone  of  moral  feeling.  2.  Irreligious 
habits.  3.  Irreligious  associates  ;  such  as  the  young  man  who  is  not  conscientioaa 
in  the  discharge  of  his  ordinary  duties  ;  the  young  man  who  is  devoted  to  pleasure. 
4.  Late  hours.  This  leads  to  neglect  of  prayer.  And  the  late  hour  is  the  hour  of 
sin.  5.  Lewd  women.  This  snare  involves  great  moral  debasement,  the  prostra- 
tion of  all  intellectual  power,  and  the  annihilation  of  all  benevolent  and  elevated 
feeling.    And  to  this  specific  form  other  vices  will  adhere.     (R.  Aiiislie.) 

Ver.  15.  The  rod  and  reproof  give  wisdom :  but  a  child  left  to  himself  bringeth 
his  mother  to  shame. — A  neglected  education,  the  parentis  dishonour : — I.  Look  at 
THE  CHILD  LEFT  TO  HIMSELF.  That  is,  without  reproof,  and  that  grave  advice  which 
gives  wisdom.  The  original  term  is  applied  to  the  unbridled  impetuosity  of  an 
animal.  The  child,  if  not  held  in  by  the  bit  and  bridle  of  a  religious  education — 
if  left  to  the  impetuosity  of  his  own  passions — will  be  ruined.  Appeal  to  the 
nature  of  things.  What  is  there  left  to  itself  that  comes  to  any  good  ?  What  is 
land  without  inclosure  and  cultivation  ?  Appeal  to  experience  as  to  the  effect  of  a 
neglected  education.  Who  are  the  pests  of  society  ?  Appeal  to  Scripture. 
II.  The  effect  of  this  neglect.  Look  at  the  parent.  "  Bringeth  his  mother  to 
shame."  This  is  only  one  result.  Other  things  follow.  Ruin  to  the  child's 
principles.  All  the  consequences  of  his  conduct  to  a  neighbourhood.  Tendencies 
to  sap  the  foundations  of  morality  and  justice  between  man  and  man.  In  all  this 
there  seems  to  be  a  remarkable  feature  of  the  retributive  justice  of  God  in  His 
moral  government.  The  education  of  children  in  the  fear  of  God  is  one  of  the 
first  and  self-evident  duties,  the  foundation  of  all  moral  good.  But  it  is  implied 
that  a  child  carefully  trained  for  God  and  religion  shall  not  bring  his  mother  to 
shame.  III.  The  motives  flowing  from  these  considerations.  1.  Enforce  this 
duty  on  our  own  hearts.     2.  See  it  in  reference  to  the  children  of  the  poor.     3.  The 


CHAT.  XXIX.]  PROVERBS,  861 

need  of  guarding  children  against  the  evil  influence  of  the  press.  Show  what 
religion  you  possess  by  your  endeavours  to  educate  your  children  religiously. 
{Daniel  Wilson,  M.  A.)  A  child  neglected,  a  parent's  disgrace: — I.  The  atfectiko 
OBJECT :  "  A  child  left  to  himself."  AUusion  is  probably  intended  to  the  natural 
impetuosity  of  a  horse.  1.  A  child  left  without  religious  instruction.  Parents  are 
enjoined  to  "  train  up  a  child  in  the  way  he  should  go  "  :  not  the  way  he  would  go. 
Education  must  have  its  foundation  in  Scripture.  The  spirit  of  the  age  requires 
that  parental  instructions  should  be  of  a  decidedly  Scriptural  character.  The  work 
of  instilling  Divine  truth  must  be  commenced  early.  Train  them  to  early  habits  of 
industry,  to  diligent  reading  of  the  Scriptures,  and  to  constant  prayer.  2.  A  child 
left  without  fervent  prayer.  Do  you  know  the  way  to  a  throne  of  grace,  and  can 
you  forget  the  child  of  your  affections?  If  you  do  not  pray  for  him  it  is  not 
likely  that  you  will  pray  with  him.  3.  A  child  left  without  a  good  example. 
Children  understand  actions  better  than  words.  The  parent  who,  by  his  ungodly 
example,  betrays  the  confidence  of  his  child  by  leading  him  in  the  way  of  sin  when 
he  should  guide  him  in  the  paths  of  piety  and  peace  is  guilty  of  a  species  of  cruelty 
difficult  to  be  described.  4.  A  child  left  to  himself  is  one  without  salutary  restraint. 
Instruction  should  be  enforced  by  authority.  If  you  lose  your  influence,  the  child 
will  assume  it  and  rule  you,  when  you  should  govern  him.  In  compelling  obedience 
the  happy  medium  should  be  observed  between  too  much  harshness  on  the  one 
hand  and  too  great  laxity  on  the  other.  Eli  does  not  appear  to  have  failed  either 
in  instruction  or  example,  but  he  is  censured  for  withholding  restraint.  Let  there 
be  energy  of  character,  efficient  discipline,  the  tenderness  of  love  blended  with 
firmness  of  decision,  and  there  will  seldom  be  a  necessity  for  adopting  any  painful 
or  severe  measures.  II.  The  parent's  disqkace.  The  duties  and  responsibilities 
of  parents  are  mutual.  It  must,  however,  be  admitted  that  a  mother's  influence  is 
more  powerful,  her  appeals  more  touching,  her  access  to  the  heart  more  easy.  But 
how  many  parents  have  passed  days  of  sorrow  and  nights  of  sleeplessness  in  con- 
sequence of  the  misconduct  of  their  offspring  1  Much  of  your  future  happiness  is 
in  the  hands  of  your  children.  Look  at  the  nature  of  things.  A  field  without 
cultivation  would  speedily  be  overgrown  by  noxious  weeds.  Appeal  to  experience. 
Who  are  the  Sabbath-breakers,  the  drunkards,  the  lawless  and  disobedient,  the 
scoffers  at  Divine  things  ?  Are  they  not  the  persons  who,  in  their  childhood  and 
youth,  were  left  to  themselves  ?  Examine  facts.  David  was  brought  to  shame  by 
Absalom  and  Adonijah.  Hophni  and  Phineas  brought  Eli  to  shame.  1.  A  word 
of  expostulation.  You  are  leaving  your  children  to  themselves  because  you  have 
never  felt  the  value  of  your  own  soul.  Think  of  your  own  comfort.  Think  of 
your  country's  welfare.  Think  of  the  approbation  of  heaven.  2.  A  word  of 
exhortation.  Your  danger  is  great.  Kepent  and  believe  the  gospel.  3.  A  word  of 
encouragement.  The  Christian  parent  has  much  to  animate  him  in  the  conscien- 
tious discharge  of  his  duty.  All  the  promises  of  God,  the  experience  of  the  past, 
and  the  hope  of  the  future  encourage  his  affectionate  endeavours  to  train  up  his 
children  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  He  must  not,  however,  expect  harvest  in  spring. 
(Janies  Cottle,  B.A.)  The  importance  of  early  discipline  : — If  we  have  conscien- 
tiously performed  any  particular  duty,  no  failure  in  the  object  to  which  it  has  been 
directed  can  inflict  disgrace.  We  may  do  our  part,  and  do  it  well,  but  we  cannot 
command  success  by  our  best  contrivances  and  our  utmost  diligence.  It  is  not 
every  child  who  is  trained  up  in  the  way  he  should  go  that  walks  in  that  way.  In 
such  cases,  deplorable  as  they  are,  no  disgrace  attaches  to  the  parent,  the  instructor, 
the  guardian.  It  is  when  the  duty  imposed  by  God  and  enforced  by  natural  feelings 
has  been  neglected  that  the  ignorant,  the  vicious,  or  the  worldly  character  becomes 
the  just  reproach  upon  those  to  whom  it  is  in  that  case  justly  to  be  ascribed.  "A 
child  left  to  himself."  How  many  ideas  of  compassion  are  suggested  by  these 
words  1  A  child,  however  carefully  nourished  and  guarded,  left  to  himself  in  regard 
to  his  soul,  his  intellect,  his  tempers,  habits,  and  character,  is  no  uncommon  case. 
A  child  left  to  himself  is  a  child  untaught.  For  them  to  be  grounded  in  the 
languages,  informed  in  history,  and  embellished  with  every  usual  branch  of  know- 
ledge and  accomplishment  is  not  enough.  To  know  God  alone  is  life  eternal.  Too 
often  children  are  practically  left  to  themselves  to  gather  their  notions  of  religion 
from  the  opinions  around  them  and  the  current  literature  of  the  day.  They  ought 
to  have  been  trained  from  childhood  to  know  the  Holy  Scriptures ;  they  should 
have  been  taught  their  ruined  state,  the  love  of  God  in  the  gift  of  His  Son,  and  the 
love  of  Christ  in  giving  Himself  to  the  death  upon  the  Cross.  The  child  untaught 
is  often  undisciplined  and  unrestrained.    The  twig  which  might  have  been  bent 


662  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxn, 

becomes  firm  as  the  gnarled  oak.  Habits  of  self-will,  habits  of  self -gratification, 
habits  of  idleness  perhaps,  prepare  for  everything  that  is  bad.  When  a  child  has 
been  thus  left  to  himself  what  can  be  expected  but  vice,  want  of  honourable 
principle,  a  character  passionate,  headstrong,  reckless  ?  It  cannot  be  a  surprise 
that,  in  such  a  case,  disgrace  is  thrown  back  upon  the  parents.  The  parent  and 
the  child  are  allied  as  long  as  recollection  can  associate  them,  and  honour  or  dis- 
honour they  reflect,  and  cannot  but  reflect,  upon  each  other.  If  parents  neglect 
the  soil  and  suffer  it  to  be  overrun  with  weeds  what  can  they  expect  to  be  the 
harvest  ?  The  shame  and  discredit  that  come  will  be  shared  by  both  parents,  but 
the  feeling  is  fastened  upon  the  heart  of  the  mother  in  a  manner  and  degree  which 
are  peculiarly  severe.  This  is  partly  the  case  because  so  much  depends  on  a 
mother's  care,  and  partly  because  of  the  keener  sensibilities  of  her  sex.  To  the 
mother  her  domestic  scene  is  the  whole  world.  The  shame  which  comes  upon  her 
as  the  punishment  of  neglected  duty  gathers  intensity  by  its  perpetual  concentra- 
tion of  the  reflection.  Let  me  urge  upon  you  as  parents  to  encounter  your  arduous 
and  responsible  duty  with  the  firm  resolve  that  you  will,  heaven's  grace  assisting 
you,  vigorously  discharge  it.  They  are  beings  to  eternity,  and  for  eternity  it  is  your 
duty  to  prepare  them.  (T.  Kennion,  M.A.)  Leaving  children  to  themselves  : — 
"Left  to  himself"  means  "left  alone,  with  nobody  to  mind  him  and  take  notice 
of  what  he  does."  This,  however,  does  not  seem  to  have  been  the  meaning  of  the 
author  of  the  proverb.  Hebrew  writers,  in  their  poetry,  would  sometimes  bring 
two  thoughts  together,  meaning  nearly  the  same,  only  expressed  in  different  words. 
Sometimes  they  would  bring  two  thoughts  together,  the  meaning  of  which  is  exactly 
opposite.  This  is  the  thing  we  have  in  the  text  Ijefore  us.  The  words  "rod  and 
reproof"  are  intended  to  be  opposite  to  the  words  "a  chUd  left  to  himself."  A 
mother  may  have  her  child  almost  always  with  her  and  yet  be  "  leaving  him  to 
himself."  A  child  is  "  left  to  himself  "  whenever  he  is  allowed  to  do  aa  he  likes, 
whenever  his  character  is  not  watched  over,  and  his  evil  inclinations  checked.  It 
is  the  spoilt  child  who  brings  his  mother  to  shame.  The  mother  is  specially 
mentioned  because  she  has  the  first  and  the  most  direct  and  constant  influence  on 
the  child.  And  when  children  are  allowed  to  do  as  they  like  it  is  usually  from  a 
weak  fondness  and  over-indulgence  on  the  mother's  part  rather  than  on  the  father's. 
In  all  reproof  of  the  faults  of  children  the  object  aimed  at  is  not  merely  to  guide 
them  aright  at  the  present  time,  but  also  to  make  them  able  to  guide  themselves 
aright  when  they  shall  have  become  older,  correct  their  own  faults,  and  restrain 
their  own  inclination  to  what  is  evil.  A  self-willed  chUd  "brings  his  mother  to 
shame,"  because  the  remarks  of  her  acquaintance  on  his  character  and  conduct 
never  fail  to  reach  her  ears.  In  nine  cases  out  of  ten,  shameful  conduct  on  the 
part  of  a  man  signifies  shameful  carelessness  on  the  part  of  that  man's  mother 
when  he  was  a  child  and  subject  to  her  authority  and  influence.  The  children  who 
are  sure  to  honour  their  mother  when  they  grow  up  are  those  who  in  childhood 
were  kept  in  their  proper  place,  whose  waywardness  and  inclination  to  what  is 
evil  were  kept  in  check  with  the  greatest  kindness  indeed,  but  still  with  the  greatest 
firmness.  Children  thus  trained  have  something  to  be  grateful  for.  One  cannot 
but  believe  that  the  grace  of  God  often  reclaims  in  after-years,  and  restores  to  what 
they  should  have  been,  many  of  those  whose  character  seemed  deeply  injured  and 
likely  to  be  ruined  by  the  mistaken  treatment  of  a  parent  in  childhood.  But  must 
it  not  sometimes  be  the  case  that  the  grace  of  God  does  not  reclaim  them  ?  For 
our  wills  are  free.  It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  a  father  and  a  mother 
constantly  differ  much  from  each  other  in  character  and  in  their  ideas  of  their 
duty  towards  their  children,  and  so  the  one  may  in  part  correct  the  mischievous 
influence  of  the  other.  And  the  evil  influence  of  home  is,  happily,  often  corrected 
by  the  beneficial  influence  of  school  discipline.  (W.  H.  Nauben,  M.A.)  Left  to 
himself: — 1.  Left  to  himself ,  he  will  not  fully  know  right  or  wrong.  2.  Left  to 
himself,  he  will  grow  proud  and  self-confident.  3.  Left  to  himself,  he  will  take  up 
with  bad  companions.  4.  Left  to  himself,  he  will  think  more  about  his  pleasures 
than  his  duties.  5.  Left  to  himself,  childish  follies  will  develop  into  man's  vices. 
(Robert  Tuck,  B.A.)  A  child  left  to  himself : — Thelwall  thought  it  very  unfair  to 
influence  a  child's  mind  by  inculcating  any  opinions  before  it  should  have  come  to 
years  of  discretion  and  be  able  to  choose  for  itself.  I  showed  him  my  garden,  and 
told  him  it  was  my  botanical  garden,  "  How  so  ?  "  said  he  ;  "  it  is  covered  with 
weeds."  "  Oh,"  I  replied,  "that  is  only  because  it  has  not  yet  come  to  its  age  of 
discretion  and  choice.  The  weeds,  you  see,  have  taken  the  liberty  to  grow,  and  I 
thought  it  unfair  in  me  to  prejudice  the  soil  towards  roses  and  strawberries." 


CHAP,  rxix.]  PROVERBS.  863 

(Coleridge't  Table  Talk.)  Children  impressed  by  gentle  rule  : — It  is  a  great 
mistake  to  suppose  that  what  will  make  a  child  stare  or  tremble  impresses  more 
authority.  The  violent  emphasis,  the  hard,  stormy  voice,  the  menacing  air  only 
weakens  authority  ;  it  commands  a  good  thing  as  if  it  were  only  a  bad,  and  fit  to 
be  no  way  impressed,  save  by  some  stress  of  assumption.  Let  the  command  be 
always  given  quietly,  as  if  it  had  some  right  in  itself  and  could  utter  itself  to  the 
conscience  by  some  emphasis  of  its  own.  Is  it  not  well  understood  that  a  bawling 
and  violent  teamster  has  no  real  government  of  his  team  ?  Is  it  not  practically 
seen  that  a  sMKul  commander  of  one  of  those  huge  floating  cities,  moved  by  steam 
on  our  Anaerican  waters,  manages  and  works  every  motion  by  the  waving  of  a 
hand,  or  by  signs  that  pass  in  silence — issuing  no  order  at  all,  save  in  the  gentlest 
undertone  of  voice  ?  So  when  there  is,  or  is  to  be,  a  real  order  and  law  in  the 
house,  it  will  come  of  no  hard  and  boisterous  or  fretful  and  termagent  way  of 
commandment.  Gentleness  will  speak  the  word  of  firmness,  and  firmness  will  be 
clothed  in  the  airs  of  true  gentleness.     (H.  Bushnell.) 

Ver.  18.  Where  there  is  no  vision,  the  people  perish. — The  improvement  of  the 
ministry  of  the  Word : — What  makes  a  people  very  unhappy  with  respect  to  the 
concerns  of  their  souls  ?  The  want  of  vision  puts  a  people  in  very  unhappy  cir- 
cumstances. By  vision  is  understood  prophecy.  By  prophecy  is  meant  the 
preaching,  expounding,  and  applying  the  Word  of  God.  Doctrine :  Though  the 
want  of  the  ministry  of  the  Word  makes  a  people  very  unhappy,  yet  it  is  not  the 
having  of  it,  but  the  right  improving  of  it  that  makes  them  happy.    I.  Deploeable 

IS    THE    CASE    OF    THOSE    WHO    ABE    DEPRIVED    OF    THE    MINISTRY   OF    THE  WoRD.       What 

makes  the  case  so  deplorable  ?  The  original  word  means,  the  people  are  naked, 
they  are  left  in  a  bare  condition  (Exod.  xxii.  25).  They  are  stripped  of  their 
ornaments,  to  their  shame.  They  are  stripped  of  their  armour,  left  naked  in  the 
midst  of  danger.  They  are  stripped  of  the  means  of  their  defence.  Hence  they 
are  exposed  in  a  special  manner  to  the  subtlety  and  violence  of  their  spiritual 
enemies,  without  the  ordinary  means  of  help.  Where  there  is  no  vision  the  people 
go  backward.  They  leave  their  first  love,  their  first  ways  in  religion ;  they  fall  into 
a  spiritual  decay  and  apostasy.  The  people  are  drawn  away :  from  their  God  and 
from  their  duty.  The  people  are  idle — they  give  over  their  work.  The  people 
perish — die  for  lack  of  instruction ;  are  destroyed  for  lack  of  knowledge.     11.  The 

MERE   HAVING    THE    MINISTRY   OF    THE    WoRD    IS    NOT    SUFFICIENT     TO    MAKE     A    PEOPLE 

PAPPY.  The  people  may  have  it,  and  yet  get  no  saving  benefit  from  it.  Outward 
privileges  make  no  man  a  happy  man.  The  mere  having  the  Word  wiU  aggravate 
the  condemnation  of  those  that  have  it  and  walk  not  answerably  to  it.     III.  A 

BIGHT   IMPROVEMENT     OF     THE     MERCY     OF     THE     WoRD    WILL    MAKE    A    HAPPY   PEOPLE. 

This  improvement  consists  in  two  things — 1.  Faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  2.  Holiness 
of  life.  This  improvement  wUl  make  happy  souls  here  and  hereafter.  Here,  in 
peace  with  God,  pardon  of  sin,  aU  spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ 
Jesus ;  and  hereafter  in  eternal  salvation.  It  bids  fair  for  prosperity  in  earthly 
things.  It  gives  happiness  under  the  crosses  and  trials  of  this  world.  It  puts  a 
happiness  into  the  relations  in  which  we  stand.  Directions  for  improving  the 
ministry  of  the  Word :  1.  Pray  much  for  a  real  benefit  from  ordinances.  2.  Dili- 
gently attend  upon  ordinances.  3.  Meditate  upon  what  you  hear,  and  converse 
with  one  another  about  it.  4.  Set  yourselves  humbly  to  obey  the  truths  delivered 
from  the  Lord's  Word,  embracing  them  by  faith.  5.  Put  your  hand  to  the  Lord's 
work  in  your  several  stations  in  your  families  and  among  those  with  whom  you 
converse,  to  prosecute  the  great  ends  of  the  gospel.  (T.  Boston,  D  D.)  The 
vitality  of  vision : — I.  Where  there  is  no  vision  of  the  present  working  of 
Christ  in  the  world,  charity  and  hope  fade.  The  progress  of  the  age  is  Christ's 
work.  Beneficial  operations  of  all  kinds  are  His  present-day  miracles.  The 
sympathy  of  the  age,  its  mission,  its  humanity,  its  sacrifice,  its  enthusiasm  for 
progress,  is  Christ's  doing.  Let  us  see  Him  in  the  past  and  in  the  present.  Then 
we  shall  have  a  nobler  faith,  a  larger  charity,  and  a  radiant  hopefulness. 
II.  Where  there  is  no  vision  of  the  Divine  Fatherhood,  devotion  decays. 
Our  devotional  life  accords  with  the  conception  of  God  we  hold  up  to  our  attention. 
If  we  think  of  God  as  stern,  arbitrary,  partial,  we  cannot  experience  love,  worship, 
trust,  sacrifice.  The  human  heart  is  constituted  to  love  only  the  lovable  ;  to  wor- 
ship only  the  perfect  and  benevolent ;  to  trust  only  the  just  and  true.  III.  Where 
there  is  no  vision  of  Divine  providence,  practical  energy  declines.  Give  up 
the  idea  of  a  Supreme  Mind  caring  for  all,  and  life  is  not  worth  living.     Let  the 


664  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xra. 

vision  of  the  all-embracing  providence  of  God  be  clear,  and  life  will  be  trans- 
figured. All  Christian  workers  are  thus  sustained.  Failure,  loss,  rejection,  may 
be  the  record  on  the  visible  side ;  but  faith  sees  on  the  unseen  side  an  all-compre- 
hending spiritual  kingdom,  and  says,  "  All  things  work  together  for  good." 
IV.  Whebe  there  is  no  vision  of  truth  and  fact,  knowledge  decays.  As 
tradition  and  conservation  prevail  truth  becomes  a  dead  carcase.  The  hour  for 
revival,  for  reform,  is  come,  and  the  minds  that  see  the  truth  lead  the  new  move- 
ment.    The  dreams  of  seers  renew  the  life  of  the  world's  thought.    V.  Where 

THERE     IS     NO     VISION     OF     THE     POSSIBILITIES     OF    HUMAN    NATURE,    SYMPATHY   DECAYS. 

Man  has  instinctively  recognised  his  fellow  as  spiritual,  as  free,  as  immortal,  as 
possessing  unlimited  capacities  of  progress,  and  as  the  object,  consequently,  of 
intense  interest  and  of  unlimited  love.     The  vision  of  that  ideal  of  man  is  the 
inspiration    of    all    philanthropy.    VI.  Where   there   is    no    vision    of    duty, 
HOLINESS   DECLINES.     Man  is  the  subject  of  relations.     The  highest  relation  he 
maintains  is  to  Christ.     His  life-care  is  the  duty  he  owes  to  Christ.    As  we  have 
that  vision  before   us,  we  shall  ennoble  all  we  do.     VII.  The  vision  of  heaven 
SAVES  hope  from  PERISHING.     The  inspiration  of  all  progress  is  hope.     The  most 
fruitful  hope  we  can  cherish  is  the  perfection  of  mankind  in  the  celestial  life  in 
fellowship  with  Christ.     Such  a  vision  ennobles,  sanctifies,  vitalises,  lights  up  the 
present  with  heavenly  radiance,  and  makes  death  the  gate  of  life.     (T.  Matthews.) 
Divine  vision  essential  to  human  salivation: — I.  True  vision  is  a  revelation  from 
God.    a  communication  not  furnished  by  nature ;    not  the  product  of   human 
intellect,  or  imagination,  or  fancy;   not  the  "tradition  of  the  elders,"  however 
venerable ;  but  a  special  unfolding  of  the  Divine  nature  and  government,  adapted 
to  the  moral  exigencies  of  the  race.     Such  a  communication  is  possible.     Such  is 
probable — 1.  From  conflicting  indications  of  the  Divine  character  furnished  by 
nature.     2.  The  universally  felt  moral  necessities  of    man.     Such   is   actually 
accomplished,  as  the  whole  body  of  Christian  evidence  attests.    II.  There  are 
MANY  PLACES  WHERE,  AS  YET,  THIS  VISION  IS  NOT.     Where  it  is  not  kuowu.     Where 
it  is  not  published.    Where  it  is  not  believed.     III.  Where  it  is  not,  the  people 
PERISH.     1.  It  alone  reveals  a  Saviour  and  a  salvation  adapted  to  man.     2.  It 
alone  is  associated  with  spiritual  power  to  deliver  man  from  the  bondage,  and 
misery,  and  guilt,  and  doom,  of  sin.     The  vision  of  God  is  to  them  that  possess  it 
a  most  precious  thing.     They  who  possess  it  not  ought  to  be  the  objects  of  the 
deepest  compassion.     They  who  do  possess  it  are  bound,  by  every  consideration  of 
gratitude  and  pity,  to  send  it  to  those  who  do  not.     {/.  M.  Jarvie.)        Divine 
revelation : — The  text  presents  two  facts  concerning  redemptive  revelation.    I.  Its 
ABSENCE  IS  A  GREAT  CALAMITY.     "  Where  there  is  no  vision,  the  people  perish." 
The  word  "  perish  "  has  been  variously  rendered:  some  read  "will  apostatise," 
others  "  are  made  naked,"  others  "  are  dispersed,"  others  "are  become  disorderly." 
All  renderings  agree  in  expressing  the  idea  of  calamity,  and  truly  is  it  not  a  sad 
calamity  to  be  deprived  of  the  Bible  ?    II.  Its  regulative  experience  is  a  great 
BLESSING.     "  He  that  keepeth  the  law,  happy  is  he."     This  "  vision  "  is  not  an 
abstraction  or  a  speculative  system — it  is  a  "law " ;  it  comes  with  Divine  authority  ; 
it  demands  obedience ;  it  is  not  the  mere  subject  for  a  creed,  but  the  code  for  a 
life  ;  its  aim  is  to  regulate  all  the  movements  of  the  soul.     It  is  only  those  who  are 
ruled  by  it  who  are  made  happy,  those  who  have  it  and  are  not  controlled  by  it 
will  as  assuredly  perish.     It  is  not  the  hearers  of  the  law  who  are  just  before  God, 
but  the  doers  of  the  law.     Who  is  the  happy  man  ?     Not  the  man  who  has  the 
"  vision  "  and  does  not  study  it,  nor  the  man  who  studies  it  and  never  reduces  it 
to  practice :  it  is  the  man  who  translates  the  "  vision  "  into  his  life.     "  He  that 
keepeth  the  law,  happy  is  he."     There  is  no  heaven  for  man  but  in  obedience  to 
God.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)         The  soul  perishing  for  lack  of  vision : — The  vision 
here  is  acquaintance  with  God  and  the  things  of  the  invisible   world.     Vision 
became  almost  synonymous  with  revelation.     Where  there  is  no  Bible,  there  can 
be  no  vision.     To  talk  of  preparing  a  nation  for  the  reception  of  the  Bible,  by  first 
of   all   civilising   that  nation  is  to  betray  ignorance  of   what  has  produced   the 
degeneracy  of  humanity,  and  mistrust  of  the  engine  which  God  has  placed  in  our 
hands.     The  civilisation  must  and  will  follow  the  reception  of  the  Bible.     Notice 
the  marginal  rendeiiiig,  "  the  people  is  made  naked."     The  people  is  stripped,  the 
people  has  no  clothing  in  which  to  appear  before  God,  if  you  take  away  revelation. 
They  may  attempt  a  righteousness  of  their  own,  and  think  to  cover  themselves 
with  a  covering  which  their  own  hands  have  woven.     But  the  text  is  most  emphatic 
in  denouncing  such  schemes  and  hopes.     We  must  put  on  Christ,  and  be  clothed 


CHAP.  XXIX.  J  PROVERBS.  665 

with  His  righteousness.  If  we  would  make  a  right  and  full  use  of  the  disclosures 
and  statements  of  our  Bible,  we  must,  it  would  seem,  have  the  things  of  redemption 
and  futurity  presented  with  the  same  distinctness  and  vividness  to  the  internal 
organs,  as  the  things  of  the  world  are  to  the  external.  This  is  the  great  triumph 
of  spirit  over  matter.  Speak  to  those  whose  rehgion  is  more  than  nominal,  who 
do  behold  Christ  with  the  eye  of  the  soul.  We  account  for  much  of  that  slow  pro- 
gress in  piety,  which  you  both  observe  in  others  and  lament  in  yourselves,  on  the 
principle  that  you  are  but  seldom  occupied  with  contemplations  of  the  invisible 
world.  Let  us  not  be  wanting  in  diligence  in  using  the  telescope  that  has  been 
entrusted  to  us  to  aid  us  in  seeing  the  unseen.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  No  vision : — 
The  question  suggested  by  the  text  is,  Cj^^pffi^  see  ?  Were  we  made  to  see  ?  Is  all 
else  related  by  law  of  adaptation  to  man  on  this  earth  save  (Tod  Himself  who 
made  the  earth  and  man  ?  It  is  vision  that  decides  our  scale  in  this  world,  and 
our  honour  and  glory  in  the  world  to  come.  For  ages  men  have  believed  that  they 
were  made  to  see  and  know  God  in  His  works  and  in  His  Word ;  that  we  have  not 
only  eyes,  but  objects ;  that  we  can  hold  intercourse  with  God — love  Him,  trust 
Him,  and  pray  to  Him.  The  peril  of  our  age  is  no  new  peril.  Materialism  is  as 
old  as  Sadducean  Judaism,  This  is  the  great  vital  difference  in  men — vision. 
This  it  is  that  decides  their  principles,  their  ethics,  their  characters.  I.  Matebial- 
iSTic  IDEAS  OF  LIFE  BLIND  US  TO  THE  TRUE  VISION.  We  are  in  a  world  of  material 
things.  But  we,  Christians,  build  temples  to  the  invisible  Lord.  We  seek  and  we 
worship  a  Saviour  whom,  not  having  seen,  we  love.  We  judge  morality  to  be  more 
than  utility.  We  walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight.  There  is  no  true  vision  without  the 
inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  H.  Cheist  is  the  ebvealeb  of  life  and  immob- 
TALiTY.  These  words  contain  two  distinct  truths.  Life  is  the  spiritual  view  of  all 
things.  Immortality  is  life  in  Christ  beyond  the  grave.  IH.  Chabactee  is  decided 
BY  ouB  visions  OF  TRUTH.  The  right  life  comes  from  the  right  thought.  If  my 
life  is  to  be  redeemed  and  moulded  by  Divine  influences,  then  my  vision  is  all  in 
all  to  me.  IV.  Pebishinq  is  seen  in  this  present  life.  Men  do  perish !  Com- 
pared with  what  you  might  be,  you  are  now  perishing.  Woe  to  that  nation  that 
has  no  eye  to  see  the  face  of  God  in  Christ  1  (W.  M.  Statham.)  The  beneficent 
influence  of  heavenly  visions  : — Man  has  spiritual  wants  as  well  as  bodily  wants, 
and  he  must  have  spiritual  things  to  satisfy  them.  Temporal  and  visible  things 
meet  and  satisfy  all  the  wants  of  the  body,  but  the  soul  must  receive  its  sustenance 
from  the  invisible  and  the  eternal.  The  spiritual  world  is  a  fact  to  the  senses  of 
the  soul  as  truly  as  the  material  world  is  a  fact  to  the  bodily  senses.  Visions  are 
as  necessary  for  the  soul  as  food  for  the  body,  and  so  heavenly  visions  were  not 
God's  gifts  to  one  nation  and  for  a  limited  time,  but  are  to  all  countries  and  for  all 
times.  Godly  men  in  our  days  are  having  visions  exactly  in  the  same  sense  as  the 
seers  and  prophets  of  old ;  the  difference  is  in  degree,  not  in  kind.  But  a  dis- 
tinction must  be  made  between  the  seer  in  the  highest  sense  and  seers  in  a  general 
sense.  God  inspires  and  gives  special  visions  to  a  chosen  few  in  different  ages  and 
countries.  Note  the  powers  of  inward  vision  to  which  we  give  the  names  of 
insight  and  intuition — insight  into  human  character,  intuition  of  Divine  principles 
— clear  knowledge  of  what  man  is  and  how  God  wiU  act.  The  original  meaning 
of  the  word  "saw,"  is  to  cleave,  or  split;  then  to  see  into,  to  see  through,  to  get 
down  beneath  the  surface  of  things  and  discover  their  real  nature.  What  charac- 
terises the  bulk  of  Hebrew  visions  is  "  penetrativeness."  All  the  seers  of  the  world 
are  hard  workers,  and  are  active  in  their  visions.  Sometimes  the  seer  does  valuable 
service  to  the  world  by  rediscovering  some  great  revealed  truth  which  had  been 
hidden  by  the  accretion  of  ages  of  erroneous  human  ideas  and  creeds.  Luther 
was  such  an  one.  And  we  are  to  thank  Heaven  for  seers  Uke  Carlyle,  Euskin, 
Beecher,  Browning,  and  Tennyson,  who  fearlessly  cleave  old  customs,  shams,  con- 
ventionalisms, dogmas,  and  creeds,  and  proclaim  to  the  world,  like  the  prophets 
of  old,  eternal  and  unchangeable  truths.  Note  the  mighty  influence  of  heavenly 
visions  on  the  world.  What  would  have  been  the  moral  condition  of  the  world  liE 
God  had  given  no  visions  to  holy  and  inspired  men  ?  I.  The  restraining  foweb 
OF  VISIONS.  In  the  days  of  Samuel  there  was  "  no  open  vision."  God  mercifully 
raised  him  up,  and  gave  him  visions  to  enable  him  to  check  and  restrain  the 
ungodliness  of  his  age.  Our  great  want  is  more  men  of  visions  as  pohtical  and 
social  reformers  and  preachers.  II.  The  sustaining  poweb  of  visions.  Men  are 
sure  to  perish  socially  and  spiritually  if  God  does  not  mercif  uUy  grant  them  visions. 
in.  The  ennobling  influence  of  visions  upon  men's  chaeactebb.  The  tendency 
of  God's  visions  to  men  is  to  purify  their  thoughts,  to  elevate  their  spirits,  to 


tSM  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.xxix. 

ennoble  their  characters.  The  objective  in  the  visions  gradually  becomes  sub- 
jective, as  a  part  of  the  character.  But  you  are  not  to  expect  these  heavenly 
visions  by  sleeping  and  dreaming,  but  by  holy  meditation,  fervent  prayer,  and 
strenuous  effort  to  live  the  life  of  the  Son  of  God.  IV.  The  blessedness  of 
OBEDIENCE  TO  THE  HEAVENLY  VISIONS.  If  we  would  know  the  highest  joy  of  visions, 
we  must  obey  them.  (Z.  Mather.)  Ideals  : — Man  talks  to  God  ;  that  is  prayer. 
God  talks  with  man  ;  that  is  inspiration.  According  to  the  sensational  philosophy 
there  is  no  vision,  there  is  no  invisible  world,  or  at  least  we  cannot  know  it  directly 
and  immediately.  This  takes  all  the  glory  out  of  life.  Take  out  from  man  the 
power  of  perceiving  the  invisible  and  the  eternal,  and  all  life  loses  its  life.  God  is 
no  longer  a  Divine  reality.  He  is  only  an  opinion.  The  same  philosophy  which 
robs  the  universe  of  its  God  robs  man  of  his  soul.  This  philosophy  is  equally  fatal 
to  morals.  There  are  no  longer  any  great,  eternal,  immutable  laws.  Take  vision 
out  of  religion,  what  have  you  left?  You  had  a  Church  of  Christ,  now  jou  have  a 
Society  of  Ethical  Culture.  I.  Ideals  are  realities.  What  we  call  ideals  are 
not  conceptions  we  have  created  ;  they  are  realities  we  have  discovered.  The 
^reat  laws  of  nature  are  not  created  by  the  scientists.  They  only  formulate  and 
express  the  laws  of  nature.  The  laws  of  harmony  are  eternal ;  and  when  the 
musician  finds  a  new  harmony,  he  finds  what  was  before.  In  the  ethical  realm, 
the  great  laws  of  righteousness  are  not  created ;  they  are  eternal.  Moses  did  not 
make  them,  he  only  found  forms  in  which  to  state  them.  God  is  not  a  thesis,  an 
opinion,  a  theory,  a  supposition,  created  to  account  for  phenomena ;  He  is  the 
great  underlying  reality  of  which  all  phenomena  are  the  manifestation. 
II.  Imagination  is  seeing.  Science  owes  its  progress  to  this  power  of  vision. 
All  the  greatest  men  of  science  first  saw  dimly  and  imperfectly  the  invisible 
ret^lities,  then  followed,  tested,  and  tried  their  visions,  and  proved  the  reality  of 
them.  The  great  seers  and  prophets  of  all  time  have  not  been  men  who  have 
created  thoughts  to  inspire  us  ;  they  have  been  men  with  eyes  that  saw,  and  they 
have  helped  also  to  see.  III.  Ideals  being  realities,  and  imagination  seeing, 
scepticism  is  ignorance.  By  scepticism  is  meant  the  doubt  that  scoiis  at  the 
invisible  and  eternal,  not  the  mere  questioning  of  a  particular  dogma.  We  are 
not  to  measure  the  truth  by  our  capacity  to  see,  but  our  capacity  to  see  by  the 
truth.  The  world  needs  nothing  so  much  as  men  who  will  carry  the  spirit  of 
vision  into  every  phase  of  life.  There  are  two  classes  of  men  in  this  world — 
drudges  and  dreamers.  The  man  who  works  without  vision,  who  is  not  lifted  up 
by  his  thoughts  out  of  mere  material  things,  he  is  a  drudge.     {Lyman  Abbott.) 

Ver.  20.  Seest  thou  a  man  that  is  hasty  in  his  -words  ? — Impetuosity  of  temper: — 
The  Adige  at  Verona  appears  to  be  a  river  quite  broad  and  deep  enough  for  naviga- 
tion, but  its  current  is  so  rapid  as  to  make  it  quite  unserviceable.  Many  men  are 
BO  rash  and  impetuous,  and  at  the  same  time  so  suddenly  angry  and  excited,  that 
their  otherwise  most  valuable  abilities  are  rendered  useless  for  any  good  purpose. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  23.  A  man's  pride  shall  bring  him  low. — On  pride  .-—Pride,  though  it 
imphes  an   assumption  of  superiority,  has  a  manifest  tendency  to_  degradation. 

1.  A  man's  pride  will  bring  him  low  because  it  subjects  him  to  the  imputation  of 
folly.  There  is  no  condition  of  life  that  can  warrant  the  indulgence  of  this  sinful 
and  corrupt  passion.  The  maxims  of  human  policy  teach  us  that  in  proportion  to 
the  trust  must  be  the  responsibility.  The  uncertainty  and  imperfection  of  every 
blessing  which  this  world  affords  should  alone  be  sufficient  to  prevent  that  siUy 
exaltation  of  the  mind  which  constitutes  pride.  Neither  abundance  of  riches  nor 
superior  endowments  of  the  mind  are  a  sufficient  justification  for  pride.  Neither 
the  acquisition  of  fame,  the  flatteries  of  self-love,  nor  the  consciousness  of  distin- 
guished merit,  should  swell  the  heart  with  arrogance  or  pride.  The  truest 
characteristics  of  superior  greatness  and  superior  wisdom  are  modesty  and 
humiUty ;  modesty  freed  from  false  shame,  and  humihty  without  affectation  or 
abasement.  If  these  motives  are  insufficient  to  warrant  the  indulgence  of  pride, 
much  less  ought  it  to  arise  from  the  casual  distinction  of  rank  in  the  different 
orders  of  men.  Pride  is  not  confined  to  any  particular  rank  or  station.  From 
•whatever  cause  it  proceeds,  it  always  betokens  weakness,  folly,  and  corruiition. 

2,  The  various  evils,  and  the  general  depravity  which  it  produces.  The  text  is 
often  verified  as  "pride  produces  poverty."  More  persons  have  sunk  ijito  poverty 
from  this  cause  than  from  any  other.    From  indulging  in  a  thou-aud  idh  expenses, 


CHAP,  xsn.]  PROVERBS.  667 

in  order  to  support  a  kind  of  pompous  vanity,  the  proud  man  can  seldom  spare  a 
charitable  mite  "  to  give  to  him  that  needeth."  Pride  is  also  the  source  of  con- 
tinual mortification.  The  petty  vexations  of  pride  that  are  compounded  with  every 
vain,  selfish,  and  malignant  passion  have  no  claim  to  our  indulgence.  Pride  is 
more  productive  of  quarrels,  bitterness,  and  strife  than  anything  else.  This  base 
and  selfish  passion  always  creates,  and  always  keeps  alive,  a  watchful  and  incessant 
jealousy  of  power.  Hence  the  mildest  exhortation  and  the  most  friendly  remon- 
strance is  often  converted  into  the  bitterness  of  accusation  or  the  insolence  of 
reproach.  This  odious  vice  is  seen  at  its  worst  in  the  awful  end  of  the  suicide. 
The  dreadful  act  of  self-destruction  is  often  committed  in  the  evil  moment  of 
■wounded  pride  or  mortified  ambition.  The  proud  man  sits  on  an  imaginary 
eminence  of  his  own  creation,  and  propagates  servility  or  wretchedness  all  around 
him.  In  a  mind  thus  bewildered  and  deceived  the  first  principle  of  improvement 
is  wanting.  He  who  is  not  conscious  of  any  defect  can  have  no  sufficient  motive 
for  amendment.  Pride  never  appears  so  sinful  and  offensive  as  when  we  consider 
man  in  relation  to  his  Maker.  Then  we  perceive  it  destroying  the  efficacy  and 
poisoning  the  very  source  of  all  those  virtues  which  he  is  chiefly  bound  to  practise. 
The  proud  man  is  in  reality  always  degraded  in  proportion  as  he  thinks  himself 
exalted.  {J.  Hewlett,  B.D.)  Honour  shall  uphold  the  humble  in  spirit. — 
Honour: — This  word  means  "nobleness  of  mind."  It  is  a  natural  instinct  of 
human  nature  to  be  trustful,  especially  when  a  man's  honour  is  at  stake  ;  but  there 
has  been  so  much  deception  as  to  make  almost  everybody  doubt  everybody  else. 
Every  representation  we  make  should  be  the  truth ;  a  deception  is  never  excusable. 
1.  Honour  is  an  acquired  nature.  The  germ  of  honour  is  born  in  us,  but  every 
child  has  to  be  taught  by  example  and  precept  to  cultivate  it.  We  sometimes  cram 
our  children  too  much  with  catechism,  and  omit  to  cultivate  their  honour.  There 
is  as  much  reUgion  in  being  honourable  as  iu  being  prayerful.  2.  Honour  should 
become  an  essential  part  of  our  nature.  It  is  only  the  ignorant  and  the  foolish 
who  can  be  tickled  by  a  title  or  a  name.  Let  us  seek  to  have  honour  in  our  nature. 
Honour  should  grow  in  us  and  become  an  essential  part  of  our  nature.  Uncommon 
honour  should  be  the  common  practice  of  everybody.  3.  Honour  should  be  the 
principle  of  all  our  transactions.  Whether  you  gain  by  it  or  not,  be  honour- 
able. Let  your  honour  be  as  true  in  the  dark  as  in  the  light.  4.  In  honour  prefer 
one  another.  Do  not  gibe  at  a  friend  or  detract  from  an  enemy.  If  you  can  praise 
one  another,  do  so,  but  never  throw  mud  at  anybody.  If  you  really  know  that  a 
man  or  woman  is  doing  wrong,  be  honourable  enough  to  tell  them  so,  and  not  so 
mean  as  to  talk  of  it  behind  their  backs.  Be  honourable  ia  all  your  sayings  and  in 
all  your  doings,  so  that  this  world,  through  you,  may  become  a  more  joyous  dwelling- 
place.     (W.  Birch.) 

Ver.  25.  The  fear  of  manbringeth  a  snare. — The  mischiefs  of  slavish  complaisance 
and  cmvardice  : — Every  passion  of  the  soul  may  be  of  use  to  us,  but  is  capable  also, 
by  being  perverted,  of  causing  much  vexation  and  misery  to  ourselves  and  injury  to 
our  fellow-creatures.  Fear,  while  it  proceeds  from  right  principles,  and  is  propor- 
tioned to  the  weight  and  moment  of  the  evils  about  which  it  is  conversant,  must 
serve  the  most  beneficial  purposes,  as  it  warns  us  where  our  greatest  danger  lies, 
and  strongly  prompts  us  to  avoid  it.  But  the  case  is  quite  otherwise  when  it  forms 
imaginary  dangers  and  alarms  with  false  terrors.  Then  our  fears  turn  us  aside 
from  our  duty,  and  iti  avoiding  trifling  evils  we  run  ourselves  into  greater. 
I.  What  is  the  teab  of  man  ?  A  reverence  of  human  authority  and  customs, 
and  a  diead  of  the  censure  and  reproaches  of  our  fellow-creatures.  1.  There  is  a 
reverence  due  to  human  authority  in  all  points  that  do  not  exceed  the  just  bounds 
of  it,  and  the  paying  this  regard  is  absolutely  necessary  to  hold  the  frame  of  civil 
societies  together.  The  ends  of  society  cannot  be  secured  but  by  mutual  conde- 
scension and  respect,  and  the  compliance  and  submission  of  the  minor  part,  in 
things  lawful.  2.  A  man  ought  to  be  afraid  of  censure  and  reproach  being  fixed 
upon  him,  and  anxious  to  deliver  and  clear  himself  from  it.  Men  must  be  of  a 
temper  quite  stupid  if  they  have  no  fear  at  all  of  pubUc  reproach  and  infamy,  and 
must  lose  a  very  powerful  restraint  from  mean,  ungenerous,  and  disgraceful  prac- 
tices. 3.  We  are  guilty  of  the  utmost  rashness  and  folly  if  we  expose  ourselves  to 
the  resentments  of  our  fellow-men  unnecessarily.  And  a  dread  of  those  punish- 
ments which  the  civil  magistrate  inflicts  is  not  only  lawful,  but  necessary.  Thus 
far,  then,  the  fear  of  man  may  be  defended  and  justified.  II.  In  what  sense  it 
BfiiSGEiH  A  SNAP.E.    It  throws  temptatious  in  men's  way  which  are  likely  to  prevail 


668  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxx. 

so  far  as  to  destroy  all  improvements  in  true  wisdom  and  virtue.  1.  Suppose  a 
man,  under  the  influence  of  this  slavish  principle,  engages  in  search  after  truth, 
vyhat  proficiency  is  it  possible  for  him  to  make  ?  In  order  to  making  improve- 
ments in  Divine  knowledge  it  is  absolutely  necessary  that  the  mind  be  free,  calm, 
and  unruffled,  under  no  restraint  or  terror.  There  must  be  no  corrupt  passion  to 
darken  the  understanding,  nor  private  interest  to  mislead  and  pervert  it.  2.  It  is 
as  great  an  absurdity  to  expect  that  one  who  is  dispirited  by  worldly  fears  should  be 
a  confessor  and  martyr  for  true  religion  as  that  a  coward  should  be  brave  and 
valiant.  Slavish  fear  of  man  leads  men  even  to  revile  and  banter  the  truth.  3.  This 
fear  will  have  the  same  malignant  influence  upon  our  morals  as  upon  our  faith. 
When  it  rises  to  such  a  height  as  to  overrule  the  dictates  of  natural  conscience, 
and  entirely  to  destroy  the  strength  and  constancy  of  our  minds,  we  are  an  easy 
prey  to  every  temptation,  and  lie  open  to  the  most  desperate  and  abandoned 
wickedness.  If  it  be  our  ultimate  view  to  secure  the  countenance  and  favour  of 
persons  in  authority  and  avoid  their  displeasure,  this  likewise  wiU  subject  us  to 
many  snares  and  inconveniences.  III.  OrrEE  some  bemedies  AOArNST  this  feab 
OF  MAN.  1.  Maintain  and  improve  in  our  minds  a  strong  sense  of  the  necessary 
difference  between  good  and  evil.  2.  Add  a  becoming  sense  of  the  dignity  of  our 
nature.  3.  Trust  in  God,  as  advised  in  the  latter  part  of  the  text.  4.  Cultivate  a 
supreme  reverence  for  God.  These  two — fear  of  man  and  fear  of  God — are  absolutely 
inconsistent,  and  cannot  subsist  together.  (James  Foster.)  The  fear  of  man: — This 
is  a  deadly  foe  to  a  godly,  consistent  life.  It  stops  many  a  one  on  the  very  threshold 
of  the  kingdom.  It  turns  back  many  who  seemed  to  run  well.  1.  The  fear  of  man 
often  leads  to  downright,  positive  sin,  2.  The  fear  of  man  keeps  many  a  lad  from 
decision  for  Christ.  {G.  Everard,  M.A.)  The  fear  of  man : — I.  Our  great  danger. 
1.  For  the. fear  of  man  is  more  general  than  we  are  aware  of.  2.  To  all  who  yield 
to  its  influence  it  brings  a  fatal  snare.  II.  Its  proper  and  only  eefectual  anti- 
dote. Regard  for  God  Himself.  We  should  trust  Him  for  support,  happiness, 
recompense.  Improvement:  1.  A  word  of  caution.  2.  Of  encouragement.  (S.Simeon, 
M.A.)  Whoso  putteth  Ms  trust  in  the  Lord  shall  be  safe, — How  to  be  safe: — 
I.  There  is  safety  nowhere  except  in  the  care  of  God,  for  in  His  hands  alone 
are  sources  of  safety.  II.  God  can  make  safe  only  those  who  trust  Him  fully. 
ni.  Complete  trust  can  exist  only  between  parties  in  accord  and  in  the  con- 
fidence of  each  other.  IV.  In  order  to  trust  in  the  Lord  two  things  are 
essential.  1.  We  must  confidently  believe  that  God  is  able,  willing,  and  ready  to 
care  for  us.  2.  That  we  are  worthy  of  His  care.  V.  To  be  safe  we  must  be  at 
ONE  with  God.  VI.  Outside  of  God's  protection  abb  dangbb,  dabbmbss,  and 
DKAlH — etebnaij.    (Homiletic  Review.) 


CHAPTEE  XXX. 


Vers.  1-9.  The  ■words  of  Agur  the  son  of  Jakeh. — Agur  the  philosopher  : — Who 
Agur  was  is  not  known.  I.  A  devout  philosopher.  1,  He  was  conscious  of  his 
ignorance.  The  first  lesson  for  every  man  who  would  get  knowledge  to  learn  is  that 
he  knows  nothing.  2.  He  was  conscious  of  universal  mystery.  Compare  Job.  vii. 
9,  12.  He  must  be  God  Himself  who  could  wholly  comprehend  the  works  of  God. 
II.  An  intelligent  Bibleist.  He  was  more  than  a  naturalist ;  he  was  a  Bibleist. 
1.  He  regarded  the  Word  of  God  as  pure.  Pure  in  its  essence  and  in  its  influence. 
It  commends  itself  to  universal  conscience.  2.  He  regarded  it  as  trustworthy, 
God's  Word  is  Himself — Himself  revealed ;  he  who  trusts  it  is  in  safe  keeping.  3.  He 
regarded  it  as  sufficient.  It  is  like  a  vital  germ — you  can  neither  attempt  to  add 
anything  to  it  nor  take  anything  from  it  without  injuring  it.  III.  An  enlightened 
suppliant.  He  asks — 1.  DeUverance  from  moral  evil.  2.  A  moderate  amount  of 
worldly  goods.  The  man  was  fully  alive  to  the  power  of  circumstances  upon 
character,  and  devoutly  desired  that  his  external  circumstances  should  be  such  as  to 
conduce  to  spiritual  excellence.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  Sorely  I  am  more  bratlah  than  any  man,  and  have  not  the  onderatanding: 
of  a  man. — A  homily  for  humble  folk : — Agur  was  probably  a  man  of  years  and 


CHAP,  rex.]  PROVERBS.  669 

honour,  and  possibly  his  two  young  friends,  Ithiel  and  Ucal,  looked  up  to  him  more 
than  was  meet,  and  therefore  his  principal  endeavour  was  to  wean  them  from  undue 
confidence  in  himself.  He  passed  the  gravest  censure  upon  himself,  that  his  hearers 
might  not  suffer  their  faith  to  stand  in  the  wisdom  of  men.  Did  Agur  really  mean 
aU  he  said?  One  mark  of  a  man's  true  wisdom  is  his  knowledge  of  his  ignorance. 
The  truth  of  our  text  relates  to  one  particular  line  of  things.  This  man  was  a 
naturalist.  He  was  an  instructed  scientist,  but  he  felt  that  he  could  not  by  search- 
ing find  out  God,  nor  fashion  an  idea  of  Him  from  his  own  thoughts.     I.  A  sense 

OF  INFEBIORITY  MUST  NOT  KEEP  US  BACK  FROM  FAITH  IN  GOD,       If  we  haVC  to  Say  what 

Agur  said,  let  us  also  trust  as  Agur  trusted.  Some  say,  "  We  cannot  hope  to  be 
saved,  because  we  cannot  reach  the  heights  of  other  men."  They  are  discouraged 
by  the  piety  that  some  believers  have  attained.  But  they  see  these  good  people  at 
their  best,  and  they  see  in  them  the  results  of  their  faith.  Some  are  hindered 
because  they  cannot  feel  such  couvictions  of  sins,  &c.,  as  other  men.  But  our 
wisdom  is  to  leave  our  experience  with  the  Lord,  who  will  appoint  us  sun  or  shade, 
as  best  wiU  suit  our  growth.  Seek  not  to  copy  another  man's  ups  or  downs ;  but 
wait  on  God,  and  put  thy  trust  in  Him,  even  though  thou  shouldst  seem  to  thyself 
to  be  more  foolish  than  any  other  living  man.  II.  A  sense  of  inferiokity  must  not 
KEEP  us  FROM  LEARNING.  If  you  have  not  the  understanding  of  a  man,  there  is  so 
much  more  cause  that  you  should  go  to  school  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  till  the  eyes  of 
your  understanding  shall  be  enlightened,  and  you  shall  know  the  truth,  and  the 
truth  shall  make  you  free.  Vital  truth  is  simple.  These  things  of  heavenly 
learning  are  revealed  to  babes.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  a  great  teacher.  The  sense  of 
ignorance  is  a  very  good  beginning  for  a  learner.  The  doorstep  of  the  palace  of 
Wisdom  is  a  humble  sense  of  ignorance.  III.  A  sense  of  inferiority  must  not 
KEEP  us  BACK  FROM  SERVING  GoD.  The  Lord  lovcs  to  use  tools  that  are  not  rusted 
with  self-conceit.  God  can  use  inferior  persons  for  grand  purposes.  He  has  often 
done  so.  His  greatest  victories  were  won  by  a  hammer  and  a  tent-pin,  by  an 
ox-goad,  by  the  jawbone  of  an  ass,  by  a  sling  and  stone,  and  such  like.  His 
greatest  prophets  at  the  first  tried  to  excuse  themselves  on  the  ground  of  unfitness. 
The  Lord  does  not  expect  of  you  more  than  you  can  do :  it  is  accepted  if  it  be 
according  to  what  a  man  hath,  and  not  according  to  what  he  hath  not.  If  you  can 
do  but  little,  make  the  best  of  yourself  by  intensity  and  by  perseverance.  Make 
up  by  spiritual  force  what  you  lack  in  natural  ability.  You  that  cannot  do  very 
much,  take  care  never  to  lose  an  opportunity.  IV.  A  sense  of  inferiority  must  not 
HINDER  our  joy  IN  THE  LoRD.  If  you  feel  that  you  are  more  brutish  than  anybody 
else,  yet  believe  in  God  up  to  the  hilt ;  believe  in  Him,  and  trust  Him  with  all  your 
heart,  and  then  feel  all  the  more  gratitude  that  He  should  have  loved  such  a 
worthless  one  as  you.  Glorify  God  by  yoUr  very  weakness.  Glory  in  your  infirmity. 
(C  H.  Spurgeo7i.) 

Ver.  4.  Who  hath  ascended  up  into  heaven,  or  descended  ? — God's  riddle  : — This 
verse  gives  God  Almighty's  great  conundrum  spoken  out  of  eternity  into  time  ;  it  is 
the  riddle  propounded  by  the  Supreme  Intelligence  to  the  heart  and  reason  of 
every  man  born  into  the  world.  The  history  of  humanity  is  little  else  than  one 
long  wi-estle  with  God's  infinite  conundrum.  There  are  noble  souls  and  able 
thinkers  who  never  guess  the  riddle  here.  There  are  lesser  minds  that,  light- 
heartedly,  give  the  riddle  up — those  who  call  themselves  agnostics.  Never  be 
a  giver-up  of  God's  riddles  ;  work  at  them  till  you  die.  The  position  of  a  giver-up 
of  God's  riddle  is  dreary  and  paralysing  ;  it  cauterises  imagination,  which  is  man's 
creative  faculty  ;  it  ignores  a  thousand  self-evident  principles  ;  it  freezes  the  main- 
springs of  human  activity  ;  and  it  is  not  really  humble — it  implies  the  possession  of 
all  kinds  of  knowledge.  It  is  a  sweet  legend  of  the  Talmud  that  the  indentation  of 
the  upper  lip  of  every  man  born  into  the  world  is  a  mark  of  the  finger  of  God 
touching  the  mouth  at  birth  and  saying,  "  Child,  thou  knowest,but  thou  shalt  not 
be  able  to  reveal  that  which  thou  knowest  till  thou  hast  learnt  it  by  the  things 
which  thou  shalt  suffer  in  the  infant  school  of  human  life."  "  What  is  His  name  ?  " 
It  is  a  beautiful  name,  a  name  that  can  save  the  anxious  heart  from  losing  its  way 
in  the  tangled  speculations  that  pass  muster  for  religious  truth.  It  is  a  name  that 
can  irradiate  with  eternal  hope  the  very  darkest  problems  of  life.  It  is  a  name 
that  can  encourage  men  to  wait  and  work  trustfully,  patiently,  hopefully.  How 
infinitely  varied  are  the  processes  by  which  the  moral  sense  of  man  feels  after  and 
finds,  and  tries  to  give  a  name  to  the  Supreme  Intelligence  who  "  holds  the  winds 
in  His  fists."     Darwin  says,  "  There  lives  and  works  a  soul  in  all  things ;  one  hand 


670  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxx. 

has  surely  worked  through  this  universe."  Schlermann,  the  explorer,  was  puzzled 
by  some  irregular  holes  upon  the  crumbling  front  of  an  ancient  temple  resembling 
the  impression  of  nails,  as  if  some  Greek  characters  had  once  been  fastened  to  the 
stone.  He  bethought  him  of  tracing  between  the  nail-marks  with  a  piece  of  chalk, 
and  behold  there  stood  out  the  Greek  word  Oeoq — God.  But  this  name  is  rudi- 
mentary and  inadequate.  Boundless  intelligence,  administering  boundless  power, 
by  its  very  awfulness  and  vagueness  has  constantly  evolved  in  human  history  the 
grossest  caricatures  of  the  name  of  God.  The  Eternal  Power  has  manifested  His 
moral  life,  His  character,  His  feeling  toward  the  race,  in  one  human  form,  one 
supernatural  and  Divine  Man,  who,  as  the  heart  of  God  incarnate,  is  "  the  visible 
moral  embodiment  of  the  all-pervading  omnipotence  Himself  for  ever  invisible." 
The  embodiment  soon  returned  to  the  Father  ;  that  is.  He  withdrew  from  limitations, 
and  returned  to  universal  life ;  but  He  has  made  known  God's  name  to  the  race. 
The  Divine  Man  of  Nazareth  is  the  sacrament  of  God ;  He  is  the  outward  and 
visible  sign  of  the  heart  of  universal  Fatherhood  ;  and  to  know  it,  with  an  intense 
spiritual  conviction  that  is  beyond  expression,  is  to  know  the  answer  to  God's  riddle 
about  Himself.     {Canon  Wilberforce.) 

Ver.  7.  Two  things  have  I  required  of  Thee ;  deny  me  them  not  before  I  die. — 

Agur's  request : — Agur  seems  to  allude  to  the  ancient  custom  of  feeding  slaves  in 
great  families.  They  had  a  certain  measure  of  food  daily  allowed  them.  He  may 
also  have  had  in  view  the  manner  in  which  God  fed  the  people  of  Israel  in  the 
wilderness  with  manna,  of  which  they  were  commanded  to  gather  daily  a  certain 
measure,  but  none  for  the  morrow.  That  God  would  thus  supply  his  wants  from 
day  to  day  was  his  modest  petition.  We  should  interpret  the  prayer  of  this  wise 
man  in  a  favourable  and  candid  manner,  as  put  up  by  one  who  was  religious  and 
humble,  and  disposed  to  submit  his  own  will  to  the  will  of  God.  It  is  a  prayer  of 
choice,  or  a  comparative  prayer.  Kiches,  poverty,  and  a  competency — these  are 
things  which  cannot  be  accurately  fixed  without  reference  to  the  state  and  condition 
of  men.  Food  convenient  for  a  man  is  such  a  competency  as  will  maintain  him  in 
that  order,  degree,  or  calling  in  which  God  hath  placed  him.  The  moderation  of 
Agur's  prayer  is  highly  commendable  if  we  consider  that  he  lived  at  a  time  when 
temporal  blessings  were  more  expressly  promised,  and  spiritual  blessings  less 
clearly  propounded,  than  under  the  gospel.  A  competency,  or  a  middle  state 
between  want  and  superfluity,  deserves  to  be  preferred  as  the  best  and  happiest 
condition.  The  wiser  Gentiles  were  of  this  opinion,  but  their  reasons  are  reasons 
of  convenience  ;  but  Agur  gives  for  his  choice  a  religious  and  pious  reason.  If  we 
carefully  examine  the  political  laws  of  Moses,  we  shall  find  that  the  Divine  provi- 
dence intended  the  Jewish  people  for  that  very  situation  between  poverty  and 
riches  which  was  the  object  of  Agur's  wish.  The  means  of  accumulating  great 
wealth  by  an  extensive  commerce,  by  circulating  large  sums  of  money  upon  large 
interests,  by  extending  their  dominions,  and  by  planting  colonies  abroad,  were 
withholden  from  them ;  and  their  lands,  industriously  cultivated,  would,  by  the 
blessing  of  God,  furnish  them  with  the  necessaries,  though  not  the  superfluities,  of 
life.  Vows  of  poverty  are  made  on  the  basis  of  our  Lord's  counsel  to  the  young 
ruler.  But  that  was,  clearly,  an  extraordinary  case.  The  practice  of  the  first 
Christians,  who  sold  their  lands  and  possessions,  is  alleged  in  favour  of  voluntary 
poverty.  But  there  is  nothing  commendable  in  superstitious  and  affected  poverty. 
Agur  represents  poverty  as  a  state  which  exposes  to  the  temptations  of  dishonesty 
and  perjury,  and  prays  that  he  may  not  be  exposed  to  it,  and  to  the  temptations 
which  accompany  it.  No  doubt  he  added  endeavours  to  his  petitions.  It  is  not 
unlawful  to  possess  riches.  They  are  of  their  own  nature  indifferent.  Many  good 
men  mentioned  in  sacred  history  were  rich ;  but  none  of  them  are  said  to  have 
been  desirous  of  riches.  Agur  was  apprehensive  lest  wealth  should  make  him 
irreligious.  Great  wealth  and  power  and  honours  bring  with  them  a  variety  of 
business,  draw  after  them  a  multitude  of  flatterers,  nourish  pride  and  conceit,  and 
afford  continual  means  and  opportunities  of  pursuing  all  sorts  of  pleasures ;  so  that 
what  with  the  cares,  and  what  with  the  diversions  of  life,  no  time  is  left  for  God 
and  religion.  There  is,  then,  a  plain  and  good  reason  why  God  for  the  most  part 
withholds  a  great  abundance  of  outward  things  from  those  whom  He  most  loves, 
namely,  lest  by  enriching  the  man  He  should  lose  the  servant.  It  is  very 
imprudent,  therefore,  in  men  earnestly  to  pursue  that  which  so  much  endangers 
their  welfare.  They  to  whom  wealth  hath  presented  itself,  either  unsought,  or 
honestly  obtained,  ought  to  be   very  cautious  and  considerate.     Their  state  is 


CHAP.  XXX.]  PROVERBS.  671 

exposed  to  danger,  and  yet  it  is  possible  to  be  wise  and  happy  and  safe  in  it,  if 
proper  means  be  used.     (John  Jortin,  D.D.) 

Ver.  8.  Remove  far  from  me  vanity  and  lies. — On  the  purity  of  the  heart : — The 
first  request  is,  "  Remove  far  from  me  vanity  and  lies."  "  Vanity  "  signifies  light- 
ness, or  emptiness.  "  Lies  "  signify  falsehood.  Sometimes  the  word  vanity  is  used 
of  idolatrous  worship  ;  sometimes  to  denote  the  foUy  and  unprofitableness  of  any 
vice.  1.  The  prayer  implies  a  desire  that  we  may  be  preserved  from  setting  our 
affections  on  such  objects  as  are  but  vain  and  unsatisfying,  and  will,  in  the  end, 
disappoint  our  expectation.  When  we  place  our  supreme  happiness  upon  the 
world,  instead  of  making  it  a  means  of  leading  us  to  God,  then  its  inherent  vanity 
appears.  There  is  something  more  in  this  request  than  being  preserved  from 
practices  directly  vicious.  2.  The  prayer  implies  that  God  would  graciously 
preserve  us  from  deceiving  ourselves,  and  thinking  our  character  better  and  our 
state  safer  than  it  really  is.  We  ought  to  pray  for  preservation  from  self-deceit,  as 
to  particular  branches  of  our  character  and  conduct,  as  well  as  our  general  state. 
3.  The  request  implies  a  desire  to  be  preserved  from  pride  and  self-conceit  upon 
any  subject.  Everything  may  be  the  fuel  of  pride — our  persons,  our  performances, 
our  relations,  our  possessions.  4.  This  request  implies  a  desire  to  be  dehvered  from 
fraud  and  dissimulation  of  every  kind.  There  is  no  end  which  a  good  man  ought 
to  aim  at  which  may  not  be  more  certainly,  safely,  and  speedUy  obtained  by  the 
strictest  and  most  inviolable  sincerity  than  by  any  acts  of  dissimulation  whatever. 
(1)  Learn  the  duty  of  prayer.  (2)  Learn  the  importance  of  habitual  watchfulness. 
(3)  Learn  the  importance  of  strict  adherence  to  truth.  (J.  Witherspoon,  D.D.) 
On  the  happiness  of  a  mind  open  to  the  impression  of  truth  and  attached  to  duty  : — 
Li  this  comprehensive  prayer  everything  conducive  to  the  perfection  of  the  soul,  to 
the  support  of  the  body,  to  our  comfortable  subsistence  in  this  world,  and  to  our 
preparation  for  a  state  of  eternal  felicity ;  everything  that  should  excite  the  desires, 
and  employ  the  activity  of  a  wise  and  good  man,  is  contained.  Take  the  sentence, 
"  Remove  far  from  me  vanity  and  lies."  1.  Vanity  is  that  passion  which  is  founded 
on  an  exorbitant  opinion  of  one's  own  situation  and  accomplishments,  and  is  con- 
stantly engaged  in  the  pursuit  of  admiration  and  applause.  This  passion  is 
accompanied  by  great  delusion  with  respect  to  ourselves,  to  others,  and  to  human 
nature  in  general.  The  term  may,  however,  include  whatever  obscures  the 
understanding  with  prejudice,  whatever  dazzles  the  fancy  with  delusive 
appearances  of  pleasure,  whatever  captivates  the  heart  with  the  representation  of 
fictitious  or  exaggerated  delight ;  whatever  misleads  the  judgment  or  misplaces  the 
affections.  2.  Under  the  term  "lies"  is  comprehended  that  corruption  of  heart 
which  is  the  cause  of  wUful  and  fraudulent  deception.  The  power  of  self-deception 
is  astonishing.  That  the  greatest  evils  to  which  we  are  at  present  exposed  proceed 
from  the  folly  and  corruption  of  mankind  wiU  be  acknowledged  by  every  person  of 
discernment.  Two  grand  objects  occupy  the  attention  and  activity  of  all  mankind — 
the  acquirement  of  good  and  the  removal  of  evil.  (W.  L.  Brown,  D.D.)  Give 
me  neither  poverty  nor  riches ;  feed  me  with  food  convenient  for  me. — Seeking 
a  competency  in  the  wisdom  of  Providence  : — Few  things  are  of  more  moment  than 
to  have  our  desires  of  temporal  blessings  limited  and  directed  in  a  proper  manner. 
I.  What  we  may  leakn  in  general  feom  this  praveb.  1.  That  it  is  lawful  to  pray 
for  temporal  blessings.  2.  That  God  is  the  real  and  proper  giver  of  every  temporal, 
as  weU  as  of  every  spiritual,  blessing.  II.  The  particular  object  or  the  prophet's 
DESIRE.  He  does  not  refuse  submission  to  the  will  of  God  by  thus  making  choice 
of  a  particular  state  of  life.  Poverty  and  riches  are  mentioned  as  the  two  extremes. 
Where  is  the  middle  between  the  two  ?  1.  God  is  the  best  judge  of  what  is  most  fit 
and  convenient  for  us.  2.  Resignation  to  God  is  a  most  acceptable  expression,  both 
of  our  worship  and  obedience.  Resignation  is  the  very  habit  of  obedience.  3.  Such 
a  temper  of  mind  will  greatly  contribute  to  our  own  inward  peace.  It  wiU  preserve 
us  from  perplexing  anxiety  and  many  uneasy  fears  for  futurity.  (John  Wither- 
spoon,  D.D.)  The  danger  of  prosperity  : — 1.  An  easy  and  affluent  fortune  affords 
the  means  not  only  of  pampering  our  bodies,  but  of  gratifying  all  our  lusts  and 
appetites.  2.  Indulgence  leads  men  to  place  their  happiness  in  such  enjoyments. 
3.  When  the  better  part  is  neglected,  every  vice  will  spring  up  in  the  soul.  See  the 
great  malignity  and  deceitfulness  of  sin.  Make  a  wise  improvement  of  the  advan- 
tages you  enjoy  over  one  another.  Let  all  persons  in  health,  quiet  and  peaceful 
circumstances,  learn  what  it  is  they  ought  to  guard  against — pride,  security, 
forgetfulness  of  God,  &c.     (Ibid.)        The  danger  of  adversity  ; — It  is  a  matter  of 


672  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xrr. 

experience  that  great  poverty  makes  many  take  unjust  and  unwarrantable  methods 
of  procuring  relief.  1.  Ignorance  is  one  reason  why  poverty  becomes  a  temptation 
to  fraud.  2.  To  this  fraud  the  poor  are  introduced  insensibly,  and  led  on  by 
degrees.  3.  In  time  it  destroys  the  sense  of  shame.  Let  me  put  you  in  mind — 
(1)  What  reason  many  have  to  be  thankful  to  the  God  of  life,  who  has  given  them 
their  daily  provision,  in  fulness  and  sufficiency.  A  humble,  thankful  disposition  is 
their  duty.  (2)  If  poverty  is  a  temptation,  it  ought  to  be  an  argument  to  all  to 
avoid  it,  or  seek  deliverance  from  it  by  lawful  means.  (3)  If  you  are  poor,  pray 
God  to  preserve  you  from  fraud  and  disingenuity  of  every  kind.  You  should  not 
only  study  to  preserve  yourselves  from  sin,  but  from  all  such  circumstances  of 
temptation  as  are  dangerous  to  human  constancy.  How  necessary  it  is  that  you 
should  look  for  the  Divine  assistance  and  direction,  to  avoid  the  temptations  of 
every  state  of  life.  What  an  inseparable  connection  there  is  between  true 
religion  and  your  employments  and  state  in  this  present  world.  Whether 
you    be    rich    or    poor,    remember    an    approaching    eternity.       (Ibid.)  On 

the  temptations  and  dangers  of  opulence  and  exalted  station : — That  virtue  and 
happiness  are  generally  found  between  opposite  extremes  will  be  universally 
acknowledged.  If  we  review  the  economy  and  course  of  nature  we  shall  find  that 
extremes  are  unknown  in  its  constitution,  and  that  every  temporary  excess  is 
counterpoised  by  another  till  the  proper  balance  be  restored.  Extremes  are  the 
result  solely  of  human  foUy  and  corruption.  The  golden  rule  of  mediocrity  ia 
peculiarly  applicable  in  estimating  the  different  conditions  of  human  life.    I.  The 

DANGERS,    TEMPTATIONS,    AND    GENEEAL   INCONVENIENCES    OF    A    WEALTHY   AND    EXALTED 

STATION.     Many  shapes  of  vice  and  misery  stand  behind  the  blaze  of  opulence. 

1.  Pride.  Which  deprives  men  of  all  true  knowledge  of  themselves,  and  exposes 
them  to  the  iU-will  and  enmity  of  others.  Opulence  and  splendour  tend  to 
enfeeble,  if  not  to  eradicate  a  just  notion  of  mutual  dependence  and  obligation, 
and  to  introduce  in  its  stead  the  absurd  opinion  of  inherent  and  immutable  inde- 
pendence and  superiority.  2.  Want  of  feeling  for  distress.  Eiches  tend  to  shut 
the  breast  against  emotions  of  compassion.  3.  Effeminacy,  indolence,  and  inca- 
pacity of  exertion  are  natural  attendants  on  riches  and  splendid  station.  But  no 
real  enjoyment  can  be  obtained  by  man  without  some  exertion.  Exertion  sweetens 
the  enjoyment  itself,  and  quaUfies  for  increasing  and  multiplying  it.  The  eye 
dazzled  with  the  lustre  of  riches  loses  its  aptitude  for  the  research  of  truth.  The 
rich  are  not  often  the  learned.  4.  Ambition.  This  passion  agitates  and  engrosses 
the  mind  more  than  any  other,  to  the  dominion  of  which  man  is  subject. 
Prosperous  and  exalted  circumstances  have  a  powerful  tendency  to  excite  and 
foster  this  outi'ageous  passion.  5.  Irreligion  and  profaneness.  The  most  powerful 
incitements  to  religious  affections  are  often  perverted  into  causes  of  impiety. 
11.  The  temptations  and  dangers  of  poverty.  Evil.  1.  Either  an  entire  want 
of  the  necessaries  of  life,  or  the  purchase  of  them  by  unremitting  toil  and  fatigue. 

2.  The  want  of  a  proper  education.  3.  Contempt.  The  poor  are  sometimes 
regarded  as  beings  of  another  species — as  beasts  of  burden  to  those  who  are  more 
favoured  by  fortune.  Consequently  the  indigent  are  frequently  tempted  to  repine 
and  murmur  at  the  dispensations  of  Providence.  4.  Temptations  to  dishonesty, 
fraud,  and  theft.  III.  The  advantages  of  a  middle  station  in  life.  This  is 
the  soil  best  adapted  to  the  culture  and  perfection  of  every  quality,  intellectual  or 
moral.  The  natural  affections  are  not  suppressed  in  the  middle  sphere,  or  diverted 
from  their  proper  course,  and  operate  their  salutary  effects  on  domestic  and  more 
general  intercourse.  Accordingly,  the  greatest  portion  of  the  knowledge,  ability, 
and  virtue  which  exist  in  the  world  wiU  be  found  in  this  station  of  life.  Everything 
said  above  strongly  inculcates  contentment  and  gratitude  if  it  has  pleased  God  to 
bestow  on  us  that  worldly  portion  which  is  most  subservient  to  our  happiness. 
Take  care  to  judge,  with  candour  and  gentleness,  of  the  conduct  of  persons  placed 
in  the  higher  stations  of  society.  Take  care  to  show  great  indulgence  and 
compassion  towards  the  poor.  (W.  L.  Brown,  D.D.)  The  prayer  of  Agur  : — • 
I.  The  meaning  and  import  of  this  petition.  A  middle  state  of  life  cannot  be 
a  proper  subject  for  all  men's  petitions  to  heaven,  for  human  life  requires  a  distinc- 
tion of  station.  In  society  there  must  be  subordination.  This  petition  cannot 
propose  one  fixed  standard  or  measure  of  fortune  as  the  proper  object  of  every 
man's  desires.  It  means  a  competency  suited  to  our  respective  stations.  Riches, 
poverty,  or  competence  are  relative  terms,  and  cannot  be  accurately  fixed,  without 
reference  to  our  condition  or  situation  in  the  world.     11.  The  moral  disadvantages 

WHICH     ATTEND     THE    TWO     EXTREMES    OF     AFFLUENCE     AND     INDIGENCE.       1.    Such    aS 


CHAP.  XXX.]  PROVERBS.  673 

attend  affluence.  Various  vices  flourish.  Many  lose  their  integrity.  Many 
abandon  themselves  to  the  indulgence  of  irregular  passions,  merely  because  they 
had  the  means  of  indulgence  in  their  power.  Riches  specially  tempts  to  forgetful- 
ness  of  our  Maket.  A  sense  and  feeling  of  want  is  a  constant  monitor,  ever 
reminding  us  of  our  dependence.  This  dependence  creates  in  us  an  unwillingness 
to  offend,  and  an  inclination  to  serve  and  please  God.  Opulence  tempts  us  to  be  as 
forgetful  of  our  neighbour  as  of  our  God.  Of  course  all  do  not  yield  to  the  tempta- 
tions of  ri-ches.  There  are  many  exceptions.  2.  Poverty  has  many  disadvantages 
and  dangers.  The  temptations  in  a  state  of  indigence  are  urgent,  and  too  often 
prevail.  It  requires  a  peculiarly  right  frame  and  happy  disposition  of  mind  to 
submit  with  patient  fortitude  to  humiliation,  and  to  reject  every  gainful  temptation 
that  offers  to  corrupt.  If  any  convenient  though  fraudful  expedient  should  oiler 
to  relieve  his  necessities,  human  weakness  will  be  strongly  urged  to  provide  a 
dishonest  subsistence  at  the  expense  of  his  integrity.  The  text  reminds  us  that  as 
we  are  the  creatures  of  God,  we  are  the  dependents  also  on  His  providence.  He  is 
never  inattentive  to  the  wants  of  His  faithful  servants.  These  sentiments  will  lead 
us  to  an  uncomplaining  submission  to  His  appointments,  and  an  equal  resignation 
in  all  conditions.  Whatever  may  be  our  allotment  in  the  world,  let  us  be  piously 
gi-ateful  to  Heaven  for  the  blessings  we  enjoy ;  let  us  endeavour  to  deserve  those  we 
want ;  and  let  it  be  the  chief  object  of  our  attention  by  a  wise  and  virtuous  use  of 
the  temporary  treasures  or  possessions  entrusted  to  us  in  this  life  to  secure  the 
eternal  possessions  of  the  next.  (G.  Carr,  B.A.)  A  definition  of  money  : — 
Money  is  the  god  of  the  material  world,  and  there  its  power  stops.  A  London 
newspaper  offered  a  prize  for  the  best  definition  of  money,  and  it  was  awarded  to  a 
young  man  whose  definition  was  :  "  An  article  which  may  be  used  as  a  universal 
passport  to  everywhere  except  heaven,  and  as  a  universal  provider  of  everything 
except  happiness."  The  purgatory  of  possessing  much  wealth: — John  Hopkins, 
the  founder  of  the  university  in  Baltimore  bearing  his  name,  accumulated  nine 
millions  of  dollars.  One  day  he  said  to  his  gardener :  "  Next  to  the  hell  of  being 
utterly  bereft  of  money  is  the  purgatory  of  possessing  a  vast  amount  of  it.  I  have  a 
mission,  and  under  its  shadow  I  have  accumulated  wealth,  but  not  happiness." 
{Christian  Age.)  Little  better  than  much  : — "  Better  a  little  fire  that  warms  than 
mickle  that  burns."  "One  may  be  very  uneasy  with  a  plentiful  fortune,  and  as 
happy  in  an  humble  condition,  for  it  is  the  mind  that  makes  us  either  the  one  or 
the  other."  "Far  from  Jupiter,  far  from  the  thunder."  Agur's  prayer  is  a  continual 
lecture  to  him  that  covets  more  than  enough.  Socrates,  passing  through  the 
markets,  cried,  "  How  much  is  here  I  do  not  want !  "  "  That  suit  is  best  that  fits 
me  best,"  says  an  English  adage.  (Saturday  Magazine.)  Easy  circumstances : — 
1.  This  prayer  is  deservedly  admired  on  account  of  the  motive  by  which  it  was 
dictated,  viz.,  a  concern  for  his  own  virtue  on  the  part  of  him  who  composed  it. 
Agur's  wish  for  the  middle  state  grew  out  of  a  persuasion  that  it  was  the  most 
favourable  to  virtue.  This  is  a  prayer  not  to  be  led  into  temptation.  2.  It  is 
marked  by  humility  and  self-knowledge.  3.  Notice  the  attainableness  of  the  thing 
prayed  for.  Much  can  be  done  by  the  co-operation  of  man's  will  with  the  opera- 
tion of  God's  providence  and  Holy  Spirit.  What  is  true  of  our  bodUy  health  and 
spiritual  state  is  true  of  our  worldly  circumstances.  These  also  depend  very  much 
upon  ourselves.  "What  shall  I  do  to  be  happy  in  this  world?"  This  is  a 
question  of  importance  in  itself,  even  if  it  must  be  regarded  as  a  minor  question. 
The  Scriptures  abound  with  instruction  respecting  it.  The  Church  puts  up  many 
prayers  for  blessings  merely  temporal,  and  for  deliverance  from  evils  that  can  only 
affect  us  here.  If  any  say,  "  This  middle  state,  presented  as  so  desirable,  what 
state  is  it  ?  what  amount  of  income  goes  to  constitute  it  ?  "  I  answer  that  it  is  not 
the  same  to  all.  What  is  wealth  to  one  man  would  be  poverty  to  another ;  what  is 
a  middle  state  for  one  would  be  a  low  state  for  another,  and  a  high  one  for  a 
third.  He  is  poor  whose  expenses  are  greater  than  his  means ;  and  he  is  not  so 
who  lives  within  his  means,  and  spends  less  than  he  earns  or  owns.  By  "  poor  " 
we  too  often  designate  all  who  live  by  labour,  but  this  is  a  loose  and  improper  way 
of  speaking.  He  only  is  poor  who  cannot  maintain  the  scale  of  living  and  the 
kind  of  appearance  he  has  assumed.  The  way  to  the  true  happy  mean  between 
riches  and  poverty  is  the  old-fashioned  way  of  industry  and  frugality.  Of  industry 
the  effects  are  better  understood  than  those  of  saving.  The  objects  and  occasions 
that  make  it  a  duty  to  save  are  some  of  them  distant  ones,  and  others  are  not  sure 
to  arise.  And  the  sums  we  can  spare  from  our  immediate  wants  are  so  small  that 
they  seem  scarcely  worth  laying  by.     But  the  result  of  small  savings  is  considerable 

44 


C74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOIt.  [chap.  xxx. 

at  last.  {A.  Gibson,  M.A.)  Agur^s  prayer: — I.  The  person  heee  speakino 
WAS  A  PERSON  OF  TRUE  PIETY.  This  person  was  truly  a  good  man,  for  he  was 
humble  (vers.  2,  3).  He  had  sublime  views  of  God  (ver.  4).  In  his  character  we 
perceive  a  deep  reverence  for  the  Word  of  God,  and  great  delight  in  its  purity 
(ver.  5).  In  this  character  we  contemplate,  in  relation  to  prayer,  earnestness  and 
judiciousness  (vers.  7,  8).  From  God  he  expected  all  his  mercies,  whether  spiritual 
or  temporal,  and  he  expected  them  as  an  undeserved  favour.  He  did  not  prescribe 
to  God,  but  by  His  Spirit  he   was  taught  to  pray  as  in  the  words   before  us. 

II.    AgUR   was   a    person    WHOSE    WILL   WAS    ABSORBED    OR   LOST    IN    THE    DiVINE    WILL. 

This  was  an  evidence  of  his  piety.  To  submit  to  the  will  of  God  is  His  command,  and 
is  the  bounden  duty  of  all  creatures.  By  nature  the  will  is  rebellious ;  it  is  as  an 
iron  sinew,  and  as  a  brow  of  brass.  The  first  effect  of  the  grace  of  God  is  to 
reconcile  the  mind  to  the  plan  of  salvation  by  Jesus  Christ.  They  wish  no  altera- 
tion in  the  doctrines  of  the  Cross  on  their  account ;  of  the  whole  covenant,  in  its 
conditions  and  its  Head,  its  promises  and  discipline,  they  say,  "  It  is  all  my  salvation 
and  all  my  desire."  They  delight  in  the  law  of  the  Lord  after  the  inward  man,  and 
they  allow  God  the  entire  management  of  their  providential  lot.  They  know  that 
the  disposing  of  their  lot  is  from  the  Lord ;  whether  they  are  rich  or  poor,  their 
wishes  are  not  the  rule,  but  the  appointment  of  God.  III.  Ague's  desire  after 
EARTHLY  things  WERE  VERY  MODERATE.  "  Givc  me  neither  poverty,  nor  riches,  but 
feed  me,"  &c.  The  heart  of  man  since  the  Fall,  having  lost  God  as  a  portion,  and 
its  interest  in  spiritual  things,  has  become  ravenous  in  its  desires  after  the  things 
of  sense  and  of  time.  It  seeks  pleasure  after  pleasure,  honour  after  honour,  riches 
after  riches,  field  after  field ;  and  yet,  like  the  ocean,  though  all  the  rivers  run  into 
it,  the  heart  of  man  is  never  satisfied.  But  the  saints  having  returned  to  God  in 
Christ,  as  the  rest  and  portion  of  their  souls,  and  finding  themselves  happy  in  God, 
are  very  moderate  in  their  desires  after  earthly  things.  They  desu-e  nothing  of 
God  as  to  the  present  life  which  He  is  not  willing  to  give,  and  which  does  not  con- 
tribute to  their  advantage.  They  do  not  wish  more  than  they  really  want,  and 
they  would  not  lay  up  treasures  on  earth.    IV.  Agur    was    a    wise  man,  who 

considered    THE    TEMPTATIONS     INCIDENT    TO    THE   LOT   OF    OTHER     MEN.       "  Lest    I    be 

fuU,  and  deny  Thee."  To  be  full  is  to  be  very  rich,  to  fare,  like  the  rich  man  in  the 
Gospel,  sumptuously  every  day,  to  have  more  than  their  hearts  can  wish.  "  Lest  I  be 
full,  and  deny  Thee  to  be  the  Author  of  my  mercies — deny  my  dependence  on  Thee  for 
Thy  blessing  which  maketh  rich — deny  Thee  the  glory  due  to  Thy  name,  and  take  it  to 
myself  or  ascribe  it  to  others — deny  Thee  before  men,  by  being  ashamed  of  mingling 
with  Thy  poor  people  in  Thy  worship.  Lest  my  forgetfulness  of  God  strengthen  into 
aversion,  and  my  aversion  become  atheism,  and  I  say.  Who  is  the  Lord  ?  "  When 
every  gale  blows  perfume,  and  every  post  brings  joyful  intelligence,  it  is  not 
possible  for  the  spirit  of  a  wicked  man  to  avoid  the  swellings  of  pride,  and  the 
elevation  of  self-confidence.  The  other  temptation  which  this  good  man  wished  to 
avoid,  by  the  grace  of  God,  was  poverty :  "  Lest  I  be  poor,  and  steal,  and  take  the 
name  of  my  God  in  vain."  He  doth  not  say,  "  Lest  I  steal  and  be  condemned  by 
men  for  it,  be  imprisoned  for  it,"  but  "Lest  I  steal,  and  take  the  name  of  my  God  in 
vain  " ;  that  is,  "  Lest  I  dishonour  God  by  breaking  the  eighth  precept  of  His  law, 
lest  by  so  doing  I  dishonour  my  profession  as  a  holy  man,  or  lest,  if  charged  with 
the  crime,  I  should  deny  or  conceal  it,  and  so,  by  endeavouring  to  hide  one  sin, 
should  commit  another — by  denying  the  sin  of  theft,  commit  the  sin  of  lying." 
The  motives  against  sin  which  animated  Agur  were  noble  motives,  and  such  as 
they  were  should  animate  us.  His  religion  was  all  of  a  piece,  his  prayers  were  the 
fruit  of  his  piety,  and  his  life  corresponded  to  his  prayers.  (Christian  Recorder.) 
Agur's  prayer  : — This  prayer  may  justly  be  considered  as  ejaculatory.  It  consists 
of  two  petitions,  the  one  relating  to  spiritual  blessings,  the  other  to  temporal 
blessings.  I.  "  Eemove  from  me  vanity  and  lies."  The  words  show  Agur's  concern 
to  be  delivered  from  everything  like  ostentation  or  self-confidence,  and  from  the 
desire  to  utter  as  true  things  which  he  might  not  fully  comprehend,  with  the  view 
of  being  admired  and  applauded  for  his  wisdom  and  penetration.  TJie  prayer 
reaches  to  the  removal  of  the  natural  atheism  and  impiety  of  the  human  heart  of 
every  false  notion  of  God,  and  of  every  imaginary  ground  of  hope  on  which  the 
unrenewed  mind  is  apt  to  depend.  II.  "Give  me  neither  poverty  nor  riches." 
There  is  not  a  wise  man  acquainted  with  the  frailties  of  human  nature,  or  with  the 
temptations  incident  to  a  condition  either  of  peculiar  diflQculty  or  prosperity,  who, 
if  he  were  to  express  any  wish  concerning  it  at  all,  would  not  cordially  join  with 
Agur.    To  perceive  this  to  be  the  case,  consider — 1.  The  evils  incident  to  a  state  of 


CHAP.  XXX.]     .  PROVERBS.  675 

poverty.  The  incapacity  of  discharging  necessary  obligations  is  almost  enough  to 
mar  the  flight  of  the  boldest  faith,  and  deaden  the  efforts  of  the  strongest  devotion. 
And  how  often  do  the  devices  of  injustice  start  up  in  the  minds  of  the  poor  1  In  aU 
their  transactions  they  are  ever  in  hazard  of  grasping  at  what  is  not  their  own,  of 
practising  falsehood,  dissimulation,  and  even  perjury.  2,  The  evils  incident  to 
a  state  of  affluence.  By  riches  we  understand  that  surplus  of  wealth  or  property 
which  any  one  enjoys  above  what  is  absolutely  necessary  to  procure  those  con- 
veniences and  comforts  which  are  suited  to  the  condition  wherein  he  is  placed. 
Such  riches  may  be  a  blessing,  and  give  power  to  do  good ;  but  alas  1  they  almost 
uniformly  tend  to  corrupt  the  heart,  to  undermine  those  sentiments  of  dependence 
on  God  which  are  so  becoming  to  the  character  of  man,  and  to  foment  a  spirit  of 
rebellion  against  the  Divine  authority.  They  engender  selfishness,  pride,  arrogance, 
and  unbearable  insolence  towards  others.    III.  By  means  of  a  middle  state  we 

ARE  IN  GBEAT  MEASUEE  EXEMPTED  FROM  THE  EVILS  OF  BOTH  THESE  STATES.   Such  a 

man  has  sufficient  to  feed,  and  nourish,  and  clothe  himself  and  those  who  are 
dependent  on  him.  His  dependence  on  God  is  neither  weakened  by  his  having  too 
much  of  the  world,  nor  his  affection  withdrawn  from  Him  by  having  too  little. 
Such  a  man  is  peculiarly  favourable  to  the  dispositions  he  should  feel,  and  the 
duties  he  should  perform  towards  those  that  are  around  him.  Eemember  that  God 
alone  has  the  disposal  of  your  lot.  Of  this  you  may  be  assured,  it  is  the  one  which 
He  knows  to  be  best  fitted  for  you.  {Jas.  Somerville,  D.D.)  Wealth  presents  a 
broader  mark  for  misfortune : — Have  you  not  seen  that  the  flourishing  tree,  when 
adorned  with  luxuriant  foliage,  or  loaded  with  fruit,  is  most  easily  broken  by  the 
fury  of  the  tempest?  Have  you  not  heard  that  the  summit  of  the  loftiest 
mountain  meets  first  the  lightning  of  heaven  ?  In  like  manner,  when  you  multiply 
flocks  and  herds,  you  not  only  increase  your  cares,  but  present  a  broader  mark  to 
the  shafts  of  misfortune.  When  "  fed  with  food  convenient  for  you,"  pay  a 
becoming  attention,  on  the  one  hand,  to  frugality,  without  which  none  can  be  long 
independent,  and  with  which  few  would  be  pure.  Beware,  on  the  other,  of  spend- 
ing your  life  in  anxiety  or  meanness,  in  order  to  increase  your  worldly  store.  Surely 
the  wealth  of  this  world  is  not  the  best  blessing  which  your  heavenly  Father  has  to 
bestow.  In  a  thousand  ways  which  you  do  not  foresee  He  can  promote  the  happi- 
ness of  those  who  fear  Him.  (Dr.  Laurie.)  Moderate  desires : — As  there  is  a 
misery  in  want,  so  there  is  a  danger  in  excess.  I  would  therefore  desire  neither 
more  nor  less  than  enough.  I  may  as  well  die  of  a  surfeit  as  of  hunger.  (J.  Warwick.) 
Neither  poverty  nor  riches : — I.  General  remarks  on  Agdr's  prater.  1.  It  is  short, 
concise,  but  fuU  and  comprehensive.  2.  It  is  singular  with  respect  to  its  matter,  as 
weU  as  the  manner  in  which  it  is  expressed.  How  few  of  us  have  ever  offered  up 
Buch  a  petition  1  Moderation  in  our  desires  and  pursuits  after  worldly  good  is  an 
eminent  attainment,  but  how  little  of  it  do  we  possess  ourselves,  or  observe  in 
others  !  3.  It  discovers  much  heavenly-mindedness  and  self-denial.  A  man's  own 
heart  would  not  suggest  it  to  him  ;  it  is  a  dictate  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  H.  Con- 
sider ITS  import  or  THE  PARTICULARS  INCLUDED  IN  THE  PRATER  ITSELF.      1.   It  implies 

that  both  riches  and  poverty  come  from  God,  and  are  not  merely  the  result  of 
second  causes.  "  The  lot  is  cast  into  the  lap,  but  the  whole  disposal  thereof  is  of  the 
Lord. "  2.  It  supposes  that  there  is  a  medium  between  poverty  and  riches  which  is 
most  desirable  and  ought  to  be  the  object  of  every  one's  request.  The  idea  of  a 
competency  must  be  regulated  by  the  extent  of  our  actual  necessities,  both  personal 
and  relative.  Competency  must  also  be  determined  by  our  station  and  condition  in 
life.  That  which  is  sufficient,  and  more  than  sufficient,  for  one,  is  not  in  aU 
respects  sufficient  for  another.  The  more  we  possess,  the  greater  will  be  our 
responsibility,  and  the  greater  our  danger.  Learn  to  judge  of  a  competency  not  by 
the  sentiments  of  mankind,  but  by  reason  and  the  Word  of  God.  If  Providence 
has  placed  us  in  the  middle  state  between  indigence  and  affluence,  let  us  learn  to 
esteem  it  as  the  most  desirable.  (B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  A  sufficiency  adjusted  and 
recommended : — The  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God  have  so  ordered  it  that  those 
proportions  of  the  good  things  of  this  life  which  are  most  consistent  with  the 
interests  of  the  soul  are  also  most  conducive  to  our  present  felicity.  I.  The  import 
OF  Agur's  wish.  1.  Poverty  and  riches  are  relative  terms ;  the  idea  of  them  varies 
as  they  are  applied  to  persons  of  different  condition,  education,  birth,  or  figure  of 
life.  This  wish  cannot  be  understood  to  propose  one  certain  size  and  measure  of 
fortune  as  the  proper  standard  of  all  men's  desires,  but  in  a  sense  accommodated 
to  the  various  ranks,  conditions,  and  characters  of  men.  Unless  we  exclude 
temporal  blessings  from  being  the  subject  of  human  petitions,  thus  much  we  may 


676  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxx. 

reasonably  and  lawfully  ask  of  God.  This  petition  is  sometimes  explained  as 
requesting  a  middle  station  in  life,  within  reach  of  those  conveniences  which  the 
lower  orders  of  mankind  must  necessarily  want,  and  yet  without  embarrassment  of 
greatness.  This  limitation  cannot,  however,  be  allowed,  seeing  that  society  cannot 
subsist  without  a  diversity  of  stations  and  offices.  Both  extremes  above  and  below 
the  proportion  of  our  character  are  equally  dangerous  to  our  virtue  and  happiness, 
and  it  is  hard  to  determine  which  is  most  ineligible.  II.  The  force  of  those 
REASONS  HERE  SUGGESTED  FOR  THIS  WISH.  The  danger  apprehended  from  poverty  is 
the  temptation  to  supply  wants  by  fraud  and  violence,  theft  or  robbery,  lying  or 
perjury.  The  temptation  to  these  crimes  is  very  strong  in  a  state  of  distress.  A 
crowd  of  unfortunate  passions  surround  the  man,  and  will  not  suiier  him  to  attend 
to  the  remonstrances  of  justice  or  the  precepts  of  religion.  On  the  other  hand, 
riches  multiplied  beyond  the  proportion  of  our  character,  and  the  wants  appendant 
to  it,  naturally  dispose  men  to  forget  God.  They  are  apt  in  such  circumstances  to 
think  themselves  secure  and  independent,  out  of  the  reach  of  Providence,  and  no 
longer  concerned  to  solicit  His  favour.  A  superfluous  abundance  tempts  us  to 
forget  God.  If,  then,  both  poverty  and  riches  are  thus  dangerous  to  our  virtue  and 
religion,  the  proper  subject  of  our  petitions  to  God,  with  regard  to  temporals,  must 
be  a  state  between  these,  that  medium  of  convenience  proportioned  to  the  several 
conditions  of  life  which  the  example  in  the  text  recommends  to  our  choice  and 
prayers.  This  wise  supplicant  was  contented  with  his  present  situation,  and  though 
he  prayed  for  the  condition  he  thought  most  desirable,  yet  left  the  event  to  God,  and 
•was  prepared  to  submit  to  His  will,  though  either  of  the  extremes  should  be  his 
portion.  1.  If  we  would  avoid  the  dangers  and  temptations  of  poverty,  it  concerns 
us  not  to  overrate  the  conveniences  of  our  station,  and  to  fix  the  proportion  fit  for 
us  rather  too  low  than  too  high.  2.  It  is  a  great  security  to  use  ourselves  to  live 
within  the  restraints  of  a  lower  condition  than  that  we  are  placed  in.  3.  To  guard 
against  temptations  from  the  other  extreme,  remember  the  advice  of  the  psalmist, 
"If  riches  increase,  set  not  your  heart  upon  them."  No  condition  of  life  is 
necessarily  sinful  or  necessarily  virtuous.  We  may  pass  with  innocence  through 
want  and  through  abundance.  Christian  prudence  will  advise  us  to  request  a 
situation  least  exposed,  the  safe  portion  of  a  moderate  adjusted  convenience.  (J. 
Rogers.)  Wherein  is  a  worldly  condition  most  eligible? — I.  The  requests — the 
THINGS  PLEADED  FOR  AT  THE  HANDS  OF  GoD.  1.  "  Eemovc  far  from  me  vanity  and 
lies."  This  respects  his  inward  man,  the  concerns  of  his  soul.  2.  The  second 
request  concerns  his  outward  man,  and  the  temporal  enjoyments  of  this  transitory 
life.  These  are  also  the  gifts  of  God.  Notice  somewhat  that  he  deprecates  and 
declines,  viz.,  poverty  and  riches.  Something  for  which  he  supplicates,  viz.,  food 
convenient  for  him.  II.  The  arguments  upon  which  he  grounds  this  choice.  An 
argument  drawn  from  the  perils  of  riches  and  the  temptations  of  poverty.  He 
argues  that  a  middle  estate  or  condition  in  the  world,  upon  rational  and  religious 
grounds,  is  most  eligible  for  a  man,  as  such,  with  respect  to  this  life ;  or  for  a 
Christian,  as  such,  designing  the  happiness  of  another  life.  Proposition — 1.  God 
hath  the  absolute  disposal  of  all  men  as  to  their  estates  and  conditions  in  the  world. 
2.  God,  in  His  various  dispensations  of  the  good  and  evil  things  of  this  world,  acts 
not  only  as  an  absolute  Sovereign,  but  according  to  the  rules  of  His  own  most 
infinite  wisdom,  as  may  most  conduce  to  His  own  glory  and  the  good  and  weal  of 
His  own  people.  3.  No  outward  condition  in  the  world  that  men  can  be  brought 
into  hath  any  influence  upon  God,  so  as  to  render  us  more  or  less  acceptable  to 
Him.  4.  One  and  the  same  condition  in  the  world  is  not  alike  desirable  or  eligible 
to  all  men  under  all  circumstances,  nor  to  the  same  men  at  several  times,  or  as 
placed  by  God  in  several  stations.  IH.  What  is  this  middle  worldly  condition  ? 
Consider  it  with  a  threefold  respect.  1.  With  respect  to  a  man's  personal  and 
private  capacity  as — a  single  person.  2.  With  respect  unto  a  man's  relative  capacity 
■ — as  he  may  be  concerned  to  take  care  of  others,  as  well  as  make  provision  for  him- 
self. 3.  With  respect  unto  a  man's  being  placed  in  a  higher  or  more  public  station 
— as  magistracy  or  ministry.  IV.  Upon  what  ground  mat  this  middle  estate  be 
adjudged  the  most  eligikle  and  desirable.  It  is  with  respect  to  man's  short 
passage  through  this  world,  for  his  mind  and  for  his  body.  It  is  in  relation  to 
another  world.  Three  things  are  prerequisites  in  order  to  our  future  happiness. 
1.  A  right  and  orderly  entering  into  the  way  of  salvation  by  the  door  of  sound 
regeneration  and  conversion.  2.  A  progress  in  that  way  by  a  holy  and  heavenly 
conversation.  3.  A  perseverance  in  that  way  of  faith  and  holiness  to  the  end 
against  all  internal  or  external  opposition.     Caution  to  the  poor.    Bemember  that 


CHAP.  XXX.]  PROVERBS.  677 

your  condition  lays  you  open  to  many  strong  temptations  to  dishonour  and  neglect 
God  and  Christ,  and  your  souls,  and  so  makes  way  for  your  being  miserable  in  both 
■worlds.  Two  cautions  to  the  rich  :  "  Be  not  high-minded,  nor  trust  in  uncertain 
riches."  "Honour  the  Lord  with  your  substance."  Three  cautions  to  those  in 
middle  state  of  life  :  See  what  interpretation  you  are  to  make  of  those  providences 
that  have  put  a  check  to  your  endeavours  and  graspings  at  great  things  in  the 
world.  Moderate  your  affections  to  the  things  of  this  world.  Seeing  Providence 
has  placed  you  in  the  most  eligible  condition,  labour  to  answer  it,  and  evidence  it 
to  be  so  by  your  proficiency  and  progress  in  holiness  and  godliness.  (John  Oakes.) 
The  middle  condition  of  life  : — This  is,  generally  at  least,  more  safe  and  eligible 
than  either  want  or  superfluity.      I.  Explain  the   twofold  danger  intimated. 

1.  To  deny  sometimes  signifies  to  act  as  if  there  was  no  righteous  Governor  and 
Judge  of  mankind.  In  the  height  of  prosperity  men  are  apt  to  be  careless  and 
inconsiderate.  The  vices  implied  are  pride,  presumption,  arrogance,  luxury,  and 
immoderate  pursuits  of  pleasure.  Plenty  too  naturally  begets  excess.  It  heightens 
and  inflames  sensual  passions ;  and  inchnes  a  man  towards  atheism.  Eiches 
minister  to  ambition,  and  rich  men  readily    become  imperious  and  tyrannical, 

2.  The  vices  to  which  strait  and  penurious  circumstances  expose  men  are  theft  and 
perjury.  The  causes  why  the  poor  so  easily  give  way  to  temptations  of  this  kind 
are  the  want  of  a  good  education,  lack  of  training  for  specific  employments.  Such 
persons  are  often  destitute  of  due  regard  to  their  reputations,  and  so  lose  one  of  the 
surest  guards  of  virtue  and  integrity.  Often  the  poor  are  badly  influenced  by  their 
associates.  II.  Suggest  reflections  to  prevent  mistakes.  1.  Both  riches  and 
poverty  are  capable  of  being  improved  to  the  most  useful  purposes.  2.  As  poverty 
has  such  disadvantages,  we  may  well  commiserate  the  case  of  the  poor.  3.  Take 
care  to  moderate  the  passion  for  riches  and  greatness.  (James  Foster.)  The 
dangers  of  riches  and  poverty : — Agur  builds  his  prayer  for  mediocrity  on  the 
opposite  dangers  to  which  riches  and  poverty  are  exposed.  1.  It  is  inferred  that 
riches  beget  self-sufiiciency,  a  fancied  independency  and  a  denial  or  forgetfulness 
of  God.  The  inference  receives  but  too  much  confirmation  from  experience. 
Riches  are  not  less  prejudicial  to  happiness  than  they  are  to  virtue.  What  are  the 
chief  preservatives  against  the  dangers  of  riches  ?  Let  the  rich  man  remember 
that  all  which  he  possesses  was  given  to  him,  or  more  precisely,  has  been  lent  to 
him  ;  that  he  has  as  much  need  of  the  assistance  of  the  poor  man  as  the 
poor  man  has  of  his  ;  that  rich  and  poor  have  the  same  natures,  the  same 
weaknesses  and  infirmities  ;  and  that  the  hand  that  gave  the  riches  may  withdraw 
them  at  any  time.  2.  It  is  shown  that  the  pecuHar  and  characteristic  vices  of 
poverty  and  want  are  dishonesty  and  discontent.  The  life  of  those  in  the  lower 
ranks  is  subject  to  many  hardships  and  miseries ;  and  these  present  temptations  to 
discontent  and  dishonesty.  But  let  the  poor  remember  that  neither  of  these  is 
likely  to  be  of  any  service  to  them.  Discontent  always  augments  the  evil  with 
which  we  are  oppressed.  It  adds  to  it  its  own  bitterness.  Dishonesty  can  at  the 
utmost  bring  temporary  relief.  What  is  gained  by  fraud  is  usually  wasted  in 
extravagance.  And  who  was  ever  known  to  rest  with  the  commission  of  one  crime  ? 
The  bounds  of  integrity  once  broken  through,  it  is  rarely  within  our  will  or  our 
power  to  retreat.  In  comparing  their  happiness  with  that  of  the  rich,  the  poor  are 
often  deceived.  (Geo.  Haggitt,  3I.A.)  A  moderate  condition  the  happiest  and 
safest : — I.  A  petition.  Expressed  in  two  ways — negatively,  declaring  what  he 
would  not  have ;  positively,  containing  what  he  would  have.  Though  expressed  in 
two  ways,  this  is  one  single  request.  1.  If  we  ought  to  pray  against  riches,  we 
should  never  covet  or  seek  after  abundance  and  excess  of  worldly  treasures.  2.  If 
we  ought  to  pray  against  poverty,  then  a  superstitious  affectation  of  wilful  poverty, 
such  as  we  see  in  Komish  monks,  is  neither  a  state  of  Christian  perfection  nor  a 
part  of  religion  acceptable  to  God.  II.  The  reason  of  this  petition.  He  fears 
that  too  much  affluence  would  lead  him  into  impiety  and  irreligion.  He 
fears  that  excessive  poverty  might  incline  him  to  rob  his  neighbour  of  his 
right,  and  back  his  injustice  with  lies  and  perjury.  Learn — 1.  That  the 
rule  and  measure  of  our  endeavours  and  desires  in  the  gaining  and  enjoy- 
ing these  outward  conveniences  ought  to  be  their  subserviency  to  our  spiritual 
advantages,  and  the  forwarding  us  in  our  duty  to  God  and  to  our  neighbour. 
2.  To  assure  an  unblemished  innocence,  we  ought  not  only  to  avoid  gross  trans- 
gressions, but  even  every  occasion  which  may  expose  us  to  them.  {N.  Brady.) 
Agur^s  request  but  one,  and  that  comparative  : — He  that  hath  neither  too  Uttle 
nor  too  much  muet  needs  have  a  competency,  or  food  convenient  for  him.    It  is  not 


678  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxx. 

a  prayer  absolutely  against  riches,  or  absolutely  against  poverty.     It  is  a  prayer  of 
choice,  or  a  comparative  prayer  ;  as  if  he  had  said,  "  Rather  than  either  riches  or 
poverty,  give  me  the  mean  between  both."     I.  The  thing  peated  for.    Begin  with 
the  affirmative.     If  we  know  the  mean  which  Agur  chooseth,  we  shall  soon  guess 
what  he  understands  by  riches  and  poverty,  the  extremes  which  he  refuseth.    Com- 
petent food  is  a  competent  maintenance.     Competency  is  the  mean  between  want 
and  superfluity.     It  is  the  same  as  the  prayer  Christ  taught  us  to  pray,  "  Give  us 
our  daily  bread."     A  competency  is  twofold,  either  in  regard  of  nature  or  of  a 
man's  condition.     That  may  not  be  sufficient  for  one  man's  condition  which  is 
sufficient  for  another's.     It  is  not  unlawful  to  have  and  enjoy  riches  in  abundance, 
but  it  is  unlawful  to  covet  and  seek  after  them.    Desire  no  more  of  such  things 
than  thou  canst  lawfully  ask  God  in  prayer.    A  competency,  or  middle  estate 
between  want  and  superfluity,  is  in  choice  to  be  preferred  as  the  best  and  happiest 
condition.     Agur's  choice  was  a  wise  man's  choice.     II.  The  beason  of  the  re- 
quest. The  rule  of  our  desires  and  endeavours  in  the  getting  and  enjoying  of  these 
outward  things  ought  to  be  our  spiritual  welfare,  and  the  bettering  of  us  to  God- 
ward.     Men  who  abound  in  wealth  and  superfluity  are  much  subject  to  the  malady 
of  impiety  and  irreligion.     Consider  the  wickedness  of  men's  nature,  which  abuseth 
the  abundance  of  God's  blessings  to  dishonour  Him  that  gave  them.     Consider  also 
the  unreasonable  foUy  of  men  so  greedily  to  long  for  and  pursue  after  that  which 
so  much  endangereth  their  welfare  and  happiness.     A  lesson  of  caution  to  those 
who  are  rich,  to  keep  a  continual  watch  over  themselves,  that  they  forget  not  God 
in  their  abundance.     Poverty  and  want  of  things  needful  hath  her  dangers  and 
evils,  as  well  as  riches  and  abundance.     Stealing,  not  merely  by  force  and  violence, 
but  also  by  fraud,   cozenage,   or  detention  of  another's  due.     Perjury,  or  false 
swearing  readily  follows  on  fraud.     The  one  is  likely  to  bring  on  the  other.     We 
must  take  care  to  avoid  the  occasion  of  such  sin,  as  well  as  the  sin  itself.     (Joseph 
Mede,  B.D.)        Poverty  and  riches  : — 1.  Both  poverty  and  riches  are  the  gift  of 
God;  otherwise  the  wise  man  needed  not  to  have  prayed,  "Give  me  neither 
poverty  nor  riches,"  if  it  had  been  in  his  own  power  to  make  the  choice.     2.  Neither 
poverty  nor  riches  are  such  gifts  for  which  a  wise  man  would  pray,  because  each 
of  these  conditions  have  their  dangers   and  inconveniences  annexed  to  them. 
3.  The  way  to  remove  these  inconveniences  is  to  remove  far  from  us  vanity  and 
lies,  and  then  we  may  so  moderate  ourselves  in  each  of  these  estates  as  to  be 
humble  before  God  in  the  midst  of  our  abundance,  and  thankful  to  Him  in  our 
distress.      4.  Notwithstanding  this,   yet  the  safest,   and   consequently  the  most 
desirable,  course  of  life,  is  a  middle  state  between  poverty  and  riches  ;  and  it  is  for 
the  interest,  as  well  as  for  the  ease  of  man,  that  God  would  let  us  neither  want  nor 
abound,  but  only  "  feed  us  with  food  convenient  for  us."     (C.  Hickman,  D.D.) 
The  eligibility  of  a  moderate  fortune  : — 1.  It  is  to  a  special  and  overruling  provi- 
dence of  God  we  are  to  ascribe  both  poverty  and  riches.     2.  A  middle  state  of  life 
is,  to  some  persons,  and  on  some  accounts,  more  eligible  than  either  poverty  or 
riches.     3.  Some  arguments  which  may  teach  us  an  entire  submission  to  the  will 
of  God,  whichever  of  these  three  states  He  may  think  fit  to  appoint  us.     There 
will  be  the  greatest  difficulty  in  persuading  people  to  this  duty  who  labour  under 
very  hard  or  mean  circumstances.     Poverty  is  very  apt  to  sink  their  spirits,  and 
render  them  unfit  for  the  nobler  luxuries  of  piety  and  devotion.     Contentment  is 
a  virtue  by  no  means  always  found  among  rich  men.    A  moderate  fortune,  if  it  do 
not  afford  the  greatest  opportunities  of  doing  good,  yet  is  a  happy  and  desirable 
state,  and  perhaps,  in  general,  the  most  safe  and  innocent.     The  fact  that  God 
appoints  men  the  three  different  states  of  life  is  proper  to  teach  us  all,  indifferently, 
the  true  art  of  contentment.     For  as  the  knowledge  of  God  perfectly  comprehends 
whatever  may  be  good  or  convenient  for  us,  so  His  power  can  effect,  and  His 
goodness  will  incline  Him  to  effect  it.     {R.  Fiddes,  D.D.)        The  danger  of  ex- 
tremes : 1.   A    GOOD    MAN    REALISING    THE    MORAL    INFLUENCE    OF    OUTWARD    CIRCUM- 
STANCES.    We  say  it  matters  not  what  circumstances  are,  we  all  can  be  good.     But 
it  is  manifestly  easier  for  some  to  be  than  others.     It  becomes  a  religious  duty  to 
make  our  outward  circumstances  helpful  as  far  as  possible,  relieving  us  from  undue 
care,  and  helping  us  to  keep  a  quiet  spirit.     II.  A  good  man  discerning  the  danger 
OF  EXTREMES  IN  CIRCUMSTANCES.     Under  thcm  men  ever  lose  their  power  of  self- 
restraint.      III.   A  GOOD   MAN  PRAYING   TO  REACH  AND  REST   IN   THE  HAPPY  MEDIUM.      Is 

such  contentment  with  our  circumstances  compatible  with  right  ambition,  and 
striving  to  be  faithful  in  all  things?  (R.  Tuck,  B.D.)  The  proper  measure  of 
('•njy^ornl  wealth  : — The  lawfully  expanded  meaning  of  these  words  is,  "Apportion 


CHAP.  XXX.]  PROVERBS.  679 

my  possessions  to  my  needs,  my  means  to  the  ends  of  my  being."  And  thus  we  are 
presented  with  this  truth — a  person  has  the  proper  measure  of  temporal  wealth 
when  he  has  sufficient  to  enable  him  to  do  the  proper  work  of  life.  Thus  the 
question  as  to  what  is  riches  and  what  poverty  is  not  a  question  to  be  decided  by 
either  feeling  or  opinion.  That  we  think  we  have  too  little  and  want  more  is  aside 
of  the  point  at  issue.  It  is  the  proportion  of  means  to  ends  that  is  the  question. 
Our  possessions  are  not  simply  sources  of  enjoyment ;  they  are  instruments  for 
service.  Our  business  in  this  world  is  to  do  the  will  of  God,  and  not  to  please 
ourselves.  Our  kind  of  service,  of  course,  varies — varies  almost  as  widely  as  do  our 
characters.  And  as  our  duty  varies,  it  follows  that  our  necessary  means  will  also 
vary.  Your  station  in  life  may  be  a  prominent  one  ;  you  may  have  more  numerous 
and  wider  interests  to  attend  to  than  another,  and  in  consequence  you  require 
a  proportionately  larger  measure  of  property.  Or  your  lot  may  be  a  lowly  one, 
little  associated  with  the  common  affairs  of  men,  and  in  order  to  a  faithful  service 
you  will  require  much  less.  But  the  question  is  whether  you  have  enough  to  enable 
you  to  rightly  occupy  your  station  as  it  is,  and  to  do  your  duty  well.  If  you  have, 
then  you  have  just  the  right  amount  of  temporal  wealth.  And,  mark  you,  this 
applies  only  to  the  duty  of  one's  providential  station.  Let  no  man  create  all  sorts 
of  artificial  obligations  and  unnecessary  work,  and  then  protest  that  his  means  are 
unequal  to  his  needs.  Let  no  one  thrust  himself  into  a  station  of  life  for  which  he 
was  never  intended,  and  then  say  he  must  live  up  to  his  position  in  society.  Let 
him  not  create  all  sorts  of  lofty  tastes  and  extravagant  modes  of  living,  and  then 
think  himself  too  poor  because  his  possessions  are  not  equal  to  these  new  inflated 
notions.  Our  means  should  be  adjusted  to  our  providential  lot,  not  to  our  factitious 
circumstances.  Life's  obligation  and  life's  glory  lie  in  filling  the  space  appointed 
by  God,  in  doing  well  the  task  prescribed  by  Him,  and  in  making  the  most,  for  our 
own  good  and  the  world's,  of  what  He  has  given  us,  whether  it  be  little,  or  whether 
it  be  much,     (J.  J.  Ingram.) 

Ver.  12.  There  is  a  generation  tliat  are  pure  in  their  own  eyes. — Self -righteous- 
ness condemned : — There  is  a  whole  generation,  not  merely  a  few  individuals,  of 
self -justified  sinners.  I.  The  sELr-KiGHTEOus  heathen.  But  he  has  very  serious 
and  pitiable  disadvantages.  He  has  but  the  law  of  nature,  with  a  few  rays  of 
Divine  truth  which,  through  tradition,  have  broken  in  upon  his  darkness.  II.  The 
BELF-EiGHTEOUs  Jew.  The  modcm  Jew  is  precisely  where  the  Jew  who  rejected 
Jesus  as  the  Messiah  was  in  St.  Paul's  days.  HI.  The  self-righteous  infidel. 
He  worships  reason,  and  he  thinks  that  he  has  the  only  rational  religion.  He  is 
his  own  standard  of  perfection.  IV.  The  self-kighteous  man  of  the  world.  One 
who  pays  very  slight  regard  to  externals — the  mere  forms  of  religion — and  none  at 
all  to  the  internals.  V.  The  Pharisees  and  semi-Pharisees  of  the  present  day. 
Those  who  trust  in  themselves  that  they  are  righteous,  and  despise  others ;  who 
mix  together  faith  and  works  in  regard  to  justification.  VI.  The  evangelical 
Pharisee.  Loud  in  his  profession,  censorious  of  the  world,  and  also  of  humble 
Christians  who  feel  doubt  and  hesitation,  not  professing  quite  so  much.  His  faith 
does  not  work  by  love,  nor  purify  the  heart.  Such  men  have  no  constancy — 
they  have  not  the  vitality  of  the  principle  of  grace  rooted  in  the  heart.  {J. 
Hamhleton,  M.A.) 

Vers.  18,  19.  There  be  three  things  which  are  too  wonderful  for  me. — The 

Christian  evidence  of  teleology : — A  confession  of  ignorance  is  always  a  hopeful 
sign.  Only  that  which  is  necessary  for  man  to  know  at  the  successive  stages  of  his 
development,  and  which  he  could  not  find  out  by  his  own  unaided  powers,  was 
disclosed  through  inspiration.  So  far  from  fathoming  the  depths  of  omniscience, 
the  inspired  writers  often  did  not  discern  the  full  purport  of  their  own  utterances. 
They  were  the  mouthpieces  through  which  God  spoke  to  enlighten  the  world  during 
all  time.  Natural  science  can  explain  much  related  to  the  flight  of  the  eagle  and 
the  movement  of  the  serpent,  and  yet  the  real  problem  remains  unsolved  and  seems 
to  mock  human  skill.  1.  In  whatever  domain  of  nature  we  look  we  find  evidences 
of  a  wisdom  and  power  which  are  above  material  forces  and  our  skill  in  imitating 
them.  2.  Prom  the  proofs  of  external  nature,  every  rational  creature  comes  into 
such  relations  with  God  that  he  must,  unless  blindly  perverse,  feel  himself  subject 
to  Divine  power,  and  under  obligations  to  perfect  obedience.  3.  It  is  of  our  own 
choosing  if  we  grovel  in  that  which  is  mean  and  low,  for  we  are  constantly  invited 
to  a  higher  life,  to  purer  thoughts,  to  nobler  works.     4.  Man  is,  however,  still 


680  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxx. 

subject  to  the  difficulties  of  his  environment,  so  far  as  his  material  nature  is  con- 
cerned. Birth  into  newness  of  Ufe  is  by  an  energy  which  is  beyond  nature,  both  in 
its  origin  and  in  its  working,  but  it  is  clearly  seen  in  its  effects.  {Jacob  Cooper,  D.D.) 
The  way  of  an  eagle  in  the  air. — The  eagle : — Four  wonderful  things  about  the 
eagle.  1.  It  is  wonderful  for  its  strength.  Shown  in  its  swiftness;  the  great 
height  to  which  it  flies ;  the  heavy  food  it  can  carry.  2.  Its  sight.  It  can  rise 
from  its  rest  at  noon,  and  go  soaring  up  towards  the  sun.  It  can  go  on  rising 
higher  and  higher,  and  yet  all  the  time  be  gazing  steadily  at  the  full-orbed  splen- 
dour which  is  shining  round  it.  From  its  great  height  the  eagle  can  see  even  a 
little  hen  walking  about  on  the  earth.  3.  Its  training.  The  parent  eagles  teach 
the  young  ones  how  to  fly,  so  that  when  they  grow  up  they  may  be  able  to  take  care 
of  themselves.  4.  Its  safety.  In  its  nest,  on  the  top  of  some  mountain  peak,  far 
away  out  of  reach  of  danger.     {B.  Newton.) 

Vers.  24-28.  There  be  four  things  which  are  little  upon  the  earth,  but  they  are 
exceeding  wise. — The  four  wise  things  : — Everything  is  full  of  lessons  of  wisdom. 
I.  The  ants.  They  know  the  time  for  work,  and  they  do  their  work  when  the 
time  comes.  This  is  their  wisdom.  II.  The  conies.  What  these  lack  in  strength 
they  make  up  in  wisdom.  They  dart  into  their  mountain  fastnesses  and  are  safe. 
Knowing  their  natural  helplessness,  they  have  the  wisdom  to  make  the  rocks  their 
habitation,  and  are  stronger  in  their  retreats  than  all  the  powers  that  may  come 
against  them.  So  there  is  a  Kock  for  us  :  that  Kock  is  Christ.  III.  The  locusts. 
Their  work  is  nothing  but  plague  and  ruin  ;  but  it  is  not  so  much  the  character  of 
their  work,  as  the  wisdom  or  system  on  which  they  do  it,  that  is  here  commended 
for  our  observance  and  imitation.  We  too  have  an  allotted  work  to  do,  and  we 
must  do  it  together.  One  man's  work  may  by  itself  be  little,  but  it  adds  to  a  great 
whole.  IV.  The  spideb.  An  example  of  private  industry  and  ingenious,  patient 
toil.  She  aims  at  no  great  and  showy  things.  Learn  the  worth  of  assiduity  in 
little  things,  humble  spheres,  and  private  duties.  (J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.,  LL.D.) 
Little  hut  loise : — These  words  teach  that  wisdom  is  not  measurable  by  physical 
magnitude.  The  elephantine  and  prodigious  body  may  hardly  have  a  soul  at  all. 
Wisdom — wisdom  alone — is  the  true  standard  of  measurement.  The  humblest  life 
is  greater  than  the  sublimest  art,  and  one  spark  of  intellect  is  infinitely  more 
precious  than  the  most  crushing  animal  strength.  It  is  possible  to  be  little  and  yet 
to  be  exceeding  wise.  He  makes  a  wise  use  of  nature  who  regards  it  as  a  book  of 
Divine  instruction.  The  ants  "prepare  their  meat  in  the  summer."  This  is  fore- 
cast. Some  people  seem  to  have  no  forecast ;  no  power  of  turning  the  past  into  the 
prophet  of  the  future.  The  ants  know  the  time  of  their  opportunity,  and  make  the 
best  of  it.  Every  man  has  a  summer.  Life  hath  but  one  summer,  as  hath  the 
rolling  year.  The  conies  "  make  their  houses  in  the  rock."  The  tenant  is  weak, 
the  habitation  is  strong.  There  is  a  law  of  compensation.  In  the  universe  there 
is  a  law  of  what  I  may  term  complement,  a  law  which  makes  up  to  men,  somehow, 
the  thing  that  is  wanting.  Man  must  always  look  out  of  himself  for  this  comple- 
mental  quantity,  God  provides  the  Eock  for  the  conies,  and  God  provides  a  Rock 
for  all  weakness.  The  locusts  "  come  forth  all  of  them  by  bands."  A  very  beau- 
tiful and  practical  republic.  They  have  no  king,  but  every  one  of  them  has  a  little 
bit  of  kingliness  in  himself.  Here  I  find  combination,  co-operation,  going  together, 
moving  in  bands.  God  hath  called  us  to  unity,  co-operation.  One  man  is  not  as 
good  as  another.  There  are  men  who  cannot  go  in  bands.  The  spider  "  taketh 
hold  with  her  hands,  and  is  in  kings'  houses."  This  means  skill,  and  patience,  and 
progress.  Every  man  is  set  upon  an  ascending  scale  of  human  life.  All  the  Divine 
movement  is  an  upward  movement.  In  all  labour  there  is  profit.  The  whole  study 
becomes  an  argument.  If  God  has  given  such  wisdom  to  insects,  how  much  more 
will  He  give  it  to  men  ?  If  God  commends  so  distinctly  the  right  use  of  instinct, 
how  bitterly  will  He  complain  of  the  abuse  of  reason  1  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The 
conies  and  the  rock : — The  text  may  be  taken  as  illustrative  of  a  twofold  view  of 
the  people  of  God.  On  the  one  hand,  the  weakness  of  the  Church ;  on  the  other 
hand,  the  strength  of  the  Church.  I.  The  weakness  of  the  Chcbch.  1.  It  is  a 
collection  of  "  feeble  folk  "  in  an  historical  sense.  It  has  always  been  a  poor,  per- 
secuted minority.  2.  In  a  spiritual  sense.  The  generic  character  of  our  race  is 
summed  up  in  two  words — the  "  flesh  is  weak."  3.  In  an  experimental  sense. 
They  become  feeble  in  their  own  estimation.  4.  In  a  relative  sense.  As  compared 
with  their  "  ghostly  enemies."  II.  The  strength  of  the  Church.  Not  in  itself, 
but  in  Him,  the  Rock  of  Ages,  in  whom  it  ever  finds  shelter  and  help.    (J.  B.  Owen, 


CHAP.  XXX.]  PROVEBBS.  681 

M.A.)  The  compensations  of  Providence : — God  overbalances  all  seeming  evil  by 
compensatory  benefits,  so  that  what  happens  is  never  wholly  unrelieved  evil.  1.  It 
takes  time  to  realise  the  result  of  the  Divine  dealings.  2.  There  is  no  exposure  in 
our  lot  over  against  which  God  has  not  set  some  refuge.  3.  The  providences  of 
God  have  ever  two  sides  4.  It  is  to  the  compensations  of  Providence  that  we 
should  pay  increasing  heed.  There  is  some  good  on  the  way  to  us,  even  if  it  be 
borne  in  the  arms  of  so  unwelcome  a  messenger  as  suffering.  The  true  art  of  living 
is  to  carve  our  fortune,  be  it  what  it  may,  into  a  ladder  of  ascent  toward  spiritual 
perfection,  for  God  brings  to  us  nothing  that  may  not  be  for  our  good.  {M.  McG. 
Dana,  D.D.)  Great  lessons  from  little  things  : — I.  Glance  at  the  severaii 
ALLUSIONS  or  THIS  SCRIPTURE.  Ants  show  their  wisdom  in  their  social  habits,  their 
industrious  workings,  their  sagacious  foresight.  In  time  of  plenty  they  provide  for 
scarcity.  Instinctively  foreseeing  the  evil,  they  set  themselves  might  and  main  to 
get  ready  against  it  The  voice  says  to  us,  "  Look  onward.  Now  is  the  summer  of 
grace,  the  gathering-time  of  salvation."  The  conies  are  full  of  timorousness  and 
fear.  They  show  their  wisdom  by  running  at  the  least  sound  of  danger  into  the 
crannies  of  the  rocks.  This  working  of  the  law  of  self-preservation  says  to  us, 
' '  Beware  1  Be  not  self-confident  1  Get  away  into  the  clefts  of  the  rock  Christ  Jesus." 
The  locusts  go  in  well-marshalled  and  compacted  companies.  Union,  harmony, 
co-operation  are  among  the  chief  things  in  the  economy  of  the  locusts.  One 
impulse  stirs  them.  They  all  act,  and  act  together.  Ye  are  Christ's  temple,  and 
union  is  the  cement  that  knits  together  the  severed  parts.  Ye  are  Christ's  army, 
and  union  alone  can  give  solidity  to  its  ranks  and  strike  its  foes  with  terror.  The 
chief  property  of  the  spider's  working  is  completeness — diligent,  persistent  com- 
pleteness. Learn  to  have  a  purpose,  and  bend  to  it  all  your  powers.  II.  Lessons 
MINISTERED  TO  BY  THESE  TINY  CREATURES.  1.  The  great  law  of  ficlf-preservation. 
2.  The  necessity  of  regeneration.  3.  They  bear  a  message  concerning  Christian 
diligence.  4.  Aiid  concerning  Christian  completeness.  5.  The  pointing  of  these 
little  creatures  is  onward.  6.  And  they  may  teach  us  the  importance  of  decision. 
{H.  J.  Eoper.)  The  four  wise  things : — I.  The  ants.  1.  Their  weakness.  Look 
at  their  size;  their  foes;  the  duration  of  their  lives.  2.  Their  wisdom.  This 
wisdom  consists  in  foresight,  dUigence,  prudence,  and  union.  3.  Their  teaching. 
The  lesson  is  weakness  made  up  for  by  industry.  We  are  now  to  gather  and  appro- 
priate the  bread  of  life.  II.  The  conies.  1.  Their  feebleness.  Physically :  not 
armed  by  strength,  or  weapons,  or  armour.  Intellectually :  few  creatures  are  more 
timid  than  a  rabbit.  They  have  no  daring,  no  strategy,  no  idea  of  combined  action. 
2.  Their  strength.  This  consists  in  renouncing  self.  Their  safety  is  to  flee  to  a 
place  of  refuge.  And  as  they  are  so  weak  themselves,  they  choose  the  strongest 
that  can  be  procured.  How  wise  would  be  feeble  men  if  they  would  follow  the 
same  tactics.  But  it  is  the  tendency  of  man  to  cling  to  his  own  thoughts  and  his 
own  ways.  Each  thinks  his  own  efforts,  his  own  plans,  his  own  productions  better 
than  his  neighbour's.  So,  especially  in  religion,  man  is  a  feeble  creature.  If  he 
attempts  his  own  salvation  his  refuge  shall  be  swept  away.  But  if,  knowing  his 
own  feebleness,  he  makes  his  dwelling  in  the  rock  Christ  Jesus,  he  shall  be  safe. 
And  what  a  home  is  that  Rock !  It  contains  not  only  shelter  and  protection,  but 
provision  and  joy.  III.  The  locusts.  Locusts  are  not  pleasant  creatures.  They 
often  accomplish  much  harm,  as  they  appear  in  large  swarms,  and  destroy  every- 
thing they  come  across.  Notice — 1.  Their  principal  characteristics.  These  are — 
(1)  Contemptible  insignificance.  A  dozen  can  be  crushed  in  a  man's  hand  or  trod 
under  his  foot.  They  are  poor,  wretched,  hideous  creatures.  (2)  Utter  worthless- 
ness.  They  accomplish  no  good  purpose,  and  afford  neither  pleasure  nor  profit  to 
any.  (3)  Woeful  destructiveness.  All  they  accomplish  is  plague  and  ruin.  _  The 
land  may  be  a  garden  of  Eden  before  them  ;  they  leave  it  behind  a  desolate  wilder- 
ness. (4)  Absence  from  restraint.  They  have  no  king.  This  might  teach  us  how 
people  who  have  no  government  and  no  restraint  rush  madly  on  in  their  course  of 
destruction.  But  this  is  not  the  purpose  of  the  wise  man.  Notice — 2.  Their 
remarkable  power.  Notwithstanding  their  evil  purposes  they  accomplish  mighty 
results,  even  though  they  be  destructive.  The  wisdom  which  is  commended  to  us 
consists  in — (1)  Their  unanimity.  They  have  no  varied  counsels.  What  one  does 
all  do.  They  nave  no  politics  and  no  parties  or  sects.  If  men  were  equally  united, 
what  might  not  be  accomplished.  (2)  Their  perseverance  and  determination.  No 
obstruction  can  check  their  progress.  People  troubled  with  their  ravages  some- 
times dig  pits  and  trenches  and  fill  them  with  water,  or  build  piles  of  leaves  and: 
timber,  which  they  set  on  fire.    But  the  hordes  rush  on  right  into  the  water  till 


682  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

those  behind  walk  on  the  dead  bodies  of  their  drowned  comrades,  or  into  the  fires 
till  they  are  extinguished  by  the  moisture  of  their  own  bodies.  Though  uncounted 
millions  perish  in  the  front,  there  are  always  sufficient  in  the  rear  to  fill  up  their 
I)laces.  Man  has  a  work  to  accomplish — not  of  destruction,  but  of  mercy.  Many 
will  fall  in  the  eilort ;  there  must  be  martyrs.  Christ  Himself  had  to  be  a  victim, 
but,  though  the  world  dig  its  trenches  and  Satan  build  up  walls  of  fire,  we  are  to  go 
boldly,  and,  if  need  be,  to  fill  the  one  with  our  dead  bodies,  or  to  quench  the  other 
with  our  blood  rather  than  betray  our  Master's  cause.  IV.  The  spider.  The 
lessons  from  the  spider  are  here  rather  implied  than  indicated,  but  it  will  be 
interesting  to  select  a  few  from  the  many  thoughts  which  this  remarkable  insect 
suggests.  Here  is — 1.  Unostentatious  toil.  The  spider  does  not  court  public  gaze. 
The  generality  of  the  world  is  not  particularly  favourable  to  his  presence.  The 
bird  would  snap  him  up  ;  the  housewife  would  sweep  him  away.  He  is  contented 
to  do  his  own  work  without  exciting  either  admiration  or  envy.  So,  to  quote  a 
writer,  "  It  is  not  the  daring  public  act  that  makes  a  man  great  and  distinguished  ;  it 
is  not  the  splendid  oration  that  makes  a  man  an  orator,  but  the  long  and  painful 
culture  of  mind,  body,  and  soul."  The  spider  is  not  seen,  and  yet  he  works.  His 
work  is  all  of  the  best.  There  are  no  slovenly  threads,  no  unfinished  corners. 
His  web  is  geometrically  perfect.  He  might  catch  his  prey  with  a  carelessly-made 
trap  or  an  unsightly  web,  but  he  never  attempts  to  do  so.  We  may  well  learn  to 
do  the  least  thing  we  undertake  with  the  best  of  our  ability,  and  not  to  shirk  our 
duties  because  we  suppose  that  our  work  will  not  be  observed.  Assiduity  in  little 
things,  humble  spheres,  and  private  duties  marks  the  true  man.  The  spider 
taketh  hold  with  his  hands.  Hands  were  made  to  use.  2.  Honoured  safety. 
Industry  will  make  its  way  in  whatever  sphere  of  life  those  who  employ 
it  may  be  placed.  The  great  and  good  will  carry  out  their  life-work,  even 
amid  the  discouragements  of  uncongenial  greatness.  {Hojnilist.)  Teachinrjs 
from  animate  nature  : — The  human  soul  has  liberty  to  make  everything  within 
the  compass  of  its  knowledge,  however  insignificant  it  may  be,  to  contribute 
to  its  growth,  its  happiness,  and  its  perfection.  The  text  teaches  us  to  study 
animated  nature  for  the  purpose  of   gathering  moral  wisdom.     I.  Explain  the 

ILLUSTRATIONS    OF    ChBISTIAN    KNOWLEDGE    AND  DUTY    PRESENTED   IN    THIS    TEXT.       The 

ants  excel  in  foresight ;  in  their  social  habits  and  economical  arrangements  they 
display  admirable  industry  and  sagacity.  They  apply  themselves  to  the  ingathering 
of  proper  food,  and  that  at  the  most  proper  time.  Conies  are  weak  and  timorous, 
having  neither  power  nor  courage  to  defend  themselves  against  the  assaults  of  their 
enemies.  But  they  give  an  exemplary  proof  of  the  highest  wisdom  in  "  making 
their  houses  in  the  rocks,"  where  their  enemies  can  neither  destroy  nor  disturb 
them.  The  sense  of  our  indigence  and  weakness  should  drive  us  to  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  In  the  union  of  the  locusts  great  wisdom  is  displayed.  Their  concen- 
tration of  aim  and  energy,  the  social  combination  of  individuals,  is  an  example  to 
the  sons  of  men.  The  spider  is  an  illustration  of  patient  perseverance  in  the  use 
of  means,  in  order  to  the  attainment  of  a  specific  end.  The  work  of  the  spider 
discover  unity,  proportion,  and  completeness.  We  should,  like  them,  strive  to 
surmount  every  obstacle,  in  order  to  gain  our  end  and  fulfil  our  object,  which 
is  to  glorify  God's  name.  II.  Apply  these  illustrations  for  the  instruction 
AND  encouragement  OF  SuNDAT-scHOOL  TEACHERS.  1.  To  the  motivcs  of  the  work. 
The  love  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  regard  to  immortal  souls.  2.  To  the  duties 
belonging  to  it.  Perseverance,  condescension,  and  a  spirit  of  love.  3.  The 
difficulties  attending  it.  Want  of  spirituality,  pride.  Apply  to  those  who  are 
engaged  in  the  work  ;  to  those  who  have  not  yet  begun ;  and  to  parents.  {FirlcHng 
Oitld,  M.A.)  Spiritual  diligence  the  source  of  hapjnness  : — Man  is  the  most 
important  and  most  interesting  being  in  our  world  ;  this  is  shown  in  several 
particulars,  but  among  other  proofs  of  man's  natural  greatness  is  his  power  to 
seek  and  derive  moral  profit,  not  only  from  beings  that  are  superior  to  himself,  but 
also  from  beings  greatly  inferior  in  nature  and  destiny  ;  his  mind  can  spread  itself 
over  the  length  and  breadth  of  creation.  Thus  the  text  teaches  us  to  study 
animated  nature  for  the  purpose  of  gathering  moral  wisdom.     I.  It  is  proper 

TO    GLANCE    AT    THE    TEXT     IN    THE    LIGHT    OF    NATUR.\L     HISTORY.       1.    The    antS.       "A 

people  not  strong."  Cicero  believed  the  ant  furnished,  not  merely  with  senses, 
but  with  mind,  reason,  and  memory.  A  remarkable  phenomenon  :  the  great  God 
exists,  works,  and  reigns  in  the  little  ant ;  it  is  an  humble  mediator  between  us  and 
the  Infinite.  2.  The  conies,  or  rabbits,  "  are  a  feeble  folk."  Every  creature  in 
the  universe  has  the  power  of  self-defence,  every  wise  creature  puts  it  in  exercise. 


CHAP,  xsx.]  PROVERBS.  683 

The  neglect  of  this  power,  in  a  moral  sense,  has  been  the  ruin  of  our  race ;  its 
restoration  is  the  work  of  the  Lord  from  heaven.  3.  The  locust.  Many  allusions  to 
them  in  Scripture,  especially  a  wonderful  description  in  the  second  chapter  of  Joel ; 
they  give  a  fine  specimen  of  union,  harmony,  and  co-operation,  social  combination, 
&c.  4.  The  spider.  An  instance  of  patient  perseverance  to  gain  a  specific  end. 
In  a  spider's  work  is  unity,  proportion,  and  completeness,  as  much  accuracy  as  if 
she  knew  all  the  laws  of  architecture  and  mathematics  ;  so  man  should  strive  to 
surmount  every  obstacle  to  gain  his  point  and  fulfil  his  purpose.  His  great  work 
is  to  glorify  God,  &c.  11.  In  a  genebal  view  of  the  whole  passage  notice  the 
GREAT  moral  TRUTHS  WHICH  IT  TEACHES.  "  Ask  HOW  of  the  beasts,  and  they  shall 
teach  thee,  and  the  fowls,"  &c.,  &c.  (Job  xii.  7).  And  what  do  the  little  creatures 
described  in  the  text  teach  us  ?  1.  That  we  ought  to  act  according  to  our  whole 
nature.  They  do  so.  These  little  beings  carry  out  all  the  powers  they  possess, 
their  whole  constitution  is  at  work ;  they  never  war  against  their  own  instincts, 
they  never  act  inconsistently  with  themselves.  Man  acts  wisely  only  in  proportion 
as  he  acts  agreeably  to  all  the  principles  and  powers  of  his  own  extraordinary 
constitution.  There  are  many  sorts  of  beings  in  existence ;  some  of  these  beings 
are  superior  to  ourselves :  they  act  according  to  their  entire  nature.  There  are  also 
beings  which  are  inferior  to  ourselves;  they  likewise  act  according  to  their  entire 
nature.  Man  does  not  do  so ;  he  has  broken  the  order  of  the  universe ;  he  has 
broken  his  own  peace,  and  brought  his  own  nature  to  ruin  ;  he  is  at  variance  with 
himself,  with  the  creation,  and  with  God  :  this  is  man's  sin,  his  misery.  The  soul 
of  man  is  not  only  a  part  of  his  nature,  but  the  principal  part  of  it ;  it  includes 
moral  consciousness :  when  our  soul  acts  so  as  to  govern  absolutely  and  always 
every  other  part  of  our  nature,  it  is  then  only  we  act  according  to  the  whole  of  our 
nature ;  man  acts  unnaturally  when  he  acts  as  if  he  had  no  soul,  no  reason,  no 
conscience,  no  law,  no  judge.  Now,  when  is  man  acting  according  to  the  whole 
of  his  nature?  When  does  he  act  wisely?  (1)  Man's  greatest  good  consists  in  his 
restoration  to  the  favour,  image,  and  service  of  his  God — in  union  with  God. 
Look  to  God  as  your  end,  take  care  of  your  hearts  in  this  matter,  let  your  intellect 
and  affections  ascend  up  to  God ;  make  the  Divine  nature  your  great  study,  your 
true  home,  your  eternal  heaven.  (2)  To  this  end  suitable  means  must  be  employed; 
there  is  the  whole  mediatorial  system,  &c.  It  is  not  the  existence  of  Christianity, 
but  its  influence  on  our  moral  system,  that  can  save  us ;  as  an  abstract  system,  it 
can  do  you  no  more  good  than  paganism,  deism,  or  atheism,  unless  you  make  it 
the  means  of  your  ascension  to  God,  its  infinite  author  and  end.  (3)  It  is  not 
enough  that  we  know  what  our  greatest  good  is,  and  what  the  proper  means  of 
securing  it  are ;  but  we  must  employ  these  means  in  the  time  and  manner  which 
God  requires.  2.  The  text  teaches  us  that  we  ought  to  secure  all  the  happiness  of 
which  our  nature  is  susceptible.  These  little  creatures  do  so.  The  text  distinctly 
illustrates  this ;  but — 1.  That  God  has  provided  happiness  for  every  nature,  and 
for  every  nature  its  own  happiness.  God's  happiness  is  peculiar  to  Himself.  It  is 
like  Himself — eternal,  immutable,  infinite,  necessary.  His  is  the  happiness  of 
creating,  of  reviewing,  of  contemplating  His  own  universe  and  His  own  nature. 
His  happiness  is  to  pour  out  a  living  stream  of  bliss  over  His  vast  creation. 
Misery  existing  only  in  the  creature  is  not  eternal,  is  not  necessarily  existent,  is 
not  essential  to  the  universe.  But  happiness  is  so  ;  there  must  be  felicity,  for 
there  must  be  God.  God  wishes  you  well — there  should  be  no  doubt  about  that ; 
His  language,  His  actions,  His  nature  prove  that.  Men  do  not  believe  that  God  has 
provided  happiness  for  them.  Two  things  account  for  this — their  own  experience 
and  their  hard  thoughts  of  God.  2.  Man's  happiness  is  to  be  obtained  in  con- 
nection with  his  own  activity.  The  text  suggests  this  idea.  Man  can  arrive  at 
moral  pleasure  only  by  the  action  of  his  own  nature  ;  activity  is  the  means,  though 
not  the  meritorious  cause,  of  his  spiritual  perfection.  Indolence  of  every  kind 
tends  to  misery.  3.  We  ought  not  to  be  satisfied  without  obtaining  all  the 
happiness  which  the  Divine  mercy  has  provided  for  us.  {Caleb  Morris.) 
Things  that  are  little,  but  exceeding  wise  (to  the  young)  : — Instinct  is  a 
sort  of  wisdom.  1.  The  ant  teaches  a  lesson  of  providence  or  prudence.  It  looks 
forward  into  the  future,  and  makes  provision  for  what  is  coming.  We  are  not  to 
be  over-anxious,  but  we  are  to  look  forward,  make  our  plans,  and  take  our 
measures.  2.  The  little  coney,  when  it  has  once  run  into  the  cleft,  has  the  whole 
strength  of  the  mountain  to  protect  it.  Outside  the  rock  it  is  helpless  enough  ; 
inside  the  rock  it  is  perfectly  safe.  The  Bible  speaks  of  Christ  as  the  Eock  of  His 
people.     3.  Weak  by  itself,  the  locust  is  strong  in  association  with  others.    He 


684  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ixx. 

teaches  us  the  power  of  association.  Christ  has  gathered  His  disciples  into  a 
society;  that  brings  responsibility  on  each  one  of  us.  4.  It  is  a  lesson  of 
perseverance  that  the  spider  teaches.  No  matter  how  we  are  laughed  at  or 
opposed,  we  must  perseveringly  keep  on,  if  we  are  in  the  right  way.  {Gordon 
Caltkrop,  M.A.)  Little  and  wise  (to  the  young) : — None  are  too  little  or 
feeble  to  fill  some  place  in  God's  creation.  The  ants  teach  us  to  lay  up  treasure 
in  heaven.  Every  temptation  resisted,  every  act  of  kindness  and  usefulness  done, 
every  cross  manfuUy  borne,  is  so  much  treasure  laid  up  in  God's  storehouse.  The 
least  suspicion  of  danger  sends  the  conies  scampering  into  their  holes.  So  at  every 
sight  or  sound  of  evil  we  should  away  at  once  to  the  Rock  of  Ages.  The  locusts 
teach  us  that,  in  order  to  act  together,  each  one  of  us  must  keep  his  place,  doing 
his  duty  in  that  state  of  life  to  which  it  has  pleased  God  to  call  you.  The  spider 
teaches  us  to  lay  firm  hold  on  God's  promises  in  Christ  Jesus  by  the  hand  of  faith, 
and  spend  life  in  faithful  and  loving  work  for  God.  (J.  E.  Vernon,  M.A.) 
Lessons  from  little  creatures  (to  the  young): — I.  The  ants.  1.  Their  houses  or 
ant-hills.  2.  Their  foresight.  General  two  ways  of  entrance  and  escape,  and  at 
these  doors  they  place  sentinels.  3.  Their  industry.  They  work  all  day  long,  and 
even  by  moonlight.  They  are  diligent.  4.  They  provide  meat  in  season.  11.  Thb 
CONIES.  Hawks  and  eagles  prey  upon  them,  so  they  never  venture  far  from  the 
mouth  of  their  hole.  Christ  is  our  Rock ;  never  venture  away  from  His  safe  keeping. 
III.  The  locusts.  Very  small,  but  very  destructive.  Work  in  bands.  Very  wise. 
It  is  not  perhaps  much  that  any  one  of  you  can  do,  but  if  you  all  unite  in  doing 
good  you  may  accomplish  a  great  deal.  IV.  The  spider.  A  clever,  busy  creature. 
Very  humble,  yet  so  ingenious  and  busy  that  it  finds  room  to  live  even  in  kings' 
palaces.  It  is  a  mean-looking  creature,  but  it  is  diligent  at  its  own  proper  work. 
The  King's  palace  will  find  room  for  many  poor,  mean-looking  creatures  who  did 
the  work  that  Christ  wanted  them  to  do  in  this  world  cleverly  and  busily.  [G.  B. 
Blake,  M.A.)  Locusts  and  lizards: — I.  The  locusts  of  Syria  and  Arabia  belong 
to  the  class  of  wise  little  folks  that  know  how  to  combine  and  conquer  (Joel  ii.  7). 
Like  grasshoppers,  these  resistless  little  creatures  have  long,  gauzy,  overlapping  winga 
for  sailing  through  the  air,  and  a  pair  of  long,  jointed  hind  legs  for  leaping  over 
obstacles  on  the  ground.  They  are  born  in  millions,  and  swarm  in  immense 
numbers  among  the  hot  sands  of  the  desert.  No  sooner  can  the  young  locusts 
leap  with  ease  than  they  marshal  themselves  in  companies,  like  so  many 
regiments  of  soldiers ;  and,  by  some  unerring  law  of  instinct,  begin  to  march  in 
one  direction  towards  a  fixed  goal.  They  march  steadily  through  valleys  clad 
with  living  green  and  plains  studded  with  brilliant  wild  flowers ;  and  after  they 
have  gone  the  land  is  desolate  as  winter  at  Christmas.  They  climb  walls  and 
leap  ditches  like  conquering  armies  millions  strong  ;  and  in  a  single  day  blooming 
gardens  are  turned  into  barren  wilderness.  The  trees  are  barked,  vegetables  and 
flowers  are  eaten  up,  vines  are  laid  waste,  and  every  green  thing  is  consumed. 
Mountains  they  scale  with  amazing  swiftness ;  they  run  up  the  faces  of  precipices, 
they  cross  rivers,  and  even  penetrate  walls  of  fire  I  Now,  it  is  of  these  destructive 
creatures  that  Agur  speaks.  Strange  that  a  good  and  wise  man  should  ask  us  to 
imitate  such  voracious  animals  1  But,  mark  you,  he  invites  us  to  imitate  their 
good  qualities  only.  They  are  orderly  and  united.  "  The  locusts  have  no  king, 
yet  go  they  forth  all  of  them  by  bands."  There  is  no  strife  in  their  camp  ;  they 
fight  desperately,  but  they  do  not  fight  among  themselves.  Peace  reigns  at  home. 
How  quietly  do  these  small,  clever  creatures  preach  to  us  of  orderliness  and  union ! 
They  have  no  self-will,  no  egotistical  conceits,  no  personal  hobbies.  Sour  and 
sulky  locusts  are  not  known.  Wanton  and  wayward  locusts  are  never  seen.  The 
principle  is,  union  is  strength.  Little  people  can  work  wonders,  if  they  will  only 
unite.  If  all  the  members  of  one  family  were  united  on  the  side  of  reverence  and 
truth,  they  could  put  down  all  the  lying  and  swearing  in  a  village.  And  if  all  the 
members  of  the  Church  loved  the  Lord  Jesus  passionately,  and  united  for  the 
grand  purpose  of  saving  lost  men  and  women,  soon,  very  soon,  the  whole  world 
would  be  brought  within  the  fold  of  the  Good  Shepherd.  II.  The  last  weak  and 
wise  creature  mentioned  by  Agar  is  the  spider,  or  rather  the  lizard.  "  The  spider 
taketh  hold  with  her  hands,  and  is  in  kings'  palaces."  The  Hebrew  word  for 
"  lizard"  is  a  curious  and  rare  word,  and  the  translators  of  the  Bible  thought  it 
meant  the  spider,  because  spiders  resemble  lizards  in  these  respects,  that  they 
are  small  and  clever,  ambitious  and  daring,  and  frequently  found  in  royal  houses. 
Moreover,  it  is  better,  because  more  accurate,  to  translate  the  whole  verse  :  The 
lizard  thou  canst  catch  with  thy  hands  (so  small  is  it),  yet  is  it  found  in  kings' 


CHAP,  xrt.]  PROVERBS.  685 

palaces  (so  clever  and  ambitious  is  it).  Lizards  are  charming  little  creatures,  bright- 
yellow  as  the  golden  canary,  and  speckled  like  the  young  frog.  They  are  wonder- 
fully quick,  nimble,  and  wise.  They  can  run  over  the  smoothest  surfaces,  and  can 
even  creep  along  ceilings  like  flies.  Notwithstanding  their  littleness,  they  climb  to 
the  highest  positions.  Their  power  lies  in  their  activity  and  agility,  in  their  energy 
and  alertness.  Let  all  young  folks  imitate  them,  and  they  will  rise  to  honour  and 
influence.  Dull,  drowsy,  humdrum  people  climb  no  mountains  of  difficulty,  and 
sojourn  all  their  days  in  the  valley  of  humiliation.  Success  of  the  noblest  kind 
has  always  behind  it  energetic  toil,  skilful,  persistent  labour.  We  cannot  be  lazy 
and  good  or  great.  Sir  William  Jones  is  the  name  of  a  great  Englishman  who 
could  speak  twenty-eight  languages,  while  occupying  one  of  the  highest  legal 
positions  in  India.  Li  youth  he  was  marvellously  energetic  and  industrious,  quick- 
witted, quick-footed,  quick-handed,  and  daring ;  he  did  all  things  well,  and 
triumphed  over  all  difficulties.  Dr.  Thackeray,  his  tutor,  used  to  say  of  him,  "  If 
that  boy  were  left  naked  and  friendless  on  Salisbury  plain,  he  would  find  his  way 
to  fame  and  riches."  And  let  us  remember  that  the  palace  of  the  Great  King,  in 
the  city  of  shining  gold,  can  only  be  entered  by  active,  energetic  Christians.  How- 
ever little  we  are,  however  weak,  we  may  climb  high.     (J.  Moffat  Scott.) 

Vers.  29-31.  There  be  three  things  which  go  well,  yea,  four  are  comely  in 
going. — Going  well : — To  each  of  us  is  appointed  a  journey.  It  begins  at  the 
cradle  and  ends  at  the  grave.  To  some  the  pilgrimage  is  measured  by  years,  while 
to  others  it  is  but  a  matter  of  days.  Whether  long  or  short,  it  behoves  us  to  travel 
it  wisely  and  well.  What  is  it  to  "  go  well "  ?  What  does  the  wise  man  mean  ? 
He  calls  our  attention  to  certain  objects,  each  of  which  he  declares  has  a  certain 
beauty  in  its  going.  Let  us  discover  their  teaching.  I.  "  The  lion  is  strongest 
among  beasts,  and  tumeth  not  away  for  any."  Two  qualities  are  indicated — 
STRENGTH,  COURAGE.  1.  Strength  is  a  matter  of  very  great  importance.  This 
world  is  an  uncomfortable  place  for  the  weak.  Go  into  the  business  world,  into 
the  professions,  and  success  is  very  largely  a  question  of  power  of  endurance.  The 
moral  aspect  of  the  question  is  especially  important.  Men  were  never  so  severely 
tried.  Be  strong !  2.  The  lion  also  teaches  us  the  value  of  courage.  Conscience 
is  to  be  followed.  New  ideas  call  for  champions.  Popular  evils  are  to  be  assaulted. 
Be  brave !  II.  What  is  the  lesson  of  the  greyhound  ?  1.  Celerity  of  movement. 
Life  calls  for  haste.  Too  much  time  is  lost.  Men  loiter.  They  fail  in  punctuality. 
2.  Certain  varieties  of  the  greyhound  have  not  only  great  speed,  but  great  scent. 
There  is  in  man  a  quality  which  answers  to  this  power  of  scent  in  the  hound.  We 
call  it  conscience,  moral  sense,  spiritual  discernment.  It  exists  in  varying  degree. 
No  man  is  more  to  be  despised  than  he  whose  moral  sensibilities  are  wholly 
blunted.  III.  What  may  we  learn  from  the  goat  ?  1.  Notice  his  ability  to  attain 
to  apparently  inaccessible  heights.  Where  others  fail  he  succeeds.  2.  Observe 
his  security  in  places  of  peril.  We  want  men  who  are  safe  anywhere — not  only  in 
the  protected  places,  but  in  the  places  of  danger  as  well.  3.  See  how  he  finds 
subsistence  where  almost  any  other  animal  would  perish.  Life  is  not  alike  to  all 
of  as.  We  do  not  all  feed  in  green  pastures.  Blessed  is  he  whose  moral  nature 
thrives  not  only  in  the  luxuriant  meadows,  but  upon  the  barren  mountain-side.  It 
is  possible.  IV.  "A  king  against  whom  there  is  no  rising  up."  1.  Joseph 
Benson  put  it,  "  A  king  and  his  people  with  him."  He  has  their  confidence  and 
support.  Wanted,  men  in  whom  the  world  has  faith  1  What  a  power  is  he 
"against  whom  there  is  no  rising  up."  2.  A  king,  carrying  with  him  everywhere 
the  consciousness  of  royalty.  Noblesse  oblige.  God  hath  appointed  to  us  a 
kingdom.  Go  to  it  kinglike.  So  shalt  thou  "  go  well,"  and  so  at  the  end  it  shall 
be  said  unto  thee,  "Well  done,  thou  good  and  faithful  servant."  (Homiletic 
Review.) 

Ver.  30.  A  lion  which  is  strongest  among  beasts,  and  tumeth  not  away  fox 
any. — The  lion  (to  the  young) : — 1.  A  lesson  of  moderation.  When  the  lion 
gets  enough  to  eat,  he  is  satisfied,  and  does  not  go  on  killing  either  men  or  beasts 
for  the  mere  love  of  killing.  The  Bible  rule  about  moderation  is  given  in  1  Tim. 
vi-  8.  2.  A  lesson  of  kindness.  Some  striking  instances  as  illustration  can  be 
given.  3.  A  lesson  of  obedience.  Illustrate  from  story  of  Daniel.  4.  A  lesson  of 
gratitude.    Illustrate  by  story  of  Androcles.    {R.  Newton,  D.D.) 


686  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xixi. 


CHAPTEE  XXXI. 

Veb.  1.  Tlie  ■words  of  king  Lemuel,  the  prophecy  that  his  mother  taught  ^itn, — 

The  words  of  king  Lemuel : — I.  The  first  thing  that  strikes  us  here  is  thb 
MOTHER.  "  The  prophecy  which  his  mother  taught  him."  1.  A  mother's  anxiety. 
What  shall  he  be?  Better  not  to  be,  than  to  turn  out  a  bad  man.  Seekest  thou 
great  things  for  the  little  one  by  thy  side  ?  Seek  them  not ;  better  is  it  to  be  good 
than  to  be  great ;  to  be  obscure  in  holiness  rather  than  to  be  conspicuous  in  sin. 
2.  This  is  a  pious  mother.  "  The  son  of  my  vows."  It  is  a  great  thing  to  be  the 
child  of  a  good  mother.  We  do  not  know  the  name  of  this  mother — her  son's 
nature  we  know.  What  eminent  sons  have  ascribed  all  their  distinction  to  their 
mother;  but  she  is  out  of  sight.    He  attains  to  fame  ;  she  is  still  unknown.    II.  This 

MOTHER  TAUGHT  HER  SON  THINGS    PERTAINING  TO  CHARACTER.       Men    CanUOt   COmmand 

circumstances  or  facts,  but  they  can  preserve  principles.  Principles  are  like  the 
piles  on  which  you  build  bridges,  or  on  which  you  construct  railways  over  morasses 
and  swamps.  Principles  are  the  piles  of  life.  Unshaken  convictions  and  principles 
are  only  found  in  profound  minds  King  Lemuel's  mother  left,  as  she  might 
safely  do,  the  technicalities  of  instruction  to  others;  she  looked  after  character; 
she  laid  the  foundation  strong  in  goodness.  Women  teach  goodness  better  than 
men.  There  is  the  right  power  of  woman.  When  the  counsels  of  good  mothers 
have  been  disregarded,  how  often  those  mothers  have  been  avenged  1  III.  The 
PROPHECIES  which  HIS  MOTHER  TAUGHT  HIM.  The  words  of  Lcmuel's  mother  are 
living  still.  In  youth  we  love  and  are  loved  so  quickly.  Then  love  is  pure — more 
of  the  heart  and  less  of  the  senses,  which  all  true  love  is.  In  noble  natures,  the 
purer  the  heart,  the  more  it  is  purified  by  the  love  of  God.  Youth  is  the  time  for 
the  choice  between  God  and  good,  and  Satan  and  evil.  "Be  sober,"  said  this  mother. 
"  Do  not  excite  the  body,  lest  the  body  should  rise  against  the  soul  and  dethrone  her." 
"  My  soul,"  said  John  Foster,  "  shall  either  be  mistress  in  my  body,  or  shall  quit 
it."  Never  were  young  men  in  more  danger  than  now.  1.  Young  men  waste 
time.  The  wise  man  must  "  separate  himself."  Ill  habits  gather  by  obscure 
degrees.  2.  Young  men  fail  in  high  principle.  You  see  how  everything  goes  down 
before  things  of  money  value.  It  is  hard  to  reckon  things  by  another  than  a  money 
value.  All  fast  living  means  low  thinking,  or  nothing  at  all.  These  are  the  men 
who  see  nothing  in  religion,  because  they  know  nothing  about  it.  Our  sanctifica- 
tion  must  be  wrought  out  where  we  are,  not  where  we  are  not.  Life  is  serious  and 
earnest,  but  let  us  not  despair  over  its  failures,  even  though  they  abide  with  us  to 
the  close.  "  He  that  walketh  with  wise  men  shall  be  wise."  Walk  with  them  in 
their  books,  in  solitude,  in  meditation,  and  join  their  company  at  last.  [E.  Paxton 
Hood.)  The  counsels  of  a  noble  mother  to  her  son: — The  identity  of  this  man 
Lemuel  is  lost  in  the  mist  of  ages.  A  motherly  ministry  is  the  tenderest,  the  strongest, 
most  influential  of  all  the  Divine  ministers  of  the  world,  but  when  the  ministry  is 
the  expression  of  a  genuinely  religious  nature,  and  specially  inspired  by  heaven, 
its  character  is  more  elevated,  and  its  influence  more  beneficent  and  lasting.  The 
counsel  of  this  mother  involves  two  things.  I.  An  earnest  interdict.  With  what 
earnestness  does  she  break  forth  1  Her  motherly  heart  seems  all  aflame  I  Her 
vehement  intuition  is  against  animal  indulgence  in  its  two  great  forms,  debauchery 
and  intemperance;  against  inordinate  gratification  of  the  passions  and  the  appetites. 
The  reign  of  animalism  is  a  reign  that  manacles,  enfeebles,  and  damns  the  soul. 
Lust  blunts  the  moral  sense,  pollutes  the  memory,  defiles  the  imagination,  sends  a 
withering  influence  through  all  the  faculties  of  the  moral  man.  II.  Aw  earnest 
injunction.  She  enjoins  social  compassion.  Some  think  in  the  phrase  "ready  to 
perish  "  there  is  an  allusion  to  the  practice  of  administering  a  potion  of  strong 
mixed  wine  to  criminals,  for  the  purpose  of  deadening  their  sensibility  to  suffering. 
But  there  are  ordinary  cases'of  suffering  and  distress  where  wine  might  be  adminis- 
tered with  salutary  effect.  What  this  mother  inculcates  is  compassion  to  the  poor. 
It  is  the  duty  and  honour  of  kings  to  espouse  the  cause  of  the  distressed.  This 
mother  enjoins  not  only  compassion,  but  also  justice.  She  is  a  model  mother. 
{David  Thomas  D.D.) 

Yer.  8.  Open  thy  mouth  for  the  dumb  in  the  cause  of  all  euch  as  are  appointed 
to  destruction. — The  sin  of  cruelty  to  the  brute  creation: — There  is  no  necessary 
reference  in  this  verse  to  the  inferior  animals.  We  use  it  merely  for  our  accom- 
modation.    That  there  is  such  cruelty  requires  neither  proof  nor  argument.     What 


CHAP.  XXXI.]  PROVERBS.  687 

persuasions  should  urge  to  guard  against  this  cruelty  in  every  form  ?  1.  The 
affecting  consideration  that  the  lower  animals  have  not  the  power  of  expressing 
and  complaining  of  their  wrongs.  2.  Their  subserviency  to  the  comfort  and 
happiness  of  man.  3.  They  are  the  objects  of  God's  peculiar  and  providential  care. 
4.  Cruelty  to  animals  is  utterly  inconsistent  with  the  spirit  and  law  of  Christianity. 
(David  Runciman,  M.A.)  Job's  example: — Job  was  an  excellent  pattern  to  all 
princes.  He  was  eyes  to  the  blind,  and  feet  to  the  lame,  and  a  father  to  the  poor, 
and  no  doubt  he  was  a  mouth  also  to  the  dumb.  Such  a  prince  the  mother  of 
Lemuel  wishes  her  son  to  be.  She  exhorts  him  to  do  justice  and  judgment  to  all 
his  people,  but  to  regard  with  peculiar  tenderness  those  unfortunate  men  that  were 
in  danger  of  losing  their  estates  and  lives  by  reason  of  accusations  brought  against 
them.  If  they  were  unable,  through  ignorance,  or  awkwardness,  or  fear,  to 
plead  their  own  cause,  she  would  have  him  to  be  their  advocate,  and  to  plead 
everything  that  truth  and  equity  would  allow  on  their  behalf.  But  charity  to  the 
poor,  and  clemency  to  the  accused,  must  not  interfere  with  the  due  administration 
of  justice.  It  is  the  business  of  princes,  in  the  admimistration  of  justice,  to  see 
that  the  poor  do  not  suffer.     {George  Lawson,  D.J).) 

Vers.  10-27.  Who  can  find  a  virtuous  woman?  for  her  price  is  far  above  rubies. — 

The  prophecy  of  Lemuel's  mother : — There  was  never  yet  a  woman  who  did  not 
wish  to  have  some  part  in  the  choice  of  her  son's  wife ;  and  the  mother  of  king 
Lemuel  was  no  exception  to  the  rule.  She  knew  the  kind  of  woman  that  would 
make  him  happy,  and  she  contrived,  by  some  means,  to  instil  the  knowledge  into 
the  heart  of  her  son.  It  is  a  fact,  which  should  ever  be  before  the  minds  of  mothers, 
that  their  sons  are  naturally  disposed  to  love  and  revere  them.  This  should  make 
all  mothers  walk  warily,  and  lead  them  to  the  source  of  every  good,  so  that,  having 
sat  at  the  Master's  feet  and  learned  of  Him,  they  may  go  back  to  their  children 
with  His  Spirit  shining  through  their  eyes,  and  guiding  alike  their  thoughts, 
emotions,  and  actions.  The  question  with  which  this  panegyric  begins  is  rather  a  ' 
startling  one.  "  Who  can  find  a  virtuous  woman  ?  "  Were  good  women  scarce  </  ^ 
then  ?  and  are  they  rare  now  ?  Devoted  women,  unselfish  women,  domesticated 
women,  are  not  too  easily  discovered.  Where  a  woman's  heart  is  true,  and  her 
hands  are  gentle,  where  her  voice  is  kind  and  her  eyes  far-seeing,  where  she  lives 
not  to  herself  nor  to  the  world,  but  to  the  little  circle  whose  happiness  she 
makes,  or  to  the  God  who  has  chosen  her  lot,  there  is  the  virtuous  woman  of 
whom  the  wise  man  spoke.  Nothing  so  damps  the  ardour  and  joy  of  a 
man  or  his  children  as  an  incompetent,  faulty  woman  at  the  head  of  the  house- 
hold ;  and  nothing  can  be  a  greater  source  of  strength  than  the  woman  who 
gives  an  impulse  to  all  that  is  good  and  right,  and  checks  the  evil  by  a  significant 
look  or  a  softly-spoken  word.  Good  women  are  wanted  everywhere.  {A  Woman's 
Sermon  to  Women.)  Woman^s  work : — The  figures  of  women  which  pass  across 
the  pages  of  the  Old  Testament  have  so  much  nobility  and  so  much  character  that 
even  the  slight  sketches  of  them  in  the  Bible  have  always  impressed  the  imagination, 
and  awakened  the  art  of  mankind.  There  is  that  in  the  New  Testament  woman 
which,  in  the  past,  has  lifted  womanhood  into  the  worship  of  the  world,  and  in  the 
present  has  been  the  foundation  of  all  that  has  been  given  to  her,  and  of  all  that 
she  has  won  for  herself.  In  this  chapter  is  the  image  of  the  perfect  wife,  done  in 
poetry.  The  woman  here  has  the  attributes  of  wisdom,  for  strength  and  honour 
clothe  her,  and  her  future  is  secured  by  it.  Her  common  speech  is  full  of  it,  and 
the  wisdom  of  speech  is  love.  So  wise  is  she  that  trust  is  safe  in  her.  Her 
wisdom  wins  love  for  her ;  her  children  bless  her,  and  her  husband  praises  her. 
She  is  the  active  manager  of  business  as  well  as  of  the  household.  She  has  her 
own  prosperity,  her  own  work  in  life  ;  and  her  charities,  which  are  many,  are  her 
own.  This  is  the  Jewish  ideal  of  womanhood,  yet  the  Jew  of  the  Old  Testament 
fails  to  find  any  ideal  for  womanhood  beyond  wifehood  and  motherhood.  Only 
portions  of  this  belong  to  the  notions  which  women  have  in  England  of  wifehood 
and  home.  Each  class  of  society — according  to  the  amount  of  money  it  can  allot 
to  the  household — has  its  own  separate  ideal  of  the  function  of  wives  and  mothers. 
In  every  case  loveliness  and  loving-kindness  and  wisdom  and  the  making  of  the 
beautiful,  and  the  adornment  of  life  should  be  by  women  combined  with  work. 
There  is  an  inexhaustible  capacity  in  women  for  this  twofold  life,  and  for  complete 
success  in  it ;  but  the  idea  of  it  is  not  as  yet  justly  conceived,  and  there  is  no  steady 
education  for  it.  A  thousand  prejudices  stand  in  the  way  of  such  a  conception, 
and  of  the  individual  and  free  effort  that  it  needs.    The  working  class  girls  find 


y 


/ 


638  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ixxi. 

their  work  so  heavy  and  so  long,  that  they  have  not  strength  of  body  or  leisure  ol 
soul  to  learn  what  belongs  to  wifehood  and  motherhood.     There  is  scarcely  any 
class  so  neglected,  so  overworked,  so  put  upon  by  others,  so  worn  out  before  they 
are  thirty  years  old.     But  there  are  thousands  of  women  who  can  never  marry  and 
never  have  a  home.     If  they  cannot  be  mothers,  let  them  have  the  means  to  be 
eager,  living,  and  active  women,  able  to  work  for  one  another,  and  for  the  world  ; 
able  to  invent  new  work  and  new  spheres  of  work,  fitted  for  womanhood's  special 
aims  and  powers,  and  for  the  advance  of  the  cause  of  humanity.     This  earth  should 
be  a  fitting  place  and  home  for  humanity.     It  is  not  that  now,  and  one  of  the 
reasons,  and  it  may  be  the  most  important  of  them  aU,  is  the  imprisonment  of  the 
energy  of  womanhood,  both  by  men  and  by  themselves,  in  a  narrow  individualism. 
{Stopford  A.  Brooke,  LL.D.)         The  model  woman  : — The  chief  points  commended 
in  the  description  may  be  impressed  if  we  deal  with  woman's  love,  work,  care, 
charity,  speech,  and  praise.     I.  Heb  love.     Shown  not  in  professions  and  demon- 
stration of  affection  merely,  but  in  trying  to  occupy  faithfully  her  place.     It  is  far 
better  to  show  love  than  merely  to  speak  it.     So  God  wants  to  see  our  love  to  Him 
in  its  signs.     II.  Her  work.     Kinds  of  work  for  women  differ  according  to  their 
condition  in  society ;  but  every  woman  should  have  her  work.    A  woman's  work 
is  first  the  feeding  and  tending  of  her  household ;  beyond  this  she  may  be  able  to 
work  so  as  to  earn.     Show  how  much  there  is  that  young  women  can  do  towards  a 
living  in  these  days.    All  should  try  to  be  independent.     III.  Her  care.    In  the 
ruling  of  her  household ;   finding  for  each  member  work,  food,  and  appropriate 
clothing.     Watching  that  nothing  is  either  wasted  or  lost,  and  everything  made 
the   best  of.     IV.  Her  charity.      Caring  for  the  poor,  and  distributing  of   her 
abundance  to  them.    How  important,  as  an  example  to  the  children,  is  a  generous, 
charitable  mother !     V.  Her  speech.    Always  prudent  and  kindly.    Never  gossip- 
ing, never  slandering,  never  hasty  or  passionate.     Ever  firm  but  gentle.     See  how 
often  otherwise  good  characters  are  spoiled  by  the  unbridled  tongue.     VI.  Her 
PRAISE.     It  comes  from  her  husband,  from  her  children,  and  even  from  her  God. 
"  Supreme  love  to  God,  which  is  religion,  is  that  which  generates,  animates,  and 
adorns  all  other  virtues  of  character."     (Robert  Tuck,  B.A.)        The  worth  and 
work  of  woman : — By  a  virtuous  woman  is  meant  one  who  is  characterised  by  a 
number  of  positive  virtues  and  excellences,  and  chiefly  by  piety,  or  the  fear  and 
love  of  God.     Illustrate  this  subject  by  the  Ufe  of   "  Carmen  Sylva,"  Queen  of 
Roumania.    I.  The  worth  of  woman.    "  Far  above  rubies."    Let  a  man  ask  himself 
what  would  be  the  worth  to  his  heart,  to  his  home,  to  his  children,  to  society,  of 
such  a  woman  as  is  described  here — the  ideal  woman  of  God's  Word,  the  woman 
that  every  woman  would  be  if  she  only  feared  God,  loved  His  Word,  imbibed  His 
Spirit,  and  moulded  her  character  upon  His  most  blessed  teachings.     1.  Consider 
the  worth  of  such  a  woman  as  a  daughter.     This  is  the  first  relationship  in  life 
woman  is  called  to  fulfil.     Who  can  estimate  her  worth  to  her  parents,  or  to  her 
brothers  and   sisters  ?      She   is  not  wilful,  headstrong,  passionate,  selfish ;    but 
humble,  respectful,  dutiful,  affectionate.     The  foundation  of  true  womanly  worth 
is  piety,  the  fear  and  love  of  God.     Without  true  religion  the  character  has  no 
basis.     Where  that  is  found  we  may  expect  all  the  virtues  to  flourish  into  beauty. 
2.  The  worth  of  such  a  woman  as  a  wife.     Here  is  an  elaborate  description  of 
her  housewifely  care  and  prudence,  and  industry,  and  economy,  and  the  blessed 
effects  of  all  this  on  the  happiness  of  her  husband's  heart  and  home,  and  on  hi3 
character,  reputation,  and  prosperity.     Oh,  that  young  men  would  look  for  piety  in 
their  wives  !      Nothing  like  that  to  govern  their  tongues,  and  to  sweeten  their 
tempers,  and  to  make  them  amiable,  pure,  and  true.    II.  The  work  of  woman. 
Home  is  her  sphere,  and  her  work  is  to  make  home  happy.     Some  women  think 
their  work  is  to  reform  and  regenerate  the  world.     So  it  is,  but  the  proper  sphere 
for  their  reforming  work  is  not  in  the  publicities  of  the  world,  but  in  the  privacies 
of  the  home,  in  their  little  children's  nurseries,  and  by  the  side  of  the  domestio 
hearth.    I  hold  the  worth  of  unmarried  women  in  high  esteem.     They  are  of  the 
greatest    value  to  society,  and  especially  to  the  Church  of    God.      No  single 
woman   need  pine   in  ennui  for  want  of   useful  occupation.     (Richard  Glover.) 
Far  above  rubies : — The  Bible,  which  is  the  great  reservoir  of  the  rights  of  man, 
is  also  the  storehouse  of  the  rights  of  woman.     Woman's  Magna  Charta  is  the 
Word  of  God.     It  teaches  us  to  nonour  woman ;  it  warns  every  man  that  if  he 
degrades  woman  he  degrades  himself,  and  that  everywhere  man  rises  as  he  lifts 
woman  up.     This  text  is  a  woman's  estimate  of  what  woman  should  be.     All  the 
parts  that  women  hiwe  contributed  to  the  Bible  are  poems ;  this  is  no  exception. 


oup.  xm]  PROVERBS.  689 

I.  Thb  domestic  QUALiTtEs  OF  WOMAN.  The  question  of  the  text  is  indeed  a  warning 
that  the  kind  of  woman  about  to  be  described  is  a  model  not  always  attained.  It 
is  not  every  woman  wliose  price  is  "  far  above  rubies."  In  ancient  times  the 
women  made  the  garments  which  their  husbands  wore.  We  call  the  unmarried 
woman  a  "spinster";  and  the  word  wife  means  a  "weaver,"  It  is  the  woman 
who  keeps  the  house  together.  This  is  the  description  which  a  woman  gives  of 
a  woman's  domestic  qualities.  She  must  be  wife,  she  must  be  lady,  she  must  be 
housekeeper.  11.  The  personal  qualities  of  the  model  woman.  It  is  said  that 
she  is  strong.  As  far  as  her  strength  is  the  result  of  careful  and  conscientious 
attention  to  the  laws  of  health,  it  deserves  to  be  described  as  a  virtue,  and  a  virtue 
that  ought  to  be  cultivated.  If  the  future  race  of  men  is  to  be  strong,  the  present 
race  of  women  must  first  be  strong.  Then  she  is  industrious.  She  not  only  saves 
the  money  others  have  entrusted  her  with,  and  uses  it  well,  but  she  uses  her  own 
energy  until  she  sells  her  own  merchandise,  and  her  industry  increases  her 
possessions  till  they  become  such  that  the  watch-lamp  has  to  be  lighted  that  at 
night  they  may  be  secure.  Strong  and  industrious,  she  could  afford  to  be  generous. 
But  though  she  is  generous,  she  is  provident.  She  is  also  elegant,  a  lover  of 
beauty  Euskin  says,  "A  woman's  first  duty  is  to  please,  and  a  woman  who  does 
not  please  has  missed  her  end  in  life."  She  is  beautiful  in  her  speech.  She  should 
take  an  interest  in  everything  that  interests  every  man  in  the  house.  She  is  kind, 
but  orderly.  She  keeps  discipline.  III.  Look  at  hee  reward.  "  Her  husband 
praiseth  her."  "  Her  children  call  her  blessed."  The  sweetest,  daintiest,  purest 
blossoms  of  a  woman's  heart  will  only  flourish  when  she  is  praised  by  him  she 
loves  best.  This  is  the  true  reward  of  the  true  woman.  Her  character  is  the 
secret  of  her  power  and  her  reward.  {W.  J.  Woods,  B.A.)  A  virtuous  woman : — 
1.  The  person  inquired  after.  A  virtuous  woman  is  a  woman  of  strength.  Though 
the  weaker  vessel,  yet  made  strong  by  wisdom  and  grace  and  the  fear  of  God.  A 
woman  of  spirit,  who  has  the  command  of  her  own  spirit,  and  knows  how  to 
manage  other  people's,  one  that  is  pious  and  industrious,  and  a  helpmeet  for 
a  man.  A  woman  of  resolution.  2.  The  difficulty  of  meeting  such  an  one. 
Good  women  are  very  scarce,  and  many  that  seem  to  be  so  do  not  prove  so.  3.  The 
unspeakable  value  of  such  an  one,  and  the  value  which  he  that  hath  such  a  wife 
ought  to  put  upon  her,  showing  it  by  his  thankfulness  to  God,  and  his  kindness 
and  respect  to  her,  whom  he  must  never  think  he  can  do  too  much  for.  {Matthew 
Henry.)  Religion  for  every  day — Our  wives  : — To  the  young  womanhood  it  may 
be  said — Tour  capability  to  fulfil  the  offices  of  womanhood  will  be  proportioned  to 
your  worth  of  character,  and  to  the  use  you  have  made,  or  are  prepared  to  make, 
of  your  opportunities.  Earnestness  of  life  is  the  only  passport  to  satisfaction  in 
life.  I.  As  A  WIFE,  REALISE  TOUR  INDIVIDUAL  RESPONSIBILITY.  The  husbaud  is  the 
head  of  the  household ;  but  a  wife's  position  does  not  imply  inferiority.  She  is 
her  husband's  companion  in  life  and  for  life,  to  be  regarded  by  him  as  his  equal. 
The  husband  is  the  bread-winner,  the  wife  is  the  bread-keeper  and  distributor.  In 
all  the  affairs  of  domestic  life  the  wife  should  maintain  her  position  and  influence. 
She  should  insure  her  authority  by  proving  her  ability  to  do  what  the  office  of  a 
wife  demands.  Never  for  a  moment  permit  your  husband  to  feel  that  he  may  not 
trust  the  concerns  of  home  to  your  care.  Act  in  such  a  way  that  instinctively  he 
will  know  his  property,  his  honour,  his  happiness,  are  safe  in  your  hands. 
n.  Cultivatb  all  womanly  excellences.  Strengthen  and  enlarge  the  best  side  of 
life,  by  developing  everything  in  yon  that  is  good.  There  are  certain  virtues 
essential  to  the  ideal  wife.  Be  thoughtful.  Be  industrious.  Be  restful.  Be  loving. 
A  sublime  seU-forgetfulness  lies  at  the  bottom  of  every  noble  life,  and  of  every 
great  service  wrought  for  human  good.  Homely  and  commonplace  as  this  ideal 
may  seem,  it  will  demand  all  your  resources.  What  has  been  urged  cannot  be 
attained  without  time,  judgment,  care,  patience,  and  the  constant  aid  of  Divine 
grace  in  adaptation.  {George  Bainton.)  A  noble  woman^s  picture  of  true  woman- 
hood: — I.  Mark  her  conduct  as  a  wife.  Here  is  inviolable  faithfulness.  The 
husband  trusts  her  character  and  her  management.  Here  is  practical  affection. 
Oenaine  wifely  love  seeks  the  good  of  her  husband,  is  constant  as  nature.  Here 
b  elevating  influence.  Her  words  have  inspired  her  husband  with  honourable 
ambitions,  and  her  diligence  and  frugality  have  contributed  the  means  by  which  to 
reach  his  lofty  aims.  Here  is  merit  acknowledged.  There  are  men  who  are 
incapable  of  appreciating  the  character  or  reciprocating  the  love  of  a  noble  wife. 
Blessed  is  the  man  who  has  found  a  wife  approaching  this  ideal !  II.  Heb 
KASAOEUSMT  AS  A  uiSTBBSS.    Notioe  her  industry.    Diligence  in  useful  pursuits 

45 


^ 


690  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxi. 

should  be  the  grand  lesson  in  all  female  education.     III.  Her  blessedness  as  a 
MOTHER.     In  the  spirit,  the  character,  and  the  lives  of  her  children  she  meets  with 
an  ample  reward  for  all  her  self-denying  efforts  to  make  them  good  and  happy. 
Her  children's  lives  are  a  grateful  acknowledgment  of  all  her  Hndness,  and  in 
their   spirit  and   conversation   she    reaps   a  rich  harvest  of    delight.     IV.  Heb 
GENEROSITY  AS  A  NEIGHBOUR.     Her  Sympathies  are  not  confined  to  the  domestic 
sphere.     They  overflow   the  boundary  of    family  lite — they  go    forth    into   the 
neighbourhood.     V.  Her  excellence   as  an    individual.     She  was   vigorous  in 
body ;  elegant  in  her  dress  ;  dignified  and  cheerful  in  her  bearing ;   devout  and 
honoured  in  her  religion.    Religion  was  the  spirit  of  her  character,  the  germ  from 
■which  grew  all  the  fruits  of  her  noble  life.     (Homilist.)        The  virtuous  woman  as 
a  icife : — She  is  a  wife.     The  modern  conception  of  a  woman  as  an  independent 
person,  standing  alone,  engaged  in  her  own  business  or  profession,  and  complete  in 
her  isolated  life,  is  not  to  be  looked  for  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs.     It  is  the  creation 
of  accidental  circumstances.     However  necessary  it  may  be  in  a  country  where  the 
women   are  largely  in   excess   of   the  men,   it  cannot  be  regarded  as  final  or 
satisfactory.     In  the  beginning  it  was  not  so,  neither  will  it  be  so  in  the  end.     If 
men  and  women  are  to  abide  in  strength  and  to  develop  the  many  sides  of  their 
nature,  they  must  be  united.     It  is  not  good  for  man  to  be  alone ;  nor  is  it  good  for 
woman  to  be  alone.     There  are  some  passages  in  the  New  Testament  which  seem 
to   invalidate  this  truth.     The  advocates  of  celibacy  appeal  to  the  example  of 
Christ  and  to  the  express  words  of  St.  Paul.    But  the  New  Testament,  as  our  Lord 
Himself  expressly  declares,  does  not  abrogate  the  eternal  law  which  was  from  the 
beginning.    And  if  He  Himself  abstained  from  marriage,  and  if  St.  Paul  seems  to 
approve   of   such  an  abstention,  we  must   seek  for  the  explanation  in  certain 
exceptional  and  temporary  circumstances ;  for  it  is  precisely  to  Christ  Himself  in 
the  first  instance,  and  to  His  great  apostle  in  the  second,  that  we  owe  our  loftiest 
and  grandest  conceptions  of  marriage.    There  was  no  room  for  a  personal  marriage 
in  the  life  of  Him  who  was  to  be  the  Bridegroom  of  His  Church;  and  St.  Paul 
distinctly  implies  that  the  pressing  troubles  and  anxieties  of  his  own  life,  and  the 
constant  wearing  labours  which  were  required  of  the  Gentile  apostle,  formed  the 
reason  why  it  was  better  for  him,  and  for  such  as  he,  to  remain  single.     At  any 
rate  the  virtuous  woman  of  the  Proverbs  is  a  wife ;  and  the  first  thing  to  observe  is 
the  part  she  plays  in  relation  to  her  husband.     She  is  his  stay  and  confidence. 
{R.  F.  Horton,  D.D.)         The  excellent  looman  : — In  this  final  chapter  of  Proverbs 
we  have  celebrated  in  poetic  numbers  the  wife  and  mother  in  practical  life.     Each 
age  has  its  own  ideal.     Study  this  ideal  in  outline  and  in  detaU.    Strength,  energy, 
activity,  is  here  the  main  thought.     Foresight,  industry,  and  business  capacity  are 
desired.    A  virtuous  woman  is  a  woman  with  virtue ;  that  is  vim,  strength.     The 
virtuous  woman  is  virile  without  being  masculine.     The  virtuous  woman,  whose 
price  is  above  rubies,  is,  like  the  ideal  man,  to  walk  after  the  law  of  God  in  every 
footstep  of  life,  as  well  as  in  every  lengthened  path  of  continued  duty.    Love  to 
God  creates  a  holy  ambition.     It  spurs  her  on  to  be  what  Jehovah  intended  onr 
first  mother  to  be — a  true  helpmeet.      Full  of   the  detail  of  daily  industry  and 
household  management,  she  is  yet  far-sighted.     Methodical,  wise-hearted,  kindly  in 
disciphne,  her  household  moves  like  the  order  of  the  heavenly  bodies.    Woman's 
strength  may  be  in  her  tongue,  even  more  than  in  her  arms  and  hands.     This 
edged  tool,  growing  sharper  by  constant  use,  must  be  consecrated,  else  it  will  kill 
more  than  cure.     The  secret  and  spring  of  such  a  character  as  that  of  the  virtuous 
woman  is  the  fear  of  the  Lord.     This  fear — reverence  mingled  with  love — is  a 
'  well-spring  of  life.     Watered  by  this  stream,  all  fair  flowers  of  grace,  and  fruits  of 
character  grow.      {W.  E.   Giiffis.)        The  excelle7it  woman : — Three  things  con- 
cerning woman  as  she  is  portrayed  in  the  Proverbs.     1.  Her  power  both  for  good 
and  evil  is  emphasised.     She  is  recognised  as  important  in  the  social  structure. 
2.  Her  position,  as  portrayed  here,  gives  us  a  high  estimate  of  the  life  of  the  Jews 
as  a  nation.     You  can  always  tell  a  nation's  character  from  the  character  of  its 
women.     3.  The  Jewish  woman  was  a  wife  and  mother.     She  took  the  place  God 
made  for  her,  and  filled  it  excellently ;  and  in  that  for  any  one  in  any  place  lies  the 
highest  success  in  life.    I.  The  virtue  most  dealt  with  here  is  industrt.    Look  at 
this  model  woman,  accepting  with  a  cheerful  and  masterly  mind  the  place  God  has 
given  her,  bound  to  do  her  best  to  satisfy  its  conditions,  and  so  destined  to  genuine 
content.    To  work  is  God's  intention  for  us,  and  if  we  have  any  thought  of  wishing 
to  live  for  Him,  work  will  not  be  to  us  an  episode  so  disagreeable  that  we  are  to 
escape  from  it  as  soon  as  possible,  but  rather  that  for  which  we  are  made,  and  that 


CHAP.  XXXI.]  PROVERBS.  691 

in  ■which  we  ought  to  be  most  at  home.  II.  The  model  woman  is  EmciENT  in  the 
MANAGEMENT  OF  HER  HOUSEHOLD.  The  word  "  virtuous  "  refers  not  so  much  to 
purity  as  to  adaptation  to  the  place  where  God  has  put  her.  The  meaning  is, 
"  Who  can  find  a  capable  woman  ?  "  Her  capability  is  shown  in  her  addressing 
herself  in  strength  to  the  exigencies  of  her  place.  It  requires  wisdom  to  do 
anything  well.  The  ideal  woman  uses  her  good  sense  to  advantage  in  the  manage- 
ment of  the  home.  Nothing  is  more  worthy  of  one's  most  acute  thought  than  the 
inconspicuous  duties  of  the  home.  Ill,  This  ideal  woman  is  full  of  enterprise. 
There  is  something  very  homely  and  natural  in  this  portrait  of  the  thrifty  house- 
wife turning  an  honest  penny  when  occasion  offers.  This  is  the  overflow  of  her 
exuberant  interest  in  the  prosperity  of  her  household.  Her  business  enterprise  is 
not  a  sign  of  her  seeking  new  interests  outside  of  the  home,  but  on  the  contrary 
a  sign  of  her  greater  devotion  to  it.  Home  over  everything,  everything  for  the 
home,  is  her  idea.  IV.  The  ideal  woman  is  sympathetic.  She  does  not  forget 
the  poor.  Her  vigorous  mind  does  not  make  her  a  hard,  calculating  person  of 
business.  She  is  still  a  woman,  full  of  sympathy  for  the  unfortunate,  ready  to 
help  the  unsuccessful.  Back  of  the  calculating  mind  lies  the  warm,  throbbing 
heart,  thrilled  with  the  highest  emotions.  V  The  ideal  woman  is  wise  of  speech. 
She  is  the  counsellor  of  the  household,  giving  good  advice  and  teaching  them  that 
kindness  which  is  life's  truest  wisdom.  The  easy  running  of  home  affairs  makes 
a  great  difference  in  the  happiness  of  every  one.  Home  is  where  the  character  of 
the  children  is  being  formed.  The  widest  empire  does  not  offer  a  more  dignified 
throne  for  the  exercise  of  high  wisdom  than  the  mother's  seat  in  the  home.  The 
results  of  such  a  good  woman's  life  are  visible.  She  has  a  happy  husband.  She 
has  appreciative  children.  She  has  a  good  name.  May  God  give  to  many  a 
girlish  heart  a  new  dream — not  of  fair,  but  of  good  women,  that  shall  reproduce 
itself  in  a  strong,  gentle,  wise  life.  (D.  J.  Burrell.)  A  helpful  wife : — Writing 
of  the  greatness  of  Mr.  D.  L.  Moody,  Professor  Drummond  says :  "  If  you  were  to 
ask  Mr.  Moody — which  it  would  never  occur  to  you  to  do — what,  apart  from  the 
inspirations  of  his  personal  faith,  was  the  secret  of  his  success,  of  his  happiness 
and  usefulness  in  life,  he  would  assuredly  answer,  '  Mrs.  Moody.'  "  An  indus- 
trious icife : — Mrs.  Henry  Clay,  the  wife  of  the  celebrated  American  statesman, 
during  her  husband's  long  and  frequent  absences  from  home  at  the  seat  of  govern- 
ment, used  to  take  the  reins  into  her  own  hands  at  the  farm.  She  made  a  practical 
study  of  agriculture,  oversaw  the  overseer,  and  became  an  oracle  among  the 
farmers  of  the  neighbourhood.  Preparatory  to  Mr.  Clay's  departure  from  home, 
she  invariably  received  from  him  a  handsome  cheque,  which  she  as  regularly 
restored  to  him  upon  his  return,  with  the  laconic  remark  that  she  found  no  use  for 
it !  {J.  B.  F.  Tinling.)  A  good  wife  : — A  good  story  is  told  of  the  famous  plaid, 
without  which  Blackie  was  rarely  seen.  One  day,  at  Dr.  Donald  Macleod's  house, 
he  said,  "  When  I  was  a  poor  man,  and  my  wife  and  I  had  our  difficulties,  she  one 
day  drew  my  attention  to  the  threadbare  character  of  my  coat,  and  asked  me  to  order 
a  new  one.  I  told  her  I  could  not  afford  it  just  then,  when  she  went,  like  a  noble 
woman,  and  put  her  own  plaid  shawl  on  my  shoulders,  and  I  have  worn  a 
plaid  ever  since  in  memory  of  her  loving  deed  !  "  [Memoir  of  J.  Stuart  Blackie.) 
And  worketh  willingly  with  her  hands. — Beautiful  hands  : — As  a  young  friend 
was  standing  with  us  noticing  the  pedestrians  on  the  sidewalk,  a  very  stylish  young 

lady  passed  us.     "What  beautiful  hands  Miss has!"  exclaimed  our  friend. 

"  What  makes  them  beautiful  ? "  "  Why,  they  are  small,  white,  soft,  and 
exquisitely  shaped."  "  Is  that  all  that  constitutes  the  beauty  of  the  hand  ? 
Is  not  something  more  to  be  included  in  your  catalogue  of  beauty?"  "What 
more  would  you  have?"  "  Are  they  charitable  hands?  Have  they  ever  fed  the 
poor  ?  Have  they  ever  carried  the  necessities  of  life  to  the  widow  and  the  orphan  ? 
Has  their  soft  touch  ever  smoothed  the  irritation  of  sickness  and  the  agonies  of 
pain  ?  Are  they  useful  hands  ?  Have  they  been  taught  that  the  world  is  not 
a  pl.ayground,  or  a  theatre  of  display,  or  a  mere  lounging-place  ?  Do  those  delicate 
hands  ever  labour  ?  Are  they  ever  employed  about  the  domestic  duties  of  life  ? 
Are  they  modest  hands  ?  Will  they  perform  their  charities  or  their  duties  without 
vanity?  Or  do  they  pander  to  the  pride  of  their  owner  by  their  delicacy  and 
beauty  ?  Are  they  humble  hands  ?  Will  their  owner  extend  them  to  grasp  the 
hand  of  that  old  schoolfellow  who  now  must  earn  her  living  by  her  labour? 
Are  they  holy  hands?  Are  they  ever  clasped  in  prayer  or  elevated  in  praise?  " 
(Christian  Treasury.)  She  layeth  her  hands  to  the  spindle. — Homely  attain- 
ments : — There   is   a   trite   but   apposite  moral  in   the   anecdote  told  of   James 


692  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxi. 

I.  on  having  a  girl  presented  to  him  who  was  represented  as  an  English 
prodigy  because  she  was  deeply  learned.  The  person  who  introduced  her  boasted 
of  her  proficiency  in  ancient  languages.  "I  can  assure  your  Majesty,"  said  he, 
"  that  she  can  both  speak  and  write  Latin,  Greek,  and  Hebrew."  "  These  are 
rare  attainments  for  a  damsel,"  said  James;  "but  pray  tell  me,  can  she  spin?  " 
She  maketh  herself  coverings  of  tapestry. — Needlework  : — Whenever  (said  Dr. 
Johnson),  whenever  chance  brings  within  my  observation  a  knot  of  young  ladies 
busy  at  their  needles,  I  consider  myself  as  in  the  school  of  virtue  ;  and  though  I 
have  no  extraordinary  skill  in  plain  work  or  embroidery,  I  look  upon  their 
operations  with  as  much  satisfaction  as  their  governess,  because  I  regard  them  as 
providing  a  security  against  the  most  dangerous  insnarers  of  the  soul,  by  enabling 
them  to  exclude  idleness  from  their  solitary  moments,  and,  with  idleness,  her 
attendant  train  of  passions,  fancies,  chimeras,  fears,  sorrows,  and  desires.  She 
openeth  her  mouth  with  wisdom ;  and  in  her  tongue  is  the  law  of  kindness. — 
The  nobility  of  womanhood  : — 1.  Tact  is  evidently  the  characteristic  of  one  who 
"  openeth  her  mouth  with  wisdom."  She  is  not  one  whose  garrulity  proves  the 
truth  of  the  proverb,  "In  the  multitude  of  words  there  wanteth  not  sin,"  for  she 
has  sufficient  sense  of  the  seriousness  of  life  to  avoid  utterances  which  are  idle  and 
thoughtless.  Her  words  are  the  dictates  of  that  wisdom,  the  beginning  of  which 
is  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  Nor  does  she  merely  speak  wise  words,  but,  with  true 
wisdom,  she  recognises  that  "  there  is  a  time  to  speak  and  a  time  to  be  silent,"  so 
that  her  reproofs  and  encouragements  live  long  in  grateful  memories.  2.  But 
authority  is  quite  as  important  as  tact,  and  this  is  characteristic  of  one  who  has 
a  "  law "  in  her  lips.  Suppleness  in  management  is  of  little  value  unless  there 
be  strength  behind  it.  God  never  meant  that  women  should  be  always  yielding 
to  other  people's  opinions,  or  that  they  should  be  swayed  hither  and  thither  by 
every  passing  breeze  of  emotion.  As  much  as  men  they  need  firmness,  the  royal 
power  of  rule,  for  in  the  home,  in  the  sick-room,  and  in  the  class  they  have  a 
veritable  kingdom  in  which  to  exercise  authority  for  God.  3.  It  must  not  be 
forgotten,  however,  that  the  authority  here  spoken  of  is  the  law  of  kindness.  Such, 
in  the  highest  sense,  is  the  authority  of  Christ  over  His  people.  The  noblest  rule 
requires,  not  the  display  of  force,  nor  the  terrors  of  foolish  threats,  nor  the  counter- 
mining of  a  suspicious  nature,  but  the  law  of  kindness,  which  is  obeyed  because  it 
evidently  springs  from  love  and  is  enforced  by  love.  Gentlest  influences  are  by  no 
means  the  feeblest.  The  spring  crocus  can  be  crushed  by  a  stone,  but,  unlike  it, 
the  crocus  can  push  its  way  up  through  the  stiff,  hard  soil,  until  it  basks  in  the 
sunshine.  The  light  of  the  sun  does  not  make  noise  enough  to  disturb  an  insect's 
sleep,  but  it  can  waken  a  whole  world  to  duty.  Those  who  have  been  able  to  win 
j  or  to  retain  the  affection  and  trust  of  others  exercise  a  power  which  angels  might 
desire.  (A.Rowland,  LL.B.)  A  soothing  voice  : — Yes,  we  agree  with  that  old 
poet  who  said  that  a  low,  soft  voice  was  an  excellent  thing  in  woman.  Indeed, 
we  feel  inclined  to  go  much  further  than  he  has  on  the  subject,  and  call  it  one 
of  her  crowning  charms.  How  often  the  spell  of  beauty  is  rudely  broken  by  coarse, 
loud  talking !  How  often  you  are  irresistibly  drawn  to  a  plain,  unassuming 
woman  whose  soft,  silvery  tone  renders  her  positively  attractive.  In  the  social 
circle  how  pleasant  it  is  to  hear  a  woman  talk  in  that  low  key  which  always 
characterises  the  true  lady.  In  the  sanctuary  of  home,  how  such  a  voice  soothes 
the  fretful  child  and  cheers  the  weary  husband  I     (C.  La7nb.) 

Ver.  28.  Her  children  arise  up,  and  caU  her  blessed.— T/ie  children's  praise : — 
This  is  part  of  the  just  debt  owing  to  the  virtuous  woman.  It  is  enough  to  make 
virtuous  people  happy  that  they  are  blessed  of  God.  Yet  this  is  thrown  in  as  the 
reward  of  virtue,  that  among  men  also  ordinarily  it  hath  its  praise.  The  praise 
that  attends  the  virtuous  woman  comes  from  her  own  children.  1.  It  is  a  great 
comfort  to  those  who  are  good  themselves  to  see  their  children  rising  up.  Here 
rising  up  means,  stir  up  themselves  to  pursue  the  same  course  as  their  good 
mother.  2.  The  children  of  the  virtuous  woman  call  her  blessed.  It  is  her  honour 
that  she  shall  be  praised  by  them  that  are  best  acquainted  with  her  and  most 
indebted  to  her.  I.  The  character  of  those  parents  to  whom  honour  is  due 
from  their  children.  1.  Those  that  are  truly  wise  deserve  praise.  2.  Thoj^e  that 
are  truly  kind.  3.  Those  that  are  industrious  and  careful.  4.  Those  that  are 
charitable.  5.  Those  that  are  virtuous  ;  that  is,  sober  and  temperate,  just  and 
righteous  in  their  conversation,  exemplary  in  integrity  and  uprightness.  6.  Those 
that  are  pious  and  reUgious  towards  God.    II.  The  duty  of  ohildben  in  dib- 


CHAP,  xxa.]  PROVERBS.  698 

CHARGING  THEiE  DEBT  TO  THEIR  PARENTS.  1.  Maintain  a  grateful  remembrance, 
and,  on  occasion,  make  honourable  mention  of  our  godly  parents.  2.  Give  thanks 
to  God  for  them.  3.  We  ought  to  be  very  sensible  of  our  loss  when  such  , 
parents  are  removed  from  us.  {Philip  Henry,  M.A.)  The  blessing  of  the  pious  / 
mother : — The  family  is  the  profoundest  and  most  sacred  of  all  our  social  relation- 
ships. It  is  a  type  of  spiritual  relationships,  and  a  means  of  realising  them; 
In  this  delineation  of  the  excellent  woman  the  influence  of  the  mother  is  more 
especially  recognised.  The  distinctive  honour  of  the  pious  mother  is  that  she 
receives  the  benediction  of  her  own  children.  They  do  her  honour,  speak  of  her 
with  reverence  and  love  and  blessing.  What  must  a  mother  be  in  order  to  inherit 
such  benediction  of  her  children?  Notice  her  prudent  regulation  of  the  affairs 
of  her  household ;  her  kindness,  gentleness,  and  benignity ;  her  piety.  The 
religiousness  that  influences  a  child  is  the  religiousness  of  common  life,  the 
religiousness  that  is  the  life  that  imbues  all  things  with  its  feeling  and  sanctifies 
all  things  with  its  presence.  Urge  upon  young  women  the  present  cultivation  of 
such  a  character  as  will  make  them  wise  and  holy  mothers.  {Henry  Allon,  D.D.)  / 
Gratitude  for  a  good  mother : — Mrs.  Susannah  Wesley  was  a  model  mother.  The  V 
wife  of  a  country  curate,  she  brought  up  her  large  family  so  well  that  all 
Christendom  has  cause  to  bless  her  name.  At  her  death  her  children  gathered 
around  her  bed  and  sang  a  hymn  of  praise  in  gratitude  to  God  for  such  a  mother. 
She  is  called  the  "  Mother  of  Methodism,"  so  much  did  her  famous  sons  John  and 
Charles  Wesley  owe  to  her  influence  and  training.  General  Garfield  said  that  his 
was  a  model  mother.  When  young  and  headstrong  he  obtained  work  on  a  canal 
boat  against  her  wishes.  One  dark  night,  when  alone  on  the  boat,  he  fell  overboard. 
It  was  in  a  lock,  where  the  water  was  deepest.  He  could  not  swim,  and  was 
sinking  when  his  hand  touched  a  rope  hanging  over  the  side,  apparently  by 
accident.  He  climbed  on  deck  and  found  that  the  rope  was  only  held  by  the 
slightest  twist  round  a  block.  He  felt  it  was  God's  hand  which  had  saved  him, 
and  resolved  to  start  for  home  at  once.  He  found  his  mother  and  described  his 
miraculous  escape.  "  What  hour  was  it  ?  "  she  asked.  He  told  her,  and  she  said, 
"At  that  very  moment  I  was  praying  for  you,  my  son,  that  God  would  protect 
and  bless  you."  And  in  after-life  Garfield  used  to  say,  "I  owe  everything  to  my 
mother."  Her  husband  also,  and  lie  praiseth  her. — Gratitude  for  a  good  wife : — 
The  Earl  of  Beaconsfield  said,  "  Every  step  in  my  life  to  honour  and  success  I  owe  ' 
to  my  good  and  faithful  wife."  President  Lincoln,  on  receiving  a  presentation, 
said,  "  I  will  hand  this  to  the  lady  who,  by  her  counsel  and  help,  has  made  it 
possible  in  anywise  for  me  to  serve  my  country."  A  working  man  at  a  great 
meeting  said  recently,  "  My  wife  was  a  good  woman  before  her  conversion,  but  now 
she  is  worth  her  weight  in  diamonds."  When  Jonathan  Edwards  was  discharged 
from  his  appointment  he  came  home  in  despair.  But  his  wife  smiled  bravely  and 
said,  "  My  dear,  you  have  often  longed  for  leisure  to  write  your  book,  and  now  it 
has  come.  I  have  lighted  a  fire  in  your  room,  and  set  the  table  with  pens  and 
paper."  He  was  so  cheered  that  he  set  to  work  at  once,  and  wrote  the  book  that 
made  him  famous.  (S.  AI.  Evans.)  A  wife  praised  by  her  husband: — The 
late  Robert  Moffat  had  a  wife  of  rare  excellence.  For  more  than  fifty  years  she 
shared  his  toils  in  South  Africa.  The  Secretary  of  the  London  Missionary  Society 
says,  "  After  their  return  from  Africa,  while  talking  over  their  labours  at  the 
Mission  House,  Mrs.  Moffat  said,  '  Robert  affirms  that  I  do  not  hinder  him  in 
his  work.'  '  No,  indeed,'  replied  Dr.  Moffat,  '  but  I  can  aifirm  that  she  has  often 
spnt  me  out  to  missionary  work  for  months  together,  and  in  my  absence  has  managed 
the  station  better  than  I  could  have  done  myself.'  Her  husband's  first  exclamation 
on  finding  her  gone  was,  '  For  forty-three  years  I  have  had  her  to  pray  for  me.'  " 

Ver.  29.  Many  daughters  have  done  virtuously,  but  thou  excellest  them  aUL — 

To  daughters  : — The  world  has  dealt  severely  with  woman.  It  has  always  been 
too  fashionable  to  distort  her  character,  and  with  cruel  cowardice  cast  on  her  the 
entire  blame  for  all  the  ills  humanity  endures.  Long  ago  it  was  declared  that  "  if 
the  world  were  only  free  from  women,  men  would  not  be  without  the  converse  of 
the  gods."  Even  Chrysostom  pronounced  woman  to  be  "a  necessary  evil,  a  national 
temptation,  a  desirable  calamity,  a  domestic  peril,  a  deadly  fascination,  and  a 
painted  iU."  There  is  still  an  Italian  proverb  to  the  effect,  "  If  a  woman  were  ae 
little  as  she  is  good,  a  pea's  pod  would  make  her  a  gown  and  a  hood."  Similarly 
the  Germans  say,  "  There  are  only  two  good  women  in  the  world — one  of  them  ifi 
dead,  and  the  other  is  not  found."    So  Englishmen  sometimes  say,  "  If  there  ig 


C94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxl 

any  mischief  you  may  rest  sure  that  a  woman  has  to  do  with  it."  It  cannot  be 
denied  that  the  devil  employed  woman  to  accomplish  the  ruin  of  the  race  ;  that  by 
her  he  disturbed  Abraham's  home  and  heart,  cast  innocent  Joseph  into  prison, 
robbed  Samson  of  his  strength,  brought  life-long  trouble  upon  David,  seduced 
Solomon  into  idolatry,  caused  John  the  Baptist  to  be  beheaded,  and  drove  Paul 
and  Barnabas  from  Antioch.  But  let  us  go  over  to  the  other  side,  and  deal  fairly 
with  woman.  "Whilst  we  hear  the  harsh  voices  of  men  shamefully  revihng  our 
Saviour  we  cannot  discover  an  instance  of  a  woman  insulting  or  injuring  the  God 
man.  Whilst  men — even  the  favoured  disciples — forsook  Christ  and  fled,  women 
responded  readily  to  the  loving  appeals  of  Jesus,  clung  constantly  to  His  person, 
ministered  self-denyingly  to  His  needs,  and  watched  patiently  and  persistently  at 
His  cross.  Eemember  that  "  many  daughters  have  done  virtuously."  It  is  not  a 
few  who  stand  before  us  for  our  admiration  and  gratitude.  It  is  a  glorious  galaxy 
of  pure-minded,  consecrated  women  to  whom  the  Church  and  the  world  are,  and  ever 
will  be,  indebted.  And,  further,  recollect  that  they  became  what  they  were,  and  accom- 
plished what  they  did,  by  personal  effort.  They  strove  to  excel.  They  reasoned 
thus :  "  The  thing  is  right,  reasonable,  desirable ;  circumstances  demand  that  it 
should  be  done ;  therefore,  with  aU  my  heart  I  will  do  it  or  fail  in  the  effort." 
Hence  the  words  of  the  vrise  man.  "  Many  daughters  have  done  virtuously,  but 
thou  exceUest  them  all."  The  words  seem  to  picture  before  us  a  racecourse  with 
women  runners — the  goal,  perfect  virtue;  the  course,  three-score  years  and  ten; 
the  umpire,  God ;  the  spectators,  men  and  angels.  We  see  the  maiden  entering 
the  lists  before  she  reaches  her  teens.  Young,  innocent,  inexperienced,  and 
trustful,  she  begins  the  race  ;  we  watch  her  pressing  on  through  youth,  adolescence, 
and  old  age.  Now  surpassing  some  who  started  with  her,  then  being  surpassed  by 
some  who  began  long  after  her ;  now  level,  abreast  of  scores  of  equals,  then  out- 
distancing her  compeers.  To-day  passing  one  barrier  of  temptation,  and  to-morrow 
scoring  another  victory.  Not  stopping  for  some  fading  allurements  as  Atalanta 
did,  but  adding  one  excellency  to  another  until  it  is  said  of  her  :  "  Many  daughters 
have  run  weU,  but  thou  hast  outrun  them  all ;  many  daughters  have  done  virtuously, 
but  thou  excellest  them  all."  Young  women,  I  ask  you  each  to  enter  on  this  holy 
competition.  Let  me  say,  then,  that  you  should  cultivate  affection  for,  and  obedience 
to,  your  parents.  We  have  known  cases  in  which  daughters  have  been  callously 
absorbed  in  thoughts  of  themselves  whilst  aU  sympathy  for  the  anxious  and  ageing 
mother  has  been  wanting — where  the  young  woman  has  deemed  it  beneath  her  to 
help  a  hard-toiling  parent.  I  beseech  you  to  remember  that  next  to  God  you  cannot 
love  too  deeply  and  lastingly  those  who  have  so  sympathetically  watched  over  and 
waited  upon  you.  Never  suffer  either  parents  or  friends  to  have  cause  for  pro- 
nouncing you  idle  ©r  indifferent  to  home  claims.  Be  as  careful  what  books  you 
read  as  you  are  with  what  persons  you  associate.  Above  all,  acquaint  yourself  with 
the  Scriptures.  And  do  not  be  ashamed  to  have  it  known  that  you  pray.  It  is  a 
lofty  honour  to  commune  with  the  Infinite  Father.     (J.  H.  Kitchens,  D.D.) 

Ver.  30.  A  woman  that  feareth  the  Lord,  she  shall  be  praised. — A  woman  worthy 
of  praise : — This  text  recognises  the  fact  that  a  woman  seeks  admiration.  She 
loves  to  be  praised.  What  is  so  natural  and  universal  cannot  be  wrong.  Generally 
speaking,  a  woman  who  has  lost  the  desire  of  praise  is  a  lost  woman.  Her  self- 
respect  has  gone,  and  she  has  parted  with  her  strongest  motive  to  strive  after 
personal  excellence.  A  woman  wins  her  way  and  strengthens  her  influence  by  the 
admiration  she  commands  and  the  affection  she  inspires.  Praise  is  more  necessary 
to  the  right  growth  and  happy  development  of  human  character  than  is  commonly 
supposed.  We  do  each  other  a  moral  wrong  by  withholding  it  when  deserved. 
The  desire  to  be  commended  may  be  thought  an  unworthy  and  selfish  motive.  It  is 
unworthy  when  the  heart  is  satisfied  with  the  praise  of  foolish  people.  Very 
important  it  is  whose  praise  we  seek.  All  dishonest  gains  are  bad.  To  claim 
commendation  when  we  are  conscious  of  not  deserving  it,  or  even  to  accept  it 
without  protest,  is  mean  and  destructive  of  personal  integrity.  To  seek  the  honour 
that  Cometh  from  God,  to  deserve  well  of  the  good,  can  only  spring  from  sympathy 
with  goodness.  The  text  glances  at  means  of  winning  admiration  which  you 
must  not  rely  on.  "Favour  is  deceitful,  and  beauty  is  vain."  The  praise  these 
will  bring  you  is  not  worth  coveting.  Beauty  of  form  and  feature  is  almost  always 
a  snare  when  it  is  not  an  index  to  beauty  of  soul.  A  woman  should  not  place  her 
worth  in  these  outward  advantages.  She  is  to  aim  at  a  higher  beauty,  to  seek  to 
be  beautiful  in  the  eyes  of  Him  "  who  seeth  not  as  man  seeth."    Three  things 


CHAP,  xxxi.]  PROVERBS.  695 

should  guide  you  in  dress — truth,  order,  and  harmony.  You  violate  the  rule  of 
truth  if  you  ever  dress  so  as  to  be  mistaken  for  what  you  are  not.  You  should 
never  purchase  what  will  have  an  ill  look  when  it  is  shabby.  If  you  do  you  violate 
the  law  of  order.  You  offend  against  the  law  of  harmony  if  what  you  have  on 
excites  remark.  A  woman  is  dressed  harmoniously  when  her  dress  seems  part  of 
herself.  As  the  world  is,  marriage  is  the  goal  of  a  woman's  existence.  Marriage 
makes  or  mars  a  woman.  Girls  whose  chief  talk  is  about  young  men  merit  severe 
reprobation.  On  this  matter  good  advice  may  be  summed  up  under  three  heads : 
Think  little.  Talk  less.  Do  nothing.  It  will  be  time  enough  for  you  to  think 
what  your  chances  are  and  whom  you  will  marry  when  the  question  comes  before 
you  in  a  practical  form.  This  advice  is  based  upon  sound  reasons  and  justified  by 
manifold  experiences.  Piety  is  the  bond  of  feminine  virtues,  the  crown  of  womanly 
graces.  A  cold  theology  of  intellectual  ideas  will  never  satisfy  you.  The  religion 
that  will  command  your  devotion  and  obedience  must  offer  a  living  person  to  your 
faith  and  loyal  affection.  The  gospel  offers  you  the  Lord  Jesus.  Translate  the 
description  of  fidelity,  kindness,  industry,  and  prudence  given  in  this  chapter  into 
the  language  of  to-day.  Picture  to  yourselves  this  model  of  womanly  excellence 
set  in  the  duties  and  circumstances  of  your  own  lives,  and  then  aim  to  be  like  her, 
for  such  will  be  the  woman  that  feareth  the  Lord,  and  whom  He  will  deem  worthy 
of  praise.  {E.  W.  Shalders,  B.A.)  Woman's  praises  and  virtues: — I.  Her 
VIRTUES  (vers.  11-27).  Her  conjugal  fidelity;  her  kindness  and  constancy  of 
affection ;  her  housewifery  and  diligence ;  her  thrift  and  management ;  her  industry 
and  assiduity;  her  charity  and  liberality;  her  providence  and  forecast;  her 
magnificence  in  furniture  and  apparel ;  her  reputation  in  pubUc ;  her  tralfic  and 
trade  abroad  ;  her  discretion  and  obligingness  in  discourse ;  her  care  of  home  and 
good  government  of  her  family.  II.  Her  praise.  At  home  ;  in  public  ;  through 
the  whole  country  where  she  Uves.  Prove  virtue  to  be  the  only  praiseworthy  thing. 
Favour  and  beauty  are  frail,  and  subject  to  decay  in  their  nature  and  in  the 
opinions  of  men.  They  are  things  that  may  be  counterfeited  and  put  on.  They 
prove  too  frequently  occasions  of  evil  and  incentives  to  sensuality.  The  good 
woman  prizes  favour  and  beauty  under  three  conditions.  Not  so  as  ambitiously 
to  seek  them  or  fondly  to  vaunt  them.  Not  so  as  to  rely  on  them  as  solid  goods. 
Not  BO  as  to  misemploy  them,  but  to  guide  them  with  virtue  and  discretion.  Praise 
is  sure  to  come  to  the  woman  that  "  feareth  the  Lord."  The  woman  has  equal 
rights  with  man.  A  virtuous  woman  may  mean  a  stout,  valiant  woman ;  or  a  busy, 
industrious  woman  ;  or  a  woman  of  wealth  and  riches ;  or  a  discreet  woman.  Li 
its  principle,  this  "  fear"  is  a  reverential  fear.  In  its  operations,  like  the  warp,  it 
runs  through  the  whole  web  of  all  her  duties.  Such  a  woman  shall  be  praised. 
{Adam  Littleton,  D.D.)  Beauty  and  goodness  : — I.  The  approbation  to  be 
DESIRED.  The  love  of  approbation  is  at  once  a  virtuous  and  a  powerful  motive. 
It  includes  the  approbation  of  God  and  of  good  men.  Some,  however,  cherish  the 
love  of  approbation  too  much,  and  will  sacrifice  principle  in  order  to  obtain  it.  It 
is  a  dangerous  thing  to  have  the  approval  of  every  one;  it  is  apt  to  make  us 
careless,  proud,  or  indifferent.  II.  The  false  means  which  are  sometimes  relied 
ON  TO  secure  this  END.  "  Favout "  means  a  graceful  manner,  demeanour,  and 
deportment.  "Beauty"  refers  to  the  countenance.  We  may  thank  God  for 
beauty  of  person  and  elegance  of  manner  as  for  any  other  of  the  blessings  of  this 
life.  Used  rightly,  beauty  may  be  a  virtue,  but  perverted  it  becomes  a  source  of 
great  and  awful  evil.  HI.  The  certain  and  only  road  to  approbation.  The 
woman  who  wishes  to  be  praised  must  cultivate  rehgious  principle.  Women  are 
apt  to  attach  undue  importance  to  the  external  and  to  neglect  the  spiritual. 
Beauty  without  goodness  passes  away  like  a  vapour,  and  leaves  no  trace  behind ; 
or  if  it  succeeds  in  being  remembered,  it  is  only  that  it  may  be  despised  and 
abhorred.  {Clement  Dukes,  M.A.)  Woman's  virtues: — As  virtues  of  the  true 
matron  there  are  named,  above  aU,  the  fear  of  God  as  the  sum  of  all  duties  to  God ; 
then  chastity,  fidelity,  love  to  her  husband  without  any  murmuring ;  diligence  and 
energy  in  all  domestic  avocations;  frugality,  moderation  and  gentleness  in  the 
treatment  of  servants ;  care  in  the  training  of  children  ;  and  beneficence  to  the  poor. 
{Melancthon.)  Woma7i's  influence  : — I.  Favour  is  deceitful.  Men's  favour,  the 
world's  favour,  how  fickle  it  ever  is,  how  soon  it  changes,  and  what  a  short  time  it 
exists !  How  many  souls  have  been  ruined  by  the  world's  favours !  Flattery  has 
produced  pride,  and  has  blinded  the  eyes  and  led  the  steps  along  the  downward 
way.  n.  Beauty  is  vain.  We  need  not  disparage  beauty  in  itself.  Beauty  of 
form  and  feature  is  of  God.    But  how  short-lived  mere  beauty  of  face  is  1    Sick- 


696  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxi. 

nesses  lessen  it,  increasing  age  denies  it,  afflictions  spoil  it.     HI.  What  shall  qivb 

us  POWER  AND  INFLUENCE  FOR  GOOD  ?    Fearing  the  Lord.    This  makes  the  highest 

and  grandest  type  of  woman.     {Uriah  Davies,  M.A.)        Lotting  love: — That  love 

which  is  cemented  by  youth  and  beauty,  when  these  moulder  and  decay,  as  soon  they 

do,  fades  too.    But  if  husbands  and  wives  are  each  reconciled  unto  God  in  Christ, 

and  so  heirs  of  life  and  one  with  God,  then  are  they  truly  one  in  God  each  with 

the   other,  and  that  is  the  surest   and   sweetest  union  that  can  be.     (Archbp. 

Leighton.)         Woman  retaining  honour: — "A  gracious  woman  retaineth  honour." 

That  is,  a  woman  distinguished  for  her  modesty,  meekness,  and  prudence,  and 

other  virtues,  will  engage  affection  and  respect  when  other  accomplishments  fade 

and  decline.     {B.  E.NichoUs,  M.A.)         Womari :  her  dtiet  and  her  debts: — There 

is  among  men  no  general  agreement  as  to  what  exactly  woman  is,  or  means,  and 

what  precisely  she  is  for,  and  rather  less  agreement  among  her  own  sex.    Woman 

has  been  a  great  while  in  finding  her  place,  and  slow  in  even  suspecting  that  any 

place  of  power  and  dignity  is  her  due.     Woman  has  been  cautiously  conceded  to 

have  powers  of  thought,  or  to  be  susceptible  to  a  degree  of  discipline,  but  those 

susceptibilities  have  been  regarded  suspiciously  and  handled  evasively.    In  higher 

social  classes  woman  is  considered  rather  in  the  light  of  a  delicacy ;  as  no  true 

constituent  of  the  bone  and  sinew  of  society ;  more  an  ornament  than  a  utility, 

like  the  pictures  we  hang  on  our  walls,  or  the  statuary  we  range  in  our  alcoves — a 

kind  of  live  art.    A  womanly  woman  is  feminine  by  nature,  more  feminine  by 

grace,  and  will  be  consummately  feminine  by  translation.     What  it  lies  in  the 

nature  of  a  thing  to  become  is  a  providential  indication  of  what  God  wants  it  to 

become  by  improvement  and  development.    An  uneducated  woman  is  as  much  a 

mistake  as  an  uneducated  man  is  a  mistake.    By  education  is  meant,  first  of  all, 

womanliness,  built  out  of  alternate  layers  of  intelligence  sharpened  by  discipline 

and  integrity,  chastened  by  the  manifold  graces  of  God.    A  young  woman,  as  much 

as  a  young  man,  belongs  to  her  times.     The  beauty  of  a  home  and  the  strength  of 

a  home  is  that  it  is  the  product  of  affectionate  co-operation  and  conspiracy  between 

the  prime  partners  to  the  contract.     Society  has  not  yet  made  any  improvement  on 

the  marriage  idea  as  it  is  laid  down  in  the  second  chapter  of  God's  book — that  the 

wife  is  to  be  her  husband's  helpmeet.    The  hope  of  civilisation  is  the  home,  and  the 

hope  of  the  home  is  the  mother.     Characterless  mothers  and  enervated  homes  are 

to  be  dreaded  more  than  outward  assaults  of  immorality  or  insinuations  of  a  gross 

philosophy ;  for  it  is  the  enervation  of  the  home  that  gives  to  gross  philosophy  and 

bad  morality  the  opportunity  to  take  hold  and  do  its  corroding  and  poisonous  work. 

Civilisation  would  be  kept  as  grand  as  the  home  is  kept,  and  the  keystone  of  home 

is  the  mother.     (C.  H.  Parkhurst,  D.D.)        The  virtuoxit  woman  : — Note — 1.  Her 

industry  and  activity.     2.  Her  benevolence  and  kindness.     3.  Her  prudence  or 

discretion.     4.  Her   devotion  to   God.     The  importance  of  true  religion  as  the 

crowning  grace  of  womanhood  cannot  be  over-estimated.    (Frederick  Greeves,  D.D.) 

Our  mothers : — Writing  in  her  diary  soon  after  the  birth  of  her  babe,  Margaret 

Fuller  put  these  words,  "  I  am  the  mother  of  an  immortal  being.     God  be  merciful 

to  me  a  sinner !  "     A  true  woman  cannot  feel  other  than  seriously  the  import  of 

such  an  experience.     Somebody  has  said,  "  She  who  rocks  the  cradle  rules  the 

world  1"     The  world  is  what  those  constituting  it  make  it.     "Like  mother,  like 

child."    How  great  and  sacred  are  a  mother's  responsibilities  1     Her  teaching  and 

example  are  the  most  forceful  agents  in  the  formation  of  her  child's  life.     Virtue  is 

transmitted  as  well  as  evil.     The  good  we  do  lives  after  us  as  potentially  as  the 

bad.     The  strong  things  in  a  mother's  life  pass  on  to  the  child  as  well  as  the  weak. 

Let  no  mother  say  that  her  sphere  is  obscure  or  secondary.    A  noble  ambition  can 

fill  no  wider  scope.     Certain  things  are  essential  if  you  are  wisely  to  fulfil  your 

responsibilities  of  motherhood.     1.  Endeavour  to  be  what  you  would  have  your 

child  become ;  in  character,  in  morals,  in  religion.     2.  Look  well  to  yourself.    Live 

what  you  teach.     3.  Win  the  respect  of  your  child.     4.  Never  let  your  child  get 

beyond  you  in  intellectual  sympathy.    Hearts  may  keep  pace  where  heads  cannot 

Learn  to  sympathise  with  religious  perplexities,  and  learn  how  best  they  may  be 

eased  and  remedied.    6.  Let  your  child  be  always  certain  of  your  love.    Be  faithful 

to  your  woman's  instinct.     Deal  patiently  and  lovingly  with  your  child.     Keep  the 

home  life  bright  for  him.    Learn  to  respect  his  rights.    Allow  him  room  for  the 

free  play  of  the  varied  powers  God  has  given  him.    Are  you  not  assured  of  grace 

sufficient  for  all  your  mother-needs  ?     (George  Bainton.) 


Date  Due 


N  8 


m 


JWc  50 


^i  1} 


-^ 


•  ,"•  n  "7,  (^    M  :" 


^wuuJS-' 


