DUKE 

UNIVERSITY 


DIVINITY  SCHOOL 
LIBRARY 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2016  with  funding  from 
Duke  University  Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/worksofrevjohnwe24wesl 


THE 


WORKS 

O F T H E 


Rev.  JOHN  WESLEY,  M.  A. 

Late  Fellow  of  Lzncol/i-CoIlege,  Oxford. 


Volume  XXIV.  ' 


BRISTOL: 

Printed  by  WILLIAM  PINE,  in  Wine-Street. 

MDCCLXXIII. 


.7- 


- t.ei  “ .... 


['  3 ] 


T 


W5I3WE 


•j  ■ 


PLAIN  ACCOUNT 

o F 

CHRISTIAN  PERFECTION, 

' >1  » oci  ) ' •'  1 1.-  * y o\  )r  i i 7 <*■? 

AS  3ELIEVED  AND  TAUGHT 

By  the  Rev.  Mr.  JOHN  WESLEY, 

From  the  Year  1725.  to  the  Year  1773. 


1.  ’TXT  HAT  Ipurpofe  in  the  following  pages 
V V is,  to  give  a plain  and  diftinft  account 
of  the  fteps  by  which  I was  led,  during  a courfe 
of  many  years,  to  embrace  the  doctrine  of  Chrif- 
tran  Pei  lection.  This  I owe  to  the  fenous  part 
of  mankind,  thofe  who  defire  to  know  all  the 
truth  as  it  is  in  '-fejus.  And  thefe  only  are  con- 
cerned in  questions  of  this  kind.  To  thefe  I 
A 2 would 


[ 4 ] 

would  nakedly  declare  the  tiling  as  it  is:  endea- 
vouring all  along  to  (hew  from  one  period  to 
another,  both  what  I thought,  and  why  I thought 

fo • 

2.  In  the  year  1725,  being  in  the  twenty-third 
year  of  my  age,  I met  with  Bp.  Taylor’s  “ Rule 
and  exercifes  of  holy  living  and  dying.”  In 
reading  feveral  parts  of  this  book,  I was  exceed- 
ingly affeffed:  that  part  in  particular  which  re- 
lates to  Purity  of  Intention.  Inflantly  I refolved, 
to  dedicate  all  my  life  to  God;a//my  thoughts,  and 
words,  and  aclions ; being  throughly  convinced, 
there  was  no  medium;  but  that  every  part  of 
my  life,  (not  fome  only)  muff  either  be  a facri- 
fice  to  God,  or  rnyfelf,  that  is  in  e fie  ft,  to  the 
devil. 

Can  anv  ferious  perfon  doubt  of  this  ? or  find 
a medium  between  ferving  God  and  fei  ving  the 
devil  ? 

3.  In  the  year  1726,  I met  with  Kempis' s 
Chrijlian  Pattern.  The  nature  and  extent  of  In- 
ward Religion,  the  religion  of  the  heart,  now 
appeared  to  me  in  a ftronger  light  than  ever  it 
had  done  before.  1 raw,  that  giving  even  alt  mv 
life  to  God,  (fuppofing  it  pofiible  to  do  this  and 
go  no  farther)  wouid  profit  me  nothing,  unlefs  I 
gave  my  heart,  yea,  all  my  heart , to  him.  I faw, 
that  “ Simplicity  of  Intention  and  Purity  of 
Affebtion,”  one  def.gn  in  all  we  fpeak  or  do,  and 
one  defire  ruling  all  our  tempers,  are  indeed  “ the 

wings 


[ 5 ] 

wings  of  the  foul,”  without  which  fhe  can  never 
afcend  to  the  mount  of  God. 

4.  A year  or  two  after,  Mr.  Law’s  “ Chriflian 
Perfeftion”  and  “ Serious  Call”  were  put  into 
my  hands.  Thefe  convinced  me  more  than 
ever,  of  the  abfolute  impoflibility  of  being  half  a 
Chrijiian.  And  I determined,  through  his  grace, 
(the  abfolutely  neceffity  of  which  I was  deeply 
fenfible  of)  to  be  all- devoted  to  God,  to  give  him 
all  my  foul,  my  body,  and  my  fubftance. 

Will  any  confiderate  man  fay,  that  this  is  car- 
rying matters  too  jar  P Or  that  any  thing  lejs  is 
due  to  him,  who  has  given  himfelf  for  us,  than  to 
give  him  ourfelves,  all  we  have  and  all  we  are  ? 

g.  In  the  year  1729,  I began  not  only  to  read, 
but  to  jludy  the  bible,  as  the  one,  the  only  ftan- 
dard  of  truth,  and  the  only  model. of  pure  reli- 
gion. Hence  I faw,  in  a clearer  and  clearer 
light,  the  indifpenfable  neceffity  of  having  the 
mind  which  vjas  in  Chrifl , and  of  walking  as  Chnjl 
edfo  walked ; even  of  having,  not  fome  part  only, 
but  all  the  mind  which  was  in  him,  and  of  walk- 
ing as  he  walked,  not  only  in  many  or  in  mojl 
refpedls,  but  in  all  things.  And  this  was  the 
light  wherein  at  this  time,  1 generally  confidered 
religion,  as  an  uniform  following  of  Chrifl,  an 
entire  inward  and  outward  conformity  to  out 
Mafler.  Nor  was  I afraid  of  any  thing  more, 
than  of  bending  this  rule  to  the  experience  of 
jnyfelf,  or  of  other  men  : of  allowing  myfelf 
A3  in 


[ 6 ] 

in  any  the  leajl  difconfqrmity  to  our  grand  Ex- 
amples 

6.  On  January  i,  1733,  I preached  before  the 
Univerfitv,  in  St.  Mary’s  church,  on  the  circum- 
cifionof  the  heart,  an  account  of  which  I gave  in 
thofe  words,  “ It  is  that  habitual  difpofitiori  of 
foul,  which  in  the  facred  writings  is  termed  holi- 
nefs,  and  which  direftly  implies,  the  being 
cleanfed  from  fin,  from  all  filthinefs  b th  of  flefh 
and  fpirit,  and  by  confequence,  the  being  endued 
with  thofe  virtues  which  were  in  (Thrift  Jefus, 
the  being  fo  renewed  in'lhe  image  cj our  mind,  as 
to  be  perfB  as  our  Father  in  heaven  is  + pe.rjeclF 

In  the  fame  fermon  I obferved,  “ Love  is  the 
fulfilling  oj  the  law,  the  end  of  the  commandment . 
It  is  not  only  the  firjl  and  great  command,  but  al! 
the  commandments  in  one.  W hatjcever  things 
arejufl,  xvhaijoever  things  are  pure,  if  there  be  any 
virtue,  if  there  be  any  praife,  they  are  all  com- 
prized in  this  one  word,  Love.  In  this  is  per- 
fection, and  glory,  and  happinefs  . the  royal  law 
of  heaven  and  earth  is  this,  Thou  Jhalt  love  the 
Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart r and  with  all  thy 
fold,  and  with  all  thy  mind,  and  with  all  thy 
frength.  The  one  perfeCt  good  fliail  be  your 
one  ultimate  end.  One  thing  lhall  ye  defire  for 
its  own  fake,  the  fruition  of  him  who  is  all  in  alL 
One  happinefs  fhall  ye  propofe  to  your  fouls, 
even  an  union  with  him  that  made  them  : the 
having fellowfnip  with  the  Father  and  the  Son,  the 

being 


+ Page  5. 


r 7 i 

being  joined  to  the  Lord  in  one  fpirit.  One  defign 
ye  are  to  purfue  to  the  end  of  time,  the  enjoy- 
ment of  God  in  time  and  in  eternity,'  Defire 
other  things  fo  far,  as  they  tend  to  this:  love  the 
creature,  as  it  leads  to  the  Creator.  But  in  every 
jlep  you  take,  be  this  the  glorious  point  tha  ter- 
minates your  view.  Let  every  affe&ion,  and 
thought,  and  word,  and  affion,  be  fubordinate  to 
this.  Whatever  ye  defire  or  fear,  whatever  ye 
feek  or  fhun,  whatever  \e  think,  fpeak,  or  do,  be 
it  in  order  to  vour  happinefs  in  God,  the  foie  end, 
as  well  as  fource  + of  your  being/’ 

I concluded  in  thefe  words  : “ Here  is  the  fum 
of  the  p'erfeB  law,  the  circumcifion  of  the  heart. 
Let  the  fpirit  return  to  God  that  gave  it,  with  the 
whole  train  of  its  affetiions.  — Other  facrifices  from 
Its  he  would  not,  but  the  living  facrifice  of  the 
heart  bath  he  chofen.  Let  it  be  continually  of- 
fered up  to  God  through  Chrift,  in  flames  of 
holy  love.  And  let  no  creature  be  fuffered  to 
fit  a re  with  him  : for  he  is  a jealous  God.  His 
throne  will  he  not  divide  with  another:  he  will 
reign  without  a rival.  Be  no  defign,  no  defire 
admitted  there,  but  what  has  him  for  its  ultimate 
objeft.  This  is  the  way  wherein  thofe  children  of 
God  once  walked,  who  being  dead  Hill  fpeak  to 
us.  “ Defire  not  to  live  but  to  praife  his  name  : 
let  all  your  thoughts,  words,  and  works  tend  to 
his  glory.”  “ Let  your  foul  be  filled  with  fo  en- 
tile a lot  e to  him,  that  you  may  love  nothing 
A 4 but 

t Pages  10,  n,  12. 


[ 8 ] 

but  for  his  fake.”  “ Have  a pure,  intention  of 
heart,  a Itedfaft  regard  to  his  . glory  in  all  your 
a&ions.”  For  then,  and  not  till  then,  is  that 
mind  in  us,  which  was  alfo  in  Chrift  Jefus,  when 
in  every  motion  of  our  heart,  in  every  word  of 
our  tongue,  in  every  work  of  our  hands,  we 
“ purfue  nothing  but  in  relation  to  him,  and  in 
fubordination  to  his  pleafure:”  when  we  too 
neither  think,  nor  fpeak,  nor  a£i,  to  fulfil  our  own 
will , but  the  will  of  him  that  fent  us  : when,  whe- 
ther we  eat,  or  drink,  or  whatever  we  do,  we  do  it 
ail  to  the  glory  + of  God.” 

It  may  be  obferved,  this  fermon  was  compofed 
the  firft  of  all  my  writings  which  have  been 
publilhed.  This  was  the  view  of  religion  I then 
had,  which  even  then  I fcrupled  not  to  term  per- 
feElion.  This  is  the  view  I have  of  it  now,  with- 
out any  material  addition  or  dimunition.  And 
what  is  there  here,  which  any  man  of  under- 
flanding,  who  believes  the  bible,  can  objeft  to  ? 
What  can  he  deny,  without  flatly  contradicting 
the  fcripture  ? What  retrench,  without  taking 
from  the  word  of  God  ? 

7.  In  the  fame  fentiment  did  my  brother  and  I 
remain,  (with  all  thofe  young  gentlemen  in  de- 
rifion  termed  Methodijls)  till  we  embarked  for 
America,  in  the  latter  end  of  173 5.  It  was  the 
next  year,  while  I was  at  Savannah,  that  I wrote 
the  following  lines : 

Js 


+ Pages  17,  18. 


[ 9 ] 

Is  there  a thing  beneath  the  fun, 

That  ftrives  with  thee  my  heart  to  fhare  ? 

Ah  tear  it  thence,  and  reign  alone  l 
The  Lord  of  every  motion  there  ! 

In  the  beginning  of  the  year  1738,  as  I was 
returning  from  thence,  the  cry  of  my  heart  was, 

O grant  that  nothing  in  my  foul 
May  dwell,  but  thy  pure  love  alone ! 

0 may  thy  love  poffefs  me  whole, 

My  joy,  my  treafure,  and  my  crown ! 

Strange  fires  far  from  my  heart  remove  ; 

My  every  aB,  word,  thought,  be  love  ! 

1 never  heard  that  any  one  objected  to  this. 
And  indeed  who  can  objeftP  Is  not  this  the  lan- 
guage, not  only  of  every  believer,  but  of  every 
one  that  is  truly  awakened  P But  what  have  I 
wrote  to  this  day,  which  is  either  Itronger  or 
plainer  ? 

8- In  Auguft  following;  I had  a long  converfa- 
tion  with  Arvin  Gradin,  in  Germany.  After  he 
had  given  me  an  account  of  his  experience,  I 
defiled  him  to  give  me  in  writing  a definition  of 
the.  full  ajjurance  of  faith , which  he  did  in  the 
following  words  : 

“ Requies  in  fanguine  Chrifti ; firma  fiducia  in 
Deum  & perfuafio  de  gratia  divina  ; tranquillitas 
mentis  fumma,  atque  ferenitas  &pax,  cum  abfeiuia 
A 5 omnis 


C ]] 

omnis  defiderii  carnalis,  &ceflatione  peccatomm 
ctiam  internorurn.” 

“ Repofe  in  the  blood  of  Chrilf  ; a firm  confi- 
dence in  God  and  peffuafion  of  his  favour;  the 
higheft  tranquility,  ferenity,  and  peace  of  mind, 
with  a deliverance  from  every JleJhly  defire,  and  a 
cejfationof  all,  even  inward  fins.  ’ 

This  was  the  firfi  account  I ever  heard  from 
any  living  man,  of  what  I had  before  learned 
myfelf  from  the  oracles  of  God,  and  had  been 
praying  for  (with  the  little  compam  of  my  friends) 
and  expedling  ior  feveral  years, 

9.  In  1739,  my  brother  and  I publifhed  a vo- 
lume of  “ hymns  and  facred  poems. " In  many 
of  thefe  we  declared  our  fentiments  ftrongly  and. 
explicitly. 

p.  24.  Turn  the  full  (beam  of  nature’s  tide  : 
Let  all  our  actions  tend 
To.thee,  their  fcurce;.  thy  love  t lie  guide, 
Thy  glory  be  the  end. 

Earth  then  a fcale  to  heaven  (hall  be  : 
Senfe  fhall  point  out  the  road : 

The  creatures  ail  fhall  lead  to  thee, 

And  all  we  tafle  be  God. 

Again.  Lord,  arm  me  with  thy  Spirit's  might, 
Since  I am  call'd  by  thy  great  name  : 
In  thee  my  wandhing  thoughts  unite, 
Of  all  mv  works  be  thou  the  aim  : 

\ ‘ " ' ‘ - Thy 


C 11  J 


Thy  love  -attend  me  alt  my  days- 
And  my  foie  bufnejs  be  thy  praife. 

p.  122, 

Again*  Eager  for  thee,  I aik  and  pant. 

So  flrong  the  principle  divine 
Carries  me  out  with  fweet  conftraint,- 
Till  all  my  hallow  d foul  be  thine: 
Plung’d  in  the  God  head’s:  deep  ell  fea, 
And  loft  in  thine  immenlity  ! p.  123. 

Qncemore.  Heavenly  Adlan,  life  divine. 

Change  my  nature  into  thine:; 

Move  and  fpread  throughout  my  foul, 
Atluate  and  fill  the  whole*  p.  1^3, 

It'would  be  eafy  tocite  many  more  paftages  to 
the  fame  effect.  But  thefe  are  fuffieient  to  Ihew 
beyond  contradiction,  what  our  fentirnents  then 
were. 

10.  The  fir  ft  trad  I ever  wrote  exprefly  on  this 
fubjefl,  was  pubiiftied  in  the  latter  end  of  this 
year.  That  none  might  be  prejudiced  before 
they  read  it,  I gave  it  the  indifferent  title  of 
“ The  Character  of  a Methodiit.’’  In  this  I de- 
ft ribed  a perfxt  Chrijlian,  placing  in  the  Iront, 
Not  as  though  I had  already  obtained ~ Part  o-  it 
I fubjoin  without  any  alteration, 

“ A Mohodiji  is  one  who  loves  the  Lord  ins 
God  with  all  his  'neart,  with  all  his  foul,  v...vj'i  .;J] 
his  mind,  and  with  all-  ms  ftrengrh.  Gad-ivtlie 
joy  of  his  heart  and  the  defire  of  his  foul,  winch 
A 6 i s. 


[ »o  ] 

is  continually  crying  out,  “ Whom  have  I in  hea- 
ven but  thee,  and  there  is  none  upon  earth  whom  I 
. defir t befides  thee.  My  God  and  my  all  ! Thou 
art  the  flrength  of  my  heart,  and  my  portion  for 
ever.”  He  is  therefore  happy  in  God,  yea  al- 
ways happy,  as  having  in  him  a well  of  water, 
fpringing  up  into  everlafling  life,  and  overflow- 
ing his  foul  with  peace  and  joy.  Perfebl  love 
having  now  caji  out  fear,  he  rejoices  evermore. 
Yea,  his  joy  is  full,  and  all  his  bones  cry7  out. 
Biffed  be  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jfefus 
Chrifi,  coho  according  to  his  abundant  mercy  hath 
begotten  me  again,  unto  a living  hope  of  an  inheri- 
tance incorruptible  and  und  (filed,  re  fa  ved  in  hea- 
ven for  me. 

“ And  he  who  has  this  hope,  thus  full  of  im- 
mortality, in  every  thing  giveth  thanks,  asknowing 
that  this  (whatfoever  it  is,)  is  the  mil  of  God  in 
Chrifi  JeJus  concerning  him.  From  him  therefore 
he  cheerfully  receives  all,  faying,  Good  is  the 
will  of  the  Lord-,  and  whether  he  giveth  or  tak- 
eth  away,  equally  bleff.ng  the  name  of  the  Lord. 
Whether  in  eafe  or  pain,  whether  in  ficknefs  or 
health,  whether  in  life  or  dea  lt,  he  giveth  thanks 
from  the  ground  of  the  heart,  to  him  who  orders 
it  for  good  ; into  whofe  hands  he  hath  wholly 
committed  his  body  and  foul,  as  into  the  hands  of 
a faithful  Creator.  He  is  therefore  anxioufly 
careful Jor  nothing,  as  having  cafi  all  his  care  on 
him  that  car  elk  for  him , and?«  all  things  refling  on 

him 


[ *3  ] 

him  after  making  his  recjucft  known  to  him  with 
thankfgiving. 

“ For  indeed  he  prays  without  ceafing  : At 
all  times  the  language  of  his  heart  is  this,  “ Un- 
to thee  is  my  mouth,  though  without  a voice, 
and  my  filence  fpeaketh  unto  thee.”  His  heart 
is  lifted  up  to  God  at  all  times  and  in  all  places. 
In  this  he  is  never  hindered,  much  lefs  interrupt- 
ed by  anyperfon  or  thing.  In  retirement  or  com- 
pany, in  leifure,  bufinefs,  or  converfation,  his 
heat  t is  ever  with  the  Lord.  Whether  he  lie 
down  or  rife  up,  God  is  in  all  his  thoughts  : He 
walks  with  God  continually,  having  the  loving 
eve  of  his  foul  fixt  on  him,  and  every  where  fee- 
ing Him  that  is  mvifible . 

“ And  loving  God,  he  loves  his  neighbour  as 
himfelj  ; he  loves  every  man  as  his  own  foul.  He 
loves  his  enemies,  yea,  and  the  enemies  of  God. 
And  if  it  he  not  in  his  power,  to  do  good  to  them 
that  hate  him,  yet  he  ceafes  notto  pray  for  them , 
though  they  fpurn  his  love  and  ftill  df pit  fully 
ufe  him  and  per fecute  him. 

“ For  he  is  pure  m heart.  Love  has  purified 
his  heart  from  envy,  malice,  wrath,  and  every 
unkind  temper.  It  has  cleanfcd  him  from  pride, 
whereof  only  camcth  contention : and  he  hath  now 
put  on  bowels  of  mercies , kindnefs,  humblenefs  of 
mind,  meehnefs , long-fuff ering.  And  indeed  all  pof- 
fible  ground  for  contention,  on  his  part  is  cut  off. 
For  none  can  take  from  him  what  he  defires : 
Seeing  he  loves  not  the  world  nor  any  of  the  things 

of 


r h ] 


of  the  world  : But  all  his  dfireis  unto  God,  and  to 
the  remembrance  of  his  name. 

“ Agreeable  to  this  his  one  defire,  is  the  one 
defign  of  his  life,  namely,  To  do  nut  his  own  will , 
buithi  will  of  kirn  that  fent  him.  His  one  intention 
at  all  times  and  in  all  places  is,  not  to  pleafe 
himfelf,  but  him  whom  his  foul  loveth.  He 
hath  a fingle  eye.  And  becaufe  his  eye  isfingle,. 
his  whole  body  is  full  of  light.  The  whole  is  light, , 
as  when  the  bnpjit  fh  muff  of  a candle  doth  in- 
lighten  the  houfe.  God  reigns  alone  ; all  that  is  in 
the  foul  is  holinefs  to  the  Lord.  There  is  not  a 
motion  in  his  heart,  but  is  according  to  his  will. 
Every  thought  that  ariles  points  to  him,  and  is  in 
obedience  to  the  taw  of  Chnft. 

“ And  the  tree  is  known  by  its  fruits.  For  as 
he  loves  God,  fo  he  keeps  his  come  and  rents  : not 
only  fame  or  mojl  ol  them,  but  all,  from  the  leaf:  to 
the  gvealefl.  Fie  is  no'  content  to  ieep  the  whole 
law.  and  off  end  in  one  point,  bin  bas  in  ail  points  a 
confiaice  void  of  off  n.  e,  too  urn  God  and  toward  man „ 
Whatever  God  has  forbidden,  he  avoids,  what- 
ever God  has  enjoined  he  does.  He  > uns  the  way 
of  God's  commandments,  now  he  hath  ft  his  heart 
at  liberty.  It  is  his  glory  and  joy  lo  to  do  ; it  is 
his  daily  crown  of  rejoicing,  to  do  the  will  of 
God  on  earth,  as  it  is  done  in  heaven. 

“ All  the  commandments  of  God  he  ac- 
cordingly keeps,  and  that  with  all  his  might. 
For  his  obethcr.ee  is  tn  proportion  to  his 
love,  the  fource  from  whence  it  flows.  And 

therefore. 


[ } 

therefore,  loving  God  with  all  his  heart,  he 
ferves  him  with  all  his  ftrength.  He  contin- 
uall \ prefenis  his  foul  arid  body  a imngfacrifce,. 
■holy  acceptable  to  God  : entirely  and  without 
referve,  devoting  himfelf,  ah  he  has,  all  he  is  to 
his  glory.  All  the  talents  he  has,  he  conftantly 
employs  according  to  his  mailers  will:  every 
power  and  faculty  ol  his  foul,  every  member  of 
his  body. 

“By  confequence,  zi  Imtfoever  he  doth  it  is  all  to 
the  glory  of  God.  In  all  his  employments  of  every 
kind,,  henctonl,  aims  at  this  (which  is  implied 
in  having  a finale  eve)  but  actually  attains  it.  His 
bufinefs  and  his  refrefhments,  as  well  as  his  pray- 
ers, all  ferve  to  this  great  end.  Vv  hether  he 
fit  in  the!  houfe.  or  walk  by  the  way , whether  he 
he  down  or  rife  up,  he  is  promoting  in  all  he 
fpeaks  or  does,  the  one  bufinefs  of  his  life. 
Whether  he  put  on  his  apparel,  or  labour,  or 
eat  and  drink,  or  divert  himfelf  from  too  wafting 
labour,  it  all  tends  to  advance  the  glory  ol  God,, 
by  peace  and  goo'd-wiil  among  men.  His  one  in- 
variable rule  is  this,  Whafoevcr.ye  doin  word  or 
deed,  do  it  all  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jefas,  giving 
thanks  to  God  even  the  father  through  him. 

“ Nor  do  the  cuftoms  of  the  world  at  all  hinder 
his  running  the  race  which  is/et  before  him.  He 
cannot  therefore  lay  up  treafires  upon  earth,  no 
more  than  he  can  take  fire  into  his  bofom.  He 
cannot  J 'peak  evil  of  his  neighbour,  any  more 
than  he  can  lie  either  for  God  or  man.  He  cam 

DOST. 


[ >6  J 


not  utter  an  unkind  word  of  any  one  : for  love 
keeps  the  door  of  his  lips.  He  cannot  fprak  idle 
words:  no  corrupt  convei fation  ever  comes  out  of 
his  mouth ; as  is  all  that  is  not  good  to  the  ufe  of 
edifying , not  fit  to  uunifer  grace  to  the  hearers . 
But  whatfoever  things  are  pure,  whatfoever  things 
arc  lovely,  whatfoever  things  are  jufly  of  goecl 
report,  he  thinks,  fpeaks,  and  acts,  adorning  the 
dodlrine  c)  God  our  Saviour  in  all  things 

Thefe  are  the  very  words,  wherein  I largely 
declared,  for  the  firfl  time,  ray  fentiments  of 
Chriflian  Perfeftion.  And  is  it  not  eafy  to  fee, 
1.  That  this  is  the  very  point  at  which  I aimed 
all  along  from  the  rear  172.5  ? And  more  deter- 
minate!)’ from  the  year  1730,  w'hen  I began  to 
be  homo  unites  hbn,  a man  of  one  book,  regard- 
ing none  (comparatively)  but  the  bible  ? Is  it 
not  eafy  to  fee,  2.  That  this  is  the  very  fame  doc- 
trine, whicl\  I believe  and  teach  at  this  day  ? 
Not  adding  one  point  either  to  that  inward  or 
outward  holinefs,  which  I maintained  fix  and 
twenty  years  ago?  And  it  is  the  fame,  w’hich  bv 
the  grace  of  God,  I have  continued  to  teach  from 
that  time  till  now  ; as  will  appear  to  ever)’  im- 
partial perfon,  from  the  extracts  fubjoined  be- 
low’. 

11.  I do  not  know’ that  any  rvriter  has  made 
any  objeftion  again!!  that  tra£t,  to  this  day.  And 
for  fome  time  I did  not  find  much  oppofition 
upon  the  head,  at  leal!,  not  from  ferious  perfons. 
But  after  a time,  a cry  arofe,  and  (what  a little 

furprized 


[ *7  ] 

furprized  me)  among  religious  men,  who  affirm- 
ed, not  that  1 dated  perfection  wrong,  but  that 
“ there  is  no  pefBion  on  earth  nay,  and  fell 
vehemently  on  my  brother  and  me,  for  affirming 
the  contrary.  We  fcarce  expeCied  fo  rosgh  an 
attack  from  thefe : efpecially  as  we  were  clear 
on  juftification  by  faith,  and  careful  to  afcribe 
the  whole  of  falvation  to  the  mere  grace  of  God. 
But  what  mod  furprized  us  was,  that  we  were 
faid  to  “ diffionour  Chrift,”  by  afferting  that  he. 
J'aveth  to  the  uttermoj}.  ; by  maintaining,  he  will 
reign  in  our  hearts  alone,  and  fubdue  all  things 
to  himfelf  1 

12.  I think  it  was  in  the  latter  end  of  the  year 
174°>  that  I had  a converfation  with  Dr.  Gibfon, 
then  bifhop  of  London,  at  Whitehall.  He  afked 
me,  What  I meant  by  perfection  ? I told  him 
without  any  difguife  or  referve.  When  I ceafed 
fpeaking,  he  faid,  “ Mr.  Wefley,  if  this  be  all 
you  mean,  publiffi  it  to  all  the  world.  If  any 
one  then  can  confute  what  you  fay,  he  may  have 
free  leave."’  I anfwered,  “ My  Lord,  I will,” 
and  accordingly  wrote  and  publilhed  the  fermon 
on  Chr.iflian perfection. 

In  this  “ I endeavoured  to  fhew,  l.  In  what 
fenfe  Chriftians  are  not,  2.  In  what  fenfe  they  are 
perfect. 

I.  In  what  fenfe  they  are  not  : they  are  not 
pefeB  in  knowledge.  They  are  not  free  from 
ignorance,  no  nor  from  mijtake.  We  are  no  more 
to  expecd  any  living  man  to  be  injallible  than  to 

be 


[ r8  ] 

be  omnifcient.  They  are  not  free  from  infrmi- 
hes  ; fuch  as  weaknefs  or  flownefs^  of  under!  end- 
ing, irregular  quicknefs  or  heaviness  of  imagina- 
tion. Such  in  another  kind  are,  impropriety  of 
langu  ungracefulnels  of  pronunciation  to 
winch  one  might  add  a thoufand  namelefs  detects 
either  in  converfation  or  behaviour.  From  fuch 
infirmities  as  thefe  none  are  perfectly  freed,  till 
their  fpii  itretums  to  God.  Neither  can  we  expect 
till  then  to  be  wholly  freed  from  temptation  ; 
for  the  fer&ant  is  not  above  his  nuj/er.  But  neither 
is  there  any  abfolute  perfeilion  on  earth.'  There 
is  no  perfection  of  degrees,  none  which  does  not 
admit  of  a continual  increafe. 

1 1 . In  what  fenfe  then  are  they  perfeCl  ? Obferve 
we  are  not  now  fpeakingof  babes  in  C’v  ift  but 
adult  Chriftians.  But  even  babes  in  Chrift  are  fo 
far  perfect  as  not  to  commit  fin.  This  St.  John 
affirms  exprefsly  ; and  it  cannot  be  difproved  by 
the  examples  of  the  Oki  Teftataent.  For  what  if 
the  holiefi.  of  the  antient  Jews  did  fometimes  com- 
mit fm  ? We  cannot  infer  from  hence,  that  “ ail 
Chriftians  do  and  muft  commit  fin  as  long  as  they 
live.” 

But  does  not  the  fcripiure  fay,  A juft  man  fin- 
neth  feven  times  a day  ? It  does  not.  Indeed  it 
fays,  A juft  man  fa'lcth  feven  times.  But  this  is 
quite  another  thing.  For,  firft,  the  words  a day 
are  not  in  the  text.  Secondly,  here  is  no  men- 
tion of  falling  into,  fin  at  all.  What  is  here  men- 
tioned is , failing  into  temporal  affliction. 


“ But 


[ *9  ] 

“ But  elfewhere  Solomon  fays,  There  is  no 
man  that  Jinneth  not.”  Doubtlefs  thus  it  was  in 
the  days  of  Solomon  : yea,  “ and  from  Solomon 
to  Chrift  there  was  then  no  man  that  finned  not.’’ 
But  whatever  was  the  cafe  of  thofe  under  the 
law,  we  may  fafely  affirm  with  St.  John,  that 
fmce  thegofpel  was  given,  he  that  is  born  of  God 
Jinneth  not. 

The  privileges  of  Chr'iftians  are  in  no  wife  to 
be  meafured,  by  what  the  Old  Teftament  records 
concerning  thofe  who  were  under  the  Jewifh  dif- 
penfation  : feeing  the  jutnefs  of  time  is  now  come  ; 
the' Holy  Gkofi  is  now  given-,  the  great Jalvation 
of  God  is  now  brought  to'  men  by  the  revelation  of 
-Jefus  Chrijl.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  now 
let  up  on  earth,  concerning  which  the  Spirit  ot 
■God  declared  of  old  time,  ffo  far  is  David  from 
being  the  pattern  or  fiandard  of  Chriftian  per- 
fection] He  that  is  feeble  among  them  at  that  day 
JhalL  be  as  David,  and  .the  houfe  of  David Jkall  be 
as  >he  angel  of  the  Lord  before  them,  Zecli.  -xii.  8. 

“ But  the  apofUes  themfelves  committed  fin,  Pe- 
ter by  diffembling,  Paul  by  his  fharp  contention 
with  Barnabas.”  Suppofe  they  did,  will  you  argue 
thus:  if  two  of  the-apoftles  once  committed  fin, 
~then  a'l  other  Chrifians  in  all  ages,  do  and  mult 
commit  fin  as  long  as  they  live  ? Nay,  God  for- 
bid we.fhould-. .thus  fpeak.  No  neceflity  of  fin 
was  laid  upon  them  : the  grace  of  God  was  fine- 
ly fufficient  for  them.  And  it  is  fuffieient  for  us 
at  this  day. 


But 


N, 


r «»  ] 


\ 


But  St.  James  fays,  “ In  many  things  we  offend 
all.  True  : but  who  are  the  perfons  here  fpok- 
cn  of  ? W hy,  thofe  many  majlers  or  teachers 
whom  God  had  net  fent  : not  the  apoflle  him- 
folf,  nor  any  real  Chriftian.  In  the  word 
we  (Uu'd  by  a figure  of  fpeech,  common  in  all 
other,  as  well  as  the  infpired  writings),  the  apof- 
tle  could  not  poffibly  include  himfelf,  or  any 
other  true  believer,  appears,  firfl  from  the  ninth 
t ei  fe,  Therewith  blefs  we  God,  and  therewith  curfe 

e men.  Surely  not  we  apojl  es  ! Not  we  be- 
lievers ! Secondly,  from  the  words  preceding 
the  text:  Aly  brethren,  be  not  many  majlers  or 
feacheis,  knowing  that  wejhall  receive  the  greater 
condemnation . For  in  many  things  we  offend  all. 
v*  e!  Who  ? Not  the  apoftles  nor  true  believers, 
but  they  who  were  to  receive  the  greater  condem- 
nation, becaufe  of  thofe  many  offences.  Nay, 
thirdly,  the  verfe  itfelf  proves,  that  we  offend  all, 
cannot  be  fpoken  either  of  all  men,  or  of  all 
Chrifiians.  For  in  it  immediately  follows  the 
mention  of  a man  who  offends  not , as  the  we  firft 
mentioned  did  : from  whom  therefore  he  is  pro- 
feffedly  contradifiinguifhed,  and  pronounced  a 
per  fid:  man. 

“ But  St.  John  himfelf  fays,  If  we  fay  that  we 
have  no  fin,  we  deceive  ourftlvcs.  And,  if  we  fay 
we  have  not  finned,  we  make  him  altar,  and  his 


word  is  not  in  us.'' 


1 anfwer,  1.  The  tenth  verfe  fixes  the  fenfe  of 
the  eighth.  If  we fay  we  have  no  fin,  in  the  former, 

being 


C 21  ] 

being  explained  by  If  we  fay  we  have  not  finned, 
in  the  latter  verfe  : 2.  The  point  under  confidera- 
tion  is  not,  whether  we  have  or  have  not  finned 
heretofore : and  neither  of  thefe  verfes  afferts, 
that  we  do  fin  or  commit  fin  now : 3.  The  ninth 
verfe  explains  both  the  eighth  and  tenth,  If  we 
confefs  our  fins,  he  is  faithful  and  juft,  to forgive 
our  fins,  and  to  cleanfe  us from  all  unrighteoufiefs. 
As  if  he  had  faid,  I have  before  affirmed,  The 
blood  of  Ckrifl  cleanfthfrom  all  fin.  And  no  man 
can  fay,  I need  it  not:  I have  no  fin  to  be  cleanf- 
ed  from.  If  we  fay  zue  have  no  fn , that  we  have 
not  fnned,  we  deceive  our  fives,  and  make  God  a 
liar.  But  if  we  confefs  our  fms , he  is  faithful 
andjuf,  not  only  to  forgive  us  our  fins,  but  aifo 
to  cleanfe  us  from  all  unrighteoufiefs , that  we  may 
go  and  fin  no  more.  In  conformity  therefore 
both  to  the  doclrine  of  St.  John,  and  the  whole 
tenor  of  the  New  Teflament,  we  fix  this  conclu- 
fion,  A Chriftian  is  fo  far  perfeft,  as  not  to  com- 
mit fin. 

This  is  the  glorious  privilege  of  every  Chrif- 
tian, yea,  though  he  be  'but  a babe  in  Chriffi 
But  it  is  only  of  grown  Chriftians  it  can  be  af- 
firmed, they  are  in  fuch  afenfe  perfect,  as  fecond- 
ly,  to  be  freed  from  evil  thoughts  and  evil  tem- 
pers. Firft,  from  evil  or  finful  thoughts.  Indeed 
whence  fhould  they  fpring  ? Out  of  the  heart,  of 
man,  if  at  all,  proceed  mil  thoughts.  If  therefore 
the  heart  be  no  longer  evil,  then  evil  thoughts  no 
longer  proceed  out  of  it.  For  a good  tree  cannot 
bring  forth  evil  fruit. 


And 


[ « 1 

And  as  they  are  freed  from  evil  thoughts,  fo 
likewife  from  evil  tempers.  Ever)  one  of  thefe 
can  fay  with  St.  Paul,  I am.  crucified  uith  chrift : 
never  tjhelefs  I live : yet  not  I,  but  C'l.ijt  liveth  in 
me : words  that  man  deftly  defcribe  a deliverance 
from  inward,  as  well  as  from  outward  fin.  This 
isexpreft  both  negatively,  I live  not ; my  evil 
nature,  the  body  of  fin  is  deflroved  : and  pofi- 
tively,  Cknfi  'forth  in  me,  and  therefore  all  that 
is  holy,  and  juft,  and  good.  Indeed,  both  thefe, 
Ckrifl  liveth  in  e,  and  I live  not , are  itjfep  r.  My 
connected.  For  what  communion  hath  light 
with  darkneis,  or  Chrift  with  Behai .?  ’ 

He  therefore  who  liveth  in  thefe  Chi  iftians, 
hath  purified,  then  hearts  by  faith : infomuch  that 
every  one  that  has  Chrift  in  him,  the  hope  pf 
glory,  punfeth  him  if  even  as  he  is  pure.  He  is 
purified  from  pride:  for  Chrift  was  lowly  in 
heart.  He  is  pure  horn  defire  and  fell-will  : for 
Chrift  defiled  only  to  do  the  will  of  his  Father. 
And  he  is  pure  from  anger,  in  the  common 
fenfe  of  the  word  ; for  Chrift  was  meek  and 
gentle.  I fav,  in  the  comon  fenfe  of  the  word; 
for  lie  is  angry  al  fin,  while  he  is  grieved  for 
the  finner.  He  feels  a difplicency  at  every 
offence  againfl  God,  but  only  tender  companion 
to  the  offender. 

Thus  doth  Jefus  fave  his  people  from  their  fins, 
not  only  from  outward  fins,  but  from  the  fins  of 
their  hearts.  “ True,  fay  fame,  but  not  till  death, 
not  in  this  world.”  Nav,  St.  John  fays,  Herein 

is 


[ ] 


is  -out'  love  made  perfeB,  that  we  may  have  boldnejs , 
in  the  day  oj  judgment,  becaufe  as  he  is  fo  are  we 
in  this  world.  The  apoille  here,  bevond  all  con- 
tradidfion,  fpeaks  of  himfelfand  other  living  Chrif- 
tians,  of  whom  he  flat!  affirms,  that  not  only  at 
or  after  death,  but  in  this  world  they  are  as  their 
m after. 

Exadily  agreeable  to  this  are  his  words  in  the 
ftrft  chapter  ; God  is  light,  and  in  him  is  no  dark- 
v.efs  at  ail.  If  we  walk,  in  the  light,  as  he  is  in  the 
light,  we  have  fellowjlnp  one  with  another,  and  the 
Mood  of  Jefus  Cknft  his  Son  cleanfeth  us  from  all 
Jin.  And  again  : If  we  conjefs  our  fins,  he  is  faith- 
ful andju/t  to  forgive  us  oui  fins  and  to  cleartfeus . 
from,  all  unrighteoufhfs.  Now  it  is  evident  the  a- 
poftle  here  fpeaks  of  a deliverance  wrought  in  this 
world.  For  he  faith  not  the  blood  of  Chrjft  will 
clean fe,  (at  the  hour  death,  or  in  the  day  of  judg- 
ment) but  it  cleanfeth  at  the  time  prefent,  us  liv- 
ing Chriflians,  from  all  fin.  And  it  is  equally 
evident,  that  if  an\  fin  remain,  we  are  not 
cleanfed  from  all  fin.  If  any  unrighteoufnefs 
remain  in  the  foul,  it  is  not  cleanfed  from  all 
unrighteoufnefs.  Neither  let  any  fay,  that- 
this  relates  to  juftifi cation  only,  or  the  cleanf- 
ing  us  from  the  guilt  of  fin  : firft,  becauie  this  is 
confou  ding  together  what  the  apoftle  clearly  dif- 
tinguifhes,  who  mentions  firft,  to  forgive  us  our  fi ns, 
and  then,  to  clean  fe  us  from  all  unrighteoufnefs : 
fecondly,  becaufe  this  is  afferling  juftification  by 

works 


[ 24  ] 

works  in  the  ftrongeft  fenfe  poflible  ; it  is  mak- 
ing all  inward,  as  well  as  all  outward  holinefs,  ne- 
ceflarily  previousto  juftification.  For  if  the  cleanf- 
ing  here  fpoken  of,  is  no  other  than  the  cleanfing 
us  front  the  guilt  of  fin,  then  we  are  not  cleanf- 
edfrorn  guilt,  that  is,  not  juftified,  unlefs  oncon- 
-dition  of  walking  in  the  light  as  he  is  in  the  light. 
It  remains  then,  that  Chriftians  are  faved  in  this 
world  from  all  fin,  from  all  unrighteoufnefs : that 
they  are  now  in  fuch  a fenfe  perfeft  as  not  to 
commit  fin,  and  to  be  freed  from  evil  thoughts 
and  evil  tempers.” 

It  could  not  be  but  that  a difcourfe  of  this  kind, 
which  direftly  contradifted  the  favourite  opinion 
of  many  who  were  efteemedbv  others,  and  poffi- 
blv  efteemed  themfelves  fome  of  the  belt  of 
Chriftians,  (svhereas  if  thefe  things  were  fo, 
they  were  not  Chriftians  at  all)  fhould  give  no 
fmall  offence.  Many  anfwers  or  animadverfions 
therefore  were  expcfted  ; but  I was  agreeablv  dif- 
appoinetd.  I do  not  know  that  any  appeared  ; fo 
I wen  quietly  on  my  way. 

13.  Not  long  after,  I think  in  the  fpring,  1741, 
we  publifhed  a fecond  volume  of  h\  mns.  As  the 
doftrine  was  ftill  much  mifunder'lood,  and  confe- 
rtuently  mifreprefented,  I judged  it  needful  to  ex- 
plain yet  farther  upon  the  head,  which  was  done 
in  the  preface  to  it  as  follows  : 

“ This  great  gift  of  God,  the  falvation  of  our 
fouls,  is  no  other,  than  the  image  of  God,  frefh 
damped  on  our  hearts.  It  is  a renewal  0}  eehevers, 
in  the /pint  of  their  minds,  ajter  the  liken  fs  cj  him 

that 


C 2<5  ] 

that  created , God  hath  now  laid  the  ax  unto  the 
root  of  the  tree , purifying  their  hearts  by  faith , 
and  “ cleanfing  all  the  thoughts  of  their  hearts  by 
the  infpiration  -of  his  holy  Spirit.”  Having  this 
hope,  that  they  fhall  fee  God  as  he  is,  they 
purify  tkenfelves  even  as  he  is  pare,  and  are 
holy, -as  he  that  hath  called  them  is  holy,  in  all  man- 
ner of  converfation.  Not  that  they  have  already 
attained  all  that  they  fhall  attain,,  either  are 
already  (in  this  fenfe)  per  jell.  But  they  daily  go 
on fromfrength  to  ftrength  ; beholding  now,  as  in 
a glafs  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  they  are  changed  into 
the  fame  image,  from  glory  La  glory,  by  the fpirit 
of  the  Lord. 

“ And  where  the  fpirit  of  the  Lord  is,  there 
is  liberty,  fuch  liberty,  from  the  law  of  fin 
and  death , as  the  children  of  this  world  will  not 
believe,  tho’  a man  declare  it  unto  them.  The  Son 
hath  made  them  fee  who  are  thus  born  of  God, 
from  that  great  root  of  fin  and  bitternefs  pride . 
1 hey  feel  that  all  their fuffciency  is  of  God,  that  it 
is  he  alone  who  is  in  all  their  thoughts,  and  work- 
eth  in  them  both  to  will  and  to  do,  of  his  good  plea- 
fur  e.  They  feel,  that  it  is  not  they  that /peak  but 
the  fpirit  of  their  Father  who  fpealeth  in  them, 
and  that  whatfoever  is  done  by  their  hands,  the 
Father  who  is  in  them,  he  doth  the  works.  So  that 
God  is  to  them  all  in  all,  and  they  are  nothing 
in  his  fight.  They  are  freed  from  felf-will,  as 
defiring  nothing  but  the  holy,  and  perfeft  will  of 
Vol.  XXIV.  B God: 


[ s6  ] 

God:  not  fupplies  in,  want,  net  + cafe  in  pain, 
not  life,  or  death,  or  any  creature,  but  contin- 
ually crying  in  their  inmoft  foul,  “ Father,  thv 
will  he  done."  They  are  freed  from  evil  thoughts, 
fo  that  they  cannot  enter  into  them,  no  not  for  a 
moment.  Aforetime  when  an  evil  thought  came 
in,  they  looked  up  and  it  vanifhed  away.  But 
now  it  does  not  come  in,  there  beine  no  room 
for  this,  in  afoul  which  is  full  of  God.  They  are 
freed  from  zvand rings  in  prayer.  Whenfoever 
they  pour  out  their  hearts  in  a more  immediate 
manner  before  God,  they  have  ± no  thought  of  any 
thing  pall,  or  abfent,  or  to  come,  but  of  God  alone. 
In  times  paft,they  had  wandring  thoughts  darted  in, 
which  yet  fled  away  like  fmoke  : but  now  that 
finoke  does  not  rife  at  all.  They  have  no  fear 
or  doubt,'  either  as  to  their  ftate  in  general  or  as 
to  any  § particular  affion.  The  unchon  from 
the  Holy  One  teacheth  ||  them  every  hour,  what 
they  fhall  do  and  what  they  fhall  fpeak.  Nor 
therefore  have  they  any  t need  to  reafon  concern- 
ing  it.  They  are  in  one  fenfe  freed  from  tempta 
irons  : for  tho’  numberlefs  temptations  Jly  about 
them,  yet  they  i trouble  them  not.  At  all  times  their 
fouls  are  even  and  calm,  their  hearts  are  fledfaft 

and- 

+ This  is  too  ftrong,  Oar  Lore!  lumfelf  defired  cafe  in  pain. 
Ke  afked-for  it,  only  with  refignatiop  : A 'ot  as,  l will,  I defire, 
b\it  as  ih.au  wilt. 

$ This  is  far  too  ftrong.  See  the  fermon  or.  "'andnrg  Thoughts. 
^ Frequently  this  is"the  cafe  : but  onlv/era  t r.c.  , 

|]  For  a time  it  maybe  fo  : but  not  always. 
t Sometimes  they  have  no  need  : at  other  times  they  have, 
f Sometimes  they  do  not ; at  other  times  they  do,  and  that 
gi  ievoufly. 


[ 2 7 ] 

and  unmoveable.  Their  peace,  flowing  as  a 
river,  paffeth  all  underjlanding , and  they  rejoice 
with  joy  unfpeakable  and  full  of  glory.  For  \ they 
are  fealed  by  the  Spirit  unto  the  day  of  redemption, 
having  the  witnefs  in  themfelves,  that  there,  is 
laid  up for  them  a crown  of  righteoufnefs,  which 
the  Lord  will  give  them  in  that  day. 

“ Not  chat  every  one  is  a child  of  the  devil, 
till  he  is  thus  renewed  in  love.  On  the  contra- 
ry, whoever  has  “ a fure  confidence  in  God, 
that  through  the  merits  of  Chriff,  his  fins  are 
forgiven,”  he  is  a child  of  God,  and  if  he  abide 
in  him,  an  heir  of  all  the  promifes.  Neither 
ought  he  m any  wife  to  cajlaway  his  confidence  ox 
to  deny  the  faith  he  has  received,  becaufe  it  is 
weak,  or  becaufe  it  is  tried  with  fire,  fo  that  his 
foul  is  in  heavinefs  through  manifold  temptations. 

“ Neither  dare  we  affirm,  as  fome  have  done, 
that  all  this  falvation  is  given  at  once.,  Thdre  is 
indeed  an  injlantaneous  (as  well  as  a gradual ) 
work  of  God  in  his  children  : and  there  wants 
not,  we  know,  a cloud  of  witnefles,  who  have 
received,  in  one  moment,  either  a clear  fenfe  of 
the  forgivenefs  of  their  fins,  or  the  abiding  wit- 
nefs of  the  Holy  Spirit*  But  we  do  not  know  a 
fingle  inftance,  in  any  place,  of  a perfon’s  re- 
ceiving in  one  and  the  fame  moment,  remiflion  of 
fins,  the  abiding  witnefs  of  the  fpirit,  and  a new, 
a clean  heart. 

B 2 Indeed 

§ Not  all  who  are  faved  from  fin;  many  of  them  have  not  at- 
tained it  yet. 


C *8  ] 

Indeed  how  God  may  work,  we  cannot  tell : 
but  the  general  manner  wherein  he  does  work  is 
this  : thofe  who  once  trulled  in  themfelves,  that 
they  were  righteous,-  that  they  were  ruh,  and 
iucreafed  in  goods,  and  had  need  of  nothing,  are 
by  the  Spirit-  of  God  applying  his  word,  con- 
vinced that  they  are  poor  and  naked.  All  the 
things  that  they  have  done  are  brought  to  their 
remembrance,  andfetin  array  before  them,  lb 
that  they  fee  the  wrath  of  God  hanging  over 
their  heads,,  and  feel  that  they  deferve  the  dam- 
nation of  hell.  In  their  trouble  they  cry  unto 
the  Lord,  and  he  fhews  them  that  he  hath  taken 
away  their  fins,  and  opens  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
in  their  hearts  ; righteoufnefs,  and  peace,  and  joy 
in  the  Holy  Ghojl.  Sorrow -and  pain  are  fled  away, 
and  fin  has  no  more  dominion  over  them.  Know- 
ing they  are  jujlified  freely  through  faith  in  his 
blood,  they  have  peace  with  God  through  Jefus 
Chriji-,  they  rejoice  in  hope  oj  the  glory  of  God, 
and  the  love  of  God  is  Jhed  abroad  in  their  hearts. 

“ In  this  peace  they  remain  for  days,  or  weeks, 
or  months,  and  commonly  fuppofe,  they  fhall 
riot  know  war  any  more:  till  fome.  of  their  old 
enemies,  their  bofom  .fins,,  or  .the  fin  which  did 
moll  eafilv  befet  them,  (perhaps  anger  or  defire) 
aflault  them  again,  and  tbruft  fore  at  them  that 
they  may  fall.  Then  arifes  fear,  that  they  fhall 
not  endure  to  the  end,  and  often  doubt,  whe- 
ther God  lias  not  forgotten  them,  or  whe- 
ther they  did  not  deceive  themfelves,  in  think- 


ing 


c 29  r 

ing  their  fins  were  forgiven.  Under  thefe  cloud?, 
efpeciallv  if  they  reafon  with  the  devil,  they  go 
mourning  all  the  day  long.  But  it  is  feldom  long 
before  their  Lord  anfwers  for  himfelf,  fending 
them  the  Holy  Ghoft  to  comfort  them,  to  bear 
witnefs  continually  with  their  fpirits,  that  they 
are  the  children  of  God.  Then  they  are  indeed 
meek  and  gentle  and  teachable,  even  as  a little 
child.  And  now  + firll  do  they  fee  the  ground 
of  their  heart,  which  God  before  would  not  dif. 
clofe  unto  them,  left  the  foul  fhould  fail  before 
him,  and  the  fpirit  which  he  had  made.  Now 
they  fee  all  the  hidden  abominations  there,  the 
depths  of  pride,  felf-will  and  hell  : yet  having 
the  witnefs  in  themfelves,  Thou  art  an  heir  of 
God,  a joint-heir  with  Chrift,  even  in  the  midft 
of  this  fiery  trial,  which  continually  heightens 
both  the  ftrong  fenfe  they  then  have,  of  their 
inability  to  help  themfelves,  and  the  inexpref* 
fible  hunger  they  feel  after  a full  renewal  in  his 
image,  in  righteoufnefs  and  true  holinefs,  - Then 
God  is  mindful  of  the  defire  of  them  that  fear 
him,  and  gives  them  a fingle  -eye,  and  a pure 
heart : he  ftamps  upon  them  his  own  image  and 
fuperfeription  ; he  ereateth  them  anew  in  Chrift 
Jefus : he  cometk  unto  them  with  his  Son  and 
Blelfed  Spirit,  and  fixing  his  abode  in  their  fouls, 
B 3 bringeth 

+ Is  it  not  aftonifhing,  that  while  this  book  is  extant,  which 
was  publiihtd  four  and  twenty  years  ago,  any  one  thould  face  we 
dawn,  That  this  is  a new  dotuine,  and  what  I never  taught  be- 


fore, 


[ 3«  ] 

bringeth  them  into  the  rejl  which  remainetk  foV 
the  people  of  God.1' 

Here  I cannot  but  remark,  1.  That  this  is  the 
ftrongeft  account  we  ever  gave  of  Chriftian  per- 
fection ; indeed  too  ftrong  in  more  than  one 
particular,  as  is  obferved  in  the  notes  annexed  ; 
2.  That  there  is  nothing  which  we  have  fince 
advanced  upon  the  fubje£l,  either  in  verfe  or 
profe,  which  is  not  either  direCtly  or  indireCtly 
contained  in  this  preface.  So  that  whether  our 
prefent  doCh  ine  be  right  or  wrong,  it  is  how- 
ever the  fame  which  we  taught  from  the  begin- 
ning. 

14.  I need  not  give  additional  proofs  of  this, 
by  multiplying  quotations  from  the  volume  it- 
i'elf.  It  may  fuffice,  to  cite  part  of  one  hymn 
only,  the  laft  in  that  volume. 

Lord,  I believe  a reft  remains 
To  all  thy  people  known, 

A reft,  wher epure  enjoyment  reigns. 

And  thou  art  lov'd  alone: 

A reft  where  all  our  foul’s  defire 
Is  fixt  on  things  above  : 

Where  doubt,  and  pain,  and  fear  expire, 
Call  out  by  perfect  love. 

From  every  evil  motion  freed 
(The  Son  hath  made  us  free) 

On  all  the  powers  of  hell  we  tread 
In  glorious  liberty. 


Safe 


[ 3*  3 

Safe  in  the  way  of  life,  above 
Death,  ear  th,  and  hell  we  rife : 

We  find,  when  perfeBed  in  love, 

Our  long-fcught  paradife. 

O that  I now  the  reft  might  know, 

Believe  and  enter  in  ! 

Now,  Saviour  were,  the  power  beftow, 

And  let  me  ceafe  from  fin  ! 

Remove  this  hardnefs  from  my  heart. 

This  unbelief  remove : 

To  me  the  reft  of faith  impart, 

The  fabbath  of  thy  love. 

Come,  O my  Saviour,  come  away  ! 

Into  my  foul  defcend  ! 

No  longer  from  thy  creature  ftay, 

My  author  and  my  end. 

The  blifs  thou  haft  for  me  prepar’d 
No  longer  be  delay’d  : 

Come,  my  exceeding  great  reward, 

For  whom  I firft  was  made. 

Come  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Glroft, 

And  feal  me  thine  abode  ! 

Let  all  I am  in  thee  be  loft  : 

Let  all  be  loft  in  God! 

Can  any  thing  be  more  clear,  than  1.  That 
here  alfo  is  as  full  and  high  a falvation  as  we  have 
ever  fpoken  of  ? 2.  That  this  is  fpoken  of,  as 
receivable  by  mere  faith,  and  as  hindred  only  by 
unbelief  ? g.'  That  this  faith,  and  confequently 
the  falvation  which  it  brings,  is  fpoken  of  as 
B 4 given 


[ 3s  1 

given  in  an  injlant ? 4.  That  it  is  fuppofed  that 
inftant  may  be  now  ; that  we  need  not  flay  ano- 
ther moment ; that  now,  the  very  now  is  the  ac- 
cepted time  ! Now  is  the  day  oj  this  full  falvation! 
And,  laftly,  that,  if  any  fpeak  otherwife,  he  is 
the  perfon  that  brings  new  doCtrine  among  us  ? 

15.  About  a year  after,  namely  in  the  year 
1742,  we  publifhed  another  volume  of  hymnsu 
The  difpute  being  now  at  the  height,  we  fpoke 
upon  the  head  more  largely  than  ever  before. 
Accordingly  abundance  of  the  hymns  in  this  vo- 
lume treat  exprefsly  on  the  fubjeCt.  And  fo 
does  the  preface,  which  as  it  is  fhort,  it  may  not 
be  amifs  to  infert  entire. 

“ 1.  Perhaps  the  general  prejudice  againfi 
Chriftian  perfection,  may  chiefly  arife  from  a 
mifapprehenfion  of  the  nature  of  it.  We  wil- 
lingly allow,  and  continually  declare,  there  is 
no  fach  perfedion  in  this  life,  as  implies  either  a 
difpenfation  from  doing  good,  and  attending  all 
the  ordinances  of  God,  or  a feedom  from  ignor- 
ance, mi  Hake,  temptation,  and  a thoufand  in- 
firmities neceffarily  connected  with  flefh  and 
blood. 

“ 2.  Firft,  we  not  only  allow,  but  earneflly 
contend,  that  there  is  no  perfection  in  this  life, 
which  implies  any  difpenfation  from  attending 
all  the  ordinances  of  God,  or  from  doing  good 
unto  all  men,  while  we  have  time,  though  fpecial- 
ly  unto  the  houjlwld  ofjaitli.  We  believe,  that 
not  only  the  babes  in  Chrift,  who  have  newly 

found 


[ 33  ] 

found  redemption  in  his  blood,  But  thofe  alfo 
who  are  grown  up  into  par  ft  El  men,  are  indifpen- 
fably  obliged,  as  often  as  they  have  opportunity, 
to  eat  bread  and  drink  wine  in  remembrance  of  him, 
and  to  fear'ch  the  feriptures : by  fajiing,  as  well  as 
temperance,'  in- keep  their  bodies  under,  and  bring 
them  into  [abjection  : and  above  all,  to  pour  out 
their  fouls  in  prayer,  both  fecretly,  and  in  die 
great  congregation. . 

“ 3.  We -fecondly  believe,  that  there  is-  no 
fuch  pefe&idn  in  this  life,  as  implies  an  entire 
deliverance,  - either  from  ignorance,  or  miftake, 
in  things  not  effential  to  falvation,  or  from  ma- 
nifold temptations,  or  from- numberlefs  infirmi- 
ties, wherewith  the  corruptible  body  more  or 
Ids  preffesdown  the  fold.  We  cannot  find  any 
ground  in  feripture  to  fuppofe,  that  any  inhabi- 
tant of  an  houfe  of  clay,  is  wholly  exempt,- ei- 
ther from  bodily  infirmities,  or  from  ignorance 
of  manv  things;  or  to  imagine  any  is  incapable 
of  miftake,  or  falling  into  divers  temptations. 

4.  “ But  whom  then  do  you  mean  by  one  then: 
isperfeS?  We  mean  one  in  whom  is  the  mind- 
which  was  in  Cknf),  anti  who  fo  walketh  as  Chiiji. 
walked : a man  that  hath  clean  hands -and  a pure 
heart,  or  that  is  cleanfed  from  all  filthinrfs'  of 
jlefh  and f pint  : one  in  whom  is  no  ccccfon  of 
fumbling,  and  who  accordingly  .doth'  not  commit 
fin.  To  declare  this  a little  more  particularly  r 
we  underhand  by  that  feriptura!  exprefliOn^,  a 
perfect  man,  one  in  whom  God  hath  fulfilled  his- 
B 5 faithful 


[ 34  ] 

faithful  word,  From  all  your  flehinefs  and  from 
all  your  idols  I will  cleanfe  you  : I will  alfo  fave 
youfrom  all  your  uncleanneffes.  We  underhand 
hereby  one  whom  God  hath  Janclifed  through- 
out, in  body,  foul,  and fpirit : one  who  walketh  in 
the  light  as  he  is  in  the  light,  in  whom  is  no  dark- 
nefs  at  all-,  the  blood  of  Jefus  Chrijl  his  Son, 
having  cleanfed  him from  all  fin. 

“ g.  This  man  can  now  teftify  to  all  mankind, 
I am  crucified  with  Chrif : neverthelefs  I live ; 
yet  not  /,  but  Chrif  liveth  in  me.  He  is  holy,  as 
God  who  called  him  is  holy,  both  in  heart  and 
in  all  manner  of  converfalion.  He  loveth  the  Lord 
his  God  with  all  his  heart,  and  ferveth  him  with 
all  his  f rength.  He  loveth  his  neighbour,  every 
man,  as  himfelf ; yea,  as  Chrijl  loveth  us  : them 
in  particular,  that  defpitefully  ufe  him  and  perfe- 
cute  him,  becaufe  they  know  not  the  Son  neither  the 
Father.  Indeed  his  foul  is  all  love,  filled  with 
bowels  of  mercies,  kindnefs,  meeknefs,  gentlenefs, 
long f offering.  And  his  life  agreeth  thereto* 

full  of  the  work  of  faith,  the  patience  of  hope,  the 
labour  of  love.  And  whatfoever  he  doth  either  in 
word  or  deed,  he  doth  it  all  in  the  name,  in  the 
love  and  power  of  the  Lord  Jefus.  In  a word, 
he  doth  the  will  of  God  on  earth,  as  it  is  done  in 
heaven. 

“ 6.  This  it  is  to  be  a perfect  man,  to  be  fane - 
iified  throughout : even  “ to  have  a heart  fo  all- 
flaming  with  the  love  of  God,  (to  ufe  archbilhop 
Ufher/s  words)  as  continually  to  offer  up  every 

thought* 


[ ,35  ] 

thought,,  word,  and  work,  as  a fpirituaL  facrifice. 
acceptable  to  God  through  Chrift.”  ' In  every 
thought  of  our  hearts,  in  every  word  of  our 
tongues,  in, every  wor,k  of  our  hands,  to  Jliew 
forth  his  praife,  who  hath  called  as  oat  oj  darknefs 
into  his  marvellous  light.  . O that  both  we, 
and  all  who  feek  the  Lord  Jefiis'  in.  fincerity,. 
may  thus  he  made  perjedl  in  one  f 

This  is  the  dodfrine  which  we  preached  from, 
the  beginning,  and  which  we  preach  at  this  day. 
Indeed  by  viewing  it  in  every  point  of  light,  and 
comparing  it  again  and  again,  with  the  word  of 
God  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  experience  of  the 
children  of  God  on  the  other,  we  faw  farther  into 
the  nature  and  properties  of  Chriftian  perfedlion. 
But  ftill  there  is  no  contrariety  at  all,  between 
our  Trft  and  our  laft  fentiments.  Our  firft  con- 
ception of  it  was,  it  is  to  have  the  mind  which 
was  in  Chrifl,  and  to  walk  as  he  walked : to  have- 
all  the  mind  that  was  in  him,  and  always  to  walk 
as  he  walked.  In  other  words,  to  be  inwardly 
and  outwardly  devoted  to  God;  all  devoted  in 
heart  and  life.  And  we  have  the  fame  concep- 
tion of  it  now,  without  either  addition  or  dimi» 
nution. 

16.  The  hymns  concerning  it  in  this  volume 
are  too  numerous  to  tranfcribe..  I fh all  only  cite 
a part  of  three. 

P.  80.  Saviour  from  fin,  I wait  to  prove 
That  jefus  is  thy  heeding  name  ; 

B & 


To- 


[ 36  ] 

To  lofe,  when  perfe£led  in  love, 
Whate'er  I have,  or  can,  or  am  : 

I flay  me  on  thy  faithful  word, 

The  fervant  fhallbe  as  his  Lord. 

Anfwer  that  gracious  end  in  me 

For  which  thy  precious  life  was  given: 
Redeem  from  all  iniquity, 

Reftore  and  make  me  meet  for  heaven: 
Unlefs  thou  purge  my  every  [lain. 

Thy  fuffering  and  my  faith  is  vain. 

Didft  thou  not  die,  that  I might  live 
No  longer  to  myfelf,  but  thee  ? 

Might  body,  foul,  and  fpirit  give 
To  him  who  gave  himfelf  for  me  ? 
Come  then,  my  Mailer  and  my  God, 
Take  the  dear  purchafe  of  thy  blood. 

Thy  own  peculiar  fervant  claim, 

For  thy  own  truth  and  mercy’s  fake  : 
Hallow  in  me  thy  glorious  name  : 

, Me  for  thine  own  this  moment  take: 
And  change  and  thiougkly  purify  ; 

Thine  only  may  I live  and  die. 

P.  2^8.  Chofe  from  the  world  if  now  I Hand, 
Adorn'd  with  righteoufnefs  divine-; 

If  brought  into  the  promis’d  land 
I juflly  call  the  Saviour  mine  : 


Thy 


L 37  3 

Thy  fan&ifying  fpirit  pour 

To  quench- my  thirft  and  wafh  me  clean: 
Now,  Saviour,  let  tire  gracious  fhower 
Defcend,  and  make  m ot pure  from Jin » 
Purge  me  from  every  fmf  ill  blot  ; 

My  idols  all  be  call  afid'e  : 

Cleanfe  me  from  every  evil  thought. 

From  all  the  filth  of  feif  and  pride. 
The  hatred  of  the  carnal  mind 
Out  of  my  fielh  at  once  remove: 

Give  me  a tender  heart,  refign’d, 

And  pure,  and  full  of  faith  and  love* 

O that-  I now  from  fin  releas’d 

Thy  word  might  to-  the  utmoft  prove  : 
Enter  into  thy  promis’d  reft  ! 

The  Canaan  of  thv  perfctl  love  ! 

Now  let  me  gain  Per.ieftion’s  height! 

Now  let  me  into  nothing  fall 
Be  lefs  than  nothing  in  my  fight, 

And  feel  that  Chrift  is  all  in  all.. 

P.  298.  Lord,  f believe,  thy  work  of  grace 
Is  perfect  in  the  foul : 

His  heart  is  pure  who  fees  thy  face,. 

His  fpirit  is  made  whole. 

From  every  JickneJs  by  thy  word. 

From  every  foul-difeafe 
Sav’d,  and  to  perfctl  health  reftor’d,  * 

To  per  fed.  fiolinefs. 

He  walks  in  glorious  liberty. 

To  fin  entirely  dead ; 

Ths 


[ 38  ] 


The  Truth,  the  Son  hath  made  him  free. 
And  he  is  free  indeed. 

Throughout  his  foul  thy  glories  fhine. 
His  foul  is  all  renewed, 

And  decked  in  righteoufnefs  divine, 

And  cloath’d  and fill'd  with  God. 

This  is  the  reft,  the  life,  the  peace. 
Which  all  thy  people  prove  ! 

Love  is  the  bond  ofperfedfnefs. 

And  all  their  foul  is  love. 

O joyful  found  of  gofpel-grace  ! 

Chrift  fhall  in  me  appear  : 

I,  even  I fhall  fee  his  face  : 

I fhall  be  holy  here ! 

He  vifits  notv  the  houfe  of  clay : 

He  fhakes  his  future  home, 

O wouldft  thou,  Lord,  on  this  glad  day 
Into  thy  temple  come! 

Come,  O my  God,  thyfelf  reveal, 

Fill  all  this  mighty  void! 

Thou  only  canft  my  fpirit  fill ; 

Come,  O my  God,  my  God  ! 

Fulfil,  fulfil  my  large  defires, 

Large  as  infinity ! 

Give,  give  me  all  my  foul  requires, 

All,  all  that  is  in  thee  ! 

17.  On  Monday,  June  25,  1744,  our  firft 
conference  began,  fix  clergymen,  and  all  our 
preachers  being  prefent.  The  next  morning  \ve- 
ferioufty  confider.ecL  the  do&rine  of  fanctifica- 

tioa 


[ 39  1 

tion  of  perfe&ion,  The  queftions  afked  concerir-- 
ing  it,  and  the  fubftance  of  the  anfwers  givea 
were  as  follows 

Q.  What  is  it  to  be  fantdifed? 

A.  To  be  renewed  in  the  image  of  God,  in 
righteoufnefs  and  true  holinefs. 

Q.  What  is  implied  in  being  a perfed:  Chrif 
tian  ? 

A.  The  loving  God  with  all  our  heart,  and 
mind,  and  foul,  Dent.  vi.  5. 

0.  Does  this  imply,  that  all  inward  fin  is 
taken  away  ? 

A.  Undoubtedly : or  how  can  we  be  faid  to  be 
faved from  all  our  uncleannefes  FEzek.  xxxvi.  29, 

Our  fecond  conference  began  Aug.  1,  1745. 
The  next  morning  we  fpoke  of  fanfiification,  as 
follows : 

Q.  When  does  inward  fanftification  begin  ? 

A.  In  the  moment  a man  is  juftified.  (Yet  {in 
remains  in  him,  yea  the  feed  of  all  fin,  till  he 
is  fandlified  throughout.)  From  that  time  a be- 

liever gradually  dies  to  fin,  and  grows  in 
grace. 

Q.  Is  this  ordinarily  given  till  a little  before 
death  ? 

A.  It  is  not,  to  thofe  who  expe£I  it  no  fooner^ 

Q.  But  may  we  expe£I  it  fooner  ? 

A,  Why  not  ? For  although  we  gram,  1.  That 
the  generality  of  believers  whom  we  have  hither- 
to known,,  were  not  fo  fanftified  till  near  death : 
2.  That  few  of  thofe  to  whom  St.  Paul  wrote  his 

epifUes, 


[ 4°  J 

epiflles,  were  fo  at  that  time:  nor  3.  He  him- 
felf  at  the  time  of  writing  his  former  epifties  : ) et 
all  this  does  not  prove,  that  we  may  not  be  fo 
to-day . 

0.  In  what  manner  fhonld  we  preach  fa  notifi- 
cation ? 

A.  Scarce  at  all  to  thole  who  are  not  prefling 
forward  : to  thofe  who  are,  always  by  w;ay  of 
promife  ; always  drawing,  rather  than  driving. 

Our  third  conference  began  Tuefday,  May  26 1 
1746, 

In  this  we  carefully  read  over  the  minutes  of 
the  two  preceding  cdnferences,  to  obferve  "whe- 
ther any  thing  contained  therein  might  be  re- 
trenched or  altered  on  more  mature  confideration. 
But  we  did  not  fee  caufe  to  alter  in  any  refpett 
w hat  we  had  agreed  upon  before. 

Our  fourth  conferencebegan  on  Tuefday.  June 
the  16th.  1747.  As  feveral  perfons  were  pre- 
fent,  who  did  not  believe  the  doftrine  of  per- 
feftion,  we  agreed  to  examine  it  from  the  foun- 
dation. 

In  order  to  this,  it  was  afked, 

“ How  much  is  allowed  by  our  brethren  who 
differ  from  us,  with  regard  to  eritire  fanCtifica- 
ti'on  ?” 

A.  They  grant,  1.  That  every  one  mull  be  en- 
tirely fanftified  in  the  article  of  death  : 2.  That 
till  then  a believe  daih  grows  in  grace,  comss 
nearer  and  nearer  to  perfection  t 3.  That  we 

ought 


r 4*  ] 

©light  to  be  continually  prefling  after  it,  ana  to 
exhort  all  others  fo  to  do. 

Q.  What  do  we  allow  them  ? 

A.  We  grant,  1.  That  many  of  thofewho  have 
died  in  the  faith,  yea,  the  greater  part  of  thofe 
we  have  known,  were  not  perfeEled  in  love,  till 
a little  before  their  death  : 2.  That  the  term  Janc- 
ti.Jied,  is  continually  applied  by  St.  Paul,  to  all 
that  were  juftified.  g.  That  by  this  term  alone, 
he  rarely,  if  ever,  means  “ Saved  from  all  flu 
4.  That  confequently  it  is  not  proper  to  ufe  it  in 
that  feufe,  without  adding  the  word  wholly,  en- 
tirely, or  the  like : 5.  That  the  infpired  writers 
almoft  continually  fpeak  of  or  to  thofe  who  were 
juflified,  but  very  rarely  of  or  to  thofe  who  were 
wholly  fan&ified  :t  6.  That  confequently  it  be- 
hoves us  to  fpeak  almofl  continually  of  the  flate 
of  juftification;  but  more  rarely,  “at  leaft  ^ in 
full  and  explicit  terms,  concerning  entire  fanc- 
tificaticn.” 

0.  What  then  is  the  point  where  we  divide  ? 

A-  It  is. this : fhould  we  expecl  to  be  faved 
from  alljin  before  the  article  of  death  ? 

Q,  Is  there  any  clear  f cripture-firo?ni/e  of  this, 
that  God  will  fave  us  from  all Jin  ? 

A.  There  is*  Pfah  cxxx.  8.  He  Jliall  redeem 
Ifrael  from  all  his  fins. 

This 

d That  is,  unto  thofe  alone,  exclufive  o£  others  r but  jthey 
ffeak  to  them,  jointly  with  others  almoft  continually. 

J More  rarely  I allow  ; hut  yet  in  feme  places  very  frequenily, 
ftrongly,  and  explicitly* 


[ 42  ] 

This  is  more  largely  expreft  in  the  prophecy 
of  Ezekiel ; Then  will  I fprinkle  clean  water  upon 
you , and  ye  Jhall  he  clean : from  all  your  fiithinefs 
and  from  all  your  idols  will  I cleanfe  you — I will 
alfo  fave you  from  all  your  uncleannelfes,  chap, 
xxxvi.  ver*  2g.  29.  No  promife  can  be  more 
clear.  And- to  this  the  apoftle  plainly  refers  in 
that  exhortation.  Having  thefe  promifes , let  us 
cleanfe  ourfelves  from  all  fiithinefs  of  flefk  a ndf pi- 
nt, perf elding  holinefs  in  the  fear  of  God , 2 Cor. 
vii.  1.  Equally  clear  and  exprefsis  that  antient 
promife,  The  Lord  thy  God  will  circumcife  tky 
heart , and  the  heart  of  thy  feed,  to  love  the  Lord 
thy  God  with  all  thy  heart  and  with  all  thy  foul. 
Deut.  xxx.  6. 

0.  But  does  any  afferiion  anfwerable  to  this, 
occur  in  the  New  Teftament? 

A.  There  does,  and  that  laid  down  in  the 
plaineft  terms.  So  1 John  iii.  8.  For  this  pur  - 
pofe,  the  Son  of  God  was  manifefied , that  he  might 
defiroy  the  works  of  the  clevil , without  any  limita- 
tion or  reftriftion-;  but  all  fin  is  the  work  of  the  de- 
vil. Parallel  to  which  is  die  affertion  of  St.  Paul, 
Eph.  v.  25,  27.  Chrijl  loved  the  church  and  gave 
himfelf  for  it, — that  he  might  prefent  it  to  himfef 
a glorious  church,  not  having  fpot  or  wrinkle,  or 
any  fuch  thing , but  that  it  might  be  holy  and  with- 
out blemifh « 

And  to  the  fame  eflefl  is  his  alfertion  in  the 
eighth  of  the  Romans,  ver.  3,  4.  God  fent  his 
Son — that  the  righteoufnefs  of  the  law  might  beful- 

filUd 


[ 43  3 

filled  inusx  who  walk  not  after  thejkjh , but  after 
the  fpirit. 

0.  Does  the  Ne\v  Teftament  afford'  any  far- 
ther ground  for  expending  to  be  faved  from  alt 
fn? 

A.  Undoubtedly  it  does,  both  in  tho fe  prayers 
and  commands , which  are  equivalent  to  the 
flrongeft  affections. 

Q.  What  prayers  do  you  mean  ? 

A.  Prayers  for  entire  fandlification,  which, 
were  there  no  fuch  thing,  would  be  mere  mock- 
ery of  God.  Such  in  particular  are,  i.  Deliver 
us from  evil.  Now  when  this  is  done,  when  we 
are  delivered  from  all  evil,  there  can  be  no  fm 
remaining.  2.  Neither  pray  I for  thefe  alone , but 
for  them  afo  who fall  believe  on  me  through  their 
word : that  they  all  may  be  one , as  thou,  Father % 
art  in  me  and  l in  thee,  that  they  afo  may  be  one 
in  us : I in  them,  and  thou  in  me,  that  they  may  be 
made  perfeCl  in  one,  John  xvii.  ver.  20,  21,  23. 
3.  I bow  my  knees  unto  the  God  and  Father  of  our 
Lord  ffefus  Chrifl, — that  he  would  grant  you — that 
ye  being  rooted  and  grounded  in  love,  may  be  able 
to  comprehend  with  all  faints,  what  is  the  breadth % 
and  length,  and  depth,  and  height,  and  to  know 
the  love  of  Chrifl  which  pafetli  knowledge.  That 
ye  may  be  filed  with  all  the julnefs  of  God,  Eph.  iih. 
14,  &c.  4.  The  very  God  of  peace  fanBfy  yon 

wholly.  And  I pray  God,  your  whole fpirit,  foul 
and  body,  may  be  preferved  blamelefs,  unto  the  com- 
ing of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrifl,  1 Thef.  v.  23. 

0.  What 


[ « ] 

Q-  What  command  is  there  to  the  fame  effect  ?' 

A.  i.  Be  ye  per  fed. , as  your  Father  who  is  in 
heaven  is  perjett , Matt.  .v.  48.  2.  Thou JJia/t  love 

the  Lord  thy  God  uath-  all  thy  heart , and  with  ad 
thy  foul,  and  with  all  thy  mind , Matt.  xxii.  37. 
But  if  the  love,  of  God  fill  all  the  heart,  there  can 
be. no  fin, there. 

Q.  But  how  does  it  appear,  that  this  is  to  be 
done  before  the  article  ot  death  ? 

A.  1.  From  the  very  nature  of  a command, 
which  is  not  given  to  the  dead,  bm  to  the  living. 

I herefore  thou  fnalt  love  God  with  all  thy  heart , 
cannot  mean,  thou-fhalt  do  this,  when  thou  dieft, 
but  while  thou  liveff.  . 

2.  From  exprefs  texts  of  fcripture.  1.  The 
grace  of  God  that  bringeth  falvation  hath  appeared 
to  all  men  ; teaching  us,  that  having  renounced  un- 
godly and  worldly  lufs,  we  fiould  live  foberly , 
righteoufy,  and  godly  in  this  prefnl  world  ; lock- 
ing for  the  glorious  appearing  of  our  Lord  Jefus 
Chrif,  who  gave  Itimfelfjor  us,  that  he  might  re- 
deem us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  unto  himfef 
a peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works.  Tit.  ii, 

II  — 14.  2.  He-  hath  raifed  up  an  horn  of  falva- 

tion for  us — to  perform  the  mercy  prom  fed  to  our 

fathers-,  the  oath  which  he  fworeto  our  father  Ab- 
raham, that  he  would  grant  unto  us,  that  we  be- 
ing delivered  out  of  the  hands  of  our  enemies, fiould 
ferve  him  without  fear , in  holinefs  and  righteouf 
nefs  before  him,  all  the  days  of  our  Life,  Luke  L 
ver.  69,  &c. 

0-  Is 


~[  45  ] 

g.Is  there  any  example  in  fcripture  of  perfons 
who  had  attained  to  this  ? 

A.  Yes,  St.  John,  and  all  thofe  of  whom  he 
fays.  Herein  is  our  love  made  perfect,  that  we  may 
have  boldnef  in  the  day  of  judgment,  becaufe  as  he 
is,  fo  are  we  in  this  world,  1 'John  iv.  17. 

0.  Can  you  {hew  one  fuch -example  now  ? 
Where  is  he  that  is  thus  perfeft  ? 

A.  Tofome  that  make  this  enquiry  one  might 
anfwer,  If  I knew  one  here,  J "would  not  tell 
you  : for  you  do  not  enquires  out  of  love.  Yon 
are  like  Herod,  You  only  feek  the  young  child 
tp  flay' it. 

But  more  direftly  we  anfwer.  There  are  many 
- reafons,  why  there  fhould  be  few,  if  any,  indif- 
putable  examples.  What  inconveniencies  would 
: this  bring'on  the  perfon  himfelf,  fet  as-a  mark 
; for  all  to  (hoot  at  ? And  how  unprofitable  would 

■ it  be  to  gainfayers  ? For  if  they  hear  notMofes  and 

■ the  prophets,  Chrift  and  his  apofi  les,-  neither  would 
they  be  per fuaded  though  one  rofe from  the  dead. 

0.  Are  we  not  apt  to  have  a fecret  diftafte  to 
any  who  fay  they  are  faved  from  all  fin  ? 

A.  JTis  very  poflible  we  may,  and  that  upon 
feveral  grounds  : partly  from  a concern  for  the 
good  of  fouls,  who  may  be  hurt,  if  thefe  are  not 
what  they  profefs  : partly  from  a kind  of  impli- 
• cit  envy  at  thofe  who  fpeak  of  higher  attainments 
than  our  own : and  partly  from  our  natural  fiow- 
nefs  and  unreadinefs  of  heart,  to  believe  the 
'•works  of  God. 


Q.  Why 


[ 46  ] 

Q.  Why  may  we  not  continue  in  the  joy  of 
Faith,  till  we  ar ? perf eft cd.  in  love  ? 

A,,  Why  indeed?  Since  holy  grief  does  not 
quench  this  joy:  fince  even  while  we  are  under 
the  crofs,  while  we  deeply  partake  of  the  buffer- 
ings of  Chrift,  we  may  rejoice  with  joy  unfpeak- 
able.” 

From  thefe  extra&s  it  undeniably  appears,  not 
only  what  was  mine  and  my  brother's  judgment, 
but  what  was  the  judgment  of  all  the  preachers 
in  connexion  with  us,  in  the  years  44,  45,  46, 
and  47.  Nor  do  I remember,  that,  in  any  one  of 
thefe  conferences  we  had  one  dilfenting  voice  : 
but  whatever  doubts  any  one  had  when  we  met, 
they  were  all  removed  before  we  parted. 

■18.  In  the  year  1749,  my  brother  printed  two 
volumes-  of  “ Hymns  and  facred  Poems.”  As  I 
did  not  fee  thefe  before  they  were  publifhed, 
there  were  fome  things  in  them  which  I did  not 
approve  of.  But  I quite  approved  of'the  main 
of  the  hymns  on  this  head  ; a few  verfes  of 
which  are  fubjoined. 

Come,  Lord,  be  manifefted  here, 

And  all  the  devil's  works  deftroy  ! 

Now,  without  fin  in  me  appear, 

'And  fill  with  everlafting  joy  : 

Thy  beatific  face  difplay  : 

Thy  prefence  is  the  perfect  day.  Vol.  I./.  203. 


Swift 


r 47  ] 

Swift  to  my  refcure  come, 

' Thy  own  this  moment  feize! 

Gather  my  wandering  fpirit  home. 

And  keep  in  perfeft  peace. 

Suffer’d  no  mor'e  to  rove 
O’er  all  the  earth  abroad, 

Arreft  the  prifoner  of  thy  love, 

And  fhut  me  up  in  God;  p.  247, 

Thy  prifoners  releafe,  vouchfafe  us  thy  peace  ; 
And  our  forrows  and  fins  in  a moment  lhall  ceafe. 
That  moment  be  now  ! Our  petition  allow. 

Our  prefent  Redeemer  and  Comforter  thou.Fc/.IL 

{p.  12  4. 

From  this  inbred  fin  deliver  : 

Let  the  yoke  Now  be  broke  : 

Make  me  thine  for  ever. 

Partner  of  thy  perfect  nature, 

Let  me  be  Nozu  in  tliee  • 

A new  finlefs  creature.  p.  1 56. 

Turn  me,  Lord,  and  turn  me  now. 

To  thy  yoke  my  fpirit-  bow  ; , 

Grant  me  now  the  pearl  to  find 
Of  a meek  and-  quiet  mind.- 
Calm,  O calm  my  troubled  bread:  ; 

Let  me  gain  that-  fecond  red  ; 

From  my  works  for  ever  ceafe, 
Perfeftedin  holinefs.  p • 162. 

Come 


C 4S  ] 

Come  in  this  accepted  hour, 

Bring  thy  heavenly  kingdom  in  1 
Fill  us' with  the  glorious  power 

Rootingout  thefeeds  of  fin.  p.  i68* 

Come,  thou  dear'Lamb  for  fmners  (lain. 
Bring- in  the  cleanling  flood,; 

Apply,  to  wafh  out  every  {lain, 

Thine  efficacious  blood. 

rO  let  it  fink  into  our  foul 
Deep  as  the  in-bred  fin  : 

Jvlake  every  wotmded  fpirit  whole 
And  ever}’  leper  clean  f p. 

Prifoners  of  hope  arife 
And  fee  your  Lord  appear  ! 

Lo  ! On  the  wings  of  love  he  flies, 

And  brings  redemption  near. 

Redemption  in  his  blood 
He  calls  you  to  receive;: 

Come  unto  me,  the  pard’rung  God  : 

Believe,  he  cries,  believe! 

Jefus  to  thee  we  look, 

’Till  faVed  from  fin’s  remains, 

Rejefb  the  inbred  tyrant’s  yoke, 

And  caff  away  his  chains. 

Our  nature  fhall  no  more 
O’r  us  dominion  have  : 

By  faith  we  apprehend  the  power, 

Which  {hall  for  ever  fave.  p.  188. 

Jefu, 


[ 49  ] 

Jefu,  our  life,  in  us  appear. 

Who  daily  die  thy  death  ! 

Reveal  thyfelf  the  finilher  : 

Thy  quick’ning  Spirit  breathe  ! 

Unfold  the  hidden  myftery  ! 

The  fecondgft  impart  1 
Reveal  thy  glorious  felfin  me  : 

In  every  waiting  heart.  p.  ip^. 

In  Him  we  have  peace,  In  him  we  have  power  ! 
Preferved  by  his  grace  throughout  the  dark  hour. 
In  all  our  temptations,  he  keeps  us  to  prove 
Hisutmoft  falvation,  His  fullnefs  of  love. 
Pronounce  the  glad  Word,  and  bid  us  be  free  ; 
Ah,  haft  thou  not,  Lord,  Ablefling  for  me  ? 
The  peace  thou  haft  given,  this  moment  impart. 
And  open  thy  heaven,  .O  Love  in  my  heart  \ p.  324. 

A fecomd  edition  of  thefe  hymns  was  pub- 
lifhed  in  the  year  1752  ; and  that  without  ahv 
other  alteration,  than  that  of  a few  literal  mlf- 
takes. 

I have  been  the  more  large  in  thefe  extrafls, 
becauie  hence  it  appears,  beyond  all  poftibility 
of  exception,  that  to  this  dav,  both  my  brother 
and  I maintained,  i.That  Chriflian  Perfeftionis- 
thai  love  of  God  and  our  neighbour,  which  im- 
plies deliverance  from  all  Jin  ; 2.  That  this  is  re- 
ceived merely  by  faith  ; 3.  That  it  is  given 
injlantaneoufly,  in  one  moment : 4.  That  we  are 
to  expefl  it  (not  at  death  but)  every  moment : 
Vol.  XXIV.  C That 


[ 5°  ] 

That  now  is  the  accepted  time,  now  is  the  day 
of  this  falvation. 

19.  At  the  conference  in  the  year  per- 

ceiving forne  danger  that  a diverfity  of  fen- 
timents,  fhould  infenfibly  heal  in  amongus,  we 
again  largely  confidered  this  doCtrine.  And  foon 
after  I publifhed  “ Thoughts  on  Chriftian  per- 
fection,” prefaced  with  the  following  advertife- 
ment  : 

“ The  following  traft  is  by  no  means  defigned 
to  gratify  the  curiofity  of  any  man.  It  is  not 
intended  to  prove  the  doCtrine  at  large,  in  oppo- 
fition  to  thofe  who  explode  and  ridicule  it  : no 
nor  to  anfwer  the  numerous  objections  againft  it, 
which  may  be  raifed  even  by  ferious  men.  All 
I intend  here,  is  fimply  to  declare,  what  are  my 
fentiments  on  this  head  : what  Chriftian  perfec- 
tion does,  according  to  my  apprehenfion  include, 
and  what  it  does  not  ; and  to  add  a few  practical 
obfervations  and  directions  relative  to  the  fub- 

jea. 

“ As  thefe  thoughts  were  at  firft  thrown  toge- 
ther by  way  of  queflion  and  anfwer,  I let  them 
continue  in  the  fame  form — They  are  juft  the 
fame  that  I have  entertained  for  above  twenty 
years.” 

“ Q.  What  is  Chriftian  perfection  ? 

A.  ihe  loving  God  with  all  our  heart,  mind, 
foul  and  ftrength.  This  implies  that  no  wrong 
temper,  none  contrary  to  love,  remains  in  the 

foul  : 


[ 5i  ] 


foul : and  that  all  the  thoughts,  words  and  aftionj 
are  governed  by  pure  love. 

Q.  Do  you  affirm,  that  this  perfection  excludes 
all  infirmities,  ignorance  and  miftake  ? 

7 O 

A.  I continually  affirm  quite  the  contrary,  and 
always  have  done  fo. 

Q.  But  how  can  every  thought,  word  and  work 
be  governed  by  pure  love,  and  the  man  be  fub- 
jeCt  at  the  fame  time  to  ignorance  and  mif- 
take  ? 

A.  I fee  no  contradiction  here.  “ A man 
may  be  filled  with  pure  love,  and  ftill  be  liable 
to  miftake/'  Indeed  I do  not  expeCt  to  be  freed 
from  aCiual  miftakes,  till  this  mortal  puts  on  im- 
mortality. I believe  this  to  be  a natural  confe- 
quence  of  the  foul’s  dwelling  in  fleffi  and  blood. 
For  we  cannot  now  think  at  all,  but  by  the  medi- 
ation of  thofe  bodily  organs,  which  have  fuf- 
fered  equally  with  the  reft  of  our  frame.  And 
hence  we  cannot  avoid  fometimes  thinking  wrong, 
till  this  corruptible  ffiall  have  put  on  incorrup- 
tion. 

But  we  may  carry  this  thought  farther  yet.  A 
miftake  in  judgment  may  poftibly  occafion,  a 
miftake  in  practice.  For  inftance  Mr.  de  Renty  s 
miftake  touching  the  nature  of  mortification,  ari- 
fing  from  prejudice  of  education,  occafionea  that 
practical  miftake,  his  wearing  an  iron  girdle. 
And  a thoufand  fuch  inftances  there  may  be, 
even  in  thofe  who  are  in  the  higheft  ftate  of 
grace.  Yet  where  every  word  and  aCtion  fprings 
C 2 from 


[ 5*  ] 

from  love,  fuc-h  a miftake  is  not  properly  a [m. 
However  it  cannot  bear  the  rigor  of  God’s  juf- 
tice,  but  needs  the  atoning  blood. 

<9.  What  was  the  judgment  of  all  our  brethern, 
who  met  at  Briftol  in  Auguft  l-jd,  on  this 
head  ? 

A.  It  was  expreffedin  thefe  words ; 1.  Ever}' 
one  may  miftake  as  long  as  he  lives  ; 2.  A mif- 
take  in  opinion  mav  occafiona  miftake  in  practice : 
3.  Every  fuch  miftake  is  a tranfgreftlon  of  the 
perfecb  law.  Therefore,  4.  Every  fuch  miftake, 
were  it  not  for  the  blood  of  atonement,  would 
■oxpofe  to  . eternal  damnation.  5.  It  follows,  that 
the  mold  perfeft  have  continual  need  of  rhe 
merits  of  Clirift,  even  for  their  aftual  tranfgref- 
fions,  and  may  fay  for  themfelves,  as  well  as 
for  their  breihern,  Forgive  us  our  trefpajfes . 

This  eafily  accounts  for  what  might  otberwife 
feem  to  be  utterly  unaccountable  : namely, 
that  thofe  who  are  not  oflended  when  we  fpeak 
of  the  higheft  degree  of  love,  yet  will  not  hear 
of  living  without  jin . The  reafon  is,  they  know 
all  men  are  liable  to  miftake,  and  that  in  prac- 
tice as  well  as  in  judgment.  But  they  do  not 
know,  or  do  not  obferve,  that  this  is  not  fin,  if 
love  is  the  foie  principle  of  action. 

0.  Rut  flill  if  they  live  without  fin,  does 
nor  this  exclude  '.he  r.eceffity  of  a mediator  ? 
At  leall,  is  it  not  plain,  that  they  Hand  no  long- 
er in  need  of  Clirift  in  his  prieftly  office? 

A.  Far  from  it.  None  feel  their  need  of  Chrift 


C 53  ] 

like  thefe  : none  fo  entirely  depend  upon  him. 
For  Chrift  does  not  give  life  to  the  foul  fepa- 
rate  from,  but  in  and  with  himfedf.  Hence  his 
Words  are  equally  true  of  all  men,  in  whatfoever 
ftate  of  grace  they  axe,  As  the  branch  cannot  bear 
fruit  of  if  elf,  except  it  abide  in  the  vine,  no  more 
can  ye,  except  ye  abide  in  me  : without  (or  fepa- 
rate  from)  me,  ye  can  do  nothing. 

* In  every  ftate  we  need  Chrift  in  the  following 
refpeHs  : 1.  Whatever  grace  we  receive,  it  is  a 
free  gift  from  him  : 2.  We  receive  it  as  his  pur- 
chafe,  merely  in  confideration  of  the  price  he 
paid  : 3.  We  have  this  grace  not  only  Irom 
Chrift,  but  in  him.  For  our  prefeftion  is  not 
like  that  of  a tree,  which  flourifhes  by  the  fap 
derived  from  its  own  root,  but,  as  was  faid  be- 
fore, like  that  of  a branch,  which  united  to  the 
vine,  bears  fruit,  but  fevered  fromit,  is  dried  up 
and  withered : q.  All  our  bleftings,  temporal, 
fpiritual,  and  eternal,  depend  on  his  interceffion 
for  us,  which  is  one  branch  of  his  prieftly  ofiice, 
whereof  therefore  we  have  always  equal  need  : 
5.  The  beft  of  men  ft  ill  need  Chrift  inhis  prieft- 
ly office,  to  atone  for  their  omiflions,  their  fhort- 
comlngs.  (as  fome  not  improperly  fpeak)  theirmif- 
takes  in  judgment  and  praftice,  and  their  defects 
of  various  kinds.  For  thefe  are  all  deviations 
from  the  perfeft  law,  and  confequently  need  an 
atonement.  Yet  that  they  are  not  properly  fins, 
we  apprehend  mav  appear  from  the  words  of 
of  St.  Paul,  He  that  loveth  hath ft  filed  the  law  \jor 
C 3 love 


[ 54  ] 

love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law.\  Now  miftakes,  and 
whatever  -infirmities  neceffarily  flow  from  the 
corruptible  -date  of  the  body,  are  no  way  contra- 
ry to  love,  no:  therefore  in  the  fcripture-fenfe,  fin. 

To  explain  myfelf  a little  farther  on  this  head  : 
l.  Not  only  fn properly  fo  called,  that  is  a volun- 
tary tranfgrefiion  of  a known  law,  but  fin,  impro- 
perly fo  called,  that  is,  an  involuntary  tranfgref- 
fion  of  a divine  law,  known  or  unknown,  needs 
the  atoning  blood.  2.  I believe,  there  is  no  fuch 
perfection  in  this  life,  as  excludes  thefe  involun- 
tary tranfgrefiions,  which  I apprehend  to  be  na- 
turally confequent  on  the  ignorance  and  mi  flakes 
jnfeparable  from  mortality.  3.  Thereforeyf«/<yS 
perfeEiion  is  a phrafe  I never  ufe,  left  I fliould 
feem  to  contradict  myfelf : 4.  I believe  a perfcn 
filled  with  the  love  of  God,  is  ftill  liable  to  thefe 
involuntary  trail fgreflions  : 5.  Such  tranfgrefiions 
vou  may  call  fins,  if  you  pleafe : Ido  not,  for 
the  reafons  above-mentioned. 

<2,.  What  advice  would  you  give  to  thofe  that 
do,  and  thofe  that  do  not  call  them  fo  ? 

A.  Let  thofe  that  do  not  call  them  fns,  never 
think  that  themfelves,  or  any  other  perfons,  are 
in  fuch  a ftate,  as  that  they  can  Hand  before 
infinite  juftice  without  a mediator.  This  muft 
argue,  either  the  deepeft  ignorance,  or  the 
higheft  arrogance  and  prefumption. 

Let  thofe  who  do  call  them  fo,  beware  how 
the}'  confound  thefe  dejedls  with fins,  properly  fo 

called. 


4 Rom.  xii i.  to.  12. 


[ 55 


1 

j 


called.  But  haw  will  they  avoid  it  ? How  will 
thefe  be  diftinguifhed  from  thofe,  if  they  are  all 
promifcuoufly  called  /Ins?  I am  much  afraid,  if 
we  fhould  allow  any  fins  to  be  confiftent  with 
perfection,  few  would  confine  the  idea  to  thofe 
dejetls,  concerning  which  only  the  alfertion 
could  be  true. 

0.  But  how  can  a liablenefs  tomiflake  confift 
with  perfeCt  love  ? Is  not  a perfon  who  is  per- 
fected in  love,  every  moment  under  its  influ- 
ence ? And  can  any  miflake  flow  from  pure 
love  ? 

A.  I anfwer,  l.  Many  miftakes  may  confift 
with  pure  love  : 2.  Some  may  accidentally  flow 
from  it.  I mean,  love  itfelf  may  incline  us  to 
miftake.  The  pure  love  of  our  neighbour  fpring- 
ing  from  the  love  of  God,  tkinketh  no  evil,  believ- 
eth  and  hopeth  all  thing.  Now  this  very  temper, 
unfufpicious,  ready  to  believe,  and  hope  the  belt 
of  all  men  may  occafion  our  thinking  fome 
men  better  than  they  really  are.  Here  then  is  a 
manifeft  miftake,  accidentally  flowing  from  pure 
love. 

Q.  How  fhall  we  avoid  fetting  perfection  too 
high  or  too  low  ? 

A.  By  keeping  to  the  bible,  and  fetting  it  juft 
as  high  as  the  fcripture  does.  It  is  nothing  high- 
er, and  nothing  lower  than  this.  The  pure 
love  of  God  and  man  ; the  loving  God  with 
all  our  heart  and  foul,  and  our  neighbour  as  our- 
felves.  It  is  love  governing  the  heart  and  life, 


running 


r 56  ] 

running  though  all  our  tempers  words  and  ac- 
tions. 

Q.  Suppofe  one  had  attained  to  this,  would 
you  advife  him  to  fpeak  of  it  ? 

A.  At  firfi:  perhaps  he  would  fcarce  be  able 
to  refrain,  the  fire  would  be  fo  hot  within  him  : 
his  defire  to  declare  the  loving-kindnefs  of  the 
Lord,  carrying  him  away  like  a torrent.  But 
afterwards  he  might  : and  then  it  would  be  ad  • 
vifeable,  not  to  fpeak  of  it  to  them  that  know 
not  Gcd.  ’1  is  moll  likely  it  would  only  provoke 
them  to  contradift  and  fclafpheme  : nor  to  others 
without  fome  particular  reafon,  without  fome 
good  in  view.  And  then  he  fhould  have  efpe- 
cial  care,  to  avoid  all  appearance  of  boafting ; 
to  fpeak  with  thedeepefl:  humility  and  reverence 
giving  all  the  glory  to  God. 

0.  But  would  it  not  be  better,  to  be  intirely 
filent  ? Not  to  fpeak  of  it  at  all  ? 

A.  By  filence  he  might  avoid  many  erodes, 
which  will  naturally  and  neceffarily  enfue,  if  he 
fhnply  declare  even  among  believers,  what  God 
has  wrought  in  his  foul.  If  therefore  fuch  an  one 
were  to  confer  with  flefh  and  blood,  he  would  be 
intirely  filent.  But  this  could  not  be  done 
with  a clear  confidence  : for  undoubtedly  he  ought 
to  fpeak.  Men  do  not  light  a candle  to  put  it 
under  a bufhel  ; much  lefs  does  the  all-wife 
God.  He  does  not  raife  fuch  a monument  of  his 
power  and  love,  to  hide  it  from  all  mankind. 
Rather  he  intends  it  as  a general  blefling,  to 

thofe 


C 57  j 

thofe  who  are  fimple  of  heart.  He  defigns  there- 
by not  barely  the  happinefs  of  that  individual 
perfon,  but  the  animating  and  _ encouraging 
others,  to  follow  after  the  fame  blelTing.  His 
wdl  is,  that  many  Jhall  fee  it  and  rejoice,  and 
put  tlieir  irujl  in  the  Lord.  Nor  does  any  thing 
under  heaven  more  quicken  the  deli  res  of  thofe 
who  are  juftified,  than  to  converfe  with  thofe 
whom  they  believe  to  have  experienced  a Hill 
highej  fa!  vat  ion.  This  places  that  falvation  full  in 
their  view,  and  increafes  their  hunger  and  third: 
after  it  : an  advantage  which  muff  have  been 
entirely  loft,  had  the  perfon  fo  faved  buried  him- 
felfin  filence. 

Q.  But  isthere  no  wav  to  prevent  thefe  erodes 
which  ufuajly  fall  on  thofe  who  fpeak  of  being 
thus  faved  ? 

A ■ It  feems  they  cannot  be  prevented  altoge- 
ther, while  fo  much  of  nature  remains  even  in 
believers.  But  fonrething;  might  be  done  if  the 
preacher  in  every  place  would  i.  Talk  freely 
with  all  who  fpeak  thus,  and  2.  Labour  to  pre- 
vent the  unjuft  or  unkind  treatment  of  thofe,  in 
favour  of  whom  there  isreafonable  proof. 

0.  What  is  reafonable  proof  ? How  may  we 
certain!}'  know  one  that  is  faved  from  all  fin  ? 

A.  We  cannot  infallibly  know  one  that  is 
thus  faved  (no,  nor  even  one  that  is  juftilied)  un- 
lefs  it  fhould  pleafe  God  to  endow  us  with  the 
miraculous  dii'c eminent  of  fp  frits.  But  we  ap- 
prehend thofe  would  be  furRcient  proofs  to'  any 
C £ icafonar.IW 


[ 58  ] 

r .able  man,  and  fuch  as  would  leave  little 
? ' ■ - to  doubt,  eiiher  the  truth  or  depth  of  the 
wo;  : ),  It  we  had  clear  evidence  of  his  ex- 
ti  behaviotr,  for  fo;ne  time  before  this 

fu,  ifed  change.  This  would  give  us  reafon  to 
belie  v’e.  he  would  not  lie  for  God,  but  fpeak  nei- 
ther more  not  lefs  then  he  felt  : 2.  If  he  gave 
a (It Itincb  account  of  the  time  and  manner  where- 
in the  change  was  wrought,  with  found  fpeech 
which  could  not  be  reproved  : and  3.  If  it  appear- 
ed that  ail  his  fubfequent  words  and  actions  were 
holy  and  unblameable. 

* The  fhort  of  the  matter  is  this  : t.  I have 
abundant,  reafon  to  believe,  this  perfon  w ill  not 
lie:  2.  He  teftifies  before  God,  “ I feel  no  fin, 
but  all  love  ; I pray,  rejoice,  and  give  thanks, 
without  ceafing  : and  I have  as  clear  an  inward 
witnefs,  that  I am  fully  renewed,  as  that  I am 
juftified.'’  Now  if  I have  nothing  to  oppofe  to 
this  plaid  tefthnony,  I ought  in  reafon  to  be- 
lieve it. 

It  avails  nothing  to  objeft,  “ But  I know  fe- 
veral  tilings  wherein  he  is  quite  miftaken.”  For 
it  has  been  allowed,  that  all  who  are  in  the  body 
are  liable  to  miftake  : and  that  a miftake  in  judg- 
ment may  fometimes  occafion  a miftake  in  prac- 
tice : (tho*  great  care  is  to  be  taken  that  no  ill 
ufe  be  made  of  this  conceftion.)  For  inftance  ; 
even  one  that  is  perfefled  in  love  may  miftake 
with  regard  to  another  perfon,  and  may  think 
him  in  a particular  cafe,  to  be  more  or  lefs  faul- 
ty 


[ 59  ] 

ty  than  he  really  is,  and  hence  he  may  fpeak  to 
him  with  more  or  lefsfeverity  than  the  truth  re- 
quires. And  in  this  fenfe  (tho’  that  be  not  the 
primary  meaning  of  St.  Jaine  s in  many  things 
we.  offend  all.  This  therefore  is  no  proof  at  all 
that  the  perfon  fo  fpeaking  is  not  perfect. 

0.  But  is  it  not  a proof,  if  he  is  fur  prized  or 
f uttered  by  a noife,  a fall,  or  l'ome  fudden  dan- 
ger ? 

A.  * It  is  not  : for  one  may  hart,  tremble, 
change  colour  or  be  otherwife  difordered  in  body, 
while  the  foul  is  calmly  hayed  on  God,  and  re- 
mains in  perfect  peace.  Nay,  the  mind  itfelf  may 
be  deeply  diftreft,  may  be  exceeding  forrowful, 
may  be  perplext  and  prelfed  down  by  heavinefs 
andanguifh,  even  to  agony,  while  the  heart 
cleaves'to  God  by  perfect  love,  and  the  will  is 
wholly  refigned  to  him.  Was  it  not  fo  with  the 
fon  of  God  himfelf  ? Does  any  child  of  man  en- 
dure the  dihrefs,  the  anguifh,  the  agony,  which 
he  fuftained  ? And  yet  he  knew  on  fin. 

Q.  But  can  any  one  who  has  a pure  heart 
prefer  pleafing  to  unpleafing  food  ? Or  ufe  any 
pleafure  of  fenfe  which  is  not  ftri&lv  neceffary  ? 
If  fo  how  do  they  differ  from  others  ? 

A.  The  difference  between  thefe  and  others  in 
taking  pleafant  food,  is,  i.  They  need  none  of 
thefe  things  to  make  them  happy  ; for  they  have 
a fpring  of  happinefs  within.  They  fee  and  love 
God.  Hence  they  rejoice  evermore,  and  in  every 
thing  give  thanks * 2.  They  may  ufe  them,  but 
C 6 they 


[ 6o  ] 

they  do  not  feek  them  : 3.  They  ufe  them 
fparingly,  and  not  for  the  fake  of  the  thing  it- 
felf.  This  being  premifed,  we  anfwer  direbtly, 
fuch  an  one  may  ufe  pleafmg  food,  without 
the  danger  which  attends  thofe  who  are  not 
faved  from  fin.  He  may  prefer  it  to  unpleaf- 
ing,  though  equally  wholefome  food,  as  a 
means  of  increafingthankfulnefs,  with  a fingle  eye 
to  God,  who  giveth  os  a!l  things  richly  to  enjoy  : 
on  the  fame  principle,  he  may  fmell  to  a flower, 
or  eat  a bunch  of  grapes,  or  take  any  other  plea- 
fure  which  does  not  leffen  but  increafe  his  de- 
light in  God.  Therefore  neither  can  we  fay, 
that  one  perfefcfed  in  love  would  be  incapable  of 
marriage,  and  of  worldly  bufinefs  ; if  he  were 
called  thereto,  he  would  he  more  capable  than 
ever  ; as  being  able  to  do  all  things  without  hurry 
or  carefulnefs,  without  any  diflraflion  of 
fpirit. 

0.  But  if  two  perfect  Chriftians  had  children, 
how  could  they  he  horn  in  fin,  fince  there 
was  none  in  the  parents  ? 

A.  It  is  a polhble,  but  not  a probable  cafe  ; 
I doubt  whether  it  ever  was  or  ever  will  be.  But 
waving  this,  I anfwer,  fin  is  entailed  noon  me, 
not  by  my  immediate,  but  bv  my  find  parent. 
In  Adam  all  died  : by  the  difcbtdience  of  01.  all 
men  were  made Jinners  : all  men  without  excep- 
tion who  were  in  his  loins  when  he  ate  the  for- 
bidden fruit. 

We  have  a remarkable  illuftration  of  this  in 

gardening 


. [ 6>  ] 

orardenincr.  Grafts  on  a crab-ftock  bear  excellent 

O O 

fruit.  But  fow  the  kernels  of  this  fruit  and 
what  will  be  the  event?  They  produce  as  mere 
crabs  as  ever  were  eaten. 

Q.  But  what  does  the  perfect  one  do  more  than 
others  ? More  than  common  believers  ? 

A.  Perhaps  nothing  : lo  may  the  providence 
of  God  have  hedged  him  in,  by  outward  circum- 
flances.  Perhaps  not  fo  much  ; (tho'  he  defires 
and  longs  to  fpend  and  be  /pent  for  God  ;)  at 
leaft  not  externally  : he  neither  fpeaks  fomanv 
words,  nor  does  fo  many  works.  As  neither 
did  our  Lord  himfelf  fpeak  fo  many  words,  or 
do  fo  many,  no  nor  fo  great  works,  as  fome  of 
his  apofdes,  (John  xiv.  12.)  But  what  then  ? 
This  is  no  proof  that  he  has  not  more  grace  : and 
bv  this  God  meafures  the  outward  work.  Hear 
ye  him.  Verily  I fay- unto  you,  this  poor  widow 
has  call  in  more  than  them  all.  Verily  this  poor 
man,  with  his  few  broken  words,  hath  fpoke 
more  than  them  all.  Verily  this  poor  woman, 
that  hath  given  a cup  of  cold  water,  hath  done 
more  than  them  all  1 O ceafe  to  judge  according 
to  appearance,  and  learn  to  judge  righteous  judg- 
ment ! 

Q.  But  is  not  this  a proof  again#  him  ? 1 feel 
no  power  either  in  his  words  or  prayer  ? 

A.  It  is  not : for  perhaps  that  is  yourown  fault. 
You  are  not  likely  to  feel  any  power  therein,  if 
an  of  tl  efe  hindrances  lie  in  the  way  : 1.  Your 
own  deadnefs  of  foul.  The  dead  Pharifees  felt  no 


power 


C 62  ] 


power  even  in  his  words,  who  fpake  as  never 
man  fpake.  \ 2.  The  guilt  of  fome  unrepented  fin 
lying  upon  the  confcience  ; 3.  Prejudice  toward 
him  of  any  kind  : 4.  Your  not  believing  that  ftate 
to  be  attainable,  wherein  he  profelTes  to  be  : 3. 
Unreadinefs  to  think  or  own  he  has  attained  it  ; 
6,  Over-valuing  or  idolizing  him  ; 7.  Over-valu- 
ing your [elf  and  your  own  judgment.  If  any  of 
thefe  is  the  cafe,  what  wonder  is  it,  that  you 
feel  no  power  in  any  thing  he  fays  ? But  do  not 
others  feel  it  ? If  they  do,  your  argument  falls  to 
the  ground.  And  if  they  do  not,  do  none  of  thefe 
hindrances  lie  in  their  way  too  ? You  mull  be 
certain  of  this  before  you  can  build  any  argument 
thereon.  And  even  then  your  argument  will 
prove  no  more,  than  that  grace  and  gifts  do  not 
always  go  together. 

“ But  he  does  not  come  up  to  my  Idea  of  a 
perfeft  Chriflian.”  And  perhaps  no  one  ever 
did  or  ever  will.  For  your  idea  may  go  bepond,  or 
at  leaft  b.efide  the  fcriptural  account.  It  may  in- 
clude more  than  the  bible  includes  therein,  or 
however  fomething  which  that  does  not  include. 
Scripture  perfediion  is,  pure  love  filling  the  heart 
and  governing  all  the  words  and  a6tions.  If  your 
idea  includes  any  thing  more  or  any  thing  elfe, 
it  is  not  fcriptural  : and  then  no  wonder,  that  a 
fcripturally-perfeft  Chriflian  does  come  up  to 
it. 

I fear  many  {tumble  on  this  {tumbling-block. 
They  include  as  many  ingredients  as  they 
-pleafe,  not  according  to  feripture,  but  their  own 

imagination, 


[ 63  J 

imagination,  in  their  idea  of  one  that  is  perfect; 
and  then  readily  deny  any  one  to  be  fuch,  who 
does  not  anfwer  that  imaginary  idea. 

The  more  care  fhould  we  take,  to  keep  the 
iimple,  fcriptural  account  continually  in  our  eye. 
Pure  love  reigining  alone  in  the  heart  and  life, 
this  is  the  whole  ox  fcriptural  perfection. 

Q.  When  may  a perfon  judge  himfelf  to  have 
attained  this  ? 

A.  When  after  having  been  fully  convinced  of 
inbred  fin,  by  a far  deeper  and  clearer  convic- 
tion, than  that  he  experienced  before  juftification, 
and  after  having  experienced  a gradual  mortifica- 
tion of  it,  he  experiences  a total  death  to  fin,  and 
an  entire  renewal  in  the  love,  and  image  of  God, 
fo  as  to  rejoice,  evermore , to  pray  without  ceajing \ 
and  in  every  thing  to  give  thanks.  Not  that  “ to 
feel  all  love  and  no  fin,”  is  a fufficient  proof; 
feveral  have  experienced  this  for  a time,  before 
their  fouls  were  fully  renewed.  None  therefore 
ought  to  believe,  that  the  work  is  done,  till  there 
is  added  the  teftimony  of  the  Spirit,  witneffino-  his 
entire  fanftification,  as  clearly  as  his  juftifica- 
tion. 

0.  But  whence  is  it,  that  fome  imagine  they 
are  thus  fandlified,  when  in  reality  they  are 
not  ? 

A.  It  is  hence  : they  do  not  judge  by  all  the 
preceding  marks,  but  either  by  part  of  them,  or 
by  others,  that  are  ambiguous.  But  I know  no 
inftance  of  a perfon  attending  to  them  all,  and 

yet 


[ 64  J 

yet  deceived  in  this  matter.  I believe,  there  can 
be  none  in  (he  world.  If  a man  be  deeply  and 
fully  convinced,  after  juftification,  ofimbredfm; 
if  he  then  experience  a gradual  mortification  of 
fin,  and  afterwards  an  entire  renewal  in  the  image 
of  God  : if  to  this  change,  immenfely  greater 
than  that  wrought  when  he  was  juflified,  be  add- 
ed a clear,  direft  witnefs  of  the  renewal  : I judge 
it  as  impoxTible  this  man  fhoukl  be  deceived  here- 
in, as  that  God  fboukl  lie.  And  if  one  whom 
I know  to  be  a man  of  veracity  tefiify  tnefe  things 
to  me,  I ought  not,  without  fume  fufficient 
reafon,  to  rejeft  histeflimonv. 

0.  Is  this  death  to  fin  and  renewal  in  love, 
gradual  or  inllantaneous  ? 

A.  A man  may  be  dying  for  fome  time  ; yet 
he  does  not,  properly  fpeahing,  die,  kill  the  in- 
fiant  the  foul  is  feparated  from  the  body  : and' in 
that  itrflant  he  lives  tha  life  of  eternity.  In  like 
manner,  be  may  be  dying  to  fin,  for  fome  time  ; 
yet  he  is  not  dead  to  fin  till  fm  is  feparated  from 
his  foul.  And  in  that  inftant  he  lives  the  full 
life  of  love.  And  as  the  change  undergone  when 
the  body  dies,  is  of  a different  kind,  and  infi- 
nitelv  greater  than  anv  we  had  known  before,  yea 
fucnastill  then  it  is  impofiible  to  conceive  : fo 
the  change  wrought  when  the  foul  dies  to'  fin, 
is  of  a differen  kind,  and  infinitely  greater  than 
any  before,  and  than  any  can  conceive  till  he 
experiences  it.  Yet  be  ftill  ;row>  in  grace,  in 
the  knowledge:  of  Chriff,  in  the  iove  and  image 

of 


C 65  ] 

of  God  : and  will  do  fo,  not  only  ’till  death, 
but  to  all  eternity. 

Q.  How  are  we  to  wait  for  this  change  ? 

A.  Not  in  carelefs  indifference  or  indolent 
inadlivity;  but  in  vigorous,  uiiiverfal  obedience, 
in  a zealous  keeping  of  all  the  commandments, 
in  watchfulnefs  and  painfulnefs,  in  denying 
ourfelves  and  taking  up  our  crofs  daily  ; as  well 
as  in  earned  prayer  and  fading,  and  a clofe  at- 
tendance on  all  the  ordinances  of  God,  And  if 
any  man  dream  of  attaining  it  any  other  way, 
(yea  or  of  keeping  it,  when  it  is  attained,  when 
he  has  received  it  even  in  the  larged  meafure) 
he  deceiveth  his  own  foul.'  ’Tis  true  we  receive 
it  by  fimple  faith.  But  God  does  not,  will  not 
give  that  faith,  unlefs  we  feek  it  with  all  dili- 
gence, in  the  way  which  he  hath  ordained. 

This  confideration  may  fatisfy  thofe  who 
enquire,  Why  fo  few  have  received  the  bleffing  ? 
Enquire,  how  many  are  feeking  it  in  this  way  ? 
And  you  have  a fufficient  anfwer. 

" Braver  efpecially  is  wanting.  Who  continues 
injlant  therein  P Who  zurejiks  with  God  for  this 
very  thing  ? So  ye  have  not  becavfe  ye  ajk 
not  : or  becaufe  ye  ajh.  amijs,  namely,  “ That 
you  may  be  renewed  before  you  die,”  Before  you 
die  ! Will  that  content  you  ? Nay  hut  afk 
that  it  maybe  done  now  ! To  day!  While  it  is 
called  to-day!  Do  not  call  this  “ fetting  God  a 
lime.”  Certainly  to  day  is  his  time  as  well  as  to 
morrow.  Make  hade  man,  make  hade ! Let 

Thy 


[ 66  J 

Thy  foul  break  out  in  flrong  defire 
The  perfeft  blifs  to  prove  ! 

Thy  longing  heart  be  all  on  fire 
To  be  diffolv’d  in  love  ! 

■ , : j , 

G*  But  may  we  continue  in  peace  and  joy> 
Till  we  are  perfefl  in  love  ? 

A,  Certainly  we  may  : for  the  kingdom  of 
God  is  not  divided  againft  itfelf.  Therefore  let 
not  believers  be  difcouraged,  from  rejoicing  in  the 
Lord  always.  And  yet  we  may  be  fenfibly  pain- 
ed at  the  finful  nature  that  hill  remains  in  us. 
It  is  good  for  us  to  have  a piercing  fenfe  of  this, 
and  a vehement  to  defire  to  be  delivered  from 
it.  But  this  fhouldonly  incite  us,  the  more  zeal- 
oufly  to  fly  every  moment  to  our  ftrong  helper, 
the  more  earneftly  to  prefs  forward  to  the  mark , 
the  pi  ize  of  our  high  calling  in  Chrifl  Jefus.  And 
when  the  fenfe  of  our  fin  moll  abounds,  the  fenfe 
of  his  love  fhould  much  more  abound. 

0.  How  lhould  we  treat  thofe  who  think 
they  have  attained  P 

A.  Examine  them  candidly,  and  exhort  them 
to  pray  fervently,  that  God  would  fhew  them 
all  that  is  in  their  hearts.  The  moll  earnell  ex- 
hortations to  abound  in  every  grace,  and  the 
llrongell  cautions  to  avoid  all  evil,  are  given 
throughout  the  New  Teltament,  to  thofe  who  are 
in  the  higheft  Hate  of  grace.  But  this  fhould 
be  done  with  the  utmolt  tendernefs,  and  with- 
out any  harfhnefs,  flernnefs  or  fournefs.  We 

fhould 


[ 67  ] 

fhould  carefully  avoid  the  very  appearance  of  an- 
,ger,  unkindnefs,  or  contempt.  Leave  it  to  Satan 
thus  to  tempt*  and  to  his  children  to  cry  out, 
Let  us  examine  him  with  defpite.fulnejs  and  torture , 
that  we  may  know  his  meeknefs  and  prove  his 
patience.  If  they  are  faithful  to  the  grace  given, 
they  are  in  no  danger  of  perifhing  thereby  ; no 
not  if  they  remain  in  that  miftake,  till  their 
fpirit  is  returning  to  God. 

Q.  * But  what  hurt  can  it  do  to  deal  harfhly 
with  them  ? 

A.  Either  they  are  miftaken,  or  they  are  not.  If 
they  are,  it  may  deftroy  their  fouls.  This  is 
nothing  impolTible,  no  nor  improbable.  It  may 
fo  enrage  or  fo  difcourage  them,  that  they  will 
fink,  and  rife  no  more.  If  they  are  not  miftaken, 
it  may  grieve  thofe  whom  God  has  not  grieved, 
and  do  much  hurt  unto  our  own  fouls.  For  un- 
doubtedly he  that  toucheth  them,  toucheth  as  it 
were  the  apple  of  God’s  eye.  If  they  are  indeed 
full  of  his  fpirit,  to  behave  unkindly  or  con- 
tenlptuouflv  to  them,  is  doing  no  little  defpite  to 
-the  fpirit  of  grace.  Hereby  likewife  we  feed  and 
increafe  in  ourfelves  evil-furmifing  and  many 
wrong  tempers.  To  mftance  only  one.  What 
felf-fufficiency  is  this,  to  fet  ourfelves  up  for 
inquifitors  general,  for  peremptory  judges  in 
thefe  deep  things  of  God  P Are  we  qualified 
for  the  office  ? Can  we  pronounce  in  all  cafes. 
How  far  infirmity  reaches  ? What  may,  and 
what  may  not  be  refolved  into  it  ? What  may 

in 


[ C8  ] 

in  all  cricumflances,  and  what  may  not,  confift 
with  perfect  love  ? Can  we  precifely- determine, 
How  it  will  influence  the  look,  the  gefiure, 
the  tone  of  voice  ? If  we  can,  doubtlefs  we  are 
the  mat,  and  wijdpsn Jhcdl  die  with  us  / ■ 

0.  But  if  they"  are  difpleafed  ar  our  not  be- 
lieving diem,  is  not  this  a full  proof  again  It 
them  ? 

A.  According  as  that  difnl'eafureds  : if  they  are 
angry,-  it  is  a proof  agaiidt  them  : if  they  are 
grieved,  it  is  not.  They  ought  to-be  grieved, 
if  we  ditbelieve  a real  work  ot  God,  arid  thereby 
deprive  ourfelves  of  the  advantage  we  might 
have  received  from  it—  And  we  may  eafilv 
miftake  this  grief  for  anger,  as  the  outward  ex- 
prefhons  ®f  both  are  much  alike. 

0.  But  is  it  not  well  to  find  out  thofe,  who 
fancy  they  have  attained,  when  they  have 
not  ? 

A.  It  is  well  to  do  it  by  mild,  loving  exami- 
nation. But  it  is  not  well  to  triumph  even  over 
tliefe.  It  is  extremely  wrong,  if  we  hud  fuch  an 
inllance,  to  rejoice,  as  if  we  had  found  great 
f noils.  Ought  we  not  rather  to  grieve,  to  be 
deeply  concerned,  to  let  our  eyes  run  down  with 
tears  ? Here  is  one  w ho  fcemed  to  be  a living 
proof  of  God  s pow'er  to  fave  to  the  uttermojf. 
But  alas  ! It  is  not  as  we  hoped  ! He  is  weighed 
in  the  balance  and  found  wanting  1 And  is  this 
matter  of  joy  ? Ought  wre  not  to  rejoice  a thou- 

fand 


C 69  ] 

fand  times  more,  if  we  can  find  nothing  but  pure 
love  ? 

But  he  is  deceived.”  What  then  ? It  is  a 
harmlefs  miilake,  while  he  feds  nothing  but 
love  in  his  heart.  It  is  a miftake  which  gene- 
rally argues  great  grace,  an  high  degree  both  of 
holinefsand  happinefs.  This  Ihould  be  a matter 
of  real  joy  to  all  that  are  fimple  of  heart  : not 
the  miftake  itfelf,  but  the  height  of  grace 
which  for  a time  occafions  it.  I rejoice  that 
this  foul  is  always  happy  in  Chrift,  always 
full  of  prayer  and  thankfgiving.  I rejoice  that 
he  feels  no  unholy  temper,  but  the  pure  love 
of  God  continually.  And  I will  rejoice  if  fin  is 
^ fujpe-nded , ’till  it  is  totally  de/hoyed. 

0.  Is  there  no  danger  then  in  a man’s  being 
thus  deceived  ? 

A.  Not  at  the  time  that  he  feels  no  fin.  There 
was  danger  before,  and  there  will  be  again, 
when  he  comes  into  fr-elh  trials.  But  fo  long  as  he 
feels  nothing  but  love  animating  all  his  thoughts, 
and  words  and  actions  he  is  in  no  danger  ! He 
is  not  only  happy,  but  fafe,  wider  the  fhadom  of 
the  Almighty.  And,  for  God’s  fake,  let  him  con- 
tinue in  that  love  as  long  as  he  can  ; mean  time 
you  mav  do  well  to  warn  him  of  the  danger  that 
will  be,  if  his  love  grow  cold  and  fin  revive,  even 
the  danger  of  calling  a wav  hope,  and  flip- 
poftng,  that  became  he  hath  not  attained  yet, 
T here  fore  he  never  flu  T 


0.  But 


[ 7<3  ] 

0.  But  what  if  none  have  attained  it  vet  i 
What  if  al!  who  think  fo  are  deceived  ? 

A.  Convince  me  of  this,  and  I will  preach  it 
no  more.  But  underiland  me  . right.  I do  not 
build  any  doctrine  on  this  or  that  perfon.  This 
or  any  other  man  may  be  deceived,  and  I am 
not  moved.  But  if  there  are  none  made  perfect 
yet,  God  has  not  fent  me  to  preach  perfection. 

Put  a parallel  cafe.  Por  many  years  I have 
preached,  “ There  is  a peace  of  God  which 
palfeth  all'  underHanding.”  Convince  me,  that 
this  word  has  fallen  to  the  ground,  that  in  all 
thefe  years  none  have  attained  this  peace  ; 
that  there  is  no  living  wiinefs  ofit  at  this  dav, 
and  I will  preach  it  no  more.” 

“ O,  but  feveral  perfons  have  died  in  that 
peace  ” Perhaps  fo  : but  I want  living  witneffes. 
I cannot  indeed  be  infallibly  certain,  that  this  or 
that  perfon  is  a witne’fs.  But  if  1 were  certain 
there  are  none  fuch,  I mull  have  done  with 
this  do&rine. 

“ You  mifunderltand  me.  I believe  fome 
who  died  in  this  love,  enjoyed  it  long  before 
their  death.  But  I was  not  certain,  that  their 
former  teftimony  was  true,  ’till  feme  hours  before 
they  died.” 

You  had  not  an  infallible  certainty  then.  And 
a reafonable  certainty  you  might  have  had  be- 
fore : fuch  a certainty  as  might  have  quick- 
ened and  comforted  your  own  foul,  and  anfwered 
all  other  Chriilian  purpofes.  Such  a certainty 

as 


[ n ] 


a's  this  any  candid  perfon  may  have,  fuppofe 
there  be  any  living  witnefs,  by  talking  one  hour 
with  that  perfon  in  the  love  and  fear  of  God. 

0.  But  what  does  it  fignify,  whether  any  have 
attained  it  or  no,  feeing  fo  many  fcriptures  wit- 
nefs for  it  ? 

A.  If  I were  convinced,  that  none  in  England 
had  attained  what  has  been  fo  clearly  and  ftrong- 
ly  preached  by  fuch  a number  of  preachers,  in 
fo  many  places  and  for  fo  long  a time,  I fhould 
be  clearly  convinced,  that  we  had  all  miftaken 
the  meaning  of  thofe  fcriptures.  And  therefore 
for  the  time  to  come,  I too  mult  teach  that  - 
“ tin  will  remain  ’till  death.” 

. 20.  * In  the  year  1762,  there  was  a great  in- 
creafeof  the  work"  of  God  in  London.  Many, 
who  had  hitherto  cared  for  none  of  thefe  things 
were  deeply  convinced  of  their  loft  eftate. 
Many  found  redemption  in  the  blood  of  Chrift  : 
not  a few  backfliders  were  healed.  Andacon- 
fiderable  number  of  perfons  believed,  that  God 
had  faved  them  from  all  fin.  Eafily  forefeeing 
that  Satan  would  be  endeavouring  to  fow  tares 
among  the  wheat,  I took  much  pains  to 
apprize  them  of  the  danger,  particularly  with 
regard  to  pride  and  entliujiafm.  And  while  I 
ftayed  in  town,  I had  reafon  to  hope  they  con- 
tinued both  humble  and  fober-minded.  But  aJ- 
moft  as  foon  as  I was  gone,  enthufiafm  broke  in; 
two  or  three  began  to  take  their  own  imagina- 
tions for  impreflions  from  God,  and  thence  to 

fuppofe. 


[ 72  ] 

fuppofe,  that  they  fhould  never  die.  And  thefe 
labouring  to  bring  others  into  the  fame  opinion, 
occafioned  much  noife  and  confufion.  Soon 
after,  the  fame  perfons,  with  a few  more,  ran  into 
other  extravagances,  fancying  they  could  not  be 
tempted,  that  they  fhould  fed  no  more pain,  and 
that  they  had  the  gift  of  prophecy,  and  of  dif- 
cerning  oj  fpirits.  At  my  return  to  London  in 
autumn,  fome  of  them  flood  r eproved  : but 

others  were  got  above  inflru&ion.  Meantime  a 
flood  of  reproach  came  upon  me  almofl  from  every 
quarter  : from  themfelves,  becaufe  I was  check- 
ing them  on  all  occafions  ; and  from  others,  “be- 
caufe, they  faid,  I did  not  check  them.”  How- 
ever the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  not  flayed,  but 
more  and  more  finners  were  convinced  : while 
fome  were  almofl  daily  converted  to  God, 
and  others  enabled  to  love  him  with  all  their 
heart , 

21.  About  this  time  a friend  at  fome  dif- 
tapeefrom  London,  wrote  to  me  as  follows  : 

•“  Be  not  over  alarmed,  that  Satan  fows  tares 
among  the  wheat  of  Chrift  ! It  ever  has  been  fo, 
efpecially  on  any  remarkable  out-pouring  of  his 
Spirit  : and  ever  will  be  fo,  ’till  he  is  chained 
up  for  a thoufand  years.  ’Till  then  he  will  always 
ape,  and  endeavour  to  counter  aR the  work  of  the 
Spirit  of  Chrift. 

« One  melancholy  effetl  of  this  has  been,  that 
a world  who  is  always  afleep  in  the  arms  of  the 

evil 


[ 73  ] 

evil  one,  has  ridiculed  every  work  of  the  Holy 
Spirit. 

“ But  what  can  real  Chriftians  do  ? Why,  if 
they  would  a£t  worthy  of  themfelves,  they  (honld 
l.  Pray  that  every  deluded  foul  may  be  deliver- 
ed, 2.  Endeavour  to  reclaim  them  in  the  fpirit 
of  meeknefs,  and  laftly,  Take  the  utmoft  care, 
both  by  prayer  and  watchfulnefs,  that  the  delu- 
fion  of  others  may  not  leflen  their  zeal  in  feek- 
ing  after  that  univerfal  holinefs  of  foul,  body, 
and  fpirit,  without  which  no  man  Jhall  fit  the 
Lord. 

“ Indeed  this  compleat  new  creature  is  mere 
madnefs  to  a mad  world.  But  it  is  notwithftand- 
ing  the  will  and  wifdom  of  God.  May  we -all 
feek  after  it ! 

“ But  fome  who  maintain  this  dofirine  in  itS 
full  extent,  are  tod  often  guilty  of  limiting  tli'e  Al- 
mighty. He  difpenfes  his  gifts  juft  as  he  pleafes  ; 
therefore  it  is  neither  wife  ndr  modeft  to  affirm 
that  a perfon  muftbe  a believer  for  any  length  of 
time,  before  he  is  capable  of  receiving  an  hig% 
degree  of  the fpirit  of  holinef. ' 

“ God’s  vfual  method  is  one  thing,  but  his 
fovereignpleafure  is  another.  He  has  wifereafons 
both  for  haftening  and  retarding  his  work  : fome- 
times  he  comes  fudden  and  unexpended  : fome- 
times  not  ’till  we  have  loner  looked  for  him. 

O 

“ Indeed  it  has  been  my  opinion  for  many  years,- 
that  one  great  caufe  why  men  make  fo  little 
improvement  in  the  divine  life,  is  their  own 
Vol.  XXIV.  • D coldnefs 


[ 74  ] 

coldnefs,  negligence,  and  unbelief.  And  vet  I here 
fpeak  of  believers. 

“ May  the  Spirit  of  Chrift  give  us  a right  judg- 
ment in  all  things,  and  fill  us  -with  all  the  julnefs 
of  God,  that  fo  we  may  be  perfeQ.  and  entire , 
wanting  nothing .” 

About  the  fame  time  five  or  fix  lionefi  enthu- 
fiafts  foretold  the  world  was  to  end  on  the  28th  of 
February.  I iinmediaielv  withflood  them  bv  every 
poflible  means,  both  in  public  and  private.  I 
preached  exprefsly  upon  the  fubjeCl,  both  at 
'VVefi-fi.reet  and  Spitalfields.  I warned  thefociety 
again  and  again,  and  fpoke  feveraily  to  as  many 
as  I could  ; and  I fawr  the  fruit  ol  my  labour  ; 
They  made  exceeding  few  converts  : I believe 
fcarce  thirty  in  our  whole  fociety.  Neverthelefs 
they  made  abundance  of  noife,  gave  huge  oc- 
casion of  offence,  to  thofe  who  took  care  to  im- 
prove to  the  uttermoft  every  occafion  again  ft 
me,  and  greatly  increafed  both  the  number  and 
courage  of  thofe  who  oppofed  Chriftian  Perfec- 
tion. 

22.  Some  queftions  now  publiflied  bv  one  of 
thefe,  induced  a plain  man  to  v\  rite  the  following  : 

“ Queries,  humbly  propofed  to  thofe  who 
deny  Perfection  to  be  attainable  in  this  life. 

t.  Has  there  not  been  a larger  meafure  of  the 
Holy  Spirit. given  under  the  gofpel,  then  under 
Jewifh  difpe.nfation  ? If  not,  in  what  fenfe  was 
the  Spirit  not  given  before  Chrift  was  glorified  ? 
John  vii.  39. 


z.  Was 


C 75  ] 

2.  Was  that  glory  which  followed  the  fuffer- 
ings  of  Chrij},  1 Pet.  i.  it.  an  external  glory  or 
an  internal,  viz.  the  glory  of  holinefs  ? 

g.  Has  God  anywhere  in  [cnpture  commanded 
us  more  than  he  has  promifed  to  us  ? 

4.  Are  the  promifes  of  God  refpefting  holi- 
nefs to  be  fulfilled  in  this  life , or  only  in  the 
next  ? 

5.  Is  a Chriftian  under  any  other  laws  than 
thofe  which  God  promifes  to  write  in  our  hearts , 
fer.xxxi.  31,  &c.  Heb.  viii.  10. 

6.  In  what  fe  nfe  is  the  rig  It-  eoufncfs  of  the  law 
fulfilled  in  tho/e,  who'  walk  not  after  thefefi  but 

after  the  Spirit  ? Rom.  viii.  4. 

7.  Is  it  impoffible  for  any  one  in  this  life,  to 
love  God  with  all  his  heart , and  mind , and  foul 
andjlrength  ? And  is  the  Chriftian  under  any 
law  which  is  not  fulfilled  in  this  love  ? 

8.  Does  the  foul’s  going  out  of  the  body  effeft 
its  purification  from  indwelling  fin  ? 

9.  Iffo,  is  it  not  fomething  elfe,  not  the  blood 
of  Chrijl,  which  clean feth  i: from  all fin  ? 

10.  If  his  blood  cleanfeth  us  from  all  fin,  while 
the  foul  and«body  are  united,  is  it  not  in  this 
life  ? 

11.  If  when  that  union  ceafes ; is  it  not  in  the 
next  ? And  is  not  this  too  late  ? 

12.  If  in  the  article  of  death  ; what  fituation  is 
the  foul  in,  when  it  is  neither  in  the  body , nor 
out  oj  it  ? 

D 2 


13.  Has 


[ 76  ] 

13-  Has  Chrift  any  where  taught  us  to  pray 
for  what  he  never  defigns  to  give  ? 

14.  Has  he  not  taught  us  to  pray,  Thy  will  bt 
done  on  earth  as  it  is  done  in  heaven?  And  is  it 
not  done  perfectly  in  heaven  ? 

15.  If  fo,  has  he  not  taught  us  to  pray  for 
perfe&ion  on  earth?  Does  he  not  then  defign  to 
give  it  ? 

16.  Did  not  St.  Paul  pray  according  to  the 
'will  of  God,  when  he  prayed  that  the  Theffalo- 
nians  might  be  fanftified  wholly , and  preserved 
(in  this  world,  not  the  next,  unlefs  he  was  pray- 
ing for  the  dead)  blamelefs  in  body,  foul  and Jpirit, 
•unto  the  coining  of  Jefus  Chrijl  ? 

17.  Do  you  fmcerely  defire  to  be  freed  from  in- 
dwelling fin  in  this  life? 

18.  If  you  do,  did  not  God  give  you  that  de- 
fire ? 

19.  If  fo,  did  he  not  give  it  you  to  mock  you, 
fince  it  is  impoflible  it  fhould  ever  be  fulfilled  ? 

20.  If  you  have  not  fincerity  enough  even  to 
delire  it,  are  you  not  difputing  about  matters  too 
high  for  you  ? 

21.  Do  you  ever  prayGcd  to  clcanfethe  thoughts 
of  your  heart,  that  you  may  perfectly  love  him  ? 

22.  If  you  neither  defire  what  you  afk,  nor 
believe  it  attainable,  pray  you  not  as  a fool  pray- 
eth  ? 

God  help  thee  to  confider  thefe  queftions 
calmly  and  impartially!” 

24.  In  the  latter  end  of  this  year  God  called  to 

himfelf 


[ 77  ] 


Mimfelf  that  burning  and  fhining  light,  Jane. 
Cooper.  As  fhe  was  both  a living  and  a dying 
witnefs  of  Chriflian  Perfection,  it  will  not  be  at 
all  foreign  to  the  fubjeCt,  to  add  one  of  her  owit 
letters,  containing  a plain-  and  artlefs  relation; 
of  the  marner  wherein  it  pleafed  God  to  work 
that  great  change  in  her  foul. 

May  2,  1761. 

“ I believe  while;  memory  remains  in  me,  gra- 
titude will  continue. — From  the  time  you  preach- 
ed on  Gal.  v.  5.  I faw  clearly  the  hate  of  my 
foul.  That  fermon  defcribed  my  heart,  and 
what  it  wanted  to  be,  truly  happy.  You  read  IVL 
M.’s  letter,  and  it  defcribed  the  religion  which  I 
Jefiredi^.  From  that  time  the  prize  appeared  in 
view,  and  I was  enabled  to  follow  hard  after  it. 
I was  kept  watching  unto  prayer,  fometimes  in 
much  diftrefs,  at  other  times  in  patient  expecta- 
tion of  the  bleffing.  For  fome  days  before  you 
left  London,  my  foul  was  flayed  on  a promife  I 
had  applied  to  me  in  prayer,  The  Lord  whom  \e 
feek  [hall Juddenly  co?ne  to  his  temple . I believed 
he  would,  and  that  he  would  fit  there  as  a re- 
finer’s fire.  The  Tuefday  after  you  went,  I. 
thought  I could  not  deep,  unlefs  he  fulfilled  his 
word  that  night.  I never  knew  as  I did  then 
the  force  of  thefe  words,  Be  Jlill  and  know  that  I 
am  God.  I became  nothing  before  him,  and. 
enjoyed  perfect  calmnefs  in  my  foul.  I knew 
not  whether  he  had  deftroyed  myr  fin;  but 
D 3 -I  defirecl 


C 78  ] 

J defired  10  know,  that  I might  praifehim.  Yet 
I Toon  found  the  return  of  unbelief,  and  groaned, 
being  burdened.  Ori  Wednefdav  I went  to 
London,  and  fought  the  Lord  without  ceafing. 
I promifed,  if  he  would  fave  me  from  fin,  I would 
praife  him.  I could  part  with  all  things  fo  F 
might  win  Chrift.  But  I found  all  theft  pleas 
to  be  nothing  worth,  and  that  if  he  faved  me,  it 
muff  be  freely,  for  his  own  name’s  fake.  On 
Tlmrfday  I was  fo  much  tempted,  that  I thought 
of  deflroying  myfelf,  or  never  converfing  more 
with  the  people  of  God.  And  yet  I had  no 
doubt  of  his  pardoning  love:  but  “ ’twas  worfe 
than  death  my  God  to  love,  and  not  my  God 
alone.”  On  Friday  my  diftrefs  was  deepened. 
I endeavoured  to  pray  and  could  not.  I went  to 
Mrs.  D.  who  prat  ed  for  me,  and  told  me,  it  was 
the  death  of  nature.  I opened  the  bible  on  The 
fearful  and  unbelieving  Jliall  have  their  part  m the 
lake  which  burneth  with  fire  and  brirnfone.  I 
could  not  bear  it.  I opened  again  on  Mark  xvi. 
6,  7.  Be  not  aj righted : ye  Jeek  Jfus  of  Nazareth 
— Go  your  way  ; tell  his  difaples  he  goeth  before 
you  into  Galdee : there  fhall  ye  fee  him.  I was 
encouraged  and  enabled  to  pray,  believing  I 
fhould  fee  Jefus  at  home.  I returned  that  night 
and  found  Mrs.  G.  She  prayed  for  me:  and  the 
predefhnarian  had  no  plea,  but  “ Lord,  thou  art 
no  refpefter  of  perfons.”  He  proved  he  was  not, 
by  blefiing  me.  I was  in  a moment  enabled  to 


[ 79  ] 

lav  hold  on  Jefus  Chrift,  and'  found  falvatlon  by 
fimple  faith.  He  allured  mo,  the  Lord,  the  king 
was  in  the  rnidit  of  me,  and  that  I fhould  fee 
evil  no  more.  I now  blelfed  him  who  had’  vi- 
fited  and  redeemed  me,  and  teas  become  my 
wifdom , rigliteoufne/s,  fanBification  and  redemp- 
tion. I faw  Jefus  altogether  lovely,  and  knew 
he  was  mine  in  all  his  offices.  And,  glory  be  to 
him ! He  now  reigns  in  my  heart  without  a 
rival.  I find  no  will  but  his.  I feel  no  pride; 
nor  anv  affefction  but  what  is  placed  on  him.  I 
know,  it  is  by  faith  I ftand,  and  that  watching 
unto  prayer  muff  be  the  guard  of  faith.  l am 
happy  in  God  this  moment,  and  I believe,  for  the. 
next.  I have  often  read  the  chapter  you  men- 
tion, (1  Cor.  xiii.)  and  compared  my  heart  and 
life  with  it.  In  fo  doing,  I feel  my  fhort-com- 
ings,  and  the  need  I have  of  the  atoning  blood. 
Yet  I dare  not  fay,  I do  not  feel  a meafure  of  the 
jove  there  defcribed,  though  I am  not  -all  I ffiall 
be.  I defire  to  be  loft  in  that  love  which  pnjfeth 
knowledge. — I fee  the  jujl  f, hall  live  by  faith  : and 
unto  me,  who  am  lefs  than  the  leaft  of  all  faints, 
is  this  grace  given.  If  I were  an  archangel,  I 
fhould  veil  my  face  before  him,  and  let  filence 
fpeak  his  praife  !” 

25.  The  next  year,  the  number  of  thofe  who 
believed  they  were  faved  from  fin  ftill  increafing, 
1 judged  it  needful  to  publifli,  chiefly  for  their 
D 4 ufe. 


[ So  J 

ufe,  “ Farther  Thoughts  on  Chriftian  Perfec- 
tion.” 

Q.  How  is  Chrijl  the  end  oj  the  law  jor  nghte- 
aufnefs  to  every  one  that  believeth  ? Rom.  x.  a. 

* A . In  order  to  underfland  this,  you  mud 
underhand  what  law  is  here  fpoken  of.  And 
this  I apprehend,  is  1.  The  Mofaic  law,  the 
whole  Mofaic  difpenfation  ; which  St.  Paul  con- 
tinually fpeaks  of  as  one,  though  containing 
three  parts,  the  political,  moral,  and  ceremo- 
nial : 2.  The  Adamic  law,  that  given  to  Adam 
in  innocence,  properly  called,  “ the  law  of 
works.”  This  is  in  fubftance  the  fame  \yith  the 
Angelic  law,  being  common  to  angels  and  man. 
It  required,  that  man  fhould  ufe  to  the  glory  of 
God,  all  the  powers  with  which  he  was  created. 
Now  he. was  created  free  from  any  defedt,  either 
in  his  underdanding  or  his  affedlions.  His  body 
was  then  no  clog  to  the  mind  : it  did  not  hinder 
his  apprehending  all  things  clearly,  judging  truly 
concerning  them,  and  reafoning  judly;  if  he 
reafoned  at  all.  I fay,  “ If  he  reafoned  for 
podibly  he  did  not.  Perhaps  he  had  no  need  of 
reafoning,  till  his  corruptible  body  preffed  down 
the  mind,  and  impaired  its  native  faculties. 
Perhaps  till  then,  the  mind  faw  every  truth  that 
offered,  as  dire.dlly  as  the  eye  now  fees  the  light. 

Confequently  this  law,  proportioned  to  his 
original  powers,  required  that  he  fhould  always 
think,  always  fpeak,  and  always  a cl  precifely 

right, 


[ 8!  ] 


right, -iii  every  point  whatever.  He  was  well 
able  fo  to  do.  And  God  could  not  but  require 
the  fervice  he  was  able  to  pay. 

But  Adam  fell : and  his  incorruptible  body  be- 
came corruptible  : and  ever  fince  it  is  a clog  to 
the  foul,  and  hinders  its  operations.  Hence  at 
prefent  fro  child  of  man  can  at  all  times  appre- 
hend clearly,  or  judge  truly.  And  where  either 
the  judgment  or  apprehenfion  is  wrong,  it  is  im- 
poffible  to  reafon  juftly.  Therefore  it  is  as  na- 
tural for  a man  to  miftake  as  to  breathe  ; and  he 
can  no  more  live  without  the  one  than  without 
the  other.  Confequently  no  man  is  able  to 
perform  the  fervice  which  the  Adamic  law  re- 
quires. . 

And  no  man  is  obliged  to  perform  it  : God 
does  not  require  it  of  any  man.  For  Chriji  is 
the  end  of  the  Adamic,  as  well  as  the  Mafaic  lazu. 
By  his  death  he  hath  put  an  end  to  both  he 
hath  abolilhed  both  the  one  and  the  other,  with 
regard  to  man  ; and  the  obligation  to  obferve 
either  the  one  or  the  other  is  vanifhed  away. 
Nor  is  any  man  living  bound  to  obferve  the 
Adamic,  more  than  the  Mofaic  law.  t 

In  the  room  of  this,  Chrifl  hath  eftablifhed 
another,  namely,  The  law  of  faith.  Not  every 
one  that  doeth,  but  every  one  that  believeth, 
now  receiveth  righteoufnefs,  in  the  full  fenfe  of 
the  word,  that  is,  he  is  juflified,  fanftified  and 
glorified. 

D 5 <2-2 

+■•  I mean,  it  Is  not  the  condition  either  of  prefent  or  future 
falvation. 


[ 82  ] 

Q.  2.  Are  we  then  dead  to  the  law  ? 

A.  We  art  dead  to  the  law  by  the  body  oj  Clirijl 
given  for  us,  Rom.  vii.  4.  to  the  Adamic,  as 
well  as  Mofaic  law.  We  are  wholly  freed  there- 
from by  his  death  : that  law  expiring  with  him. 

0.  3.  How  then  are  we  not  without  law  to  God, 
but  under  the  law  to  Clirijl  ? 1 Cor.  ix.  21. 

A.  We  are  without  that  law.  Rut  it  does  not 
follow  that  'we  are  without  any  law.  For  God 
has  eflablifhed  another  law  in  its  place,  even  the 
Jaw  of  faith.  And  we  are  all  under  this  law  to 
God  and  to  Chrift.  Both  our  Creator  and  our 
Redeemer  require  us  to  obferve  it. 

* 0.  4.  Is  love  the  fulfilling  of  this  law  ? 

A.  Unqueftionablv  it  is.  The  whole  law,  un- 
derwhich  we  now  are,  is  fulfilled  by  love,  Rom. 
xiii.9,  10.  Faith  working  or  animated  by  love, 
is  all  that  God  now  requires  of  man.  He  has 
fubftituted  (not  fincerity,  but)  love,  in  the  room 
of  angelic  perfeHion. 

0.  5.  How  is  love  the  end  of  the  commandment  ? 

X Tim.  i.  5. 

A.  It  is  the  end  of  every  commandment  of 
God.  It  is  the  point  aimed  at  by  the  whole,  and 
every  part  of  the  Chriftian  inllitution.  The  foun- 
dation is  faith,  purifying  the  heart,  the  end  love, 
preferving  a good  confcience. 

0.  6.  What  love  is  this  ? 

* A.  The  loving  the  Lord  our  God  with  all  our 
heart , mind,  foul  and Jlrength  : and  the  laving  our 
neighbour,  every  man  as  ourfelves,  as  ourown  fouls. 

Q.  7. What  are  the  fruits  or  properties  of  this  love? 

A.  St. 


[ 83  ] 

A,  St.  Paul  informs  us  at  large,  love  is  long- 
fufTering.  It  fuffers  all  the  weaknefles  of  the 
children  of  Goa,  all  the  wickednefs  of  the  clnl- 
drenofthe  world.  And  that  not  for  a little  time 
only;  but  as  long  as  God  pleafes.  In  all' it  fees 
the  hand  of  God,  and  willingly  fubmits  thereto. 
Meantime  it  is  kind.  In  all,  and  after  all  it  fuf- 
fers, it  is  foft,  mild,  tender,  benign.  Love  en- 
vieth  not : it  excludes  every  kind  and  degree  of 
envy  out  of  the  heart.  Love  a&etk  not  rajhly,  in 
a violent  headftrong  manner,  nor  paffes  anv  rath 
or  fevere  judgment.  It  doth  not  behave  itfeljin- 
decently , is  not  rude,  does  not  aft  out  of  charac  - 
ter : Jeekcth  not  her  own  eafe,  pleafure,  honour 
or  profit : is  not  provoked ; expels  all  anger  from 
the  heart : thinketh  no  evil ; caffeth  out  all  jea- 
loufy,  fufpicioufnefs  and  readinefs  to  believe 
evil rejoiceth  not  in  iniquity  ; yea,  weeps  at  the 
fin  or  folly  of  its  bitterefl  enemies  ; but  rejoiceth 
in  the  truth , in  the  holinefs  and  happinefs  of 
every  child  of  man.  Love  covet eth  all  things t 
{peaks  evil  of  no  man  ; believeth  all  things , that 
tend  to  the  advantage  of  another's  character.  It 
hvpeth  all  things , whatever  mav  extenuate  the 
faults'  which  cannot  be  denied,  and  it  enduretk. 
all  things,  which  God  can  permit,,  or  men  and, 
devils  inflict.  This  is  the  law  of  Chnjf  the  per*. 
J-eB  law,  the  law  of  liberty. 

And  this  diftinftion  between  the  law  of  faith, 
(or  love)  and  the  law  of  works,  is  neither  _a  fubtle, 
nor  an  unnecefiary  diilinftion.  It  is  plain-,  eafiy 
and  intelligible  to  any  common  underliaodine. 

D'  6 And 


[ 84  .] 

And  it  is  abfolutely  necelfary,  to  prevent  a thou- 
fand  doubts  and  fears,  even  in  thofe  who  do  walk 
in  love. 

* 0.  8.  But.  do  we  not  in  many  things  offend 
all , yea , the  bell  of  us,  even  againft  this  law  ? 

A.  In  one  fenfe  we  do  not,  while  all  our  tem- 
pers and  thoughts,  and  wrords  and  works  fpring 
from  love.  But  in  another  wre  do,  and  fhall  do, 
more  or  lefs,  as  long  as  we  remain  in  the  body. 
For  neither  love  nor  the  unBion  of  the  Holy  One 
makes  us  infallible.  Therefore  through  una- 
voidable defedl  of  underftanding,  we  cannot  but 
miflake  in  many  things.  And  thefe  miflakes 
will  frequently  occafion  fomcthing  wrong,  both 
in  our  temper,  and  words,  and  aftions.  From 
miflaking  his  charafler,  we  may  love  a pei  fon 
lefs  than  he  really  deferves.  And  by  the  fame 
miflake  vre  are  unavoidably  led  to  fpeak  or  a£t 
with  regard  to  that  perfon,  in  fuch  a manner  as 
is  contrary  to  this  law,  in  fome  or  other  of  the 
preceding  inflances. 

9.  Do  we  not  then  need  Chrifl,  even  on 
this  account  ? 

A.  Theholieft  of  men  flill  need  Chrifl  as  their 
prophet,  as  the  light  of  the  world.  For  he  does 
not  give  them  light.  but  from  moment  to  mo- 
ment;  the  inflant  he  withdraws,  all  is  darknefs. 
They  flill  need  Chrifl  as  their  king.  For  God 
dees  not  give  them  a flock  of  holinefs.  But  un- 
lefs  they  received  a fupply  every  moment,  no- 
thing but  unholinefs  would  remain.  They  flill 
need  Chrifl  as  their  priefl,  to  make  atonement 

for 


C 85  ] 


for  their  holy  things.  Even  perfect  holinefs  is 
acceptable  to  God  only  through  Jefus  Chrift. 

Q.  10.  May  not  then  the  very  beft  of  men 
adopt  the  dying  martyr’s  confeftion,  “ I am  in 
'myfelf  nothing  but  fin , darknefs , hell : but  thou 
art  my  light,  my  holinefs,  my  heaven  ?” 

A.  Not  exaftly.  But  the  bell  of  men  may  fay, 
“ Thou  art  my  light,  my  holinefs,  my  heaven. 
Through  my  union  with  thee,  I am  full  of  light, 
of  holinefs  and  happinefs.  But  if  I were  left  to 
myfelf,  I'fiould  be  nothing  but  fin,  darknefs, 
hell.” 

But  to  proceed.  The  bell  of  men  need 
Chrift  as  their  priell,  their  atonement,  their  ad- 
vocate with  the  Father  : not  only,  as  the  continu- 
ance of  their  every  blelfing  depends  on  his  death 
and  interceffion,  but  on  account  of  their  coming 
fhort  of  the  law  of  love.  For  every  man  living 
does  fo.  You  who  feel  all  love,  compare  your- 
felves  with  the  preceding  defcription.  Weigh 
yourfelves  in  this  balance,  and  fee  if  you  are  not 
wanting  in  many  particulars. 

Q.  it.  But  if  all  this  be  confillent  with  Chrif- 
tian  Perfection,  that  perfection  is  not  freedom 
from  all  fin  : feeing  fn  is  the  tranfgrefion  of  the 
law.  And  the  perfeCt  tranfgrefs  the  very  law 
they  are  under.  Befides,  they  need  the  atone- 
ment of  Chrift.  And  he  is  the  atonement  for 
nothing  but  fin.  Is  then  the  term  finlefs  perfec- 
tion proper  ? 

A.  It  is  not  worth  difputing  about.  But  ob- 

ferve, 


f §5  ] 

lerve,  in  what  fenfe  the  perfons  in  qitefiion  need 
the  atonement  of  Chriit.  They  do  not  need 
him  to  reconcile  them  to  God  afrejh  for  they 
are  reconciled.  The}-  do  not  need  him  to  rtfiore 
the  favour  of  God,  but  to  continue  it.  He  does 
not  procure  pardon  for  them  anew , but  ever  liveth 
to  \ make  intercejjion  for  them.  And  by  one  offering 
he  hath  pcrfieded  J.or  ever  them  that  are  /acidified, 
Heb.  x.  14. 

For  want  of  duly  conudering  this,  fome  denv, 
that  they  need  the  atonement  ol  Chriit.  Indeed 
exceeding  few  : I do  not  remember  to  have  found 
five  of  them  in  England.  Of  the  two,  I would 
fooner  give  up  Perfection.  But  we  need  not 
give  up  either  one  or  the  other.  The  Perfection 
I hold,  Love  rejoicing  evermore , praying  without 
ceafing,  and  in  every  thing  giving  thanks,  is  well 
confident  with  it:  if  any  hold  a Perfection  which 
is  not,  they  mult  look  to  it. 

0.  12.  Does  then  Chriltian  Perfection  imply 
any  more  than  fincenty  ? 

A.  Not  if  you  mean  by  that  word,  love  fulfilling 
the  heart,  expelling'  pride,  anger,  defire,  felf- 
will  ; rejoicing  evermore,  praying  without  ceaf- 
ing, and  in  every  thing  giving  thanks.  But  I 
doubt  few  life  fincenty  in  this  fenfe.  Therefore 
I think  the  old  word  is  belt. 

A perfon  may  be  firxere,  who  has  all  Ins  na- 
tural tempers,  pride,  anger,  lult,  felf-will.  But 
he  is  not  per  fed,  till  his  heart  is  cleanfed  from 
thefe,  and  all  its  other  corruptions. 


To 


[ 8;  ] 

To  clear  this  point  a lithe  farther;  1 know 
many  that  love  God  with  all  their  heart.  He  is 
their  one  delire,  their  one.  delight,  and  they  are 
continually  happy  in  him.  They  love  their 
neighbour  as  themfelves.  They  feel  as  fincere, 
fervent,  conllant  a defire,  for  the  happinefs  of 
every  man,  good  or  bad,  friend  or  enemy,  as  lor 
their  own.  They  rejoice  evermore,  pray  with- 
out ceafing,  and  in  every  thing  give  thanks. 
Their  fouls  are  continually  11  reaming  up  to  God, 
in  holy  joy,  prayer,  and  prarfe.  This  is  a point 
of  faff.  And  this  is  plain,  found,  fcriptural  ex- 
perience. 

But  even  thefe  fouls  dwell  in  a {battered  body* 

and  are  fo  prelt  down  thereby,  that  they  cannot 

alwavs  exert  themfelves  as  they  would,  bv  think- 
' . * ...  J 
ing,  fpeaking,  and  afling  precijety  right.  For 

want  of  better  bodily  organs,  they  mull  at  times, 

think,  fpeak,  or  aft  wrong;  not  indeed  through. 

adefe£t  of  love,  but  through  a defeft  oi  knowledge. 

And  while  this  is  the  cafe,  notwithllanding  that 

defeft,  and  its  confequences,  they  fulfil  the  law 

of  love. 

Yet  as  even  in  this  cafe  there  is  not  a full  con- 
formity to  the  perfeft  law,  fo  the  moll  perfeft  do 
on  this  very  account  need  the  blood  of  atone- 
ment, and  may  properly  for  themfelves,  as  well 
as  for  their  brethren  fay,  Forgive  us  our  trej - 

Q.  13.  But  if  Chrift  has  put  an  end  to  that 

law. 


[ 88  ] 

law,  what  need  of  any  atonement  for  their  tranf- 
grefling  it  ? 

si.  Obferve  in  what  fenfe  he  has  put  an  end  to 
it,  and  the  difficulty  vaniffies.  Were  it  not  for 
the  abiding  merit  of  his  death,  and  his  continual 
intercejfion  for  us,  that  law  would  condemn  us 
ftill.  Thefe  therefore  we  ftill  need,  for  every 
tranfgreffion  of  it. 

Q.  14.  But  can  one  that  is  faved  from  fin  be 
tempted  ? 

A.  Yes ; for  Ckrijl  was  tempted. 

Q.  15.  However,  what  you  call  temptation,  I 
call  the  corruption  of  my  heart.  And  how  will 
you  diftinguiffi  one  from  the  other  ? 

A.  In  fome  cafes  it  is  impoffible  to  diflinguifh, 
without  the  diretl  zvilnejs  of  the  fpirit.  But  in 
general  one  may  diftinguiffi  thus : 

One  commends  me.  Here  is  a temptation  to 
pride  : but  infiantly  my  foul  is  humbled  before 
God.  And  I feel  no  jrride  : of  which  I am  as 
fure  as  that  pride  is  not  humility. 

A man  Itrikes  me.  Here  is  a temptation  to 
anger.  But  my  heart  overflows  with  love.  And 
I feel  no  anger  at  all  : of  which  I am  as  fure,  as 
that  love  and  anger  are  not  the  fame. 

A woman  folicits  me.  Here  is  a temptation  to 
luft.  But  in  the  inftant  I ffirink  back.  And  I 
feel  no  defire  or  luft  at  all:  of  which  I can  be  as 
fure,  as  that  my  hand  is  cold  or  hot. 

Thus  it  is,  if  I am  tempted  by  a prefent  objeft : 
and  it  is  juft  the  fame,  if  when  it  is  abfent,  the 

devil 


[ 89  ] 

devil  recalls  a commendation,  an  injury,  or  wo* 
man  to  my  mind.  In  the  inftant  the  foul  repels 
the  temptation,  and  remains  filled  with  pure 
love. 

And  the  difference  is  Hill  plainer,  when  I com- 
pare my  prefent  Hate  with  my  pall,  wherein  I 
felt  temptation  and  corruption  too.  • 

g.  16.  But  how  do  you  know,  that  you  are 
fanbtified,  favedfrom  your  inbred  corruption? 

A.  1 can  k'now  it  no  otherwife  than  I know 
that  I am  juftified.  Hereby  know  we  that  we  art 
of  God , in  either  fenfe,  by  the  Spirit  that  he  hath 
given  us. 

We  know  it  by  the  witnefs,  and  by  the  fruit  of 
the  Spirit.  And  firff,  by  the  witnefs.  As  when 
we  werejufiified,  the  Spirit  bore  witnefs  with  our 
fpirit,  that  our  fins  were  forgiven ; fo  when  we 
were  fanftified,  he  bore  witnefs,  that  they  were 
taken  away.  Indeed  the  witnefs  of  fanftification 
is  not  always  clear  atfirft ; (as  neither  is  that  of 
jufiification)  neither  is  it  afterward,  -always  the 
fame,  but  like  that  of  julfification,  fometimes 
ftronger  and  fometimes  fainter.  Yea,  and  fome- 
times it  is  withdrawn.  Yet  in  general,  the  latter 
teftimony  of  the  Spirit  is  both  as  clear  and  as 
fteddy  as  the  former. 

Q.  17.  But  what  need  is  there  of  it,  leeing 
fanttification  is  a real  change , not  a relative  only, 
like  jufiification  ? 

Q.  But  is  the  new-birth  a relative  change  only  ?■ 
Is  not  this  a reed  change  ? Therefore  if  we  need 


no 


t 9P  J 

no  'vttnefs  of  our  falsification,  becanfe  it  is  a 
rea\ change,  for  the  fame  reafon  we  ihoukl  need 
none,  that  we  are  born  of,  or  ate  the  children 
of  God. 

Q.  1 8.  * But  does  not  falsification  ffnneby 
its  own  light  ? 

■d'  Ana  does  not  the  new  birth  too  ? Some- 
times it  does.  And  fa  does  fandli  ft  cation  : at 
others  it  does  nor.  In  the  hour  of  temptation 
Satan  clouds  the  work  of  God,  a’nd  injects  vari- 
ous doubts  and  reafonings,  efpeciallv  in  thofe 
who  have  either  verv  weak  or  very  ffrong  under- 
flandings.  At  fuch  times  there  is  abfokitc  need 
of  'hat  wunefs : without  which  the  work  of  fanc- 
tification,  not  only  could  not  he  difcerned,  but 
could  no  longer  fubfiit.  Were  it  not  for  this,  the 
foul  could  not  then  abide  in  die  love  of  God  : 
much  lets  could  it  rejoice  evermore,  and  in  every 
thing  give  thanks.  Inthefe  circumflances  there- 
fore, a diret 1 tejlimonx  that  we  are  fanefified  is 
neceffarv  in  the  higheft  degree. 

“ But  I have  no  nibnfs  that  I am  fared  from 
fm.  And  yet  I have  no  doubt  of  it.”  Venr  well. 
As  long  as  you  have  no  doubt,  it  is  enough  ; 
when  \ on  have,  vou  will  need  that  witnejs. 

<2-  19.  But  what  feriptme  makes  mention  of 
any  fuch  thing,  or  gives  any  reafon  to  expeft 
it? 

A.  That  feripture.  t Cor.  ii.  12,  We  have  re- 
ceived not  the  /pint  that  is  oj  the  wortd,  but  the 

Spirit 


£ 9*  3 


Spirit  which  is  of  God , that  we  may  know  the 
ihv  gs  which  are  freely  given  us  of  God. 

Mow  furejy  fanftification  is  one  of  the  things 
which  are  freely  given  us  of  God.  And  no  poffiblc 
reafon  can  be  affigned,  why  tnis  fhould  be  ex- 
cepted, when  tne  apoftle  fays,  If  e receive  the 
Spirit  for  this  very  end,  that  we  may  know  the 
things  which  at e thus  freely  given  us 

Is  not  the  fame  thing  implied  in  that  well 
known  fcripture,  Rom.  viii.  15.  IheSpintiL- 
Jelf  witnrffeth- with  our  fpirit,  that  we  are  the 
children  of  God  ? Does  he  only  wi  nefs  to  thofe 
who  are  children  of  God  in  the  lowed  fenfe  ? 
Nay,  but  to  thofe  alfo  who  are  fuch  in  the  high- 
eft  fenfe.  And  does  he  not  wit  nefs  that  they  are 
fuch  in  the  highefl  fenfe  ? What  reafon  have  we 
to  doubt  it  ? 

What  if  a man  were  to  affirm,  fas  indeed  many 
do)  that  this  witnefs  belongs  only  to  the  highefl 
clafs  of  Chriffians  ? Would  not  you  anfwer,  the 
apodle  makes  no  reftriclion.  Therefore  doubt- 
lefs  it  belongs  to  all  the  children  of  God.  And 
will  not  the  fame  anfwer  hold  if  any  affirm,  that 
it  belongs  only  to  the  lowefl  clafs  ?• 

Confider  like  wife  1 John  v.  ig.  We  know  that 
we  are  of  God.  Ho  tv  ? By  the  Spirit  that  he  hath 
given  us.  Nav,  her ehy  we  know  that  he  abideth 
in  us.  And  what  ground  have  we  either  from 
fcripture  or  reafon,  to  exclude  the  witnefs  anv 
more  than  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  from  being  here 
intended  ? By  this  then  alfo  we  know  that  we  are 


t 92  3 

of  God,  and  in  what  fenfe  we  are  fo.  Whether 
we  are  babes,  young  men,  or  fathers,  we  know, 
in  the  fame  manner. 

Not  that  I affirm,  that  all  young  men,  or  even 
fathers,  have  this  teftimony  every  moment : 
there  maybe  intermiffions  of  the  direfl  teftimony 
that  they  are  thus  born  of  God.  But  thofe  inter- 
miffions are  fewer  and  fliorter.  as  they  grow  up 
in  Chrift.  Andfotne  have  the  teflimony  both  of 
lheir  juflification  and  falsification,  without  any 
intermiffion  at  all : which  I prefume  more  might 
have,  did  they  walk,  humbly  and  clofely  with. 
God. 

Q_.  20.  May  not  fame  of  thefe  have  a tef- 
timony from  the  Spirit,  that  they  fhall  not  final- 
ly fall  from  God  ? 

A.  They  may.  And  this  perfuafion,  nei- 
ther life  nor  death Jkall febarate  them  from  him, 
far  from  being  hurtful,  may  in  fome  circum- 
fiances  be  extremely  ufeful.  Thefe  therefore 
we  fhould  in  no  wife  grieve,  but  earneftly  in- 
courage  them,  to  hold  the  beginning  of  their 
confidence  fiecljajl  to  the  end. 

Q_.  21.  But  have  any  a teftimony  from  the  Spi- 
rit, that  they  fhall  never fm  ? 

A.  We  know  not  what  God  may  vouchfafe  to 
fome  particular  perfons.  But  we  do  not  find  any  ge  • 
neralftate  defcribed  infcripture, from  which aman 
cannot  draw  back  to  fin.  If  there  were  anv  ftate 
wherein  this  was  impoffible,  it  would  be  that  of 
thofe  who  are fanchfied,  who  ave fathers  in  Chnfi, 

who 


93  ] 


i who  rejoice  evermore , pray  without  ceajing , and 
in  every  thing  give  thanks.  But  it  is  not  impoffi- 
ble  for  thefe  to  draw  back.  They  who  are  fan  Eli- 
fed,  may  yet  fall  and  perifh,  Heb.  x.  29.  Even 
fathers  in  Chrifl,  need  that  warning,  Love  not 
\ the  world,  1 John  ii.  15.  They  who  rejoice , 

: pray,  and  give  thanks  without  ceafing,  may  never- 
thelefs  quench  the  Spirit,  1 Thef.  v.  16.  See.  Nay 
even  they  who  are  fealed  unto  the  day  of  redemp- 
tion may  yet  grieve  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  Eph. 
/v.  3 0. 

j - Altho’  therefore  God  may  give  fuch  a witnefs 
to  fome  patricular  perfons,  yet  it  is  not  to  be  ex- 
pended by  Chriftians  in  general,  there  being  no 
feripture  whereon  to  ground  fuch  an  expecta- 
tion. 

0.  22.  By  what  fruit  of  the  Spirit  may  we 
know  that  we  are  of  Gcd,  even  in  the  higheft 
fenfe  ? 

A.  By  love,  joy,  peace  always  abiding ; by 
invariable  long-fuffering,  patience,  refignation ; 

• by  gentlenefs,  triumphing  over  all  provocation  ; 
by  goodnefs,  mildnefs,  ftveetnefs,  tendernefs  of 
fpirit  ; by fidelity , fimplicity,  godly  fincerity  ; by 
meeknefs , calmnefs,  evennefs  of  fpirit  ; by  temper • 
once,  not  only  in  food  and  deep,  but  in  all  things 
natural  and  fpiritual. 

f.  23.  But  what  great  matter  is  there  in  this  ? 
Have  we  not  all  this  when  we  are  juftified  ? 

I A.  What  ! Total  refignation  to  the  will  of 
God,  without  any  mixture  of  felf-w'fll  ? * Gen- 
| tlenefs. 


t 94  J 

tlenefs,  without  any  touch  of  anger,  even  the 
moment  we  are  provoked  ? Love  to  God,  with- 
out  the  leaf!  love  to  the  creature  but  in  and  for 
God,  excluding  all  pride  ? Love  to  man,  exclud- 
ing all  envy,  all  jealoufv,  and  rafh  judging  ? 
meeknefs,  keeping  the  whole  foul  inviolablv  calm  ? 
And  temperance  in  all  things  P Denv  that  any 
ever  came  up  to  this  if  you  pleafe  ^ but  do  not 
fay  all  who  are  juflified,  do. 

Q.  2_y  But  fome  who  are  newly  juflified  do: 
what  then  will  you  fay  to  thefe  ? 

1.  If  they  really  do,  I will  fay,  they  are  fanCtn* 
fietl,  faved  from  fin  in  that  moment : and  that 
they  never  need  lofe  what  God  has  given,  or 
■ feel  fin  any  more. 

But  certainly  this  is  an  exempt  cafe.  It  is 
otherwife  with  the  generality  of  tliofe  that  are 
juflified.  They  feel  in  themfelves,  more  or  lefs, 
pride,  anger,  felf-will,  and  an  heart  bent  to 
baekfliding.  And  till  they  have  gradually  mor- 
tified thefe,  they  are  not  fully  renewed  in  lose. 

<9.  But  is  not  this  the  cafe  ol  all  that  are 

juflified?  Do  they  not  gradually  die  to  fin  and 
grow  in  grace,  til!  at,  or  perhaps  a little  before 
•death,  God  per lefts  them  in  love? 

A.  I believe  this  is  the  cafe  of  mod,  but  not  all. 
God  ufually  gives  a confiderable  time,  fpr  men 
to  receive  light,  to  grow  in  grace,  to  do  and  buf- 
fer his  will  before  they  are  either  juflified  or 
fanbtified.  But  he  does  not  invariably  adhere  to 
this.  Sometimes  he  cuts  Jhort  his  zucrlt.  He 

dees 


[ 95  3 

does  the  work  of  many  years  in  a few  weeks  : 
perhaps  in  a week,  a day,  an  hour.  - He  juftifies 
or  fanftifies  both  thofe  who  have  done,  oi  filter- 
ed nothing,  and  who  have  not  had  time  for  a 
gradual  growth  either  in  light  or  grace.  And 
may  lie  not  do  what  he  will  with  his  own  ? Is  thine 
eye  evil,  becauje  he  is  good  ? 

* It  need  not  therefore  be  affirmed  over  and 
over,  and  proved  by  forty  texts  of  feripture, 
either  that  molt  men  are  perfected  in  lo vtatla/l, 
that  there  is  a gradual  work  of  God  in  the  foul ; 
or  that,  generally  fpeaking,  it  . is  a long  time, 
even  many  years,  before  fin  is  deftroyed.  AM 
this  we  know.  Bui  we  know  likewife,  that 
God  may,  with  man’s  good  leave,  cut Jhort  his 
work,  in  whatever  degree  he  pleafes,  and  do  the 
ufual  work  of  many  years  in  a moment.  He 
does  lo,  in  many  inftauces.  And  yet  there  is  a 
gradual  work,  both  before  and  after  that  moment. 
So  that  one  may'  affirm,  the  work  is  gradual-, 
another,  it  is  injlanuineous,  without  any  manner 
of  contradiction. 

Q.  26.  Does  St.  Paul  mean  any  more  by  being 
fealed  with  the  spirit,  than  being  renewed  in 
love  ? 

A.  Perhaps  in  one  place,  2 Cor.  i.  22.  he 
does  not  mean  fo  much.  But  in  another,  Eph. 
i.  13.  he  feems  to  include  both  the  fruit  and  the 
•witnefs-;  and  th3t  in  a higher  degree  than  we  ex- 
perience, even  when  we  are  firft  renewed  in  love, 
God fealeth  us  with  the  Spirit  of  promfe,  by  giv- 
ing 


[ 9S  ] 

ing  us  the  full  affurance  of  hope ; fuch  a confidence 
of  receiving  all  the  promifes  of  God,  as  excludes 
the  poffibility  of  doubting:  with  that  holy  Spirit , 
by  univerfal  holinefs,  ftamping  the  whole  image 
of  God  on  our  hearts. 

*<9.  27.  But  how  can  thofe  who  are  thus  Jtaled 
grieve  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  ? 

A.  St.  Paul  tells  you  very  particularly,  1.  By 
fuch  converfcition  as  is  not  profitable,  not  to  the 
ufe  of  edifying , not  apt  to  minifier  grace  to  the 
hearers ; 2.  By  relapfing  into  bitternefs  or  want 
of  kindnefs  ; 3.  By  wrath , lafting  difpleafure,  of 
want  of  tender-heartednefs ; 4.  By  anger,  how* 
ever  foon  it  is  over,  want  of  inftantly  forgiving 
one  another ; 3.  By  clamour  or  bawling,  loud, 
harfh,  rough  fpeaking;  6.  By  eiil-fpeaking,  whif- 
pering,  tale-bearing;  needlefsly  mentioning  the 
fault  of  an  abfent  perfon,  though  in  ever  fo  foft 
-a  manner. 

0.  28.  What  do  you  think  of  thofe  in  London, 
who  feem  to  have  been  lately  renewed  in  love  ? 

* A.  d here  is  fomething  very  peculiar  in  the 
experience  of  the  greater  part  of  them.  One 
would  expeft,  that  a believer  fhould  firft  be  fil- 
led with  love,  and  thereby  emptied  of  fin  : where- 
as thefe  were  emptied  of  fin  firfl,  and  then  filled 
with  love.  Perhaps  it  pleated  God  to  work  in 
this  manner,  to  make  his  work  more  plain  and 
.undeniable;  and  to  diftinguifli  it  more  clearly 
from  that  overflowing  love,  which  is  often  felt 
even  in  ajuftified  ftate. 


It 


C 97  ] 

It  feems  likewife  moft  agreeable  to  the  great 
promife,  Ezek.  xxxvi  25,  26,  From  all  your 
fdthinr.fi  I will  clean  fe  you  ; a new  heart  alfo  will 
I give  you , and  a new  Spirit  will  I put  within 
you. 

But  I donot  think  of  them  all  alike  ; there  is 
a tvide  difference  between  feme  of  them  and 
others.  I think  moft  of  them  with  whom  I 
have  fpoken,  have  much  faith,  love,  joy, 
and  peace.  Someofthefel  believe  are  renewed 
in  love,  and  have  the  diretl  witnefs  of  it  : And 
they  manifeft  the  fruit  above  defended,  in  all 
their  Avords  and  actions.  Now  let  anv  man  call 
this  what  he  will.  It  is  what  I call  p^rfecUon. 

But  fome  who  have  much  love,  peace  and  joy, 
yet  have  not  the  direft  Avittjefs.  And  others  who 
think  they  have,  are  neverthelefs  manifeftly  want- 
ing in  the  fruit.  How  many  I Avill  not  fay  : 
perhaps  one  in  ten,  perhaps  more  or  fewer.  But 
fome  are  undeniably  Avanting  in  long  fifering, 
Chriftian  refignation.  They  do  not  fee  the  hand 
of  God  in  whatever  occurs,  and  chearfully  em- 
brace it.  They  do  not  in  every  thing  give  thanks 
and  rejoice  evermore.  They  are  not  happy, 
at  1 call,  not  always  happy.  For  fometimes  they 
complain.  They  fay,  “ This  or  that  is  hard  I” 

* Some  are  Avanting  in  gentlenefs.  They 
rfifl  evil,  inftead  of  turning  the  other  cheek, 
d hey  do  not  receive  reproach  Avith  gentlenefs  ; 
no,  nor  even  reproof.  Nay  they  are  not  able  to 
bear  contradiftion  without  the  appearance,  at 
Vol.  XXIV.  E ‘ leaft, 


[ 98  ] 


leak,  of  refentment.  If  they  are  reproved,  x>: 
contradicted,  tho’  mildly,  they  do  not  take  it 
well.  They  behave  with  more  dillance  and  re- 
feree than  they  did  before.  If  they  are  reproved 
or  contradicted  harfhly,  they  anfwer  it  with  harfh- 
nefs;  with  a loud  voice,  or  with  an  angry  tone, 
or  in  a Iharp  and  furly  manner.  Thev  fpcak 
fharply  or  roughly,  when  they  reprove  others, 
and  behave  roughly  to  their  inferiors. 

* Some  are  wanting  >;i  goodnefs,  The'.'  are  not 
kind,  mild,  fweet,  amiable,  foft,  and  loving  at  all 
times,  in  their  fpirit,  in  their  words,  in  their  look, 
and  air,  in  the  whole  tenor  of  their  behaviour  ; 
and  that  to  all,  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  with- 
out refpeft  of  perfons  : particularly  to  them  that  are 
out  of  the  way,  to  oppofers,  and  to  thofe  of  their 
own  houlhold.  They  do  not  long,  ftudy,  endea- 
vour by  every  means,  to  make  all  about  them 
happy.  They  can  fee  them  uneafy,  and  not  be 
concerned : perhaps  they  make  them  fo.  And 
then  wipe  their  mouths  and  fav,  “ Why,  thev 
deferve  it.  It  is  their  own  fault.” 

Some  are  wanting  in  fidelity,  a nice  regard  to 
truth,  (implicit)',  and  godly  fineerity.  Their 
love  is  hardly  without  djjjimulation  ; fomething 
like  guile  is  found  in  their  mouth.  To  avoid 
roughnefs,  they  lean  to  the  other  extreme.  Thev 
are  fmooth  to  an  excels,  fo  as  fcarce  to  avoid  a 
degree  of  fawning,  or  of  feeming  to  mean  what 
they  do  not. 

* Some  are  wanting  in  meeknefs,  nuietnefs,  of 
, fpirit. 


C 99  ] 


fpirit,  compofure,  evennefs  of  temper.  They  are 
up  and  down,  fometimes  high,  fometimes  low  ; 
their  mind  is  not  well  balanced.  Their  affec- 
tions are  either  not  in  due  proportion : they  have 
too  much  of  one,  too  little  of  another  : or  they 
are  not  duly  mixed  and  tempered  together,  fo 
as  to  counterpoife  each  other.  Hence  there  is 
often  a jar.  Their  foul  is  out  of  tune,  and  can- 
not make  the  true  harmony. 

Some  are  wanting  in  temperance.  They  do  not 
fleddily  ufe  that  kind  and  degree  of  food,  which 
they  know,  or  might  know,  would  raofl  con- 
duce to  the  health,  ftrength  and  vigour  of  the 
body.  Or  they  are  not  temperate  in  deep  : 
they  do  not  rigorouflv  adhere  to  what  is  bell  both 
for  body  and  mind.  Otherwife  they  would  con- 
ftantly  go  to  bed  and  rife  early,  and  at  afixthour. 
Or  they  fup  late,  which  is  neither  good  for  body 
nor  foul.  Or  they  ufe  neither  fading  nor  abfti- 
nence.  Or  they  prefer  (which  are  fo  many  forts 
of  intemperance)  that  preaching,  reading  or 
converfation,  which  gives  them  tranfient  joy 
and  comfort,  before  that  which  brings  godly 
borrow,  or  inflruclion  in  right eoufnefs.  Such  joy 
is  not  fanftified.  It  doth  not  tend  to  and  termi- 
nate in  the  crucifixion  of  the  heart.  Such  faith 
doth  not  center  in  God  but  rather  in  itfelf. 

So  far  all  is  plain.  I believe  you  have  faith, 
and  love,  and  joy,  and  peace.  You  who  are 
particularly  concerned,  know  each  for  yourfelf 
E 2 that 


{[  100  ] 

t^iatyou  are  wanting  in  the  refpeCts  above-men- 
tioned. You  are  wanting  either  in  long-differ- 
ing, gentlenefs  or  goodnefs ; either  in  fidelity, 
meeknefs  or  temperance.  Let  us  not  then  on 
either  hand,  fight  about  words.  In  the  thing 
we  clearly  agree. 

You  have  not  what  I call  perfection.  If  others 
will  call  it  fo,  they  may.  However  hold  fafl 
what  you  have,  and  earneftly  pray  for  what 
yon  have  not. 

0.  29.  Can  thofe  who  are  perfect  grow  in 
grace  ? 

A.  Undoubtedly  they  eln.  And  that  not* only 
while  they  are  in  the  body,  but  to  all  eternity. 

0.  30.  Can  they  fall  from  it  ? 

A.  I am  well  affined  they  can.  Matter  of 
fafd  puts  this  beyond  difptute.  Formerly  we 
thought,  one  laved  from  fin  could  not  fall. 
Now,  we  know  the  contrary'.  We  are  furround- 
ed  with  iuffances  oi  thofe  who  lately  experienc- 
ed all  that  I mean  by  perfection.  They  had  both 
the  fruit  of  the  Spiritand  the  zvitnejs.  But  they 
have  now  loft  both.  Neither  does  any  one  Hand, 
by  virtue  of  any  thing  that  is  implied  in  the 
valurc  of  the  date.  I here  is  no  fuch height  or 
Jirenglh  of  hohnefs.  as  it  is  impoffihle  to  fall  from. 
If  there  be  any  that  cannot,  fall , this  wholly  de- 
pends on  the  promifeof  God. 

<2-  31.  Can  thofe  who  fall  from  this  date,  re- 
cover it  ? 

A.  \\  hy  not  ? We  have  many  inftances  of 

this 


[ *04  ] 

®fiis  alfo.  Nay,  it  is  an  exceeding  common  thing,, 
for  perfons  to  lofe  it  more  than  once,  before  they 
are  eftablifhed  therein. 

It  is  therefore  to  guard  them  who  are  faved  from 
fin,  from  every  occafion  of  Rumbling,  that  I give 
the  following  advices..  But  firlt  I fitall  fpeak 
plainly  concerning  the  work  itfelf. 

I efieem  this  late  work  to  be  of  God  : pro- 
bably, the  greateft  now  upon  earth.  Yet  like 
all  others,  this  alfo  is  mixed  with  much  human 
frailty.  But  thefe  weaknelfes  are  far  lefs  than 
might  have  been  ’ expefted  ; and  ought  to  have 
been  joyfully  borne  by  all  that  loved  and  fol- 
lowed after  righteoufnefs.  That  there  have 
been  a few  weak,  warm-headed  men,  is  no  re- 
proach .to  the  work  itfelf,  no  juft-  ground  for 
accufing  a multitude  of  fober-minded  men,  who 
are  patterns  of  flriff  holinefs.  Yet  (juft  contrary 
to  what  ought  to  have  been)  the  oppofition  is 
great;  the  helps  few.  Hereby  many  are  hin- 
dered from  feeking  Taith  and  holinefs  by  the 
falfe  zeal  of  others  : and  feme  who  at  firft  betran 

O 

to  run  well,  are  turned  out  of  the  way. 

0.  32.  What  is  the  firft  advice  that  you  would 
give  them  ? 

A.  Watch  and  pray  continually  againft  pride. 
If  God  has  caft  it  out,  fee  that  it  enter  no  more; 
it  is  full  as  dangerous  as  defirc.  And  you  may 
Hide  back  into  it  unawares  ; especially  if  you 
think  there  is  no  danger  of  it.  “ Nay,  but  I 
afcribe  all  I have  to  God.”  So  you  may,  and 
E 3 be 


[ 102  ] 

be  proud  neverthelefs.  For  it  is  pride,  not  only 
to  afcribc  any  thing  we  have  to  ourfelves,  but  to 
think  we  have  what  we  really  have  not.  Mr. 

L for  inllance,  afcribed  all  the  light  he  had 

to  God,  and  fo  far  he  was  humble.  But  then  he 
thought  he  had  more  light  than  any  man  living. 
And  this  was  palpable  pride.  So  you  afcribe 
all  the  knowledge  you  have  to  God  ; and  in  this 
refpeft  you  are  humble.  But  if  you  think  you 
have  more  than  you  really  have  ; or  if  you  think 
you  are  fo  taught  of  God,  as  no  longer  to  need 
man’s  teaching,  pride  lieth  at  the  door.  Yes,  you 
have  need  to  be  taught,  not  only  by  Mr.  M — d, 
or  me,  but  by  the  weakeft  preacher  in  London: 
yea,  by  all  men.  For  God  fendeth  by  whom  he 
will  fend. 

Do  not  therefore  fay  to  any  who  would  ad'vife 
or  reprove  you,  “ You  are  blind:  you  cannot 
teach  me.”  Do  not  fay,  This  is  your  zcifdom, 
your  carnal  rea/on  : but  calmly  weigh  the  thing 
before  God. 

* Always  remember,  much  grace  does  not  im- 
ply much  light.  Thefe  do  not  always  go  toge- 
ther. As  there  may  be  much  light  where  there 
is  but  little  love,  fo  there  may  be  much  love 
where  there  is  little  light.  The  heart  has  more 
heat  than  the  eye ; yet  it  cannot  fee.  And  God 
has  wifely  tempered  the  members  of  the  bodv  to- 
gether, that  none  may  fay  to  another,  “ I have 
no  need  of  thee.” 

To  imagine  none  can  teach  you,  but  thofe 

who 


[ 103  J 

who  are  themfelves  faved  from  fin.  is  a very 
great  and  dangerous  miilake.  Give  not  place 
to  it  for  a moment.  It  would  lead  you  into  a 
thoufand  other  millakes,  and  that  irrecoverably. 
No  : dominion  is  not  founded  in  grace,  as  the  mad- 
men of  the  laft  age  talked.  Obey  and  regard 
them  that  are  oyer  you  in  the  Lord,  and  do  not 
think  you  know7  better  than  them.  Know  their 
place,  and  your  own  : always  remembering,  Much 
love  does  not  implv  much  light. 

The  not  obfervin?  this  has  led  fome  into 

O 

many  millakes,  and  into  the  appearance,  at  leaf!, 
of  pride.  O beware  of  the  appearance  and  the 
thing.  Let  there  be  in  you  that  lowly  mind  whick 
was  in  Chrift  Jefus.  And  be  ye  likewife  cloathed 
with  humility.  Let  it  not  only  fill,  but  cover  you 
all  over.  Let  modelly  and  felf-diffidence  appear 
in  all  your  words  andaflions.  Let  allyoufpeak 
and  do  fhew  that  you  are  little,  and  bafe,  and 
mean,  and  vile  in  your  own  eyes. 

As  one  inllance  of  this,  be  always  ready  to 
own  any  fault  you  have  been  in.  If  you  have  at 
any  time  thought,  fpoke  or  allied  wrong,  be  not 
backward  to  acknowledge  it.  Never  dream  that 
this  will  hurt  the  caufe  of  God : no,  it  will  further 
it.  Be  therefore  open  and  frank  when  you  are 
taxt  with  any  thing:  do  not  feek  either  to  evade 
or  difguife  it.  But  let  it  appear  jult  as  it  is,  and 
you  will  thereby  not  hinder,  but  adorn  the 
gofpel. 

E 4 Q.  33. 


[ 104  ] 

33.  What  is  the  fecond  advice  which  you 
would  give  them  ? 

A.  Beware  of  that  daughter  of  pride,  enthufi- 
tfm  ! O keep  attheufmoft  diffance  from  it:  give 
no  place  to  an  heated  imagination.  Do  not  baf- 
tilv  afcribe  things  to  God.  Do  not  eafily  fup- 
pofe  dreams,  voices,  impreffions,  vifions  or  reve- 
lations to  be  from  God.  They  may  be  from  him. 
They  may  be  from  nature.  They  may  be  from 
the  devil.  Therefore  believe  not  every  Spirit , but 
try  the  Jpirits  whether  they  be  of  God.  Try  all 
things  by  the  written  word,  and  let  all  bow  down 
before  it.  You  are  in  danger  of  entbufiafm  every’ 
liour,  if  you  depart  ever  fo  little  lrom  fcripture  : 
yea,  or  from  the  plain  literal  meaning  of  any 
text,  taken  in  connexion  with  the  context.  And 
fo  you  are,  if  you  defpife  or  lightly  efteem  rea- 
fon,  knowledge  or  human  learning:  every  one 
of  which  is  an  excellent  gift  of  God,  and  may 
ferve  the  noblelf  purpofes. 

I advife  you,  never  to  ufe  the  words,  wifdom , 
reafon , or  knowledge , by  way  of  reproach.  On 
the  contrary,  prav  that  you  yourfelf  may  abound 
in  them  more  and  more.  If  s ou  mean  worldly 
wifdom,  ufelefs  knowledge,  falfe  reafoning,.  fav 
fo : and  throw  aw’ay  the  chaff,  but  not  the 
wheat. 

One  general  inlet  to  entbufiafm  is,  expecting 
the  end  without  the  means;  the  expecting  know- 
ledge, for  inftance,  without  fearching  the  fcrip- 
ture, and  confulting  the  children  of  God : the 

expending 


[ 105  ] 


expending  fpiritual  ftrength  without  conftant 
prayer,  and  Heady  watchfulnefs : the  expecting 
any  blefting  without  hearing  the  word  of  God  at 
every  opportunity 

Some  have  been  ignorant  of  this  device  of  Sa- 
tan. They  have  left  off  fearcfting  the  fcriptures. 
Theyfaid,  “ God  writes  all  the  fcriptures  on  my 
heart.  Therefore  I have  no  need  to  read  it.” 
Others  thought,  they  had  not  fo  much  need  of 
hearing,  and  fo  grew  flack  in  attending  the 
morning  preaching.  O take  warning,  you  who 
are  concerned  herein.  You  have  liftened  to  the 
voice  of  a flranger.  Fly  back  to  Thrift,  and  keep 
in  the  good  old  way,,  which  was  once  delivered  to 
the  faints  : the  Way  that  even  an  Heathen  bore 
teftimony  of,  “ That  the  Chriftians  rofe  early 
everyday  to  fing  hymns  to  Thrift  as  God.  ’ 

The  very  defire  of  growing  in  grace  mav  fome- 
times  be  an  inlet  of  entliufiafm.  As  it  continu- 
ally leads  us  to  feek  new  grace,  it  may  lead  us 
unawares  to  feek  fomething  elfe  new,  befides  ?2rt/< 
degrees  of  love  to  God  and  man.  £0  it  has  led 
fbme  to  feek  and  fancy  they  had  received  gifts 
of  a new  kind,  after  a new  heart,  as  1.  the  loving 
God  with  all  our  mind.  2.  with  all  our  foul,  3. 
with-  ail  our  ftrength,  4.  onenefs  with  God,  g. 
onenefs  with  Chrift,  6.  having  our  life  hid  with 
Chrift  in  God,  7.  being  dead  with  Thrift,  8. 
rifing  with  him,  9.  the  fitting  with  him  in  hea- 
vrenly  places,  10.  the  being  taken  up  into  his 
throne,  1 1,  the  being  in  the  new  Jerufalem,  12, . 

E 5 the 


C 106  ] 

the  feeing  the  tabernacle  of  God  come  down 
among  men,  13.  the  being  dead  to  all  works,  14. 
the  not  being  liable  to  death,  pain,  or  grief,  or 
temptation. 

One  ground  of  many  of  thefe  miftakes  is,  the 
taking  every  frefn,  ftrong  application  of  any  of 
thefe  fcriptures  to  the  heart,  to  be  a gift  of  a new 
kind:  not  knowing  thatfeveral  of  thefe  fcriptures 
are  not  fulfilled  yet;  that  mod  of  the  others  are 
fulfilled  when  we  are  juflified  ; the  red,  the  mo- 
ment we  are  fan&ified.  It  remains  only,  to  ex- 
perience them  in  higher  degrees.  This  is  all  we 
’nave  to  expert. 

* Another  ground  of  thefe,  and  a thoufand 
miftakes  is,  the  not  confidering  deeply,  that  love 
is  the  highefr  gift  of  God,  humble,  genile,  pati- 
ent love  : that  all  vifions,  revelations,  manilelta- 
tions  whatever,  are  little  things  compared  to 
love:  and  that  all  the  gifts  above-mentioned 
are  either  the  fame  with,  or  infinitely  inferior  to 
it. 

It  were  well  you  fhould  be  throughly  fenfible 
of  this;  the  heaven  of  heavens  is  love.  There  is 
nothing  higher  in  religion:  there  is,  in  effeft, 
nothing  elfe  : if  you  look  for  any  thing  but  more 
love,  you  are  looking  wide  of  the  mark,  you  are 
getting  out  of  the  royal  way.  And  v.  hen  you 
are  afking  others,  Have  you  received  this  or 
that  blefifing  ? If  you  mean  any  thing  but  more 
love,  you  mean  wrong;  you  are  leading  them 
eut  of  the  way,  and  putting  them  upon  a falfe 

feent. 


C 107  ] 

fcent.  Settle  it  then  in  your  heart,  that  from 
the  moment  God  has  favedyou  from  all  fin,  you 
are  to  aim  at  nothing  more,  but  more  of  that  love 
defcribed  in  the  thirteenth  of  the  Corinthians. 
You  can  go  no  higher  than  this,  till  you  are  car- 
ried into  Abraham’s  bofom. 

I fay  yet  again,  beware  of  enthujiafm.  Such 
is  the  imagining  -you  have  the  gift  of  prophefy- 
ing,  or  of  difcerning  of  fpirits,  which  I do  not 
believe  one  of  you  has  ; no,  nor  ever  had  yet. 
Beware  of  judging  people  to  be  either  right  or 
wrong,  by  your  own  feelings.  This  is  no  fcrip- 
tural  way  of  judging.  O keep  clofe  to  the  law 
and- to  the  trjlimony  ! 

Q.  34.  What  is  the  third? 

A.  Beware  of  Antinomianifrn , making  void  the 
law , or  any  part  of  it  through  faith.  Enthufi- 
afm  naturally  leads  to  this  : indeed  they  can  fcarce 
be  feparated.  This  may  ileal  upon  you  in  a 
thoufand  forms,  fo  that  you  cannot  be  too 
watchful  again!!  it.  Take  heed  of  every  thing, 
whether  in  principle  or  praftice,  which  has  any 
tendency  thereto.  Even  that  great  truth,  that 
Chrift  is  the  end  of  the  law , may  betray  us  into 
it,  if  we  do  not  confider,  that  he  has  adopted 
every  point  of  the  moral  law,  and  grafted  it  into 
the  law  of  love.  Beware  of  thinking,  “ becaufe 
I am  filled  with  love,  I need  not  have  fo  muck 
holinefs.  Becaufe  I pray  always,  therefore  I 
need  no  fet  time  for  private  prayer  : becaufe- 1 
watch  always,  therefore  I need,  no  particular 
E 6 felf- 


[ 108  ] 


felf-examination.”  Let  us  magnify  the  law,  the 
whole  written  word,  and  main  it  honourable. 
Let  this  be  our  voice,  I prize  thy  commandments 
above  gold  or  precious  Jlones.  0 what  love  have  I unto 
thy  law.  All  the  day  long  is  my  jludy  in  it ! Be- 
ware of  Antinomian  books  : particularly  the  works 
of  Dr.  Crifp  and  Mr.  Saltmarfh.  Thy  contain 
many  excellent  things.  And  this  makes  them  the 
more  dangerous.  O be  warned  in  time  ! Do  not 
play  with  fire  : do  not  put  your  hand  on  the 
hole  of  a cockatrice  den ! I entreat  you,  beware 
of  bigotry.  Let  not  your  loye  or  beneficence  be 
confined  to  Methodijls  (fo  called)  only ; much 
lefs  to  that  very  fmall  part  of  them,  who  feem  to 
be  renewed  in  love  : or  to  thofe  who  be’ieve 
vour’s  and  their  report  ; O make  not  this  your 
Shibboleth.  Beware  of  Jhllnefi : ctafing,  in  a 
wrong  fenk,from  your  own  works.  To  mention 
one  infiance  out  of  many,  “ You  have  received, 
fays  one,  a great  bleffing.  But  you  began  to  talk 
of  if,  and  to  do  this  and  that.  So  you  loft  it. 
You  fhould  have  been  (till A 

Beware  of  fef-indulgence  : yea.  and  making  a 
virtue  of  it,  laughing  at  fef -denial,  and  taking  up 
the  crofs  daily,  at  faffing  or  abftinence.  Beware 
of  ceiforioujnefs  : thinking  or  calling  them  that 
any  ways  oppofe  you,  whether  in  judgment  or 
pracfice,  blind,  dead  .fallen,  or  “ enemies  to  the 
work.”  Once  more,  beware  of  Solifdianijm : 
crying  nothing  but  “ believe,  believe:”  and 
condemning  thofe  as  ignorant  or  legal,  who  fpeak 

in 


L 109  ] 

in  a more  fcriptural  wav.  At  certain  feafons  in- 
deed, it  may  be  right  to  treat  of  nothing  but  re- 
pentance, or  merely  of  faith,  or  altogether  of 
holinefs  : but  in  geneial  our  call  is,  to  declare 
the  whole  counfei  of  God,  and  to  prophefy  ac- 
cording to  the  analogy  of  faiih.  The  written 
word  treats  of  the  whole,  and  every  particular 
branch  of  righteouinefs,  descending  to  its  minut- 
elt  branches,  as  to  be  Sober,  courteous,  diligent, 
patient  to  honour  all  men.  So  hkewife  the  Holy 
Spirit  works  the  fame  in  our  hearts,  not  merely 
creating  defiles  alter  holinefs  in  general,  but 
flrongly  inclining  us  to  every  particular  grace, 
leading  us  to  every  individual  part  of  what fo ever 
is  lovely.  And  this  with  the  greatefl  propriety  : 
for  as  by  works  faith  is  made  perfecl,  fo  the  corn- 
pleating  or  deflxoying  the  work  of  faith,  and  en- 
joying the  favour,  or  buffering  the  difpfeafure  of 
God,  greatly  depends  on  every  Single  aft  of  obe- 
dience or  difobedience. 

0.  35.  What  is  the  fourth? 

A.  Beware  of  /is  of  omijfion  : lofe  no  opportu- 
nity of  doing  good  in  any  kind.  Be  zealous  of 
good  works  : willingly  omit  no  work,  either  of 
piety  or  mercy.  Do  all  the  good  you  poffibly 
canto  the  bodies  and  fouls  of  men.  Particularly, 
thou  Jhalt  in  any  wife  reprove  thy  neighbour,  and 
not  fujfer  fn  upon  him.  Be  aElive.  Give  no 
place  to  indolence  orfioth  : give  no  occafion  to 
fay,  “ Ye  are  idle,  ye  are  idle.'5  Many  will  fay 
fo  ftill ; but  let  your  whole  fpirit  and  behaviour 

refute 


[ 110  ] 

refute  the  Hander.  Be  always  employed  : lofe 
no  Hired  of  time:  gather  up  the  fragments,  that 
none  be  loft.  And  whatfoever  thy  hand  findeth 
to  do,  do  it  with  thy  might.  Be Jloxv  to  fptak, 
and  weary  in  fpeaking.  In  a multitude  oj  words 
there  wantetli  not  Jin.  Do  not  talk  much  : neither 
long  at  a time.  Few  can  converfe  profitably 
above  an  hour.  Keep  at  thentmoft  diftance  from 
pious  chit-chat,  from  religious  goftipping. 

Q.  3 6.  What  is  'he  fifth  ? 

A.  Beware  of  defiring  any  thing  but  God. 
Now  you  defire  nothing  elfe.  Every  other  de- 
fire  is  driven  out  : fee  that  none  enter  again. 
Keep  thy f elf  pure  \ let  your  eye  remain  Jingle , and 
your  whole  body  Jhallbe j ullcj light.  Admit  no  defire 
of  pleafmg  food,  or  any  other  pleafure'of  fenfe  v 
no  defire  of  pleafing  the  eye,  or  the  imagination, 
by  any  thing  grand,  or  new,  or  beautiful : no  de- 
fire of  money,  of  praife,  or  efteem  ; of  happinefs- 
in  any  creature.  You  may  bring  thefe  defires 
back  ; but  you  need  not : you  need  feel  them  no 
more.  O Hand  faft  in  the  libeity  wherewith. 
Chrift  hath  made  you  free! 

Be  patterns  to  all,  of  denying  yourfelves,  and 
taking  up  yourcrofs  daily.  Let  them  fee  that  you 
make  no  account  of  any  pleafure,  which  does 
not  bring  you  nearer  to  God;  nor  regard  any 
pain  which  does:  that  you  fimply  aim  at  pleafing 
him,  whether  by  doing  or  fuffering;  that  the 
eonftant  language  of  your  heart,  with  regard  to 

pleafure, 


L 111  1 

pleafure  or  pain,  honour  or  di (honour,  riches- 
or  poverty,  is, 

AH’s  alike  to  me,  fo  I 

In  my  Lord  may  live  and  die  f 

0.  g 7.  What  is  the  fixth  ? 

A.  Beware  of  fchifm,  of  making  a rent  in  the 
church  of  Chrift.  That  inward  difunion,  the 
members  ceafing  to  have  a reciprocal  love  one 
for  another , (1  Cor.  xii.  25,)  is  the  very  root  of 
all  contention,  and  every  outward  reparation. 
Beware  of  everything  tending  thereto.  Beware 
of  a dividing  fpirit  : (Iran  whatever  has  the  lead 
afpeft  that  way.  Therefore  fay  not,  I am  of 
Paul,  or  of  Apollo s ; the  very  thing  which  oc- 
casioned the  fchifm  at  Corinth.  Say  not,  this 
is  my  preacher ; the  bejl  preacher  in  England. 
Give  me  him,  and  take  all  the  reft.’’  All  this 
tends  to  breed  or  foment  division,  to  difunite 
thofe  whom  God  hath  joined.  Do  not  defpife, 
or  run  down  any  preacher.  Do  not  exalt  any 
one  above  the  red,  led  you  hurt  both  him  and 
the  cattle  of  God.  On  the  other  hand  do  not 
bear  hard  upon  any  by  reafon  of  fome  incohe- 
rency or  inaccuracy  of  expredion : no,  nor  for 
fome  miftakes,  were  they  really  fuch. 

Likewife  if  you  would  avoid  fchifm,  obferve 
every  rule  of  the  fociety,  and  of  the  bands,  for 
confcience  fake.  Never  omit  meeting  your  clafs 
or  band  ; never  abfent  yourfelf  from  any  public 

meeting. 


[ l*2  ] 

meeting.  Thefe  are  the  very'  finews  of  our  fo- 
ciety:  and  whatever  weakens,  or  tends  to  weak- 
en our  regard  for  thefe,  or  our  exactnefs  in  at- 
tending them,  ftrikes  at  the  verv  root  of  our 
community.  As  one  faith,  That  pirt  of  our 
ceconomy,  the  private  weekly  meetings  for 
prayer,  examination,  and  particular  exhorta- 
tion, has  been  the  greateft  means  of  deepening 
and  confirming  every  blefling,  that  was  received 
by  the  word  preached,  anclof  diflufing  it  to  others, 
who  could  notattendthe  public  miniftry  ; where- 
as, without  this  religious  connexion  and  inter- 
courfe,  the  moft  ardent  attempts  by  mere  preach- 
ing, have  proved  of  no  lading  ufe.:>' 

Suffer  not  one  thought  of  feparating  from  your 
brethren,  whether  their  opinions  agree  with 
your’s  or  not.  Do  not  dream,  that  any  man 
fins,  in  not  believing  you , in  not  taking  )Our 
word  : or  that  this  or  that  opinion , is  eflential  to 
the  work,  and.  both  mull  Hand  or  fall  together. 
Beware  of  impatience  of  contradi&ton.  Do  not 
condemn  or  think,  hardly  of  thofe,  who  cannot 
fee  jud  as  you  fee,  or  who  judge  it  their  duty  to 
contradict  you,  whether  in  a great  thing  or  a 
fmall.  I fear  fome  of  us  have  thought  hardly  of 
others,  merely  becanfe  they  contradicted  what 
we  affirmed.  All  this  tends  to  divifion.  And 
by  every  thing  of  this  kind,  we  are  teaching 
them  an  evil  Teflon  again d ourfelves. 

O beware  of  touchint-fs,  of  teftinefs.  not  bear- 
ing to  be  fpoken  to;  darting  at  the  lead  word; 

ami 


[ 1 13  ] 

and  flying  from  tliofe  who  do  not  implicitly  re- 
ceive mine  or  another’s  fayings  ! 

* Expect  contradifdion  and  oppofuion,  toge- 
ther with  erodes  ol  various  kinds.  Confider 
the  words  of  St.  Paul,  To  you  it  is  given  in  the 
b half  of  Chrift  for  his  fake,  as  a fruit  of  his 
death  and  intercedion  for  you,  not  only  to  believe , 
but  aljo  to  fufferjor  his  fake,  Phil.  i.  10.  It  is 
given!  God  gives  you  this  eppofition  or  re^ 
proach  : it  is  a frefh  token  of  his  love.  And  will 
you  difown  the  giver  ? Or  fpurn  his  gift,  and 
count  it  a misfortune  ? Will  you  not  rather  fay, 
“ Father,  the  hour  is  come,  that  thou  (houldeft 
be  glorified.  Now  thou  give  ft  thy  child,  to  fuf- 
fer  fomething  for  thee.  Do  with  me  according 
to  thy  will;”  Know  that  theft  things,  far  from  be- 
ing hindrances  to  the  work  of  God,  or  to  your 
foul,  unlefs  by  your  own  fault,  are  not  only 
unavoidable  in  the  courfe  of  providence,  but 
profitable,  yea  ntjpedary  for  you.  Therefore  re- 
ceive them  from  God  (not  from  chance)  with  wil- 
lingnefs,  with  thankfulnefs.  Receive  them  from 
men  with  humility,  meeknefs,  yieldingnefs,  gen- 
tlenefs,  fweetnefs.  Why  fhould  not  even  your 
outward  appearance  and  manner,  be  foft  ? Re- 
member the  ebarafter  of  Lady  Cutts  : “ it  was 
faid  of  the  Roman  Emperor,  Titus,  never  anv 
one  cam'e  difpleafedfrom  him.”  But  it  might  be 
faid  of  her,  never  any  one  went  dif plea  fed  to  her. 
So  fecure  were  all,  of  the  kind  and  favourable 

reception. 


[ 1H  J 

reception,  which  they  would  meet  with  from 
her.” 

Beware  of  tempting  others  to  feparate  from  you. 
Give  no  offence  which  can  poffibly  be  a- 
roided  : fee  that  your  praftice  be  in  all  things 
fuitable  to  your  profeiTton,  adorning  the  do&rine 
of  God  our  Saviour.  Be  particularly  careful  in 
fpeaking  of  yourfelf  : you  may  not  indeed  deny 
the  work  of  God  : but  fpeak  of  it  when  you  are 
called  thereto,  in  the  molt  inoffenfive  manner 
poflible.  Avoid  all  magnificent,  pompous  words. 
Indeed  you  need  give  it  no  general  name.  Nei- 
ther “ perfection,  fanftification,  the  fecond  bl ef- 
fing, nor  the  having  attained.”  Rather  fpeak 
of  the  particulars,  which  God  has  wrought  for 
you  \ ou  may  fay,  lt  At  fuch  a time  I felt  a 
change  which  I am  not  able  to  exprefs.  And 
fince  that  time  I have  not  felt  pride,  or  felf-will, 
or  anger,  or  unbelief : nor  any  thing  but  a full- 
nefs  of  love,  to  God  and  to  all  mankind.”  And 
anfwer  any  other  plain  queftion  that  is  afked, 
with  modefty  and  fimplicity. 

And  if  any  of  you  fhould  at  any  time  fall  from 
what  you  now  are,  if  you  fhould  again  feel  pride 
or  unbelief,  or  any  temper  from  which  you  are 
now  delivered ; do  not  deny,  do  not  hide,  do 
not  difguife  it  at  all,  at  the  peril  of  your  foul. 
At  all  events  go  to  one  in  whom  you  can  confide, 
and  fpeak  juft  what  you  feel.  God  will  enable 
him  to  fpeak  a word  in  feafon,  which  ftiall  be 
health  to  vour  foul.  And  furely  he  will  again 

lift 


[ *»5  J 

lift,  up  your  head,  and  caufe  the  bones  that  have 
been  broken  to  rejoice. 

0.  38.  What  is  the  la  ft  advice  that  you  would 
give  them  ? 

A.  Be  exemplary  in  all  things : particularly  in 
outward  things  (as  in  dr  e/s)  in  little  things,  in  the 
laying  out  of  your  money,  (avoiding  every  need- 
lefs  expence)  in  deep,  fteddy  ferioufnefs,  and  in 
the folidity  and  ufefulnefs  of  all  your  converfa - 
lion.  So  {hall  you  be  a light  Jhining  in  a dark 
place  : fo  (hall  you  daily  grow  in  grace,  till  an 
entrance  he  mvnjlered  unto  you . abundantly,  into 
the  ever  l a fling  kingdom  of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrifl. 

2 6.  * Jn  the  year  1764,  upon  a review  of  the 
whole  fubjeCt,  I wrote  down  the  fum  of  what 
I had  obferved,  in  the  following  (hort  propofi- 
tions.” 

“ 1.  There  is  fuch  a thing  as  perfection  ; for  it 
is  again  and  again  mentioned  in  fcripture. 

2.  It  is  not  fo  early  as  juftification  ; for  jufti- 
fied  perfons  are  to  go  on  to  perfeblion.  Heb, 

vi.  x. 

3.  It  is  not  fo  late  as  death  ; for  St.  Paul 
1'peaks  of  living  men  that  were  perfeft,  Phil, 
iii.  15. 

4.  It  is  not  abfolute . Abfolute  perfection  be- 
longs not  to  man  : nor  to  angels  ; but  to  God. 
alone. 

5.  It  does  not  make  a man  infallible  : none  is 
infallible,  while  he  remains  in  the  body. 


6.  Is 


[ lift  J 

6.  Is  it  finltfs  ? It  is  not  worth  while  to  contend 
lor  a term.  It  is  Jalvation  from  Jin. 

7*  Ii  is  perfetl  love,  i John  iv.  18.  This  is  the 
eftence  of  it  ; its  propei ties,  or  infeparable  fruits, 
are  rejoicing  evermore,  praying  without  ceafing, 
and  in  every  thing  giving  thanks,  1 Tilth  v.  i6, 
itc. 

8.  It  is  improveahle.  It  is  fo  far  from  lying  in  art 
indivifiblc  point,  front  being  incapable  of  increafe 
that  one  perfected  in  love,  may  grow  in  grace 
far  fwiitcr  than  he  did  before. 

9.  It  is  amiffijble,  capable  of  being  loft  ; of 
which  we  have  numerous  inftances.  But  we 
■were  not  thoroughly  convincedof  this  till  five  or 
fix  years  ago. 

to.  It  is  conftan  Iv  both  preceded  ?nd  fol- 
lowed by  a gradual  work. 

n.  But  is  it  in  itfelf  inftantaneous,  or  not  ? 
In  examining  this,  let  us  go  on  flep  by  Hep. 

An  in//antar.eous  thanst  lias  been  wrought  in 
feme  believers  : none  can  deny  this. 

Since  thatchange  thev  enjoy  perfect  love.  They 
feel  this  and  this  alone.  They  rejoice  evermore, 
pray  without  ceafing,  and  in  every  thing  give 
thanks.  Now  this  is  all  that  I mean  by  perfection. 
Therefore  thefe  are  witneffes  of  the  perfection 
which  I preach. 

“ But  in  forne  this  change  was  not  in- 
ftantaneous.” They  did  not  perceive  the 
inftant  when  it  was  .wrought.  It  is  often 
difficult  to  perceive  the  inftant  when  a man 

dies. 


C **;  ] 

\ 

•dies.  Yet  there  is  an  inftant  in  which  life 
•ceafes.  And  if  ever  fin  ceafes,  there  mull 
he  a la  ft  moment  of  its  exiftence,  and  a firlt 
xnomeht  of  our  deliverance  from  it. 

But  if  they  have  this  love  now,  they  will 
lofe  it.”  They  may  ; but  they  need  not.  And 
whether  they  do  or  no,  they  have  it  now:  they 
now  experience  what  we  teach.  They  now  are 
all  love.  They  now  rejoice,  pray  and  praife  with- 
out ceafing. 

“ However,  fin  is  only  fufpended  in  them  ; 
it  is  not  dtflroyedl'  Call  it  which  you  pjeafe. 
They  are  all  love  to  day  : and  they  take  no 
thought  for  the  morrow. 

“ But  this  do  ft  rise  has  been  much  abated.” 
So  has  that  of  juftification  by  faith.  But  that 
is  no  reafou  for  giving  up,  either  this  or  any 
other  fcriptural  doftrine  ! When  you  wafh  your 
child,  as  one  fpeaks,  “ throw  away  the  water 
but  do  not  throw  away  the  child.” 

“ But  thofe  who  think  they  are  faved  from 
fin  fay  the^- have  no  need  of  the  merits  ofChrift.” 
They  fay  juft  the  contrary.  Their  language,  is. 

Every  moment.  Lord,  I want 
The  merit  of  thy  death  ! 

"They  never  before  had  fo  deep,  fo  unfpeakable  a 
conviftion  of  the  need  of  Thrift,  in  all  his  offices 
as  they  have  now. 

Therefore  all  our  preachers  fliould  make  a 

point, 


[ n8  ] 

point,  of  preaching  per ftBiort  to  believers,  con- 
flantly,  ftrongly  and  explicitly. 

And  all  believers  fhould  mind  this  one  thing , 
and  continually  agonize  for  it. 

9 7.  * I have  now  done  what  I propofed.  I have 
given  a plain  and  fimple  account,  of  the  manner 
wherein  I firfl  received  the  do&rine  of  perfection, 
and  the  fen fe  wherein  I received,  and  wherein 
I do  receive  and  teach  it  to  this  day.  I have  de- 
clared the  whole,  and  ever)'  part  of  what  I 
mean  by  that  fcriptural  expreflion.  I have  drawn 
the  pitlure  of  it  at  full  length,  without  either 
-difguife  or  covering  And  I would  now  afk  any 
impartial  perfon,  What  is  there  fo  frightful 
therein  ? Whence  is  all  this  outcry,  which  for 
thefe  twenty  years  and  upwards,  has  been  made 
throughout  the  kingdom  : as  if  all  Chriftianity 
were  deftroyed,  and  all  religion  torn  up  by  the 
roots  ? Why  is  it,  that  the  very  name  orper- 
feftion  has  been  call  out  of  the  mouths  of  Chrif- 
tians  ; yea,  exploded  and  abhorred,  as  if  it  con- 
tained the  moll  pernicious  herefv?  Why  have 
the  preachers  of  it  been  hooted  at,  like  mad 
dogs,  even  by  men  that  fear  God  ? Nay,  and  by 
fome  of  their  own  children,  fome  whom  they, 
under  God,  had  begotten  through  the  gofpel  ? 
What  reafon  is  there  for  this  ? Or  what  prdcnce  ? 
Reafon,  found  reafon  there  is  none.  It  is  irnpof- 
fible  there  fhould  : but  pretences  there  are,  and 
thofe  in  great  abundance.  Indeed  there  is  a 
ground  to  fear,  that  with  fome  who  trea  11s 

thus, 


[ H9  ] 

thus,  [it  is  mere  pretence:  that  it  is  no  more 
than  a copy  of  their  counte'nance,  from  the  be- 
ginning to  the  end.  They  wanted,  they  fought 
occafion  again  ft  me:  and  here  they  found  what 
•they  fought.  “ This  is  Mr.  W efley’s  doQrine  ! 
He  preaches  perfection  !”  He  does  : yet  this  is 
not  his  doftrine,  any  more  than  it  is  j yours  ; or. 
any  one’s  elfe,  that  is  a minifter  of  Chrift.  For 
it  is  his  doftrine,  peculiarly,  emphatically  his ; 
it  is  the  doftrine  of  Jefus  Chrift.  Thofe  are  his 
Words,  not  mine,  "Eg- it  TiAEtoi  wr  o nat-rog  ifxijt  o 
It  Tot's  teAe ios  l rt . d e JliG.ll  thei  efor e be  perje£l, 

as  your  Father  zvho  is  in  heaven  is  perfeEl.  And 
who  fays,  ye  fhall  not  ? Or  atleaft,  not  till  your 
foul  is  feparated  from  the  body  ? It  is  the  doc- 
trine of  St.  Paul,  the  doQrine  of  St.  James,  of 
St.  Peter,  and  St.  John  : and  no  otherwife  Mr. 
W efley’s,  than  as  it  is  the  doftrine  of  every  one 
who  preaches  the  pure  and  the  whole  gofpel.  I 
tell  you,  as  plain  as  I can  fpeak,  where  and  when 
I found  this.  I found  it  in  the  oracles  of  God, 
in  the  Old  and  New  Teftament  : when  I read 
them  with  no.  other  view  or  defire  but  to  fave 
my  own  foul.  But  wlrofe  ever  this  do&rine  is,  I 
pray  you,  what  harm  is  there  in  it  ? Look  at  it 
again  : furvey  it  on  every  fide,  and  that  with  the 
clofeft  attention.  In  one  view  it  is  purity  of  in- 
tention, dedicating  all  the  hie  to  God.  It  .is  the 
giving  God  all  our  heart ; it  is  one  defire  and  de- 
fign  ruling  all  our  tempers.  It  is  the  devoting, 
not  a part,  but  all  our  foul,  body,  and  fubftance 

to 


[ 120  ] 

to  God.  In  another  view,  it  is  all  the  mind 
which  was  in  Chrift,  enabling  us  to  walk  as 
Chrift  walked.  It  is  the  circumcifion  of  the 
heart  from  all  filthinefs,  all  inward  as  well  as  out- 
ward pollution.  It  is  a renewal  of  the  heart  in  the 
whole  image  of  God,  the  full  likenefs  of  him 
that  created  it.  In  yet  another,  it  is  the  loving 
God  with  all  our  heart,  and  our  neighbour  as 
ourfelves.  Now  take  it  in  which  of  thefe  views 
you  pleafe,  (for  there  is  no  material  difference) 
and  this  is  the  whole  and  foie  perfection,  as  a 
train  of  writings  prove  to  a demonflration,  which 
I have  believed  and  taught  for  thefe  forty  years, 
from  the  year  1725,  to  the  ypar  1765. 

28.  Now  let  this perfichon  appear  in  its  native 
form,  and  who  can  fpeak  one  word  againft  it 1 
Will  any  dare  to  fpeak  againft  loving  the  Lord 
our  God  with  all  our  heart,  and  our  neighbour 
as  ourfelves  ? Againft  a renewal  of  heart,  not 
only  in  part,  but  in  the  whole  image  of  God  ? 
Who  is  he  that  will  open  his  mouth  againft  be- 
ing cleanfed  from  all  pollution  both  of  flefh  and 
fpirit  ? Or  againft  having  all  the  mind  that  was 
in  Chrift,  and  walking  in  all  things  as  Chrift 
walked  ? What  man,  who  calls  himfelf  a Chrif- 
tian,  has  the  hardinefs  to  object,  to  the  devoing, 
not  a part,  but  all  our  foul,  body  and  fubftance 
to  God  ? What  ferious  man  would  oppole  the 
giving  God  all  our  heart,  and  the  having  one  de- 
fign  ruling  all  our  tempers  ? I fay  again,  let  this 
perfection  appear  in  its  ownfhape,  and  who  will 

fight 

O 


t 121  ] 

right  again Q it  ? It  muff  be  dif gulfed,  before  it 
can  be  oppoftd.  It  mull  be  covered  with  a bear- 
fkin  firft,  or  even  the  wild-beafts  of  the  people, 
will  fcarce  be  induced  to  worry  it.  But  whatever 
thefe  do,  let  not  the  children  of  God  any  longer 
fight  again  ft  the  image  of  God.  Let  not  the  mem- 
bers. of  Chrill  fay  any  thing  againft  having  the 
whole  mind  that  was  in  Chrifr.  Let  not  thofe  who 
are  alive  -to  God  oppofe  the  dedicating  all  our 
life  to  him.  Why  fhould  you , who  have  his 
love  fhed  abroad  in  your  heart,  withftand  the- 
giving  him  all  your  heart  ? Does  not  all  that -is- 
within  you  crv  out  ; “ O who  that  loves  can  love 
enough  ?”  What  pity  that  thofe  who  defire  and 
defign  to  pleafe  him,  fhould  have  any  other  de- 
fign or  define  ? Much  more  that  they  fnould 
dread,  as  a fatal  delusion,  yea,  abhor,  as  an  a* 
domination  to  God,  the  having  this  one  defire 
and  defign,  ruling  every  temper!  Why  fhould 
devout  men  be  afraid  of  devoting  all  their  foul, 
body,  and  fubftance  to  God  ? Why  fhould  thofe 
who  love  Chrill,  count  it  a damnable  error,  to 
think  we  may  have  all  the  mind  that  was  in  him  p 
We  allow,  we  contend,  that  we  at e juJHJicd 
J'reelv,  through  the  righteoufnefs  and  the  blood 
of  Chrift.  And  why  are  you  fo  hot  againfi:  us, 
becaufe  we  expeft  likewife,  to  be  fanttife.d 
wholly  through  his  Spirit  ? We  look  for  no  fa- 
vour either  from  the  open  fervants  of  fin,  or 
from  thofe  who  have  only  the  form  of  religion. 
But  how  long  will  you,  who  worfbip  God  in 

Vol.  XXIV.  L fpirit, 


[ 122  ] 

fpirit,  who  are  circumcijed  with  the  circumcifon 
not  made  with  hands , fet  your  battle  in  array 
againfl  thofe,  who  feek  an  entire  circumcifion  of 
heart , who  third  to  be  cleanfed  from  ail  filthi- 
nejs  offlejh  and  fpirit,  and  to  per f cl  holinejs  in  the 
fear  of  God?  Are  we  your  enemies,  bccaufe  we 
look  for  a full  deliverance  from  that  carnal  mind , 
which  is  enmity  again jl  God  ? Nay,  we  are  your 
brethren,  your  fellow-labourers  in  the  vineyard 
of  our  Lord,  your  companions  in  the  kingdom 
and  patience  of  Jefus.  Although  this  we  con- 
fefs,  fif  we  are  fools  therein,  vet  as  fools  bear 
with  us:)  we  do  expeflto  love  God  with  all  our 
heart,  and  our  neighbour  as  ourfelves.  Yea, 
we  do  believe,  that  he  will  in  this  world  lo 
“ cleanfe  the  thoughts  of  oui  hearts,  by  the  in- 
fpiration  of  his  Holy  Spirit,  that  we  fhall  perfect- 
ly love  him,  and  worthily  magnify  his  holy 
name.” 


INSTRUCTIONS 


[ 123  ] 


I N S TRUCTIONS 

FOR 

CHRISTIANS. 


SECTION  I. 

LESSON  I and  II. 

Of  GOD. 

HOW  many  Gods  are  there  ? 

One:  who  is  God  the  Father,  God  the 
Son,  - and  God  the  Holy  Ghoft.  Thefe  three 
are  one. 

2.  What  is  God  ? 

A Spirit. 

g.  What  do  you  mean  bv  a fpirit  ? 

One  that  cannot  be  feen  or  felt. 

4.  What  fort  of  a fpirit  is  God  ? 

One  that  ahvays  Was,  and  always  will  be. 

Where  is  God  ? 

Every  where. 

F 2 


6.  What 


t 124  ] 

6.  What  does  God  know  ? 

Every  thing. 

7.  What  can  God  do  ? 

Whatever  he  will. 

8.  Does  God  love  you  ? 

Yes:  he  loves  every  thing  which  he  has  made, 

9.  What  has  God  made  ? 

Every  thing,  and  in  particular,  man. 

LESSON  IIE  and  IV. 

Of  the  Creation  and  Fall  of  mart. 

1.  H ow  did  God  make  man  ? 

His  body  out  of  the  dull,  his  foul  out  of  no* 
thing. 

2.  Why  did  God  make  man? 

To  know,  love  and  be  happy  in  God  for  ever. 

3.  Where  did  God  put  the  firfl  man  and  wo- 
man ? 

In  the  garden  of  paradife. 

4.  What  command  did  he  give  them  there  ? 
Not  to  eat  of  the  tree  in  the  midft  of  the  ear- 

den. 

£.  Did  they  keep  that  command  ? 

No,  they  did  eat  of  it. 

6.  What  hurt  did  they  bring,  on  tbemfeives 
jthereby  ? 

Sm  and  guilt,  pain  and  death. 

7.  Did  their  fin  hurt  any  befide  themfelvcs  ?' 
Yes:  all  men  that  came  from  them. 

•$,  How  did  it  hurt  them  ? 

They 


t 12<5  ] 

They  are  all  born  in  fin  and  guilt,  and  fubje£t 
to  pain  and  death. 

g.  How  are  men  born  in  fin  ? 

We  are  all  born  proud,  felf-willed,  lovers  of  - 
the  world,  and  not  lovers  of  God. 

L E S S O N V.  VI.  and  VII. 

OJ  the  Redemption  of  Man. 

1.  By  whom  are  we  to  be  faved  from  fin  ? 

By  Jefus  Chrift  the  eternal  Son  oi  God. 

2.  What  did  he  do  to  fave  us  ? 

He  was  made  man,  and  lived  and  died,  and 
rofe  again. 

3.  What  may  we  gain  by  his  living  and  dying 
for  us  ? 

Forgivenefs  of  fins,  and  holinefs  and  heaven. 

4.  When  does  God  forgive  our  fins  ? 

When  we  repent  and  believe  in  Chrift. 

5.  What  do  you  mean  by  repenting  ? 

Being  thoroughly  convinced  of  our  finfulnefst, 
guilt,  and  helplefinefs. 

6.  What  is  believing,  or  faith  ? 

A conviftion  of  thofe  unfeen  things  which. 
God  has  told  us  in  the  bible. 

7.  What  is  faith  in  Chrift  ? 

A conyiftion  that  Chrift  hath  loved  me,  and 
gave  himfelf  for  me. 

8.  By  whom  is  this  wrought  in  us? 

By  the  Holy  Ghoft. 

F3 


9.  What 


t >*6  J 

9.  What  is  holinefs  ? 

The  love  of  God,  and  of  all  mankind  for  God’s 
fake. 

10.  Is  lie  that  believes  and  loves  God,  faved 
from  fin  ? 

Yes:  from  all  finful  tempers  and  words  and 
works. 

1 1.  How  is  he  faved  from  pride  ? 

He  is  little  and  mean,  and  bafe  and  vile  in  his 
own  eyes. 

12.  How  is  he  faved  from  felf-will  ? 

His  heart  continually  fays,  “ Lord,  not  as  I 
“ will,  but  as  thou  wilt.” 

13.  How  is  he  faved  from  the  love  of  the  world  ? 

He  defires  nothing  but  God. 

14.  How  is  he  faved  from  finful  words  ? 

His  words  always  fpring  from  the  grace  of 
God,  and  are  fit  to  mini  Her  grace  to  the  hearers. 

15.  How  is  he  fayed  from  finful  works  ? 

By  the  Spirit  of  God  which  dwelleth  in  him, 
whether  he  eats  or  drinks,  or  whatever  he  does, 
it  is  all  to  the  glory  of  God. 

LESSON  VIII.  and  IX. 

Of  the  Means  of  Grace. 

1.  What  is  grace  ? 

The  power  of  the  Holy  Ghofl,  enabling  us  to 
believe,  and  love  and  ferve  God. 

2.  How  are  we  to  feek  this  ? 

In 


r is7  ] 

In  a conftant  and  careful  ufe  of  the  means  of 
grace. 

3.  Which  are  the  chief  means  of  grace  ? 

The  Lord’s  fupper,  prayer,  fearching  the 

fcriptures,  and  fading, 

4.  How  often  did  the  firll  Chridians  receive 
the  Lord’s  fupper  ? 

Every  day:  it  was  their  daily  bread. 

5.  How  often  did  they  join  in  public  prayers  ? 
Twice  a day,  as  many  of  them  as  could. 

6.  How  often  did  they  ufe  private  prayer  ? 
Every  morning  and  night,  at  lead. 

7.  How  did  they  fearch  the  fcriptures  ? 

They  heard  or  read  them  every  day,  and  me- 
ditated therein  day  and  night. 

8.  How  often  did  the  old  Chridians  fad  ? 
Every  We.dnefd.ay  and  Friday , till  three  in  the 

afternoon. 

9.  How  long  is  every  Chridian  to  ufe  all  thefe 
means  of  grace  ? 

To  his  life’s  end. 

LES  S O N X.  and  XI. 

Of  Hell. 

1.  Where  do  unbelievers  go  after  death  ? 

To  hell 

2.  What  Tort  of  a place  is  hell  ? 

It  is  a dark  bottomlefs  pit,  full  of  fire  and 
brimdone. 

F 4 3.  How 


t «*  ] 

3.  How  will  they  fpend  their  time  there  ? 

In  weeping  and  wailing  and  gnafhing  of  teeth. 

4.  Will  both  their  fouls  and  bodies  be  tor- 
mented ? 

Yes : every  part  of  them  at  once. 

5.  How  will  their  bodies  be  tormented  ? 
By  lying  and  burning  in  flaming  fire. 

6.  How  will  their  fouls  be  tormented  ? 

By  a fenfe  of  the  wrath  of  God  ; by  pride, 
felf-will,  malice  ana  envy  ; by  grief,  defire,  fear, 
rage,  and  defpair. 

7.  Who  will  be  their  tormentors  P 

Their  own  confciences,  the  devils,  and  one 
another. 

8.  But  will  they  have  no  reft  from  torment  ? 
No,  not  for  one  moment,  day  or  night. 

9.  How  long  will  their  torment  lalt? 

For  ever  and  ever. 

LESSON  XII. 

Of  Heaven. 

1.  Where  will  believers  go  after  death  ? 

To  heaven. 

2.  What  fort  ofa  place  is  heaven  ? 

A place  of  light  and  glory. 

3.  How  will  good  men  live  there  ? 

In  joy  and  happinefs,  greater  than  they  can 
now  defire  or  think. 

4.  Will  they  fuffer  nothing  there  ? 


No. 


[ 129  ] 


No.  They  will  have  no  want,  or  pain,  or  fin. 

5.  What  fort  of  bodies  will  they  have  then  ? 
Spiritual  bodies,  fwifter  than  lightning,  atid 

brighter  than  the  fun. 

6.  But  wherein  will  their  chief  happinefs  lie  ? 
In  the  enjoyment  of  God. 

7.  How  will  they  enjoy  God  ? 

They  will  knowT,  and  love,  and  fee  God,  face 
to  face. 

8.  How  will  they  fpend  their  time  ? 

In  fingingpraife  to  God. 

9.  How  long  will  this  happinefs  1'aft  ? 

As  long  as  God  lives,  that  is,  for  ever  and 
ever.  Lord ! bring  me  thither  ! Amen. 


SECTION  II. 

LESSON  I. 

Of  God,  and  of  the  foul  of  man. 

TAKE  care  you  do  not  draw  nigh  to  God 
with  your  lips,  while  your  heart  is  far  from 

him. 

Never  fay  any  thing  to  God,  which  you  do 
net  mean. 

Do  not  dare  to  tell  a lye  to  God,  for  he  fees  all 
that  is  in  your  heart. 

F 5 Do/ 


[ *3°  ] 


Do  you  know  who  God  is  ? 

If  you,  do  not  know  God,  how  can  you  hope 
to  pleafe  God  ? 

Think  on  this.  Alind  it  well,  for  God  is  here. 
He  minds  you,  if  you  do  not  mind  him. 

LESSON  II. 

God  is  an  eternal  Spirit,  without  beginning 
and  without  end. 

He  cannot  be  feen,  or  fully  known  by  man. 

He  is  good,  and  all  good  comes  from  him. 

He  has  power,  to  do  whatever  he  will. 

He  is  wife,  knowing  all  things,  and  doing  all 
things  well. 

He  is  happy,  and  cannot  want  any  thing. 

He  loves  all  things  which  he  has  made»  and 
man  above  all. 

It  is  his  will,  That  all  men  fhould  be  faved. 
and  come  to  the  knowledge  of  his  truth. 

He  is  juft,  to  give  to  every  man  according  to 
his  works. 

He  is  true  in  his  promifes,  and  in  his  threat- 
nings. 

He  is  merciful,  forgiving  the  fins  of  thofe  who 
truly  repent  and  believe. 

LESSON  III. 

No  man  hath  feen  God  at  any  time.  The 

Sc-n 


[ *31  ] 

Son  of  God'who  is  in  the  hofom  of  the  Father, 
he  hath  declared  him  unto  us. 

No  one  knoweth  the  Son  of  God,  hut  the  Fa- 
ther, and  no  one  knoweth  the  Father  but  the  Son, 
and  he  to  whom  the  Son  will  reveal  him. 

All  our  reading,  and  the  things  we  hear  either 
at  church,  or  any  where  elfe,  cannot  reveal  God 
unto  us. 

* All  the  men  in  the  world  cannot  give  us  the 
lead  fpark  of  the  true  knowledge  of  God,  or  of 
the  things  of  God. 

Only  God  himfelf  can  do  this,  by  giving  us 
his  good  Spirit. 

He  gives  his  grace  and  his  light  to  thofe  who 
pray  earneftly  for  it. 

* He  declares  himfelf  to  thofe  who  do  his  will, 
fo  far  as  they  know  it  already. 

LESSON  IV. 

There  is  none  good  but  One,  that  is  God. 

Every  thing  that  is  good,  comes  from  God 
alone,  whether  it  be  in  heaven  or  in  earth. 

If  there  be  any  thing  good  in  any  man,  it  all 
comes  from  God. 

Therefore  he  alone  ought  to  be  praifed  for  it 

all. 

All  that  we  do  without  him,  without  his  grace 
and  his  help,  is  evil. 

Without  God  we  can  do  nothing  that  is  good. 

He  that  has  not  God,  has  nothing  that  is 
F 6 g pod  j, 


[ *32  ] 

good ; and  is  more  unhappy  than  any  words  can 
tell.  * 

LESSON  V. 

I know  that  God  has  power  to  keep  what  I 
commit  to  him,  fafe  unto  that  dav. 

Our  fouls  are  now  fpoiled  and  deftroyed  by 
fin. 

None  can  fave  us  from  our  fins,  but  God 
who  has  all  power. 

Let  us  commit  our  fouls  wholly  to  him,  to 
do  with  them  what  he  will,  and  as  he  will. 

Then  he  will  keep  us  by  his  power,  and  de- 
fend  us  againft  every  thing  that  would  hurt  us. 

He  is  able  to  deliver  us  from  all  danger,  and 
to  keep  our  fouls  unto  the  great  day. 

And  at  that  day  he  will  reftore  in  glory  both 
our  bodies  and  fouls,  and  all  that  we  had  com- 
mitted to  his  charge. 

O 

LESSON  VI. 

Do  you  know  what  your  foul  is  ? 

You  have  in  you  (though  you  cannot  fee  it)  a 
foul  that  will  never  die. 

God  made  this,  that  he  might  come  and  dwell 
in  it. 

iLGod  lives  and  dwells  in  your  foul,  then  he 
makes  it  like  himfelf. 

* He  makes  the  foul  in  which  he  dwells,  good, 

wife. 


[ ] 

wife,  juft,  true,  full  of  love,  and  of  power  to  do 
well. 

* He  makes  it  happy.  For  it  is  Ins  will,  that 
your  foul  fhould  rejoice  in  him  for  ever.  He 
made  it  for  this'very  thing. 

When  a foul  defires  God,  and  knows  and  en- 
joys him,  then  it  is  truly  happy. 

But  when  a foul  does  not  defire  God,  nor 
kn  ow  and  enjoy  him,  it  is  truly  miferable. 


SECTION  III. 
LESSON  I. 

How  to  regulate  our  defires. 


rTP  H E gate  by  which  God,  with  his  holy 
grace,  comes  into  us,  is  the  defire  of  the 

foul. 

This  is  often  called,  the  heart , or  the  will. 
Unlefs  our  defire  be'toward  God,  we  cannot 
pleafe  him. 

All  our  knowledge  without  this,  does  but  make’ 
us  the  more  like  the  devil. 

* The  defire  is  to  the  foul,  what  the  mouth 
and  the  ftomach  are  to  the  body. 

It  is  by  the  mouth  and  the  ftomach  that  the 
body  receives  its  nourifhment,  whether  good  or 
fead. 


Thai 


[ m ] 

That  our  body  may  live,  we  mufl  take  care  to 
put  nothing  but  what  is  good  into  our  mouth  or 
flomach. 

And  that  our  foul  may  live,  we  mufl  take  care 
to  defire  nothing  but  what  is  stood. 

O o 

LESSON  II. 

* Defire  was  made  for  that  which  is  good,  that 
is,  for  Gcd,  who  is  the  only  good,  and  for  his 
will,  from  which  every  good  thing  flows. 

We  ought  to  defire  nothin'!  but  God,  and  that 
which  is  according  to  his  holy  will. 

And  we  ought  to  turn  our  defire  from  every 
thing  befide. 

For  every  thing,  befide  God  and  bis  will,  is 
evil. 

Therefore  no  man  ousdrt  to  follow  his  own 
will. 

As  the  will  of  God  is  the  fpring  of  all  good, 
fo  our  own  will  is  the  fpring  of  all  evil. 

Take  care,  not  to  ufe  yourfelf  to  do  your  own 
will. 

No  foul  can  ever  be  faved  unlefs  it  renounces 
its  own  will,  and  its  own  defiles. 

Father,  let  not  my  will  be  done,  but  thine  1 

We  came  into  the  world,  not  to  do  our  own 
will,  but  the  will  of  him  that  fent  us. 

If  we  are  already  accuftomed  to  do  our  own 
will,  we  mufl  break  that  cuflom  without  delay. 

Our 


[ *35  [ 

O Lord,  lave  us  from  our  own  will,  or  we 
perifh. 

LESSON  III. 

No  one  can  do  any  thing  good  of  himfelf,  with- 
out the  help  of  God. 

All  our  own  defires  are  only  evil  continually. 

Therefore  no  man  fhould  defire  to  be  efteem- 
ed,  honoured,  or  praifed  by  any  man. 

And  no  one  ought  to  praife  or  efieem  himfelf. 

Rather  we  ought  to  defpife  ourfelves : and  we 
ought  to  defire  to  be  thought  by  others,  what  we 
really  are,  that  is,  poor,  weak,  fooiilh,  finful 
creatures. 

Then  fhould  we  find  help  from  God.  For  he 
refifteth  the  proud,  but  giveth  grace  to  the  hum- 
ble. 

* They  who  teach  children  to  love  praife, 
train  them  up  for  the  devil. 

Praife  is  a deadly  poifon  to  the  foul  ; there- 
fore never  praife  any  one  to  his  face. 

Do  not  plant  either  in  him  or  yourfelf  that 
pride  of  heart,  which  is  an  abomination  to  the 
Lord. 


LESSON  IV. 

You  are  of  yourfelf  nothing  but  fin,  and  de- 
ferve  nothing  but  hell. 

Therefore  you  ought  to  be  contend,  though, 
you  fhould  have  little  or  nothing  in  the  world. 
And  you  ought  not  to  defLre  any  thing  more 

than 


[ *36  ] 

than  you  have ; for  you  have  now  more  than 
you  deferve. 

Chufe  therefore  the  word  and  meaneft  things  : 
for  even  thefe  are  too  good  for  fuch  a finner. 

To  raife  any  other  de fires  in  vour  heart,  is  to 
prepare  you  for  hell- fire. 

They  that  give  you  fine  cloaths,  are  giving 
your  foul  to  the  devil. 

They  that  humour  you,  do  not  love  you. 

If  your  lather  and  mother  give  you  every  thing 
that  you  like,  they  are  the  word  enemies  you 
have  in  the  world  : 

By  doing  this,  they  make  you  flaves  to  the 
flelh,  to  vanity  and  corruption  : 

And  fo  keep  you  as  far  from  the  Spirit  of 
Chrift,  as  the  devil  himfelfcan  wifh. 

LESSON  V. 

God  is  power,  wifdom,  goodnefs  itfelf. 

Therefore  we  fhould  define  to  praife,  and  ho- 
nour hirr  as  he  deierves,  and  to  pleafe  him  in 
every  thing. 

The  end  for  which  we  were  born  is  to  praife 
and  honour  God. 

And  this  we  may  do  without  ceafing,  by  con- 
tinually lifting  up  our  hearts  to  him. 

This  is  the  continual  employment  of  the  an- 
gels of  God  in  heaven. 

They  fing  day  and  night,  to  him  that  flheth 

upon 


[ *37  ] 

upon  the  throne,  and  to  the  Lamb  for  fever  and 
ever. 

Holy,  holy,  holy,  Lord  God  of  holds ! let  all 
the  earth  be  full  of  thy  glory. 

LESSON  VI. 

God  is  continually  helping  us,  and  pouring 
his  benefits  upon  us. 

All  things  come  from  him,  our  foul,  our  bo- 
dy, our  life,  our  parents,  our  friends,  and  the 
goocj  angels  that  guard  us. 

The  earth  on  which  we  tread,  the  air  we 
breathe,  the  fun  .which- fhines  upon  us,  the  food 
that  keeps  us  alive,  the  cloaths  that  cover  us, 
die  fire  that  warms  us,  are  all  from  him. 

Therefore  we  fhould  thank  God  for  all  thefe 
things,  and  for  every  one  of  them. 

We  ought  to  be  thankful,  even  to  a man, 
when  he  does  us  any  good. 

How  much  more  oupht  we  to  be  thankful  to 

O 

God,  who  made  that  man,  and  who  does  u s 
good  by  him  ; 

Thou  art  worthy,  O Lord,  our  God,  to  re- 
ceive glory,  and  honour,  and  power  : 

Becaufe  thou  had  created  all  things,  and  for 
thy  pleafure  they  are  and  were  created. 

And  God  not  only  has  done  us  all  this  good, 
but  he  does  us  more  and  more  good,  continually. 

For  without  his  goodnefs,  we,  and  all  the 
world,  fhould  fall  into  nothing  in  a moment. 

* We 


[ ] 

* W e are  j uft  like  the  brittle  veflel,  which  if 
it  were  not  always  upheld,  would  fall  at  once 
and  break  in  pieces. 

Therefore  it  fhould  be  our  defire  to  be  always 
thinking  of  God,  becaufe  he  is  always  blefting- 

us. 

0 God,  our  Father,  teach  us  to  give  thee 
thanks,  at  all  times,  and  fur  all  things,  through. 
Jefus  Chrift ! 

LESSON  VII. 

Thus  God  has  bees  help’ng  us  this  day.  And 
we  have  no  lefs  need  of  his  help  for  the  time  to- 
come. 

« 

Above  all,  if  we  would  be  happy,  we  have 
need  of  his  bleffing  upon  our  fouls. 

1 his  he  gives  to  them  who  truly  defire  it  and 
none  el  fie. 

i herefore  let  us  defire  of  God  to  give  us  his 
grace,  his  good  fpirit,  and  the  knowledge  of 
himfelf. 

* Let  us  aftc  of  him  a meek  and.  quiet  fpirit,  a 
contented,  humble,  thankful  heart. 

If  any  man  lack  wifdom  let  him  afk  of  God, 
who  giveth  to  all  men  liberally,  and  it  fhall  be 
given  him. 

Let  us  then  take  C3re,  not  to  offend  him, 
from  whom  we  hope  to  receive  fo  great  bene- 
fits. 

And  let  us  alwavs  be  ready  to  do  his  will ; for 

if 


[ *39  ] 

if  any  man  honour  God  and  do  his  will  him  he 
. heareth. 

LESSON  VIII. 

But  we  have  often  offended  God  already,  and 
fo  are  unworthy  of  Iris  grace  and  bleffings. 

Therefore  we  ought  with  earned:  defire  to  affe 
God  to  forgive  our  pad  fins,  for  the  fake  of  his 
Son  who  died  for  us,  and  to  keep  us  from  them 
for  the  time  to  come. 

Thefe  defires, 

1.  To  praife  God,  for  his  power,  wifdom, 
and  goodnefs  ; 

2.  To  thank  him  for  all  his  benefits  : 

3.  To  afk  his  grace,  that  fo  we  may  pleafe 
him  : and 

4.  To  beg  his  mercy  for  the  pardon  of  our 
fins ; are  what  we  commonly  call  prayer. 

We  never  pray  but  when  we  have  really  thefe 
defires  in  our  heart. 

If  we  fay  ever  fo,  many  words  without  having 
thefe  defires  we  are  but  like  parrots  before 
God. 

Beware  of  this  ; of  drawing  nigh  unto  God 
with  your  lips,  while  your  heart  (that  is,  your 
defire)  is  far  from  him. 

LESSON  IX. 

What  do  you  mean,  when  you  pray  to  God, 
in  the  name  of  Jefus  Chrift  ? 


The 


L ] 

The  bare  faying  of  thefe  words  fignifies  no- 
thing. Itis  only  mocking  God,  if  you  do  not 
know  what  you  fay. 

We  were  all  under  the  wrath  and  under  the 
'curfe  of  God  when  jefus  Chrifl  the  Son  of  God. 
died  for  us. 

\ 

And  for  his  fake,  if  we  truly  believe  in  him, 
God  is  now*  reconciled  to  us. 

Therefore  all  our  tail!  Ihould  be  in  Jefus 
Chrifl,  whenever  we  pray  to  God  for  any 
thing. 

For  God  would  not  hear  us  at  all,  but  for  the 
fake  of  the  blood  of  Chrifl  filed  for  us. 

Therefore  we  ought  to  pray  always  with  an 
etc  to  him,  looking  unto  Jefus: 

And  ourdehres  Ihould  all  fpring  from  his  grace 
and  be  agreeable  to  bis  defies. 

Then  he  offers  our  defires,  as  his  own,  to 
God  his  Father,  before  whofethrone  lie  hands. 

' And  God  can  refufe  nothing  to  the  defires  and 
the  merits  of  his  well-beloved  Son. 

When  therefore  you  pray  in  the nameof  Jefus 
Chaff,  it  is  as  if  you  fhould  fay, 

* “ Lord  I offer  thee  the  defires  which  are 
wrought  in  me  by  the  grace  of  Jefus  Chrift. 

I prav,  that  thou  wilt  unite  them  to  the  defires 
of  thy  Son,  and  regard  them  as  his,  who  is  plead- 
ing for  me. 

And  grant  me  what  I thus  defire  for  his  fake, 
for  thine  own  glory,  and  my  falvation.” 


LES- 


C *4*  ] 
LESSON  X. 


Pray  to  God,  in  jfuch  words  as  come  from 
your  heart  : It  may  be  fuch  as  thefe  : 

*“  My  God,  thou  art  good,  thou  art  wife  : thou 
-art  powerful  : Be  thou  praifed  for  ever  ! 

' Give  me  grace  to  love  and  obey  thee. 

My  God,  I thank  thee,  for  making  and  re- 
deeming me. 

My  God,  I thank  thee,  for  giving  me  meat  and 
-cloaths,  and  for  promifmg  to  .give  me  thy  love 
for  ever. 

My  God,  forgive  me  all  my  fins,  and  give  me 
■ thy  good  Spirit. 

Let  me  believe  in  thee  with  all  my-heart,  and 
•love  thee  with  all  my  flrength. 

Let  me  be  always  looking  unto  Jefus  Ghjrift, 
-who  is  pleading  for  me  at  thy  right-hand. 

Give  me  grace  not  to  do  mine  own  will, 
but  thine. 

Make  me  content  with  every  thing.  The 
•ieaftof  all  -the  good  things  thou  giveft  me  is  far 
more  than  I deferve. 

Give  me,  O my  Lord,  a- lowly  heart. 

Let  me  not  think  myfelf  better  than  any 
-one. 

Let  me  defptfe  myfelf,  anddoOk  upon  myfelf 
■as  the  very  word  of  all. 

Let  me  hate  all  praife.  Thou  alone  O my 
-God,  art  worthy  to  be  praifed. 


LES- 


[ M*  ] 

LESSON  XI. 


The  bell  prayer  in  the  world,  is  the  prayer 
which  oar  Lord  Jcfus  Chrihhimfelf  has  taught 
us. 

Our  Father  which  art  inlreaven,  i.  Hallowed 
be  thy  name.  2.  Thy  kingdom  come.  3.  Thv 
will  be  done  in  earth,  as  it  is  in  heaven.  4.  Give 
us  this  day  our  daily  bread,  and,  5.  Forgive  us 
our  trefpafles  as  we  forgive  them  that  trefpafs 
againh  us.  And  6.  Lead  us  not  into  temptation, 
but  deliver  us  from  evil.  For  thine  is  the  king- 
dom, and  the  power,  and  the  glory,  for  ever  and 
ever.  Amen  ! 

Do  you  underhand  what  you  have  faid 
now  ? 

How  dare  you  fay  to  God,  you  know  not 
what  ? 

Do  you  not  know,  that  this  is  no  prayer,  un- 
lefs  you  fpeak  it  from  your  heart. 

God  is  not  pleafed  with  your  faying  thefe 
words,  unlefs  there  is  in  your  heart  at  the  fame 
time  a real  defire,  that  God  (hould  be  1.  Known 
and  elleemed.  2.  Honoured  and  praifed,  3. 
Obeyed  by  all  rr.pn  4.  1 hat  he  fhould  feed 
your  fouls  with  his  grace  and  his  love,  3.  That 
he  Ihould  forgive  yon  your  pah  fins,  and  6. 
That  he  Ihould  keep  you  for  the  time  to  come, 
from  all  fin  and  from  the  fnares  of  the  devil. 


SEC- 


[ *43  ] 


SECTION  IV. 

LESSON  I. 

JIozv  to  regulate -our  Underftanding. 

./’"'VUR  underftanding  was  made  for  truth,  that 
is,  for  God  himfelf,  for  his  word  and  his 
"Works. 

Therefore  we  fhould  not  defire  to  know  any 
thing  but  God,  an-d  whan  he  • has  fpoken  and 
done  for  his  own  glory. 

Accordingly,  lying  is  the  moll  abominable  of 
all  things.  The  devil  is  a liar,  and  the  fathen 
of  it. 

We  fhould -not  defire  to  know  what,  men  fay 
•or  do.  It  is  folly  and  vanity. 

Curiofity  isgood  for  nothing. 

It  fills  our  mind  with  darknefs  : and  makes  us 
fenfelefs  and  unfit  for  the  light  of  God. 

What  a lofs  is  this  to  fill  thofe  vefiels  with 
filth  and  dung,  which  were  made  to  receive  the 
•pure  light  of  God. 

LESSON  II. 

The  eye  of  the  underftanding,  which  fhould  ’ 
fee  God,  is  quite  {hut  in  all  men  fince  the  fall. 

W e are  born  quite  blind  to  God,  and  the 
things  of  God. 


And 


[ *44  ] 


And  it  is  God  alone  that  can  open  the  eye* 
of  our  foul,  to  fee  and  know  fpiritual  things. 

We  could  not  fee  or  know  the  fun,  the  earth, 
or  any  other  of  the  things  of  this  world,  if  God 
had  not  given  us  bodily  eves. 

And  we  can  never  know  the  things  of  God,  if 
God  do  not  redore  the  fpiritual  eyes  of  our  foul. 

This  he  does  for  thofe  and  thofe  only,  who 
flee  from  evil,  and  learn  to  do  good. 

Give  me  underdanding,  O Lord,  and  I will 
keep  thy  law ; yea,  I will  keep  it  with  my  whole 
heart. 

Open  thou  mine  eyes,  that  I may  fee  the 
wondrous  things  of  thy  law. 

'fill  God  opens  our  eves  to  fee  the  things  a- 
bove,  we  mud  believe  what  God  has  told  us, 
though  we  fee  it  not. 

But  we  mud  not  believe  what  the  world  tells 
us  about  the  things  of  God:  for  all  men  who 
have  not  his  Spirit,  are  blind  and  liars. 

We  mud  trull  in  God,  as  to  thofe  things 
which  as  yet  we  cannot  comprehend  : 

And  wait  and  defire,  that  lie  would  open  the 
eyes  of our  underdanding,  and  give  us  his  light, 
that  we  may  fee  all  things  clearly. 

LESSON  III. 

* A blind  man,  though  he  could  reafon  ever 
fo  well,  yet  could  not  by  this  means,  either 
know  or  fee  the  things  of  the  world. 


Aud 


[ »4  5 ] 

And  with  all  his  reafon  he  could  have  only 
very  dark,  grofs,  nay,  and  falfe  conceptions  of 
them. 

* In  like  manner,  though  all  the  men  in  the 
world  fhould  reafon  wijlv  all  their  might  con- 
cerning them  : yet  could  they  not  by  this  means 
know  either  God  or  the  things  of  God. 

Nay,  with  all  their  reafon  they  could  only 
have  dark,  foolifli,  falfe  conceptions  of  them. 

Before  God  can  be  known,  he  mull  give  other 
eyes  to  the  foul  and  other  light  than  man  can 
give.  - 

We  may  paint  the  fun  or  fruits  in  a pifdure  ; 
but  this  painted  fun  cannot  warm  or  give  us 
light. 

A'nd  thofe  painted  fruits  cannot  nourifli  us, 
nor  give  us  any  ldrength. 

juft  fo  we  may  draw  pictures,  as  it  were  in 
our  mind,  of  God,  and  of  the  things  of  God. 

But  thefe  pitfures  can  give  us  no  true  light. 
Neither  can  th.ev  nouriih  our  louls,  or  give  us 
any  ft  length  to  ferve  God. 

They  are  only  dead  fhadows,  cold  and  empty, 
barren  and  unfruitful. 

We  can  build  nothing  upon  them  but  the 
wind,  which  ferves  only  to  puff  men  up,  and 
to  drive  each  againll  the  other  in  endlefs  dif- 
putes,  till  they  burl!  of  themfelves  or  dafh  in 
pieces  one  again!!  another. 


Vo  I..  XXIV. 


G 


LE3- 


f H6  ] 

LESSON  IV. 


Our  underftanding,  or  reafon  without  the 
grace  and  fupernatural  light  of  God,  is  like  a 
blind  man  who  draws  wild,  random  piftuves  of 
things  he  never  faw  nor  can  fee. 

The  natural  man  difcerneth  not  the  things  of 
the  fpirit  of  God. 

They  are  foolifhnefs  unto  him,  neither  can  he 
know  them,  becaufe  they  are  fpiritually  difcern- 
ed. 

No  one  knoweth  the  things  of  God,  but  the 
Spirit  of  God!  and  he  to  whom  God  reveal  eth 
them  by  his  Spirit. 

Offer  therefore  your  underftanding  to  God, 
with  a fincere  defire  to  do  his  will  only. 

And  pray  him  earneftly,  to  give  you  his  light, 
and  to  open  the  eyes  of  your  foul. 

LESSON  V. 

* Endeavour  to  fee  God  in  all  things,  and  to 
give  a reafotylor  every  thing,  from  the  perfec- 
tions of  God. 

For  example.  Why  was  the  world  made  ? 
To  fhew  the  goodnefs,  and  wifdom,  and  power 
of  God. 

Why  do  men  die  ? Through  the  jnftice  oi 
God. 

- Men  having  abufed  the  life  he  gave,  it  was 
juft  to  take  it  away. 

Why 


[ 14  7 ] 

Why  is  it  our  duty  to  obey  our  parents  ? Be- 
caufe it  is  the  will  of  God. 

Why  ought  we  not  to  return  evil  for  evil  ? 
Becaufe  God  would  have  us  do  like  him;  who 
is  continually  doing  good  unto  us,  even  when 
we  ourfelves  do  evil. 

Why  may  we  not  defpife  or  judge  our  neigh- 
bour ? Becaufe  God  is  the  judge  of  all. 

Thus  we  fhould  accuftom  ourfelves  to  have 
God  always  before  our  eyes,  and  to  walk  con- 
tinually in  his  prefence. 

Thus  every  thing  may  fhew  us  the  power, 
wifdom  or  goodnefs,  the  truth,  juftice  or  will  of 
God  ; 

And  f©  every  thing  may  fhew  us  the  weak- 
riefs,  ignorance,  folly,  and  wickednefs  of  men. 

LESSON  VI. 

What  do  you  believe  of  God  ? 

I believe  in  God  the  Father  Almighty,  maker 
of  he  aven  and  earth. 

And  in  Jefus  Chrilf,  his  only  Son,  our  Lord. 

Who  was  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghoft,  born 
of  the  Virgin  Mary; 

Suffered  under  Pondus  Pilate,  was  crucified, 
dead  and  buried  ; he  defcended  into  hell ; 

The  third  day  he  rofe  again  from  the  dead; 

He  afcended  into  heaven,  and  fitteth  at  the 
right  hand  of  God  the  Father  Almighty  : 

G 2 


From 


[ i4»  ] 

From  whence  he  {hall  come  to  judge  the 
quick  and  the  dead  : 

I. believe  in  the  Holy  Ghoft, 

3 lie  holy  Catholic  church, 

The  communion  of  faints, 

3 he  forgivenefs  of  fins, 

The  refurrection  of  the  body,  and  the  life 
everlaft  ing. 

You  may  learn  from  thofe  words,  t.  To  be- 
lieve in  God  the  Father,  who  is  powerful,  and 
wife,  and  good ; who  made  vou  and  all  things 
vifble  and  invifible,  temporal  and  eternal. 

You  may  learn,  2.  To  believe  in  God  the 
Son,  who  lived  and  died  to  redeem  you  and  all 
•mankind  ; 

And  i.  To  believe  in  Gcd  the  Holv  Ghoft, 
who  reftores  fallen  man  to  the  image  ot  God  in 
which  he  was  made. 

LESSON  VII. 

All  which  comes  to  this.  Almighty  God,  the 
maker  of  all  things,  made  man  to  this  intent, 
that  defiring  God  alone,  God  might  fill  him 
with  his  knowledge,  with  his  love,  and  joy,  and 
glorv,  for  ever. 

But  man  turned  his  defire  from  God,  and  his 
will,  and  fo  became  both  guilty,  wicked  andmi- 
■fer-able. 

The  -Spn  of  God  was  made  man,  lived  and 
died,  and  rofe  again,  to  buy  forgivenefs  for  us, 

and 


C !49  3 

and  to  fliew  us  bow  we  ought  to  renounce  our 
own  will  and  defires,  and  to  give  ourfelves  up 
to  the  holy  tv  ill  of  God. 

This  the  Holy  Ghoft:  works  in  us,  inlighten- 
ing  our  underftanding,  and  filling  our  fouls  with 
a divine  peace  and  joy. 

Hereby  we  are  joined  again  with  all  that  is 
holy  either  in  earth  or  heaven. 

We  rejoice  together  with  them  in  the  com- 
mon falvation,  in  the  benefits  and  graces  of 
Jefus  Chrift. 

And  after  the  body  is  dead  and  rifen  again, 
we  fhall  live  together  in  eternal  glory. 

LESSON  VIII. 

We  cannot  now  comprehend  how  thefc  three 
are  one,  God  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Ghoft. 

But  tho’  we  do  not  comprehend  it,  yet  we  be- 
lieve it,  becaufe  God  hath  faid  it. 

The  true  knowledge  of  all  the  things  of  God 
is  wrought  in  our  fouls  by  his  holy  Spirit. 

This  is  a faving  knowledge,  when  it  works  by 
love,  and  brings  us  to  imitate  God. 

So  we  are  taught  by  St.  Paul,  be  ye  followers 
of  God,  as  dear  children,  and  walk  in  love  as 
Chrift  alfo  hath  loveth  us,  and  given  himfelf 
for  us.  i 

For  every  one  that  loveth  (faith  St.  John)  is 
born  of  God,  and  knoweth  God. 

G 3 


But 


[ ] 

But  he  that  loveth  not,  knoweth  not  God  ; 
for  God  is  love. 

So  likewife  if  a man  fay,  he  knows  Jefus 
Chrift  and  keeps  not  his  commandments,  he  is 
a liar,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  him. 

We  then  favingly  know  God  the  Father,  the 
maker  of  all  things,  when  we  love  him  with 
obedient  reverence  : 

When  we  confidently  give  ourfelvesup  into 
his  hands,  and  rely  on  his  providence  : 

And  when  we  imitate  his  goodnefs  in  all 
, things  and  towards  all  men. 

"We  then  favingly  know  God  the  Redeemer, 
when  we  live  as  thofe  whom  he  has  bought  with 
his  blood. 

And  when  all  our  tempers  and  words  and  ac- 
tions fhew,  that  he  has  redeemed  us  from  the 
prefent  evil  world. 

We  favingly  know  God  the  fanftifier  when 
we  are  holy,  as  he  is  holy. 

When  he  hath  purified  both  our  hearts  and 
lives  by  faith,  fo  that  wTe  continually  fee  and 
love  God. 


SECTION  V. 

LESSON  I. 

How  to  regulate  our  Joy. 

MEN  are  poor,  ignorant,  foolifh  finners  that 
will  fhortly  rot  in  the  earth. 


And 


C *5*  ] 


And  all  that  is  in  the  world  is  perilhable  and 
vain,  and  will  foon  be  deftroyed  by  fire. 

Therefore  we  ought  by  no  means  to  place  our 
joy  and  delight,  on  any  of  thefe  things. 

Neither  ought  we  to  rejoice  or  delight  in 
pleafingmen,  who  will  quickly  turn  to  duff  ; 

Nor  in  beino-  handfome  or  well  dreft,  or  well 
provided  with  all  things ; for  all  this  will  perifh 
forever. 

God  alone  is  great,  good,  and  the  giver  of  ah 
good  things. 

Therefore  we  ought  to  rejoice  and  delight  in 
him  alone,  and  in  the  fulfilling  of  his  good  and 
holy  will. 

And  we  fhould  now  accuflom  ourfelves  to 
this : to  rejoice  and  delight  in  God  and  his  holy 
will. 

LESSON  II, 

For  example,  we  fhould  rejoice  that  we  have 
for  our  true  father,  an  eternal  and  almighty  God. 

We  fhould  rejoice  that  this  God  has  made  us, 
to  fill  us  with  divine  and  eternal  joy. 

That  is,  if  you  believe  in  Jefus  and  do  his 
holy  will : 

If  we  will  love  and  obey  him,  and  not  love 
either  the  honours,  riches,  or  pleafures,  that 
pafs  away  like  a dream! 

And  this  we  may  do  by  the  power  of  his  grace, 
G 4 by 


[ *5*  J 

by  the  Holy  Ghoft.  which  he  is  ready  to  give 
unto  us. 

We  fhould  rejoice  that  God  is  happy  and 
glorious  in  lnmfelf,  that  he  is  greater  than  we  can 
think  : 

That  he  knows  every  thing,  and  can  do  every 
thing : 

That  he  is  juft  and  good  : that  he  is  true  in  all 
his  promifes;  and  wife  to  teach  and  govern  us 
well  : 

We  fhould  rejoice,  that  God  alone  deferves 
to  be  defired,  known,  loved,  praifed,  and 
glorified  for  ever. 

We  fhould  rejoice  that  the  Son  of  God  took 
our  nature  upon  him,  in  order  to  take  us  with 
him  to  heaven  for  ever. 

And  that  even  now7  he  will  come  and  dwell  in 
our  heart,  if  we  defire  it,  and  believe  in  him, 
and  do  his  will. 

LESSON  III. 

When  any  thing  is  done  according  to  the  will 
of  God,  we  ought  to  rejoice  in  it. 

But  when  any  thing  is  done  according  to  our 
own  will,  we  ought  not  to  rejoice  but  be  forry 
for  it. 

Therefore  we  ought  greatly  to  be  troubled  and 
deeply  forrow,  for  the  fins  committed  againfl 
God,  whether  by  ourfelves  or  others  : 

For 


[ '53  ] 

For  in  finning  we  follow  our  own  will,  and 
defpife  the  will  of  God. 

Likewife,  when  any  one  praifes  us,  if  we  are 
wife,  we  fliould  be  alhamed  and  lorry  ; and 
Ihould  fay, 

O Lord,  thou  art  good,  and  thou  alone. 
Thou  alone  art  worthy  to  be  praifed. 

O Lord  it  is  a Ihameful  theft  for  a poor  crea- 
ture to  take  to  itfelf  the  elteem  and  praife  which 
belongs  to  thee  only. 

On  the  contrary ; when  we  are  defpifed  or 
ill-ufed,  or  when  we  have  not  things  as  we 
would  have,  we  Ihould  rejoice., 

We  fhouid  take  all  as  from  the  hand  of  God, 
and  be  well  content,  faying  unto  him, 

0 Lord,  I deferve  nothing  but  pain  and  con- 
tempt : I rejoice  that  thy  juliice gives  me  what  I 
deferve. 

1 delire  to  thank  thee  lor  it  with  all  my  heart, 
and  to  rejoice  that  thy  holy  will  is  done  upon 
me. 

It  is  thy  will  that  we  Ihould  be  like  Chr III  : 
and  he  was  defpifed  and  hated  of  men. 

He  lived  m contempt,  and  want,  and  pain.  O 
let  me  rejoice  to  tread  in  his  heps. 

Let  me  be  content,  let  me  . rejoice  to  fulFer 
with  him,  that  I may  reign  with  him. 

LESSON  IV. 

One  that  is.fick,  ii  he  is  wile,  will  rejoice  to 
take  a (rood  medicine,  be  it  ever  fo  bitter. 

G 5 Efpe- 


C 1 54  ] 


Efpecially  if  he  knows  it  is  given  him  bv  a wife 
phyfician,  and  that  it  will  reftore  his  bodily- 
health. 

In  like  manner,  if  we  are  wife,  we  (hall  re- 
joice to  take  what  God  fends  us,  be  it  ever  fo 
bitter. 

For  we  are  fure  it  is  given  us  by  the  wifephy- 
fician  of  our  fouls,  in  order  to  reftore  them  to 
health  and  life  everlafting.  On  the  contrary, 

It  would  be  folly  and  madnefs  in  a Tick  man, 
to  rejoice  in  taking  the  things  that  pleafe  his 
tafte,  though  they  would  kill  him. 

And  the  lame  folly  and  madnefs  it  is  in  us,  to 
rejoice  in  taking  the  things  that  pleafe  our  cor- 
rupt will. 

Becaufe  the  end  of  thefe  things  is  death,  even 
the  deftroyingboth  body  and  foul  in  hell. 

LESSON  V. 

When  you  are  glad  of  any  thing  that  is  given 
you,  be  fure  to  remember,  that  all  this  comes 
from  God. 

Therefore  thank  him  for  it,  and  think  in  vour- 
felf,  God  has  a thoufand  and  a thoufand  times 
more  than  this,  to  give  them  that  love  and  obey 
him. 

And  be  readv  to  leave  all  thefe  little  things, 
whenever  it  is  his  will. 

If  any  fay  to  you,  ‘ See  what  a pretty  thing 

here 


[ KS  5 ] 

here  is,’  ‘ Look,  here  is  a pretty  thing  for  you,’ 
they  are  fools,  and  know  not  what  they  do. 

This  is  the  way  to  make  you  fond  of  fuch 
foolifh  things,  but  if  you  love  thefe,  you  cannot 
love  God. 

If  any  one  ever  faid  to  you,  ‘ Did  it  hurt 
you  ? Give  me  a blow  for  it,’  they  were  then 
teaching  you  to  ferve  the  devil. 

For  this  was  teaching  you  to  revenge  your- 
felf;  and  to  revenge  ourfelves  in  ferving  the 
devil. 

If  any  one  ufed  to  fay  to  you,  when  you  did 
anything,  ‘ It  was  not  my  child,  was  it  ? Say,  it 
was  I.’ 

Then  they  were  leading  you  the  way  to  hell  i 
for  all  liars  go  to  hell. 

And  whoever  they  are  that  teach  their  chil- 
dren lying,  pride,  or  revenge,  they  offer  their 
Tons  and  their  daughters  unto  devils. 

LESSON  VI. 

Above  all,  beware  of  the  love  of  money;,  for. 
it  is  the  root  of  all  evil. 

Money  is  now  the  God  of  this  world.  The 
aim  of  men  is  to  get  and  keep  this. . And  herein 
they  place  their  welfare  and  joy. 

This  is  an  idolatry  no  lefs  damnable  than  that 
of  the  Heathen  world. 

There  would  be  little  or  no  ufe  for  money,  if 
Love  governed  the  world. 

G 6/  And 


[ *s  ] 


And  even  now  money  is  good  for  nothing, 
but  as  it  is  a means  of  procuring  among  men  of 
the  world,  the  things  needful  to  fuftain  life. 

Neither  ought  we  to  de fire  it  any  farther,  than 
as  it  is  needful  for  this  end. 

God  to  whom  it  belongs  (as  do  all  things’  will 
require  us  to  give  a drift:  account  of  it. 

His  will  is,  that  when  we  have  ufed  what  is 
needful  of  it  for  ourfelves,  we  fhould  give  all  the 
reft  to  the  poor,  and  for  his  glorv. 

Do  not  ufe  youifelves  therefore  to  lay  it  up, 
but  give  what  you  can  fpare  to  the  poor. 

Or  elfe  buy  a little  meat  or  cloaths  for  them, 
or  fome  good  books  for  their  inftruftion. 

And  rejoice  when  you  ufe  vour  money  thus; 
becaufe  this  is  for  the  glory  of  God, 

LESSON  VII. 

Joy  was  made  lor  God.  Therefore  we  are 
taught  in'  his  word,  to  rejoice  in  the  Lord  al- 
ways. 

We  fhould  look  upon  God  and  his  grace,  as 
a great  treafure  ; and  thence  we  may  learn  how 
to  rejoice  in  him 

When  we  poftefs  a vaft  treafure,  fo  that  we 
cannot  poftiblv  lofe  it,  then  our  joy  is  perfeft. 

Such  will  be  the  joy  of  the  faints  in  heaven, 
becaufe  then  they  cannot  poftiblv  lofe  this  trea- 
fure any  more. 

But  when  we  poftefs  a vaft  treafure  in  fuch  a 

manner. 


[ 157 


j 


manner,  that  we  may  lofe  it  every  moment,  it  is 
plain  that  our  joy  therein  lhould  be  tempered 
with  a very  feriousLear. 

And  fo  it  is  with  us.  We  may  lofe  the  grace 
of  God,  yea,  every  moment,  by  divers  ways. 

We  may  lofe  it  by  our  own  wilful  fins,  by 
our  negligence,  or  by  our  prefumption. 

To  thefe  we  are  tempted  continually,  by  an 
infinite  number  of  malicious  and  fubtle  enemies. 

Thefefurround  us  at  all  times,  and  in  allplaces, 
and  they  never  reft  day  or  night. 

Day  and  night  the  devil  goeth  about  as  a roar- 
ing lion,  feekingwhom  he  may  devour. 

Therefore  blefl'ed  is  the  man  that  feareth  al- 
ways. 

And  accordingly  the  fame  apoftle,  who  teaches 
us  to  rejoice  in  the  Lord  always. 

Teaches  us  at  the  fame  time,  to  work  out  our 
falvation  with  fear  and  trembling. 

And  fo  St.  Peter,  fpeaking  to  thofe  who  re- 
joice in  Chrift  with  joy  unfpeakable  and  full  of 
glory  ; 

Advifes  them  to  remember  him,  who  would 
judge  them  according  to  their  works,  and  pafs 
the  time  of  their  fojourning  in  fear. 

LESSON  VIII. 

If  we  have  loft  this  great  treafure  by  our  own 
fault,  we  have  nothing  in  its  place  but  poverty 
and  mifery. 


But 


[ 1.53  j 

But  God  has  promifed  to  give  it  to  us  again, 
if  we  are  thoroughly  fenfible  of  ourlofst 

If  we  repent,  bring  forth  fruits  meet  for  repen- 
tance, and  truly  believe  in  Jefus  (Thrift. 

So  there  is  room  for  us,  ftill  to  rejoice  in  hope  ; 
yet  with  a lively  fenfe  of  our  paft  fins,  and  pre- 
fent  mifery. 

For  to  fueh  alone  is  the  promife  made  : thus 
faith  the  Lord,  to  this  man  will  I look,  even  to 
him  that  is  poor,  and  of  a contrite  fpirit,  and 
that  trembleth  at  my  word. 

And  our  Lord  fays,  Blefted  are  they  that 
mourn,  for  they  fliall  be  comforted. 

A broken  and  a contrite  heart,  O God,  thou 
wilt. not  defpife. 

LESSON  IX. 

Even  religious  joy,  if  it  be  not  thus  mixed 
with  fear,  will  foon  be  a mere  neft  of  felf-love. 

It  wTiJl  cover  the  greatnefs  of  our  corruption, 
and  fo  hinder  us  from  feeking  to  be  cured  of  it. 

It  will  make  us  carnally  prefume  tliat  we  have 
the  treafure  of  grace,  while  indeed  we  are  far 
from  it. 

So  the  church  of  Laodicea  faid,  I am  rich 
and  increafed  in  goods,  and  have  need  of  no- 
thing. 

But  (Thrift  anfwered,  Thou  knowcft  not  that 
thou  art  wretched,  and  miferable,  and  poor,  and 
blind,  and  naked. 


And 


[ *59  ] 

And  it  is  to  fuch  that  he  fays,  Wo  unto  yotr 
that  are  rich  ; for  ye  have  received  your  confi>- 
iation. 

Wo  unto  you  that  are  full ; for  ye  (hall  hurt- 
ger. 

Wo  unto  you  that  laugh  now  ; for  ye  {halt 
mourn  and  weep. 

Thefe  are  they  to  whom  St.  James-  fays,  Be 
afxlifted,  and  mourn  and  weep  : 

Let  your  laughter  be  turned  to  mourning,  and 
your  joy  to  heavinefs. 

Bleffed  is  the  man  that  feareth  the  Lord  ; for 
the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wifdom. 

Therefore  learn  to  ferve  the  Lord  in  fear,  and 
to  rejoice  in  him  with  reverence. 


SECTION  VI. 

LESSON  I. 

How  to  regulate  our  Practice, 

/"\UR  body  and  our  life  belong  to  God. 

Therefore  we  ought  to  difpofe  of  them  ac- 
cording to  his  will,  not  according  to  our  own. 

Our  owa  will  naturally  inclines  to  our  own 
profit,  our  own  honour,  and  our  own  pleafure. 

And 


L 160  ] 

And  thus  it  begets  in  us  the  deadly  vices  of  co- 
v-etoufnefs,  pride,  and  fenfuality. 

They  hinder  the  workings  of  God  in  us,  and 
the  falvation  olour  fouls. 

Therefore  , we  ought  to  accuflom  ourfelves, 
with  God’s  help,  to  deny  ourfelves  in  all  tilings : 

We  fhould  accuflom  ourfelves  to  do  all  we 
do  in  a fpirit  of  charity,  and  for  the  good  of 
others  : 

In  a fpirit  of  humility,  without  any  defign  or 
defire  of  being  efteemed. 

And  in  a fpirit  of'  penitence,  without  any 
regard  to  our  own  pleafure,  either  ol  body  or 
mind. 

In  all  things  we  fhould  aim  at  being  madecon- 
formable  to  our  crucified  Saviour. 

This  is  the  true  fpirit  of  the  Chriflian  life  and 
practice.  This  is  true  Chriilianiry. 

But  it  is  wholly  oppofite  to  the  fpirit  of  the 
world,  and  of  corrupt  nature. 

By  which,  alas!  one  buffers  one’s  felf  to  be  fo 
foftly  drawn  into  hell,  and  drop  finding  into 
everlafting  perdition. 

LESSON  II. 

It  is  the  will  of  God,  that  we  Qiouid  do  no- 
thing but  to  pleafe  him. 

It  is  his  pleafure  to  be  glorified  by  our  falvation. 

His  glorv  fhould  be  our  lupreme,  abfolute,  and 
nniverfal  end. 


The 


[ i6>  ] 

The  glory  of  God  is  advanced  in  this  life,  whets 
we  gives  ourfelves  up  to  Jefus  Chriir. 

Then  his  power  works  through  us,  many  holy 
actions  ; for  which  he  alone  is  to  be  honoured 
and  praifed. 

Without  me,  faith  our  Lord,  ye  can  do  no- 
thing. But  he  that  abideth  in  me  bringeth  forth 
much  fruit. 

Herein  is  my  Father  glorified,  that  ye  bear 
much  fruit. 

This  is  to  be  underfiood  of  all  forts  of  aftions 
and  things  : for  every  thing  we  do  is  to  be  done 
to  the  glory  ol  God. 

And  nothing  can  be  done  well  hut  in  the  name, 
that  is,  in  the  flrength,  and  through  the  blefling 
of  Jefus  Clin  ft. 

Whether  ye  eat  or  drink,  or  whatever  ye  do, 
do  all  to  the  glory  of  God. 

Whatfoeyer  ye  do  in  word  or  deed,  do  all  in 
the  name  of  the  Lord  Jefus. 

L E S SON  III. 

So  for  example,  we  eat  and  drink  to  the  glory 
of  God,  and  in  the  name  of  Jefus  Chrift,  when 
we  are  enabled  by  him  to  do  it  on  a right  prin- 
ciple, and  in  a right  manner,  fo  as  to  fay  to  him 
from  the  heart, 

Suffer  me  not  O Lord  to  eat  and  drink  like  a 
brute  bead,  only  by  a brutal  appetite  : 


Much 


[ 162  J 

Much  lefs  do  tboufuffer  me  to  follow  herein 
the  motions  of  my  corrupt  nature. 

But  grant  me,  thro’  the  Spirit  of  thy  Son,  to 
eat  and  drink  fo  much  as  is  needful  to  fupport 
my  life. 

And  let  me  fpend  that  life  wholly  in blefling 
thee,  and  in  loving  andobying  thee. 

So  likewife  you  fpeak  to  the  glory  of  God, 
and  in  the  name  of  Jefus  Chrift,  when  by 
his  ftrength,  you  fay  nothing  but  what  is  guided 
by  him,  anddire&ed  according  to  his  will  : 

When  you  fpeak  nothing  but  what  is  needful 
and  proper  to  give  men  good  thoughts  and  turn 
them  from  fuch  as  are  wicked  and  vain. 

And  thus,  in  all  things,  let  this  be  your  fingle 
aim,  That  God  mav  be  glorified  through  Jefus 
Chrift. 

LESSON  IV. 

What  are  the  ten  commandments  of  God  ? 

j.  Thou  fhalt  have  no  other  God  but  me. 

2.  Thou  {halt  not  make  to  thyfelf  any  graven 
image  nor  the  likenefs  of  any  thing  that  is  in 
heaven  above,  or  in  the  earth  beneath,  or  in  the 
waters  under  the  earth,  thou  fhalt  not  bow 
down  to  them,  nor  worlhip  them  : fori  the 
Lord  thy  God,  am  a jealous  God,  and  vifit  the 
fins  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children  unto  the 
third  and  fourth  generation  of  them  that  hate  me, 
and  lhew  mercy  unto  thoufands  in  them  that 
love  me,  and  keep  mv  commandments. 

g.  Thoiv 


[ 163  ] 

3.  Thou  {halt  not  take  the  name  of  the  Lord 
thy  God  in  vain  : for  the  Lord  will  not  hold 
him  guiltlefs  that  taketh  his  name  in  vain  . 

4.  Remember  that  thou  keep  holy  the  fabbath 
day.  Six  days  {halt  thou  labour  and  do  ali  that 
thou  haft  to  do,  but  the  feventh  day  is  the  fabbath 
of  the  Lord  thy  God  : in  it  thou  {halt  do  no  man- 
ner ofwork,  thou  and  thy  foil  and  thy  daughter, 
thy  man  fervant  and  thy  maid  fervant,  thy  cattle 
and  the  ftranger  which  is  within  thy  gates. 
For  in  fix  days  the  Lord  made  heaven  and  earth, 
the  fea  and  all  that  in  them  is,  and  refted  the 
feventh  day  : therefore  the  Lord  blefted  the 
feventh  day,  and  hallowed  it. 

5.  Honour  thy  father,  and  thy  mother,  that 
thy  days  may  be  long  in  the  land  which  the. 
Lord  thy  Godgiveth  thee. 

6.  Thou  {halt  do  no  murder. 

7.  Thou  fhalt  not  commit  adultery. 

8.  Thou  {halt  not  fteal. 

9.  Thou  {halt  not  bear  falfe  witnefs  againft  thy 
neighbour, 

10.  Thou  fhalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour’s 
houfe,  thou  fhalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour’s  wife, 
nor  his  fervant,  nor  his  maid,  nor  his  ox,  nor 
his  afs,  nor  any  thing  that  is  his, 

LESSON  V. 

Confider,  the  law  of  God  is  a fpiritual.  law. 
Therefore  all  thefe  commandments  are  to  be  fpi- 
ritually  underftood. 

Tbs 


L l64  1 

The  fit  ft  commandment  means,  Thou  (halt 
not  think,  believe,  or  own  any  thing  to  be  God 
but  me. 

Thou  fin  alt  not  fear  anv  thing  but  me. 

Thou  fhalt  not  feek  after  witches  or  wizards, 
or  prafctifeany  ftich  abomination. 

Thou  fhalt  not  put  thy  tr  It  in  anv  creature. 

Thou  fhalt  not  love  any  thing  but  me,  or  for 
my  fake. 

God  likewife  herein  commands  thee  to  be- 
lieve in  him,  and  to  acknowledge  him  in  all  thy 
wavs. 

Ke  commands  thee  to  thank  him  for  all  thou 
haft,  and  to  make  him  thv  only  fear  and  dread: 

To  be  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  i\\  the  day  long, 
and  H~>  trust  in  him  with  all  thy  heart: 

To  defire  him  alone;  co  rejoice  in  him  a! wavs, 
and  to  love  him  with  all  thy  hear  t,  and  with  ail 
thy  foul. 

The  fecond  commandment  teaches  us,  not  to 
fancy  that  God  is  like  the  thoughts  or  irpamna* 
tions  of  our  dark  reafon  : 

It  teaches  us  alfo,  not  to  worfhip  or  how  to 
any  image  or  pit! lire,  but  to  gloriiy  God.  both 
with  our  bodies  and  with  our  iprrits. 

LESSON  VI. 

If  we  will  keep  the  third  commandment, 

We  muft  never  fwear  falfelv  : and  if  we  have 
fw'orn  to  do  any  thing,  we  muft  furely  do  it. 

We 


[ l65  ] 

We  mull  never  ufe  the  name  of  God  at  all, 
but  with  reverence  and  godly  fear. 

We  mult  not  value  ourfelves  upon  his  name, 
his  covenant,  or  the  knowledge  of  him  in  vain  i 

That  is,  without  profiting  thereby,  without 
bringing  forth  fuitable  fruits. 

, We  mult  not  cover  over  our  own  will,  or  paf- 
fions,  or  defigns,  with  the  holy  name  of  God,  of 
his  truth,  or  his  glory. 

By  the  fourth  commandment  you  are  taught, 
to  do  no  worldly  buunefs  on  the  Lord's  day. 

But  to  fpend  it  wholly  in  prayer,  praife,  hear- 
ing or  reading  the  word  of  God,  and  other  works 
of  piety  and  charity, 

The  fifth  commandment  teaches  you  thefe 
Tilings,  ■ 

Shew  all  lowlinefs  and  reverence  to  vour  father 
and  mother,  and  do  whatever  either  of  them  bids 
you. 

If  need  be,  relieve  them,  and  never  let  them 
want  any  thing  you  can  help  them  to. 

Efteem  the  minifters  who  are  over  you  in  the 
Lord,  very  highly  in  love  for  their  work  fake. 

Obey  them,  and  fubmit  vourfelves  to  them  ; 
for  they  watch  over  your  fouls. 

Honour  the  king.  Obey  magiftrates.  Pray 
for  kings,  and  all  that  are  in  authority. 

If  you  have  a mailer  or  millrefs,  be  obedient 
to  them  in  finglenefs  of  heart,  as  unto  Chrift. 


LES- 


i 166  ] 

LESSON  VII. 


The  fixth  commandment  forbids  not  onlv  the 
hilling  or  hurting  any  one,  but  all  anger,  hatred, 
malice,  or  revenge. 

It  forbids  all  provoking  words,  all  ftrife  and 
contention,  all  gluttony  and  drunkennefs. 

The  feventh  commandment  forbids  not  only 
all  outward  uncleannefs,  but  even  the  looking  on 
a woman  to  lull  after  her. 

It  forbids  alfo  the  ufmg  any  thing  merely  to 
pleafe  ourfelves.  For  this  is  a kind  of  fpiritual 
fornication. 

The  eighth  commandment  forbids  not  only  the 
taking  from  another  what  is  his,  either  openly 
or  fecretly ; 

But  likewife  the  Healing  from  God  (to  whom 
they  all  belong)  either  our  affections,  or  our  time, 
or  our  goods,  or  our  labour,  by  employing  any 
of  them  any  otherwife  than  for  him. 

The  ninth  commandment  requires  us,  to  put 
away  all  lying,'  and  to  fpeak  the  truth  from  our 
heart. 

It  requires  us  to  fpeak  evil  of  no  man,  but  to 
put  away  all  back-biting  and  tale-bearing. 

It  requires  us  alfo,  to  judge  no  man,  that  we 
be  not  judged  ; but  to  leave  every  one  to  God, 
the  judge  ol  all. 

The  tenth  commandment  requires  us  to  be 
content  with  what  we  have,  and  to  defne  nothing 
more. 


LES- 


L l67 


■i 

J 


LESSON  VIII. 

Thefe  are  thofe  laws  of  God,  fo  wonderful  and 
holy,  of  which  David  {peaks  fo  often  with  love 
and  admiration. 

Thefe  all  the  fcriptures  recommend  as  the 
fpringof  life,  the  light  of  the  heart,  the  treafure 
-cf  fouls : yea,  our  Lord  calls  them  life  everlaft- 
ing,  John  xii.  50. 

Thefe  the  Holy  Spirit  has  promifed  to  write  in 
the  hearts  of  thofe  that  truly  believe  in  Jefus. 

They  may  all  be  fttmmed  up  in  three. 

1.  To  love  God;  2.  To  love  Jefus  Chrifthim- 
felf,  his  crofs  and  his  tribulation,  his  reproach, 
the  fellowfhip  of  his  fufferings,  and  the  being 
-made  conformable  to  his  death. 

3.  To  love  our  neighbour. 

Our  heart  therefore  fhould  always  be  full  of 
reverence  for  thefe.  The  love  of  them  fhould  be 
fixed  in  the  very  marrow  of  our  bones. 

We  fhould  labour  after  this,  by  earned  prayer, 
by  reading,  and  bv  meditating  on  thofe  deep 
words  : 

The  law  of  the  Lord  is  an  undefiled  law,  (the 
law  of  love)  converting  the  foul : the  teflimony  of 
the  Lord  is  fure,  and  giveth  wifdom  to  the  fimple. 

The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  clean  and  endureth  for 
ever,  the  ]udgments  of  the  Lord  are  true  and 
righteous  altogether. 

More  to  be  defired  are  they  than  gold  ; yea, 

than 


[ 168  ] 

than  much  fine  gold ; fweetei'  alfo  than  honey  and 
the  honey-comb. 

LESSON  IX. 

In  a word:  with  regard  to  God,  always  live 
and  act,  as  being  in  the  prefence  of  God. 

Remember  he  is  continually  looking  upon  you. 
And  he  will  bring  into  judgment,  all  that  you 
have  done,  faid,  or  thought,  whether  it  be  good 
or  evil. 

For  all  which,  you  will  be  either  rewarded  or 
p uni [hed  everlafringly. 

Never  fail  to  pray  to  God  morning  and  even- 
ing, as  well  as  before  and  af  er  you  eat  or  drink. 

Often  lift  up  your  heart  to  God  at  other  times, 
particularly  before  any  work  or  bufinefs. 

Defire  his  blefTing  and  help,  and  afterwards 
give  him  thanks,  and  offer  it  up  to  God  and  his 
glory. 

Hear  the  truths  of  God  with  attention  and  re- 
verence. whether  at  home  or  at  church. 

But  do  not  think  you  have  ferved  God,  barely 
becaufe  you  have  heard  them,  or  have  got  them 
by  heart. 

Pray  to  God  to  give  you  a true  underftanding 
of  them,  and  to  enliven  them  by  the  working  of 
his  Spirit. 

Pray  him  to  giv  e you  an  humble,  fubmiffive, 
fimple,  and  obedient  heart. 

As  to  your  father  and  mother,  and  fuperiors, 

Pray 


[ 169  ] 

» .. 

Pray  to  God  for  them,  love  and  reverence 
them,  obey  them  without  murmuring,  even  in 
thofe  things  which  do  not  pleafe  you,  unlefs 
they  are  plainly  fins. 

Do  nothing  without  their  knowledge,  or  with- 
out their  leave. 

LESSON  X. 

With  regaid  to  your  neighbours,  and  your 
companions, 

Pray  to  God  for  them  alfo,  wifh  them  as  well 
as  you  do  yourfelf ; and  do  to  them,  as  you  would 
have  them  do  to  you. 

Think  every  one  better  than  yourfelf:  live  in 
peace  with  them,  help  them  : if  they  have  done 
you  wrong,  forgive  them,  and  pray  heartily  to 
God  for  them. 

With  regard  to  yourfelf, 

Pray  to  God  that  you  may  always  think  mean- 
ly of  yourfelf. 

Eat  nothing  between  meals. 

At  your  meals  eat  moderately,  of  whatever 
is  given  you,  whether  you  like  it  or  not. 

Defire  nothing  fine.  Do  not  defire  abundance 
of  anv  thing.  Be  content  with  a little. 

Employ  your  time  as  you  are  direfted.  Never 
be  doing  nothing.  Idlenefs  tempts  the  devil  u 
tempt  you. 

Do  not  difpute,  do  not  contradifl  any  one,  do 
not  talk  unlefs  there  be  a necefiity. 

Vol.  XXIV.  LI  D0 


[ i7o  ] 


Do  not  feek  to  excufe  yourfelf  when  you 
have  done  wrong,  but  be  always  ready  to  c o li- 
fe fs  your  fault,  both  to  God  and  man. 

For  God  will  not  forgive  your  fin  fo  long  as  you 
flrive  to  excufe  it. 

LESSON  XI. 

If  you  do  anything  well,  thank  God  for  it, 
•and  fay, 

I praife  thee,  O Lord,  for  giving  me  grace  to 
■do  this.  Without  thee,  I can  do  nothing  but 
■ evil. 

And  take  care  not  to  value  yourfelf  upon  it. 
]f  you  do,  it  deftroys  your  foul. 

When  you  do  wrong,  without  knowing  it, 
perhaps  it  may  be  excufed  : cfpecially,  if  you  are 
glad  to  be  taught  better. 

But  whatever  fault  you  commit  willfully, 
knowing  it  tohec  fault,  it  cannot  be  excufed. 

So  you  muft  alwavs  be  puniflied  for  lying,  for 
calling  names,  for  tlifobedience,  or  for  ftriking 
any  one  : For  you  know,  this  is  a fin  againft  God, 
and  you  muft  be  punifhed  for  it,  out  ofloveto 
you  and  for  your  good. 

You  deferve  punilhment,  both  in  the  fight  of 
God  and  man. 

If  this  fault  was  not  .punifhed  now,  it  would 
grow  upon  you  and  carry- vou  to  hell. 

To  prevent  this,  it  is  'good  to  let  you  fuffer 

a 


[ *7*  J 

a punifhment  now  a hundred  thoufand  million  of 
times  lefs  than  that. 

If  you  do  this  again,  you  mud  be  punifhed 
again  ; but  prav  to  God  that  you  may  do  it  no 
more. 

That  foolifn  love  which  would  fpare  you  now, 
would  be  indeed  the  moll  cruel  hatred. 

LESSON  XII. 

Some  may  think  the  rules  before  laid  down, 
to  be  either  impoflfible  or  ridiculous. 

They  would  not  appear  impollible  to  us,  but 
becaufe  we  have  not  been  accuftomed  to 
them. 

. If  we  had  we  fhould  find,  by  the  grace  of 
God,  that  nothing  can  be  eafier. 

Neither  can  any  think  them  ridiculous,  unlefs 
it  be  thofe  to  whom  the  crofs  ol  Chrift  is  foolilh- 
nefs. 

They  are  indeed  ridiculous  to  the  world,  be- 
caufe the  world  is  an  enemy  to  God. 

But  the  wifdom  of  the  world  is  foolifhnefs 
with  God,  as  the  wifdom  of  God  is  foolifhnefs 
to  the  world. 

Be  not  conformable  then  to  this  prefent  world. 
And  love  not  the  world  nor  the  things  of  the 
world.  If  any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of 
the  father  is  not  in  him. 

How  unhappy  therefore  are  they  who  bring 
H 2 up 


[ iyz  ] 

up  their  children  according  to  the  rules  of  the 
world  ? 

They  who  train  them  up,  as  it  is  called,  to 
make  their  fortunes  in  the  world  ! 

1 hat  is  indeed,  to  perifh  with  the  world,  to 
be  turned  into  hell,  with  all  that  forget  God. 

They  will  be  reproached  and  curled  to  all  eter- 
nity by  thofe  whom  they  thus  trained  up  for  the 
devil.  1 ogether  with  whom  they  will  have  their 
lot  m everJafting  burnings. 

But  happy  are  thofe  who  defpifing  the  rules 
of  the  diabolical  and  antichrilHan  world, 

Train  up  the  precious  fouls  of  their  children, 
wholly  by  the  rules  of  Jefus  Chrift. 


CHRISTIAN  REFLECTIONS. 

Tranflated  from  the  French. 

* t.  r | "'HE  firft  motions  of  turning  to  God, 
-*•  are  ufually  like  a fpark  of  fire  drop- 
ped on  ice,  with  the  wind  blowing  on  all  fides  ; 
which  mull  therefore  be  quickly  extinguilhed, 
unlefs  God  is  pleafed  to  keep  it  alive. 

2.  If  you  defire  to  give  yourfelf  up  to  God, 
be  not  difcouraged  at  hindrances,  temptations, 
oppofitions  : but  confidcr,  the  grace  of  God  in 
the  Gul  grows  bv  degrees,  like  .a  grain  of  muf- 
tard-feed  in  the  earth. 

3- 


[ *73  ] 

g.  It  is  not  faid,  Blejfed  is  the  man  that  hath  not 
finned : bat  he  to  whom  the  Lord  imputetk  it  not. 

4.  Read  a little  at  a time,  and  offer  it  to  God  on 
your  knees.  Thus  David  prayed  feven  times  a 
day. 

5.  The  grace  we  receive  foon  vanifhes  away, 
if  it  be  not  nourifhed  and  increafed  by. holy  exer- 
cifes,  which  are  the  very  firft  fruits,  or  rather 
the  firft  bloffoms  of  converfion. 

6.  Retirement  from  the  world,  joined  with 
prayer  and  proper  employ,  are  means  of  morti- 
fying our  fenfes,  without  which  prayer  profits 
little. 

* 7.  The  beft  helps  to  mortification  are  the 
ill  ufage,  the  affronts,  and  the  Ioffes  which  befal 
us.  We  fhould  receive  them  with  all  humility, 
as  preferable  to  all  others,  were  it  only  on  this 
account,  That  our  will  has  no  part  therein,  as  it 
has  in  thofe  which  we  choofe  for  ourfelves. 

8.  Wo  to  them  that  feek  comments  to  ob- 
fcure  the  bible,  and  to  widen  the  narrow  wray  of 
falvation  ! For  none  can  change  the  wrord  of  our 
Lord,  I have  given  you  an  example,  that  ye  may 
do  as  I have  done:  Neither  that  word,  What  I 

Jay  unto  you , I fay  unto  all. 

9.  When  we  would  give  ourfelves  to  God, 
we  fhould  not  be  eager  at  the  beginning,  to  hear 
long  difcourfes  on  the  fublime  truths  of  Chrifti- 
anity ; fince  it  is  not  then  the  time  for  deep 
knowledge,  but  for  good-works  and  bufferings. 
Thofe  who  are  juft  turning  to  God,  may  even 

H 3 receive 


[ J74  3 

receive  prejudice  from  fuch  an  employment  of 
their  yet  feeble  minds.  It  fuffices  for  them  now, 
to  know  what  they  ought  to  do,  and  inRead  of 
multiplying  knowledge,  to  multiply  good-works. 
to.We  fhould  bear  not  only  with  patience  but  with 
joy,  lofs  of  goods,  pleafures,  and  the  evils  of  earth, 
feeingChriR  has  taught  us  by  his  example,  that  there 
is  no  other  way  of  attaining  the  glory  of  heaven. 

*11.  -The  fouls  of  men  are  things  fo  great  and 
precious,  that  having  need,  according  to  the 
divine  wifdom,  ol  an  invifible  guardian,  and  a vi- 
able guide,  they  can  neither  have  an  angel  to 
guard,  nor  a man  to  guide  them,  but  thcfe  whom 
God  himfelf  gives,  by  a peculiar  appointment. 

* 12.  The  language  of  love  and  grace  is  upon 
earth,  the  beginning  of  the  language  of  heaven. 

* 13.  Thofe  w'ho  feel  that  they  are  alwaysupon 
the  verge  of  death,  and  who  have  eternity  in 
their  heart,  will  not  find  any  thing  very  alluring 
or  agreeable  in  the  wrorld.  And  he  to  tvhom  God 
is  all,  looks  on  every  thing  upon  earth  as  nothing. 

* 13.  True  virtue  confiRs  in  a thorough  con- 
formity to  the  whole  will  of  God  : who  wills  and 
does  all  (excepting  fin)  which  comes  to  pafs  in  the 
world.  And  in  order  to  be  truly  holy,  we  have  only 
to  embrace  all  events,  good  and  bad,  as  his  will. 

15.  Except  the  fight  of  glory,  and  the  partici- 
pation of  grace  ( the  light  of  God}  all  is  darknefs 
in  this  wTorld  and  in  the  other.  We  need  not  there- 
fore fo  much  lament  over  thofe,  who  want  their 
bodily  fight,  as  over  them  who  being  quickfighted 

in 


[ W5  ] 


in  this  life,  will  in  the  other  be  blind  for  ever. 

16.  God  is  not  honoured  as  God,  in  a man- 
ner worthy  of  him,  but  bv  the  voluntary  obla- 
tion which  we  make  him  of  our  life.  His  Son 
made  an  oblation  of  his  own  to  God  ; which 
obliges  us  if  we  are  real  Chriftians,  to  give  him 
our  life,  and  that  of  thofe  who  are  fo  dear  to  us, 
that  they  are  as  our  fecond  foul. 

* 17.  In  the  greateft  affliftions  which  can  be- 
fal  the  juft,  either  from  heaven  or  earth,  they  re- 
main immoveable  in  virtue,  and  perfectly  fub- 
miftive  to  God,  by  an  inward  loving  regard  to 
him,  uniting  all  the  powers  of  their  foul. 

* 18.  Such  is  the  condefcenfion  of  God,  that 
he  requires  us  to  love  him  even  more  than  we 
fear  him.  'Many  fear  without  loving  him  : but 
no  one  loves  without  fearing  him,  and  being  rea- 
dy to  die  rather  than  offend  him.  Among  per- 
fons  of  every  age,  and  every  profelhon,  there 
are  but  few  of  this  difpofition  : but  what  of  piety 
appears  in  them,  refembles  the  bloftbms  which 
we  fee  in  fpring,  that  adorn  the  trees  for  a-while, 
but  loon  difappear,  and  leave  no  fruit  behind  them. 

* 19.  Whether  we  think,  or  fpeak  to  God, 
whether  we  aft  or  fuffer  for  him,  all  is  prayer, 
when  we  have  no  other  objeft  than  his  love  and 
the  defire  of  pleafing  him. 

, * 20.  That  filence  of  fpirit  which  cuts  off  all 
thofe  thoughts  and  words,  that  might  fpring  from 
theaffliftion  we  feel,  on  the  lofs  of  them  who  are 
moft  near  and  dear  to  us,  is  the  beft  fubmiftion 
H 4 we 


[ 

sve  can  pay,  to  that  empire  over  die  living  and 
the  dead,  which  God  has  referved  to  himfelf. 
And  the  heft  devotion  we  can  praflife  on  thefe 
occafions,  is,  as  far  as  poflibleto  efface  from  our 
minds,  thofe  images  which  difquiet  and  afflift 
us,  that  God  alone  may  fill  our  heart,  and  re- 
main for  ever  the  obje£t  and  the  mafler  of  our 
paffions  and  of  our  thoughts. 

* 21.  We  ought  to  confider,  at  the  death  of 
thofe  whom  we  love  the  moll,  and  even  of  them 
from  whom  tve  receive  life,  that  all  the  names  of 
tendernefs  and  refpeft,  which  proceed  from  flelh 
and  blood,  are  loll  at  the  moment  of  their  repara- 
tion from  us,  to  return  to  God  as  their  principal: 
to  the  end  that  the  llream  running  no  more,  we 
may  have  recourfe  to  the  fountain  ; that  ceafing 
to  fee  them,  we  may  feek  to  him,  of  whom  they 
were  only  the  image;  and  that  fo  we  may  now 
have  no  other  Father  than  him  which  is  in  hea- 
ven, of  whom  we  are  in  ceffantly  to  afk  the  bread 
oflife,  and  eternal  inheritance. 

22.  The  mofl  magnificent  houfes  and  palaces 
are  only  trophies  of  human  vanitv,  which  in  a 
little  time  will  perifh  in  flames  with  the  wrnrld. 
Let  us  provide  an  habitation,  in  the  eternal  pa- 
lace of  paradife,  by  now  purifying  ourfelves  in 
the  flames  of  divine  love. 

23.  In  the  world,  the  fathers  mud  die,  before 
their  children  can  enter  upon  their  inheritance. 
But  in  the  church,  the  children  mult  die,  to 

enter 


[ m ] 

enter  into  the  inheritance  of  their  heavenly 
Father. 

24.  If  the  death  of  them  we  love,  does  not 
make  us  enter  into  ourfelves,  corr eft  that  tyhich 
difpleafes  God,  and  afk  of  him  light  to  difcover 
the  delufions  of  the  world  and  the  devil : we 
have  reafon  to  fear  that  nothing  will,  but  that  we 
{hall  live  and  die  without  wifdom. 

25.  Grace  from  within  and  affliftion  from 
without,  deftroy  the  fins  of  thofe  fouls,  who  caft 
themfelves  into  the  arms  of  God,  and  fincerely 
defire  to  be  given  up  to  him. 

26.  The  language  of  love,  even  when  it  fpeaks 
the  moft  ftrongly,  ought  to  be  decent  and  cour- 
teous, there  being  no  courtefy  like  that  which 
we  learn  from  the  hoi}-  fcripture. 

27.  We  need  not  afFeff  elaborate  reafonings  in 
matters  of  grace,  becaufe  the  principle  of  this  is 
faith,  which  does  not  reafon  at  all,  but  goes  fim- 
ply  where  God  points  out  the  way. 

28.  The  way  to  find  nothing  grievous  in  this 
world,  is  to  have  eternity  always  in  our  thoughts. 
For  then  all  of  grand  and  magnificent  which  we 
fee  here,  appears  a mere  Ihadow,  a nothing. 
How  natural  a refleftion  is  this,  when  great  men 
die  in  the  prime  of  life  ! What  can  fhew  in  a 
fironger  light  the  vanity  of  all,  which  men  ad-_ 
mire  fo  much  and  leave  fo  foon! 

* 29.  We  ought  to  honour  thofe  holy  .ones 
which  God  honours,-  and  to  expeft  more  afiif- 
tance  from  them  than  from  others,  at  the  time 
H 5 when 


[ *78  ] 


when  he  manifefts  their  holinefs ; becaufe  they 
are  then  as  it  were  new  fountains,  which  God 
caufes  to  appear  in  his  church,  and  who  will 
foon  (as'other  faints  have  done)  retire  into  God 
their  fotirce,  after  they  fhall  have  watered  a few 
ifiore  of  his  children. 

30.  God  hates  nothing  fo  much  as  the  forget- 
ting the  favours  which  lie  does  to  them  whom  he 
deigns  to  name  his  friends. 

gt.  The  whole  life  of  a Chrifiian  confifls  in 
following  God  ; w'ho  manifefts  his  will  more  and 
more,  according  to  our  faithfulnefs  to  him. 

32.  When  one  is  willing  fimply  to  follow  the 
truth,  there  is  no  trouble  in  deciding  the  greateft 
difficulties. 

33.  God  himfelf  inllrufls  thofe  who  follow 
him  with  fimplicity,  and  ffiines  in  their  hearts 
when  they  regard  none  but  him.  To  arrive  at 
this  hapvy  flate,  we  mull  defire  only  that  which 
God  gives  us  from  his  own  hand,  and  beg  him 
with  fervent  prayer,  to  keep  us  always  in  the 
defire  of  him  alone,  and  of  his  grace. 

* 34.  It  is  fcarce  conceivable,  how  flrait  the 
way  is,  wherein  God  leads  them  that  ferve  him, 
and  how  dependent  upon  him  we  muff  be, 
unlefs  we  will  be  wanting  in  our  faithfulnefs  to 
him. 

35.  It  is  God's  part  to  prevent  us,  and  ours 
to  adore  and  ferve  him  in  perfeft  fubjettion  la 
his  will. 

36,  Few 


C *79  ] 


36.  Few  perfons  go  to  God  with  that  fulnefs 
of  heart,  which  makes  them  walk  with  vigour  in 
the  narrow  way  to  heaven. 

37.  As  a fmgle  foul  furpaffes  in  excellence  all 
bodies,  how  beautiful  fo  ever  they  are  ; fo  a Tin- 
gle fpiritual  fin  often  furpaffes  in  guilt  a multi- 
'tude  of  bodily  fins.  And  fpiritual  fins  are  the 
more  dangerous,  in  that  bodily  fins  ufually  come 
-to  a period  by  age,  by  change  of  fortune,  by  the 
removal  of  the  occafions,  by  the  difgufis  that  ac- 
company, or  the  evils  that  follow  them : but  it 
is  quite  otherwife  with  fpiritual  : nothing  being 
fo  fruitful  as  the  fins  of  the  fpirit. 

38.  There  is  nothing  fo  bitter  that  love  does 
not  fweeten.  And  if  one  fees  that  the  covetous, 
the  ambitious,  the  voluptuous,  turn  their  greateft 
labours  into  their  greatell  plcafures,  is  it  {{range 
that  the  love  of  God,  and  the  forrow  for  having 
offended  him,  are  capable  of  {weetening  whatever 
he  has  ordained  for  the  healincr  of  our  fouls  ? 

O 

39.  God  gives  his  children  a kind  of  fpiritual 
air  to  breathe,  namely,  the  influence  of  his  fpirit.. 
And  this  never  fails  them  that  love  him,  how 
weak  fo  ever  they  are. 

40.  The  grand  truths  of  repentance,  and  the 
prefent  kingdom  of  heaven,  are  unveiled  under 
the  new  law.  The  gofpel  always  joins  them 
together;  and  it  is  impofihble  to  put  them  aftim 

der. 

* 41.  As  a very  littledufl  willdiforder  a clock, 
and  the  lealt  fand  will  obfeure  out  fight-,,  fo  the 
, 0 H 6 " teift- 


[ *8o  ] 


leaft  grain  of  fin,  which  is  upon  the  heart,  will 
hinder  its  right  motion  toward  God. 

* 42.  It  is  fcarce  credible,  of  how  great  con- 
fequence  before  God  the  fmallelt  things  are,  and 
what  great  inconveniences  fometimes  follow 
lliofe,  which  appear  to  be  light  faults. 

* 43.  We  ought  to  be  in  the  church,  as  the 
faints  are  in  heaven;  and  in  the  houfe  as  the  ho- 
lieft  men  are  in  the  church  ; doing  our  work  in 
the  houfe  as  they  pray  in  the  church,  worftip- 
ping  God  from  the  ground  of  the  heart. 

* 44.  There  is  no  love  of  God  without  pati- 
ence, and  no  patience  without  lowlinefs  and 
fweetnefs  of  fpirit.  It  is  by  this  alone,  that  we 
are  able  to  pafs  the  days  of  winter,  as  thofe  of 
fummer;  that  is,  the  afflictions  we  meet  with 
from  time  to  time,  as  well  as  the  joys  and  confo- 
lations. 

45.  God  loves  nothing  fo  much  as  gratitude 
and  thankfgiving.  And,  as  this  is  the  firft  aft  of 
our  piety,  it  ought  to  be  the  moft  conflant,  and 
to  begin  and  conclude  all  our  pravers. 

46.  To  continue  in  grace,  we  mult  pray  with- 
out ceafing,  fmce  we  cannot  continue,  unlefswe 
grow  therein.  Hence  it  is,  that  many  of  thofe 
who  receive  it,  lofe  it  immediately  ; becaufe  their 
commerce  with  the  world,  does  not  permit  them 
to  pray  often  ; or  il  they  do,  it  is  with  a thoufand 
diftraftions,  which  dilhonour  the  majefty  of 
God,  whom  we  fhould  hardly  approach,  but 
with  the  lowell  probation  both  of  body  and 

c foul. 


C »8»  ] 

foul.  He  difpenfes  indeed  with  that  of  the  body, 
becaufe  our  weaknefs  does  not  permit  us  to  be 
always  in  that  podure:  but  our  inmod  foul 
Ihould  be  always  bowed  down  belore  him  in  the 
lowed  humiliation. 

* 47.  The  evils  of  the  body  cure  themfelves 
in  time,  but  not  thofe  of  the  fpirit;  becaufe  they 
partake  of  its  nature,  which  is  immortal,  and 
for  this  cure  they  can  rely  on  none  but  God  • 
who  is  the  only  phyfician  of  fouls,  as  it  is  he 
alone  who  creates  them. 

48.  The  bearing  men,  and  differing  evil  in 
peace  and  filence.  is  the  futn  of  the  whole  Chrif- 
tian  life.  Without  this  a man  is  a captive 
though  at  liberty,  and  with  this  he  is  free  though 
a captive. 

49.  A true  Chadian  is  not  a common  thing.. 
And  he  who  is  fuch,  is  unfpeakably  happy. 

50.  To  be  habitually  prepared  for  the  Lord’s 
table,  we  mud;  walk  in  the  narrow  way,  at  a dif- 
tance  from  the  world,  nourifh  our  fouls  with 
the  truths  of  God  laid  down  in  the  gofpels,  and 
in  the  epi files,  which  are  a kind  of  commentaries 
upon  them  : meditate  on  them  in  the  fecret  of 
our  heart,  and  grow  in  love  as  well  as  in  know- 
ledge. 

51.  Truths  refemble  money,  all  the  value 
whereof  depends  upon  the  proper  ufe  of  it. 

52.  Humility  and  patience  are  the  fured: 
proofs  of  the  increafe  of  love. 


53-  In~ 


[ 182  ] 

53.  Inftead  of  reading  much,  to  fatisfy  our 
curiofity,  we  ought  to  content  ourfelves  with 
reading  a little,  in  order  to  make  a full  ufe 
thereof,  and  turn  it,  as  it  were,  into  our  fub- 
flance.  Otherwife  by  filling  our  heads  with 
knowledge,  we  drive  the  grace  of  God  irom  our 
hearts. 

£4.  Both  at  the  beginning  and  end,  and  even 
in  the  midft  of  our  reading,  we  fhould  lift  up  our 
hearts  to  God,  whether  wirh  words  or  with- 
out, that  he  would  pleafe  to  convert  what  we 
read  into  fpiritual  food,  fuc'n  as  by  means  of  his 
truth  may  nourifb  and  ftrengthen  us  more  and 
more  in  his  love. 

55.  The  truths  of  religion  are  like  effences,  of 
which  we  give  the  fick  a little  at  a time,  becaufe 
being  full  of  fpirits,  all  parts  of  the  body  are  af- 
feffed  by  the  little  that  is  taken.  This  occafioned 
our  bleffed  Lord  to  fay,  My  words  are  [pint  and 
life.  And  accordingly  one  of  his  divine  truths, 
fuffice  a man  to  nourilh  his  foul  for  a whole 
day. 

56.  One  may  fay  of  the  knowledge  of  fubhme 
truths,  wdiat  the  apoftle  fays  of  the  goods  of  this 
woild,  that  they  may  not  hurt  a Cbriftian,  he 
ought  to  polfefs  them  not : that  is,  without  any 
attachment  to  them,  without  any  reliance  upon 
them. 

y/.  Nothing  is  fo  capable  of  defiroying  the 
grace  of  God,  even  in  retirement,  as  idlenefs. 

* ^8-  Agree  with  the  poor  cpuicklv  while  thou. 

art 


[ *83  ] 


art  in  the  way  with  them.  Make  them  friends 
by  the  mammon  of  unrighteoufnefs.  For  thev 
will  be  as  princes  in  paradife,  where  they  will 
receive  the  rich  into  the  everlafting  habitation. 

- 39.  The  whole  Chriftian  religion  is  only  love* 
pure  and  fervent  as  the  fire  at  pentecoft. 

60.  Inllead  of  bufying  our  mind  with  dwelling 
on  the  grievous  p alt  of  what  is  palt  and  to  come, 
we  fhould  remember,  that  the  gofpel  does  not 
permit  us  to  dwell  on  any  thing,  but  the  prefence 
and  love  of  God,  who  fills  our  foul,  provided 
we  do  not  difquiet  ourfelves  with  vain  thoughts. 
But  we  cannot,  either  in  earth  or  heaven,  inhabit 
any  other  than  a peaceful  heart. 

61.  Swreetnefs  joined  with  firength  are  the  two- 
marks  of  the  Spirit  ol  God. 

62.  As  God  is  well  pleafed,  that  they  who- 
love  him  fhould  form  deligns  for  his  glory,  we 
ought  to  labour  therein  with  all  our  power;  and 
yet  not  to  be  any  way  difcompofed,  when  he 
breaks  in  pieces  our  bell  defigns,  fo  our  heart  is 
{fill  fixed  to  be  his  entirely,  and  to  live  to  his 
glory.  ^ 

63.  The  whole  of  ChrifHan  religion  is  love. 
This  alone  deftrovs  the  defire  of  the  goods,  and 
the  fear  of  the  evils  of  this  world.  We  fhould 
labour  to  increafe  it,  without  defiring  and  with- 
out fearing  any  thing. 

64.  The  love  of  God  has  its  forrows  and  tears, 
as  well  as  its  joys  and  confolations. 

C$.  As  love,  which  is  the  foul  of  our  foul  and 

life 


[ *84  ] 

life  of  our  life,  is  at  firft  only  a (ingle  fpark,  we 
(hould  take  care  that  nothing  remain  in  our  foul, 
that  hinders  its  growth  and  enlargement. 

# 66.  God  is  the  firft  objeft  of  our  love  : its 
next  office  is,  to  bear  the  defends  of  others.  For 
as  he  is  invifible  to  us,  it  is  his  will,  that  we  fee 
and  love  him  in  our  neighbour.  And  we  (hould 
begin  the  pra£l;ice  of  this  love,  amidft  our  own 
houfhold. 

67.  The  littlenefs  of  things  does  not  hinder 
their  being  greatly  pleafmg  to  God,  when  we  do 
them  with  all  our  heart : as  on  the  contrary, 
great  things  done  lazilv,  are  little  in  his  light  : 
Becaufe  in  all  our  works,  he  regards  the  fpirit 
abundantly  more  than  the  matter. 

68.  Let  none  imagine  he  is  virtuous  becaufe 
he  talks  of  virtue  with  pleafure.  Virtue  without 
practice  is  a mere  illufion. 

69.  Thofe  who  (eek  God  find  him,  in  praftif- 
ing  the  exercifes  whit  h he  has  prefcribed  in  the 
gofpel.  1 he  fum  of  which  is,  love,  obey,  be 
humble,  fuffer  his  will. 

70.  God  is  fo  great,  that  we  know  not  how  to 
pray  to  him,  but  by  his  own  Spirit,  and  the 
movement  which  he  gives  us. 

71.  Great  virtue  confffts  in  trying  to  vary  and 
multiply  the  marks  of  our  gratitude  for  all  the 
mercies  of  God. 

* 72.  One  obferves,  that  whereas  there  is  but 
one  devil  who  perfecutes  the  innocerft,  there  are 
feyen  that  perfecute  the  penitent.  . 


73.  Chiifi 


[ i85  3 

73.  Chrift-  charges  himfelf  with  our  temporal 
affairs,  provided  we  charge  ourfelves  with  tliofe 
that  regard  his  glory. 

74.  The  fmalleft  things  of  religion  are  great, 
becaufe  the  Spirit  of  God  is  in  them. 

75.  The  main  of  Chriftianity  confifts,  in  not 
following  our  own  fpirit.  and  being  given  up  to 
God  by  renouncing  ourfelves.  Accordingly, 
there  is  nothing  more  profitable  for  a Chrif- 
tian  than  ficknefs,  which  joins  obedience  with 
faith. 

76.  Our  one  defire  fhould  be,  to  have 
no  other  defire  in  this  world  but  to  be  faithful 
to  God. 

* 77.  Humility  alone  unites  patience  with 
love,  without  which,  it  is  impoflible  to  draw 
profit  from  fuffering,  or  indeed  to  avoid  being 
difcontented  at  being  affliCted  : efpecially  when 
we  think  that  we  have  given  no  occafion  for  the 
evil  which  men  make  us  buffer.  If  we  then  fall 
into  impatience,  it  is  for  want  of  humility,  what- 
ever love  we  may  appear  to  have. 

78.  Perfect  humility  is  a kind  of  felf-annihi- 
lation  ; and  this  is  the  center  of  all  virtues. 

79.  When  we  let  the  time  of  affliction  pafs, 
without  profiting  bv  it,  we  commit  three  faults  : 
that  is,  to  defpife  God  ; to  forget  ourfelves  ; 
and  to  overlook  the  great  leffon  which  religion 
teaches,  viz.  What  we  are  in  this  world,  and 
what  we  (hall be  in  the  other. 

80.  The  firfl  thing  we  ought  to  do  when  great 

affliction 


[ i8&  ] 

affliction  befals  us  is,  to  examine  the  ffate  of  our 
fouls:  and  if  we  find  ourfelves  culpable  in  any 
thing,  whatever  it  cods,  to  make  our  peace 
with  God. 

81.  There  is  none  who  comforts  Chriftiansbut 
the  Spirit  of  God  ; the  word  itfelf,  feparate  from 
him  is  ufelefs.  He  is  therefore  peculiarly  filled 
the  Comforter;  becaufe  he  is  come  down  on  the 
earth,  on  purpofe  to  heal  our  forrows  and  cares, 
by  (bedding  his  love  abroad  in  our  hearts. 

* 82.  The  readied  way  to  efcapefrom  our  dif- 
fer ings  is,  To  be  willing  they  fliould  endure  as 
long  as  God  pleafes. 

83.  They  who  have  known  mod  of  the  inef- 
fable greatnefs  of  God  have  had  the  deeped  re- 
verence for  it.  The  fenfe  of  this,  ousrht  to  make 
us  wrork  out  our  falvation  with  fear  and  trembling, 
and  diffruff  ourfelves  in  our  bell  undertakings, 
particularly  in  thofe  which  regard  the  fervice  of 
the  church  ; becaufe  they  require  the  higheff  pu- 
rity of  heart,  in  all  that  are  employed  therein. 

* 84.  As  painters  chufe  and  prepare  the 
ground,  which  they  defign  for  their  choiceft 
works,  fo  God  prepares  the  ground  of  thofe 
fouls,  by  whom  he  intends  to  do  great  things  ; 
Thus  he  prepared  St.  Paul,  even  from  his  mo- 
ther’s womb. 

85.  We  ought  earneflly  to  pray  to  God,  be- 
fore we  undertake  any  thing,  though  we  feel 
fuch  love  in  our  heart,  that  there  are  no  poor 
whom  we  would  not  relieve,  no  fick  whom  we 

would 


r *s7  ] 

would  not  heal,  and  none  afflifled  whom  we 
would  not  fuccour,  even  at  the  expence  of  our 
life.  For  experience  {hews,  that  in  order  to  do 
good,  it  is  not  enough  to  have  a loving  heart  : 
And  that  God  fometimes  gives  thefe  defires  and 
yet  does  not  bring  them  to  effedl. 

86.  Our  own  houfhold  gives  us  too  great  oc- 
cafion  to  know,  the  greatnefs  and  depths  of  our 
inward  wounds,  by  the  falls  into  which  we  are 
fo  often  betrayed,  by  their,  perhaps  involuntary 
cfefedls.  How  ought  we  to  watch  over  ourfelves, 
in  order  to  refill  thefe  temptations,  which  (how 
little  foever  the  occafions  be)  are  great,  becaufe 
they  are  continual  ? 

87.  The  bare  fight  of  men  in  the  world, 
imprefies  I .know  not  what  of  evil  on  the  hearts 
ofgood  meri  : there  is  a kind  of  contagious  air 
hid  in  the  fpirit  of  the  ungodly,  which  communi- 
cates itfelfto  the  foul  more  infenfibly,  than  the 
infedlion  of  the  plague  communicates  itfelf to  the 
body.  In  order  therefore  to  folid  Chrillian  holi- 
iiefs’,  We  mull  keep  at  a dillance  from  thefe 
men. 

88.  The  world  is  an  enemy  to  truly  good 
works,  particularly  the  great  change  which 
God  works  in  the  foul. 

89.  Flattery  is  a poifon  which  is  the  more 
dangerous,  the  more  fweet  and  infenfible  it  is. 
Thofe  , therefore  who  are  juft  fetting.out  in  reli- 
gion, fiiould  carefully  fhut  their  ears  to  praife, 
even  to  that  which  the  bell  of  men  fometitnes 

give. 


r 188  j 

give,  without  thinking  of  the  mifchief  it  may 

do. 

90.  Virtue  is  like  a cryflal,  on  which  the 
leaft  word  of  praife  imprints  a blot,  which  muft 
be  effaced. 

91.  We  fhould  be  continually  labouring  to 
cut  off  all  the  ufelefs  things  that  furround  us.  And 
God  ufually  retrenches  the  fuperfluities  of  our 
foul,  in  the  fame  proportion  as  we  do  thofe  of 
our  bodies. 

92.  As  the  devil  will  not  be  (hut  up  in  the 
alnfs  till  the  judgment  of  the  great  day,  he 
makes,  meantime,  an  abyfs  of  the  fouls  of  wicked 
men,  into  which  he  plunges  hiinfelf  with  whole 
legions. 

93.  As  man  has  nothing  excellent  but  love, 
he  gives  God  nothing,  unlefs  he  gives  him  this. 
Even  as  all  the  rclt  of  God's  gifts  would  be  ufe- 
lefs to  man,  did  he  not  give  him  his  love  alfo. 

9^.  The  devil  is  fo  hideous,  that  he  could  not 
deceive  us,  nor  make  himfelf  beloved  by  us, 
did  he  not  cover  himfelf  with  the  beauty,  and 
the  fweet  and  agreeable  appearances  of  the  crea- 
tures. 

95.  The  belt  means  of  refilling  the  dev  il  is, 
to  deltroy  whatever  of  the  world  remains  in  us, 
in  order  to  raife  for  God,  upon  its  ruins,  a build- 
ino-  all  of  love.  Then  Iball  we  begin  in  this 
lleeting  life  to  love  God,  as  u7e  (hall  love  him 
in  eternity. 

96.  The  love  of  God  and  the  love  of  the  world 

cannot 


[ >s9  ] 

cannot  fubfift  together  in  one  heart.  It  mull 
needs  be,  that  one  of  them  will  conquer  and  de- 
flroy  the  other. 

97.  St.  Augulfine  fays,  There  is  danger,  left 
after  fin  is  killed,  it  comes  to  life  again,  if  it  be 
not  buried. 

98.  If  we  would  be  fuperior  to  the  goods  and 
evils  of  this  world,  the  things  that  are  fecn,  ought 
to  be  to  us  as  if  they  were  not  feen  : and,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  things  that  are  not  feen,  as  if 
they  were  always  before  our  eyes, 

* 99.  Nothing  ftiews  the  real  ftate  of  our  foul, 
like  perfecution  and  affiiflion.  And  if  we  fuffer 
them  with  that  humility  and  firmnefs,  which  on- 
ly the  grace  of  God  can  work  in  us,  we  attain  a 
larger  meafure  of  conformity  to  Chrift,  bv  a due 
improvement  of  one  of  thefe  occafions,  than  we 
could  have  done  by  imitating  his  mercy,  in 
abundance  of  good  works. 

100.  The  lcripture  fpeaks  of  the  earth  as  awil- 
dernefs,  an  hofpial,  a prifon,  an  image  of  hell. 
Therefore  wo  unto  them  that  are  attached  to  it; 
who  do  not  labour  to  die  to  all  below,  and  to  af- 
pire  after  nothing  but  heaven,  where  alone  is 
true  life,  and  all  that  deferves  the  name  of  good 
or  pleafure. 

101.  How  real  foever  the  things  of  earth  ap- 
pear, they  are  no  other  than  veils  that  deceive 
sis.  The  ills  thereof  hide  eternal  goods  from  us, 
-and  the  goods  hide  from  us  eternal  evils. 

102.  The  true  marks  of  love  are,  an  hunger 

and 


[ 19°  ] 

and  thirft  after  theword  and  the  life  of  Chrift. 

303.  God  often  deals  more  rigoroufiy,  with 
thofe  whom  he  loves  than  with  others.  And  his 
will  is,  that  the  afflictions  which  he  fends  them, 
fhould  ferve  to  difengage  them,  from  whatever 
attached  them  to  the  world,  that  they  may  be 
more  free  to  cleave  to  him. 

* 104.  We  fcarce  conceive,  how  eafv  it  is  to 
rob  God  of  his  due,  in  our  friendfhip  with  the 
mofl  virtuous  perfons,  until  thev  are  torn  frotn 
us  by  death.  But  if  this  lofs  produce  lafting  for- 
row,  it  is  a clear  proof,  that  we  had  two  trea- 
fures,  between  which  we  had  divided  our  heart. 

105.  The  devil  is  enraged  only  at  thofe  who 
fight  again  him,  and  his  rage  increafes,  when  he 
fees  the  increafe  of  grace  in  them.  But  he  cannot 
conquer  us,  if  we  continue  to  fight,  and  to  have 
fteady  deper.dance  on  God,  who  fights  for  and 
in  his  children,  and  can  never  be  conquered. 

106.  We  are  to  labour  as  if  we  had  no  depend- 
ance  on  the  grace  of  God  : and  to  truff  as  in- 
tirelv  in  his  grace,  as  if  we  did  not  labour  at  all. 
The  one  prelerves  us  from  negligence,  the  other 
from  prefumptkm. 

107.  There  are  fome  peculiar  occafions  that 
rarely  occur,  which  we  ought  to  manage  with 
the  utmoff  care  ; becaufe  one  of  thefe  is  of  far 
more  value  before  God,  than  many  ordinary 
ones. 

108.  Even  the  weaknefs  which  remains  in  us 
is,  by  the  teftimony  of  God,  one  of  the  moll 

powerful  J 


[ * 9 1 ] 


powerful  means,  of  making  us  more  ftrong  than 
ever,  more. immoveable  in  his  fervice. 

109.  If  we  were  not  weak  and  impotent,  our 
good  works  would  be  to  us  our  own  property  ; 
juft  as  the  corn  he  produces  out  of  the  earth  be- 
longs to  the  hufbandman.  Whereas  now  they  be- 
long wholly  to  God,  becaufe  they  proceed  from 
him  and  his  grace,  which  triumphs  over  our 
weaknefs,  when  raifing  our  works  and  making 
them  all  divine,  honours  himfelf  in  us  through 
them. 

110.  When  men  have  fown  the  feed  in  the 
ground,  they  ceafe  awhile  from  their  labour.  But 
when  Jefus  Chrift  has  fown  his  grace  in  our 
hearts,  we  fhould  befeech  him  to  labour  with  us 
Hill,  and  to  perfect  that  which  he  has  begun  : 
otherwife  there  will  be  no  fruit.  For  the  devil 
omits  nothing  which  may  hinder  the  good  feed 
from  growing  up,  and  bringing  forth  fruit  to  per- 
leftion. 

* 111.  If  we  do  not  teftify  to  God,  by  a con- 
tinual care  for  our  falvation,  that  we  efteem  his 
grace  above  all  things,  the  leaf!  confent  to  an 
evil  thing,  makes  it  retire  by  little  and  little,  in- 
to the  bofotn  of  Chrift,  Irom  whence  it  came. 
\ et  he  is  fo  gracious,  that  after  we  are  truly 
humbled,  he  gives  us  new  grace. 

*112.  God,  in  order  to  cure  fome  fouls  of 
thofe  fins  which  are  thegreateft  of  all  in  his  fight, 
fullers  them  to  fall  into  others,  which  are  greater 
in  the  fight  of  men. 


112.  Chrif- 


[ *92  3 


113*  Chriflian  friendfhip  is  the  refinement  of 
that  love  which  we  bear  to  a fellow-chriftian,  to 
whom  God  unites  us  by  an  affe£tion  which  can- 
not be  well  known  but  by  thofe  who  truly  love 
God. 

114.  The  Holy  Spirit,  having  made  of  all 
Chriftians  one  foul,  they  ought  to  have  the  faine 
joys  and  forrows.  But  ifit  pleafes  him  (of  which 
alfo  we  have  examples  in  fcripturej  to  make  of 
two  or  more  Chriflians  one  heart  and  one  foul, 
there  ought  to  be  an  increafe  of  joy  in  their  holy 
affeftions,  as  much  greater  as  their  friendfhip 
is  moreperfett  than  that  of  other  Chriflians. 

1 1^.  One  of  the  principal  rules  of  religion  is, 
to  lofe  no  occafion  offerving  God.  And  fince 
he  is  invifible  to  our  eyes,  we  ought  to  ferve 
him  in  our  neighbour,  which  he  receives  as 
done  to  himfelf  in  perfon,  Handing  vifibly  before 
us. 

116.  The  way  to  advance  more  and  more  in 
love,  is  to  praftifeitto  the  uttermoft. 

117.  The  chief  worfhip  we  owe  to  God,  is 
to  love  him  with  all  our  heart  without  (haring  it 
between  him  and  the  creatures.  They  ought  to 
ferve  us  only  for  Heps,  to  lift  us  up  toward 
him. 

118.  Love  has  this  in  common  with  facrifice, 
that  it  ought  to  l e offered  to  God  alone. 

* 1 19.  To  preferve  the  life  of  the  foul,  prayer 
ought  to  be  joined  with  the  other  ordinances,  as 
it  is  the  channel  which  reaches  to  heaven,  and 

brings 


C *93  1 

brings  down  into  the  foul  that  breath  of  God, 
without  which  it  cannot  live. 

* iso.  Charity  cannot  be  prafififed  right,  un- 
lefs  fir  ft,  We  exercife  it  from  the  moment  God 
gives  the  occafion  ; *nd  fecondly  retire  the  in- 
ftant  after,  and  offer  it  to  God  by  humble  thankf- 
giving.  And  this  for  three  reafons  ; the  firft,  To 
render  to  him  what  we  have  received  from  him  ; 
the  fecond,  To  avoid  the  dangerous  temptation 
which  fprings  from  the  very  goodnefs  of  thefe 
works;  and  the  third,  To  unite  ourfelves  to  God, 
in  whom  the  foul  expands  itfelf  in  prayer,  with 
all  the  graces  we  have  received,  and  the  good 
works  which  we  have  done,  to  draw  from  him 
new  ftrength  againft  the  bad  effefls  which  thefe 
very  works  may  produce  in  us,  if  we  do  not  make 
ufe  of  the  antidotes  which  God  has  ordained  a- 
gainft  thefe  poifons.  The  true  means,  to  be  fil- 
led anew  with  the  riches  of  grace,  is  thus  to  ftrip 
ourfelves  of  it : and  without  this  it  is  extremely 
difficult  not  to  grow  faint  in  the  praflice  of  good 
works. 

* 121.  We  ought  to  know,  that  we  have  no 
part  in  the  good  which  we  do  ; and  that  accord- 
ingly, as  God  hides  himfelf  in  doing  it  by  us,  we 
ought  alfo,  as  far  as  is  poffible,  to  hide  it  from 
Gurfelves,  and  in  a manner  to  annihilate  ourfelves 
before  him,  faying,  “ Lord,  wre  are  nothing  be- 
fore thee  ; but  thou  art  all  to  us.  We  continue 
to  be  as  nothing,  after  thou  haft  by  thy  double 
mercy,  drawn  us  out  of  nothing  and  out  of  fin  : 

Vol.  XXIV,  1 the 


[ »94  ] 

the  proof  whereof  we  inceffantly  bear  in  ourfelves, 
in  ourcontinual  weaknefs  and  helpleffnefs.  We 
fee  ourfelves  in  the  midft  of  an  ocean  : for  thou 
art  the  true  and  boundlefs  ocean  of  nature  and 
of  grace,  which  neither  ebbs  nor  flows,  but  is 
permanent  and  immoveable.  Thou  fpreadeft  a- 
broad  as  it  pleafeth  thee,  the  celeftial  waters  in 
all  ages,  and  draweft  them  back  and  fendeftthem 
again  into  the  fouls  thou  lovefl,  by  fluxes  and  re- 
fluxes, ineffable  and  divine.  Thy  Spirit  is  the 
only  wind  that  blows,  and  that  reigns  over  the 
infinite  ocean.  And  as  we  fee  the  waters  on 
earth,  which  ceafe  to  run,  though  but  for  a litile 
while,  are  immediately  corrupted,  we  have  rea- 
fonto  fear,  left  the  fame  thing  befal  our  fouls,  if 
inftead  of  caufing  thefe  heavenly  waters  to  return 
to  thee  their  fource,  we  retain,  and  flop  them 
in  their  motion,  though  it  were  but  for  a moment. 
For  whereas  the  rivers  of  earth  corrupt  themfelves 
when  they  flop,  but  without  corrupting  the  chan- 
nel through  which  they  flow,  the  rivers  of  thy 
grace,  though  ftopt,  are  never  themfelves  cor- 
rupted, but  the  fouls,  the  channel  through  which 
they  pafs.  We  find  therefore,  O God,  it  is 
more  difficult  to  reftore  to  thee,  by  an  humble 
thankfulnefs,  the  graces  we  have  received  from 
thee,  than  to  attract  them  into  our  fouls  by  prayer  ; 
and  that  accordingly  thefe  refluxes  toward  the 
fountain,  are  greater  favours  than  the  efluxes 
therefrom.  Wherefore  the  only  grace  which  we 
implore  from  thee,  and  which  comprehends  all 

others. 


[ J95  ] 

ethers,  is,  That  thy  grace  may  never  defcend  to 
us,  but  to  re-afcend  toward  thee:  and  that  it  may 
never  re-afcend,  but  to  defcend,  into  us  again  : 
fo  that  we  may  be  eternally  watered  by  thee,  and 
thou]be  eternally  glorified.” 

* 122.  Good  works  do  not  receive  their  laft 
perfeftion,  till  they  as  it  were  lofe  themfelves  in 
God.  This  is  a kind  of  death  to  them,  refembl- 
ing  that  of  our  bodies,  which  will  not  attain 
their  higheft  life,  their  immortality,  till  they  lofe 
themfelves  in  the  glory  of  our  fouls,  or  rather  of 
God,  wherewith  thy  will  be  filled.  And  it  is  only 
what  they  had  of  earthly  and  mortal,  which  good 
works  lofe  by  fpiritual  death. 

* 123.  Fire  is  thefymbol  of  love  : and  the  love 
of  God  is  the  principle  and  end  of  our  good 
works.  But  as  truth  furpalfes  figure,  the  fire 
of  divine  love  has  this  advantage  over  material 
fire,  that  it  can  re-afcend  to  its  fource,  and  rife 
thither  with  all  the  good  works  which  it  pro- 
duces. And  by  this  means  it  prevents  their  be- 
ing corrupted  by  pride,  vanity,  or  any  evil  mix- 
ture. But  this  cannot  be  done  otherwife  than  by 
making  thefe  good  works,  in  a fpiritual  manner 
die  in  God,  by  deep  gratitude,  which  plunges 
the  foul  in  him  as  i.nxan  abyfs,  with  all  that  it  is, 
and  all  the  grace  and  works  for  which  it  is  in- 
debted to  him : a gratitude,  whereby  the  foul 
Teems  to  empty  itfelf  of  them,  that  they  may  re- 
turn to  their  fource,  as  rivers  feem  willing  to 

I 2 empty 


L <9«  ] 

empty  themfelves,  when  they  pour  themfelves 
with  all  their  waters  into  the  fea. 

124.  The  natural  admiration  of  man  flows 
from  ignorance  : but  that  of  a Chrillian  from 
Knowledge. 

* 125.  When  we  have  received  anv  favour 
from  God,  we  ought  to  retire,  (if  not  into  our 
clofet,  into  our  heart)  and  fay,  “ I come,  Lord, 
to  reftore  to  thee  what  thou  haft  given,  and  I 
freely  relinquilh  it,  to  enter  again  into  ray  own 
nolhingnefs.  For  what  Is  the  moft  perfeft  crea- 
ture, in  heaven  or  earth  in  thy  prefence,  but  a 
void  capable  ofbeing  filled  with  thee  and  bv  thee, 
as  the  air  which  is  void  and  dark  is  capable  of  be- 
ing filled  with  the  light  of  the  fun  ? Grant  there- 
fore, O God,  that  I may  never  appropriate  thy 
grace  to  ctyfelf,  any  more  than  the  air  appropri- 
ates to  itfelf  the  light  of  the  fun ; who  withdraws 
it  every  day  to  reftore  it  the  next,  there  being 
nothing  in  the  air  that  either  appropriates  its  light 
or  refills  it.  O give  me  the  fame  facility  of  re- 
ceiving  and  reftoring  thy  grace  and  good  works  : 
I fay  thine  ; for  I acknowledge  the  root  from 
which  they  fpring,  is  in  thee,  and  not  in 

me.” 

* 126.  As  all  that  we  can  properly  call  our  own, 
is  the  evil  which  is  natural  to  us,  they  who  are 
truly  touched  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  have  no  right 
to  complain  ol  any  reproach,  whether  they  arc 
guilty  ol  the  thing  or  not.  It  fuffices,  that  they 

have 


[ *97  J 

have  in  them  the  principle  of  all  the  faults  which, 
are,  or  can  be  laid  to  their  charge. 

127.  There  is  no  true  charity  which  is  not 
accompanied  with  humility,  courage  and  pati- 
ence. 

* 128.  We  fltouid  chiefly  execife  our  love  to- 
ward thofe  who  moll  check'  either  our  way  of 
thinking,  or  our  temper,  or  our  knowledge,  or 
the  defire  we  have,  that  others  fhould  be  as  vir- 
tuous as  we  would  wilh  to  be  ourfelves. 

* 129.  As  God  once  fubfilled  without  any  crea- 
ure  in  his  own  infinite  fulnefs,  fo  love  will  one 
day  fubfifl  in  itfelf,  without  any  outward  works': 
which  are  now  only  the  llreams,  whereof  love 
is  the  fource,  the  fhoots  of  which  this  is  the  root, 
the  rays  whereof  love  is  the  fun,  the  fpark  of 
which  this  is  the  fire,  always  afting,  ajways  con- 
fuming,  and  yet  preferving  the  foul  wherein  it 
dwells. 

* 130.  The  defire  of  exercifing  charity,  o- 
bliges  us  to  purify  ourfelves  by  all  forts  ofholy  ex- 
ercifes,  that  we  may  be  filled  with  the  gifts  of 
God,  and  capable  of  imparting  them  to  others, 
without  lofing  any  thing  of  our  own  fulnefs. 
By  thus  exercifing  our  charity,  we  increafe  it. 
This  alone,  when  it  fills  the  heart,  has  the  advan- 
tage of  giving  always  and  by  giving  enriching 
itfelf. 

131.  One  of  thegreatefl;  evidences  of  the  love 
of  Gcd,  to  the  fouls  he  hath  touched  with  his  love, 

I 3 is 


[ t98  ] 

is  to  fend  them  affhflions,  with  grace  to  bear 
them. 

132.  There  is  no  affli&ion  which  befals  the 
righteous,  of  which  God  is  not  the  author.  And 
whereas  the  ills  of  other  men  have  no  mixture 
of  good,  God  mingles  with  the  fufferings  of  the 
righteous,  thofe  feeds,  which  although  bitter 
at  firft,  yet  afterward  bring  forth  peaceable- 
fruit. 

133.  Ever  in  great  fickneffes  or  affliflions  we 
ought  to  tellify  to  God,  that  in  receiving  them 
as  from  his  hand,  we  feel  pleafure  in  the  midft  of 
the  pain,  from  being  afflifled  by  him  who  loves 
us,  and  whom  we  love. 

134.  If  we  are  perfuaded,  that  God  does  not 
afflift  us,  but  to  make  us  dill  more  capable  of 
loving  him,  by  purifying  our  hearts  through 
that  fire  which  he  came  to  bring  into 
the  "world,  we  fhould  take  pleafure  in  differ- 
ing our  affliflions,  and  confuming,  by  that 
divine  fire,  this  fire  of  the  earth,  which 
makes  us  love  too  well  our  bodies,  our 
health,  our  own  will  and  the  things  of  the 
world. 

135.  There  would  be  danger  in  ever  men- 
tioning to  any  perfon,  any  good  work  which 
he  had  done  : if  he  was  not  humble,  and  his 
heart  abafed  before  God,  by  a deep  fenfe  of  his 
favours. 

136.  God  ufually  mingles  pains  with  the  fig- 

nal 


[ *99  1 

gal  graces  which  he  gives,  or  will  gtve  to  them 
he  loves.  And  his  thus  calling  them  down  is  the 
ordinary  token,  that  he  is  about  to  raife  them 
up. 

137.  Happy  are  they  who  are  lick,  or  lofe  their 
life,  for  having  done  a good  work. 

138.  The.  fouls  of  the  juft  re-enter  into  God 
by  death,  as  the  venal  blood  re-enters  the 
heart. 

139.  Moft  of  thofe  who  die  well  in  the  judg- 
ment of  men,  die  ill  in  the  judgment  of 
God. 

140.  The  weightineft  of  our  words  and  ac- 
tions is  an  effe£l  of  fimplicity  joined  with  pru- 
dence. 

141.  Nothing  gives  us  fo  great  confidence 
in  fpeaking,  as  fpeaking  from  the  fulnefs  of  our 
heart.  And  when  it  is  filled  with  love,  this 
confidence  is  fo  great  that  we  can  hardly  refrain 
from  fpeaking. 

142.  He  who  loves  none  but  God,  thinks 
of  him  always,  and  that  which  is  mot  God,  can- 
not pleafe  him. 

143.  “ If  I grieve,  O Lord,  it  is  becaufe 
loving  thee  as  I do,  I do  not  fee  thee.” 

144.  God  is  fo  great  that  he  communicates 

his  greatnefs  to  the  leaft  things  which  are  done 
for  his  fervice. 

135.  To  live  as  a Chtiftian,  one  rnuft  a£l 
I 4 only 


[ 200  ] 

only  by  the  fpirit  of  God  : otherwife  we  live  as 
Heathens.  ^ 

146.  God  hardly  gives  his  fpirit  even  to  thofe 
whom  he  has  already  efiablidied  in  grace,  if 
they  do  not  afk  it  of  him  on  all  occafions  not 
only  once,  but  many  times. 

147.  The  fil'd  fruit  of  faith  is  prayer,  the 
lifting  up  the  foul  to  God  to  implore  his  af- 
fifiance  even  in  the  fmalled  things,  which  it  would 
undertake  for  his  fervice. 

14H.  Faith  teaches  us  two  things  at  the  fame 
time:  one,  that  we  ought  to  do  nothing  but  for 
God:  the  other,  that  he  mud  engage  us  in 
thofe  good  works  which  we  would  carry'  on  and 
finifh  well. 

149.  As  far  as  we  advance  in  obedience,  fo 
far  we  advance  in  faith.  And  fo  far  as  we 
advance  in  faith,  we  advance  in  love,  which 
is  the  heart,  the  life,  the  foul  of  faith. 

150.  We  fltould  do  nothing  without  afking 
confent  of  God  ; and  we  fhould  take  care  not 
to  prevent  his  anfwer,  by  thofe  almod  infenfible 
defires  which,  lie  hid  in  the  foldings  of  our 
heart. 

* 151.  All  is  clear  to  us,  in  proportion  as  we 
walk  in  the  bright  path  of  faith,  obedience,  prayer, 
love,  and  Chridian  fidelity. 

152.  God  teaches  the  fouls  he  loves,  and 
that  love  him,  in  a far  more  excellent  manner 
than  men  can  do.  For  whereas  they  fpeak 

only 


[ 201  ] 


only  to  the  ear,  he  fpeaks  to  the  heart.  They 
can  only  propofe  what  ought  to  be  done : 
he  gives  power  to  execute,  light  and  heat  at 
once. 

1<53-  When  a Chriftian  is  lick  his  bed  is 
his  church. 

154.  We  fhould  be  prepared  by  purity  of  heart 
to  fpeak  of  God,  left  we  fhould  wound  his  truths. 
We  are  to  give  a ftricl  account  of  our  leaft  idle 
words  : and  [hall  we  not  give  a ftriff  account 
ofhis  ! 

1^5.  Great  men  have  herein  more  of  the 
image  of  God  than  others,  that  they  have  more 
means  of  doing  good.  And  one  may  fay,  that 
they  are  born  for  that  end,  To  do  good  in  the 
world. 

156.  God  never  hears  our  prayers  without  in- 
crealing  our  love  to  him  and  our  neighbour. 

* 157.  All  that  a Chriftian  does,  even  Iris 
eating  and  fleeping,  is  prayer,  when  it  is  done 
with  fimplicity,  according  to  the  order  of  God, 
without  either  adding  to,  or  diminifhing  from 
it,  by  his  own  choice. 

158.  Love  is  the  only  virtue  which  has  no 
bounds. 

* 159.  The  three  greateft  punifhments  which 
God  can  inflift  on  ftnners  in  this  w'orld,  are,  1. 
To  let  loofe  their  own  defires  upon  them  ; 2.  To 
let  them  fucceed  in  all  they  wifh  for,  and  3.  To 
fuffer  them  o continue  many  years  in  the  quiet 
enjoyment  thereof-. 

1 5 160. 


[ 202  J 


160.  The  Heathen  philofophers  well  knew 
that  man  is  the  world  in  miniature.  But  they 
did  not  know,  that  every  fingle  man  is  a w'orld 
of  corruption.  And  that  all  the  impurity  which 
is  in  the  creation,  flows  from  the  impurity  con- 
tained in  our  fouls. 

161.  If  the  greateft  philofophers  can  hardly 
account  for  the  confli£bs  that  rife  in  the  air,  how 
can  they  account  for  thofe  that  rife  in  our  fouls, 
the  depth  of  which  furpafles  that  of  the  fea  ? 
This  ignorance  is  one  ot  the  greateft  exercifes  ol 
our  patience  ; and  of  the  moft  ufeful,  if  we  fuf- 
fer,  but  not  confent  to  it. 

* 162.  God  confiders  our  outward  good 
works,  only  according  to  the  good  difpofitions 
of  our  hearts.  And  as  this  is  fometimes  like  the 
trees  in  winter,  full  of  warmth  within,  though 
producing  nothing  without,  he  loves  this  barren- 
nefs,  caufed  only  by  outward  hindrances,  more 
than  men  do  flowers  and  fruits. 

164.  True  friendfhip  obliges  us  to  have  no 
lefs  regard  to  the  delires  of  our  friends  than  to 
their  needs. 

165.  Happy  the  foul  in  which  love  never 
{beeps,  and  to  which  it  ferves  for  a perpetual 
fpur. 

166.  It  is  obferved,  that  the  afftions  which 
proceed  from  love,  are  done  without  difficulty. 
How  much  more  if  they  proceed  from  the  love 
of  God,  fince  it  is  himfelf  who  does  them  in 
us  ? 

167. 


[ 203  J 


167.  God,  in  creating  vifible  things,  only  gave 
us  a pifture  of  things  inviftble. 

168.  There  are  three  ways  to  edify  our  neigh- 
bour: the  firff,  to  treat  well,  at  leaft  in  words, 
all  evil  men,  particularly  thofe  who  feek  to  do 
us  evil : the  fecond,  To  judge  no  man,  though 
appearances  are  again  ft  him;  and  even  when  the 
fault  is  proved,  as  far  as  we  can,  either  to  excufe 
or  cover  it  by  a modeft  filence:  and  the  third, 
Unlefs  there  be  a plain  necefiity,  not  to  fpeak  of 
ourfelves,  good  or  bad. 

* 169.  Love  fhews  courtefy  to  young  and  old, 
good  and  bad,  wife  and  unwife:  indeed  to  all 
the  world.  Butit  ufes  no  flattery  either  to  others 
or  ourfelves. 

* 170.  Love  fafts  when  it  can,  and  as  much 
as  it  can.  It  leads  to  all  tire  ordinances  of  God, 
and  employs  itfelf  in  ail  the  outward  works 
whereof  it  is  capable.  It  flics  as  it  were,  like 
Elijah,  over  the  plain,  to  find  God  upon  his 
holy  mountain. 

* 171.  We  ought  to  fuffer  with  patience  what- 
ever befals  us,  to  bear  the  defefifs  of  others,  and 
our  own,  to  own  them  to  God  in  fecret  praver, 
or  with  groans  which  cannot  be  uttered  : but  ne- 
ver to  fpeak  a fharp  or  peevifh  woid,  nor  to 
murmur  or  repine. 

172.  If  to  avoid  occafions  of  fin,  and  to 
ftrengthen  our  weaknefs,  we  would  now  and  then 
retire  from  the  world,  it  is  incredible,  what  help 
I 6 


we 


C 204  ] 

we  fhould  receive  from  Gocty  and  what  increafe 
in  the  fruits  of  his  Spirit. 

* 173.  The  fea  is  an  excellent  figure  of  the 
fulnefs  of  God,  and  that  of  the  bleffed  fpnits. 
For  as  the  rivers  all  return  into  the  fea,  fo  the 
bodies,  the  fouls  and  the  good  works  of  the  righ- 
teous, return  into  God,  to  live  there  in  his 
eternal  repofe. 

* 179.  What  the  fcripture  terms  the  finger  of 
God,  is  no  other  than  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  en- 
graves in  our  hearts  what  pleafeth  him. 

17,5.  Nothing  is  more  oppofite  to  falvation 
than  the  love  of  riches ; for  in  the  fame  propor- 
tion as  thefe  increafe,  all  experience  fhews,  the 
love  of  pleafure,  and  the  defire  of  honour  in- 
creafes  alfo. 

176.  One  that  is  truly  poor  in  fpint  loves  po- 
verty, as  much  as  other  men  love  riches. 

177.  At  firfl  the  Chriflians  were  wholly  dif- 
tinct  from  the  world.  But  as  they  are  now  min- 
gled with  it,  and  of  the  fame  fpirit,  thofe  who 
ferioufly  defire  falvation,  ought  fo  far  as  they 
can,  to  feparate  themfelves  from  all  that  have 
the  fpirit  of  the  world. 

■ * 178.  It  is  full  as  glorious  to  die  for  charity 
as  for  truth;  nor  will  it  have  a lefs  recompence 
from  God. 

* 179.  Death  entered  by  the  ear  into  the 'foul 
of  our  firft  mother:  by  the  eye  chiefly  it  enters 
the  fouls  of  her  children.  But  whereas  Eve, 
after  having  hearkened  to  the  ferpent,  took  the 

forbidden 


C . ] 

forbidden  fruit,  her  children  generally,  after 
having  been  it,  hearken  to  the  c-ounfels  of  the 
devil.  And  indeed,  if  the  few  words  of  that  un- 
happy fpirit  ruined  Eve,  even  in  a hate  of  inno- 
cence, what  can  we  expe£t,  if  in  our  ftate  of  fin 
and  impotence,  we  pafs  our  life  in  perpetual 
converfe  with  the  world,  and  in  the  continual 
fight  of  creatures  under  which  the  devil  conceals 
himfelf  far  better  than  under  the  form  of  a fer- 
pent  ? 

* 180.  To  conceive  fill!  better  the  danger  we 
are  in,  while  we  remain  in  the  corruption  of 
the  world,  confider  on  the  one  hand,  Eve,  with 
her  flrength  and  innocence,  in  the  paradife  of 
God:  on  the  other,  men  weak  and  finful,  the 
creatures  all  infeftious,  all  inllruments  of  fin, 
and  that  are  as  a veil  with  which  the  devil  co- 
vers himfelf,  to  tempt  us  the  more  efieflually; 
and  lafily,  the  world,  which  is  the  place  ofba- 
nilhment  with  regard  to  our  bodies,  a prifon 
with  regard  to  our  fouls,  and  an  hell  with  regard 
to  thofe  evil  fpirits,  who  remain  there,  continu- 
ally mingled  with  men,  till  the  judgment  of  the 
great  day. 

181.  The  world  which  we  are  to  hate,  is  not 
this  heaven  and  this  earth  which  we  behold,  but 
the  infeftion  which  fin  has  fpread  through  them 
and  all  the  creatures  which  they  contain.  So  that 
whereas  at  their  creation  they  were  the  objedls 
that  excited  man’s  praife,  admiration  and  devo- 
tion 


[ no6  ] 

tion  toward  God,  they  are  now  the  objects  of 
his  concupifence  and  irregular  defires. 

* 182.  The  great,  will,  after  their  death,  look 
upon  the  pomp  and  pleafures  wherein  they  had 
lived,  juft  as  thofe  who  awake  from  a deep  fleep 
do  on  the  riches,  honours,  and  pleafures  which 
they  faw  in  their  dream. 

183.  There  is  no  other  way  to  find  God,  than 
to  defpife  all  things  elfe,  to  love  him  alone  in 
the  unity  of  his  being,  the  trinity  of  perfons,  and 
the  incarnation  of  his  Son. 

184.  Although  all  that  is  created  lives  in  and  by 
God,  as  the  birds  live  in  and  by  the  air.  never- 
thelefs  this  univerfal  fyflem  of  beings  has  not  yet 
acquired  its  laft  perfection.  It  bears,  deeply 
engraven  in  all  its  parts,  the  marks  of  Adam’s 
difobedience  ; which  render  it  altogether  unwor- 
thy of  our  defires  and  affe&ions. 

183.  God  has  not  given  man  an  heart  fo  vaft 
and  fo  capable  of  loving,  but  in  order  to  fill  it 
with  his  love,  and  with  himfelf  alone.  Ac- 
cordingly we  ought  to  ufe  the  creatures  as  fo 
many  fteps  to  raife  us  up  to  the  Author  of  our 
being,  that  we  may  render  him  not  only  for  our- 
felves,  but  for  them  alfo,  a perpetual  homage,  by 
acknowledging  all  the  wonders  and  benefits  for 
which  they  are  indebted  to  him. 

* 186.  As  on  many  occafions  feme  of  the 
fenfes  correft  the  others,  and  reafon  corrects 
them  all ; fo  faith  which  is  in  Chriftians  a fupe- 
rior  reafon,  ought  to  correft  the  judgment  which 

purely 


[ 207  i 

purely  human  reafon  forms  of  the  goods  ancf 
evils  of  this  world. 

187.  If  the  whole  earth  is  no  more  than  a point 
compared  with  the  heaven  that  furrounds  it,  what 
is  it  when  compared  to  the  fuperior  fphere  which 
furrounds  all  the  lower  heavens  ? What  is  the 
littlenefs  then  of  any  or  all  oi  the  things  which 
the  earth  contains  ? 

* 188.  All  that  is  good  here  below  flows  from 
above.  And  if  but  one  drop  could  fall  into  our 
heart  of  the  happinefs  of  heaven,  pure  as  it  is  in 
its  fource,  earth  would  become  a paradife.  Nor 
would  there  be  then  need  to  put  off  the  body  ; 
becaufe  the  leaf!  part  of  thofe  heavenly  goods, 
received  in  its  fulnefs,  would  render  us  bleffed 
and  immortal,  even  in  this  world. 

* 189.  Although  all  the  grace  of  God  depends 
on  his  mere  bounty,  yet  is  he  pleafed  generally 
to  attach  them  to  the  prayers,  and  good  inftruc- 
tions,  the  good  examples  and  the  holinefs  of 
thofe  among  whom  we  are  brought  up.  And  if 
we  knew  the  fecret  of  the  grace  of  Chriff,  and 
the  ftrong  though  invifible  attra&ions  whereby 
he  draws  fome  fouls  through  their  intercourfe 
with  others,  we  fhpuld  fceware  to  whom  we  in- 
truded the  education  of  our  children. 

J90.  When  the  world  difplays  all  its  grandeur 
and  goods  before  us,  we  fhould  fay  to  it,  as  our 
Lord  to  Satan,  when  he  fnewed  him  all  the 
kingdoms  of  the  earth  and  the  glory  of  them  : 

Get 


[ 208  ] 

Get  thee  behind  me,  world , for  it  is  written , Thou 
Jhalt  worjhip  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  him  only  Jhalt 
thou  Jerve. 

191.  There  is  nothing  in  the  world  that  is 
not  in  a continual  flux,  and  with  fo  rapid  a mo- 
tion, that  one  cannot  poffefs  it,  but  part  by  part, 
and  from  moment  to  moment. 

* 192.  To  prepare  the  mind  for  prayer  it 
ought  to  be  at  liberty,  in  tranquility,  in  humility, 
in  confidence,  in  fimplicity,  and  in  an  entire 
dependence  on  God : not  troubled,  not  divided, 
not  wavering,  neither  preventing  the  will  of 
God  by  any  fecret  pafiion. 

* 193.  Prayer  continues  in  the  defire  of  the 
heart,  though  the  underflanding  be  employed  on 
outward  things. 

194.  We  fhould  not  be  impatient  to  receive 
of  God,  but  to  give  him  our  heart,  the  only 
thing  he  requires. 

Thole  words  of  St.  Paul,  No  irian  can 
call  Jefus  Lord  but  by  the  Holy  Ghojl,  (hew  us 
the  neceffity  of  eying  God  in  our  good  works,  in 
our  prayers,  and  even  in  our  minuteft  thoughts, 
kr.o1  mg  that  none  are  pleafing  to  him  but  thofe 
which  he  forms  in  us  and  with  us.  From  hence 
we  learn,  that  we  canno^  fpeak  to  him  or  ferve 
him,  unlefs  he  ufes  our  tongue,  hands,  and  heart, 
to  do  by  himfelf,  and  by  his  Spirit,  whatever  he 
would  have  us  do 

iq6.  All  devotion  depends  on  that  new  heart, 
which  God  gives  us  when  it  pleafes  him.  In 

order 


[ 209  ] 


order  to  receive  it,  the  foul  fhould  be  difengaged, 
from  all  that  {huts  up  the  door  of  our  heart  againfl 
the  Spirit.  We  are  continually  as  afleep,  unlefs 
he  awakens  us. 

197.  By  retirement  and  abftraflednefs  from 
the  world,  we  fhould  remove  all  hindrances  to 
thofe  fecret  converfations,  thofe  vifits,  unknown 
to  men  of  the  world,  and  thofe  divine  impreffi- 
ons,  which  make  us  groan  and  figh,  love  and 
defire,  pray  and  importune  God  to  give  us  the 
continual  influence  of  his  Spirit,  without  which 
the  foul  remains  dry,  and  barren,  as  trees  are 
in  winter,  though  there  may  be  life  in  their 
root. 

198.  Whenever  Godceafes  to  infpire  us  with 
his  holy  Spirit,  we  lie  open  to  the  corruption 
of  our  own  fpirir,  and  the  malice  of  the  wicked 
one.  And  this  he  frequently  does  if  we  difcon- 
tinue  our  watching,  or  are  not  inflant  in  prayer. 

* 199.  God’s  command,  To  pray  without 
ceafing,  is  founded  on  the  neceffity  we  have  of 
his  grace,  to  preferve  the  life  of  God  in  our 
foul,  which  can  no  more  fubfifl  one  moment 
without  it,  than  the  body  can  fubfifl  without  con- 
tinual fupplies  of  air. 

2oo._  If  even  thofe  who  have  known  the 
grace  of  God,  do  not  continually  watch  unto 
prayer,  the  evil  root  of  fin  will  have  more  influ- 
ence on  them  than  the  good  feed  of  grace. 
v 201.  God  in  his  excellent  wifdom  raifes  in  us 
good  thoughts,  and  then  infpires  us  with  prayer, 

t© 


C 210  ] 

ta  afk  of  him  thofe  graces,  which  he  is  refolved 
to  give,  when  we  afk  with  a full  fubmiflion  to  his 
will.  Therefore  in  order  to  know,  if  we  fhall 
obtain  what  we  afk,  we  have  only  to  confider. 
Do  we  feek  our  own  pleafure.  or  merely  the 
grace  of  God  in  our  prayers  ? If  this  only,  we 
fhall  have  the  petitions  we  afk  of  him. 

* 202.  As  the  moll  dangerous  winds  may  en- 
ter at  little  openings,  fo  the  devil  never  enters 
more  dangeroufly  into  the  fouls  of  good  men,, 
than  by  little  amufements,  and  little  unobferved 
incidents,  which  feeming  to  be  nothing,  yet  in- 
feniibly  open  the  heart  to  great  temptations. 

203.  To  make  our  reading  ufeful,  it  fhould 
be  inclofed  between  two  prayers,  at  the  begin- 
ning and  the  end  of  it. 

* 204.  The  chief  defire  of  Chriflian  parents 
fhould  be,  for  the  falvation  of  their  children. 
Without  this,  all  they  do  for  them  ferves  only  to 
draw  the  curfe  of  God  upon  themfelves ; fince 
they  are  as  guardian  angels  that  ought  to  conduft 
to  heaven,  thofe  to  whom  they  have  given  life. 
’Tis  a great  miflake  to  fuppofe,  they  can  pleafe 
God  by  any  other  good  works  while  they  negleft 
this. 

205.  True  piety  confifts  in  doing,  not  what- 
we  chufe,  but  what  God  chufes  for  us. 

206.  The  hclieftmen  are  troubled,  when  God 
ever  fo  little  turns  away  his  face  from  them. 
And  from  thence  arifes  the  neceffity  of  continu- 
ally watching  and  prayer. 

* 


2 07.. 


r 211  j 

e 207.  The  perfection  we  are  inceflantly  t© 
prefs  after,  is  no  other  than  perfect  love  : and 
love  cannot  increafe  in  the  foul,  but  by  a difen- 
gagement  from  fenfible  and  pleafing  objedts. 
Otherwife  our  love  is  falfe,  our  courtefy  deceit- 
ful, and  our  condefcenfion  to  others  only  a 
fnare  to  ourfelves ; becaufe  inftead  of  flowing 
from  the  love  of  God,  they  flow  from  felf-love, 
and  the  love  of  the  world. 

* 208.  The  readieft  way  which  God  takes  to 
draw  a man  to  himfelf  is,  to  afflidl  him  in  that 
which  he  loves  the  moll,  and  with  good  reafon 
and  to  caufe  this  afflidlion  to  arife  from  fome 
good  aftion  done  from  a Angle  eye  : becaufe 
nothing  can  more  clearly  fhow  him  the  empti- 
nefs  of  what  is  moll  lovely  and  deflrable  in  the 
world. 

209.  Separation  from  the  world  is  the  firfl 
ftep  towards  heaven,  and  the  beginning  of  our 
commerce  with  God,  who  advances  towards  us 
when  he  fees  we  eflrange  ourfelves  from  others, 
to  go  to  him. 

* 2x0.  God  does  nothing  but  in  anfwer  to 
prayer:  and  even  thofe  who  have  been  con- 
verted to  God,  without  praying  for  it  themfelves, 
(which  is  exceeding  rare)  were  not,  without  the 
prayers  of  others. 

211.  As  our  wants  are  continual,  fo  fhould 
our  prayers  be,  chiefly  in  the  beginning  of  our 
good  refolutions : as  there  is  no  time  wherein 
we  have  greater  need  of  peculiar  help  from  God. 

* 212. 


t 212  -] 

' * 212.  To  prayer  fhould  be  added  continual 
employment ; for  grace  flies  a vacuum  as  well  as 
nature,  and  the  devil  fills  whatever  God  does  not 
fill. 

213.  One  ought  to  read  the  holy  fcriptures 
with  fo  deep  a refpefit,  andfo  abfolute  a fubmif- 
fion,  as  fhew  that  we  are  thoroughly  perfuaded 
it  is  the  Holy  Ghofl  that  fpeaks.  And  we  ought 
to  receive  with  all  humility  what  he  is  pleafed  to 
difcover  to  us,  to  profit  thereby,  leaving  the  reft 
in  the  treafure  of  his  infinite  knowledge.  Such 
reading  is  no  lefs  ufeful  than  prayer,  and  brings  a 
bleffing  with  it,  which  is  the  principle  of  our 
good  works,  and  of  the  condufl  of  our  whole 
life. 

* 214.  One  of  the  greateft  faults  which  pa- 
rents can  commit,  and  which  is  the  fource  of 
numberlefs  diforders  in  families  and  in  common- 
wealths, is,  that  inflead  of  bringing  up  their 
children  as  thofe  that  are  now  the  children  of 
God,  by  the  fecond  birth  which  they  received 
inbaptifm,  they  think  only  of  giving  them  fuch 
an  education  as  is  fuitable  to  their  firft  birth. 
They  take  great  care  of  them  as  they  are  children 
of  Adam,  but  none  at  all  as  they  are  children  of 
God.  Thus  they  are  murderers  of  their  own 
children,  ftifling  the  life  of  God  which  was 
begun  in  their  fouls. 

215.  If  we  would  be  obeyedbyour  domeftics 
we  mull  not  only  command,  but  endeavour  to 
gain  their  heart.  For  God  himfelf  to  make 

himfelf 


[ 213  j 

liimfelf  obeyed,  does  not  barely  give  command- 
ments, but  alfo  infpires  his  love  into  the  fouls  of 
thofe  who  are  to  fulfil  them. 

*216.  Uniformity  of  life  and  fymetry  of  ac- 
tion, is  effential  to  Chriftian  holinefs.  It  is  like 
a circle,  which  is  confidered  as  the  firft  of  figures, 
becaufe  of  the  equality  of  all  its  parts. 

* 2 17.  It  is  highly  dangerous  to  grow  in  the 
knowledge  of  the  things  of  God,  and  not  in  the 
love  of  God. 

* 218.  God  does  not  love  men  that  are  incon- 
flant,  nor  good  works  that  are  intermitted.  No- 
thing is  pleafing  to  him  but  what  has  a refembl- 
ance  of  his  own  immutability, 

219.  God,  who  is  a Spirit,  will  dwell  no 
where  on  earth  but  in  our  fpirits,  which  are  his 
palaces.  ■ But  he  does  not  confider  them  as  fuch, 
unlefs  they  are  wholly  devoted  to  him. 

220.  The  truly  devout  fhow,  that  paffions  as 
naturallv  flow  from  true  as  from  falfe  love  : fo 
deeply  fenfible  are  they  of  the  goods  and  evils  of 
thofe  whom  they  love  for  God’s  fake.  But  this 
can  only  be  comprehended  by  thofe  who  under- 
ftand  the  language  of  love ; which  to  all  others, 
how  wife  or  learned  foever,  is  ftrange  and  bar- 
barous. 

221.  Trull  in  God,  who  every  moment  aflifls 
thofe,  who  give  themfelves  up  to  him.  If  we 
will  be  always  thinking  of  what  is  paft  and  what 
is  to  come,  wc  fhall  be  under  continual  ap- 
prehenfions. 


222.  To 


[ 214  ] 


222.  To  defire  to  grow  in  grace  which  is  the 
greated  thing  in  the  whole  world,  and  yet  not 
to  drive  and  labour  after  it,  is  defiring  to  eftablifh 
an  order  contrary  to  that  of  God,  which  is  im- 
moveable as  himfelf. 

223.  Can  we  be  troubled  when  we  know  that 
God  does  all,  and  that  not  an  hair  falls  from  our 
head  without  his  permiffion  ? 

* 224.  The  bottom  of  our  foul  may  be  in 
repofe,  even  while  we  are  in  many  outward  trou- 
bles; judas  the  bottom  of  the  fea  is  calm,  while 
the  furface  is  drongly  agitated. 

223.  Chridianity  is  fummed  up  in  being 
throughly  willing  that  God  fhould  treat  us  in 
the  manner  that  pleafes  him.  As  by  becoming 
Chridians  we  are  become  his  lambs,  we  ought 
to  be  ready  to  differ  even  to  the  death,  without 
complaining. 

226.  We  ought  never  to  make  a law  of  the 
advices  tve  give,  but  leave  thofe  to  whom  they 
are  given  to  their  own  choice. 

* 227.  God  frequently  conceals  the  part  which 
his  children  have  in  the  converfton  of  other  fouls. 
Yet  one  may  boldly  fay,  that  a perfon  who  long 
groans  before  him  for  the  converfion  of  another, 
whenever  the  foul  is  converted  to  God,  is  one  of 
the  chief  caufes  of  it ; efpecially  if  it  is  a mother 
who  prays  and  groans  for  her  child 

* 228.  A condant  attention  to  the  work  with 
which  God  intruds  us,  is  the  greated  mark  of 
folid  piety. 


229.  When 


C 2l5  ] 


229.  When  God  affli&s  us,  we  ought,  if  pof- 
fible,  to  add  fomething  to  our  ufual  exercifes  of 
piety,  to  harden  ourfelves  againft  that  little  re- 
laxation which  our  prefent  circumftances*  may 
require. 

230.  If  after  having  renounced  all,  we  do  not 
inceffantly  watch  over  our  aftions,  and  befeech 
God  to  accompany  our  vigilance  with  his,  we 
fhall  be  again  entangled  and  overcome. 

231.  The  more  pure  the  heart  is,  the  more 
capable  it  is  of  prayer. 

232.  When  we  know  the  pride  of  our  heart, 
we  fhould  offer  it  to  God,  as  a ficknefs  which  he 
alone  can  cure. 

233.  This  is  humility,  to  ferve  God  in  the  ftate 
wherein  we  are,  waiting  till  he  fhall  make  us 
better. 

* 234.  We  are  to  bear  with  thofe  whom  we 
cannot  amend,  and  to  be  content  with  offering 
them  to  God.  There  is  no  greater  exercife  of 
charity  than  this,  nor  of  true  refignation.  And 
fince  God  has  borne  our  infirmities  in  his  own 
perfon,  we  may  well  bear  thofe  of  each  other 
for  his  fake. 

235.  Seeing  Chrill  has  given  his  life  for  our 
falvation,  it  is  juft  that  they  who  love  fouls  for 
his  fake,  fomerimes  hazard  their  own  life  for 
him,  to  repay  fome  part  of  his  unexampled  love. 

236.  Where  there  is  love,  there  humility, 
long-fuffering,  patience,  and  all  other  vntues 

meet 


[ ] 

meet  together : inafmuch  as  thefe  are  only  the 
branches  whereof  love  is  the  root. 

237.  Chriftians  generally  defire  to  have  only 
fweet  medicines  for  the  diftempers  of  their  fouls, 
not  confidering  that  we  ufe  fharp  and  bitter 
ones  to  cure  the  difeafes  of  our  bodies. 

* 238.  Nothing  is  more  to  be  lamented,  than 
that  the  wounds  of  the  foul  are  invifible  like 
herfelf:  and  that  we  are  fo  far  from  beina;  fenfi- 
ble  of  them  as  foon  as  we  have  received  them, 
that  for  a long  time  we  find  pleafure  in  our  mif- 
fortune,  and  fancy  we  are  well,  though  we 
are  fick  unto  death. 

239.  We  cannot  keep  the  Spirit  of  God  after 
we  have  received  it,  but  by  increafing  it  by  con- 
ftant  exercifes  of  piety.  Nor  can  we  increafe  it, 
but  by  keeping  curfelves  at  a diftance  from  the 
world. 

240.  To  abandon  all,  to  ftrip  one’s  felfofall, 
in  order  to  feek  and  follow  Jefus  Clirifi,  naked 
in  Bethlehem  when  he  was  born,  naked  in  the 
hall  when  he  was  fcourged,  and  naked  when  he 
died  on  the  crofs.  is  fo  great  a mercy,  that 
neither  the  thing  nor  the  knowledge  of  it  is  giv- 
en to  any,  but  through  faith  in  the  Son  of 
God. 

* 241.  As  devils  and  the  fouls  of  men  are 
both  of  the  fame,  of  a fpiritual  nature,  and 
accordingly  the  former  well  underftand  what 
paffes  in  the  latter,  they  find  it  eafy  to  tranfmit 
from  one  foul  to  another  the  corrruption  and  in- 
fection 


[ 217  ] 

feftion  they  meet  with  there,  by  means  of  the 
evil  converfation  and  friendly  intercourfe  there 
is  between  them. 

242.  There  is  no  faithfulnefs  like  that  which 
ought  to  be  between  a true  guide  of  fouls  and 
the  perfons  direcled  by  him.  They  ought  con- 
tinually to  regard  each  other  in  God,  and  clofe- 
ly  to  examine  themfelves  whether  all  their 
thoughts  are  pure,  and  their  words  conduced 
with  Chrillian  difcretion.  Other  affairs  are  only 
the  affairs  of  men,  but  thefe  are  peculiarly  the 
things  of  God. 

* 243.  The  fears  which  the  firfl  appearance  of 
the  great  truths  of  God  raife  • in  the  minds  of 
young  converts,  referable  thofe  which  are  oc- 
cafioned  at  firfl  bv  the  apparition  of  good  angels  : 
but  they  foon  pafs  away,  and  leave  the  foul  in 
peace  and  foy  in  the  Holy  Ghoft. 

244.  Of  all  converfions,  the  mofl  apoftolical 
is  that  which  is  wrought  by  the  very  words  of 
the  gofpel.  By  thefe  God  has  converted  both 
the  Jews  and  Heathen?,  and  has  formed  and  does 
ftill  form  his  church. 

24 3.  The  foul  wherein  God  has  fhed  abroad 
his  grace,  no  longer  knows  any  language  but  that 
of  grace. 

246.  The  words  of  the  gofpel  are  the  words  of 
life.  All  others  are  only  dead  words,  whatever 
vigour  they  may  feem  to  receive  from  the  elo- 
quence of  him  that  fpeaks  them. 

247-  Grace  renders  fweetto  the  foul  not  onlv 
Vol.  XXIV.  K _ the 


t 218  j 

the  harfheft  truths,  hard  hayings  which  we  could 
not  bear  before,  but  alfo  the  moil  difficult  ac- 
tions and  the  moft  grievous  bufferings. 

*48.  Jefus  Chrift  alone  opens  the  ears  »fthe 
heart  ; and  then  we  run  in  his  ways  after  the 
odour  of  his  ointments. 

* 249.  Jefus  Chrift  renews  his  own  life  every 
hour  in  the  bodies  and  fouls  of  real  Chriffians. 
They  are  living  images  ol  him,  and  reprefent 
him  in  a more  excellent  manner  than  the  writ- 
ings of  the  gofpel  itfelf.  For  the  dead  charac- 
ters of  the  gofpel  (though  living  in  another  fenfe,) 
contains  only  the  pad  life  of  Chrift;  whereas 
true  Chriffians  contain  alfo  his  prefent  life,  and 
that  in  living  characters  : which  caufed  the 
apoitle  to  declare,  I live  not,  but  ChriJt  hveth  in 
me. 

2,50.  Every  new  viBory  which  the  foul  gains 
is  the  effect  of  a new  prayer. 

251.  It  is  very  poffible  fora  man  to  love  any 
of  the  creatures,  without  their  contributing  to 
it  ; but  it  is  not  poffible  for  him  to  love  God, 
unlefs  God  himfelf  waters  him  from  moment 
to  moment. 

252.  The  clouds  which  frequently  rife  in  the 
fouls  of thofe  who  are  truly  convened  to  God, 
do  not  hinder  the  continuance  of  that  joy  which 
his  prefence  produces  in  them:  but  the fe clouds 
are  all  fcattered  by  a frafh  fupply  of  faith,  and  of 
the  Spirit  of  Jefus  Chrift. 

* 253.  It  is  not  good  For  a babe  in  ChriPr, 

either 


[ 219  j 

either  to  converfe  much  with  the  world,  or  to  be 
wholly  alone. 

* 254.  Employment  frequently  holds  the  place 
of  mortification,  and  produces  the  fame  effefts. 

25,5.  Thofe  who  write  by  the  Spirit  of  God 
do  not  follow  their  memory  fo  much  as  their 
heart. 

* 256.  Our  continuance  in  good  works  is  the 
bell  means  to  retain  a continual  fenfe  of  the  love 
of  God. 

257-  We  cannot  continue  ingood  works,  un- 
lefs  we  renounce  all  defire  ol  the  goods,  honours, 
and  pleafures  of  the  world. 

258.  Let  the  things  of  earth  roll  under  our 
feet,  as  thofeof  heaven  roll  over  our  heads. 

' 2^9.  God  hates  doth  as  much  as  prefump- 
tion. 

260.  It  is  frequently  neceffary  to  ferve  God, 
and  abandon  ourfclves  to  him,  though  we  fee  but 
darkly  what  is  his  will  concerning  us,  without 
waiting  for  particular  revelations.  For  we  can- 
not expefl  in  the  order  of  grace,  as  in  that  of 
reafon,  to  have  evidence  and  demonltration  at 
every  Hep. 

261.  Truth  cannot  fo  well  be  found  by  difput- 
ing,  as  bv  holy  meditation. 

262.  Every  one  has  his  peculiar  gift  from  God, 
according  to  which  he  ought  to  condudl  himfelf. 
At  the  fame  time  he  fhould  labour  with  fobriety, 
to  acquire  the  knowledge  of  divine  things,  fo  he 

K 2 does 


[ 220  ] 


•does  it  with  a fingle  eye,  that  he  may  profit  there*- 
by,  and  be  more  deeply  grounded  in  love. 

263.  They  that  cannot  fall  one  way,  may  fall 
another.  And  thole  who  are  truly  devoted  to 
God,  have  a great  liberty,  to  do  or  not  to  do 
-thofe  outward  things  which  are  in  themfelves  in- 
different. 

* 263.  The  fympathies  formed  by  grace,  far 
furpafs  thofe  formed  by  -nature. 

265.  The  love  of  God  leads  us  firft  to  the  true 
love  of  ourfelves,  and  thence  to  the  love  of  our 
neighbour. 

266.  It  is  good  to  renew  ourfelves  from  time 
To  time,  bv  clofely  'examining  the  flate-  of  our 
foul,  as  if  we  had  never  been  renewed  before* 
For  nothing  tends  more  to  the  full  affurance  of 
faith,  than  to  keep  ourfe-lves  by  this  mean's  in 
humility  and  the  exercife  of  all  good  works. 

* 267.  God  confiders  us  only  according  to 
what  we  are  in  our  hearts,  in  the  fecret  move- 
ments of  our  foul,  in  our  hidden  intent  ions  and  our 
paffions  imperceptible  to  others.  The  goodnefs 
of  all  our  works  depends  on  the  purity  and  fimph- 
citv  of  our  heart,  which  is  at  it  were  the  fpirit, 
the  invi>fibl.e  foul  of  this  vifible  hodv. 

268.  We  fhould  difengage  ourfelves  from  all 
thofe  pleafures,  which  if  offierwife  innocent,  vet 
fill  the  capacity  of  the  heart,  which  fhould  be 
Tilled  bv  grace  only. 

* 269.  If  we  do  not  devote  all  we  do  to  God, 
there  is  nothing  in  our  belt  works  but  what  is  hu- 


man 


[ 22-1  ] 


man  or  pagan  : becaufe  we  regard  only  ourfelveS" 
therein,  and  while  we  do  what  is  good  in  appear- 
ance, we  in  effeft  put  ourfelves  by  a fecret  fell- 
complacence  in  the  place  of  God. 

2;o.  In  the  greatefl  temptations,  a fingle  look 
to  Jefus  Chrifl,  or  the  bare  proUnouncing  his 
name,  fuffices  to  overcome  the  wicked  one, 
fo  it  be  done  with  confidence  and  calmnefs  ol 
fpirit. 

271.  There  is  nothing  either  in  earth  or  hell 
that  can  poflibly  hurt  a foul,  which  regards  Jefus 
Chrifl,  with  a lively  faith,  either  in  his  death, 
or  in  his  refurreflion. 

* 272.  Thankfgiving  is  as  it  were  the  foul  of 
prayer,  with  which  it  fhou'ld  begin,  continue,  and 
end. 

273.  The  hindrances  of  our  thankfulnefs, 
.when  we  conquer  them,  increafe  inflead  of  di- 
minifhing  it. 

*274.  God  frequently  gives  afoul  that  ardent- 
ly loves  him,  a difpenfadon  from  thofe  laborious 
works,  which  it  would  do,  to  teilify  its  gratitude 
by  laying  obfiacles  in  the  way  which  makes 
them  impofiible. 

275.  In  fouls  filled  with  love,  the  defire  to 
pleafe  God  is  a continual  prayer. 

* 276.  Nothing  is  more  true,  than  that  the 
yoke  of  Chrifl  is  eafy , and  his  burden  light.  For 
one  need  only  love,  to  fulfil  the  whole  law,  even 
wheh.  it  cannot  be  outwardly  accompli  fired.  And 
yet  it  is  true,  that  this  difpenfation  from  outward 

K 3 works. 


I 222  ] 


tvorks,  which  proceeds  from  providential  hin- 
drances, is  often  a greater  trial  to  fouls  full  of  love 
than  the  molt  painful  of  thofe  works  would  have 
been. 

277.  God  does  not  always  fuffer  hiinfelf  to  be 
overcome  by  his  children  (as  he  was  by  Jacob] 
in  the  fecret  combats  of  faith  and  love,  wherein 
they  wreftle  with  him.  He  often  remains  victor- 
ious over  the  foul,  which  defires  to  labour,  to 
luffer,  to  die  for  him  ; that  he  may  attach  her 
more  and  more  to  his  love  by  hindering  the  ef- 
fefts  of  that  love  which  (he  bears  him.  But  how- 
ever the  combat  is,  {he  is  fo  much  the  happier 
through  the  increafe  of  her  love  by  thofe  very 
oppofitions,  as  torrents  are  raifed  by  the  obftacles 
which  they  meet  with.  And  the  faith  which 
guides  her  love,  gives  her  tounderlfand  that  file 
luccceds  in  the  moft  excellent  manner,  by  con- 
tributing to  the  fuccefs  of  God’s  defigns,  by  the 
difappointment  of  her  own. 

278.  God  only  requires  of  his  adult  children 
that  their  hearts  be  throughlv  purified,  and  that 
they  offer  him  continually  the  wilhes  and  vows, 
that  naturally  fpring  from  perfefii  love.  For  thofe 
defires  being  the  fiilf  genuine  fruits  of  love,  are 
the  moft  perfeft  prayers  which  can  fpring  from 
it. 

279.  The  neceffitv  of  continual  watching 
unto  prayer  rifes  hence,  that  the  devil  is  contin- 
ually watching  to  furprize  us,  and  to  deftroy  us 

. ?:  a by 


over 


[ 223  ] 

by  thofe  very  viflories  which  we  gain 
him. 

* 280.  As  the  furious  hate  which  the  devit 
bears  us  is  termed,  the  roaring  of  that  lion,  fo 
our  vehement  love  may  be  termed,  crying  after 
God. 

281.  Thofe  who  know  the  greatnefs  and  I10I1- 
nefs  of  the  church,  count  nothing  therein 
little. 

28s.  On  every  occafion  of  uneafinefs.  we 
fhould  retire  to  prayer,  that  we  may  give  place 
to  the  grace  and  light  of  God,  and  then  foim  our 
_refolutions,  without  being  111  any  pain  what  fuc- 
cefs  they  may  have. 

283.  Thofe  ■ who  clofely  follow  God,  eafily 
judge  of  the  manner  wherein  they  ought  to  a£h 
in  fpiritual  things.  They  need  walk  but  a little 
in  the  ftrait  way,  to  fee  before  them  the  light 
which  difperfes  the  clouds. 

284.  Nothing  of  that  which  is  in  the  order 
of  God,  ought  to  be  accounted  tioublefome. 

* 285.  A foul  returned  to  God,  ought  to  be 
attentive  to  every  thing  which  is  faid  to  him  on 
the  head  of  falvation,  with  a fecret  defire  to 
profit  thereby. 

286.  The  whole  life  of  grace  confiffs  in  de- 
pendence upon  God. 

287.  There  is  no  furer  mark  of  a true  con- 
verfion,  than  to  be  greatly  tempted  of  the  devil. 
The  belt  means  of  overcoming  him  is,  to  have 
no  dependence  upon  ourfelves,  but  to  throw 

K 4 ourfelves 


[ 22*  ] 

©mfelves  wholly  upon  God,  with  an  abfolute 
dependence  on  his  will. 

288.  The  jujl Jhall  live  b\  faith.  By  his  con- 
tinual regard  to  God  he  draws  thofe  graces  and 
influences  from  heaven,  without  which  the  mod 
righteous  man  upon  earth  could  not  fubfyft  one 
moment. 

289.  Ignorance  of  the  truths  which  exalt  God, 
and  abafe  man,  (convinced  that  in  whatever  date 
he  is,  he  has  continual  need  of  new  grace, 
which  God  gives  to  thofe  only  that  humble 
theinfelve's  more  and  more)  has  caufed  the  ruin 
of  many,  who  were  much  admired  in  the  find 
dages.of  their  converfion. 

290.  Jefus  Chrid,  becoming  man  out  of  love 
to  us,  fatisfied  the  judice  of  his  Father,  by  an 
humility,  ail  obedience,  and  a patience  as  incom- 
prehenfible  in  the  human  nature,  as  God  in  his 
divine  nature,  was,  is,  and  always  will  be,  to  afl 
but  himfelf. 

291.  We  ought  to  defire  the  Lord’s  fupper 
with  the  fame  earnednefs  as  we  defire  to  pre- 
ferve  the  health  wre  enjoy,  or  to  recover  that 
we  have  lod. 

292.  He  to  whom  the  Lord's  fupper  ferves 
chiefly  for  food,  fliould  prepare  himfelf  by  ano- 
ther food,  the  word  of  God.  He  to  whom  it 
ferves  chiefly  for  a medicine,  fliould  prepare 
himfelf  for  it  by  repentance. 

293.  God  impofes  one  kind  of  penance  on 
every  penitent,  by  gi\  ing  him  various  afflictions ; 

and 


[ 225  3 


and  anothor  kind,  in  the  unavoidable  inconve- 
niences which*  attend  every  calling  whatever. 
And  none  is  duly  prepared  for  the  Lord’s  flip- 
per, but  he  that  acquits  himfelf  well  in  affliftion 
and  in  his  calling. 

294.  None  is  duly  prepared  for  it,  who  does 
not  daily  examine  the  ground  of  his  confcience, 
with  an  earned:  defire  to  judge  himfelf  that  he 
may  not  he  judged  of  the  Lord. 

295.  They  whom  God  has  preferved  from 
grofs  fins,  ought  to  have  tender  compaffion  and 
great  patience  toward  thofe  whom  God  has  fuf- 
fered  to  fall  into  them,  and  whom  he  has  left  in 
them  for  a feafon.  It  is  thus  they  are  to  fhew 
their  humuhty  and  gratitude  to  God,  and  their 
charity  to  their  neighbour. 

296.  Of  the  fins  which  God  has  pardoned,- 
Jet  nothing  remain  but  a deeper  humility  in  our 
heart,  and  a ftrifler  regulation  in  our  words,  in 
our  aftions,  and  in  our  fuffe rings. 

297.  A natural  goodnefs  and  eafinefs  of  tem- 
per, often  hinder  our  growing  in  grace  ; making- 
us  do  almolt  all  good  works  rather  from  inclina- 
tion, than  by  the  Spirit  of  God. 

298.  Examples  are  to  be  followed  with  cau- 
tion ; but  the  gofpel  rules  without  referve.  St. 
Paul  advifes  to  follow  him,  only  fo  far  as  he  fol- 
lowed Chrift. 

299.  It  is  of  no  ufe  to  love  the  brightnefs  of 
truth,  unlefs  we  fhew  the  warmth  of  it  in  ou? 

X £ S0^ 


pra&ice. 


[ 226  ] 


300.  The  warmth  oflove  refembles  that  of  the 
heart,  which  extends  itfelf  to  the  fmalleft  parts 
oi  die  body. 

*301.  If  the  love  of  God  does  not  increafe  in 
us,  in  the  fame  degree  as  we  increafe  in  know- 
ledge, the  ftronger  principle  will  overcome  the 
weaker,  and  knowledge  will  ftifle  love.  This 
has  occafioned  men  of  the  greatell  learning,  al- 
moft  to  envy  their  happinefs,  who  know  little, 
but  love  much. 

* 302.  The  body  increafes  without  decreafing, 
till  it  comes  to  a certain  age.  But  there  is  no 
limited  time  w herein  the  foul  may  not  either  in- 
creafe  or  decreafe. 

303.  Silence  offpirit  confifts  in  cutting  off  all 
vain  and  ufelefs  thoughts. 

• 304.  One  may  be  interoperate  in  fpeaking  as 
well  as  in  eating.  And  as  after  we  have  failed 
long,  we  are  apt  to  eat  too  much,  fo  are  we  to 
fpeak  too  much  after  we  have  been  long  filent. 

305.  It  is  not  reafonable  to  delire  they  mould 
love  us,  who  do  not  love  God. 

306.  We  would  every  day  gain  fomething 
upon  ourfelves,  and  be  a little  more  difer.gaged 
from  the  objefts  that  furround  us. 

307.  When  we  fhould  counfel  our  friends, 
{hence  is  nolefs  blameable  than  indifference. 

308.  The  holy  fcripture  is  the  mirror  wherein 
we  fee  God,  and  wherein  we  may  fee  the  fmail- 
eft  fpots  upon  our  fouls. 

309.  Death  is  the  gTeateft  affair  of  human 

life. 


[ 227  ] 

life*  We  mull  prepare  for  it  while  we  are  in 
reft  and  health. 

310.  In  whatever  wap  of  life  we  are,  wre  de- 
pend on  the  mercy  of  God.  And  it  is  far  better 
humbly  to  truft  in  him,  though  with  fomething 
of  uncertainty,  than  to  truft  in  ourfelves  with 
the  utmoft  alfurance.  Adam,  left  to  himfelf, 
fell.  Whereas  fhoufands  ol  his  offspring,  though 
finful,  and  feeble,  Hand  through  the  grace  of 
Jefus  Chrift. 

*311.  If  one  cannot  faithfully  ferve  an  earthly 
prince  without  expo'fing  himfelf  to  many  dangers 
in  his  court,  and  to  death  in  his  armies,  it  is  far 
more reafonable  that  thofe  who  ferve  God  in  the 
church,  which  is  the  court  of  his  Son,  fhould 
expofe  themfelves  to  all  the  dangers,  and  fuffer 
all  the  evils  that  occur  in  his  fervice  : efpecially 
as  he  who  has  eflabhfhed  this  kingdom,  was 
himfelf  hated  of  men,  and  has  foretold,  that  the 
war,  which  they  who  preached  the  gofpel  after 
him,  need  make  upon  the  world,  would  cau-fe 
them  likewife  to  be  hated  of  all  men,  for  his 
name’s  fake. 

* 312.  A true  guide  of  fouls,  ought  to  be  as 
the  heart,  the  tongue,  and  the  hand  of  God,  to 
labour  by  his  affiftance  for  the  falvalion  of  them 
that  are  under  his  care.  For  it  is  not  he  that 
prays,  that  fpeaks,  that  wilhes,  drives,  buffers; 
but  it  is  the  Spirit  of  God  which  does  all  this, 
when  the  minifter  is  united  tc»him,  and  calls 
upon  him  continually. 

K6. 


3‘8V 


[ 2i>8  ] 

3^3*  There  is  this  difference  in  the  miniffers 
of  the  church  and  of  the  world,  that  the  latter 
affume  pomp  and  grandeur,  whereas  the  former 
are  always  covered  with  charitv  and  humility. 

* 314.  There  ought  nothing  to  come  out  of 
the  mouth  or  the  heart  of  a preacher  of  the  gof- 
pel,  but  what  is  not  only  reafonable  but  chnft-ian, 
and  animated  by  the  holy  Spirit. 

* 315.  Between  the  phyficians  of  the  foul  and 
thofe  of  the  body,  there  is  a great  difference  in 
this.  The  latter  are  more  and  more  hardened, 
by  the  fight  of  more  patients  and  difeafes  ; 
whereas  the  hearts  of  the  former,  by  the  fight 
of  fpiritual  difeafes,  grow  more  and  more 
tender. 

316.  A man  mull  have  courage  more  than  hu- 
man, to  make  war  on  all  the  world  both  within 
and  without  him. 

* 317.  The  only  way  to  undertake  the  preach- 
ing of  the  gofpel,  is.  To  enter  upon  it  by  the 
infpiration  of  God,  without  having  any  regard 
to  the  world,  or  of  what  is  either  agreeable  or 
difagreeable  in  it,  and  to  forget  evpn  our  own 
houfe  and  relations  j nil  as  Abraham  did,  in  order 
to  love  God  alone,  as  if  he  alone  tvere  our 
world,  our  relations,  our  all. 

* 318.  It  is  the  glory  of  all  true  minillers  of 
C.1  mill,  to  referable  the  angels  of  God.  They 
.nearly  referable  them,  by  having  renounced  the 
body,  in  order  to  regard  the  foul  only  : by  their 

, life  all  fpiritual,  uniform  throughout,  all  from 

God, 


C 229  ] 


God,  all  for  God,  and  all  proceeding  from 
the  Spirit  of  God,  as  is  that  of  the  angels  in  hea- 
ven. 

319.  The  government  of  fouls,  particularly 
in  that  which  regards  the  fpiritual  life,  is  not  a 
government  of  dominion  and  empire,  but  of  love 
and  tendernefs.  It  confifls  in  following  the 
movements  of  God  in  the  perfons  committed  to 
us,  after  having  difeerned  by  his  light,  that  thefe 
movements  come  from  him. 

320.  God  is  the  mailer  of  fouls  : he  moves 
and  guides  them  as  he  pleafes,  according  to  the 
depth  of  his  judgments.  We  who  are  only  his 
fervants  and  helpers  of  thefe  fouls,  depend  far 
more  on  what  he  works  in  them,  than  they  do 
upon'us.. 

* 321.  He  who  is  honoured  with  the  minif- 
try,  ought  to  be  and  to  appear  as  far  feparate 
from  common  Chriilians,  as  common  Chriftians 
ought  to  be  and  to  appear  feparate  from  Hea- 
thens. 

* 322.  A preacher  fhould  earneftly  beg  of 
God,  that  his  being  accuilomed  to  facred  offices 
ma\  no  ways  abate  the  folemn  awTe  which  he  at 
firil  experienced  in  them.  There  is  the  utmoil 
need  that  he  ffiould  have  as  much  of  this  to  the 
end  (if  not  more)  as  at  the  beginning. 

323.  It  is  often  improper  to  declare  our  fenti- 
ments  haflily  and  abruptly.  It  may  put  it  out  of 
our  power  to  defend  the  truth ; at  leaft  with  any 
profit. 

324* 


[ 2 3°  ] 

324.  M millers,  above  all  other  men,  Ihould 
have  thofe  words  continually  before  their  eyes. 
The  kingdom  of  heaven  fujfereth  violence , and  the 
violent  take  it  by  force. 

* 325.  The  difpenfation  which  God  indifpen- 
fibly  requires  of  all  that  would  minifter  his  word, 
excludes  every  other  deftgn  but  that  which 
fp  rings  from  his  grace  and  the  motion  of  his 
Spirit. 

* 326.  Chrift  has  always  referved  in  his  church 
feme  miniiters  who  bear  in  their  fouls  tbe  cha- 
racter of  his  divinity,  fo  as  to  do  nothing  which 
is  not  fuitable  to  his  greatnefs,  and  far  diflant 
from  the  corruption  which  not  only  overflows 
the  world,  but  even  the  church,  the  generality 
of  his  minilters. 

327.  None  ought  to  believe  himfelf  worthy  of 
the  miniflry. 

328.  A minifter  ought  to  avoid  conteniion. 

329.  Nothing  increafes  grace  fo  much  as  the 
miniflry,  when  it  is  exercifed  by  the  Spirit  of 
God. 

* 330.  Faith  has  a peculiar  force  in  an  houfe 
where  fevera!  fouls  conrecrated  to  God  are  joined 
together. 

331.  Tbe  life  of  a mini  Her  ought  to  be  uni- 
form, to  render  it  exemplary.  * And  if  his  ex- 
ample does  not  edify  the  world,  neither  will  his 
writing  benefit  the  church* 

332.  When  w.e  fpeak  to  others  of  the  things 

cf 


[ 23»  J 

of  God,  we  ought  always  to  fpeak  to  ourfelves, 
fo  as  to  take  to  ourfelves  at  lead  an  equal  part 
of  the  inflructions  which  we  give  them. 

333.  Thofe  who  have  furmounted  the  defire 
of  the  flefh,  have  Hill  to  lurmount  that  of  the 
tongue  and  of  the  underflanding : particularly  at 
-this  time,  wherein  knowledge  is  io  frequently 
found  feparate  from  virtue. 

* 334.  When  any  one  writes  for  God,  he 
fhonld  feek  for  no  other  eloquence  than  that 
which  God  gives  in  the  fnnplichy  of  his  Spirit. 
He  would  corrupt  this,  were  he  to  mix  it  with 
human  eloquence ; and  he  Ihould  never  forget, 
before,  in,  and  after  his  work,  to  cry  to  God, 
that  he  may  have  his  heart  continually  lifted  up 
to  him,  who  ought  to  be  the  fource  of  all  the 
thoughts  and  all  the  converfation  of  every  mi- 
ni Her. 

* 2)35-  While  a man  is  alienated  from  God, 
he  makes  little  account  olthat  natural  inclination 
which  fuchan  one  as  to  fome  good  works,  or  his 
averfiou  to  fome  fins.  But  from  the  moment 
that  he  is  converted  to  God,  he  fanftifies  this 
inclination  and  this  averfion,  and  ferves  himfelf 
of  it  in  order  to  increafe  it : and  neverthelefs, 
the  eafe  with  which  we  do  thofe  good  works,  and 
avoid  thofe  evil  ones,  does  not  at  all  diminifli 
the  reward  or  value  of  them.  Thus  what  tvas 
only  virtuous  Heathenifm  before,  becomes  true 
Chriftian  virtue,  by  the  infufion  of  love,  which 
is  in  us  ai  it  were  a fecond  foul,  all  divine,  and 

which 


[ 232  ] 

which  transforms  into  itfelf  that  which  before 
animated  the  body. 

* 336.  How  clear-fjghted  foever  a man  is  in 
other  refpefts,  he  hardly  fees  all  that  love  re- 
quires to  be  done,  whether  in  refpe- r or  Cod  or 
his  neighbour,  but  while  he  feeis  tnat  love  in 
his  heart. 


INSTRUCTIONS 


[ 233  3 


INSTRUCTION'S 

F O R 

MEMBER  S 

O F 

RELIGIOUS  SOCIETIES. 

Tran  Hated  from  the  French. 


i.  "\  yT EMBERS  of  religious  focieties,  who- 
TVIL  ought  to  be  fo  holv.  who  have  fo  many 
lielps  for  becoming  fo,  frequently  fall  fhort  ofit, 
through  the  exceffive  confidence  they  are  taught 
to  place  in  external  rules.  They  do  not  know 
that  true  holinefs  flows  neither  irotn  the  will, 
nor  from  the  efforts  of  man.  They  are  not  fen- 
fible  that  their  corruption  is  above  all  remedies 
except  only  the  grace  of  Chriff  : that  all  outward 
helps  reach  not  the  deep  and  invifible  wound  of 

the 


' [ 234  1 

the  heart,  and  that  they  are  defperately  fick, 
who  fancy  they  can  be  cured  bv  their  own  cares 
or  labours.  1 hefe  do  not  hold  by  the  root  of  all 
true  good,  which  is  Jefus  Cbiilf.  They  are  fe- 
vered from  the  principle  of  health  and  life  : and 
it  is  for  this  reafon  that  thev  are  fo  weak,  fome- 
times  fo  fenfual,  and  always  fo  proud,  becaufe 
they  do  not  receive  that  influence  which  gives 
ftrength,  purity,  and  humility,  in  the  fpirit  of 
grace  and  love.  This  is  therefore  highly  need- 
ful for  them  to  confid.tr,  that  neither  the  Jiajf  of 
the  prophet  nor  his  fervant  is  able  to  raife  the 
dead  : but  only  the  prophet  himfelf  flretched 

upon  the  body  ; that  is,  Chriil  become  man  for 
us. 

2.  It  is  of  deep  importance,  that  they  fhoulcT 
underhand  the  connexion  there  is  between  their 
vows  and  the  gofpel.F  * Suppofe  thev  did  not 
vow  obedience  to.  their  Superior,  they  mu  ft  dread 
their  own  will  as  the  fcurce  of  all  vices.  For  in 
any  flate  we  are  not  at  our  own  difpofal,  we  are 
not  to  live  to  ourfelves,  or  permitted  to  reft  in 
ourfelves,  or  to-be  our  own  rule  and  end.  \\  e 
need  not  make  a vow  of  poverty  ; but  in  every 
flate  the  love  of  riches  is  forbidden  ; covet- 
oufoefs  is  idolatry  ; and  trull  in  our  goods  is 
incompatible  with  a due  truft  in  God.  We 
muft  limit  ourfelves  to  the  neceflities  of  nature; 
difpenfe  the  reft  with  the  molt  exact  fidelity,  and 

ufe 

+ This  letter  wa& originally  defigned  for  tbofe  oi  a Rtligious 
Houle  in  France. 


n 


[ 23  5 ] 

ufe  even  what  we  allow  ourfelves  as  though  we 

O 

Iufed  it  not.  We  need  not  bind  ourfelves  to  a (ingle 
life  : but  the  laws  ofchafiity  are  fo  drift  in  every 
date;  faults  of  this  kind  are  fo  dangerous ; the 
occafion  of  them  are  fo  frequent  in  the  world  ; 
and  it  is  fo  juft  to  be  afraid  of  that  fin  which 
may  he  committed  even  by  a look,  that  it  is  eafier 
to  abfiain  from  all,  than  to  flop  precifely  at  the 
point  where  innocence  ends.  See  what  is  the- 
ijground  of  refol.ving  upon  a fingle  hie.  And  we 
fhould  infinitely  deceive  ourfelves,  if  we  re- 
garded chafiuy  as  a thing  indifferent  before  we 
I [made  the  refohution.  The  dangers  we  are  in, 
an  holy  fear,  the  care  of  an  meflimable  treafure- 
qlodged  in  a brittle  veflel,  and  the  defire  of  pleaf- 
[iiig  Clrriit  by  giving  him  an  undivided  heart,, 
[were,,  or  ought  to  have  been,  our  only  motives 
:or  making  Inch  a refol'ution.  It  is  becaufe  we 
,k>  not  conceive  this,  that  we  are  fo  little  awarded 

• ' O 

agamll  the  tender  connexions,-  and  fo  feebly  re- 
fill that  defire  of  p leafing ; fo  often  attach  our- 
felves to  perfons  whom  we  ought  not  to  fee,  but 
.n  order  to  become  more  pure  ; that  we  nourifh 
in  our  hearts  a thoufand  ufelefs  and  frivolous 
lefires.;  fuffer  our  comfort  to  depend  on  the 
1 /noft  trifling  things;  and  fall  into  the  in- 
:omprchenfib!e  folly  of -having  renounced  what 
is  lawful,  the  love  of  a fpoufe,  and  of  children, 
o put  filly,  little,  forbidden  attachments  in  the 
plqce  of  thefe  innocent  and  even  holy  ties. 

3-.  Obferve  the  difference  between  the  rules 

which. 

IK 


[ 236  ] 

which  are  merely  of  human  authority  and  the 
laus  oi  Goa.  The  former  may  on  feveral  occa- 
fions  be  difpenfed  with;  whereas  the  laws  of1 
God  are  tndifpenfable  : nor  can  their  obligation 
lie  weakened  ekh’er  by  cuftom,  or  by  example, 
or  authority.  Neither  can  tee  excufe  ourfelves 
on  account  of  ignorance,  becaufe  that  ignorance 
itfelf  is  a fin.  Accordingly  we  may  not  on  any! 
pretence  lofe  time  in  trifling  difcourfe,  love 
worthlefs  things,  fuffer  ourfelves  to  be  betrayed 
into  murmuring  and  impatience,  or  follow  our 
pride,  or  felf-will  in  any  thing.  Thefe  would 
be  fins,  though  we  were  not  fo  peculiarly  de- 
voted to  God : and  our  profeflion  of  religion 
only  adds  a new  degree  of  guilt  to  them. 

* 4.  It  is  then  of  great  moment  to  diftinguifh 
between  thofe  rules  which  feem  purely  arbitrary, 
and  thofe  which  all  muii  impofe  upon  them- 
felves,  if  they  purpofe  to  fare  their  fouls.  Such 
are  ffated  hours  of  private  prayer,  reading,  and  1 
meditation;  conffant'and  ferious  emplovment; 
plain  and  modefl  apparel,  and  a carriage  flill 
more  plain  and  modefi;  a feeady  uniformity  oi 
behaviour;  following  the  counfeL  of  fome  guide J 
who  is  taught  of  God  ; an  habitual  dread  of  foft- 
nefs  and  pleafure,  and  a love  of  penitence.  No- 
thing of  this  is  arbitrary.  Piety  partly  confifls 
in  thefe  things,  partly  depends  upon  them.  II 
you  was  in  no  religious  fociety,  you  would  be  1 
equally  obliged  to  thefe;  but  you  would  be  de- 


m: 

[ *37  ] 

priced  of  the  valuable  helps  of  rule,  of  inftruc- 
tion,  and  of  example,  which  you  now  enjoy. 

* 5.  And  even  thofe  rules  which  appear  quite 
■arbitrary  and  indifferent,  are  ufually  neceffary 
in  order  to  the  keeping  of  others,  as  the  hufk 
preferves  the  corn,  and  as  the  letter  preferves 
the  fpirit.  It  feems  indeed  to  men  of  the  world, 
that  thefe  are  little  things  : but  pride  and  world- 
ly wifdom  are  ill  judges  of  what  is  little  or  great 
,in  the  eye$  of  God.  There  are  abundance  of 
things  neceffary. in  ofder  to  difeipline,  precious 
helps  for  humility  and  fervency  of  fpirit,  which 
: the  world  defpifes,  but  which  the. children  of 
! God  know  the  value  of. 

* 6.  Above  all  things,  we  muff  labour  to  con- 
vince ourfelves  throughly,  that  we  can  never  fill 
up  the  charaffer  of  a life  confecrated  to  the  fer- 
*vice  of  God,  without  an  univerfal  renunciation 
' of  all  things  ; that  it  avails  nothing  to  (hut  all  the 
I other  gates,  if  we  leave  one  open  for  the  devil ; 
that  we  only  make  him  rage  tire  more,  unlefs 
we  refill  1 im  more  valiantly  in  every  point  : 
■that  the  lead  vice  indulged  brings  back  all  the 
reft  : that  the  felf-love  which  leads  us  to  except 
anything,  leads  us  afterwards  to  refume  all;  that 
whatever  takes  up  a part  of  our  heart,  neceffari- 
, -ly  wounds  and  weakens  it : that  the  parting  it, 
j when  we  owe  and  have  promifed  the  whole,  is 
■no  lefs  than  facrilege  ; that  the  deatli  of  Ananias 
-ought  to  make  all  thofe  tremble,  who  keep  back 
-apart:  that  the  command  to  Lot  and  his  wife. 

Not 


r *38  ] 

Not  to  look  back,  is  renewed  by  Chrifi  in  tbe  gof- 
pel ; that  it  is  eafy,  by  our  defires,  to  turn  back 
to  the  worlds  and  that  one  cannot  even  thus 
return  to  it,  without  rendering  ourfelves  unwor- 
thy to  enter  into  the  promiled  land;  that  we 
cannot  conceive  the  fury  of  the  devil  againft 
thole  who  undertake  to  live  an  angelic  life  in  a 
mortal  body;  we  cannot  conceive  therefore  how 
necelfary  it  is  to  redouble  our  vigilance  againft 
his  unwearied  efforts,  and  to  be  as  unwearied  and 
as  diligent  as  him  ; other  wife  lie  mull  prevail. 

*7.  Let  us  be  throughly  perfuaded,  that  Chrif- 
tianity  implies  a general  oppofition  to  all  the 
falfe  notions  of  the  world,  to  its  maxims  and 
fentimems;  that  it  knows  no  other  pattern  than 
Jefus  Cirri  lb  and  him  crucified;  that  his  difgraces 
and  griefs  are  all  its  riches. and  all  its  confolarions: 
that  confequently  nothing  is  more  oppofite  there- 
to than  pride  and  the  love  of  pieafures,  and  that 
the  only  way  for  Chriflians  to  become  great,  is  to  1 
he  frncerely  willing  to  be  the  leaft  of  a!!  ; that  is, 
the  moll  unknown,  the  moll  defpifed,  the  moft  » 
■dependent,  the  leaft  accommodated,  and  \et 
the  moft  patient  and  the  moft  fatisfied ; not  i 
through  an  idea  of  our  own  virtue,  which  would 
be  tbe  height  ol  pride,  but  from  a confcioufnefs  ! 
of  our  own  unw orthinefs,  and  from  a deep  love 
of  the  truth,  which  makes  us  fenfible  of  it. 

8.  Let  us  take  care  to  preferve  all  the  fervor 
and  all  the  exaftnefs  which  we  find  in  the  com- 
munity, to  look  upon  ourfelves  as  charged  with 

this 


C 239  ] 

This  depofitum,  and  obliged  to  tranfmit  k to 
others;  never  to  give  it  the  lead  fhock,  either 
by  our  example  or  advice;  to  be  infinitely  afraid 
of  the  great  guilt  implied  in  weakening  piety  or 
regularity  in  any  point  ; to  tremble  at  the 
thought  of  the  fatal  confeqv.c-nces  that  the  lead 
relaxations  draw  after  them,  which  are  ufually 
without  remedy,  and  which  terribly  fwell  the  ac- 
count of  thofe  which  open  the  door  for  them.  It 
is  often  but  a fma'll  thing,  in  appearance;  but 
all  is  precious  and  important;  and  a perfon  de- 
voted to  God  is  to  look  upon  nothing  as  little  or 
indifferent. 

9.  Be  convinced  of  the  necelhty  of  leading  a 
ferious  life,  and  of  loving  none  but  fenous  em- 
ployments: regard  every  thing  which  is  but  a 
frivolous  fperiding  -of  time,  as  an  amufement 
unworthy  of  you;  fly  even'  employment  which 
conduces  only  to  luxury  or  vanity  : refufe  -not 
that -which  is  troubleiome  and  humbling  : place 
your  honour,  not  in  being  ferved,  but  in  ferving 
others;  labour  ufe fully,  as  far  as  ever  your  flrength 
will  permit  ; have  nothing  of  little,  of  weak, 
of  childifh,  in  your  inclinations  ; have  on  the 
contrary,  fomething  grand  and  manly  in  your 
fentiments,  raifed  above  the  weakr.els  of  your 
fex||,  which  naturally  leads  to  amufements  and 
trifles. 

* 10.  Accuflom  vourfelf  to  do  nothing  with- 
-out  defign,  without  refleftion,  without  a lively 

fentiment 

j|  This  was  originally  written  for  worn  en. 


[ 24° 


1 

J 


Fcntiment  of  piety  : not  to  fufier  any  of  your 
aftions  to  be  loft  ; not  to  lofe  the  fruit  of  any  of 
your  pi  ayers  : Never  to  appear  before  God  in 
public  fervice,  without  fummoning  all  your 
faith  ; to  efteem  nothing  great  but  for  the  holy 
difpofitions  with  which  it  is  performed  : Never 
to  fepara'e  your  aftions  or  your  fufferings  from 
thofe  of  Jefus  Chrift,  fropa  which  they  derive  all 
their  value  : to  count  for  nothing  all,  either  vir- 
tue or  u'ifdom,  which  is  not  grounded  on  Jefus 
Chrill,  which  has  more  of  (how  than  of  truth, 
which  fwclls  felf-love,  not  the  love  of  God  : to 
diflruft  all  virtues  which  do  not  render  vou  more 
humble,  more  detached  from  yourfelves,  more 
ready  to  yield  to  all  the  world : To  dread 
in  that  which  is  good,  the  vain  fatisfaction  which 
is  almoft  infeparable,  and  which  is  the  potion  of 
it:  To  be  truly  humbled  by  your  faults  ; to  pre- 
ferve  with  great  care,  the  defire  of  future  blifs, 
the  fenfe  of  the  mercies  of  God,  the  remem- 
brance of  vour  fins  and  miferies,  and  the  fpiritof 
compunfticn,  which  is  the  very  foul  of  religion. 

* H.  Guard  early  again  ft  the  temptations  and 
dangers  which  might  one  day  weaken  you*.  Few 
continue  as  they  have  begun  ; fewer  advance  in 
virtue.  There  are  even  in  the  mod  holy  re- 
treats, what  are  almoft  certain  means  of  enfeebl- 
ing the  foul  : and  it  is  a great  misfortune,  either 
not  to  know  them,  or  when  one  does  know 
them,  not  to  guard  againft  them.  It  is  itnpcf- 
ftble  to  fet  down  lieie,  even’  tiling  which  rnav 

fldckcn 


[ 241  ] 

flacken  the  foul.  A thoufand  imperceptible 
ways,  a thoufand  infenfible  declenfions,  a thou- 
fand  flight  lofles,  a thoufand  fee  ret  fnares,  may 
occafion  this.  Natural  inconfiancy  and  fickle- 
nefs,  lukewarmnefs  in  prayer,  union  with  per- 
fons  that  are  not  fervent  in  fpirit,  attachment  to 
anything  wrong,  which  Godpuniihes,  the  flight- 
ing of  little  duties,  of  little  faults,  of  the  checks 
of  an  enlightened  confluence ; the  forgetting  the 
reafons  and  motives  which  induced  us  to  chufe 
the  flare  wherein  we  are;  a fecret  difguft  at  our 
fuperior  : too  quick  a fenfe  of  fome  flight  or  re- 
fufal;  too  great  liberty  in  examining  the  defe&S 
of  our  brethren  ; liflening  to  murmurers;  any 
fecret  unfaithfulnefs  not  acknowledged;  any 
thing  done  with  a doubting  confcience ; any 
temptation  on  which  we  have  not  had  the  hu- 
mility to  afk  advice  ; any  fear  of  raillery  in  do- 
ing our  duty  ; any  flight  diflipation  ; but  above 
all  any  fecret  pride : for  it  is  this  fin  which  al- 
mofl  always  leads  to  the  refl.  And  one  cannot 
too  much  recommend  to  them  who  would  be  all 
devoted  to  God,  an  humility  proportioned  to 
the  graces  they  have  need  of,  in  order  to  ad- 
vance in  virtue  and  perfevere  to  the  end. 

12.  Labour  to  extinguifh  in  yourfelf,  to  the 
very  root,  the  defire  to  pleafe,  which  finks  even 
to  the  marrow,  and  which  is  the  moft  invinci- 
ble obflacle  to  the  pure  love  of  God.  This  driven 
out  on  one  fide,  returns  on  another.  It  lives 
equally  on  vice  and  on  virtue  : it  does  not  for- 
Vol.  XXIV.  L get 


[ 242  ] 

get  the  body,  but  to  avail  itfelf  more  of  the  qua- 
lities of  the  mind  : it  is  humble  and  yet  fierce  : 
it  is  full  of  felf-will,  and  afledls  to  will  nothing  : 
it  often  deceives  itfelf,  and  is  the  fource  of  a 
thoufand  errors  and  fedudlions. — Happy  he  who 
is  aware  of  fuch  an  enemy,  who  combats  it  fm- 
cerely,  yet  who  has  no  hopes  of  conquering  it 
otherwife  than  by  the  almighty  grace  of  Jefus 
Chrift.  All  the  imperfeftions  of  religious  focie- 
ties,  all  their  irregularities,  flow  from  this  poi- 
foned  fountain.  Where  difcipline  is  wanting,  it 
p-roduces  grofs  evils.  It  produces  evils  no  lefs 
dangerous,  though  fpiritual,  wherever  true  piety 
is  not  fufficiently  known,  and  where  the  depth 
of  human  mifery  is  covered,  not  healed,  by  fu- 
perficial  remedies. 

* 13.  As  perfons  ufually  know  only  the  out- 
fide  of  chaftity,  and  are  little  informed  of  its  in- 
ward ground  and  its  extent,  it  is  of  importance 
to  conflder,  that  this  virtue  refides  chiefly  in  the 
heart;  that  it  extinguiflies  all  defir%  to  have  a 
place  in  the  heart  of  another  ; that  it  is  an  ene- 
my to  pleafure,  to  all  that  gratifies  the  fenfes,  to 
all  fuperfluitv,  to  all  that  fatisfies  -curiofity  or 
foftnefs,  to  all  that  weakens  the  foul  and  makes 
it  bend  earthward,  to  all  that  wounds  the  moil 
fevcre  modefly,  to  all  that  difturbs  the  peace  and 
tranquillity  neceflary  for  prayer,  to  all  that  is  ca- 
pable of  creating  or  recalling  dangerous  images  ; 
in  fine,  to  ail  that  ftrengthens  the  chains  which 
attach  the  foul  to  the  body,  and  the  inclination 

which 


[ 243  ] 


which- it  is  fo  hard  to  lay  afide,  of  feeking  our 
repofe  in  fenfible  things. 

* *4-  In  order  to  be  agreeable  in  a family,  we 
ought  not  to  buffer  in  ourfelves  any  defeft  which 
we  can  correft.  We  fhould  be  neat  in  our 
cloath.s,  in  our  chamber,  in  all  that  we  do  ei- 
ther for  ourfelves  or  others.  Our  gait,  our  way 
of  fpeaking,  our  whole  behaviour,  fhould  be  re- 
formed with  care.  There  may  be  much  of  fnn- 
plicity  therein,  and  yet  much  of  dignity.  We 
fhould  not  give  ourfelves  leave  to  laugh,  to  fpeak, 
to  admire  any  thing,  in  a flat  and  difgufling  man- 
ner. We  fhould  carefully  avoid  every  thing  that 
is  coarfe,  clownifh,  or  indecent,  and  every  way 
of  exprefTmg  joy  or  friendfhip  which  is  not  quite 
well-bred  and  modeft.  Shun  betimes  little  habits 
which  give  pain  to  others,  and  which  age  and 
negligence  may  increafe.  Accuftom  yourfelfto 
reflett  upon  every  thing  which  might  incommode 
another ; to  avoid  with  care,  and  not  to  Aide  in- 
to it  either  through  hurry  or  forgetfulnefs.  On 
the  other  fide,  we  ought  to  bear  with  fweetnefs 
whatever  incommodes  us  in  another;  to  exa£t 
nothing ; to  excufe  every  thing,  and  to  be  pa- 
tient ourfelves  and  ftudious  for  the  good  of  the 
family,  purely  from  a motive  of  Chriftian  love  ; 
regarding  as  mere  worldly  politenefs  whatever  is 
done  with  a lower  view,  or  from  purely  human 
motives. 

* 15.  The  chief  difpofitions  of  mind,  which 
are  neceflary  in  every  member  of  a Chriftian  fa- 

L 2 mily, 


[ 244  ] 


mily,  are  goodnefs.  fweetnefs,  patience,  the 
defire  of  obliging,  the  fear  of  grieving  or  hurting 
any  one,  a care  to  preferve  love  in  himfelf  and 
others;  a pain  to  fee  any  breach  therein : hu- 
manity toward  the  weak  either  in  mind  or  in  bo- 
dv;  a joy  in  taking  the  burdens  of  others  upon 
ourfelves ; a love  of  the  religious  exercifes 
which  are  performed  in  common;  an  avoiding 
all  needlefs  fingularity  ; an  unfpeakable  averfion 
to  complaints  and  murmurs;  a fine  ere,  refpett- 
ful  and  tender  union,  firlf  with  our  fupeiior, 
and  afterwards  with  all  our  brethren.  We  can- 
not but  bellow  different  degrees  of  love  and  ef- 
teem  upon  thefe,  according  to  their  different 
gifts  and  graces.  But  we  fhould  be  very  wary, 
as  to  the  public  marks  whereby  we  (hew  our  in- 
ward preference  ol  fome  to  others. 


Directions  to  preferve  fervency  effpirit. 

* 1.  Tf  we  would  preferve  our  fervour  unabat- 
ed,  we  mult  particularly  attend  to  thofe 
things  which  have  at  all  times  led  to  wearinefs 
and  weaknefs  of  fpirit,  and  to  thofe  which  tend  to 
inlpire  Zealand  fervor,  and  to  rekindle  languid  de- 
fires. We  fhould  regard  t he  former  as  certain  mif- 
chiels.  whatever  pretences  mar  be  made  to  excufe 
them,  and  the  latter  as  invaluable  helps,  how- 
ever 


[ 245  ] 

ever  little  or  trifling  they  may  appear  to  falfe 
wifdom. 

* 2.  Frequently  reflefl  on  the  infenfible  de- 
cays by  which  our  piety  is  weakened.  Dread 
the  confequences  of  the  lead  relaxations,  which 
at  the  beginning  appear  fo  far  removed  from  the 
point  to  which  they  lead.  Be  alhired,  that  all 
faults  which  are  neglefled  are  punifhcd,  the  lit- 
tle ones  by  great,  the  inward  by  outward,  luke- 
warmnefs  by  infenfibrlity.  Be  always  faithful 
to  your  confidence,  to  the  firft  cry  of  charity,  to 
that  clear  decifion  which  you  hear  in  your  heart 
upon  every  duty.  Do  not  confound  with  your 
reafon  this  fupreme  rule  of  reafon.  Reverence 
it  as  the  voice  of  God.  Do  not  deliberate  on 
the  obedience  you  owe  to  it.  Give  no  entrance 
-to  the  enemy,  by  reafoning  upon  any  command 
or  prohibition  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  By  refilling 
the  beginning  of  temptations,  you  eafily  con- 
quer them,  whereas  after  the  firft  moment,  you 
are  almoft  difarmed  and  vanquifhed. 

3.  Love  prayer,  and  do  all  that  in  you  lies, 
that  it  may  be  continual.  We  receive  nothing 
from  God  but  by  this ; it  is  the  hand  that  knocks 
and  that  receives.  The  gifts  of  God  do  not  come 
to  us  without  this:  when  this  languifhes  all  is 
languid:  and  it  is  always  by  lukewarmnefs  in 
prayer,  that  we  fall  into  that  general  lukewarm- 
nefs which  is  without  remedy. 

4.  Prize  the  holy  and  happy  liberty  of  your 

L 3 ftate : 


[ 2*6  ] 

fiate  : t the  freedom  from  ever)-  other  dutv,  but 
that  of  loving  and  ferving  Chrid  ; the  exemp- 
tion from  the  pain  of  the  nrft  woman,  though 
you  have  had  a part  in  her  fm.  Be  thankful  to 
God,  that  he  has  brought  you  to  an  afylum,  of 
which  your  weaknefs  had  fo  great  need  : where 
the  eyes  of  a whole  communitv  enlighten  and 
obferve  you ; where  you  are  animated  by  exam- 
ple : and  where  the  infirmities  of  others  exercife 
your  patience  and  feed  your  charity*  Beware 
you  be  net  like  the  Ifraeli  es  of  old,  who  thought 
fcorn  of  the  pleafant  land ; and  do  not  give  way 
to  the  lead  defire  of  turning  back  into  Egypt. 

e).  Check  every  thought  which  tends  to  this, 
under  what  pretext  foever  it  comes.  It  is  a dan- 
gerous temptation,  to  dwell  on  fome  rules  which 
we  diflike,  and  would  have  taken  away  ; on  cer- 
tain defefis  which  are  common  in  focieties, 
which  lead  infenfibly  to  repent  of  being  joined 
therein  ; on  the  weaknefs,  the  ignorance,  the 
want  of  underdanding  or  of  education  in  fuch 
and  fuch,  who  therefore  cannot  be  of  ufe  to  us; 
on  adifeipline  which  fometimes  appears  ufelefs, 
embarrading,  contrary  to  the  liberty  of  the  Spi- 
rit of  God:  on  fomething  either  uneven  or  im- 
prudent in  the  conduft  of  our  fuperiors : in  a 
word,  on  any  thing  which  abates  the  love  of  our 
fiate,  and  tends  to. extinguilh  our  thaukfuluefs  for 
it.  All  thefe  thoughts  dtould  be  repred,  the 

moment 

+ That  of  a tingle  life.  This  trail  too  was  oj  iginally  directed 
to  fingle  women,  living  in  one  community. 


L 247  ] 

moment  they  appear.  If  we  give- them  an  hear- 
ing we  are  fallen  : and  if  the  heart  is  not  exafdlv 
clofed  againll  them,  they  furprize  and  poifon  it. 

* 6.  Make  it  a point  of  duty,  to  do  nothing 
out  of  humour,  that  is.  without  any  reafon  but 
inclination.  Be  faithful  in  the  ufe  of  every 
means,  independently  on  relifh  or  difrelifh. 
When  you  are  heavy,  look  for  the  rctnrzmof 
grace  and  unfiion  : when  you  have  mofltfeEuasah 
prepare  for  temptation.  Look  on  thefe  inssatd 
viciflitudes  as  you  do  on  thofe  of  bodily  health. 
Do  not  negleft  them  ; and  yet  beware  of  being 
difcouiaged  thereby.  Only  redouble  your  dili- 
gence and  your  care  in  proportion  to. 4he^ length 
and  violence  of  your  t rials.  And  from/fim  mo- 
ment that  light  appears  again,  be  fo  humble  and 
fo  thankful  that  you  miy.  keep  it. 

* 7.  The  efleern,'  confidence,  and  friendfhip 
of  others  ferve  only  to  weaken  you,  if  they  lefien 
that  compun&ion  and  contempt  of  yourfelf 
which  is  the  fource  of  true  flr£ngth.  Unlefs 
love  or  neceffity  require  it,  be  not  forward' to  talk 
of  thofe  things  whichyou. know  the  belt.  Efieein 
fnnplicity  and  purity  of  heart  more  than  the  fine.fi 
underflanding.  Do  not  cherifli  the  defrre  of 
either  having  or  fhewing  this.  Never  fhew  in 
your  converfation  an  air  of  capacity  and  fuffici- 
ency.  Cure  the  prejudices  of  perfon*  lefs  en- 
lightened than  you,  by  a model!,  calm,  loving 
behaviour,  and  draw  no  other  advantage  from 

L 4 being 


[ 248  ] 

being  more  knowing,  than  that  of  being  more 
humble. 

* 8.  Be  fweet,  even,  courteous,  from  a motive 
of  faith  and  love,  not  from  a defire  to  pleafe. 
The  more  capable  virtues  of  this  kind  are  of  at- 
trafting  efteem  and  friendfhip,  the  more  vigi- 
lance andjealoitfy  over  ourfelves  is  needful,  that 
they,  may  be  pure  and  holy.  For  it  is  eafy  to 
, deduce1  the  heart  of  others,  even  though  .we  ar® 
clear  ourfelves.  And  it  is  a great  afflifciion  to  one 
who  loves  God,  to  be  the  occafion  of  another’s 
loving  him  lefs,  or  in  a lefs  noble  and  lets  per- 
feft  manner. 

* 9.  Regard  then  thofe  advantages  which 
draw  love  and  efteem,  only  as  fnares  and  fources 
of  temptation,  without  that  extraordinary  grace 
which  is  feldom  given,  becaufe  men  are  feldom 
humble  enough  to  obtain  it.  Be  abafed  before 
God  for  whatever  diftinguilhes  you  in  the  fight 
of  men  ; as  it  expofes  you  to  pride,  the  moft 
fhameful  of  all  vices  in  a poor,  finful  wretch. 
Efteem  only  that  which  God  efteems ; praife 
only  that  which  he  praifes.  Make  little  account 
of  all  the  fhining  virtues  which  are  found  even  in 
reprobates.  Regard  piety  and  humility  as  the 
only  ones  which  diltinguifh  the  children  of  God 
from  the  children  of  wrath. 

* 10.  Preferve  with  the  utmoft  care  the  fpirit 
of  piety,  recollection,  tvatchfulnefs,  and  com- 
punftion.  Do  nothing  in  hafie  and  with  diflipa- 
frion.  Speak  nothing  but  what  is  necelfary. 

Never 


C H9  J 

Never  fpeak  without  watching  over  your  words 
and  the  motive  which  leads  you  to  fpeak.  Talk 
not  even  on  ufeful  lubjefts  but  with  a fingle 
eye;  otherwife  you  may  iofe  the  treafure  which 
is  in  your  heart  by  Chewing  it  from  a wrong  mo- 
tive. 

*11.  Let  none  of  your  aflions,  not  even  the 
fmalleft  be  loft.  Do  them  all  from  views  which 
fpring  from  faith.  Accordingly,  know  why  you 
do  them.  Do  not  walk  by  chance,  without  fee- 
ing vour  mark  or  without  aiming  at  it.  Defpife 
nothing,  becaufe  every  adiion  may  become  of 
great  price.  Make  all  noble,  all  grand,  all  di- 
vine. Nothing  is  little  when  one  loves  much, 
and  nothing  is  great  when  one  loves  but  little. 

* 12.  When  you  are  doing  a thing,  never  de- 
pend on  doing  it  better  another  time  ; but  at  this 
time  give  it  all  poftible  attention.  When  you 
are  doing  one  thing,  do  not  think  on  another, 
that  is  to  follow  it.  Always  limit  yourfelf  to  the 
prefent  moment,  and  diftruft  projebb  which 
caufe  you  to  flight  the  prefent  work,  by  promif- 
ing  wonders  in  time  to  come. 

13.  Efteem  no  virtues,  if  they  do  not  fpring 
from  the  Spirit  of  Chrift ; if  they  are  not  an  ef- 
fect of  his  grace;  if  they  do  not  terminate  in 
him.  Reafon  and  wifdom  feparate  from  faith 
are  mere  folly;,  and  pride  under  the  dilgnife  of. 
virtue  is  vice  ftill-.  While  we  abide  in  the  heart 
of  Chrift  we  are  alive  ; if  we  are  out  of  this- di- 
vine fountain  of  all.  good,  out  of.  this  vine,  we- . 

L £ cart 


C 2<5°  ] 

can  bear  no  fruit,  or  none  which  deferves  any 
tiling  but  death. 

* 14.  Do  not  wait  till  the  evening  before 
you  examine  all  your  abtions  and  all  your 
motives.  Keep  one  part  of  your  foul  continu- 
ally attentive  on  what  the  other  does.  Let  not 
your  whole  foul  be  taken  up  with  any  thing, 
except  prayer,  which  is  then  mod  puie  when 
one  lead  reflebls  upon  it.  Never  lofe  ferenity 
of  mind  and  peace  of  heart ; becaufe  when  your 
foul  is  ruffled  you  no  longer  know  what  you  do, 
whither  you  go,  nor  where  your  danger  lies. 
Stop  the  very  moment  you  begin  to  be  no  longer 
your  own  mader.  That  moment  fly  to  prayer, 
and  continue  therein  till  peace  returns  to  your 
foul. 

15.  Do  not  love  your  faults,  but  love  the  pro- 
fitable humiliation  which  follows  them.  Let 
none  of  .them  pafs  lightly  over;  but  do  not  drive 
to  correbl  them  out  of  pride.  Be  more  afraid  of 
the  glare  of  virtue,  and  the  admiration  it  draws, 
than  of  your  greated  infirmities  : for  thegreated 
of  fins  is  pride  of  heart  and  a vain  fatislaflion  in 
your  own  righteoufnefs,  of  which  thofe  outward 
imperfections  may  be  the  remedy.  When  you 
fall  into  any  of  them,  you  ought  immediately  to 
think  of  God,  and  not  of  men  ; quietly  to  day 
yourfcdf  on, him,  and  not  to  fink  dill  lower  by 
being  disheartened,  or  by  evil  fhame. 

* 16.  Never  be  under  fo  much  apprehenfion 
.as  when  you  do  any  good,  when  you  fpeak  with 

vifdofia 


[ 251  ] 

wifdom  and  reafon ; becaufe  you  are  then  on 
the  brink  of  that  mod  flippery  and  dangerous 
precipice,  vanity.  After  having  felt  more  fervor 
and  enlargement  of  heart  in  any  ordinance,  or 
having  fuffered  any  thing  with  more  patience 
and  fweetnefs  than  ufual,  labour  to  be  more 
humble  ; for  the  devil  is  watching  to  heal  away 
the  fruit  as  foon  as  it  appears:  and  it  is  juft  in 
God  to  fuffer  it  fo  to  be,  if  you  are  robbing  him 
of  his  glory.  Always  receive  commendations 
and  marks  of  elleem  which  a fecret  reluflance, 
for  fear  left  God  Ihould  blaftthefe  vain  applaufes 
with  an  hidden  curfe.  On  the  contrary,  efteem 
yourfelf  happy  in  being  neglefted,  defpifed, 
yea,  reproached,  how  feverely  foever ; becaufe 
God  generally  fhews  himfelf  moft  prefent  and 
moft  gracious  at  thofe  precious  moments. 

London,  Feb.  26,  1768. 


.tit 


I 


16 


THOUGHTS 


[  l.  252  ] 


THOUGHT  S 

O N 

A SINGLE  LIFE. 


l.  r | ''HE  forbidding  to  marry , as  it  is  well 
known  the  church  of  Rome  does,  and 
has  done  for  feveral  ages  (in  which  marriage  is 
abfolutely  forbidden,  not  only  to  all  religious 
orders,  but  to  the  whole  body  of  the  clergy]  is 
numbered,  by  the  great  apoftle,  among  the  doc- 

trines of  devils.  And  among  the  fame  we  need 
not  fcruple  to  number,  the  defpifmg,  or  condemn- 
ing marriage : as  do  many  ofthofe  in  the  Romifh 
church,  who  are  ufually  termed  myjlic  writers. 
One  of  thefe  does  not  fcruple  to  affirm  : “ Mar- 
riage is  only  licenfed  fornication .”  But  the 
Holy  Ghoft  fays,  Marriage  is  honourable  in  all, 
and  the  bed  und filed.  Nor  can  it  be  doubted  but 
persons  may  be  as  holy  in  a married,  as  in  a Single 
hate. 


II.  In 


f 253  ] 


II.  In  the  latter  claufe  of  the  fentence,  the 
apoftle  feeras  to  guard  againft  a miftake,  into 
which  fome  fincere  Ghriftians  have  fallen  ; par- 
ticularly, when  they  have  juft  found  fuch  a li- 
berty of  fpirit,  as  they  had  not  before  experi- 
enced. They  imagine  a def lenient  where  there 
is  none,  and  fear  where  no  fear  is.  And  it  is 
poftibly  this  very  fear  of  fin,  may  betray  them 
into  fin.  For  it  may  induce  married  perfons  to 
defraud  each  other , forgetting  the  exprefs  deter- 
mination of  the  apoftle,  The  wife  hath  not  power 
of  her  own  body,  but  the  hufband ; and  the  hifband 
hath  not  power  of  his  own  body,  but  the  wife9 
1 Cor.  vii.  4. 

III.  And  yet  we  muft  not  forget  what  the 
apoftle  fubjoins  in  the  following  verfes.  I fay 
to  the  unmarried  and  widows : it  is  good for  them% 
if they  abide  even  as  /,  ver.  8.  Art  thou  bound  unto  a 
wife  ? Seek  not  to  beloofed  : art  thou  loofed from  a 
wife  P Seek  not  a wife.  But  if  thou  marry,  thou 
hafl  not  finned. — Never  thelefs fuch  fall  have  trou - 
blein  the fief,  ver.  27,28.  I would  have  you  without 
carefulnefs.  He  that  is  unmarried  careth  for  the 
things  of  the  Lord,  how.  he  may  pleafe  the  Lord! 
But  he  that  is  married  careth  for  the  things  of  the 
world,  how  he  may  pleafe  his  wife. — The  unmar- 
ried woman  careth  for  the  things  of  the  Lord , that 
fhe  may  be  holy  both  in  body  and  fpirit:  but  fe 
that  is  married  careth  for  the  things  of  the  world, 
how fe  may  pleafe  her  hifband.  And  this  Lfpeak 

for 


C 2 <54  ] 


for  your  own  profit,  that  you  may  attend,  upon  the 
Lord  without  difiraflion,  ver.  32,  35. 

IV.  But  thought  is  good for  a man  not  to  touch 
a woman,  (ver.  1.)  yet  this  is  not  an  univerfal 
rule.  / would,  indeed,  fays  the  apoftle,  that  all 
men  were  as  myfelj,  ver.  7.  But  that  cannot  be.  For 
every  man  hath  his  proper  gift  of  God,  one  after 
this  manner,  another  after  that.  If  then  they 
cannot  contain,  let  them  marry  ; for  it  is  better  to 
marry  than  to  burn, ver.  9.  To  avoid  fornication,let 
every  man  have  his  own  wife,  and  let  every  woman 
have  her  own  hufband.  Exa&ly  agreeable  to  this 
are  the  words  of  our  Lord.  When  the  apoftle^ 
faid,  If  the  cafe  be  fo,  it  is  good  not  to  marry,  he 

faid  unto  them,  All  men  cannot  receive  this  faying, 
but  they  to  whom  it  is  given.  For  there  are  fome 
eunuchs,  who  where  fo  born  from  their  mother's 
womb ; there  are  fomer  who  were  made  eunuchs  by 
men  ; and  there  are  eunuchs  who  have  made  them- 
felves  eunuchs,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  s fake . 
He  that  is  able  to  receive  it,  let  him  receive  it.  Matt, 
xix.  Xi,  12. 

V.  But  who  is  able  to  receive  this  faying?  To 
abilain  from  marriage,  and  yet  not  burn  ? It  be- 
hoves every  one  here  to  judge  for  himfelf ; none 
is  called  to  judge  for  another.  In  general,  I 
believe,  every  man  is  able  to  receive  it,  when  he  is 
firft  juftified.  I believe  every  one  then  receives 
this  gift : but  with  moll  it  does  not  continue 
long.  Thus  much  is  clear  : it  is  a plain  matter 
of  faff,  which  no  man  can  deny.  It  is  not  fo 

clear* 


[ 255  J 


clear,  whether  God  withdraws  it  of  his  own  good 
pleafure,  or  for  any  fault  of  ours.  I incline  to 
think,  it  is  not  withdrawn,  without  fome  fault 
on  our  part.  But  be  that  as  it  may,  I have 
now  only  to  do,  with  thofe  who  are  ftill  able  to 
receive  this  faying. 

VI.  To  this  happy  few  I fay,  l.  Know  the 
advantages  you  enjoy,  many  of  which  are  point- 
ed out  by  the  apoftle  himfelf.  You  may  be 
without  care fulnefs.  You  are  under  no  neceflity 
of  caring  for  the  things  of  the  world.  You  have 

only  to  care  for  the  things  of  the  Lord,  how  you 
may  pleafe  the  Lord.  One  care  alone  lies  upon 
you,  how  you  may  be  holy  both  in  body  and 
fpirit. 

You  may  attend  upon  the  Lord  without  difrac- 
tion. While  others,  like  Martha,,  are  cumbered 
with  much  ferving,  and  drawn,  hither  and  thither 
by  many  things,  you  may  remain  centred  in 
God,  fitting,  like  Mary,  at  the  mailer’s  feet  and 
lillening  to  every  word  of  his  mouth. 

You  enjoy  a blelfed  liberty  from  the  trouble  in 
tjie  fefn,  which  mull  more  or  lefs  attend  a mar- 
ried ft  ate,  from  a thoufand  namelefs  domeftic 
trials  which  are  found  fooner  or  later  in  every 
family.  You  are  exempt  from  numberlefs  oc- 
cafions  of  forrow  and  anxiety,  with  which  heads 
of  families  are  intangled  : efpecially  thofe  who 
have  fickly,  or  weak,  or  unhappy,  or  difobedi- 
ent  children.  If  your  fervants  are  wicked,  you 
may  put  them  away,  and  your  relation  to  them 

ceafes,. 


[ 2J6  ] 

csafes.  But  what  could  you  do  with  a wicked 
fon  or  daughter?  How  could  you  diflolve  that 
relation  ? 

Above  all,  you  are  at  liberty  from  the  greateft 
of  all  intanglements,  the  loving  one  creature 
above  all  others.  It  is poffible,  to  do  this  without 
fin,  without  any  impeachment  of  our  love  to 
God.  But  how  inconceivably  difficult  ? To 
give  God  our  whole  heart,  while  a creature  has 
Jo  large  a lhare  of  it  ? How  much  more  eafily 
may  we  do  this,  when  the  heart  is  tenderly  in- 
deed, but  equally  attached  to  more  than  one  ? 
Or  at  leaf!,  without  any  great  inequality  ? What 
angelic  wifdom  does  it  require,  to  give  enough  of 
our  affeftion,  and  not  too  much,  to  fo  near  a re- 
lation ? 

And  how'  much  eafier  is  it  (juft  to  touch  on 
one  point  more)  wholly  to  conquer  our  natural 
defires,  than  to  gratify  them  ex  aflly  Jo  far,  as 
Chriftian  temperance  al’ows  ? Juft  fo  far  as 
every  pleafure  of  fenfe  prepares  us  for  taking 
pleafure  in  God. 

VII.  You  have  leifure,  to  improve  yotirfelf, 
in  every  kind,  to  wait  upon  God  in  public  and 
private,  and  to  do  good  to  your  neighbour  in 
various  ways* as  Chriftian  prudence  fhall  fuggeft. 
Whereas  thofe  who  are  married  are  neceffarily 
taken  up  with  the  things  of  the  world.  Y ou  may 
give  all  your  time  to  God  without  interrup- 
tion, and  need  afk  leave  of  none  but  yourfelf  fo 
to  do.  You  may  employ  every  hour  in  what 

you 


[ 257  ] 

you  judge  to  be  the  moft  excellent  way.  But 
if  you  was  married,  you  may  afk  leave  of  your 
companion : otherwife  what  complaints  or  dif- 
guft  would  follow  ? And  how  hard  is  it  even  to 
know  (how  much  more,  to  aft  fuitfibly  to  that 
knowledge)  how  far  you  ought  to  give  way,  for 
peace  fake,  and  where  to  flop  ? What  wifdom 
is  requifite,  in  order  to  know,  how  far  you  can 
recede  from  what  is  -mo  ft  excellent,  ^particularly 
with  regard  to  converfation  thfit  is  not  to  the  life 
of  edifying,  in  order  to  pleafe  your  good-natured 
or  ill-natured  partner,  without  difpleafmg  God? 

VIII.  You  may  give  a//.your  worldly  fubjlance 
to  God.  Nothing  need  hinder.  You  have  no 
increafing. family,  you  have  no  wife  or  children 
to  provide  for,  which  might  occafion  a tftoufand 
doubts  (without  any  extraordinary  meafure  of  di- 
vine light)  whether  you  had  done  either  too 
much  or  too  little  for  them.  You  may  make  your- 

felf friend3  of  all  the  mammon  of  unrighteoufnefs 
which  God  intrufts  you  with  : having  none  that 
has  any  right  to  complain,  or  to  charge  you 
with  unkindnefs  for  fo  doing.  You  may  lay  out 
all  your  talents  of  every  kind,  entirely  for  the 
glory  of  God  : as  you  have  none  elfe  to  pleafe, 
none  to  regard,  but  him  that  lived  and  died  for 
you. 

IX.  I fay,  fecondly,  Prize  the  advantages  you 
enjoy  : know  the  value  of  them.  Efteem  them  as 
highly  while  you  have  them,  as  others  do  after 
they  have  loft  them.  Pray  conftantly  and  fer- 
vently 


C 2<58  ] 

Vently  for  this  very  thing,  that  God  would  teach 
you  to  fet  a due  value  upon  them.  And  let  it  be 
m<iftei  of  daily  thanklgiving  to  God,  that  he  has 
made  you  a partaker  of  thefe  benefits.  Indeed 
the  more  full  and  explicit  you  are  herein,  the 
more  fenlible  you  will  be  of  the  caufe  you  have 
to  be  thankful  : the  more  lively  conviftion  you 
will  have,  ofthe  greatnefs  of  the  bleffing. 

X.  If  you  know  and  duly  prize  the  advantages 
you  enjoy,  then  3.  be  careful  to  keep  them. 
But  this  (as  eafy  as  it  may  feem)  it  is  impoflible 
you  fhould  do  by  your  own  flrength  : fo  various, 
fo  frequent  and  fo  drong  are  the  temptations 
which  you  will  meet  with  to  calf  them  away. 
Not  onjy  the  children  of  the  world,  but  the  child- 
ren of  Godwill  undoubtedly  tempt  yrou  thereto  : 
and  that  parilv  bytbe  mod  plaufible  reafons,  part- 
ly bv  the  mod  artful  perfuafions.  Mean  time 
the  old  deceiver  will  not  be  wanting  to  give  an 
edge  to  all  thofe  reafons,  and  perfuafions,  and  to 
recall  the  temptation  again  and  again,  and  prefs 
it  clofe  upon  you  heart.  You  have  need  there- 
fore to  ufe  every  help.  And  the  firlf  of  thefe  is 
earned  prayer.  Let  no  day  pafs  without  this, 
without  praying  for  this  very  thing,  that  God 
would  work  what  -with  men  is  impoflible  : that 
he  would  vouchfafe  to  preferve  his  own  gift, 
and  that  you  may  not  fuffer  any  lofs  this  day, 
either  by  the  fubtlety  or  power  of  devils  or  men, 
or  the  deceitfulnefs  of  your  own  heart. 

XI.  A fecorid  help  may  be,  the  converfing 

frequently 


[ 2 59 


frequently  and  freely  with  tn  . ■ vour  own  f?x, 
who  are  like-minded.  It  may  i.e  t ; i ts  te  vice, 
to  difclofe  to  there  the  very  (ecref  . he  fs : 

especially  the  weakneffes  fpringm  • n onr  -ra- 

tural  conflitution,  or  education,  oi  : 1 d 

habit,  and  the  temptations  which  r i to 

time  moll  eafiiybefer  you.  Advife  with  : hern  on 
every  circumltance  that  occurs  ; open  your  .-eart 
without  referve.  By  this  means  a thouiand  de- 
vices of  Satan  will  be  brought  to  nought.  Innu- 
merable fnares  will  be  prevented  ; or  you  will  pafs 
through  them  without  being  hurt.  Yea,  and  it  at 
fome  time  you  fliould  have  buffered  a little,  the 
wound  will  fpeedily  be  healed. 

XII.  I fay,  Of  your  own  f ex  : for  in  the  third 
.place,  it  will  be  highly  expedient,  to  avoid  all 
needlefs  converfation,  much  more  all  intimacy 
With  thofe  of  the  other  fex  ; fo  expedient,  that 
unlefs  you  obferve  this,  you  will  finely  caflaway 
-.the  gift  of  God.  Say  not,  “ But  they  have 
“ much  grace  and  much  underllanding.”  So 
much  the  greater  is  the  danger.  There  would 
be  lefs  fear  of  your  receiving  hurt  from  them,  if 
they  had  lefs  grace  or  lefs  underllanding.  And 
whenever  any  of  thefe  are  thrown  in  your  way 
make  a covenant  with  your  eyes,  your  ears,  your 
.hands,,  that  you  do  not  indulge  yourfelf  in 
any  that  are  called  innocent  freedoms.  Above  all, 
Keep  your  heart  with  all  diligence.  . Check  the 
firfl  rifings  of  defire.  Watch  againfl  every  Tal- 
ly of  imagination,  particularly  if  it  be  pleafing. 

If 


[ 260  ] 


If  it  is  darted  in  whether  you  will  or  no,  yea  let 
no  vain  thought  lodge  within  you.  Cry  out,  “ Mv 
“ God  and  my  all,  I am  thine,  thine  alone  ! I 
“ will  be  thine  for  ever  ! O fare  me  from  felting 
“ up  an  idol  in  my  heart!  Save  me  from  taking 
any  ftep  toward  it ! Still  bring  mv  every  thought 
“ into  captivity , to  the  obedience  of  .Chrijid ' 

XIIjI.  “ But  how  {hall  I attain  to,  or  how 
preferve  this  flrength  and  firmnefs  of  fpirit  ?:  In 
Order  lo  this,  I advife  you,  fourthly  (need  I fay, 
to  avoid  the  fin  of  Onan  : feeing  Satan  will  not 
call;  out  Satan  ? Qr  rather)  Avoid  with  the  ut- 
mofl  care,  all  fojtnfs  and  effeminacy  : remember- 
ing the  exprefs  denunciation  of  an  infpired 
writer,  oi  y.a,hay.o  1,  the  foft  or  effeminate,  whether 
poor,  or  rich  (the  apoftle  does  not  make  any  dif- 
ference, upon  that  account)  Jhatl-  not  inherit  the 
kingdom  oj  God.  Avoid  all  delicacy,  fir-ft:  in  {pi- 
nt, then  in  apparel,  food,  lodging,  and  a thou- 
fand  namelefs  things  : and  this -the  more  fpeedily 
and  the  more  refolutelv,  if  you  have  been  long 
accuftomed  thereto.  Avoid  all  oeedlefs fef -in- 
dulgence, as  well  as  delicacy  and  foflnefs.  All 
thefe  tend  to  breed,  or  chcrifh  thofe  appetites 
and  paffions,  which  you  have  renounced  for 
Chriil’s  fake.  They  either  create  or  increafe 
thofe  defires,  which  for  the  kingdom  of  hea- 
ven's fake  you  are  determined  not  to  gratify. 
Avoid  all  ffoth,  inattivity,  indolence.  Sleep  no 
more  than  nature  requires.  Be  never  idle.  And 
ufe  as  much  bodily  exercife,  as  your  ftrength  I 

will  !j 


[ “««  ] 

will  allow.  I dare  not  add  Monfieur  PafcaPs 
rule,  avoid  all pleafure.  It  is  not  poffible  to  avoid 
all  pleafure  even  of  fenfe,  without  deftroying  the 
body.  Neither  doth  God  require  it  at  our  hands. 

It  is  not  his  will  concerning  us.  Gn  the  contrary 
he  giveth  us  all  things  to  enjoy ; fo  we  enjoy 
them  to  his  glory.  But  I fay,  avoid  al Vthat  plea- 
fure, which  any  way  hinders  you  from  enjoying 
him  : yea,  all  fuch  pleafure  as  does  not  prepare 
you  for  taking  pleafure  in  God.  Add  to  this  con - 
jlant  and  continued  courfe  of  univerfal  felf-dertial, 
the  taking  up  your  crofs  daily,  the  enduring  hard- 
flip  as  a good  foldier  of  Jefus  Chrif.  Remember 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  [offers  violence,  and  the  vio- 
lent take  it  by  force.  This  is  the  way:  walk 
therein  : think  not  of  a fmoother  path.  Add  to 
your  other  exercifes  conflant  and  prudent fajling , 
and  the  Lord  will  uphold  you  with  his  hand. 

XIV.  I advife  you  laftly,  if  you  defire  to 
keep  them,  ufe  all  the  advantages  you  enjoy.  In- 
deed without  this,  it  is  utterly  impodible  to  keep 
tfiem  ; for  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  fpoken 
(the  word  which  ' cannot  be  broken,  which 
ttiuft.be  fulfilled,  with  regard  to  all  the  good 
gifts  of  God)  To  him  that  hath,  ufes  what  he 
hath.yZzu//  be  given  : and  he  Jhall  have  more  abun- 
dantly : but  from  him  that  hath  not,  ufes  it  not, 
fiall  be  to.hen  evcn  that  which  he  hath.  Would  you 
therefore  retain  what  yo-u  now  have,  what  God 
hath  already  given  ? If  fo,  giving  all  diligence , 
ufe  it  to  the  uttennoif.  Standfajl  in  every  inltance 

of 


[ ^2  ] 

of  the  liberty  'wherewith  Chrijl  hath  made  you  free. 
Be  not  intangled  again  in  the  cares  of  this  life , 
but  caf  all  your  care  on  him  that  carethfor  you. 
Be  careful  for  nothing,  but  in  every  thing  make 
your  requefs  known  unto  God  with  thankf giving. 

See  that  you  wail  upon  the  Lord  without  dif- 
traElion  : let  nothing  move  you  from  your  center. 
One  thing  is  needful ; to  fee,  love,  follow  Chrift, 
in  every  thought,  word  and  work. 

Flee  the  forrow  of  this  world  : it  worketh  death. 
Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled.  In  all  circum- 
flances,  let  your  foul  magnify  the  Lord,  and  vour 
fpmt  rejoice  in  God  your  Saviour.  Preferve  a 
conllant  ferenitv  of  mind,  an  even  chearfulnefs 
of  fpirit. 

Keep  at  the  utmoft  diftance  from  foolifh  defires , 
from  defiring  any  happinefs  but  in  God.  Still 
let  all  your  defre  be  to  him,  and  to  the  remember- 
ance  oj  his  name. 

Make  full  ufe  of  all  the  leifure  you  have  : ne- 
ver be  unemployed : never  triflingly  employed : let 
every  hour  turn  to  fome  good  account.  Let 
not  a ferap  of  time  be  fquandered  away  : Gather 
up  the  fragments,  that  nothing  be  lof.  Give  all 
your  time  to  God : lav  out  the  whole,  as  you 
judge  will  be  moll  to  his  glory.  In  particular, 
fee  that  you  wafte  no  part  of  it  in  unprofitable 
converfation : but  let  all  your  difeourfe  be  fea- 
fonedwith  fait,  and  meet  to  minijler  grace  to  the 
hearers. 

Give  all  vour  money  to  God.  You  have  no  pre- 
tence 


f 263  J 


tence  for  laying  up  treafure  upon  earth.  While 
you  “ gain  all  you  can,”  and  “ fave  all  you 
can,”  “ give  all  you  can,”  that  is  all  you 
have. 

Lay  oat  all  your  talents  of  every  kind,  in  doing 
all  good  to  all  men ; knowing  that  every  man 
Jhall  receive  his  own  reward , according  to  his  own 
labour. 

XV.  Upon  the  whole,  without  difputing, 
whether  the  married  or  / ingle  life  be  the  more 
perjeP  flate  (an  idle  difpute  ; fince  perfection 
does  not  confift  in  any  outward  Jlate  whatever, 
but  in  an  abfolute  devotion  of  all  our  heart  and 
all  our  life  to  God)  : we  may  fafely  fay,  blelfed 
are  they  who  have  made'themfelves  eunuchs,  for  the 
kingdom  of  heaven's  fake  : who  abftain  from 
things  lawful  in  themfelves,  in  order  to  be  more 
devoted  to  God.  Let  thefe  never  forget  thofe 
remarkable  words  t,  Peter  faid,  Lo,  we  have 
left  all  and followed  thee.  And  Jefus  anfwered and 
faid , Verily  I fay  unto  you  (a  preface  denoting  both 
the  certainty  and  importance  of  what  is  fpoken) 
There  is  no  man  that  hath  left  (either  by  giving 
them  up,  or  by  not  accepting  them)  houfe,  or 
brethren , oir  fjlers , or  father,  or  mother,  or  wife , 
or  children,  or  lands,  for  my  fake  and  the  gofpel’s  ; 
but  he  Jhall  receive  an  hundred fold — now,  in  this 
time ; and,  in  the  world  to  come,  eternal  life. 
t Mark  x.  28,  30. 


A LETTER 


[ *64  ] 


A 


LETTER 

TO  A 

FRIEND, 

CONCERNING 

TEA. 


Newington,  Dec.  10,  1748. 

Dear  Sir, 

1.  T Have  read  vour  letter  with  attention,  and 
much  approve  of  the  fpirit  with  which  it 
is  wrote.  You  fpeak  in  love.  I defire  to  do  fo 
too  ; and  then  no  harm  can  be  done  on  either 
fide.  You  appear  not  to  be  wedded  to  vour 
own  opinion,  but  open  to  further  conviftion.  I 

would 


[ z6o  ] 


would  willingly  be  of  the  fame  temper;  not  ob- 
ftinately  attached  to  either  fide  of  the  quelfion. 

I am  clearly  fatisfied  of  the  neceffity  of  this  ; a 
willingnefs  to  fee  what  as  yet  I fee  not.  For  I 
know,  an  unwill ingnefs  to  be  convinced,  would 
Utterly  blind  either  you  or  me  : and  that  if  we 
are  refolvtcl  to  retain  our  prefent  opinion,  reafon 
and  argument  dignify  nothing. 

2.  I ihall  not  therefore  think  it  is  time  or 
pains  rnifemployed,  to  give  the  whole  caufe  a 
fecond  hearing  : to  recite  the  occation  of  every 
Hep  I have  taken,  and  the  motives  inducing  me 
fo  to  do  : and  then  to  confider,  whatsoever  either 
you  or  others  have  urged,  on  the  contrary  fide 
•of the  quelfion. 

3.  Twenty-nine  years  fince,  when  I had  fpent 
a few  months  at  Oxford,  having  as  I appre- 
hended, an  -exceeding  good  conltifuiion,  and 
being  otherwife  in  health,  I was  a little  lurprizecl 
at  fome  Symptoms  of  a paralytic  diforder.  I 
could  not  imagine  what  Should  occafion  the  flak- 
ing of  my  hand  ; .till  I obferved  it  was  always 
world  after  breaklalf,  and  that  if  I intermitted 
drinking  tea  for  two  or  three  clays,  it  did  not 
fhake  at  all.  Upon  enquiry,  I found  tea  had  the 
fame  eiTcfit  upon  others  alfo  of  my  acquaintance; 
and  therefore  faw,  that  this  was  one  of  i s natural 
effefts  (as  feveral  phylicians  have  often  remarked) 
efpeciallv,  when  it  is  largely  and  frequently 
drank;  and  moll  ol  all  on  perrons  01  weak 
nerves.  Upon  this  I lelfened  the  quantity,  drank 

Voi..  XXIV.  M ' it 


[ 266  ] 

it  weaker,  and  added  more  milk  and  fugar.  But 
Hill  for  above  fix  and  twenty  years,  I was  more 
orlcfs  fubjefct  to  the  fame  diforder. 

q.  Julv  was  two  years,  I began  to  obferve, 
that  abundance  of  the  people  in  London,  with 
whom  T converfed,  laboured  under  the  fame, 
and  many  other  paralytic  diiorders,  and  that  in 
a much  higher  degree  ; infomuch  that  fome  of 
their  nerves  were  quite  unflrung;  their  bodily 
{Length  quite  decayed,  and  they  couid  not  go 
through  their  daily  labour.  I enquired,  “ Are 
you  not  an  hard  drinker  ?”  And  was  anfwered, 
by  otie  and  another,  and  another,  “ No,  indeed 
Sir,  not  I ; I drink  fcarce  any  thing  but  a little 
tea,  morning  and  night."  I immediately  re- 
membered my  own  cafe  ; and  after  weighing  the 
matter  througblv,  eafilv  gathered  from  mam- 
concurring  circumflances,  that  it  was  the  fi.me 
cafe  with  them. 

5.  I confidered,  “ What  an  advantage  would 
“ it  be  to  thefe  poor  enfeebled  people,  if  they 
“ would  leave  off  what  fo  manifeHly  impairs 

their  health,  and  thereby  hurts  their  bufinefs 
“ alfo  P Is  there  nothing  equally  cheap  which 
“ they  could  ufc?  Yes,  furely  : and  chcapcrtoo. 
“ If  they  ufed  Engl;  Hi  herbs  in  its  Head,  (which 
« would  coft  eithei  nothing,  or  what  is  next  to 
“ nothing)  with  the  famebre  ?d,  butter,  and  milk, 
“ they  would  fave  jv.H  the  price  of  the  tea.-’ 
“ And  hereby  t'nev  might  not  only  leffen  their 
“ pain,  but  in  fome  degree  their  poverty  too.  For 

“ they 


[ 26?  j 

M they  would  he  able  to  work  (as  well  as  to  fave} 
“ confiderably  more  than  they  can  do  now. 

“ And  by  this  meiins,  if  they  are  in  debt,  they 
“ might  be  more  juft,  paying  away  what  they 
«>  either  earned  or  faved.  If  they  are  not  in 
“ debt,  they  might  be  more  merciful,  giving  it 
“ away  to  them  that  want.” 

6.  I confidered  farther,  “ What  an  advantage 
« might  this  be,  particularly  in  fuch  a body  of 
“ men  as  thofe  are,  who  are  united  together  in 
“ thefe  focieties  ? Who  are  both  fo  numerous 
“ and  fo  poor  ? How  much  might  be  faved  in  fo 

numerous  a body,  even  in  this  fmgle  article  of 
“ expence?  And  how  greatly  is  all  that  can  poffi- 
“ fcly  be  faved,  in  every  article,  wanted  daily,, by 
“ thofe  who  have  not  even  food  convenient  for 
“ them 

7. -  I foon  perceived,  that  this  latter  confidera- 
tion  was  of  a more  general  nature  than  the  for- 
mer: and  that  it  affected  many  of  thofe,  whom 
the  other  aid  not  fo  immediately  concern : feeing 
it  was  as  needful  for  all  to  fave  needlefs  expences, 
as  for  fome,  to  regain  the  health  they  had  im  - 
paired. Efpeci'aHy,  confidered  as  members  of  a 
fociety,  the  wants  of  which  they  could  not  be 
tmapprizcd  of.  They  knew,  of  thofe  to  whom 

' they  were  fo  peculiarly  united,  fome  had  not 
food  to  fuftain  nature  : fome  were  deftitute  of 
'even  neceifary  cloathing  : fome  had  not  where 
to  lay  their  head.  They  knew,  or  might  know, 
that  the  little  Contributions  made  weekly,  did  in 
M 2 no 


[ 268  ] 


-no  wife  fuffice  to  remove  thefe  wants,  being 
barely  fufficient  to  relieve  the  Tick:  and  even 
that  in  fo  fcanty  a manner,  that  I know  not,  if 
foine  of  them  have  not,  with  their  allowance, 
pined  away,  and  at  length  died  for  want.  If  you 
and  I have  not  faved  all  we  could  to  relieve 
thefe,  how  ihall  we  face  them  at  the  throne  of 
God  ? 

8.  I refleBed,  If  one  only  would  fave  all 
« tliat  he  could,  in  this  Angle  inftanre,  he  might 
« furelv  feed  or  cloath  one  of  his  brethren,  and, 
“ perhaps,  fave  one  life.  What  then  might  be 
“ done,  if  ten  ihoufand,  or  one  thoufand,  or  only 
five  hundred  would  do  it  ?':  Yea,  if  half  that 
number  fhould  fay,  “ I will  compute  this  day 
“ what  I have  expended  in  tea,  weekly  or  yearly. 
•>  I will  -immediately  enter  on  cheaper  food. 
a And  whatever  is  faved  hereby,  I will  put  into 
« t1nat  poor  box  weekly,  to  feed  the  hungry,  and 
“ to  cloath  the  naked.”  I am  mi/laken,  if  any 
among  us  need  want,  either  food  or  raiment  from 
that  hour. 

o.  I thought  farther,  “ It  is  faid,  nav,  many 
“ tell  me  to  my  face,  I can  perfuade  this  people 
“ to  any  thing.  I will  make  a fair  trial.  It  I 
“cannot  perfuade  them,  there  maybe  force  good 
“ effeft.  All  who  do  not  wilfully  flout  their  eyes 
“ will  fee,  that  I have  no  fuch  influence  as  they 
“ fuppoled-  If  I can  perfuade  any  number ; 
“ many  who  are  now  weak  or  ftek,  will  be  re- 
“ ilured  to  health  and  ftrength.  Many  will  pay 

“ rhofe 


C 269  ] 

“ thofe  debts,  which  others,  perhaps  equally 
“ poor,  can  but  ill  afford  to  lofe.  Many  will 
“ be  Iefs  ftraitened  in  their  own  families.  Many 
“ by  helping  their  neighbour,  will  lay  up  for 
“ themfelves  treafures  in  heaven.” 

lOi  Immediately  it  ffruck  into  my  mind,  “ But 
“ example  mud  go  before  precept.  Therefore  I 
“ mull  not  plead  an  exemption  lor  myfelf,  from. 
“ a daily  pradlice  of  twenty-feven  years.  I muff 
“ begin.”  I did  fo.  I left  it  off  myfelf  in  Au- 
guft,  1746.  And  I have  now  had  fufficienttime 
to  try  the  effedls,  which  have  fully  anfwered  my 
expectation  : my  paralytic  complaints  are  all 
gone : my  hand  is  ffeady  as  it  was  at  fifteen : al- 
though I mull  expefl  that,  or  other  weakneffes, 
foon  ; as  I decline  into  the  vale  of  years.  And 
fo  confiderable  a difference  do  I find  in  my  ex- 
pence, that  I can  make  it  appear,  from  the  ac- 
counts now  in  being,  in  only  thofe  four  families 
at  London,  Briftol,  Kingfwood,  and  Newcaftle,  I 
fave  upwards  of  fifty'  pounds  a vear. 

J 1.  The  firff  to  whom  I explained  thefe  things 
at  large,  and  whom  I ad vi fed  to  fet  the  fame  ex- 
ample to  their  brethren,  were,  a few  of  thofe, 
who  rejoice  to  affiff  my  brother  and  me,  as  our 
fons  in  the  gofpel.  A week  after  I propofed  it 
to  about  forty  of  thofe  whom  I believed  to  be 
ftrong  in  faith : and  the  next  morning  to  about 
fixty  more,  intreating  them  all  to  fpeak  their 
minds  freely.  They  did  fo  : and  in  the  end,  faw 
the  good  which  might  infue ; yielded  to  the  force 
M 3 of 


[ 27°  ] 

of  fcrtpture  and  reafon : and  refolved  all  'but 
two  or  three)  by  the  grace  of  God,  to  make  the 
trial  without  delay. 

12.  In  a fhort  time,  I propofed  if,  but  with  all 
•the  tendernefs  I could,  fir  ft,  to  the  body  of  thofe 
who  are  fuppofed  to  have  living  faith,  and  after 
flaying  a few  days,  (that  I might  judge  the  better 
how  to  fpeak)  to  the  whole,  focietv.  It  foon 
appeared  (as  I doubted  not  but  it  would)  how  far 
thefe  were  from  calling  me  Rabbi-,  from  implicitly 
fubmitting  to  my  judgment,  or  implicitly  follow- 
ing my  example.  Objections  rofe  in  abundance 
from  all  Tides.  Thefe  I now  proceed  to  confider  : 
whether  they  are  advanced  by  you,  or  by  others, 
and  whether  pointed  at  the  premifles,  or  direCtly 
at  the  conclufion. 

13.  I.  Some  objected,  “ Tea  is  not  unwhole- 
“ fome  at  all ; not  any  kind  prejudicial  to 
“ health.” 

To  thefe  I reply,  firft,Ycm  fhould  notbefofure 
of  this.  Even  that  cafual  circumftance,  related 
in  Dr.  Short’s  hiftory  of  it,  might  incline  vou 
to  doubt,  viz.  that  “ while  the  Chinefe  drv  the 
“ leaves,  and  turn  it  with  their  hands  upon  the 
“ tin-plates,  the  moifture  of  them  is  fo  extremely 
“ corrofive,  that  it  eats  into  the  flelh,  if  not 
“ wiped  off  immediately.”  It  is  not  probable 
then,  that  v*hat  remains  in  the  leaves  is  quite 
friendly  to  the  human  body. 

Secondly,  Many  eminent  phyficians  have  de- 
clared 


[ 2 71  ] 

dared  their  judgment,  that  it  is  prejudicial  in 
feveral  refpefils  : that  it  gives  rife  to  riumberlefs 
diforders,  particularly  thofe  of  the  nervous  kind: 
and  that,  if  frequently  ufed  by  thofe  of  weak 
nerves,  it  is  no  other  than  a flow  poifon. 

Thirdly,  If  all  phyficians  were  fdcnt  in  the 
cafe,  yet  plain  fa £1  is  againft  you.  And  this 
fpeaks  loud  enough.  It  was  prejudicial  to  ihy 
health  : it  is  fo  to  many  at  this  day. 

iq.  “ But  it  is  notfo  to  me”  fays  the  obje&or, 
“ why  then  fhould  Ileave  it  off?” 

lanfwer,  firft,  to  give  an  example  to  thofe  to 
whom  it  is  undeniably  prejudicial. 

Secondly,  That  you  may  have  the  more 
wherewith  to  give  bread  to  the  hungry,  and  rai- 
ment to  the  naked. 

15.  “ But  I cannot  leave  it  off;  for  it  helps 
“ my  health.  Nothing  elfe  will  agree  with 
“ me.” 

I anfwer,  firft,  will  nothing  elfe  agree  with 
you  ? I know  not  how  to  believe  that.  I fup- 
pofe  your  body  is  much  of  the  fame  kind  with 
that  of  your  great  grandmother.  And  do  you 
think  nothing  elfe  agreed  with  her?  Or  with  any 
of  her  progenitors  ? What  poor,  puling,  ficldy 
things,  muft  all  the  Englifh  then  Have  been,  till 
within  thefe  hundred  years ! But  you  know 
they  were  not  fo.  Other  things  agreed  with 
them.  And  why  not  with  you  ? 

Secondly,  If  in  fa£l  nothing  elfe  will,  if  tea 
has  already  weakened  your  ftoraach,  and  im- 
M 4 paired 


[ 2/2  ] 

paired  your  digeftion  to  fuch  a degree,  it  has 
hurt  you  more  than  you  are  aware;  it  has  nreju- 
diced  your  health  extremely.  You  have  need 
to  abhor  it  as  deadly  poifon,  and  to  renounce  it 
from  this  very  hour. 

So  fays  a drinker  of  drams,  “ Nothing  elfe 
4i  will  agree  with  me.  Nothing  elfe  will  raife 
“ my  fpirits.  I can  digeft  nothing  without.” 
Indeed!  Is  it  fo  ? Then  touch  no  more,  if  you 
love  your  life. 

Thirdly,  Suppofe  nothing  elfe  agrees  with 
you  at  firll  ; yet  in  a while  many  things  will. 
When  I fil'd  left  off  tea,  I was  half  afleep  all  day 
long  : my  head  ached  from  morning  to  night. 
I could  not  remember  a quedion  alked,  even  till 
I could  return  an  anfwer.  But  in  a week’s  time 
all  thefe  inconveniences  were  gone,  and  have 
never  returned  fince. 

Fourthly,  I have  not  found  one  Angle  excep- 
tion yet ; not  one  perfon  in  all  England,  with 
whom  after  fufficient  trial  made,  nothing  elfe 
would  agree. 

It  is  therefore  well  worth  while  for  you  to  try 
again  ; if  you  have  any  true  regard  for  your  own 
health,  or  any  compadion  for  thofe  who  are 
perifhing  all  around  you,  for  want  of  the  com- 
mon neceflaries  of  life. 

16.  If  you  are  fincere  in  this  plea;  if  you  do 
not  talk  of  your  health,  while  the  real  objection 
is  your  inclination,  make  a fair  trial  thus,  1. 
Take  half  a pint  of  milk  every  morning,  with  a 

little 


[ 273  J 

little  bread,  not  boiled,  but  warmed  only;  (a  man 
in  tolerable  health  might  double  the  quantity.]  2. 
If  this  is  too  heavy,  add  as  much  water,  and  boil 
it  together  with  a fpoonful  of  oatmeal.  3.  If  this 
agrees  not,  try  half  a pint,  or  a little  more  of 
water-gruel,  neither  thick  nor  thin  ; not  fweet- 
ened,  (for  that  may  be  apt  to  make  him  fic.k]  but 
with  a very  little  butter,  fait,  and  bread.  4.  If 
this  difagrees,  try  fage,  green  balm,  mint,  or 
penny-royal  tea,  infufing  only  fo  much  of  the 
herb  as  juft  to  change  the  colour  of  the  water. 
5.  Try  two  or  three  of  thele  mixed,  in  various 
proportions.  6.  Try  ten  or  twelve  other  Englifh' 
herbs.  7.  Try  Jclti  on,  a mixture  of  herbs  to  behad 
at  many  grocers,  far  healthier  as  well  as  cheaper 
than  tea.  8.  Try  cocoa,  • If  after  having  tried 
each  of  thefe,  for  a week  or  ten  days,  you  find 
none  of  them  will  agree  with  your  conftitution, 
then  ufe  (weak  green]  tea  again  : but  at  the  fame 
time  know,  that  your  having  ufed  it-  fo  long, 
has  brought  you  near  the  chambers- of  death. 

17.  II.  “ Ido  not  know*,  fays  another,  btit - 
“ tea  may  hurt  me.  But  there,  is  nothing  laved 
“ by  leaving  it  off : for  I am  hire  other  things:. 
“ coft  full  as  much.”  I pray,  what  other  things  ? 
Sack  and  fugar  cofts  more;  and  fo  do  -ragouts,, 
or  pheafants,  or  ortolans.  But  what  is  this  to 
the  point?  We  do  not  fay,  all  things  are 
cheaper.  But  any  of  the  things  above- menth 
sned  are ; at  leaf!  if  prudently  managed.  There- 

M-  -5  ' 


tors*. 


[ 274  J 

fore,  if  you  really  defire  to  fave  what  you  can, 
you  will  drink  tea  no  more. 

18.  “ Well,  I do  not  defign  to  buy  any  more 
“ myfelf;  but  where  others  drink  it,  there  is  no- 
thing  faved  by  my  abftaining.”  I anfwer,  firft. 
Yes,  fomething  is  faved,  though  but  little  ; efpe- 
cially  if  you  tell  them  before,  I fhall  not  drink 
tea.  And  many  a little,  you  know,  put  together, 
will  make  a great  fum. 

Secondly,  If  the  whole  faved  were  ever  fo 
little,  if  it  were  but  two  mites,  when  you  fave 
this  for  God  and  your  brethren’s  fake,  it  is 
much. 

Thirdly,  Your  example  in  faving  a little  now, 
may  occafion  the  faving  of  more  by  and  by. 

Fourthly,  It  is  not  a little  advantage  which 
you  may  reap,  even  now,  to  your  own  foul : 
by  habituating  yourfelf  not  to  be  afliamed  of  be- 
ing fmgular  in  a good  thing  : by  taking  up  your 
crofs  and  denying  yourfelf,  even  in  fo  fmall  an 
inflance,  and  by  acculloming  yourfelf,  to  act  on 
rational  grounds,  whether  in  a little  matter  or  a 
great. 

vg.  “ But  what  is  faved,  will  be  no  better  em- 
“ ployed.”  Do  you  fay  this  with  regard  to  your- 
felf, or  others?  If  with  regard  to  yourfelf,  it 
will  be  year  fault,  if  you  do  not  employ  it  better. 
I do  not  fay  you  will,  but  I am  fure  you  may. 
And  if  you  do  not,  it  is  your  own  fin,  and  your 
own  fhame. 

If  with  regard  to  others,  how  do  you  know 

that) 


that  it  will  not  be  employed  better  ? I trull  it 
will.  It  cannot  be  denied,  that  it  often  has,  and 
that  it  always  may  be.  And  it  is  highly  probable- 
all  who  fave  any  thing  from  the  bell  motive,  • 
will  lay  it  out  to  the  bell  purpofe. 

20.  “ As  to  example,”*  you  fay,  “ I have 
“ lately  been  without  hopes  of  doing  any  good 
“ by  it.”  I fuppofe  you  mean,  becaufe  fo  ex- 
ceeding few  will  follow  either  your  example  or 
mine.  I am  forry  for  it.  This  only  gives  me  a 
frelh  objeflion  to  this  unwholfome,  expenlive 
food,  viz.  That  it  has  too  much  hold  on  the 
hearts  of  them  that  ufe  it  : that  (to  ufe  a fcrip- 
tural  phrafe)  they,  are  under  the.  power  of  this 
trifle.  If  it  be  fo,  were  there  no  other  reafon 
than  this,  they  ought  to  throw  it  away  at  once. 
Elfe  they  no  more  regard  St.  Paul  than  they  do 
you  or  me : for  his  rule  is  home  to  the  point. 
All  things  are  lawful  for  me:  but  I will  not  be 
brought  under  the  power  of  any.  Away  with  it 
then,  however  lawful,  (that  is,  though  it  were 
wholefome  as  well  as  cheap)  if  you  are  already 
brought  under  the  power  of  it. 

And  the  fewer  they  are  who  follow  this  rule, 
the  greater  reafon  there  is,  that  you  Ihould  add 
one  example  more,  to  thofe  few.  Though, 
blelfed  be  God,  they  are  not  fo  few  as  vou  fup- 
pofe. I have  met  with  very  many  in  London, 
who  ufe  lefs  of  it,  than  they  had  done  for  many 
years  ; and  above  an  hundred,  who  have  plucked. 

M 61  out  t 


t 276  ] 

out  the  right  eye,  and  cafi  it  from  them;  who 
wholly  abflain  from  it. 

21.  You  add,  but  I am  “ equally,  vea  abun- 
“ dandy  more,  concerned  to  fet  an  example,  in 
“ all  Chriftian  b.ehaviour.”  I grant  it : this  there- 
fore ought  you  to  have 'done,  and  not  to  leave  the 
other  undone. 

22.  But  “ one  day,  (you  add)  I faw  your  bro- 
“ ther  drink  tea,  which  he  faid  was  for  fear  of 
“ giving  offence.” 

I anfwer,  firft,  Learn  from  hence  to  follow 
neither  his,  nor  my  practice  implicitly  ; but 
weigh  the  reafon  of  each,  and  then  follow  reax 
fon,  wherefoever  it  hands.  Bart, 

Secondly,  Examine  your  heart,  and  beware 
inclination  does  not  put  on  the  lhape  of  reafon. 

Thirdly,  You  fee  with  your  own  eyes,  ldo. 
not  drink  it  at  all,  and  yet  1 feldom  give  offence 
thereby.  It  is  not  then  the  hate  abn aiding,  but 
the  manner  of  doing  it,  which  ufualh  gives  the 
offence. 

Fourthly,  There  is  therefore  a manner  where- 
in you  may  do  it  too,  and  vet  give  no  more  of- 
fence than  I.  For  inflance,  If  any  afk  vou  : 
fimplv  reply,  “ I do  not  drink  tea,  I never  ufe 
it.”  If  they  fay,  “ Why  you  did  drink  it  ?’* 
Anfwer,  “ I did  fo  ; but  I have  left  it  off  a con- 
“ fiderable  time.”  Thofe  who  have  either  trood- 

O 

nature  or  good -manners  will  fay  no  more.  But 
if  any  fheuld  impertinently  add,  “ O.  but  why 
“ did  you  leave  it  off  ?”  Anfwer  mildly  “ Be- 

caufe 


[ 277  ] 

caufe  I thought  water-gruel  (fuppofe  wa3 
wholefomer,  as  well  as  cheaper.”  If  they  (with 
Hill  greater  ill-manners  ami  impertinence)  go  on, 
“ What  ! you  do  it  becaufe  Mr.  Wefley  bids 
you.”  Reply  calmly,  “ True:  I doitbecaufe  Mr. 
Wefley  on  good  reafons  advifes  me  fo  to  do.” 
If  they  add  the  trite  cant  phra  fe,  “ What,  you 
follow  man  !”  Reply,  without  any  emotion, 
“ Yes  ; I follow  any  mari,  you  or  him,  or 
“ any  other,  who  gives  me  good  reafons  for  fo 
“ doing.”  If  they  perflft  in  cavilling,  cfofe  the 
whole  matter  with,  “ I neither  drink  it,  nor 
“ difpute  about  it.” 

23.  If  you  proceed  in  this  manner,  with  mild- 
nefs  and  love,  exceeding  few  will  be  offended. 
“ But  you  ought,  fay  fome,  to  give  up  an  indif- 
“ ferent  thing,  rather  than  give  an  offence  to 
“ any.  So  St.  Paul,  I will  eat  no  ffh  whiljl  the 
“ world  jiandeth,  lejl  I make  my  brother  to  offend.'1 
\ reply,  This  is  not  an  indifferent  thing,  il  it  af~ 
feftsthe  health  either  of  myfelf  or  my  brethren. 
Therefore  that  rule,  relating  wholly  to  things  indif- 
ferent, is  not  applicable  to  this  cafe.  WouldSt. 
Paul  have  faid,  I wiil  drink  drams  while  the 
world  flandeth,  left  I make  my  brother  to  offend? 
“ But  tea  is  not  fo  hurtful  as  drams.”  I do 
not  believe  it  is.  But  it  is  hurtful.  And  that 
is  enough.  The  queftion  does  not  turn  on  the 
degree  of  hurtlulnefs.  “ However,  it.  is  but  a 
fmall  thing.”  Nay,  nothing  is  fmall  if  it  touches 
confcience.  Much  lefs  is  it  a fmall  thing,  to 
* preferve 


[ 278  ] 

preferve  my  own  or  my  brother’s  health,  or  to 
be  a faithful  fieward  even  of  the  mammon  of 
unrighteoufnefs.  O think  it  not  a fmall  thing, 
whether  only  one  for  whom  Chrift  died,  be  fed 
or  hungry,  cloathed  or  naked. 

To  conclude  the  head  of  offence.  You  mull 
at  leaft  allow,  that  all  this  is  no  plea  at  all  for 
your  drinking  tea*  at  home.  “ Yes  it  is  ; for  my 
“ hufband  or  parents  are  offended,  if  I do  not 
“ drink  it.”  I anfwer,  fir  ft.  Perhaps  this,  in 
fome  rare  cafes,  may  be  a tufficient  reafon,  why 
a wife  or  a child  fhould  ufe  this  food,  that  is, 
with  them  ; but  no  where  elfe.  But,  fecondly. 
Try,  and  not  once  or  twice  only,  if  you  can’t 
overcome  that  offence  by  reafon,  foftnefs,  love^ 
patience,  long-fuffering,  joined  with  conftant 
and  fervent  prayer. 

24.  Your  next  objection  is,  “ I can’t  bear  to 
“ give  trouble : therefore  I drink  whatever 

“ others  drink  where  I come,  elfe  there  is  fo 
“ much  hurry  about  infignificant  me.”  I an- 
fwer, 

Firft,  This  is  no  plea  at  all,  for  your  drinking- 
te^  at  home.  Therefore  touch  it  not  there,  what- 
ever you  do  abroad. 

Secondly,  Where  is  the  trouble  given  even 
when  you  are  abroad,  if  they  drink  tea,  and 
you  fill  your  cup  with  milk  and  water  ? 

Thirdlv,  Whatever  trouble  is  taken,  is  not  for 
“ infignificant  me,’'  but  for  that  poor  man,  who 
is  half-ftarved  with  cold  and  hunger  : for  that 

miferable. 


[ 279  ] 

miferable  woman,  who  while  (he  is  poifoning 
herfelf,  wipes  her  mouth,  and  fays  fhe  does  no 
evil ; who  will  not  believe  the  poifon  will  ' 
hurt  her,  becaufe  it  does  not  (fenfibly  at  lealfj 
hurt  you.  O throw  it  away  ! Let  her  have  one 
plea  lefs,  for  deftroying  her  body,  (if  no°ther 
foul)  before  the  time  ! 

25.  You  objedl  farther,  “ It  is  my  defire  to  be 
“ unknown  for  any  particularity,  unlefs  a pecu- 
“ liar  love  to  the  fouls  ofthofe  who  are  preTent.” 
And  I hope,  to  the  fouls. of  the  abfent  too  ; yea* 
and  to  their  bodies  alfo  in  a due  proportion, 
that  they  may  be  healthy,  and  fed,  and  cloathed, 
and  warm,  and  may  praife  God  for  the  confola- 
tion. 

26.  You  fubjoin.  “ When  I had  left  it  off 
“ for  fome  months,  I was  continually  puzzled 
“ with,  Why,  what,  &c.  And  I have  -feen  no 
“ good  effefts,  but  impertinent  quefiions  and 
“ anfwers,  and  unedifying  converfation  about 
“ eating  and  drinking.” 

I anfwer,  Firft,  Thofe  who  were  fo  uneafy 
about  it  plainly  fhewed,  that  you  touched  the 
apple  of  their  eye.  Confequently  tbefe,  of  all 
others,  ought  to  leave  it  off^  for  they  are  evident- 
ly brought  under  the  power  of  it. 

Secondly,  Thofe  impertinent  queflions  might 
have  been  cut  fhort,  by  a very  little  lleadinefa 
and  common  fenfe.  You  need  only  have  taken 
the  method  mentioned  above,  and  they  would 
have  dropped  in  the  midlt. 

Thirdly,  It  is  not  flrange  you  faw  no  good 

effe&s 


[ a8o  ] 

effefts  of  leaving  it  off,  where  it  was  not  left  off 
at  all.  But  you  faw  very  bad  effects  of  not 
leaving  it  off,  viz.  The  adding  fin  to  fin  : the 
joining  much  unedifying  converfation  to  waile- 
ful,  unhealthy  felf-indulgence. 

Fourthly,  You  need  not  go  far  to  fee  many 
good  effefts  of  leaving  it  off,-  you  may  fee  them 
in  me.  I have  recovered  thereby  that  healthy 
Hate  of  the  whole  nervous  fyflem,  which  I had 
in  a great  degree,  and  I aliroft  thought  irreco- 
verably loft,  lor  confiderably  more  than  twenty 
years.  I have  been  enabled  hereby  to  affift  in 
one  year  above  fifty  poor  with  food  or  raiment, 
whom  1 mull  cthenvife  have  left  (for  I had  before 
begged  for  them  all  I could)  as  hungry  and  nak- 
ed as  I found  them.  You  may  fee  the  good 
effefts  in  above  thirty  poor  people  juft  now  before 
you,  who  have  been  reftored  to  health,  thro'  the 
medicines  bought  by  that  money  which  a fingle 
perfon  has  faved  in  this  article.  And  a thoufand’ 
more  good  effects  you  will  not  fail  to  fee,  when 
her  example  is  more  generally  followed, 

2.7.  Neither  is  there  any  need  that  conver- 
fation fhould  be  unedifying,  even  when  it  turns 
upon  eating  and  drinking.  Nay,  Irom  fuch  a con- 
verfation, if  duly  improved,  numberlefs  good* 
effefis  may  flow.  For  how  few  underhand. 
Whether  ye  eat  ar  drink',  or  whatever  ye  do,  do  ail 
to  the  glory  of  God  ? And  how  glad  ought  you 
to  be  of  a fair  occafion  to  obferve,  that  though 
the  kingdom  of  God  does  not  Confift  in  meats  and 

. drinks  % 


[ 28x  ] 


drinks , yet  without  exa£t  temperance  in  thefe, 
we  cannot  have  ehher  righteoujhefs,  or peacet  or 
joy  in  tilt  Holy  Ghoft  ? 

It  may  therefore  have  a very  happy  effe£I, 
if  whenever  people  introduce  the  fubjedt.  you 
direftly  clofe  in,  and  pufh  it  home,  that  they 
may  underhand  a little  more  of  this  important 
truth. 

28.  But  “ I find  at  prefent  very  little  defire 
“ to  change  either  my  ■ thoughts  or  practice.  ’ 
Shall  I fpeak  plain?  I fear,  by  not.  handing 
your  ground,,  by  eafmefs,  cowardice,  and  falfe 
fhame,  )ou  have  grieved  the  Spirit  of  God,  and 
thereby  loh  your  convidiion  and  defire  at 
once. 

Yet  you  add,  “ I advife  every  one  to  leave 
“ off  tea,  if  it  hurts  their  health,  or  is  inconfihent 
“ with  frugalitv  ; as  I advife  every  one  to  avoid 
“ dainties  in  meat,  and  vanity  in  drefs,  from 
“ the  fame  principle.”  Enough,  enough  ! Let 
this  only  be  well  purfued,  and  it  will  fecure  all 
that  I contend  for.  I advife  no  perfons  living  to 
leave  it  off,  if  it  does  not  hurt  the  health  either 
of  them  or  their  brethren  : and  if  it  is  not  incon- 
fihent with  the  Chrifiian  frugality,  of  cutting  off 
every  needlefs  expence. 

29.  But  “ to  be  fubjeft  to  the  confequences  of 
“ leaving  it  off  again!  This  I cannot  bear.” 

I anfwer,  nrh,  It  may  be  fo.  You  cannot 
eafily  bear  it.  For  by  your  giving  up  the  point 
once,  you  have  made  it  much  harder  to  hand 

• your 


[ 282  ] 

your  ground  now,  than  it  was  at  firft.  Yet  1K1I 
*tis  worth  all  your  courage  andJabour;  fi nee  the 
reafons  for  it  are  as  ftrong  as  at  the  beginning. 

Secondly,  As  to  the  confequences  you  fear, 
they  are  fhadowv  all  ; they  are  a meer  lion  in 
the  ftreets.  “ Much  trouble  to  others.  ' — Abfo- 
littelv  none  at  all,  if  you  take  the  tea-kettle,  and 
fill  your  cup  with  water.  “ Much  foolifh  dif- 
courfe.” — Take  the  preceding-advice,  and  it  will 
be  juft  the  reverfe.^  “ Nothing  helpful  toward 
“ the  renewal  of  my  foul  in  the  image  of  Jefus 
“ Chrift.”- -What  a deep  miftake  is  this?  Is  it 
not  helpful  to  fpeak  clofely  of  the  nature  of  his 
inward  kingdom  ? To  encourage  one  another  in 
calling  off'  every  weight,  in  removing  every 
hindrance  of  it  ? To  inure  ourfelves  to  the  bear- 
ing his  crofs  ? To  bring  Chiiftianity  into  com- 
mon life  ? And  accuftom  ourfelves  to  condudl 
even  our  minuteft  actions  by  the  great  rules  of 
reafon  and  religion  ? 

O 

go.  Is  it  “ not  of  any  importance”  to  do  this  ? 
1 think,  itisofvaft  importance.  However,  “it 
“ is  a very  fmall  circumflance  in  felf-denial.  ’ It 
is  well  if  you  find  it  fo.  I am  fure  I did  not. 
And  I believe  the  cafe  is  the  fame  with  many 
others  at  this  day.  But  you  fay,  “ I have  fo 
“ many  other  affaults  of  felf-indulgence,  that  this 
“ is  nothing. — It  is  nothing,"  faid  one  to  a young 
woman,  “ to  faft  once  or  twice  a week ; to 
“ deny'  yourfelf  a little  food.  W liy  do  not  you 
“ deny  yourfelf  as  to  anger  and  fretfulnefs,  as  to 

“ peevilhnefs 


[ s83  ] 

“ peevifhnefs  and  difcontent  ?”  She  replied, 
“ That  I want : fo  I deny  myfelf  in  little  things 
“ firft,  till  I am  able  to  do  it  in.  greater.”  Nei- 
ther you  nor  I can  mend  her  reply.  Go  thou  and 
do  like  wile. 

31.  I have  done  what  I propofed,  and  indeed 
in  many  more  words  than  I at  firft  intended.  I 
have  told  you  the  occafions  of  everv  Hen  I have 
taken,  and  the  motives  inducing  me  thereto ; 
and  have  confidered  what  either  you,  or  others, 
have  urged  on  the  contrary  fide  of  the  queftjon. 

And  now'  t^ie  advice  I u'ould  give  upon  the 
whole  is  this : firft,  Pray  earneftly  to  God  for 
clear  light,  for  a full,  piercing,  and  fteady  con- 
viftion,  that  this  is  the  more  excellent  way. 
Pray  for  a fpirit  of  univerfal  felf-deniai,  of  chear- 
ful  temperance,  of  wife  frugality:  for  bowels  of 
mercies,  for  a kind  compalfionate  fpirit,  ten- 
derly fenfible  of  the  various  wants  of  your  bre- 
thren : and  for  firmnefs  of  mind,  for  a mild,  even 
courage,  without  fear,  anger,  or  fhame.  Then 
you  will  once  more,  with  all  readinefs  of  heart, 
make  this  little  (or  great)  facrifice  to  God:  and 
withal  prefent  your  foul  and  body  a living  facri- 
•fice,  acceptable  unto  God  through  Jeftts  Chrift, 


THE 


[ 3 


THE 

DESIDERATUM: 

o 

O R, 

ELECTRICITY 

Made  Plain  and  Lseful. 


By  a Lover  of  Mankind,  and  of  Common  Senfe. 


The  P R E.F  A C E. 

i.  JN  tkt following  trap,  1 have  endeavoured 

compnze  the  Jam  oj  what  has  been  hitherto 
published,  on  this  curious  and  important  fu/jecl, 
bv  Dr.  Franklin , Dr.  Hoadly,  Mr.  Wiljhn , Watfonx 
Lovett,  Freke , Martin,  Watkins,  and  in  the 
monthly  magazines.  But  I am  chiefly  indebted  to 
Dr.  Franklin  for  the  fpeculative  part,  and  to  Mr. 

Lovett 


[ *«5  ] 

Lovett  for  the  pratlical : though  I cannot  in  every 
thing  fubfcribe  to  the  faitiments  either  of  one  or  the 
other. 

2.  Indeed  I am  not  greatly  concerned  for  the 
philofophical  part,  v’hether  it  fand  or  fall.  Of 
the  falls  we  are  abjohitely  affwed : although  they 
are  of  fo  fur  prizing  a nature , that  a man  could 
not  have  afferttd  than  a few  years  ago , without 
quite  giving  up  his  reputation.  But  who  can  he 
affured  of  this  or  that  hypothefis,  by  which  he  en- 
deavours to  account  for  theft  Jails?  Perhaps  the 
utmofl  we  have  reafqn  to  cxpeil  here , is  an  high 
degree  of  probability. 

' 3.  I am  much  more  concerned  for  the  pky/kal 
part,  knowing  of  how  great  importance  this  is : how 
much  fcknefs  and  pain  may  be  prevented  or  re- 
moved, and  how  many  lives  fived  by  this  unparal- 
leled remedy.  / hid  yet  with  what  vehemence  has  it 
been  oppofed?  Sometimes  by  treating  it  with  con- 
tempt, as  if  it  were  of  hi  tie  or  no  ije  : fometunes  by 
arguments , fitch  as  they  were ; and  fometunes  by 
fuck  cautions  againfl  its  ill  efeits,  as  made  tkou- 
fands  afr  aid  to  meddle  with  it. 

4.  Bit  fo  it  has  f,*ed  with  aimofl  all  the  fnnple 
remedies,  which  have  been  offered  to  the  world  for 
• many  years.  When  Sir  John  Flayer  publlff 'ted  his 
excellent  book  on  colcU  athing,  many  for  a time 
ufd  and  profited  by  it.  So  did  abundance  of  people 
by  cold  water,  when  it  was  publicly  recommended 
by  Dr,  Hancock.  The  ingenious  and  benevolent 
hifliop  of  Cloy  ne  brought  tat- waterlike  wife  into  cre- 
dit 


[,*86  ] 

dit  for  a fcafon  : and  innumerable  were  the  cures 
wrought  thereby , even  in  the  moft  defperate  and 
deplorable  cafes.  Nor  was  it  d little  good  wJuch 
was  done  by  the  ufe  of  Tea-water,  after  Dr.  Rif] el 
had  pub' fhed  his  trad  concerning  it.  Indeed  each 
of  thefe  did  wonders  in  its  turn.  But  alas  ! their 
reign  was Jhort.  The  vafl  pai  ty  which  were  on  the 
oilier  fide,  Juon  rajed  the  cry,  and  ran  them  down. 
In  a Jew  years  they  were  out  ofjafhion , out  of  ufe , 
and  almojl  out  of  memory  ':  ana  the  foul,  hard- 
named  exotics  took  place  again,  to  the  utter  conju- 
fion  of  common  fenfe. 

g.  Muf  not  Electricity  then,  whatever  wonder s 
it  may  now  perform,  exped  foon  to  fha>  e the  Jame 
fate  ? And  yet  it  is  ahjblutdy  certain,  that  in  many, 
very  many  cafes,  it j Adorn  or  never  fails.  “ lean 
truly  fay,  ( fays  Air.  Lovett  ) I fear cc  ever  knew  any 
who  made  the  trial  and  did  not  fucceed.  Not  that 
all  diforders  will  yield  thereto.  NcUk  t in  this 
any  more  than  the  common  way,  will  the  fame  treat- 
ment of  the  fame  diforder  in  different  p<  r fans  have 
always  the  JamefuccefsA  Indeed  there  cannot  be 
in  nature  any  fuch  thing  as  an  abjolute  panacea  : 
a medicine  that  wif  cure  every  difeaje  incid  nt  to 
the  human  body.  If  there  could,  eledruxty  would 
bid  fairer  for  it  than  any  thing  in  the  world:  a sit 
takes  place  in  Jack  a vafl  number  of  d. [orders, 
fame  of  them  fo  widely  dijfer  cut  from  the  others. 

6.  And  yet  there  is  fo  nothing  peculiarly  unac- 
countable, with  regard  to  its  operation.  In  fonte 
cafes,  where  there  was  no  hope  of  help,  it  util  fac- 
eted 


C 287  ]. 

ceed  beyond  all  expectation.  In  ethers , where  wt 
had  the  greatejl  hope,  it  will  have  no  ejfeft  at  all. 
Again,  in  Jome  experiments,  it  helps  at  the  very 
JirJl,  and  proinifes  an  entire  cure:  but prej&ntly  the 
good  effeB  ceafes,  and  the  patient  is  as  he  was  be- 
Jore.  On  the.  contrar  y,  in  other  s it  has  no  effeB  at 
fir/}:  it  does  no  good ; perhaps  Jeems  to  do  hurt. 
Yet  all  this  time  it  is  Jit  iking,  at  the  root  oj  the  dif- 
eafe,  which  in  a while  it  totally  removes.  Frequent 
injiances  of  the  former  we  have  in  paralytic,  oj  the 
latter  in  rheumatic  cafes. 

7.  But  fill  one  may  upon  the  whole  pronounce 
it  the  defideratum.  the  general  and  rar  ely  failing 
remedy,  in  nervous  cafes  of  every  kind  (old  palfies 
excepted J ; as  u el i as  in  many  others.  Ferhaps  if 
the  nerves  are  really  perforated  ( as  is  now  generally 
fuppofed ) the  eltclnc  ether  is  the  only  fluid  in  the 

lyniverfe,  which  is  f ne  enough  to  move  through 
them.  And  what  if  the  nervous  juice  itfdf  be  a 
fluid  of  this  land?  If  fa,  it  is  no  wonder  tka’  it  has 
always  eluded  the fearch  of  the  mofl  accurate  natu- 
rali/ls. 

8.  Be  this  as  it  may,  Mr.  Lovett  is  of  'opinion, 
“ the  eleBrical  method  of  treating  df orders,  cannot 
be  expelled  to  arrive  at  any  con fider able  degree  of 
perfethon,  till  adminiflered  and  applied  by  the  gen- 
tlemen of  the  faculty.''’  Nay  then,  quanta  de  fpe 
decidi  ! All  my  hopes  are  at  an  end.  For  when 
wilt  it  be  adminiflered  and  applied  by  them?  Truly 
ad  Grsecas  Calendas.  Not  till  the  gentlemen  oj  the 
faculty  have  more  regard  to  the  interejl  of  their 

neighbours 


[ 288  J 

neighbours  than  their  ozon.  At  leaf),  not  till  there 
are  no  apothecaries  in  the  land : or  till  phyfidans 
are  independent  of  them. 

9.  Therefore,  without  waiting  for  what  probably 
never  will  he,  and  what  indeed  we  have  no  reajon 
to  expel 7,  let  men  of  Jenfe  do  the  left  they  can  for 
ihemfelves,  as  well  as  for  their  poor,  Jick,  he/pltfs 
neighbours.  How  many  may  they  relieve  from, 
racking  pain  or  pining  Jtckncfs  by  this  unexpenjive 
and Jpeedy  remedy  ? Re/loring  them  to  cafe,  health, 
Jl length,  generally  in  a few  minutes, frequently  in  a 

moment  l And  if  a Jew.  of  thefe  lovers  of  mankind, 
v'ho  have  fame  little  knowledge  of  the  animal  acc- 
nomy,  would  only  be  diligent  in  making  experiments, 
and  Jetting  dozen  the  more  remarkable  of  them , 1 a 
order  to  communicate  tie  n to  one  another,  that  each 
might  profit  by  the  other’s  labour  ; I doubt  not,  but 
more  nervous  dforders  would  be  cured  in  one  year, 
by  this  fng'e  remedy , than  the  whole  Englifh  Ma- 
teria Medica  will  cure,  bj  the  end  of  the  century . 

10.  It  is  not  impofjib'e,  but  the  Gentlemen  Re- 
viewers may  beflow  a compliment  on  me  as  well  as 
on  Mr.  Lovett.  If  they  me  Jo  kind,  I would  only 
beg  them,  not  to  plume  ihemfelves  upon  a difeo- 
very,  which  1 have  helped  them  to  myfeij : namely , 
that  “ the  following  is  lift  terror  e than  an  extract 

from  others I intended  it  fo  to  be.  I defgncd 
only  to  colled,  together  the  fu  If  lance  of  the  moft  cele- 
brated writings  on  the  fifed  ; and  to  place  them 
in  one  connected  view,  for  the  ufc  of  thofe  who  haz  e 
little  time  or  money  to  fpare.  I ordy  zvifh,  Jo  me 

who 


[ *89  ] 

who  has  more  Icifure  and  ability  than  me,  would 
confider  it  more  deeply , and  write  a jull  praRical 
treatife  on  electricity,  which  might  be  a blefjing~t& 

' many  generations. 

Nov.  i,  1759. 


*•  *-Tp  ROM  a thoufand  experiments  it  ap- 
Ji,  pears,  that  there  is  a fluid  lar  more 
fubtle  than  air,  which  is  every  where  dhTufed 
through  all  fpace,  which  furrounds  the  earth, 

' arid  pervades  every  part  ot  it.  And  fitch  is 
the  extreme  finenefs,  velocity,  and  expan  five-1 
nefs  of  this  active  principle,  that  all  other  matter 
feems  to  be  only  the  body,  and  this  the  foul  of 
the  tmiverfe.  This  we  might  term  elementary 
fire ; but  that  it  is  hard  for  us  to  feparate  the 
ideas  of  fire  and  burning:  although  the  latter  is 
in  reality  but  a preternatural  and  violent  effect 
of  the  former. 

2.  It  is  highly  probable  this  is  the  general  in- 
flrument  of  all  the'motion  in  the  univerfe : from 
this  pure  fire,  (which  is  properly  fo  called)  the 
vulgar  culinary  fire  is  kindled.  For  in  truth 
there  is  but  one  kind  of  fire  in  nature,  which 
exirls  in  all  places  and  in  all  bodies.  And  this 
is  fubtle  and  atlive  enough,  not  only  to  be, 
under  the  great  Caufe,  the  .feeondary  caufe  of 
Vol.  XXIV.  ' N motion. 


[ 2S°  ] 

motion,  but  to  produce  and  fuflain  life  through- 
out all  nature,  as  well  in  animals  as  in  vegeta- 
bles. 

3.  To  this  effect  the  learned  Bifhop  of  Cloyne 
obferves,  “ The  vital  flame  is  fuppofedtobe  the 
caufe  of  all  the  motions  in  the  body  of  man, 
whether  natural  or  voluntary.  And  has  not  hre 
the  fame  force  to  animate  throughout,  and  ac- 
tuate the  whole  fyflem  of  the  world?  Cherifh- 
ing,  heating,  fermenting,  diflolving,  flrining, 
and  operating  in  various  manners,  as  various 
fubjefts  offer  to  employ,  or  to  determine  its 
force  ? It  is  prefent  in  all  parts  of  the  earth  and 
firmament,  though  latent  and  unobferved,  til! 
fome  accident  produces  it  into  aft,  and  renders 
it  vifible  111  its  effefts.” 

4.  This  great  machine  of  the  world  requires 
fome  fuch  conffant,  aftive  and.powerful  principle, 
conflituted  by  its  Creator,  to  keep  the  heavenly 
bodies  in  their  Teveral  courfes,  and  at  the  fame 
time  give  fupport,  life  and  incrcafe  to  the  various 
inhabitants  of  the  earth.  Now  as  the  heart  of 
everv  animal  is  the  engine  which  circulates  the 
blood  through  the  whole  body,  fo  the  fun,  as  the 
heart  of  the  world,  circulates  this  fire  through 
the  whole  univerfe.  And  this  element  is  not  i 
capable  of  any  effentia!  alteration,  increafe  or 
diminution.  It  is  a fpccies  by  itfell ; and  is  of 

a nature  totally  diftinft  from  that  of  all  other  bo- 
dies. 

j.  That  this  is  abfolutely  neceffary  both  to 

feed 


[ 291  ] 


feed  common  Fire,  and'  to  fuflain  the  life  of  ani- 
mals, it  feems  may  be  learned  from  an  eafy  ex- 
periment. Place  a cat,  together  with  a lighted 
candle,  in  a cold  oven  : then  lute  the  door  clofe, 
having  fixt  a glafs  in  the  middle  of  it : and  if  you 
look  through  this,  you  may  obferve,  at  one  and 
the  fame  inftant,  the  candle  goes  out,  and  the 
animal  dies.  A plain  proof,  that  the  fame  fire 
is  needful  to  fuflain  both  culinary  fire  and  ani- 
mal life : and  a large  quantity  oi  it.  Some 
doubtlefs  pervades  the  oven  door;  but  not 
enough  to  fuflain  either  flame  or  life.  Indeed 
every  animal  is  a kind  of  fire-engine.  As  foon 
as  the  lungs  infpire  the  air,  the  fire  mingled  with 
k is  inflantly  difperfed  through  the  pulmonary 
veflels  into  the  blood:  thence  it  is  diffufed 
through  every  part  of  the  body,  even  the  moft 
minute  arteries,  veins  and  nerves.  In  the  mean 
time  the  lungs  infpire  more  air  and  fire,  and  fo 
provide  a conftant  fupply. 

6.  The  air  feems  to  be  univerfally  impregnated 
with  this  fire,  but  fo  diluted,  as  not  Jo  hurt  the 
animal  in  refpiration.  So  a fma'll  quantity  of  a 
liquor  dropt  in  water,  may  be  friendly  to  an  hu- 
man body,  though  a few  drops  of  the  fame  li- 
quor, given  by  tbemfelves,  would  have  occafi- 
oned  certain  death,  And  vet  yon  cannot  con- 
ceive one  particle  of  the  water,  without  a particle 
of  the  medicine.  It  is  not  impoffible,  this  may 
be  one  great  ufe  of  air,  bv  adhering  fo  clofely  to 
the  elementary  fire,  to  temper  and  render  falutary 
N 2 to 


[ 292  ] 

to  the  body,  what  would  otherwlfe  be  fatal 
to  it. 

7.  To  put  it  beyond  difpute,  that  this  fire  is 
largely  mixt  with  the  air,  you  may  make  the 
following  experiment.  Take  a round  lump  of 
iron,  and  heat  it  to  a degree  called  a -welding 
heat  : take  it  out  of  the  fire,  and  with  a pair  of 
bellows  blow  cold  air  upon  it.  The  iron  will 
then  as  effefdually  melt,  as  if  it  were  in  the  Iiot- 
tefl  fire.  Now  when  taken  out  of  the  forge,  it 
had  not  fire  enough  in  it  to  conquer  the  cohefion 
of  its  parts:  but  when  this  fire  is  joined  with 
that  which  was  mixt  with  the  air,  it  is  fufficieot 
to  do  it.  On  the  fame  principle  we  account  for 
the  increafe  of  a coal  or  wood  fire  by  blowing 
it. 

8.  And  let  none  wonder  that  fire  fiiould  be  fo 
connected  with  air,  as  hardly  to  be  feparated. 
As  fubtle  as  fire  is,  we  may  even  by  art  attach  it 
to  other  bodies  ; yea,  and  keep  it  nrifoner  for 
many  years  : and  that  either  in  a folid  or  a fluid 
form.  An  infiance  of  ihe  firfi  we  have  in  fteel  : 
which  is  made  inch,  only  bv  impacting  a large 
quantity  ol  fire  into  bars  of  iron.  I11  like  manner 
we  impaft  a great  quantity  of  fire  into  fione,  to 
make  lime.  An  inftance  of  the  fecond  kind  we 
have  in  fpirits,  wherein  fire  is  imprifoned  in  a 
fluid  form.  Hence  common  fpirits  will  burn  all 
away.  And  if  you  throw  into  the  air  fpirits  rec- 
tified to  the  highe-fl  degree,  not  one  drop  will 

come 


[ 293  ] 

eome  clown  again,  but  the  univerfal  fire  will  take 
hold  of  and  abforb  it  all. 

9.  That  this  fire  fiibfifis  both  in  air,  earth  and 
water ; that  it  is  d iff  tiled  through  ail  and  every 
part  of  the  univerfe,  was  FuJpeQzd  by  many  ofithe 
antient  naturalifts,  and  believed  by  the  great  Sir 
Ifaac  Newton.  But  of  late  years  it  has  been 
fully  demonftrated  : particularly,  by  Mr.  Stephen 
Grav,  a penfioner  at  the  Charter-houfe ; who 
fome  years  fince  prefented  to  the  Royal  Society, 
an  account  of  many  experiments  he  had  made, 
whereby  this  fubtle  fluid  became  clearly  percep- 
tible both  to  the  fight  and  feeling;.  Becaufe  the 
glafs  tube,  by  means  of  which  thofe  experiments 
were  made,  was  obferved  when  rubbed  to  attraft 
ftraws  and  other  light  bodies  (a  known  property 
of  amber,  called  in  Latin  Eleelrum)  tlujc  expe- 
riments were  termed  eltclncal : a word  which  was 
foon  affixt  to  that  fubtle  fluid  itfeli,  and  every 
thing  pertaining  to  it.  But  improperly  enough  : 
feeing  the  attracting  (or  feeming  to  attract  - ftraws 
and  feathers,  is  one  of  the  molt  inconflderable 
of  all  the  effects,  wrought  by  this  powerful  and 
univerfal  caufe. 

10.  It  was  afterwards  found,  that  a glafs  globe 
was 'on  fome  accouuts  preferable  to  a glafs -tube: 
particularly,  as  it  was  lefs  labour  to  turn  the  one 
for  fome  hours  together,  by  means  of  a fin  all 
wheel,  in  the  mean  time  rubbing  it  with  a dry 
hand,  or  a little  cufhion,  than  to  rub  the  tube  for 
fo  long  a time.  It  was  likewife  obferved,  that  a 

N 3 greater 


[ 294  ] 

greater  quantity  of  ethereal  fire  might  be  collected 
by  this  means  than  by  the  other.  I fay  colleSed ; 
for  that  fire  is  no  more  created  by  rubbing,  than 
water  is  by  pumping.  The  grand  refervoir  there- 
of is  the  earth,  from  which  it  is  diffufed  through 
all  the  other  parts  of  common  matter.  Accord- 
ingly in  thefe  experiments,  the  globe  nibbing 
againft  the  culhion,  collects  fire  from  it.  The 
culhion  receives  it  from  the  frame  of  the  ma- 
chine ; the  frame  of  the  machine  from  the 
floor.  But  if  you  cut  off  the  communication 
with  the  floor,  no  fire  can  be  produced , becaufe 
none  can  be  collected. 

11.  In  the  year  1746.  Mr.  de  Mufchenbroek, 
profeffor  of  natural  philofophy  at  Leyden,  was 
led  by  a cafual  experiment,  into  many  new  dif- 
coveries.  Thefe  were  chiefly  made  by  means  of 
a large  but  thin  glafs  phial.  The  heft  way  to  pre- 
pare which  is,  to  coat  it  with  thin  lead  ; to  line 
it  on  the  infide  with  leaf  gold,  to  within  two 
inches  of  the  top,  and  to  fallen  fome  tinfel  fringe 
to  the  bottom,  (or  to  the  end  of  the  wire  within 
the  phial)  fo  as  to  touch  the  gold  lining.  Bv 
this  wire  going  through  the  cork,  the  phial  is 
hung  on  any  metallic  body,  which  communicates 
by  a wire,  with  the  globe  or  tube.  This  metal- 
lic body  has  been  termed,  the  prime  conductor , as 
it  condu&s  or  conveys  the  fire  collected  by  the 
tube  or  globe,  either  into  the  phial,  or  into  any 
other  body  communicating  therewith. 

12.  But  all  bodies  are  not  capable  of  receiving 

it 


[ 2®5  3 

it.  There  is  in  this  refpeft  an  amazing  difference 
between  them.  The  excrements  of  nature,  as 
wax,  filk,  hair,  will  not  receive  the  ethereal  fire, 
neither  convey  it  to  other  bodies  : fo  that  when- 
ever in  circulating  it  comes  to  any  of  thefe,  it  is 
at  a full  hop.  Air  itfelf  is  a body  of  this  kind  ; 
with  great  difficulty  either  receiving  or  convey- 
ing this  fire  toother  bodies  : fo  are  pitch  and  ro- 
bin (excrements,  as  it  were,  of  trees.)  To  thefe 
we  may  add  glafs,  amber,  brimftone,  dry  earth, 
and  a few  other  bodies.  Thefe  have  been  fre- 
quently ftiled  eltBrics  per  fe ; as  if  they  alone 
contained  the  eleBric  fire  : an  eminently  impro- 
per title,  founded  on  a palpable  miffake.  From 
the  fame  miflake,  all  other  bodies,  which  eafilv 
receive  and  readily  convey  it,  were  termed  non- 
declrics ; on  a fuppofition,  that  they  contained 
no  eletlric  fire ; the  contrary  of  which  is  now  al- 
lowed by  all. 

13.  That  this  fire  is  inconceivably  fubtle,  ap- 
pears from  its  permeating  even  the  denfeft  me- 
tals, and  that  with  fuch  eafe,  as  to  receive  no 
perceptible  refiflance.  If  any  one  doubt, 
whether  it  pafs  through  the  fubflance,  or 
1 only  along  the  furface  of  bodies,  a ftrong 
fliock  taken  through  his  own  body,  will  pre- 
vent his  doubting  any  longer.  It  differs  from 
all  other  matter  in  this,  that  the  particles  of  it 
repel,  not  attraft,  each  other.  And  hence  is 
the  manifefl  divergency  in  a ftream  of  eleftrical 
effluvia.  But  though  the  particles  of  it  repel 
N 4 each 


[ 296  ] 


each  other,  yet  are  they  attracted  by  all  other1 
matter.  And  from  thefe  three,  the  extreme  fub- 
tlety  of  this  fire,  the  mutual  repulfion  of  its  parts, 
and  the  ftrong  attrafiion  of  them  bv  other  matter, 
arifes  this  effefi,thatif  a quantity  of  deduic  fire  be 
applied  to  amafs  of  common  matter  of  any  bignefs 
or  length,  (which  has  not  already  got  its  quantity) 
it  is  immediately  diffufed  through  the  whole. 

14.  Itfeems,  this  globe  ol  earth  and  water, 
with  its  plants,  animals,  buildings,  have  diffufed 
through  their  whole  fubftance,  juft  as  much  of 
this  fire  as  they  will  contain.  And  this  we  mav 
teipn  their  natural  quantity . But  this  is  not  the 
fame  in  all  kinds  of  matter  : neither  in  the  fame- 
kind  of  matter  in  all  circumflances.  A folidfoot 
of  one  kind  of  matter  (as  glafs)  contains  moreofit 
than  a folid  foot  of  another  kind.  And  a pound 
weight  of  the  fame  kind  of  matter,  when  rarefied, 
contains  more  than  it  did  before. 

15.  W e know  that  this  fire  is  in  common  mat- 
ter, bccaufe  we  can  pump  it  out,  by  the  globe  or 
tube:  we  know  that  common  matter  has  near  as 
much  of  it  as  it  can  contain,'  becaufe  if  we  3dd  a 
little  more  to  any  portion  of  it,  the  additional 
quantity  does  not  enter,  but  forms  a kind  of  at- 
mofphere  round  it.  On  the  other  hand  we  know 
that  common  matter  has  not  more  of  it  that  it  can 
contain.  Otherwife  all  loofe  portions  of  it  would 
repel  each  other;  as  they  conftantlv  do,  when 
they  have  fuch  atmofpheres.  Had  the  earth,  for 
inflance,  as  much  elefiric  fire,  in  proportion, 

as 


[ 297  '] 

as  we  can  give  to  a globe  of  iron  or  wood,  the 
panicles  of  dull  and  other  light  matter,  would 
nor  only  repel  each'  other,  but  be  continually  re- 
pelled from  the  earth.  Hence  the  air  being  con- 
dantly  loaded  therewith,  would  be  unfit  for  re- 
fpiration.  Here  we  fee  another  occafion  to  a- 
dore  that  wifdom,  which  has-made  all  things  by 
weight  and  meafure. 

16.  The  form  of  every -elechic  atmofphere,  is 
khat  of  the  body  which  it  furrounds  : becaufe  it 
is  attratled  by  every  part  of  the  furface,  though 
it  cannot  enter  the  fublfance  already  replete. 
Without  this  attraffion,  it  would  not  remain 
round  the  body,  but  d i Hi  pate  into  the  air. 

17.  The  atmofphere  of  an  eleffrified  fphere,  is 
not  more  eafily  drawn  offi  from  any  one  part  of  it 
than  from  the  other,  becaufe.it  is  equally  attraH- 
ed  by  every  part.  But  it  is  not  fo  with  bodies 
of  other  figures.  From  a cube  it  is  more  eafily 
drawn  off  at  t he  corners  than  at  the  fides:  and  fo 
from-  the  corners  of  bodies  0/  any  other  formv 
and  moft  eafily  from  the  (harped  corners.  For 
the  force  with  which  an  electrified  body  retains 
its  atmofphere,  is  proportioned  to  the  furface  on 
which  that  atmofphere  reds.  So  a-  . furface  four 
inches  fquare  retains  its  atmofphere,  with  fixteen 
times  the  force  that  one  of  an  inch  fquare  does.- 
And  as  in  pulling  the  hairs  from  an  horfe’s  tail, 
a force  infufficient  to  pull  off  an  handful  at  once, 
could  eafily  pull  it  oft  hair  by  hair  : fo  though  a. 
3|!uat  body  cannot  draw,  off  all  the.  atmolphere  at 

N-&  once. 


[ =98  ] 

once,  a pointed  one  can  eafily  draw  it  off,  parti- 
cle by  particle. 

18.  If  you  would  have  a fenfible  proof,  how 
wonderfully  pointed  bodies  draw  off  the  electric 
fire,  place  an  iron  fbot  of  four  inches  diameter 
on  the  mouth  of  a dry  bottle.  Sufpend  over  it  a 
a fmall  cork-ball  by  a filken  thread,  juft  fo  as  to 
reft  againft  the  fide  of  the  fhot.  Electrify  the 
fhot,  and  the  ball  will  be  repelled  four  or  five 
inches  from  it.  Then  prefent  to  the  fhot  fix  or 
eight  inches  off,  the  point  of  a {harp  bodkin. 
The  fire  is  inftantly  drawn  off  ; fo  the  repulfion 
ceafes,  and  the  ball  flies  to  the  fhot.  But  a blunt 
body  will  not  produce  this  effe£t,  till  it  is  brought 
within  an  inch  of  the  fhot.  If  you  prefent  the 
point  of  the  bodkin  in  the  dark,  you  may  fee 
fometimes  at  a foot  alliance,  a light  gather  upon 
it  like  a glow-worm,  which  is  manifeftly  the  fire 
it  extrafls  from  the  fhot.  The  lefs  fharp  the 
point  is,  the  nearer  it  mull  be  brought  before  you 
can  fee  the  light.  And  at  whatever  diftance  you 
fee  the  light,  you  may  draw  off  the  electric  fire. 

ig.  To  be  convinced  that  pointed  bodies  threw 
off,  .as  well  as  draw  off  the  fire,  you  may  lay  a 
long  fharp  needle  on  the  fhot.  It  cannot  then 
be  eleftrified,  fo  as  to  repel  the  ball,  becaufe 
the  fire  thrown  upon  it,  continually  runs  off  at 
the  point  of  the  needle : from  which  in  the  dark 
you  may  fee  fuch  a ftream  of  light,  as  in  the  pre- 
ceding inftance. 

20.  Whi^e  the  eledlric  fire,  which  is  in  all 

bodies. 


[ 299  J 


bodies,  isdeft  to  itfelf,  undifturbed  by  any  exter- 
nal violence,  it  is  more  or  lefs  denfe,  according 
to  the  nature  of  the  body  which  it  is  in.  In  denfe 
bodies  it  is  more  rare  : in  rare  bodies  it  is 

more  denfe.  Accordingly  every  body  contains 
fuch  a quantity  of  it,  rare  or  denfe,  as  is  fuitable 
to  its  nature.  And  there  is  fome  refihance  to 
every  endeavour  of  altering  its  denfity,  in  the 
whole  of  any  bodv,  or  in  any  part  of  it.  For 
all  bodies  refill  either  the  increafe  or  diminution 
of  their  natural  quantity.  And  on  the  other 
hand,  when  it  has  been  either  increafed  or  di- 
minilhed,  there  is  a refihance  to  its  return  to  its 
natural  hate. 

21.  With  regard  to  the  different  refihance 
made  by  different  bodies,  in  either  of  thefe  cafes 
it  is  an  invariable  rule,  that  giafs,  wax,  rofin, 
brimftone,  filk,  hair,  and  fuch  like  bodies,  refill 
the  moll  ; and  next  to  thefe,  tire  air,  provided 
it  be  dry,  and  in  a furRcient  quantity  ; that 
this  refihance  is  leaft  in  metals,  minerals,  water, 
quickfilver,  animals  and  vegetables  ; which  we 
may  rank  together  becaufe  the  difference  in  their 
refihance  is  very  inconfiderable  : and  that  in 
thefe  bodies  the  refihance  is  greater,  when  their - 
furfaces  are  polifhed,  and  extended  in  length,  than 
when  their  furfaces  are  rough  and  fhort,<>F  eud  in 
fharp  points. 

22.  W hen  a body  has  more  eledlric  fire  forc- 
ed into  it,  than  it  has  naturally,  it  is  laid  to  be 
■sleflrified  pofitivdy.  When  part  of  the  natural 

N 6 quantity  j 


[ 3°°  ] 

quantity  is  taken  awav,  it  is  faid  to  be  electrifi- 
ed negatively.  Now  when  an  iron  bar  is  ne- 
gatively eleftrified,  the  fire  drawn  out,  does  not 
go  in  again  as  Toon  as  the  experiment  is  over, 
but  forms  an  atmofphere  round  it,  becaufe  of  the 
refiftance it  finds  in  its  endeavour  to  dilate  nfelf, 
either  into  the  air  or  into  the  bar.  And  when 
it  is  eleftrified  po/itively,  the  fame  kind  of  atmof- 
phere is  formed,  by  the  fire  accumulated  upon 
it.  Whether  therefore  bodies  are  eledfrified 
negatively  or  pofitively,  and  remain  fo  when 
the  experiment  is  over,  there  are  fimilar  at- 
mofpheres  furrounding  them,  which  will  pro- 
duce fimilar  effects. 

23.  But  we  can  electrify  no  body  bevond  a 
certain  degree  ; becaufe  when  any  is  electrified 
to  that  point,  it  has  an  atmofphere  round  it  fuf- 
ficiently  Itrong  to  ballance  any  power  that  en- 
deavours to  eleCtrifv  it  farther.  Nor  is  the  elec- 
tric fire  either  from  the  tube  or  the  globe,  able 
to  force  its  way  thro’  this. 

24.  And  in  the  ordinary  courfe  of  nature,  this 
fubtle,  aftive  fluid,  which  not  only  furroimds 
every -grot's  body,  but  every  component  particle 
of  each,  where  it  is  not  in  ablolute  contact 
with  its  neighbouring  particle,  can  never  be 
idle,  but  is  ever  in  aftion,  tho’  that  attion  be 
imperceptible  to  ourfenfes.  It  is  ever  varying 
its  condition,  tho’  imperceptibly,  in  all  parts  of 
all  bodies  whatever:  and  eledlrifying  them  more 
or  lefs,  tho’  not  fo  forcibly  as  to  give  fenfible 

figns 


[ 301  ] 


fig  ns  of  it.  All  bodies  then,  and  all  their  com- 
ponent particles,  when  in  their  natural  fituation, 
have  round  their  furfaces,  where  they  are  not 
in  abfolute  contact  with  other  furfaces,  an  im- 
perceptible atmofphere  fufficient  to  balance  the 
fmaller  force  with  which  they  are  attached,  every 
way  fimilar  to  the  perceptible  atmofphere  of  bo- 
dies forcibly  electrified.  In  thefe  imperceptible 
atmospheres  is  placed  the  power  which  refills 
their  being  electrified  torn  higher  degree  than 
they  are  naturally.  And  this  power  lies  in  the 
elafticity  ofthefubtle  fluid,  every  where  difperf- 
ed  both  round  all  bodies  and  in  them. 

25.  Glafs  is  very  difficulty  electrified,  which 
feems  to  prove  it  has  averydenfe  eleCtric  at- 
mofphere. Metals  are  eafily  eleCtrified.  Confe- 
quently  they  have  rare  and  therefore  weakly-refift- 
ing  atmofpheres.  Butasheat  rarefies  all  bodies,  fo 
if  glals  be  heated  to  a certain  degrpe,  even  be- 
low melting,  it  will  give  as  free  a paffage  to  the 
eleCtric  fire,  as  brafs  or  iron  does  : the  atmof- 
phere round  it  being  then  rendered  as  rare  as  (hat 
of  metals.  Nay.  when  melted,  it  makes  no  more 
refifiance  than  water.  But  its  refinance  increa- 
fes,  as  it  cools.  And  when  it  is  quite  cold,  it 
refills  as  forcibly  as  ever.  Smoothly-polifhed  wax 
refills  as  much  as  glafs.  But  even  the  finall  heat 
rajfed  by  rubbing,  will  render  its  atmofphere  as 
rare  as  that  of  metals,  and  fo  intirely  deftroys  its 
rcfifiance.  The  fame  is  true  of  rofin  and  brim- 
ftoue.  .Even  the  heat  arifing  from  friCHon,  de- 
ftroys 


[ 302  ] 

ftroys  the  refinance  which  they  naturally  make  to 
being  electrified  ; a ftrong  proof,  that  the  refin- 
ance of  all  bodies  thereto,  is  exerted  at  their  fur- 
faces,  and  caufed  by  an  eledtric  atmofphere  of 
different  denfities,  according  to  different  circum- 
ftances. 

26.  Molt  experiments  will  fucceed  as  well 
with  a globe  of  brimftone,  as  with  one  ofglafs. 
Yet  there  is  a confiderable  difference  in  their  na- 
ture. What  glafs  repells,  brimftone  (as  alfo  rofin) 
attrafts.  Rubbed  glafs  emits  the  define  fire; 
rubfied  brimftone,  rofin  and  wax  receive  it. 
Hence  if  a glafs  globe  be  turned  at  one  end  of  a 
prime  conductor,  and  a brimftone  one  at  the 
other,  not  a fpark  of  fire  can  be  obtained  : one  re- 
ceiving it  in,  as  fall  as  it  is  given  out  bv  the  other. 
Hence  alfo  if  a phial  be  fufpended  on  the  prime 
conductor,  with  a chain  from  its  coating  to  the 
table,  and  only  one  globe  turned,  it  will  be  elec- 
trified, (or  charged  as  they  term  it)  by  twenty 
turns  ol  the  wheel  ; after  which  it  may  be  dif- 
charged , that  is  unelectrified,  by  twenty  turns  of 
the  other  wheeff 

27.  *The  difference  between  non-elefirics  (vul- 
garly  fpeaking)  and  elr fines  per  fc,  is  chiefly  this. 
1.  A non-elefiric  eafily  fuffers  a change,  in  the 
quantity  of  fire  it  contains.  Its  whole  quantity 
may  be  leffened  bv  drawing  out  a part,  which 
it  will  afterwards  refume.  Eut  you  can  only  leffen 
the  quantity  contained  in  one  ol  the  furfaces  of  an 
define : and  not  that, but  by  adding  at  the  fame  time 


an 


[ 3°3  ] 

an  equal  quantity 'to  the  other  furface.  So  that 
the  whole  glafs  will  always  have  the  famequanti- 
tv  in  its  two  furfaces.  And  even  this  ran  only 
be  done  in  glafs  that  is  thin : beyond  a certain 
thicknefs  we  know  no  power  that  can  make  this 
change.  2.  The  ethereal  fire  freely  moves  from 
place  to  place,  in  and  through  the  fubflance 
of  a non-elctlric.  But  through  the  fubflance  of 
an  eleftric  it  will  by  no  means  pafs.  It  freely 
enters  an  iron-rod,  and  moves  from  one  end  to 
another,  where  the  overplus  is  difcbarged.  But 
it  will  not  enter,  or  move  through  a glafs -red. 
Neither  will  the  thinned  glafs  which  can  he  made, 
fuffer  any  particle  of  it  entering  one  of  its  fur- 
faces,  to  pafs  through  to  the  other. 

28.  Indeed  it  is  only  metals  and  liquids,  that 
perfeftly  conduL 7 (or  t-ranfmit)  this  fire.  Other 
bodies  feem  to  conduft  it,  only  fo  far  as 
they  contain  a mixture  of  thefe ; accordingly, 
moifl  air  will  conduct  it,  in>  proportion  to  its 
moiflnefs.  But  dry  air  will'  not  condufl  it  at 
all.  on  the  contrary,  it  is  the  main  inflrument, 
in  confining  any  electric  atmofphere,  to  the  bo- 
dy which  it  furrounds.  Dry  air  prevents  its  dif- 
fipating  (which  it  docs  prefently  when  in  vacuo ) 
or  palling  from  body  to  body,  a clear  bottle  full 
of  air,  inflead  of  water,  cannot  be  ele&rified. 
But  exhaufled  of  air,  it  is  eledirified  as  effeflual- 
ly  as  if  it  was  full  of  water.  Yet  an  eleftrical 
atmofphere  and  air,  do  not  exclude  one  another; 

Tut 


C 3°4  ] 


For  we  breathe  in  it  freely,  and  dry  air  will  blow 
through  it,  without  altering  it  at  all. 

29.  When  a glafs  phial  is  eleftrified,  what- 
ever quantity  of  fire  is  accumulated  on  the  inner 
furface,  an  equal  quantity  is  taken  from  the 
outer.  Suppofe,  before  the  operation  begins, 
the  quantity  of  fire  contained  in  each  furface,  is 
equal  to  twenty  grains  : fuppofe  at  every  turn  of 
the  globe,  one  grain  is  thrown  in  : then  after 
the  firft  firoke  there  are  twenty-one  within,  nine- 
teen only  without ; after  the  fecond,  the  inner 
lurface  will  have  twenty-two,  the  outer  but 
eighteen  ; and  fo  on,  till  after  twenty  llrokes, 
the  inner  will  have  forty,  the  outer  none.  And 
the  operation  ends;  for  no  power  cr  art  of  man 
can  throw  any  more  on  the  inner  furface,  when 
no  more  can  be  taken  from  the  outer.  If  you 
attempt  to  throw  more  in,  it  is  thrown  back 
through  the  wire,  or  flies  out  in  cracks  through 
the  fides  of  the  phial.  The  equilibrium  cannot 
be  reftored  in  this  phial,  but  by  a communica- 
tion formed  between  the  inner  and  outer  furT 
face,  by  fomething  external,  touching  both  the 
outer,  and  the  wire  which  communicates  with 
the  inner  furface.  If  you  touch  thefe  by  turns, 
it  is  reftored  by  degrees  ; if  both  at  once,  it  is 
reftored  inftantly.  But  then  there  is  a (hock  oc- 
caftoned  by  the  fudden  palling  of  the  fire  through 
the  body,  in  its  way  from  the  inner  to  the  outer 
furface.  For  ft  moves  'rom  the  wire  to  the  fin- 
ger, (not  from  the  finger  to  the  wire,  as  is  com- 
monly 


[ 3 °5  J 

inonly  fuppofed.)  Thence  it  pafles  tlnough  tlie 
body  to  the  other  hand,  and  fo  to  the  outer  fur- 
face. 

30.  The  iorce  with  which  this  (hock  may  be 
given,  is  iar  greater  than  one  would  conceive* 
It  will  kill  rats,  hens,  or  even  turkeys  in  a mo- 
ment : others,  that  are  not  quite  killed,  it  flrikes 
blind.  It  will  give  polarity  to  a fine  needle, 
making  it  point  north  and  louth,  as  if  touched 
by  a loadilone.  It  will  invert  the  polarity  of  a 
compafs,  and  make  the  north  point  turn  to  the 
fouth.  At  the  fame  time  the  ends  of  the  needles 
are  finely  blued  like  the  fpring  of  a watch.  It 
will  melt  off  the  heads  and  points  of  pins  and 
needles  ; and  fometimes  the  tv  hole  furlace  of 
the  needle  is  run,  and  appears  as  it  wereblifier- 
ed,  when  examined  by  a magnifying  glafs.  It 
will  melt  thin  gold  or  filver,  when  held  tight  be- 
tween two  panes  of  glafs,  together  with  the  fur- 
face  of  the  glafs  itfelf,  and  incorporate  them  in 
a fine  enamel.  Yea,  a lirong  fpark  from  an  elec- 
trified phial,  makes  a fair  hole  through  a quire 
of  paper  doubled  : which  is  thought  good  armour 
againfl  the  pufh  of  a fwonl,  or  even  a piflol  bal- 
let. And  it  is  amazing  to  obferve  in  how  frnall 
a portion  of  glafs,  a great  eledliical  force  may 
be.  A thin  glafs  bubble,  about  an  inch  diame- 
ter, being  half  filled  with  water,  partly  gilt  on 
the  outfide,  when  electrified,  gives  as  ftrong  a 
fhock  as  a man  can  v/ell  bear  ; allowing- then  that 
it  contains  no  more  fire  after  charging  than  be- 
fore, 


[ 3°S  ] 


fore,  how  much  fire  mufl  there  be  in  this  finall 
goafs'  It  teems  to  be  a part  of  r.s  very  fubftance. 
Perhaps  if  that  fire  could  be  feparated  from  it,  ft 
would  be  no  longer  glafs.  It  might  in  lofing 
this,  lofe  itsmofi  effential  properties,  itstranfpa- 
rency,  brittlenefs,  and  elafticiiv. 

31.  Some  have  not  imprope:iy  fuppofed,  that 
all  elcElnc  bodies,  fo  called,  are  by  their  origi- 
nal conftituticin,  throughly  faturated  with  elec- 
tric fire  : that  it  remains  fixt  in  them,  funlefs 
while  the  texture  ol  thofe  bodies  is  quite  ahered- 
by  liquefa&ion)  that  fire  fixt  in  a body  confh- 
tutes  an  elcchic,  and  all  bodies  where  it  is  not 
fixt  are  von-e'eclncs.  Agreeably  to  which  they 
fuppufe,  that  in  all  non-eleftiics , the  original 
fire,  loofdy  inhering,  is  e'afily  driven  on  bv  the 
new-collefled  fire,  w hich  then  pofTeffes  its  place  : 
but  that  in  eletlrics,  the  original  fire  being  im- 
pacted into  their  fubftance,  and  therefore  more 
firmly  inhering,  will  not  give  way  to,  or  be 
driven  on  by  the  new  collected  fire.  Such  is  air 
in  particular : with  the  particles  of  which  the 
original  fire  is  clofely  incorporated.  Dry  air 
feems  to  be  fo  fullv  faturated  with  it,  that  it  is 
fcarce  capable  of  receiving  anv  more  ; whereas 
all  new-colle£ted  fire  is  continually  endeavour- 
ing to  return  into  the  earth.  Let  wires  be  elec- 
trified ever  fo  ftrongly,  vet  the  moment  any  part 
of  them  is  touched  by  a perfon  Handing  on  the 
floor,  they  are  electrified  no  longer;  all  the  fire 
efcaping  through  him  into  the  earth. 

32.  upon 


[ 3°7  J 

32.  Upon  the  principles  of  eleSricitv,  we 
may  give  a more  rational  account,  of  many  ap- 
pearances in  nature,  than  has  vet  been  done  : 
of  thunder  and  lightning  in  particular.  In  order 
to  which  we  may  obferve,  all  eleftrified  bodies 
retain  the  fire  thrown  into  them,  till  fbme  non- 
eleftric  approaches:  to  which  it  is  then  com- 
municated with  a fnap,  and  becomes  equally  di- 
vided. EleCtric  fire  is  flrongly  attracted  by 
water,  and  readily  mixes  with  it.  And  water 
being  electrified,  the  vapours  arifing  from  it, 
are  equally  eleCtrified.  As  thefe  float  in  the  air, 
they  retain  the  additional  fire,  till  they  meet  with 
clouds  not  fo  much  electrified.  Then  they 
communicate  it  with  a fhock. 

33.  The  oceau  is  compounded  of  water,  and 
fait;  one  an  electric,  the  other  not.  When 
there  is  a friction  among  the  parts  near  its  fur- 
face;  the  fire  is  collected  from  the  parts  below. 
It  is  then  plainly  vifible  in  the  night,  at  the 
Hern  of  every  failing  veil'd.  It  appears  from 
every  dafli  of  an  oar  : in  florins  the  whole  fea 
feems  on  fire.  The  particles  of  water  then  re- 
pelled from  the  elecfrified  fui  face,  continually 
carry  off  the  fire  as  it  is  collected.  They  rife 
and  form  clouds  which  are  highly  electrified,  and 
retain  the  fire  till  they  have  an  opportunity  of 
difcharging  it. 

34.  Particles  of  water  rifing  in  vapours, 
attach  themfelves  to  particles  of  air.-  One  par- 
ticle of -air  maybe  furrounded  by  twelve  particles 

of 


C 3oS  ] 


of  water  as  large  as  itfelf,  al!  touching  it,  and  by 
moreaddedt-o  them.  Particles  of  air  thus  loaded 
would  be  drawn  nearer  together  by  the  mutual 
attraction  of  the  particles  of  water,  did  not  the 
fire,  common  or  electric,  included  therein,  a hi  ft 
their  mutual  repulftan.  Hence  they  continue  fuf- 
pended.  But  if  air  thus  loaded,  be  comprefTed 
by  adcerfe  winds,  or  bv  being  driven  againft 
mountains,  or  if  it  be  coodenfed  by  the  lofs  of 
its  lire,  it  will  continue  fufpenfed  no  longer, 
but  will  defcend  in  dew.  And  if  the  water  fur- 
rounding one  panicle  of  air  comes  into  contact 
with  that  furrounding  another,  thev  naturally 
coalefce  into  a drop,  and  fo  defcend  in  rain. 

35,  The  fun  fuppiies  common  fire  to  all  va- 
pours rifing  either  from  fea  or  land  ; vapours, 
having  both  this  and  eleciric  fire,  are  better 
fupported  than  thofe  which  have  this  only.  For 
when  vapours  rife  into  the  coldeft  region,  the 
common  fire  may  fail.  But  the  cold  will  not 
diminifh  the  eleciric  ; this  is  always  the  fame. 
H once  clouds  raifed  from  frefh  waters,  from 
rnbift  earth,  or  growing  vegetables,  more  eafily 
defcend  and  depofite  their  waters,  as  having  but 
little  eleiliic  fire,  to  keep  the  particles  fepa- 
rate  from  each  other.  So  hac  the  greateftpart 
of  the  water  raifed  from  the  land,  falls  on  the 
land  again.  But  clouds  raifed  from  the  fea,  hav- 
ing both  fires,,  and  much  of  the  eleftric,  fupport 
their  water  far  more  ftror.pv,  and  being  alfifted 
by  winds,  may  bring  it  from  the  middle  of  the 

wide  ft 


[ 3°9  1 

wide!!:  ocean  to  the  middle  of  the  broadeft  con- 
tinent. And  yet  a way. is  provided  whereby  thefe 
alfo  are  readily  brought  to  depofite  their  water. 
For  whenever  they  are  driven  againft  mountains 
by  the  winds,  thofe  mountains  take  away  their 
eleftric  fire;  and  being  cold,  the  common  alfo  : 
hence  the  particles  immediately  dole.  If  the 
air  was  not  much  loaded,  the  water  falls  in  dew 
on  the  top  and  the  hides  of  the  mountain.  If  it 
was  the  elefiric  fire  being  taken  at  once  from- the 
whole  cloud,  it  flafhes  brightly,  and  cracks 
loudly.  And  the  particles  ihftantly  coalefcing 
for  want  of  that  fire,  fall  in  an  heavy  Ihower. 

36. When  a ridge  of  mountains  flops  the  clouds, 
and  draws  the  eleflnc  fire  from  the  cloud  firft 
approaching  it,  the  next  when  it  comes  near 
the  firff,  now  deprived  of  its  fire,  flafhes  into  it, 
and  depofits  its  own  water.  The  third  cloud 
approaching,  and  all  that  fiicceed,  a£l  in  the  fame 
manner;  as  fat  back  as  they  extend,  which  may 
be  for  feveral  hundred  miles.  Hence  the  conti- 
nual fforms  of  thunder,  lightning  and  rain,  on 
the  eall  fide  of  thofe  vaft  mountains,  the  Andes,  ’ 
which  running  north  and  fouth,  intercept  all  the 
clouds  brought  again  ft  them  from  the  Atlantic 
ocean.  In  a plain  country,  there  are  other  means 
to  make  them  drop  their  water.  For  if  an  elec- 
trified cloud  coming  from  the  fea,  meets  in  the 
air  a cloud  coming  from  the  land,  and  therefore 
not  ele&rificd,  the  firft  will  give  its  fiafb  into  the 
latter,  and  thereby  both  wiii  be  made  to  depofit 

their 


C 310  ] 

their  water.  The  concufiion  of  the  air  contri- 
butes alfo  to  fhake  down  the  water,  not  only 
from  thofe  two  clouds,  but  from  others  near 
them.  When  the  fea  and  land  clouds  would 
pafs  at  too  great  a difhmce  from  each  other,  thev 
are  mutually  attracted  till  within  the  difiance. 
Tor  the  fphere  of  ele£lrical  attraction  is  far  be- 
yond the  flafhi ng  difiance.  And  yet  where  a 
cloud  contains  much  fire,  it  may  ffrike  at  a con- 
fiderable  difiance.  When  a co-nduttor  has  but 
little  fire  in  it,  you  mull  approach  very  near  be- 
fore you  can  draw  a fpark.  7 brow  into  it  a 
greater  quantity  of  fire,  and  it  will  give  a fpark 
at  a greater  difiance.  But  if  a gun  barrel,  when 
electrified,  will  finite  and  make  a noife,  at  the 
difiance  of  an  inch,  at  what  a difiance,  and  with 
how  great  a noife,  may  ten  thoufand  acres  of  elec- 
trified cloud  11  rike  P No  wonder  that  this  should 
melt  metals  (which  our  artificial  fialh  does  in 
fome  degree)  though  perhaps  not  fo  properly  by 
its  heat,  as  by  infinuating  into  the  pores,  and 
creating  a violent  repulfion  between  tbe  particles 
of  the  metal  it  pafies  through,  i bis  overcomes 
the  attraction  whereby  they  cohere,  and  fo  melts 
the  metallic  body.  And  this  accounts  for  its 
melting  a fword  m the  fcabbard,  or  gold  in  the 
pocket,  without  burning  either. 

gy.  But  thunder-clouds  do  not  always  contain 
more  than  their  natural  quantity  of  electric  fire. 
Very  frequently  thev  contain  lefs.  And  when 
this  is  the  cafe,  when  they  are  negatively  electri- 
fied, 


C J 

fied,  although  the  effedfs  and  appearances  are 
nearly  the  fame, .yet  the  manner  of  operation  is 
different..  For  in  this  cafe,  it  is  really  the  fire 
from  the  mountains,  or  other  parts  of  the  earth 
which  flrikes  into  the  cloud  ; and  not,  as  we 
imagine,  fire  from  the  cloud  which  flrikes  into 
the  earth.  And  we  may  eafily  conceive,  how 
a cloud  may  be  negatively  electrified.  When  a 
portion  of  water  is  rarefied  into  a thin  vapour, 
the  fire  it  contains  is  rarefied  too.  Coufequently 
it  has  then  lefs  than  its  natural  quantity  oi  fire. 
Such  a cloud  therefore  coming  withm  a due  dif- 
tance  of  the  earth,  will  receive  from  it  a flaih  of 
eletlric  fire;  which  flafh,  to  fupply  a great  ex- 
tent of  cloud,  muff  often  contain  a sweat  quantity 
of  fire.  Such  a cloud  alfo  pafling  over  woods 
of  tall  trees,  may  filently  receive  fome  fupply, 
•either  from  the  points  of  the  houghs,  or  from  the 
firarp  ends  and  edges  of  the  leaves.  The  cloud 
thus  fupplied,  flaflies-into  other  clouds  that  have 
not  been  fo  fupplied  ; and  thofe  into  others,  till 
an  equilibrium  is  produced,  among  ail  that  are 
within  a finking  diflance  of  each  other.  And 
hence  are  repeated  Jlrokes  and  flafhes,  till  they 
defeend  in  fhowers  to  the  earth,  their  original. 
Rain,  efpecially  when  in  large  drops,  generally 
brings  down  the  electric  fire  : falling  fnow  often.; 
fummer  hail,  alwavs,  though  filently.  Corife- 
quently,  any  of  thefe  may  prevent  thunder  and 
lightning  ; or  at  leaf!,  abate  its  -violence.  Rain 
is  helpful  in  another  re  Ip  eft  likewife.  By  w.et- 

ting 


[ 312  ] 


ting  men  or  beafis,  it  faves  many  lives.  For  if 
your  cloathes  are  throughly  wet,  and  a flafh  of 
lightning  ftrikes  the  top  of  your  head,  it  will  run 
in  the  water  over  the  furfuce  of  your  body  into 
the  ground  : whereas  if  your  cloaths  were  not 
wet,  it  would  go  through  your  body.  Hence 
a wet  chicken  cannot  be  killed  by  a broke  from 
the  phial : whereas  a dry  one  is  killed  in  an  m- 
ftant.  See  here  alfo  the  wifdom  and  goodnefs 
of  him,  who  Jendeth  forth  lightnings  with  the 
rain!  It  fhould  likewife  be  obferved,  that 
wherever  electrified  clouds  pafs,  fpires,  towers, 
chimneys,  and  high  trees,  as  fo  many  points, 
draw  the  eleftric  fire,  and  the  whole  cloud  fre- 
quently difeharges  there.  Therefore  it  is  highly 
dangerous  in  fuel)  a ftorm,  to  take  lhelter  under 
a Lree. 

38.  Common  fire  (if  it  be  any  thing  more, 
than  a different  modification  of  the  fame  ele- 
ment) is  more  or  lefs  in  all  bodies,  as  well  as 
electrical.  If'there  be  a fulficient  quantity  of 
either  in  any  body,  it  is  inflamed.  But  when 
the  quantity  of  common  fire  therein  is  finall, 
there  needs  more  electric  fire  to  inflame  it. 
Where  the  quantity  of  common  fire  is  greater, 
lefs  of  the  electric  will  fuffice.  So  if  fpirits  are 
heated,  a (mall  fpark  inflames  them.  If  they 
are  not,  the  fpark  muff  be  greater.  Sulphureous 
vapours,  whether  rifing  from  the  ^arth,  or  from 
flacks  of  moift  hay  or  corn,  or  any  other  heated 
and  reeking  vegetable,  contain  abundance  of 

common 


[ 3i3  } 

common  fire.  A fmall  addition  of  eleQric  then 
will  inflame  them.  Therefore  they  are  eafily 
kindled  by  lightning. 

39.  Any  who  would  be  clearly  convinced  of 
the  nature  of  lightning,  may  make  the  following 
experiment.  Make  a fmall  crofs  of  two  thin 
if  rips  of  wood,  the  arms  being  juft  fo  long,  as  to 
reach  the  four  corners  of  a large,  thin  filk  hand- 
kerchief when  extended.  Tie  the  corners  of 
this  to  the  extremities  of  the  crofs  : and  fo  you 
have  the  body  of  a kite  : add  to  this  a proper 
tail,  loop  and  firing,  and  it  will  rife  in  the  air 
like  one  made  with  paper  : but  this  is  fitter  to 
bear  the  wind  and  wet  in  a florin  without  tearing. 
To  the  top  of  the  crofs  fix  a (harp-pointed  wire, 
rifling- a foot  above  it.  Tie  a filk  ribbon  to  the 
end  of  the  twine  next  the  hand  : and  where  the. 
filk  and  twine  join,  fallen  a key.  Raife  this  kite 
when  a thunder-fiorm  is  coming  on  : but  he  that 
holds  the  firing  muft  {land  in  a porch,  or  under 
feme  other  covering,  that  the  ribbon  may  not 
be  wet.  He  muft  likewise  take  particular  care, 
that  the  twine  do  not  touch  the  top  or  fide  of  the 
■porch.  As  fooa  as  the  thunder- cloud  comes 
over  the  kite,  the  pointed  wire  draws  the  eledlric 
fire  from  it.  The  kite  and  all  the  twine  are 
then  eleflrified,  as  plainly  appears  by  this,  that 
the  loole  filaments  of  the  twine  Hand  out  every 
wav  and  are  at  raffed  by  an  approaching  finger. 
And  when  the  kite  and  twine  being  wet,  conduft 
the  fire  freely,  it  will  ftream  from  he  key,  on  the- 
Vo l. XXIV.  O approach' 


[ 3H  3 


approach  of  the  knuckle.  By  this  key  the  phial 
may  be  charged,  and  all  other  experiments 
made,  as  by  the  globe.  And  this  is  a demon- 
Hration,  that  the  eleftric  fire  thereby  obtained,  is 
the  very  fame  with  that  of  lightning. 

40.  May  not  the  knowledge  of  this  power  in 
pointed  bodies,  of  drawing  off  the  fire  contained 
in  thefe  clouds,  fugged  to  us  a very  probable  me- 
thod of  prefcrving  houfes,  churches,  fbips  from 
the  ftroke  of  lightning?  Might  wc  not  fix  on 
the  high  eft  part  of  them,  upright  rods  of  iron 
made  (harp  as  needles,  and  gilt,  to  prevent 
tuftintr.  which  otherwife  tvould  hinder  their  free 
conveyance  of  the  elefctric  fire  ? From  the  foot 
of  thofe  rods  (which  need  not  be  above  half  a 
inch  diameter)  a wire  may  pafs  down  the  outfide 
of  the  building  into  the  ground;  or  down  round 
one  of  the  fhrouds  of  a fhip,  and  down  her  fide, 
till  it  reaches  the  water.  Would  not  thefe  rods 
filentiy  draw  off  the  ele&ricfire,  before  the  cloud 
was  nigh  enough  to  ftrike?  And  thereby  in  a 
good  meafure  fecure  us  from  that  moft  hidden 
and  terrible  mifchief!  Let  it  not  be  objecied, 
that  the  ufing  this  probable  means  of  preventing 
a threatning  danger,  would  imply  any  denial  of, 
or  diftruft  in  Divine  Providence.  Not  at  all : 
we  know  the  Creator  of  the  univerfe,  is  likewife 
the  governor  of  all  things  therein.  But  we  know 
likewife,  that  he  governs  bv  fecond  caufes;  and 
that  accordingly  it  is  his  will,  we  ihould life  all 
the  probable  means  he  has  given  us  to  attain 

every 


[ 315  ] 


every  lawful  end.  It  is  therefore  no  more  an 
impeachment  of  his  providence,  when  we  fore- 
fee a ftorm  of  lightning  and  rain,  to  fhelter  our 
houfe  (as  far  as  we  are  able]  from  the  one,  than 
to  fhelter  ourfelves  in  that  houfe  from  the  other. 
Is  it  not  juft  as  innocent  (if  it  be  poftible)  to  keep 
our  rooms  tight  from  lightning,  as  from  wind 
and  water  ? 

41.  It  may  not  be  improper  to  add  one  or 
two  obfervations,  before  we  proceed  to  what  is 
of  more  importance.  Scarce  any  phenomenon 
in  nature  has  been  efteemed  more  difficult  to  be 
accounted  for,  than  ihofe  luminous  appearances 
in  the  fky,  termed  Aurora  Borealis,  or  Northern 
Lights.  But  thefe  alfo  may  be  rationally  ex- 
plained, upon  the  principles  of  eleQricity.  We 
often  fee  clouds  at  different  heights,  palling 
different  ways,  north  and  fouth  at  the  fame  time. 
This  manifeftly  proves  different  currents  of  air, 
one  of  them  under  the  other.  Now  as  the  air 
between  the  tropics  is  rarefied  by  the  fun,  it 
rifes  ; the  denfer  air  prefling  into  its  place.  1 he 
air  fo  railed.,  moves  north  and  fouth,  and  if  it 
has  no  opportunity  before,  muff  defeend  in  the 
polar  regions.  When  this  air  with  its  vapours 
defeends  into  contaft  with  the  vapours  arifing 
there,  the  eleclric  fire  which  it  brought  begins  to 
be  communicated,  and  is  feen  in  clear  nights ; 
being  firft  vifible  where  it  is  firft  in  motion, 
namely  in  the  molt  northern  parts.  Bur  from 
O 2 thence 


[ 3*6  ] 


thence  the  flreams  of  light  feem  to  fhoot  fouther- 
1 y,  even  to  the  zenith  of  northern  countries. 

42.  Another  phenomenon  of  a totally  differ- 
ent kind,  may  be  accounted  for  on  the  fame 
principles,  although  Mr.  Prior  fuppofes  Solomon 
himfelf  to  afk,  as  a queflion  which  he  could  not 
anfwer, 

“ Whence  does  it  happen,  that  the  plant  which 
well 

We  name  the  fenfitive,  fhould  move  and  feci  ? 
Whence  know  her  leaves  to  anfwer  her  command. 
And  with  qdick  horror  fly  the  neighb’ring 
hand  ?” 

Allowing  for  poetical  amplification,  the  plain 
fact  is  this.  The  fenfitive  plant,  as  it  were, 
{brinks  away  as  foon  as  your  hand  approaches  it. 
And  from  a turgid  and  vivid  appearance,  in- 
ftantlv  droops  and  hangs  its  leaves.  Now  fup- 
nofe  this  plant  to  contain  more  eleftric  fire  than 
any  other  plant  or  animal,  it  muff  of  cottrfe  com- 
municate that  fire  to  any  other  that  touches  it. 
And  if  fo,  its  leaves  and  branches  mu  ft  be  in  a 
languid  ftate,  till  they  have  recovered  their  na- 
tural quantity.  To  illuftrate  this,  fet  any  imall 
free  in  a pot  on  a cake  of  bnmftone.  Eietrnfy 
it  and  it  grows  extremely  turgid,  fo  as  to  erect  its 
leaves.  But  the  moment  you  touch  one  of  them, 
the  whole  tree  droops,  and  hangs  all  its  lca\  es 
and  branches.  _ 


[ 3*7  1 

: To  throw  all  the  light  I can  on  the  fubjeCt, 
I fubjoin  a few  extracts  from  feveral  other 
writers. 

An  exlraQ.  from  Dr.  Watfon’r  experiments  and 
obfervations. 

1.  When  two  plates,  the  one  elefirified,  the 
other  not,  were  brought  near  each  other,  the 
flaflies  of  bright  fame  were  fo  large,  that  in  a 
dark  room,  I could  diftin&ly  fee  the  faces  of  13 
perfons.  P.  6. 

2.  A piece  of  iarge  blunt  wire  was  hung  to 
the  conductor.  To  the  end  of  this,  when  elec* 
trifled,  a black  furface  not  eleCtrified  being 
brought  near,  (though  not  near  enough  to  caufe 
a-fnap)  a brulh  of  blue fame , quite  different  from 
the  former,  iffued  of  more  than  an  inch  long, 
and  an  inch  thick.  P.  7. 

3.  If  a perfon  ftrongly  eleflrified  lays  his  hand 
on  the  cloaths  of  one  that  is  not,  efpecially  if 
they  are  thin  woollen  or  filk,  they  both  feel  as 
it  were  many  pins  pricking  them,  as  long  as  the 
globe  is  in  motion. 

4.  If  oil  of  turpentine  be  fet  on  fire  in  a vef- 
fel  held  by  one  electrified,  the  frnoke  arifing  there- 
from, received  againft  a plate  held  at  a foot  dif- 
tance  from  the  flame,  by  one  Handing  on  rofin, 
will  enable  him  to  fire  warm  fpirits  of  wine. 
The  eleffric  ftrokes  have  been  likewife  felt  lid  on 

x 

touching  the  fecond  man,  when  the  plate  he 
O 3 held 


[ 3*8  ] 

held  in  the  fmoke  has  been  between  feven  and 
eight  feet  above  the  flame.  P.  8. 

5.  Take  burning  fpirits  of  wine  inflead  of  oil 
of  turpentine  ; and  if  the  fecond  man  hold  the 
end  of  an  iron  rod  at  the  top  of  the  flame,  he 
may  kindle  other  warm  fpirits  held  near  his 
finger.  Plence  we  find  that  either  fmoke  or 
flame  condufts  the  eleftric  fire,  and  does  not 
perceptibly  dimiuifh  its  force.  P.  9. 

6.  If  the  wire  of  the  phial  be  not  touched, 
the  ele£Irified  water  or  Reel  daft  will  retain  its 
force  many  hours,  may  be  conveyed  feveral 
miles,  and  will  afterward  exert  its  force  upon 
touching  the  wire.  P.  j6. 

7.  If  an  egg  is  hung  on  the  conduflor,  and  a 
perfon  grafping  the  eleflrified  phial  with  one 
hand,  brings  the  palm  of  his  other  near  the  bot- 
tom of  the  egg,  he  receives  a fmart  flroke  on  the 
hand,  as  with  a ferula,  and  his  hand  feems  full 
of  a more  red  fire  than  is  ufually  obferved. 
P.  24. 

8.  Any  number  of  perfons  communicating  with 
each  other,  the  firfl  of  ■whom  grafps  the  phial, 
and  the  laft  touches  the  conduffor,  receives  the 
fame  fhock  as  if  it  was  one  only.  P.  25. 

9.  The  eleftric  force  always  defcribes  a cir- 
cuit, and  moves  in  the  flraitefl  line  it  can,  be- 
tween the  conduftor  and  phial.  P-  26. 

10.  To  prove  this,  w'hile  the  machine  flood 
on  wax,  I flood  upon  the  floor ; and  putting 
one  hand  on  the  machine,  touched  the  gun  bar- 
rel 


r si9  ] 

rel  with  the  other.  Upon  this  fire  ifiued,  and 
the  fnapping  continued  as  long  as  I held  my 
hand  on  the  machine,  but  no  longer.  This 
fhewed  at  once,  that  the  eleCtric  fire  pafied  from 
the  floor  through  my  body  to  the  machine.  P.  36. 

1 T the  eleCtric  fire  is  not  llopt,  no  fign  of 
1 : 2 fence  is  obfervable  in  the  bodies  fufpend- 

ed  to  the  globe.  Though  it  throws  ever  fo  much, 
of  this  fire  upon  them,  it  paffes  from  them  to  the 
floor  whence  it  came.  But  if  it  is  ftopt,  it  is  then 
accumulated  in  or  upon  thefe  bodies;  although 
this  can  be  done  only  to  a certain  degree,  after 
which  it  continually  difperfes.  If  when  it  is  ac- 
cumulated, a man  ftanding  on  the  floor  touches 
thofe  bodies,  the  fnap  is  felt,  and  the  fire  is  feen. 
But  this  fnapping  is  not,  when  the  fire  paffesofF 
continually,  as  from  a piece  of  blunt  wire  hung  to 
the  barrel,  and  a hand  brought  near  it.  Then 
it  appears  like  a blue  cone  of  flame,  with  its 
point  towards  the  wire.  When  the  hand  is  held 
at  a proper  difiance,  there  is  a blalt  therefrom, 
as  of  cold  air.  If  you  do  not  determine  the  elec- 
tric fire  to  a point,  it  is  difperfed  from  all  parts 
of  the  eleCtrified  body : but  if  you  do,  by  thus  hold- 
ing your  hand  near  the  fire,  you  fee  how  it  pai- 
fes  to  the  floor,  andfo  into  the  earth.  The  globe 
therefore  only  circulates  this  fire,  which  is  col- 
lected by  its  friCtion. againfl  the  hand  or  cufhion, 
and  which  is  conftantly  fupplied  to  thefe  from  the 
earth.  And  accordingly  the  ingrefs  of  it,  as  well 
as  the  egrefs  is  vifible.  For,  if  while  any  une- 
O 4 leCtrified 


C s20  ] 


lefdnfied  body  touches  the  barrel,  you  bring 
your  finger  near  the  wood- work  of  the  machine, 
you  will  fee  the  brufii  of  blue  flame  fet  in  from 
it  to  the  wood-work.  And  this  flame  pafles  di- 
verging into  the  machine,  and  continues  as  long 
’ as  the  barrel  is  touched.  P.  44. 

12.  That  the  eleftric  atmofphere  which  fur- 
rounds  all  eleftrified  bodies,  extends  to  a confi- 
derable  difiance,  appears  from  their  attrafting  a 
fine  thread,  at  the  diflanceof  forne  feet.  If  no 
uneleftrified  body  is  near,  this  atmofphere  feems 
to  be  equally  fpread  over  that  which  is  elefiirifi- 
ed.  But  if  one  unelectrified  is  brought  near,  the 
greateft  part  of  it  is  determined  that  way  : whence 
the  attraflion  of  the  other  parts  of  the  c-leftrifi- 
ed  body  is  confiderably  diminifhed.  This  is  the 
caufe  of  eleftric  repulfion,  which  does  not  oper- 
ate, till  the  e!e£lric  ether  is  fuHIciently  accumu- 
lated. This  repulfion  is  firongeft  in  thofe  parts 
of  the  eleftrified  body,  where  uneleftrified  bodies 
are  brought  near  it.  For  by  thefe  the  eleftric 
blaff,  which  otherwife  is  general,  is  particularly 
determined.  P.  46. 

13.  When  the  machine  is  placed  upon  rofin, 
if  a man  Handing  likewife  on’  rofin,  touches  the 
barrel  while  the  globe  is  turning,  he  will  receive 
a fnap  or  two,  and  no  more.  But  if  he  touch 
the  wood-work  of  the  machine  with  one  hand, 
and  the  barrel  with  the  other,  he  receives  fnaps 
again,  which  continue  as  long  as  he  touches  the 
machine,  and  no  longer.  Here  the  man  by 

touching 


[ 321  ] 

touching  the  machine  with  one  hand,  becomes 
a part  thereof;  and  by  turning  the  globe,  part  of 
the  elefiric  fire  inherent  in  his  body,  is  tranfmit- 
ted  to  the  barrel : but  it  is  reftored  to  him,  on 
his  touching  the  barrel  with  his  other  hand.  If 
inflead  of  touching  the  machine  or  barrel,  he 
holds  his  finger  near  either,  or  both,  you  fee 
the  fire  go  out  and  return.  P.  64. 

14.  May  we  not  gather  from  the  preceding 
experiments,  1.  That  the  attra&ion  and  repul- 
fion  of  eleftrified  bodies,  is  owing  to  the  flux  of 
ele&ric  ether?  2.  That  this  ether  is  no  other 
than  pure  fire  ? 3.  That  this  fire  appears  in  dif- 
ferent forms,  according  to  its  different  modifica- 
tions ? When  brought  towards  a point  is  it  not  a 
lambent  flame  ? When  nearer  flill,  may  we  not 
both  hear  and  feel  it  ? And  does  not  its  lighting- 
up  fpirits  demonflrate,  that  it  is  real  fife?  4. 
That  this  fire  is  intimately  conneffed  with  all 
bodies,  though  leaf!  of  all  with  pure,  dty  air  ? 
We  have  extracted  it  from  water,  flame,  fmoke, 
red-hot  iron ; and  from  a mixture  30  degrees 
colder  than  the  freezing  point.  ,5.  That  it  is 
extremely  fubtle  and  highly  elaflic  ? 6.  That  the 
eleftric  machine  may  as  properly  be  termed  a 
jir e-pump,  as  Mr.  Boyle’s  machine,  an  air-pump? 
And  laflly,  that  fire  is  not  mechanically  produ- 
cible from  other  bodies,  but  is  an  original,  dif=. 
tin£l  principle  ? 

0 5 


An 


[ 32*  J 


An  txlraR  from  Mr.  Wilfon'j  differtation  on 
electricity. 

Prop.  1.  When  two  bodies  equally  replete 
with  eledlric  matter  approach  each  other,  no 
flame  orfnapwill  enfue.  P.  5. 

Prop.  2.  Two  bodies  equally  electrified  repel 
each  other.  P.  6. 

Prop.  g.  An  eledlric  body  interpofed  between 
a perfon  and  the  earth,  prevents  his  exciting 
eledlricity  in  another  body  by  friction.  P.  1 1. 

Prop.  4.  If  there  is  originally  a certain  quan- 
tity of  eledlric  matter  in  a body  of  a given  mag- 
nitude and  denfity  ; and  that  matter  be  equally 
diftributed  therein,  by  its  elaftic  force,  according 
to  the  denfity  of  the  parts  ; upon  increafing the 
quantity  of  matter  by  adding  other  bodies  of  the 
fame  kind,  the  quantity  of  eledlric  matter  will 
be  increafed  in  the  fame  proportion.  P.  14. 

Prop.  5.  As  eledlric  bodies  adl  on  light  bodies 
that  are  not  eledlified,  fo  uneledlrified  bodies 
adl  on  the  eledlric  matter  contained  in  eledlrified 
bodies.  P.  16. 

Let  a wire  be  eledlrified  in  the  dark,  and  if 
you  hold  any  uneledlrified  body  7 or  8 inches 
from  the  end  of  it,  a dream  of  fire  will  iffue  from 
it,  which  will  diverge  to  that  body.  But  the 
divergency  will  lefTen  as  it  approaches  it,  till 
the  rays  become  parallel.  If  the  body  be  held 
not  diredlly  before  the  end  of  the  wire,  but  wide 

©f 


[ 323  ] 

ef  it  at  about  two  inches  diflance,  the  fire  will  de- 
fcribe  curvilinear  rays  towards  that  body.  P.  17. 

Hence  it  appears,  that  uneleftrifted  bodies 
aft  in  like  manner  with  electrified ; only  the 
aCting  force  of  the  one,  being  increafed  by  fric- 
tion, is  greater  than  that  of  the  other. 

Prop.  6.  When  two  equally  electric  atmof- 
pheres  are  brought  fo  near  as  to  touch,  they  re- 
pel each  other  with  a force  equal  to  their  denfi- 
ties.  P.  19. 

Prop.  7*  If  while  a fluid  furrounds  a globe 
which  is  eleCtrified  and  turned  round  an  axis  paf- 
fing  thro’’  its  center,  an  uneleCtrified  body  be  held 
near  the  equator  of  it,  the  fluid  will  rife  fuccef- 
fively  towards  that  body,  as  it  turns  round,  in 
like  manner  as  the  fea  is  afleCted  by  the  moon. 
P.  23. 

The  fhock  given  by  the  phial  is  in  proportion 
to  the  fize  of  it,  the  thinnefs  of  the  glafs,  and 
the  number  of  points  in  contaCf  with  its  lurface. 

P.  25. 

An  Extract  from  Mr.  Martinh  Effay  on  Elec- 
tricity. 

1.  The  eleftric  matter  is  emitted  from  fome- 
fort  of  bodies  when  rubbed,  which  are  called, 
eleBrics . P.  9. 

2.  By  other  forts  of  bodies,  therefore  termed 
non-eleBncs , it  is  not  emitted. 

3.  It  will  run  oft'  to  all  non-eleBrics,  but  is  re» 
drained  hv  all  eledrics. 

4.  It  fhines  like  a flame,  and  is.- emitted  with.. 

O 6 a f nap  3, 


[ 324  ] 

a fnap  ; if  towards  a non-eleSIric , the  fire  is 
condenfed  lefs  or  more,  and  fo  appears  of  a blu- 
ifh,  purple,  yellow,  or  white  colour. 

When  the  ele&ric  fire  is  not  fo  much  condenf- 
ed as  to  explode,  as  in  thunder  and  lightning,  it 
goes  off  in  a dilated  ftrearn  of  purple  flame,  great- 
ly refembling  that  part  of  the  Aurora  Borealis , 
which  appears  in  flreams  of  light. 

When  it  is  little  condenfed,  it  appears  bluijli, 
as  all  other  faint  lights  do  : when  a little  den- 
fer,  it  appears  purple  : when  denfer  flill,  it  looks 
yellow , like  candle-light  : when  highly  condenf, 
ed,  it  is  clear  and  white  like  the  light  of  the 
fun.  So  the  white  lightning  is  of  all  others  rnofl 
fierce.  So  phofphorus  rubbed  a little,  fpends 
itfelf  in  an  harmlefs  blue  flame  ; but  upon  a 
greater  attrition  kindles  into  a white  flame,  and 
burns  with  an  outrageous  and  unquenchable  fire. 

P.i7- 

And  as  lightning  pervades  foft  fubflances  un- 
hurt, but  diffolves  hard  and  compafl  bodies,  fo 
eleffric  fire  pervades  the  foft  mufcular  parts  of 
the  body,  but  violently  flrikes  the  bones  and 
tendons.  Again,  as  thofe  denfer  parts  of  lightning 
which  we  call  thunder- bolts,  finking  againfl 
hard  bodies,  glance  by  refleflion  to  different 
parts,  fo  this  fire  flriking  againfl  the  elbow,  is 
refle£led  from  thence  acrofs  the  breaft,  to  the 
other  elbow.  P.  1 8. 

Indeed  different  perfons  are  affe£lea  thereby  in 
% very  different  manner.  Some  are  extremely 

capable 


[ 325  ] 


capable  of  it,  fome  not : and  fome  are  not  fufcep- 
tible  of  it  at  all  ; a perfon,  for  indance,  who 
has  the  fmall-pox,  cannot  be  eleflrified  by  any 
means  whatever.  P.  20. 

Experiment  1.  On  the  axis,  in  the  center  of 
my  globe,  is  fixt  a circular  firing  of  threads. 
When  the  globe  is  at  reft,  they  all  hang  down  ; 
when  it  is  in  motion,  they  all  extend  thenifelves 
from  the  center,  ftrait  toward  the  inner  furface 
of  the  globe  (like  the  fpokes  of  a coach-wheel) 
which  they  nearly  touch.  Thus  they  continue 
till  the  eleftric  virtue  ceafes,  and  then  gradually 
fall  down,  as  at  firft.  P.  22. 

Exp.  2.  While  they  are  extended,  if  you  move 
your  hand  toward  the  furface  of  the  globe,  they 
move  every  way  toward  the  hand.  Hence  we 
fee  the  amazing  fubtlety  of  this  fire,  which  per- 
vades glafs  as  readily  as  if  nothing  were  in 
the  way. 

Exp.  3.  Place  a hoop  of  fine  threads  round 
the  globe  in  motion,  and  all  of  them  will 
ftand  perpendicular  to  the  furface.  Hence 
we  learn  that  the  eleflric  power  afls  equally, 
both  within  and  without  the  globe,  and  in  direc- 
tions perpendicular  to  its  furface. 

Exp.  4.  If  the  room  be  then  darkened,  the 
ends  of  the  threads  on  the  outfide,  will  be  all 
tipt  with  fire.  But  thofe  within  are  not,  which 
{hews  that  this  power  a£ls  only  ab  intra  outwardly. 
P.  23. 

Exp.  An  iron  rod  being  hung  on  filkea 

firings, 


[ 326  ] 

firings,  with  one  end  about  i of  an  inch  from 
the  globe,  will  at  the  other  end  (which  termi- 
nates in  a conical  point)  emit  a purple  flame  di- 
verging every  way.  Hold  your  finger  within  i of 
an  inch,  and  the  fire  will  ifTue  more  largely. 
P.  24. 

Exp.  6.  Hold  your  finger  flill  nearer,  and 
the  rays  will  be  fo  condenfed  as  to  run  to  it  in 
a ftream  of  yellow  flame  ; which  is  alfo  fenfible 
to  the  feeling,  as  a gentle  wind,  and  fmells  like 
the  fire  of  phofphorus. 

Exp.  7.  If  you  put  your  finger  on  the-rod, 
the  flame  inflantly  difappears,  the  fire  all  runing 
off  upon  the  finger.  But  take  it  off,  and  the 
Dame  appears  again. 

Exp.  8.  Apply  your  finger  near  a tin  tube 
fo  fufpended,  and  you  may  fee  the  fire,  and 
both  hear  and  feel  the  fnap.  P.  2,5. 

Exp.  14.  Under  an  eleftrified  plate,  put  fome 
leaf-gold  or  other  light  fubflances  on  another 
plate  uneleftrified  : and  it  will  be  attrafled  and 
repelled  alternately,  between  the  two  plates. 
For,  each  time  it  touches  the  lower  plate,  it  dif- 
charges  the  eleEtric  fire,  and  fo  becomes  again 
attraftable.  P.  28. 

Exp.  18.  If  to  a gun  barrel  you  adapt  a fmall 
tin  cup,  and  pour  in  water;  a perfon  holding 
bis  finger  perpendicular  over  the  water,  within 
i of  an  inch  of  its  furface,  will  find  the  water  rife 
in  form  of  a cone  to  meet  his  finger,  and  from 

ths 


r s27  j 

the  top  of  it,  a fiream  of  fire  will  ilfue  to  the 
finger  and  fnap  as  ufual.  P.  30. 

Exp.  19.  A dry  fpunge  is  an  eleSric.  But 
if  it  be  dipt  in  water,  and  then  hung  on  the  bar- 
rel, put  your  finger  near  it,  and  the  fire  fifties  cut, 
and  the  drops  which  before  fell  very  {lowly,  will 
now  fall  very  fail.  If  the  room  be  darkened, 
they  will  appear  as  drops  of  fire.  P.  31. 

Exp.  20.  A fyphon  hung  on  the  cup,  drops 
very  gently  till  it  is  eleftrified  ; but  then  the 
water  runs  in  a fiream,  which  in  the  dark  is 
like  a fiream  of  fire. 

Exp.  2i.  Open  a vein  in  a perfon  {landing 
on  the  rofin,  and  the  blood  will  fly  out  to  a 
certain  diftance.  But  let  him  be  eleftrified,  and 
it  will  fpin  out  with  a much  greater  force,  and 
to  a far  greater  di fiance. 

Exp.  24.  If  mercury  be  put  for  water,  the 
eleftric  force  is  fomething  greater,  but  in  no 
proportion  to  its  denfity. 

Exp.  23.  When  the  mercury  is  faturated, 
the  eleftric  ftreams  will  iffue  thro’  the  wire  more 
copioufly  than  from  the  phial  of  water,  and  will 
fnap  of  themfelves,  which  the  ftreams  ifiuing 
from  the  water  ever  do. 

Exp.  27.  The  eleftrified  phial  will  not  retain 
the  fire  very  long  ; but  if  you  hold  it  up  in  a 
dark  room,  it  will  be  feen  to  go  off  from  the 
point  of  the  wire,  in  a fmall  white  flame. 
P.  34. 

Exp.  30.  A cup  of  water  held  by  an  eleftrU 

fied 


[ 3^8  ] 

fied  perfon  will  emit  fire  more  forcibly  than 
r his  body.  P.  35. 

Exp.  32.  A perfon  ftanding  on  the  ground, 
cannot  eafily  kifs  an  eleftrified  perfon  ftanding 
on  the  rofin.  P.  36. 

Exp.  38.  If  afquarepiece  of  leaf-gold  be  plac- 
ed between  two  plates,  about  two  inches  afun- 
der,  one  of  them  ele&rified,  the  other  not,  at 
firft  it  will  be  attrafted,  and  repelled  alternately, 
till  in  a while  it  will  lofe  its  motion,  and  remain 
fufpended  between  them.  P.  39. 

Exp.  42.  If  the  globe  be  exhaufted  of  air,, 
and  then  turned,  the  eleflric  fire  will  a£I  wholly 
■within  the  globe,  where  it  will  appear  (in  a dark 
room)  as  a reddifh  or  purple  flame,  filling  the 
whole  globe.  But  this,  as  the  air  is  re-admitted 
into  it,  will  gradually  difappear.  In  this  cafe, 
the  eleffric  fire  is  confined  within,  by  the  elaftic 
air  on  the  outfide.  P.  40. 

An  extra 8 from  Mr.  Watkins’r  account  of  electrical 
experiments. 

When  the  machine  is  to  be  ufed,  the  globe 
fhould  be  wiped  clean,  with  a clean,  dry,  warm 
flannel,  its  pivots  oiled,  and  the’  culhion  and 
phial  warmed.  In  damp  weather  there  fhould 
be  a fire  in  the  room.  P.  4.  ' 

Exp.  4.  Let  an  uneleflrified  plate,  with  fcour- 
ing  fand  upon  it,  be  held  5 or  6 inches  under 
an  elebirified  plate,  and  the  fand  willbefoat- 

tratled 


[ 3-9  ] 

traCted  and  repelled,  as  to  referable  a Horrify 
fhower.  P.  16. 

Exp.  7.  If  a glafs  ball,  of  4 or  5 inches  dia- 
meter, be  hung  by  a wire  to  the  gun-  barrel,  and 
a ball  of  5 of  an  inch  diameter,  exceeding  thin, 
placed  on  a fmooth  plate,  be  brought  near 
it,  this  will  not  only  be  attracted  by  the  large 
ball,  but  will  perform  continual  revolutions 
round  it,  exaCtlyas  the  planets  do  round  the  fun. 
P.  22. 

Exp.  g.  Hang  a loadftone  on  the  barrel,  and 
a key  on  the  armature  of  it  : and  if  you  bring 
your  finger  near  the  key,  it  will  fnap  and  emit 
fire.  A plain  proof  that  the  electric  and  magnetic 
power  no  way  hinder  each  other.  P.  25. 

Exp.  33.  A fparrow  killed  by  the  ele  Ctrl 
fhock,  was  found  livid  without,  as  if  killed  with 
a flafh  of  lightning,  and  moll  of  the  blood  vef- 
fels  within  were  burfl.  Animals  fhocked  on  the 
head,  if  not  killed,  are  commonly  ftruck  blind. 

E-  55' 

Exp.  41.  Ice  held  by  an  electrified  perfon,  will 
fire  warm  fpirits  of  wine.  P.  61. 

Exp.  43.  Mr.  Watfon  put  an  ounce  of  oil  of 
vitriol,  an  ounce  of  iron  filings  and  four  ounces 
of  water,  into  a flafk.  An  ebullition  enfued. 
A11  eleftrify ’d  perfon  applied  his  finger  to  the 
mouth  of  the  flafk.  The  vapour  took  fire,  and 
burnt  out  of  the  neck  a long  time.  P.  63. 

From  an  experiment  made  by  Mr.  W atfon,  and 
others,  it  appeared,  that  the  eleCtric  fire  circu- 
lated 


C 33°  ] 

lated,  without  interruption,  from  the  Surry  fide 
of  the  1 hames  over  Weftminfter-bridge,  to  the. 
Weftminfter  fide,  and  thence  through  the  river 
to  the  Surry  fide  again,  which  is  upwards  of  800 
yards.  Spirits  of  wine  alfo  were  fired  at  the  fame 
diftance. 

From  this,  and  feverai  other  experiments,  it 
appeared,  that  diftance,  {imply  confidered,  did 
little,  if  at  all,  impair  Lite  force  of  the  ele£tric 
fhock. 

They  afterwards  conveyed  this  fhock  through 
a circuit  of  four  miles,  and  found  the  motion  of 
the  eleftric  fire  to  be  nearly,  if  not  quite  . 
taneous. 

II.  I have  been  hitherto  endeavouring  to 
make  eleftricity  plain  : I fhall  endeavour  in  the 
fecond  place,  to  make  it  ufeful. 

1.  This  ethereal  fire,  in  its  unmixt  ftate,  feems 
too  violent  an  agent  for  the  human  body  to  bear. 
Therefore  the  wife  author  of  nature  has  provid- 
ed the  air  to  temper  and  adapt  it  to  our  ufe.  So 
tempered,  it  is  the  grand  inftrument  of  life  : “ it 
gives  and  preferves,’’  fays  bifhop  Berkeley,  “ a 
proper  tone  to  the  vefiels.  It  promotes  all  fecre- 
tions,  keeping  every  part  in  motion:  it  pervades 
the  whole  animal  fyftem,  producing  great  varie- 
ty of  effefts,  various  vibrations  in  the  folids,  and 
ferments  in  the  fluids.”  Indeed  from  manys  ex- 
periments we  know,  it  communicates  activity 
and  motion  to  fluids  in  general,  and  particularly 
accelerates  the  motion  ol  the  blood  in  an  human 

bod)'. 


C 33 1 ] 


body.  This  is  quickened  three  or  four  pulfes  in 
half  a minute,  by  aperfon  only  handing  onglafs, 
and  being  eleflxified.  And  it  is  certain  many 
bodily  diforders  may  be  removed,  even  by  this 
fate  and  eafy  opera'ion. 

2.  But  becaufe  plain  matters  of  faff  weigh 
more  than  nice  fpeculative  reafoning  with  all 
who  do  not  obflinately  heel  themfelves  againfl 
convi£lion,  I (hall,  firft,  briefly  fpecify  feveral 
diforders  wherein  eletlrification  has  been  found 


eminently  ufeful,  and 
! cular  inftances. 

3.  The  diforders  in 
queflionable  ufe,  are, 
Agues, 

St.Anthony’s  fire, 
Blindnefs,  even  from  ; 

Gutta  Serena, 

Blood  extravafated, 
Bronchocele, 

Chlorofis, 

Coldnefs  in  the  feet, 
Confumption, 
Contra&ions  of  limbs. 
Cramp, 

Deafnefs,  Dropfy, 
Epilepfy, 

Feet  violentlydiforder’d, 
Felons, 

Fiflula  Lacrymalis, 

Fits,  Ganglions,  Gout, 


then  fubjoin  a few  parti- 

which  it  has  been  of  un- 

Gravel, 

Head-Ach, 

1 Hyfterics, 

Inflammations, 

King’s  Evil, 

Knots  in  the  flefh, 
Lamenefs,  Leprofy, 
Mortification, 

Pain  in  the  Back,  in  the 
Stomach, 

Palpitation  of  the  heart, 
Palfy,  Pleurify, 
Rheumatifm, 
Ringworms, 

Shingles, 

Sprain, 

Sciatica, 


Surfeit, 


L 332  1 


Surfeit,  Toe  hurt. 

Swellings  of  all  kinds,  Tooth-ach, 

I hroatfore,  Wen. 

It  will  be  eafily  obferved,  that  a great  part  of 
thefe  are  of  the  nervous  kind;  and  perhaps  there 
is  no  nervous  dtdemper  whatever,  which  would 
not  yield  to  a deadv  ufe  of  this  remedy.  It  feems 
therefore  to  be  the  grand  defidei  atum  in  phyfic, 
from  which  we  may  expecl  relief  when  all  other 
remedies  Jail,  even  in  many  ol  the  mod  painful 
and  dubborn  dtiorders  to  which  the  humanframe 
is  liable. 

I have  fear  re  known  an  indance  wherein  a 
few  fhocks  all  over  the  body,  have  failed  to  cure 
cither  a quotidian  or  tertian  ague. 

Anne  Heathcote,  daughter  of  Mr.  Heathcote, 
brazier,  in  Long-Alley,  near  Moorfields,  was 
feized,  in  May  lad,  with  what  is  commonly 
called  an  ague  in  the  head,  having  a violent  pain 
in  her  head,  face,  and  teeth.  After  trying  abun-  i 
dance  of  remedies  to  no  purpofe,  Che  was,  in 
Augud,  electrified  through  the  head.  Immedi- 
ately the  pain  fixed  in  her  teeth.  She  was  elec- 
trified four  times  more,  and  has  felt  nothing  of  it 
fince. 

4.  “ Having  obferved,”  fays  Mr.  Lovet,  “ the 
great  efficacy  of  eleQrical  ether,  in  foon  reliev- 
ing mod  kinds  of  inflammations , I was  inclined 
to  think  the  fame  efficacy  would  appear  when  it 
was  applied  to  St.  Anthony's  fire.  But  when  a 
cafe  offered,  the  inflammation  was  fo  great,  that 

at  ; 


[ 333-] 


■at  firft  I almoft  defpaired  of  fuccefs.  About 
noon  I made  the  firft  trial,  by  drawing  off  fparks 
-while  the  perfon  was  eledtnned,  on  the  rofin. 
Before  night,  the  angry  fwelling  was  much  ap- 
peafed,  and  in  a few  days  quite  cured.” 

g.  A boy  about  feven  years  old  (fays  Mr. 
Floyer,  a furgeon  in  Dorchefter)  was  taken 
blind  fuddenly  in  both  his  eyes,  without  any 
previous  pain  or  fever.  Three  or  four  days  after, 
he  was  brought  to  me.  He  was  as  blind  as  if 
his  eyes  had  been  cut  out.  Taking  the  cafe  to 
be  a perfeft  gutta  Jerena  in  both  eyes,  I told  his 
; parents,  it  was  my  opinion  he  would  never  fee 
again.  However  1 determined  to  try  the  elec- 
tric ihock  : and  the  next  morning,  fattening  a 
wire  coming  from  the  phial  to  his  legs,  and 
another  round  his  head,  I brought  the  latter  near 
the  conduftor,  and  gave  him  four  Ihocks  fuc- 
ceffivelv.  That  day  he  was  put  to  bed  and  con- 
tinued there,  fweating  profufely,  till  the  next 
morning,  when  he  agreeably  alarmed  his  father 
by  crying  out,  he  could  fee  the  window.  When 
he  was  brought  to  me  the  fecond  time,  he  could 
fee  when  I put  niy  hand  between  his  eyes  and 
the  light  of  the  fun.  This  gave  me  encourage- 
ment to  repeat  what  we  had  done  the  day  before. 
The' next  day  he  could  a little  con t raft  and  dilate 
his  eyes  ; the  third  day  he  could  dihinguifh  ob- 
jects ; the  fourth,  colours.  The  fifth  day,  after 
repeating  the  experiment,  his  fight  was  per- 
fectly reltored,  and  the  eyes,  in  every  refpeH, 

as 


[ 334  ] 

as  well  as  if  no  diforder  had  happened  to 
them. 

6.  From  a gentleman  in  Newcaftle-upon- 
Tyne,  I have  the  following  account.  Lad  week, 
a poor  man  in  Sandgate,  that  had  been  blind 
twenty-four  years,  was  led  to  the  machine.  I 
fet  him  upon  the  electrical  board,  and  drew 
fparks  for  about  twenty  minutes  from  the  pupil 
of  his  eye.  After  he  had  reded  himfelfa  little, 
and  was  able  to  look  up,  he  told  us  he  could  fee 
Sidgate,  which  he  had  not  feen  for  many  years 
before.  He  cotdd  alto  diftinguilh  objects  in  the 
room,  and  was  able  to  walk  home  without  a 
guide.  He  came  a fccond  time,  and  was  fo 
much  better,  that  I imagine  he  did  not  think  it 
necelfary  to  come  any  more. 

7.  He  adds,  about  the  time  I wrote  laPt,  a yfcung 
woman  was  cured  of  a fourteen  years  b'indnefs. 
She  was  able,  before  file  went  home,  to  diilin- 
guifii  one  letter  from  another. 

8.  From  the  fame  perfon,  a few  days  after- 
wards, I received  the  following  lines. 

“ The  cure  of  the  blind  man  of  Newcaflle, 
has  fpread  through  all  the  country;  in  confe- 
quence  of  which,  i 2m,  much  againlt  my  will, 
become  an  ocuhft. 

“ I have  had  feveral  in  hand,  and  among  the 
red  a girl,  about  feventeen,  has  been  with  me 
about  three  weeks.  Her  caie  is  owing  to  a film, 
or  (kin,  grown  over  her  eyes.  It  came  by  the 
£mall-pox  about  twelve  years  ago.  Her  friends 

have 


[ 335  ] 

have  had  all  the  advice,  and  ufed  all  the  means 
in  their  power,  but  to  no  purpofe  ; except  that 
ihe  has  loll  her  left  eye  irrecoverably,  by  one  of 
the  perfons  they  applied  to. 

“ When  Ihe  came  to  me,  the  iris  of  the  right 
eye  alfo  was  very  near  covered  with  a very  thick 
Ikin,  fo  that  Ihe  could  do  very  little  more  than 
diftinguilh  day  from  night.  It  was  grown  much 
worfe  this  winter,  and  was  fo  blood-fhot  and 
angry,  that  I told  her  mother  I could  do  nothing 
lor  her.  However  fhe  made  fhch  a lamentable 
complaint,  that  I confented  to  trv. 

“ The  method  I have  taken,  is  drawing  fparks 
from  her  eye,  and  fometimes  giving  Ihocks  from 
her  head  or  neck,  down  her  arm,  to  carry  off  the 
frequent  complaints  of  pain  and  dizzinefs  in  her 
head ; which  never  fails  of  fucceeding  in  about 
ten  minutes.  We  have  electrified  her  about 
half  an  hour  twice  every  day.  The  fk  in  w'aftes 
gradually,  and  grows  thinner  andlefs  every  day  ; 
fo  that  now  the  colour  of  the  eye  appears  through 
it,  except  m the  middle,  and  towards  the  nole, 
where  the  film  at  firft  feemed  twice  as  thick  as 
the  reft.  The  other  day,  as  1 had  her  under 
hand,  Ihefaw  the  buttons  of  my  Ihirt  fleeve,  and 
of  my  coat ; and  yefterday  faw’  the  teeth  of  one 
of  her  companions  that  was  laughing  at  her. 
But  her  eye  is  fo  weak,  that  I advifed  her  to 
make  very  1 i trie  Life  of  it  yet.” 

“ A.  perfon  having  a dark  lived  fpot  under  his 
eye  from  a blowr  three  days  belore,  it  was,  in 

lefs 


[ 336  ] 

lefs  than  a quarter  of  an  hour,  quite  taken  away, 
by  drawing  the  fparks  from  the  parts.”  Mr.  L. 

Here  extr av,afated  blood  was  manifeftly  dif- 
folveu  and  refolded  into  the  veftels.  I have 
lately  known  an  inftance  of  this  kind.  One, 
whofe  eyes  were  alrnoit  beat  out,  as  they  term 
it,  by  the  fame  operation,  loft  all  the  fwelling, 
and  the  blacknefs  too,  in  twelve  minutes. 

jo.  A woman  troubled  with  a bronchocele, 
the  mofc  obftinate  of  all  fweilings,  whofe  neck 
was  eighteen  inches  and  one  half  about,  is  already 

o * 

fo  far  relieved,  that  the  largeft  part  of  her  neck 
is  but  fifteen  inches  and  an  half  about,  the  fmall- 
efl  not' thirteen.  And  the  fwelling  now  walles 
fo  faft,  that  there  is  hopes  of  a perfect  cure.” 
Mr.  L. 

“ She  applies  the  w ire  from  the  phial  to  one 
fide  of  the  fwelling,  and  laying  one  end  of  ano- 
ther wire  to  the  other  fide  of  it,  then  guides  the 
other  end  of  that  wire  to  the  electrical  appa- 
ratus/’ 

11.  William  Jones,  a plaiflerer,  living  at 
Mr.  Frazer's,  in  King-ftreet,  Seven  Dials,  fell 
from  a fcaffbld  on  1 lmifdav,  feb.  15  laft.  He 
was  grievoufly  bruifid,  both  outwardly  and  in- 
wardly, and  lay  in  violent  pain,  utterly  helpiefs, 
till  Saturday  in  the  afternoon,  when  he  was 
brought  {carried)  by  two  men  to  be  eleChified. 
Alter  a few  minutes  be  walked  home  alone,  and 
on  Monday  went  to  work. 

Mary  Ofgathorp  had  her  foot  bruijtd  by  a 

ftone 


[ 337  3 

Done  falling  on  it,  which  occafioned  a running 
fore.  It  continued,  though  frequently  healed 
For  a time,  upwards  of  eight  years  : but  was  en- 
tirely healed  a month  ago  by  eleftrifymg,  and 

has  never  broke  out  fince. 

12.  A number  of  moderate  Ihocks  dad)  re- 
peated for  fome  time,  effeftually  cure  coldnefs  in 

■the feet.  It  does  not  fail. 

ig.  Angus  M’ In  non,  of  Lincoln  s-inn-fields, 
■was  affliSed  with  a violent  cough,  till  his 
{Length  was  wafted  away,  and  he  had  all  the 
fymptoms  of  a true  con] u wpti o n . He-was  elec- 
trified three  times  about  eighteen  months  ago, 
and  reftored  to  perfeft  health. 

Elizabeth  Collis,  a child  of  twelve  years  old, 
'living  with  Mrs.  Wragg,  in  Windmill-ftreet,  was 
fo  far  gone  in  a genuine  confumption,  that  (he  was 
judged  to  be  quite  paft  recovery.  This  fummer 
fire  was  ele&rified  four  times,  and  has  been 
rprite  well  ever  fince. 

14.  A man  at  Upfal  in  Sweden,  whofe  knee- 
joint  had  been  conlradtd  above  five  years,  (origi- 
nally from  an  ill-cured  rheum  an  fra)  was  quite 
reftored  by  drawing  off  fparks  daily  for  a few 
weeks. 

15.  “ Mrs.  M D , of  Worcefier, 

was  long  afflitled  with  a moft  violent  cramp  in 
her  legs.  This  diforder  feized  her  before  fhe 
was  twenty7  years  of  age,  and  continued  till  file 
was  upwards  of  feventy.  It  was  moft  violent 
when  {he  was  in  bed ; at  which  time  Die  was 

Vol.  XXIV.  P forced 


[ 338  ] 

forced  to  tumble  out  on  the  floor,  fometimes 
twice  or  thrice  in  the  fame  night.  It  was  at- 
tended with  exquifite  pain,  burfting  the  fmall 
blood-veffels,  which  afterwards  appeared  of  a 
livid  hue  for  a "confiderable  time. 

“ She  was  intirely  cured  in  a few  days,  by  be- 
ing electrified  once  a day,  thus.  Having  taken 
off  her  fhoes,  fire  put  one  foot  on  the  end  of  the 
chain,  which  came  from  the  charged  phial,  put- 
ting the  lower  end  of  a wire  to  the  other  foot; 
fo  that  this  being  touched,  both  legs  might  re- 
ceive the  fhock  at  once.”  Mr.  L.  I never 
once  knew  it  fail  in  this  difordcr. 

16.  Dcafnefs  rifing  from  hardened  wax,  or 
following  a fever,  is  cured  bv  only  drawing  off 
fparks.  This  was  frequently  tried'  at  Upfal.  At 
Stockholm,  a gentleman  of  diftin&ion,  who  had 
been  aim  oft:  deaf  a confiderable  time  with  a ling* 
ing  in  his  ears,  was  perfectly  cured  in  three  or 
four  minutes. 

A young  man,  who  had  almoft  loft  his  hearing 
for  fix  months,  by  violent  vomitings,  which 
forced  blood  out  of  his  ears,  was  perleftly  cured 
in  a few  minutes. 

Samuel  Jones,  gardener,  at  Lambeth-Marfh, 
in  the  year  of  the  great  froft,  leaped  into  the 
Thames  to  fave  a man  from  drowning.  Hereby 
he.became  fo  deaf  of  both  ears,  that  he  could 
not  hear  any  found  at  all,  were  it  ever  fo  near, 
or  ever  fo  loud.  In  February  laft,  after  being 
once  electrified,  he  could  hear  the  noife  of  a 

coach 


C 339  ] 


coach  at  fome  diltance.  After  the  third  time,  he 
could  hear  the  found  of  the  machine.  He  came 
no  more;  fo  it  is  fuppofed  he  is  well. 

A man,  fifty-feyen  years  old,  who  had  been 
deaf  for  thirty-two  years,  was  fo  far  relieved  in  a 
few  days,  as  to  hear  tolerably  well. 

A girl  of  feven,  born  deaf,  (who  confequently 
could  not  fpeak)  began  prefently  to  hear  words 
which  were  fpoken  very  loud  in  her  ear,  and 
could  repeat  fome  of  them  in  a few  days. 

I have  known  hearing  hereby  given  to  a man 
born  deaf. 

17.  “ In  May  1738,  came  to  me  one  Mary 
Smargins,  born  in  the  ifland  of  Nevis,  in  the 
Well- Indies,  28  years  old.  She  bad  been  fo 
deaf  (from  a cold  at  firft)  lor  feventeen  years,  as 
not  to  hear  any  one,  unlefs  they  were  very  near 
and  fpoke  loud.  Her  deafnefs  had  no  intervals. 
She  always  heard  the  leaft  with  the  left  ear. 
On  Saturday,  May  28,  the  phial  being  elerdti- 
fied  by  two  turns  of  the  wheel  only,  I applied 
one  wire  to  the  left  temple,  juft  above  the  ear, 
the  other  to  the  oppofte  temple.  She  felt  a 
fmall  warmth  in  her  head,  chiefly  from  ear  to 
ear.  I reqeated  it  four  times,  a little  flronger 
each  time.  The  warmth  increafed  at  each  fhock, 
and  though  I ftruck  her  at  each  ear  alternately, 
fire  always  felt  molt  warmth  at  the  deafelt  ear. 
At  lalt  Ihe  complained  of  fmall  twitchings  in  her 
ears,  chiefly  in  that  ear,  and  crofs  her  head.  No 
other  part  of  her  body  felt  the  Ihocks.  The 
P 2 -warmth 


[ 340  ] 

watmth  increafed  all  day  with  twitchings  at  in- 
tervals. The  next  morning  I repeated  the  ex- 
periment, which  then  affefted  her  arms  and  bo- 
dy alfo.  1 he  twitchings  were  more  violent  ; 
the  warmth  greater  round  the  ears,  chiefly  the 
deafer  ear.  Thefe  effecls  continued  all  the  dav, 
and  fhe  heard  conftderably  better.  But  toward 
evening,  by  fitting  in  an  open  window,  fhe  catch- 
ed  cold  : on  which  the  warmth  left  her,  and  fhe 
felt  very  chill  all  over  her  body.  On  Monday 
fne  was  extremely  ill,  with  pains  all  over  her. 
On  Tuefday  (he  was  much  better,  and  felt  the 
fame  kind  ol  warmth  round  each  ear  again.  On 
Wednefday  the  noife  and  beating  in  her  head, 
which  Ihe  had  had  from  the  firft  ot  her  deafnels, 
much  abated.  In  the  evening  a violent  {hoot- 
ing went  a-crols  her  head,  from  the  lelt  to  the 
right  ear.  On  Thurfday  I repeated  the  experi- 
ment. Some  minutes  after,  blowing  her  nofe^ 
there  iffued  corrupted  matter  with  a finall  quan- 
tity of  clotted  blood.  From  this  time  fhe  had  lit- 
tle noife  or  beating  in  her  head,  and  heard  per- 
fectly well. 

She  had  a great  coid,  and  her  eyes  were  much 
inflamed,  when  I began  the  experiment.  But 
after  the  firft  day’s  experiment,  the  inflammation 
decreafed,  and  after  the  fecond,  was  wholly  re- 
moved. 

I was  able  at  firfl  to  bear  the  ftrongeft  fhocks. 
But  after  repeating  them  fome  weeks,  I could 
hardly  bear  a fmall  fhock  : and  a ftrong  one  oc- 

cafioned 


[ 34i  ] 

*afioned  a violent  convulfion  of  the  muffles  of 
my  arm  and  body. 

Upon  rubbing  with  my  hand  a globe,  while 
turning,  I have  feveral  times  felt  a violent  head- 
ach,  But  it  always  went  off  upon  diffontinuing 
the  rubbing.  I have  known  many  perfons,  who 
found  an  unufual  pain  for  fome  days  after  re- 
ceiving the  Ihock.”  Thus  far  Mr.  Wilfon. 

U-am  furprized  at  this.  For  I never  yet  knew 
any  perfon,  man,  woman,  or  child,  lick  or  well, 
who  found  any  fuch  inconvenience.  Only  I 
have  known  rheumatic  pains  increafe  on  the  firft 
or  fecond  trial,  which  were  afterwards  perfectly 
cured. 

Mary  Baker,  chairwoman,  aged  27,  living  at 
Mrs.  Hunts,  in  Neal’s-yard,  near  the  Seven 
Dials,  having  been  long  ill  of  a dropfy,  was  ad- 
mitted laft  year  into  St.  George’s  hofpitai.  But 
on  November  28,  lire  was  difcharged  out  of 
it  as  incurable,  as  fhe  was  alfo  from  the  Well- 
minder  infirmary.  In  fpring  laft  ft) e was  eleftri- 
fied,  and  foon  after  parted  with  feveral  gallons 
of  water.  After  being  twice  more  elefftrified  flye 
was  well,  and  able  again  to  earn  her  living, 

18.  It  is  of  great  ufe  in  the  epilepfy  or  falling 
ficknfs ; unlefs  it  be  hereditary,  and  then  it  does 
at  leaft  no  harm. 

The  following  cafe  feems  to  have  been  of  the 

epileptic  kind.  E T , of  Worcefter,  was 

troubled  with  a very  uncommon  dil'order,  for 
ten  or  eleven  years.  The  contra&ion  ufually 
P 3 began 


[ 342  ] 


began  under  her  left  bread,  and  darted  thence 
to  her  right,  and  back  again  to  her  left  bread 
and  fhoulder.  It  then  druck  down  to  her  el- 
bow, wrid  and  fingers,  which  were  indantly  fo 
contraffed,  that  if  die  had  not  time  to  catchup 
fomething  in  her  hand,  the  nail  of  the  fore- 
finger would  fo  wound  the  thumb,  as  to  make 
the  blood  run  down.  The  contraction  likewife 
twided  and  drew  her  hand  behind  her,  turning 
it  up  again  to  the  fhoulder.  The  intervals  of  this 
terrible  diforder  were  uncertain:  fometimes  die 
had  eafe  ior  a month  : fometimes  die  was  taken 
twice  in  a day.  It  would  yield  to  no  medicine, 
but  was  by  this  method  entirely  cured  in  a few 
weeks.  She  flood  on  the  wire,  coming  from  the 
phial,  and  then  touched  the  apparatus  with  a 
finger  of  the  han  d adefted.  By  this  means  the 
fire  circulated  the  neared  way,  through  the 
body  to  the  arm  and  fingers.  This  rvas  feveral 
times  repeated  to  each  finger.  Mr.  L. 

19.  Sarah  Bettefworth,  aged  22,  then  living 
in  Cow-Lane,  was  fome  vears  fince  feized 
with  fuch  violent  fits,  that  five  or  fix  men  were 
fcarce  able  to  hold  her.  In  autumn  1756,  while 
die  was  in  one  of  them,  the  apothecary  being 
afked  by  her  mafier  if  he  diould  electrify  her  ? 
Made  light  of  it.  However  he  did  fo,  applying  the 
bottle  to  one  fhoulder  as  fire  lay  on  the  ground, 
and  the  wire  to  the  other.  On  the  fird  diock 
her  druggling  ceafed,  and  die  lay  dill.  At  the 
iecond  her  fenfes  returned.  After  two  or  three 

more4 


[ 343  ] 


more,  fhe  rofe  in  good  health.  Some  months 
after  fhe  relapfed,  and  was  elefilrified  again, 
and  again  entirely  cured. . Laft  Eafter  fire  fell 
into  a fit  again,  through  a fright,  but  by  a few 
fhocks  was  cured  and  reftored  to  health. 

William  Matthews,  fchoolmaifer,  aged  thirty- 
tjvo,  living  at  the  Foundery,  near  Moorfields, 
had  epileptic  fits  (Tuppofed  to  be  hereditary] 
from  his  birth,  till  he  was  fix  years  old.  Thence 
he  was  free  till  thirteen.  They  then  return- 
ed on  occafion  of  a fright,  and  continued  fo  to 
do  twice  or  thrice  in  a year,  till  he  was  feven- 
tcen.  From  that  time,  they  came  almoft  every 
month,  till  the  year  1753;  fince  then  they  ufu- 
ally  returned  about  once  in  ten  or  eleven  weeks. 
In  the  middle  of  March  laft.  he  bewail  to  be  ehec- 
trified,  both  through  the  head,  and  from  head 
to  foot.  April  4,  he  had  a flight  fit,  but  from 
that  time  to  this,  Nov.  1,  has  had  none  at  all. 
Can  all  England  afford  fuch  a cure  as  this, 
wrought  by  a courfe  of  medicines  ? 

20.  “ John  Webb  of  Worcdfer,  fevenly 
years  of  age,  was  much  difordered  in  his  feet 
for  ten  or  twelve  years.  The  pain  refembled 
that  of  the  gout  : and  fuch  a coldnefs  attended 
it  as  was  fcarce  fupportable.  If  he  warmed  them 
by  the  fire,  they  raged  flill  more,  as  alfo  when 
they  began  to  be  warm  in  bed.  The  nails  of 
his  toes  very  frequently  dropt  off : the  toes  in 
general  appeared  livid  ; and  frequently  large 
black  or  bluifh  fpots  were  formed  at  the  end  of 
P 4 them, 


[ 344  ] 

them,  or  on  the  top  and  fides  of  his  feet.  Thefe 
when  they  firft  came,  were  exceedingly  painful ; 
but  after  a time  grew  dry  and  hard.  His  heels 
likewife  were  generally  puffed  up  like  blown 
bladders. 

“ All  thefe  complaints  gardually  decreafed,  till 
they  totally  went  away,  by  his  being  eleftrified 
once  a day  for  fome  time,  and  afterwards  twice 
a week.  At  firft  only  fparks  were  drawn.  Af- 
terwards the  chain  was  brought  from  the  phial 
to  the  part  affefted  of  one  foot  ; then  one  end 
of  a wire  was  laid  to  the  part  affe£ted  of  the 
other  foot,  and  the  other  end  of  it  brought  to 
the  conductor.”  Mr.  L. 

21.  Felons  are  fpeedily  cured  by  drawing 
fparks.  If  any  diforder  be  fuperficial,  this  opera- 
tion fuffices  : but  if  it  lie  deeper,  then  th© 
giving  of  fhocks  is  found  to  be  more  effec- 
tual. 

22.  “ Ann  T had  a fiflula  near  the  inner 

corner  of  her  eye,  which  healed  and  broke  again 
(even  times.  The  laft  time  it  healed,  it  conti- 
nued well  for  fome  time.  After  which  it  began 
with  a finall  fuelling,  till  it  was  as  big  as  afilbert- 
Form  the  time  fhe  was  ele^rified,  by -drawing 
off  fparks,  it  gradually  decreafed,  till  it  was  en- 
tirely diflipated.”  Mr.  L. 

Eliz.  Johnfon,  daughter  of  Mr.  Johnfon,  gun- 
maker  in  the  Tower,  was  taken  on  New-year’s- 
day  laft,  with  fharp  pains  in  her  bow'els,  which 
foon  threw  her  into  convujon  Jits.  Thefe  return- 
ed 


[ 3.45-  ] 

ed  five  or,  fix  times  a day,  for  ten  or  eleven 
days.  She  was  electrified  all  over,  and  had  no  fit 
for  eight  months.  She  was  then  frighted  into  a 
fit.  She  was  again  eleftrified,  and  continues 
well. 

23.  “ A young  lady  had  been  affeHed  with 
fits  near  feven  years,  which  feized  her  without 
any  warning,  and  threw  her  flat  on  her  face, 
quite  iujfenfible.  Thefe  frequently  returned  twice 
in  a day.  This  was  attended  with  almoft  a con- 
tinual coldnefs  in  her  feet.  Her  flomach  alfo  was 
much  affe&ed.  She  flood  upon  a wire  coming 
from  the  coat  of  the  phial,  and  to  complete  the 
circuit,  another  wire  was  laid  upon  her  head, 
by  wbi«h  means  the  fire  was  conveyed  to  that 
part.  By  this  means  both  the  fits  and  coldnefs 
were  gradually  removed,  and  a complete  cure 
efxetled.'1  Mr.  L. 

24.  “ Elizabeth  B , near  theOldHills, 

a few  miles  from  Worcefler,  had  for  fifty  years 
been  afili&ed  with  fevere  fits.  They  threw 
her  down  to  the  ground,  quite  infenfible,  fome- 
times  twice  or  thrice  a day.  She  had  tried  many 
remedies,  but  to  no  purpofe.  from  the  latter 
end  of  the  year  1752,  fire  received  feveral 
{hocks.  An  inveterate  hcad-ach,  which  attended 
her,  quickly  decreafed,  and  in  fome  months 
her  fits  too  totally  ceafed.”  Mr.  L. 

25.  Ele&ricity  was  tried  at  Upfal  in  three 
cafes  of  a Ganglion,  which  it  perfectly  dif- 
perfed, 

T>  - 

^ *'■  a 


26.  Slight: 


[ 346  ] 

2 6.  Slight  attacks  of  the  gout  are  fuddenly 
and  effe&ually  removed,  by  drawing  fparks  from 
the  part  affe&ed. 

“ A perfon,  who  within  the  fpace  of  two  or 
three  years  had  feveral  attacks  of  the  gout,  fince  the 
firft  of  which,  he  had  always  a ftiffnefs  and  pain 
in  the  joint  of  one  of  his  great  toes,  and  for  a con- 
fiderable  time  in  both,  was  quite  cured,  byfet- 
ting  him  on  rofin,  while  one  on  the  floor  drew 
fparks  from  the  difeafed  parts.”  Mr.  L. 

William  Sinnock,  cabinet-maker,  in  Lombard- 
Court,  Seven  Dials,  was  in  Feb.  1758,  feized  with 
fharp  pains  in  his  feet,  which  continued  three 
months,  and  for  fix  weeks  difabled  him  from 
doing  any  work.  They  returned  in  February 
laft.  He  was  electrified  twice,  and  has  felt  no 
pain  fince. 

Thomas  Willis,  chairmaker,  aged  44,  was 
for  many  years  afflifted  with  the  gravel  in  the 
kidneys.  In  July  laft  he  was  electrified  twice. 
After  the  fecond  time  he  parted  with  a large 
quantity  of  gravel.  He  was  ele&rified  twice  more, 
and  has  not  found  the  leaft  complaint  fince. 

27.  In  very  bad  fits  of  the  head~acJi,  I have 
often,  fays  Mr.  L.  ufed  this  remedy  with  furpriz- 
ing  fuccefs. 

“ A man  of  Bromfgrove,  affliCted  for  near  a 
fortnight  with  a violent  and  conftant  kead-ach, 
was  twice  eleclrified  by  a few  light  fhocks,  wkh 
half  an  hour’s  interval,  and  entirely  cured.” 

Mr.  L. 


A 


[ 347  1 

A — — T of  White-chappel  had  a violent 

head-ach,  which  continued  for  feven  or  eight 
weeks.  After  fhe  was  eleftrified  the  pain  in- 
creafed  for  three  hours.  It  then  gradually  de- 
creafed,  till  die  was  quite  well.  This  proves 
that  it  may  remove  even  a diforder,  which  at 
firft  it  feems  to  increafe. 

28.  Samuel  Rennee,  aged  feven,  the  fon  of 
Richard  Rennee,  weaver,  living  in  York-ftreet, 
by  taking  cold,  was  feized  with  a violent  head - 
ach,  which  continued  with  fhort  intermillions 
for  above  a year.  Tuefday,  March  8,  1757,  he 
was  moderately  eleflrified  all  over.  The  pain 
left  him  from  that  hour. 

2 g.  “ A man  who  had  a fixed  pain  juft  above 
his  eye-brow  for  feveral  days,  was  by  little  fhocks 
at  the  part,  cured  in  a few  minutes ; fo  was  Mr. 
Higgins,  ofWcrcefter,  of  a periodical,  head-ach* 
which  commonly  began  at  five  or  fix  in  the  even- 
ing, and  affefcled  him  from  the  top  of  his  right 
temple  to  his  ear,  till  he  went  to  bed.  This  was, 
cured  only  by  drawing  fparks.”  Mr.  L. 

“ M 1 D s was  afflifted  with -an  al moft 

conftant,  as  well  as  violent  pain  in  the  hinder 
part  of  her  head  for  near  three  quarters  of  a year  * 
efpecially  when  fhe  lay  down  in  bed,  being  then 
fo  intolerable,  fhe  could  not  forbear  fhrieking.- 
Having  ufed  many  other- means  with  no  effeft, 
ftte  was  eleftrified  once  a day:  This  prel'ently 

relieved  (fometimes  bv  fparks,  fometimes  light 
P;  6 Stocks} 


[ 348  ] 

{hocks)  and  in  fome  weeks  perfeflly  cured  her  " 
Mr.  L. 

l<  E T wss  troubled  for  elevenyears 

with  a fevere  head-ach,  which  baffled  all  the  ef- 
forts of  medicine.  By  moderate  (hocks  applied 
to  her  head,  file  was  cured  in  a few  weeks.’’ 

Mr.  L. 

go.  Abigail  Browm,  aged  22,  then  living  irt 
Red-Crofs-flreet,  was  from  a child  frequently 
afflifted  with  a violent  head-ach . In  October 
1757,  fhe  was  eleblrified  five  days  fuccefiively, 
having  one  wire  applied  to  the  fore  part,  another 
to  the  hinder  part  of  the  head,  and  receiving 
feven  or  eight  fhocks  each  time.  Hereby  fhe 
was  entirely  cured,  nor  has  found  any  pain  in 
her  head  fince,  unlefs  occafionally  for  want  of 
fleep. 

Sarah  Webb,  wife  of  Mr.  Webb,  Tallow- 
chandler  in  Grub-fireet,  aged  46,  was  from  20- 
years  old,  fubjeft  to  a violent  pain  on  the  top  of 
her  head.  This  frequently  obliged  her  to  keep  her 
bed,  nor  could  any  remedy  for  it  be  found.  In 
December  lad  fhe  received  gentle  fhocks  from 
temple  to  temple,  and  from  the  forehead  to  the 
back  of  the  head.  This  was  done  three  days  fuc- 
ceffively,  and  fire  was  entirely  cured. 

31.  Richard  Outen,  rope-maker,  aged  23,. 
living  in  Bunhill-row,  was  troubled  with  a vio- 
lent head-ach  over  the  eyes,  before  he  was  ten 
years  old,  arifing  from  a blow  on  the  head.  He 
was  fcarce  free  from  it  a month  together  for  above 

- 12 


L 349  J 

12  years.  It  ufed  to  throb  and  fhoot  through  the 
head,  fo  that  often  he  was  almofl  di  drafted.  In 
December  1756,  he  was  eleftrified  once,  re- 
ceiving three  fhocks,  by  one  wire  applied  to  the 
forehead,  and  another  to  the  back  of  the  head. 
He  was  worfe  than  ever  for  fome  hours,  till  he 
went  to  bed,  but  awaked  in  the  morning  per- 
fectly well  : and  has  continued  fo  ever  fince. 

32.  In  deep  hyjlerical  cafes,  the  perfon  ought 
to  fit  on  the  rofin  at  lead  half  an  hour  every  morn- 
ing and  evening.  At  firft  fparks  may  be  drawn 
off ; and  afterwards  fhocks  given,  more  or  lefs, 
as  the  diforder  requires.  This  would  feldorn 
fail  of  the  defired  effeCt,  as  may  well  be  fuppof- 
ed  from  the  following  inflances. 

“ A young  gentlewoman,  about  ten  miles  from 
IV  orceffer,  fometime  after  fit e recovered  from  a 
fever,  was  feized  with  violent  hyflcrics,  which 
foon  deprived  her  both  of  memory  and  under- 
ffanding.  The  fire  was  condufted  through  her 
head  by  fparks  and  fhocks  feveral  times  a day, 
during  the  week  fhe  flayed  at  Worcefter : in 
which  time  net  only  her  memory,  but  her  un- 
derftanding  was  perfectly  reflored. 

“ Mrs.  Higgins,  of  W orceffer,  was  troubled 
for  above  ten  years  with  an  liyflerical  diforder, 
and  a coldnejs  in  her  jeet.  From  thence  that 
coldnefs  moved  gradually  up  to  her  head,  in  half 
a minute’s  time,  which  then  feemed  a palfy  in 
the  head.  Soon  after  her  teeth  tvould  chatter  as 
in  a violent  ague.  Thence  the  fhaking  proceed- 
ed 


[ 350  ] 

ed  to  her  arms,  and  whole  body,  and  was  fo  vio- 
lent, (as  hyfterics  mimic  mod  didempers)  as  to 
refemble  St.  Vitus's  Dance. 

“ Sometimes  fparks  were  drawn,  fometimes 
fnocks  were  given  ; and  (he  dood  near  half  an 
hour  daily  on  the  rofin.  In  lefs  than  a fort- 
night the  fits  went  entirely  off ; and  in  a while 
after,  the  coldnefs  of  her  feet”  Mr.  L. 

3.3 . A perfon  had  rigid  knots  in  the  thigh  like 
what  appear  in  violent  cramps,  but  not  fohard  or 
painful.  Thefe  were  entirely  diffipated  in  a 
minute  or  two,  only  by  drawing  fparks. 

34.  One  at  Upfal  who  had  lojl  the  ufe  of  his 
limb  shorn.  cold,  for  feveral  years,  was  in  fome 
weeks  quite  redored. 

One  at  Stockholm,  who  had  ufed  crutches  for 
feven  years,  could  walk  without  them  in  thirteen 
days. 

Eliz.  Buttle,  nnrfe,  aged  31,  living  in  Fether- 
done-dreet,  in  May  lafl,  felt  fuch  a pain  round 
her  ankle-bone,  that  fire  could  fcarce  fet  her  foot 
to  the  ground.  This  grew  worfe  and  worfe 
for  about  a month.  In  June  fhe  was  electrified 
feven  times  round  the  ankle  and  thrice  upon  the 
knee.  Immediatly  her  lamexitfs  ceafed,  with  the 
pain  that  occafioned  it. 

35.  Marv  La'lo,  aged  25,  then  living  in  St. 
Thomas  the  Apodle’s,  when  fire  was  a child, 
was  taken  with  a pain  in  the  bone  of  the  left  leg 
from  the  knee  to  the  bottom  of  the  foot,  which 
then  felt  as  if  a great  weight  had  been  fadened 

to 


[ 35*  ] 

to  it.  This  continued  by  intervals  for  many 
years.  Frequently  fhe  could  not  walk  without 
holding  fome  one,  and  then  in  great  agony. 
In  February  1 757,  (Ire  received  feveral  fmall 
fhocks  on  the  knee,  within  four  or  five  minutes. 
The  pain  inftantly  ceafed.  She  walked  home 
quite  well,  and  has  continued  fo  ever  firice. 

A girl  alfo  of  13,  who  after  the  fmall  pox 
had  been /«;«£  from  four  years  old,  having  been 
eleftrified  about  twenty  times  walked  without  a 
ftaff. 

“ A young  lady  from  a ftrain  in  the  knee-joint, 
or  rather  the  crural  ligament,  was  quite  difabled 
■from  walking.  About  three  qu  arters  of  a year 
after,  when  (he  came  to  me,  the  mufcular  part 
of  the  leg  was  much  fallen  away,  and  a continual 
coldnefs  attended  the  foot. 

“ I ordered  her  to  fit  on  the  rofin  at  leaft 
half  an  hour  daily,  and  to  receive  feveral  fhocks 
thro’  the  difordered  part  of  the  knee.  The  firft 
month  there  was  little  effeff.  In  the  next  there 
was  a vifible  alteration  for  the  better  ; the  third 
fhe  could  walk  a few  fteps  without  any  crutch  or 
ftaff.  In  the  following  month,  fire  feemed  quite 
well,  and  left  off  eletlriiying  : but  after  a time 
relapfed.  After  the  relapfe,  the  progrefs  of  the 
cure  was  more  tedious,  and  it  was  four  or  five 
months  before  fhe  could  leave  her  rem  edy  quite 
off.”  She  was  then  totally  cured.  Mr.  L. 

36.  “ A young  woman  drinking  at  a cold 
fpring  when  very  hot,  was  feized  with  a kind  of 

fever 


[ 352  ] 


fever  for  a quarter  of  a year.  Many  red  fpots 
then  appeared  on  her  arras,  and  foon  after  a thin 
dr;,-  crufty  fubflance,  which  appeared  rather  as 
fcales  than  fcabs,  from  her  elbows  down  to  her 
fingers.  This  leprous  diforder  (which  many  call 
a furjeit)  continued  near  three  years.  Indeed  it 
lelfened  the  firlt  and  fecond  winter ; but  the 
third  was  the  fame  as  in  fummer. 

“ By  drawing  fparks  once  a day  from  the 
parts  affected,  in  three  weeks  or  a month,  all  the 
fcales  difappeared.”  Mr.  L. 

37  “ A gentleman  in  Worcefler  had  a mor- 
tification, which  began  in  his  toe,  and  in  fpite 
of  all  die  means  ufed,  gradually  increafed.  He 
was JJiockcd , and  the  mortification  flopped:  but 
on  his  neglecting  this,  it  began  again  ; and  in- 
creafed fo  far  that  the  cafe  feemed  defperate. 
Yet  on  his  bei ngftiocked  again  through  the  mor- 
tified part,  fucli  a change  appeared  as  aflonifhed 
the  furgeon,  who  owned  it  had  done  more  good 
in  two  days  than  had  been  done  in  fix  weeks  be- 
fore.” Mr.  JL. 

38.  A clergyman  near  London  had  from  a 
child  almofl  a conflant  pain  in  the  lower  part  of 
his  left  fide.  He  was  once  eleftrified  by  fland- 
a ne  with  his  left  foot  on  the  chain,  and  has  never 
felt  the  pain  fince. 

James  Kitely,  of  Lambeth,  had  a fharp  pain 
in  his  left  fide  about  three  years.  After  being 
electrified  three  or  four  times,  the  pain  left  him, 
and  came  no  more. 

Mary 


[ 353  ] 

Mary  Burgis,  living  at  the  Tun  in  Knaves- 
Acre,  had  a pain  in  her  fide  fur  feven  years.  In- 
May  laft,  fhe  was  entirely  cared  the  firft  time  of 
deftrifying. 

Michael  Hayes,  of  King-ftreet,  Weftrdinftejv 
aged  86,  had  a violent  pain  in  his  left  ankle  for 
near  four  years.  This'  fometimes  difabled  him 
from  walking,  which  otherwife  he  could  do 
without  any  difficulty.  He  was  eleflrified' 
through  the  part,  and  perfectly  cured  before  he 
left  the  room. 

39.  Eleanor  Story,  living  in  Clerkenwell 
Church-yard,  catching  cold,  was  feized  with  pain 
and  weaknejs  in  the  fmall  of  her  back,  as  if  it  had 
been  broke.  By  following  the  prefcriptions  of 
Dr.  L.  the-  pain  after  a fortnight  fettled  in  her 
fhoulder.  There  it  continued  fo  violent,  that 
often  file  had  fcarce  any  ufe  of  her  arm.  She 
afterward  ufed  abundance  of  remedies  for  above 
two  years,  but  all  to  no  effeft.  On  Tuefday 
March  21,  1757,  fhe  received  two  firong  fhocks 
on  each  fhoulder,  which  made  the  Hein  red  and 
fore.  That  night  fhe  was  in  more  pain  than 
ufual,  trembled  all  over,  and  could  get  little 
fleep.  The  next  morning  fhe  received  feveral 
fhocks  all  over,  and  fo  on  Thurfday  morning  and 
evening.  After  the  fecond  time  her  pain  was 
gone,  and  fhe  had  the  full  ufe  of  both  her  arms. 

John  Reed,  cahi net-maker,  in  Warder *flreet, 
was  for  fix  years  afflifted  with  violent  peaks  in 
the  back  of  his  neck.  In  fprjng  1758,  he  was 

elec- 


[ 354  ] 

- electrified  about  thrice  a week  for  a month,  and 
quite  cured. 

. 40.  Jofeph  Jo  nes  was  taken  about  March  12, 

I757>  with  a violent  pain  in  the  Jiomach.  He 
received  the  fame  day  a -few  gentle  fhocks.  The 
pain  went  off,  and  returned  no  more. 

Mary  Peltecree,  warper,  living  in  Primrofe- 
ffreef,  was  troubled  fix  months  with  a pain  in 
‘ her  Jiomach  and  back , accompanied  with  extreme 
weaknefs  and  faintnefs,  which  made  her  incapa- 
ble of  her  work.  By  the  advice  of  a phyfician^ 
Jhe  took  many  medicines,  but  with  no  effech 
Five  weeks  ago  fine  was  electrified,  receiving  the 
fliock  through  the  fiomach.  1 his  was  done  for 
five  days  fuccefiively.  She  has  been  perfectly 
\\  ell  ever  fince. 

H W— — . throw  ft  er,  aged  23,  living  in 

Fleet-firect,  Bethnal-green,  not  being  regular, 
was  taken  a year  ago  with  a violent  pain  in  her 
Jiomach.  She  had  the  advice  of  a phyfician,  and 
topk  many  medicines,  but  to  no  purpofe.  At 
length  file  was  electrified,  nine  or  ten  days,  and 
is  in  perfeft  health. 

Ann  Wild,  of  Round-Court,  by  taking  cold 
in  childbirth,  .contracted  a violent  pain  in  her 
Jiomach.  After  it  had  continued  four  years,  fhe 
was  perfectly  cured  by  twice  electrifying. 

Mrs.  Edwards,  living  in  Nottingham- Court, 
Short's-Qardens,  was  ill  of  a pain  in  her  Jiomach 
for  eight  years.  It  often  took  away  her  reft, 

as 


[ 3 55  ] 


as  well  as  appetite,  and  brought  her  to  the  gates 
of  deat.Ii.  By  once  electrifying  file  was  cured. 

Eleanor  Taylor,  mantua-maker,  aged  48, 
living  in  King-ftreet,  Oldftreet-fqUare,  was  ta- 
ken in  September  1758,  with  a violent  diforder 
■ in  her  flomach,  which  felt  as  if  it  were  ready  to 
hurt!,  and  often  made  her  fwcat  to,  her  fingers 
ends.  This  continued  for  upwards  of  four 
months,  and  gave  her  little  reft  day  or  night.  ' In 
February  following  fhe  was  feized  with  therheu- 
matifin,  throughout  the  left  fide.  For  this,  hav- 
ing quite  loll  the  ufe  ol  her  left  arm,  Ihe  came 
to  be  electrified.  She  felt  the  fhock  chiefly  in 
her  flomach,'  and  her  diforder  there  was  cured. 
Alter  three  days  fire  was  electrified  again,  and 
cured  of  the  rheumatifm  alfo. 

A gentlewoman  in  London  had  an  almoft  con- 
tinilal  pain  in  her  flomach,  more  or  lefs  for  eight 
years.  She  received  one  fhock  on  her  flomach, 
and  was  well  from  that  moment. 

41.  Silas  Told,  fchoolmafter,  aged  48,  living 
in  Chriftopher’s-Al'ey,  Moorfields,  in  the  year 
1741,  had  a pieuretic  pain,  for  which  he  loft  an 
unufually  large  quantity  of  blood.  Immediately 
he  was  feized  with  a ftrong  palpitation  of  the 
heart,  which  continued,  more  or  lefs,  without 
the  intermiffion  of  one  day,  for  more  than  ftx- 
teen  years.  In  February  1757,  while  I was  elec- 
trifying for  a pain  in  my  flomach  (which  was 
wholly  removed  by  one  fhock)  he  came  in  and 
faid,  “ My  heart  is  very  bad,  and  I think  I will 

try 


[ 356  ] 


try  it  too.”  He  did  fo,  receiving  a fhock  through 
the  bread:,  and  has-  been  ever  fince  perfectly 
well. 

42.  A citizen  of  Upfal,  who  was  thoroughly 
paralytic,  was  perfectly,  cured  on!v  bv  drawing 
fparlcs. 

April  18th,.  j 756,  a remarkable  cafe  happened 
at  Edinburgh.  Robert  Moubrav,  in  the  begin- 
ning of  Januan  was  ft  ruck  with  a paJfy  of  the 
longue , and  loon  after  entirely  lod  the  ufe  of  his 
Ipeech.  Lall  week  he-  began  being  electrified, 
and  bv  Saturday  he  was  able  to  put  out  his 
tongue,  which  before  was  dead  and  motionlefs. 
On  Monday  he  could  fpeak  a little,  and  on 
Tuefday-  he  could  fpeak  as  well  as  ever. 

Thomas  Dobfon,  ieatherpipe-maker,  aged  27, 
living  in  Barnaby-drect,  was  feized  with  a pa)Jy 
in  the  tongue , on  July  24th  lad.  It  grew  worfe 
and  worfe  till  Saturday  28,  and  then  quite  de- 
prived him  of  his  fpeech.  He  was  eiefirified 
for  five  days,  bv  drawing  .(parks  from  the  tongue, 
and  (hocking  him  all  over.  And  hereby  not 
only  his  palfv  was  cured,  but  convulfions  alfo, 
which  lie  had  had  for  four  years. 

“ Mr.  P.  had  a year  or  two  ago  a flight  touch 
of  a palfy.  On  a hidden  his  arm  dropped  down, 
quite  without  drength  ; and  though  after  chafing 
it  well,  he  recovered  the  ufe  of  the  upper  and 
middle  joint,  yet  the  lower  part  was  dill  fo  weak, 
that  he  could  by  no  means  write  his  name.  But 

by 


[ 3 <57  ] 

by  a few  {hocks  in  the  arm  he  waseffe&ually  re- 
lieved. 

“ The  fame  perfon  had  lately  a much  worfe 
ftroke.  All  his  right  fide  was  fo  affedied,  that.he 
could  not  walk  without  two  to  fupport  him.  Af- 
ter he  had  been  eleftrified  three  times,  he  could 
walk  with  the  fupport  of  one  only,  and  in  a 
fhort  time  he  was  perfectly  well.  He  ufed 
to  hand  on  the  chain  with  the  right  loot,  and 
touch  the  apparatus  with  his  right  hand.” 
Mr.  L. 

I have  not  yet  known  any  inhance  of  this 
kind.  Many  paralytics  have  been  helped  : but, 
I think,  fcarce  any  palfy  of  a year  handing  has 
been  thoroughly  cured. 

43.  A gentlewoman  in  London,  who  for  fe- 
veral  years  was  never  long  together  without 
Tharp  pains  in  her  knee,  which  feemed  chieflv 
rheumatical , -was  freed  from  them  in  a moment 
by  one  Tingle  {hock. 

John  Ramfay,  cabinet-maker,  living  in  the 
Strand,  by  being  very  wet,  catched  a violent 
cold, -m  the  latter  end  of  June  1756.  This  oc- 
cafioued  a rheumatic  pain,  which  fixed  in  his 
deft  knee.  From  this  he  was  feldom  free  for  a 
week  together  tidl  November,  He  was  then  very 
511  till  February,  being  feldom  able  to  do  above 
’half  a day’s  work,  femetimes  none  for  a week 
together.  He  was  for  ten  weeks  an  out-patient 
of  St.  George’s  Hofpital;  but  received  no  be- 
mefit.  On  Monday  the  21ft  of  March  he  was 

elec- 


C 358  ] 

de&riled  through  the  knee,  and  four  times 
more  within  feven  days.  The  pain  was  re- 
moved, and  his  deep,  which  had  been  long  loft, 
returned,  as  before  he  was  firft  taken. 

Ann 'Walter,  fen-ant,  aged  22,  then  living 
in  Brick-Lane,  Spittlefields,  was  cured  entirely 
of  a violent  rheumatijm  in  her  left  arm,  by  being 
elcblrified  five  times. 

A ftone  cutter  at  Stockholm,  whofe  knees  and 
joints  of  his  toes  had  been  rendered  ft  iff,  ana  his 
finsers  crooked  by  a mixture  of  oout  and  rheu- 
matifm,  after  being  electrified  a few  days,  was 
able  to  go  to  work.  It  has  been  found  to  re- 
move or  greatly  abate  all  rheumatic  pains. 

Ann  Cambell,  living  in  Oueen-ftreei,  Seven 
Diais,  had  a fevere  rheumatifm  fourteen  weeks. 
For  nine  weeks  (he  could  not  drefs  herfelf,  nor 
oet  out  of  bed  without  help.  She  had  the  ad- 
vice  of  feveral  phyficians,  but  in  vain.  In 
fpring,  1758,  Ihe  was  electrified  five  times,  and 
thereby  reftored  to  full  health. 

William  Tyler, living  at  the  Sun  in  Long-lane, 
Smithfield,  w-as  on  March  the  9th  laft,  about 
tliree  in  the  morning,  feized  with  rheumatic 
pains , chiefly  on  his  right  fide,  fo  violently,  that 
he  vras  as  helplefs  as  an  infant,  and  was  iie- 
quently  conflrained  to  fliriek  out,  like  a woman 
in  labour.  I came  before  nine.  After  the  fe- 
cond  fhock  he  felt  fome  change  t after  the  thud 
he  wras  able  to  raife  himlelf  a little.  After  two 


more 


[ 359  ] 


more  he  rcfe  and  walked  about  the  room,  and 
before  noon  he  was  quite  eafy  and  well. 

Sarah  Guildford,  aged  37,  living  on  Saffron  - 
bill,  was  for  upwards  of  feven  years  fo  afflified 
with  the  rheumatifrn  in  her  right  Side,  that  the 
knee  and  ankle  were  waded  exceedingly.  Ja- 
nuary the  2d  lall  fine  was  eletlrified,  and  perfeddy 
cured  in  one  day.  But  it  threw  her  into  a pro- 
fufe  fweat,  particularly  from  thofe  parts  which 
had  been  mod  affefted. 

Ann  Cardiff,  fervant,  at  the  Golden  Head, 
Iflington,  aged  40,  about  fixteen  years  ago,  was 
taken  with  a violent  rheumatifrn , by  catching 
cold  in  lying-in.  It  returned  every  year,  and 
the  laft  winter  took  away  the  tile  of  her  limbs. 
She  followed  the  advice  of  feveral  phvficians, 
till  they  pronounced  her  incurable.  Oclober 
the  15th'  lad  fhe  was  ele£l  nfied,  fird  by  general 
fhocks,  then  through  the  parts  mod  affefled. 
The  fird  and  the  fecond  time  it  made  her  ex- 
« tremel v weak  and  faint.  The  third  time  fhe  was 
better,  and  after  nine  times  all  her  weaknefs  and 
pains  were  gone. 

Margaret  Virgin,  filk-winder,  aged  39,  living 
in  White  Horfe-yard,  Seethin-lane,  was  trou- 
bled with  the  rheumatifrn  before  fhe  was  ten  years 
old,  and  more  and  more  till  when  fhe  was  about 
twelve  fhe  was  confined  to  her  bed  for  near 
twenty-one  weeks.  From  that  time  fhe  was  fel- 
dom  free  from  it,  fo  that  many  times  fire  was 
quite  incapable  of  bufinefs.  Lad  winter  fire  was 

fo 


C 36°  ] 

To  ill  as  to  be  forced  to  quit  her  work,  not  beiw^ 
■able  to  lift  an  arm  to  her  head.  In  January  Ihe 
was  electrified  twice::  the  firlt  time  all  over : 
the  fecond  time  through  the  left  arm.  The  ufe 
of  her  arm  was  immediately  reftored.  Her  pains 
entirely  left  her,  ever  fmce  the  has  been  more 
capable  of  any  kind  of  work  than  fhe  had  been 
Tor  twenty  years. 

Mary  Trumble,  of  White  Crofs-flreet,  aged 
49,  began  to  be  affiiCted  with  the  rfuumatifm  be- 
fore fhe  was  30  years  of  age.  It  returned  in  her 
{boulders  or  head  every  winter:  and  for  the 

■three  winters  lall  paft  fo  increafed,  that  fhe 
■could  by  no  means  turn  either  arm  behind  her, 
and  was  extremely  pained.  Laft  winter  it  was 
v.'orfe  than  ever.  A little  before  Chrifhnas  fhe 
received  five  or  fix  fmall  fhocks.  Immediately, 
flie  was  eafy,  recovered  the  full  ufe  of  both  arms, 
and  has  retained  it  ever  fince. 

Wdlliam  G.  of  the  Little  Minories,  London, 
had  been  violently  affliffed  with  the  ikeumatifin, 
many  years.  For  feveral  winters  he  was  not 
able  to  work.  But  after  having  received  a few. 
fhocks,  in  a quarter  of  an  hour  all  his  complaints 
vanifhed  away,  and  he  was  afteiward  as  well  in 
winter  as  in  fummer. 

44.  Almoff  all  kinds  of  inflammations,  ring - 
worms,  tetters,  JlnngUs,  as  well  as  molt  kinds  of 
JweUings,  may  be  totally  cured  by  drawing  fparks 
only. 

45-  A lad  at  Stockholm,  who  had  a fevere 

Jciatica  1 


r 3«*  ] 

Jcialica  in  the  right  hip,  fo  as  not  to  bear  being 
touched,  was  cured  in  a few  days. 

John  Ellifon,  then  an  officer  of  excife,  living 
in  Hunt-flreet,  Spittlefields,  was,  upon  catching 
cold,  feized  with  a violent  Jcialica,  which  held 
him  feveral  months  without  intermiffion,  and 
frequently  almofl  took  away  the  ufe  of  his  limb. 
In  Auguft  1754,  he  was  eledlrified,  receiving  two 
{hocks.  His  pain  raged  the  more  for  four  or  five 
hours;  but  afterwards  entirely  ceafed.  And 
from  that  time  to  this  he  has  been  perfedtly  well, 
without  the  leail  relapfe. 

“ Mr,  R S of  Worcefter,  troubled 

with  a Jciatica  for  fome  years,  was  cured  at 
once  by  ffiocks  conveyed  to  the  parts  affedted.” 
Mr.  L. 

Mary  Butler,  aged  86,  living  in  Eagle-ftreet, 
Red  Lion-fquare,  having  been  affiidled  with  the 
Jciatica  for  more  than  twenty  years,  was  lafi: 
month  eledlrified  ten  or  twelve  times,  and  has 
been  eafy  ever  fince. 

It  feems  the  eledlric  fire  in  cafes  of  this  and 
of  many  other  kinds,  dilates  the  minute  vefiels, 
and  capillary-paffiages,  as  well  as  feparates  the 
clogging  particles  of  the  ftagnating  fluids.  By 
accelerating  likewife  the  motion  of  the  blood,  it 
removes  many  obfirudlions. 

46.  Thomas  Nevil,  weaver,  aged  26,  living 
at  the  bottom  ofVine-Court,  Spittlefields;  when 
about  16  years  of  age,  fprainedhls  loins  fo  vio- 
lently, that  from  that  time  he  found  a continual 

Vo  l.  XXIV.  Q weaknefs. 


[ 3:6a  ] 

weaknefs,  frequent  pains  and  an  inability  to  do  any 
hard  work.  On  Thurfday,  March  10th,  1757, 
Ire  was  eleCtrified,  receiving  five  or  fix  fhocks 
thro’ the  parts  affeCted.  When  he  went  home 
he  felt  no  pain,  but  much  forenefs  on  the  part, 
on  which  a red  fpot  appeared,  like  a fmall  pin’s 
head.  But  the  next  morning  he  was  perfectly 
well,  and  has  been  ever  fince  ftronger  than  be- 
fore the  firft  hurt. 

Francis  Halfpenny,  Taylor,  aged  go,  living 
in  Redcrofs-fireet,  Southwark,  when  about 
18  years  old,  had  a fall  from  a tree.  By  this  he 
received  fuch  a fprain,  that  he  could  not  walk 
twenty  yards,  unlefs  exceeding  flow,  without  a 
gnawing,  aking  pain  down  his  thigh.  About  the 
middle  of  September  lad  he  was  electrified  thro’ 
the  upper  part  of  the  thigh.  This  was  repeated 
at  five  or  fix  different  times.  The  firft  flrock 
■ removed  the  pain  down  to  the  knee.  At  the 
third  eleCtrifying  it  went  quite  away.  And  fince 
that  time  he  has  been  full  as  well  as  he  was  be- 
fore his  fall. 

47.  “ E H , of  Tedny,  had  a very' 

painful  fwelling  in  the  ball  of  her  great  toe  for 
fome  vears.  Having  made  ufe  of  raanv  other 
means  in  vain,  fhe  was  at  length  eleftrified.  After 
the  firft  operation  (by  drawing  fparks)  the  pain 
was  much  abated  : and  in  a fhorttime  the  fwell- 
ing difappeared  and  the  pain  left  her.” 

“ Mr.  Jofhua  W — , of  Perfhore,  was  trou- 
bled for  feven  or  eight  years  with  a pain  in  his 

fecond 


[ 3^3  3 

fecond  toe.  Tho  nothing  was  to  be  fecn,  it 
was  as  tender  as  a boil,  and  the  pain  was  fo 
great,  particularly  in  walking,  that  he  at  length 
determined  to  have  it  cut  off.  By  drawing  fparks 
he  was  cured  in  an  hour.” 

“ A gentleman  of  Worcefter,  ran  a bodkin 
into  the  fide  of  his  hand,  near  the  fore  and 
middle  fingers.  The  wound  was  no  more  than 
a prick  of  a large  pin,  yet  in  three  or  four  days 
a /welling  came  both  in  the  palm  and  on  the 
back  of  the  hand. 

“ The  fifth  day  a furgeon  was  called,  who  for 
three  months  dreffed  both  the  infide  and  the  out- 
fide  of  the  hand  to  no  purpofe.  A cauftic  was 
then  applied  ; but  with  no  more  fuccefs  than  all 
the  other  means. 

“ Finding  no  alteration,  nor  likelihood  of 
any,  he  was  eleftrified  ‘twice  (by  drawing  off 
fparks)  on  the  infide  of  his  hand,  at  the  bottom 
of  the  middle  finger.  In  four  days  it  broke, 
and  in  about  three  weeks  healed.”  Mr.  L. 

Jane  Davifon,  quilter,  aged  26,  living  in 
Quaker-ftreet,  had  about  fix  years  ago  a violent 
tooth-ach,  which  occafioned  a fuelling  in  her  right 
cheek.  This  continued  gradually  increafing 
on  the  infide  of  the  cheek,  till  it  grew  into  ati 
hard  fiefhv  lump.  Delpairing  of  any  help,  fhe 
let  it  tilone,  till  laff  jnonth  (he  was  perfuaded  to 
be  eleftrified.  She  received  feveral  ftrori?  fhocks 

O 

thro’  the  part.  Alter  this  was  done  the  firfttime 
the  fweliing  not  only  increafed  exceedingly, 
Q 2 but 


[ 364  ] 

but  was  violently  painful.  The  next  day,  tTue 

other  cheek  likewife  fwelled,  and  that  fwclhng 
fpread  thro1  the  upper  lip,  acrofs  the  mouth. 
Neverthelefs  Ihe  was  electrified  again.  Two 

or  three  days  after  it  broke,  and  for  two  days 
together,  difcharged  abundance  of  purulent 

matter  mixt  with  blood.  But  in  a few  days 
the  wound  was  entirely  healed,  and  all  the  fwel- 
ling  gone. 

48.  “ E T— , taking  cold,  was  feized 

with  a fore  throat , which  grew  worfe  and  worfe 
for  fix  days.  She  then  could  not  fwallow  even 
a bit  of  bread  foaked  in  tea.  The  fame  morning 
fhe  was  eleftrified,  fo  as  to  direCt  the  fhock  in 
a right  line  thro’  the  part  affefted.  By  the  time 
file  got  home  fhe  could  eat  any  thing.  Two 
fliocks  more  made  a perfeft  cure.” 

49.  “ The  tooth-ack,  if  proceeding  from  a 
fcorbutic  habit,  from  hollow  teeth,  or  from  a 
defluxion  of  rheum,  is  prefently  alhiaged  or  to- 
tally removed  by  this  remedy. 

“ This  may  frequently  be  done  by  drawing 
fparks  from  the  tooth  or  cheek  : in  more  flub- 
born  cafes,  by  moderate  fhocks.  The  fooner 
you  touch  the  phial,  the  weaker  the  llioc  k ; fo 
that  you  may  leficn  or  increafe  it  at  pleafure. 

“ In  giving  the  fhock,  the  moft  efTefiual  way, 
is,  to  bring  one  wire  under  the  chin  and  tooth, 
(if  it  be  on  the  under-fide)  and  lay  the  end  of 
the  other  wire  on  the  top  of  the  tooth.  If  it  be 
on  the  upper- fide,  bring  one  wire  to  the  top  of 

the 


[ S&5  ] 


the  head  over  the  tooth,  and  apply  the  other  to 
the  bottom  of  it.”  Mr.  L. 

Sarah  Ellifon,  the  wife  of  John  Ellifon,  above- 
mentioned,  catched  cold  in  lying  in,  which  fix- 
ed a fharp  pain  in  her  teeth,  and  the  fide  of  her 
face.  She  ufed  all  manner  of  means  to  remove 
this  for  upwards  of  fix  years.  Among  many 
others,  fire  had  at  feveral  times,  three  teeth 
drawn,  and  was  fourteen  times  blifiered,  but 
without  efleft.  In  July  1754,  fire  received  fix 
flrocks  through  her  head.  The  nain  ceafed  im- 
mediately, and  returned  no  more. 

50.  “ A perfon  had  a fwelling,  fuppofed  to 
be  a we.n,  between  the  neck  and  the  lhoulder- 
blade,  as  big  as  an  egg,  and  nearly  a's  hard, 
which  had  been  crrowinst  to  that  fize  for  feveral 

O O 

years.  She  had  not  been  eleftrified  many"  times 
(by  drawing  fparks  for  five  or  fix  minutes  every 
day)  before  it  began  to  foften.  Soon  after  ttdif- 
charged  a thin  humour  through  a finall  orifice, 
and  continued  difcharging  and  foftening  more 
and  more,,  till  it  was  entirely  difiipated.'’  Mr.  L.' 

51.  Whoever  defires  to  fee  a more  circum- 
flantial  account  of  many  of  the  preceding  cafes, 
with  the  names  of  rhuft  of  the  patients  and  their 
places  of  abode,  may  confalt  Mr,  Lovett’s  trea- 
tife.  It  is  wrote  not  only  with  admirable  judg- 
ment, but  with  an  excellent  fpn  it.  A principle 
of  benevolence  to  human  kind  may  be  eafily  ob- 
ferved  to  breathe  through  the  whole  : nor  can 
any  lightly  condemn  it,  but  thofe  whofe  interefl 

0 I naturally  . 


[ 366  ] 

naturally  leads  them  to  decry  whatever  would 
leffen  their  own  gain. 

52.  After  relating  thefe  cures.  Mr.  L.  himfelf 
adds,  “ I cannot  deny  but  I was  almoft  aftonifh- 
ed,  at  feeing  fuch  mighty  things  performed  by 
ele&ricity.  But  after  having  attentively  confi- 
dered  the  nature  of  eleftric  ether,  its  great  fubtil- 
ty  and  power,  its  aCtive  and  enlivening  qualities, 
and  its  mighty  tendency  to  accelerate  the  mo- 
tion of  the  fluids  in  general,  and  of  the  blood 
in  particular  (I  would  add,  and  to  pervade  the 
fined:  arteries  and  nerves,  to  dilate  their  obflruft- 
ed  or  contracted  orifices ; as  well  as  to  reflore 
the  tone  of  any  mufcle  or  fibre,  which  is  either 
impaired  or  deflroyed :)  “1  concluded  that  all 
thofe  furprizing  effects  were  no  more  than  the 
neceffary  confequences  of  fo  powerful  an  agent, 
when  thus  determined,  and  direfted.  And  the 
helping  us  in  our  bodily  infirmities,  was  one 
great  end  it  was  ordained  to  ferve,  ’ (probably  the 
great  end)  “ after  it  had  been  thus  fully  and 
plainly  difcovered  to  us.” 

53.  It  tvere  greatly  to  be  wifhed,  that  die  gen- 
tlemen of  the  faculty  would  flriftly  examine  the 
nature,  properties,  and  effects  of  this  fovereign 
remedy.  For  fuch  it  unqneflionably  is,  parti- 
cularly in  nervous  cafes;  even  in  thofe  cafes, 
which  the"  common  Materia  Medica  will  in  no 
wife  reach.  But  it  is  not  to  be  expefted.  They 
muft  not  difoblige  their  good  friends  the  apothe- 
caries. Neither  can  it  confifl  with  their  own 

intered. 


[ 3^7  ] 

intereft,  to  make  (although  not  every  man)  yet 
fo  many  men  their  own  phyficians,  which  would 
be  the  unavoidable  confequence,  if  a regular 
fylletn  of  practical  rules  were  formed  from  a pro- 
cefs  of  experiments,  whereby  a fenfible  man 
might  judge  in  what  cafes  it  would  cure,  and  in 
what  not  and  in  what  manner  it  might  be  molt 
effectually  applied  in  any  cafe  wherein  it  was- 
proper. 

In  order  to  prevent  any  ill  effeft,  thefe  two 
cautions  fhoitld  always  be  remembered.  Firft, 
let  not  the  (hock  be  too  violent  ; rather  let 
feveral  fmall  fhocks  be  given.  Secondly,  do  not 
give  a fhock  to  the  whole  body,  when  only  a 
particular  part  is  affeCted.  If  it  be  given  to  the 
part  affefted  only,  little  harm  can  follow  even 
from  a violent  {hock. 

For  indance.  In  a palfy  of  the  tanguer  the 
{hock  may  he- given  to  the  tongue  only  by  apply- 
ing one  wire  to  the  hinder  part  of  the  neck,  and 
another  to  the  tongue.  And  if  in  any  cafe  there 
be  danger  of  too  great  a fhock,  it  may  eafily  be 
prevented. 

It  is  highly  probable,  a timely  ufe  of  this 
means  might  prevent  before  they  were  thorough- 
ly formed,  and  frequently  even  then  remove 
fome  of  the  mod  painful  and  dangerous  didem- 
pers  : cancers  and fcrophulous tumours  in  particu- 
lar, though  they  will  yield  to  no  other  medicine 
yet  difcovered.  It  is  certain,  nothing  is  fo  like- 
ly, by  accelerating  the  contained  fluids,  to  dilate 

and 


C 3«8  ] 


and  open  the  paffages,  as  well  as  divide  the  coa- 
gulated particles  ol  the  blood,  that  fo  the  circm 
lation  may  be  again  performed.  And  it  is  a 
doubt,  whether  it  would  not  be  of  mote  Life, 
even  in  mortifications , than  either  the  bark  or 
any  other  medicine. 

Before  I conclude,  I would  beg  one  thing  (if 
it  be  not  too  great  a favourj  from  the  gentlemen 
of  the  faculty,  and  indeed  from  all  who  defire 
health  and  freedom  from  pain,  either  for  them- 
felve's  or  their  neighbours.  It  is,  that  none  of 
them  would  condemn  they  know  not  what;  that 
they  would  hear  the  caufe,  before  they  pafs  fen- 
tence  ; that  they  would  not  peremptorily  pro- 
nounce againfl  ele&ricity,  while  they  know  lit- 
tle or  nothing  about.  Rather  let  everv  candid 
man  take  a little  pains,  to  underfland  the  quef- 
tion  before  he  determines  it.  Let  him  for  two 
or  three  weeks  (at  leaftj  try  it  himfelf  in  the 
above-named  di forders.  And  then  his  own  fenfes 
will  fhew  him,  whether  it  is  a mere  play-thing, 
or  the  nobiefi:  medicine  yet  known  in  the  world. 


End  of  the  Twenty-fourth  Volume. 


THE 


C O N T E N T S 


OF  the  Twenty -fourth  Volume. 


Page 


A plain  account  of  Chnfiian  Perfection  3 

Inf  ructions  for  Chrijlians  - — 123 

Chrifian  Reflections,  tranfated  from  the 

French  — — 172 

Inf  ructions  for  members  of  religious  foc'ieties, 

tranfated from  the  French  — 233 

Thoughts  on  a Single  Life  — 232 

A letter  to  a friend  concerning  Tea  264 

The  D f derat um  ; or  Electricity  made  eafy  283 


- 


V 


. 


* 


ERRATA,  Vol.  XXIV. 


Page  Line 

Page  Line 

8 

18 

r diminution 

191  IO 

r he  honours 

9 

20 

r Arvi</ 

198  IO 

r Eve« 

20 

9 

r infert  as 

204  penult.  For  whereas 

-23 

18 

r o/'death 

207  17 

r grace;  depern 

25 

1 

r created  them 

IO 

ult.  continua / 

44 

18 

r ungodli«e/} 

224  26 

r th at 

62 

28 

r does  not 

226  22 

r Jhow\d 

66 

S 

r we  not 

230  $ 

r difpo^/ion 

• — 

J3 

dele  to 

— *S 

r yea,  the 

89 

1 

r a woman 

231  21 

r £as 

penult.  Yc/you 

237  22 

dele  more 

108 

7 

r Thry 

257  2 

r jou  muft 

3 10 

S 

r wary 

__  17 

r without  an 

125  antepen.  r given 

260  I 

r yet 

182 

26 

r infert.  as  tho’ 

Ov> 

O 

CO 

0 

r fufpen</ed 

we  poffeffed  them 

327  25 

r never 

GO 

M 

13 

r But  htt 

1 


1 •') 

'l  . ' 5 


V-.T-.  • 


. 


* 


Date  Due 

SEP  3.0. 

Demco  293-5 

