\    STUDIA    IN 


Presented  to 
THE  LIBRARY 

of 
VICTORIA  UNIVERSITY 

Toronto 
by 

Malcolm 


THE   CLAIMS 


CHUECH  OF  ENGLAND 


CONSIDERED; 


BEING    THE   CLOSE   OP   A   CORKESPONDENCE 
BETWEEN 


THE     EEV.     JAMES     KELLY, 

Of  Stillogan,  Ireland, 


J.    N.    DAE  BY. 


LONDON : 

W.  H.  BEOOM,  34,  PATEENOSTEE  EOW,  E.G. 


INTRODUCTION. 


THE  only  thing  necessary  to  "be  explained  in  the  pub 
lication  of  the  following  correspondence,  is  the  fact  of 
its  having  been  published  after  so  considerable  a  lapse 
of  time.  It  will  be  seen  by  the  correspondence  itself, 
that  one  of  the  parties  declined  pursuing  it  farther.* 
The  other  disliking  contention,  and  weary  of  it,  much 
preferring  direct  edification,  had  this  additional  motive 
for  not  taking  any  positive  step — namely,  an  unwilling 
ness,  unless  by  what  wa&  identified  with  direct  edifica 
tion,  to  raise  questions  in  public  on  what  had  the 
reputation  of  Protestant  truth,  in^e  presence  of  error, 
which  lifted  up  its  head  high  enough. 

Some  brethren  in  Christ  who  had  seen  the  MSS.  of 
the  correspondence,  urged  by  the  actual  state  of  things 
in  England,  desired  particularly  the  publication  of  the 
last  letter,  adding  the  last  of  Mr.  Kelly's,!  that  it  might 
be  understood,  or  of  all  if  that  _were  demanded. 
Under  the  circumstances,  he  wrote  to  Mr.  Kelly,  ac 
quainting  him  with  what  lias  just  been  mentioned,  and 
asking  permission  to  satisfy  the  wish  expressed  of  pub 
lishing  the  two  last  letters.  At  first  Mr.  Kelly  required 
the  publication  of  the  previous  part  of  the  correspond 
ence,  which  was  acquiesced  in,  as  indeed  the  other  party 
was  naturally  bound  thereto  if  demanded;  but  in  a 
subsequent  letter  Mr.  Kelly  declared  his  mind  changed 
in  this  respect,  and  acquiesced  in  the  publication  de 
manded,  the  following  communication  being  annexed. 

*  An  additional  letter  has  since  been  sent,  which  is  added  at 
the  request  of  Mr.  Kelly, 
t  Now  the  last  but  one. 

A   2 

*- 


To  THE  BEV.  J.  DAEBT. 

Stillogan  Glebe,  Dublin, 
Jan.  28th,  1842. 

MY   DEAR.    SlR, 

In  reply  to  your  letter  from  Lausanne,  which  has 
just  reached  me,  I  hasten  to  say  that  since  our  last  cor 
respondence  I   inquired  after  you  several  times  as  to 
whether  you  had  returned  to  this  country,  with  a  view 
formally  to  decline  pursuing  the  subject  of  controversy 
between   us  any  further ;   but  hearing  you  were  still 
abroad,  I  did  not  think  the  matter  of  sufficient  import 
ance  to  communicate  with  you  by  a  foreign  post.     I 
now  avail  myself  of  this  opportunity  to  let  you  know 
my  decision.     The  grounds  on  which  I  have  come  to  it 
are  these :   First,  the  inutility  (in  many  of  my  respected 
brethren's  estimation)  of  disputing  with  you.     Second, 
the  accession  of  care  and  occupation  connected  with  my 
appointment  to  this  parish,  which  I  was  led  to  reflect 
afforded  more  profitable  exercise  of  my  little  talents  than 
carrying  on  a  discussion  with  the  leader  of  an  extra 
vagant  class  of  schismatics.     Third,  the  little  hope  I 
entertained  after  reading  your  most  diffuse  and  inco 
herent  reply  to  mine  of  February  8th,  1839,  of  being 
able  to  bring  you  to  the  real  point  at  issue  between  us. 
As  to  the  publication  of  the  letters  to  which  you 
allude,  I  can  have  no  objection  if  you  see  fit,  although 
I  must  confess  I  do  not  attach  to  them  the  importance 


VI 

which  you  do.  I  have  only  to  request  that  you  will 
annex  to  them  the  following  observations  by  way  of 
explanation  of  some  passages  in  my  letter  which  you 
have  misunderstood,  and  of  final  comment  on  some 
sentiments  of  your  own. 

I  remain,  my  dear  sir, 

Tours  in  Christian  truth  and  love, 
JAMES  KELLY. 

The  observations  themselves,  alluded  to  in  this 
letter  of  Mr.  Kelly,  are  placed  at  the  end,  as  coming 
then  naturally  in  their  place  after  the  letter  on 
which  they  comment. 

With  this  brief  introduction,  acquiesced  in  by  both 
parties,  as  to  what  has  led  to  the  publication  of  them, 
these  letters  are  now  submitted  to  the  reader,  with 
the  desire  that  the  Lord  may  use  them  for  the  esta 
blishment  of  truth,  the  strengthening  of  souls  in  it, 
and  the  refutation  of  error. 


THE  LETTERS. 

To  THE  EEV.  J.  DARBY. 

Liverpool,  Feb.  8,  1839. 
MY  DEAR  SIR, 

Though  I  might  recount  many  other  adequate 
causes  of  my  silence  since  I  received  your  last,  yet 
I  must  say  my  chief  reason  for  not  being  more 
prompt  has  arisen  from  the  very  uninteresting 
reply  you  have  given  to  mine  of  December  12.  It 
really  appeared  to  me  evasive  of  discussion.  I  asked 
you,  in  order  that  we  might  come  to  the  argument 
of  the  subject  at  once,  to  allege  your  grounds  of 
separation  from  the  communion  of  the  Church  of 
England — a  very  straightforward  question  methinks, 
and  the  import  of  which  was  very  obvious.  But 
instead  of  a  plain  answer,  as  might  have  been  ex 
pected,  you  occupy  a  considerable  portion  of  your 
letter  in  making  reflections  on  me  as  "  an  adversary," 
as  you  call  me,  of  whom  you  add  "  nothing  "  (Chris 
tian  I  suppose  you  mean)  "is  to  be  expected."  You 
then  quarrel  with  my  assuming  that  you  have  for 
saken  the  Church  of  England,  as  though  this  was 
not  the  case  (remember,  I  did  not  say  the  Church,  but 
the  Church  of  England] ;  and,  lastly,  you  give  out 


8 

your  impressions  against  the  character  of  the  Church 
of  England,  erecting  them  into  assertions,  and  dilat 
ing  upon  a  new  and  better  way,  as  you  are  pleased 
to  think — adding  in  the  meanwhile  not  one  syllable, 
not  even  professing  to  do  it,  of  argument  to  bear 
out  your  assertions.  Now,  my  dear  sir,  I  feel  from 
this,  as  well  as  the  loose  character  of  your  former 
communications  to  me,  that  it  is  vain  to  expect  from 
you  anything  like  an  orderly  and  intelligible  vindi 
cation  of  your  views ;  in  this  respect  you  seem  to 
write  as  you  speak.  I  therefore  propose  for  the 
future,  without  waiting  for  such,  taking  up  just  as 
they  come  your  aspersions  of  the  Church  of  England, 
and  the  peculiarities  of  yourself  and  brethren  as  dis 
senters,  sifting  them  as  the  Lord  may  enable  me, 
and  bringing  out  the  truth  as  distinctly  as  I  can,  for 
the  perusal  of  all  who  may  see  our  correspondence. 

First,  then,  you  say  that  the  world  is  in  the  Church 
of  England.  What  do  you  mean  by  "  the  world"  ? 
Is  it  the  openly  profane  and  ungodly?  This  we 
deny :  the  Church  recognizes  as  her  members  only 
those  who  are  baptized  into  and  make  a  solemn  pro 
fession  of  "  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,"  and  all  those 
who  scandalize  their  profession  by  evil  lives,  are,  by 
the  discipline  of  the  Church,  to  be  excluded  from  her 
communion.  Do  you  mean  earthly-minded  pro 
fessors  ?  In  sorrow  we  assent  to  the  sorrowful  truth 
of  this.  St.  Paul  wept  over  such  in  the  Philippian 
Church,  and  the  same,  we  have  reason  to  believe, 
abounded  in  the  Church  of  Corinth.  There  never 
has  been,  and  there  is  nowhere  upon  earth  a  pure 
Church  in  the  sense  of  excluding  false,  worldly- 
minded  professors.  Or  do  you  say  that  the  consti 
tution  of  our  Church,  looking  at  our  articles  and 
formularies,  is  worldly  ?  This  I  deny,  and  call  upon 
you  to  prove  the  statement  if  you  make  it. 


"Worldly  professors,  then,  being  in  the  Church  of 
England,  which  is  all  the  amount  of  meaning  that 
your  charge  has  in  it,  what  is  the  duty  of  God's 
children  who  are  also  within  her  pale  ?  This  is  the 
fundamental  point  of  difference  between  us ;  this  is 
the  question  which,  troubling  the  consciences  of  our 
dear  people,  gave  you  the  occasion — which,  alas !  you 
have  industriously  improved — to  separate  them  from 
us.  You  hold  and  teach  that  it  is  imperative  on  the 
faithful  to  come  out  from  the  communion  in  which 
are  the  unfaithful.  To  use  your  own  words,  they  are 
"  to  cease  from  the  evil ;"  to  more  than  this,  in  the 
first  instance,  it  appears  you  do  not  aspire.  Mr. 
Hargrove  says,  "Do  you  see  the  evil?  then  cease 
from  it ;  let  that  be  your  first  step, — God  will  show 
you  the  next  when  you  have  taken  that."  In  other 
words,  we  are  to  take  a  leap  in  the  dark  from  the 
Established  Church,  not  knowing  where  we  shall 
land,  nor  why  this  course.  Is  there  no  evil  bound  up 
in  the  body  of  flesh  which  you  carry  about  with  you  ? 
is  it  not  even  hindering  the  regenerate  spirit,  lusting 
against  it,  "  a  vile  body,"  as  the  Scriptures  call  it, 
and  to  continue  to  the  last  ?  And  yet  you  do  not 
recommend  the  withdrawal  of  ourselves  from  the 
body,  i.e.,  suicide— that  be  far  from  you;  but  why 
not,  according  to  your  principle  above  laid  down? 
are  we  not  afflicted  with  an  evil  companionship,  so 
that  by  reason  of  it  we  often  "  cannot  do  the  things 
that  we  would  "  ? 

To  such  a  proposal  as  this,  of  course  you  justly 
reply,  The  word  of  God  says  we  are  to  bear  this 
conflict  between  the  flesh  and  spirit,  wrestling  with 
the  former,  though  in  the  flesh  not  walking  accord 
ing  to  it,  which,  so  long  as  we  attend  to,  we  are  told 
it  is  no  more  we  that  do  the  evil,  but  "the  sm  that 
dwelleth  in  us."  Precisely  similar,  then,  is  what  the 
A  3 


10 

Scriptures  say  in  the  case  you  put  of  Christians 
being  in  a  Church  in  which  there  is  worldliness. 
Look  at  the  declension  on  the  part  of  the  Jewish 
Church  throughout  their  history.  Behold  also  the 
prophets  testifying  against  the  evil,  bid  yet  remaining 
members  of  that  Church  :  and  if  we  turn  to  the  New 
Testament  Scriptures,  what  do  we  find  there  ?  The 
account  of  Churches  which  had  become  grievously 
corrupt;  even  exhortations  to  the  faithful  within 
their  pale ;  but  in  no  instance  separation  enjoined. 
Take  the  Churches  of  Thyatira  and  Sardis  for  ex 
amples  :  in  the  former  it  appears  a  false  prophetess 
was  allowed  to  assume  to  herself  a  commission  from 
God,  and  to  teach  men  to  commit  fornication,  and 
judgment  is  denounced  in  consequence.  But  what 
is  said  to  the  remnant  that  preserved  their  allegi 
ance  ?  Is  it  flee  out  of  her — form  yourselves  into  a 
new  Church?  This  would  be  your  remedy;  but 
such  is  not  the  injunction  of  Jesus ;  it  is  simply, 
"That  which  you  have  already,  hold  fast  till  I 
come"  (EeV.  ii.  25).  As  to  Sardis,  we  read  there 
were  but  "  few  names  left  which  had  not  defiled  their 
garments ;"  but  even  here  there  is  no  recommenda 
tion  to  separate  (Quere — Is  not  this  the  secret  why 
you  and  your  party  deny  the  Church  of  England  to 
be  a  Church  at  all,  to  get  rid  of  such  passages  as 
these?).  We  do  find  separatists  indeed  spoken  of 
elsewhere  (Jude  13) ;  but  it  is  in  a  bad  connexion — 
in  company  with  "  murmurers,  complainers,  and 
mockers" — the  inscription  over  whom  is  "sensual, 
having  not  the  Spirit."  I  can  readily  conceive  sepa 
ration  to  be  the  easy  course  to  take — easy  to  flesh 
and  blood ;  just  as  in  the  degenerate  Christian  family, 
for  the  member  who  walks  close  with  God,  and  is 
anxious  that  all  the  domestic  arrangements  should  be 
characterized  by  the  spirit  as  well  as  the  form  of 


11 

religion — for  him  to  withdraw  himself  from  the 
sphere  in  which  his  bearing  and  long-suffering 
tenderness,  alternately  with  his  faithfulness,  is  exer 
cised,  and  either  live  by  himself  in  solitary  commu 
nion  with  (rod,  or  unite  with  more  kindred  spirits, 
— all  this  would  be  comparative  enjoyment,  but  then 
it  would  be  a  selfish  enjoyment ;  it  would  be  a  pleas 
ing  of  himself — a  "looking  on  his  own  things,  not 
on  the  things  of  others."  He  has  left  the  family 
circle  which  he  should  have  dearly  loved ;  in  which, 
as  it  was  his  duty,  so  God  might  have  made  it  his 
privilege,  to  witness  for  His  truth,  and  promote  a 
revival  of  the  power  of  vital  godliness.  Of  course,  if 
there  were  rules  laid  down  for  the  regulation  of  the 
family,  or  doctrines  professed  by  them  at  their  family 
altar,  at  variance  with  the  word  of  God,  separation 
would  be  lawful,  though  even  then  it  should  be  re 
sorted  to  only  after  the  most  patient  zeal  in  striving 
to  effect  a  reformation.  But  I  have  supposed  the 
family  only  to  have  declined  in  spirit,  and  that  their 
professed  reverence  for,  and  outward  observance  of 
piety  still  existed ;  and  under  these  circumstances  it 
is  plain  that  the  rending  the  unity  of  the  domestic 
circle  would  be  quite  inexcusable.  Though  separation 
might  spare  the  individual  in  question  many  an  ex 
ercise  of  his  grace,  yet  it  would  be  wrong. 

Now  this,  I  conceive,  aptly  represents  the  case 
the  Church  of  England  and  you  separatists.     Iner 
has  been  a  lamentable  degeneracy  among  us  thougn, 
praised   be   the  Lord,  a  considerable  alteration   for 
the  better  is  taking  place.     But  as  a  Church  we 
profess  God's  truth,  which,  handed  down  to 
our  venerable  formularies  from  apostles  and  martyrs 
who  have  gone  before  us,  we  have  neither  added  t 
nor  taken  ffom.     The  deposit  of  Christian  doctrm 
is  with  us  as  a  Church,  and  our  people  (however 


12 

wayward  they  may  walk)  yet  profess  adherence  to  it. 
But  how  have  you  separatists  acted?  Instead  of 
resting  the  lever  of  your  brotherly  love  and  Christian 
devotedness  upon  this  important  fulcrum  of  the 
Church's  still  faithful  profession,  and  bending  all 
your  energies  to  effect  a  revival  in  the  family,  you 
have  selfishly  withdrawn  yourselves  from  us,  and, 
aggravating  the  degeneracy  in  which  you  should 
have  sympathized  as  members  of  the  body,  have  con 
temptuously  left  us  under  Grod's  judicial  sentence, — 
"unnatural  sons,"  says  Bishop  Hall,  "that  spit  in 
the  face  of  the  father  that  begot  them,  and  the 
mother  that  bore  them." 

Thus,  my  dear  sir  (I  trust  speaking  the  truth  in 
love),  I  have  alleged  selfishness  of  conduct  against 
you  and  your  party ;  may  it  not  be  possible,  I  would 
add,  that  there  attaches  pride  to  your  procedure  also  ? 
We  know  how  insensibly  it  works ; — "  a  sin,"  as  some 
one  observes,  "that  rises  from  the  ashes  of  other 
sins," — mingled  among  a  company  whose  title,  many 
of  them,  to  the  Christian  character  is  almost  defaced, 
except  to  the  eye  of  charity  which  "  hopes  all  things," 
the  shining  graces  of  individuals  are  obscured ;  but 
when  they  come  out  and  stand  apart  in  a  little  body 
by  themselves,  ah  !  then  they  attract  notice.  While 
they  remain  in  the  Church,  "  serving  the  Lord  with 
humility,  supporting  the  weak,  comforting  the  feeble 
minded,  restoring  the  offender  in  the  spirit  of  meek 
ness,"  Christians  are  like  the  convalescent  patients  we 
sometimes  see  in  an  hospital  tending  their  fellow- 
sufferers  ;  but  these  persons,  we  can  imagine,  might 
get  impatient  of  their  charitable  office,  and,  revelling 
in  the  consciousness  of  strength  themselves,  might 
not  brook  being  confounded  longer  with  the  diseased 
and  dying,  and  so  depart  from  the  asylum  that  had 
been  so  blessed  to  themselves.  Alas,  my  dear  sir, 


13 

while  I  write  it,  the  apprehension  of  something 
similar  having  to  do  with  the  course  you  are  pur 
suing,  and  persuading  others  to,  growingly  presses  on 
me,  I  do  not  say  this  is  the  casa,  and  I  heartily 
pray  it  may  not  be  the  case  with  any  of  you ;  but 
you  must  see  how  incident  the  evil  is  to  the  pro 
cedure  you  have  adopted ;  and  as  one  who  is  in  the 
flesh  himself,  I  cannot  but  remark  it.  Would  to  God 
the  people  who  have  gone  out  from  us  would  reflect 
upon  this.  They  felt  the  cross  of  having  to  witness 
for  Jesus,  and  keep  their  garments  in  the  midst  of 
declension  and  inconsistencies  around  them,  which 
was  the  school  for  them,  and  they  were  thriving  in 
it ;  but,  alas,  they  forgot  that  this  might  be  the  case ; 
and  enamoured  of  the  prospect  of  purer  communion 
(apart  from  the  embarrassing  presence  of  the  worldly) , 
and  of  the  conspicuous  position  they  would  then 
stand  in,  they  embarked  in  the  enterprise  of  dissent. 
They  know,  perhaps  with  bitter  disappointment,  the 
result — that  while  the  tares  are  more  like  wheat,  they 
are  bound  up  with  them  still,  only  closer  than  before  ; 
and  that  the  liberty  of  ministry  which  you  have 
among  you  is  a  sorry  substitute  for  the  solemn  re 
sponsibility  of  office  in  securing  edification.  Would 
to  God,  I  say,  that  with  the  experience  to  which  I 
know  some,  not  unlike  your  party,  have  been 
brought,  you  would  all  "  search  and  try  your  ways," 
and  see  if  the  flesh,  with  its  ten  thousand  labyrinths, 
has  not  betrayed  you  into  your  present  position. 

Having  thus  briefly  vindicated  the  Church  ^  of 
England  against  your  sweeping  accusation  of  being 
a  worldly  system ;  shown — and  that  even  when  there 
has  a  tide  of  corruption  set  in  upon  a  Church—  separa 
tion  is  contrary  to  the  mind  of  God;  and  having  sug 
gested  some  dangerous  motives  which  may  be  operat 
ing  upon  you,  I  come  to  analyze  for  a  moment  your 


14 

improvement,  as  you  think,  upon  ordinary  dissent — 
for  you  must  know  I  cannot  suffer  you  to  disclaim 
altogether  affinity  with  common  dissenters — the  only 
difference  I  see  between  you  and  them  is  that,  accord 
ing  to  the  genius  of  the  day,  you  are  more  latitudi- 
narian.  Until  your  views  came  out,  it  was  thought 
that  the  dissenting  bodies  in  this  country  had  become 
grievously  lax  in  their  principles  in  order  to  effect 
unity :  the  followers  of  John  Owen,  for  instance, 
changing  pulpits  with  the  followers  of  John  Wesley 
— each  party  for  the  time  being  keeping  in  abeyance 
those  doctrines  which  were  obnoxious  to  the  other. 
Even  the  heterogeneous  materials  of  Calvinism, 
Socinianism,  and  Popery  appeared  not  long  ago  com 
bined  on  the  subject  of  political  agitation  ;  and  at  this 
moment,  in  the  national  system  of  education  for  poor 
Ireland,  we  see  the  sad  spectacle  of  representatives  of 
these  several  classes  sitting  in  conclave  to  determine 
how  much  of  what  each  maintains  to  be  truth  is  to 
be  sacrificed  at  the  shrine  of  the  popular  idol  unity. 
I,  for  my  part,  did  not  think  that  latitudinarianism 
could  go  beyond  this;  but  you  and  your  brethren 
have  found  out  a  still  more  comprehensive  ground  of 
union :  you  propose  to  unite  all  classes,  not  by  the 
old-fashioned  way  of  endeavouring  to  banish  "  erro 
neous  and  strange  doctrines  " — the  fruitful  parent  of 
strife — but  by  cushioning  them,  and  inscribing  upon 
your  standard  only  one  or  two  articles  of  faith  as 
essential :  and  really  while  I  admit  this,  that  you 
have  set  your  seal  as  a  body  to  any  truth,  I  do  not 
know  that  I  am  altogether  right,  for  where  is  your 
confession  of  faith  to  be  found  ?  If  you  say  in  the 
written  word — well,  the  Socinian  professes  to  find  his 
there  too, — is  he  therefore  admissible  to  your  com 
munion  ?  I  believe  not ;  how  then  do  you  exclude 
him,  since  you  have  no  defined  standard  of  truth? 


15 

Why  it  is  by  using  a  standard  stealthily  and  in  pri 
vate,  by  secretly  defining  what  is  truth.  You  have  your 
touchstone  of  error  in  each  of  your  breasts;  the 
leaders  among  you  appeal  to  it  as  occasion  requires, 
and  thus  the  Socinian  is  excluded ;  but,  by  the  way, 
where  is  the  security  for  your  continuing  to  exclude  him  ? 
That  touchstone  of  unrecorded  opinions  within  you 
may  change,  so  that  the  sentiments  which  are  not 
congenial  to  you  to-day  may  become  so  to-morrow. 
Not  to  diverge,  however,  from  the  point — you  do  ex 
clude  the  Socinian,  though  in  an  unsatisfactory  way : 
do  you  exclude  any  others  ? — Roman  Catholics.  How 
do  I  know  this  ?  Pascal  and  Fenelon — and  doubt 
less  they  have  their  successors  in  our  day — would  be 
as  devotional  as  any  of  you  in  speaking  of  and  extol 
ling  Jesus ; — if  you  have  no  other  test  than  this,  why 
the  wafer  idolaters  may  come  among  you,  and  be 
called  brethren.  If  indeed  you  have  your  mental 
touchstone  to  apply  to  their  views,  you  are  free,  I  will 
suppose,  from  the  intrusion  of  both  these  obnoxious 
classes,  though  I  leave  it  to  you  to  show  your  consist 
ency  in  recognizing  what  is  truth  in  their  cases,  and 
then  stopping  short.  Do  you  not  see,  my  dear  sir, 
that  at  the  very  point  your  recognition  of  truth  ends, 
there  your  admission  of  error  begins  ?  and  here  is  your 
latitudinarianism.  Let  men  but  profess  their  belief, 
as  your  phrase  is,  "  in  the  blood,"  and  then,  whatever 
be  their  heterodoxy,  they  are  admissible  among  you— 
Baptists  and  Ptcdobaptists,  Anninians  and  Calvinists, 
Millennarians  and  Anti-millennarians,  Quakers,  &c. 
Your  cords  of  union  are  indeed  lengthened,  but,  alas, 
how  superficial  the  truth  they  circumscribe  ! 
ordinance  of  baptism,  though  a  command,  cannot  be 
administered  among  you;  the  doctrine  of  (rod  a 
electing  love,  the  second  advent,  the  agency  ot  1 
Spirit  in  the  Church,  cannot  be  introduced  at  your 


16 

meetings,  forsooth,  because  the  moment  you  touch 
upon  these  topics  your  boasted  unity  is  at  an  end. 
Doubtless  it  has  happened  because  of  the  paucity  of 
your  numbers,  and  their  select  character,  being 
chiefly  from  the  one  communion,  that  you  have  had 
somewhat  more  of  liberty  than  I  have  described  as 
the  tendency  of  your  system  (though,  by  the  way,  I 
saw  myself  the  elements  of  discord  working  among 
you  at  Clifton)  ;  but  according,  I  repeat,  to  your  lati- 
tudinarian  principle,  coming  together  only  as  be 
lievers  in  the  atonement,  this  liberty  you  have  had 
does  not  legitimately  belong  to  you.  Just  as  in  the 
national  system  of  education,  when  the  teacher  goes 
beyond  the  books  of  extracts  he  transgresses  the  rule, 
so  when  in  your  assemblies  for  worship  you  touch  on 
ground  other  than  what  is  common  to  you  as  Christians 
of  all  denominations,  you  violate  your  principles.  The 
only  way  you  can  fairly  get  out  of  this  bondage  is  by 
determining  your  views  of  doctrine,  and  authorita 
tively  setting  them  forth;  then  indeed  your  ranks 
will  not  present  so  party-coloured  and  motley  a  group, 
but  they  will  be  sadly  thinned ;  and  if  you  have  not 
your  Thirty-nine  Articles,  like  the  Church  of  Eng 
land,  which  you  aifect  to  despise,  yet  will  you  have 
some  "  Shibboleth  "  which  will  get  you  the  character 
you  are  now  giving  others.  You  see  how  involved 
you  are  in  a  dilemma :  either  you  meet  on  the  com 
mon  ground  of  one  or  two  truths,  and  then  you  can 
not  go  beyond  them  in  your  teaching,  or  you  have  a 
regular  system  of  doctrine,  conformity  to  which  is 
expected,  and  then  you  are  inconsistent,  for  you 
repudiate  all  confessions  and  creeds. 

But  now  to  another  subject.  You  say  that  the 
Holy  Ghost  is  not  honoured  in  the  constitution  of 
our  Church.  Your  letter  does  not  explain  where  the 
hindrance  lies;  I  guess,  however,  what  you  mean, 


17 

from  your  addresses  which  I  have  heard,  ana  your 
brethren's  publications :  it  is  because,  it  seems,  we 
admit  an  ordained  ministry  among  us,  i.e.,  by  ordi 
nation  we  give  authority  in  the  Church  to  those 
whom  we  believe  endued  with  the  necessary  gifts, 
and  called  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  Mark,  we  do  not 
arrogate  to  ourselves  in  the  first  instance,  as  our 
liturgy  testifies,  the  selection  of  our  ministers;  but 
those  who  appear  by  their  solemn  profession  and 
examination  to  be  called  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  take 
upon  them  the  office,  we  ordain  to  it.  Why,  my 
dear  sir,  you  do  yourselves  something  similar :  those 
who  commend  themselves  to  you  by  their  gifts,  and 
as  apt  to  teach,  you  yield  submission  to,  and  they  act 
as  pastors  among  you.  I  remember,  at  your  late 
meetings  at  Clifton,  asking  Mr.  Hargrove  how  he  took 
upon  him  to  expound  Scripture  to  his  assembled  bre 
thren  one  morning,  and  his  answer  was  to  this  effect, 
"  You  and  some  two  or  three  others  had  arranged  it 
previously."  You  see,  then,  you  have  authority 
exercised  among  you,  though  in  a  covert  way ;  the 
difference  is,  that  -we  demand  from  all  candidates  for 
the  ministry  among  us,  Do  they  believe  they  are 
moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  take  upon  them  the 
solemn  office  ?  and  so  far  as  man  can  go,  we  see  that 
we  are  not  imposed  upon,  by  requiring  that  they  be 
persons  well  reported  of,  and  of  competent  know 
ledge  in  the  word  of  God ;  whereas  you,  by  a  sort  of 
whispering  debate  among  those  who  are  the  managers 
of  your  party — irresponsible  persons,  determine  who 
are  fit  to  teach,  and  who  not.  There  is  with  you  no 
solemn  examination  of  the  individual  by  those  who 
have  authority  given  them  in  the  Church ;  there  is  no 
fasting  or  prayer  previously,  to  implore  the  guidance 
of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  but  just  according  to  the  way 
the  individual  pleases  his  hearers,  and  it  might  be  by 


18 

sparing  their  sins,  your  selection  is  made ;  and  then  it 
is  only  for  the  time  being,  for  you  may  supersede 
him  on  the  morrow — and  all  this  most  inconsistently, 
for  he  may  affirm  that  the  Spirit  has  moved  him  to 
speak  just  as  confidently  as  you  affirm  you  are  moved 
by  the  Spirit  to  silence  him.  I  ask,  my  dear  sir,  is 
God  a  God  of  order ;  and  can  you  say  that  amidst 
this  confusion  the  Holy  Ghost  is  honoured  among 
you  ?  To  sum  up  in  a  few  words  this  part  of  the 
matter,  there  must  be  authority  used  in  the  ordering 
of  the  Church ;  and  while  this  is  conformable  to  the 
general  rule  laid  down  in  the  word,  it  is  as  absurd  to 
say  that  this  introduction  of  it  hinders  the  Spirit,  as 
it  would  be  to  contend  that  the  use  of  types,  ink,  and 
paper  is  officious  meddling  on  our  part  to  preserve 
the  Scriptures,  and  that  it  interferes  with  the  agency 
of  the  Spirit.  Authority,  I  repeat,  must  be  had 
recourse  to ;  and  we  maintain  that  ours  is  conform 
able  to  the  general  rule  laid  down  in  the  word  of 
God ;  but  while  you  have  authority  among  you  in  a 
covert  way,  it  is  capriciously  exercised  according  to 
no  open  acknowledged  standard ;  and  thus  while  our 
dear  people  whom  you  have  got  among  you  are 
taught  to  flatter  themselves  that  they  are  free  from 
the  yoke  of  man,  you  and  the  other  managers  of 
your  party  are  virtually  their  lords ;  and  if  your  own 
minds  receive  an  evil  impulse,  God  knoics  what  mis 
chief  you  may  inflict  upon  them ;  or  if  you  are  pre 
served — and  I  pray  the  Lord  you  may,  and,  further, 
be  reclaimed  from  your  present  schismatic  course — 
other  leaders  may  arise  among  you,  men  of  parts  and 
ambition,  who  may  become  the  worst  of  spiritual 
despots. 

On  the  whole,  my  dear  sir,  I  think  I  have  proved 
that  your  system  has  not  originated  in  obedience  to 
the  word  of  God,  and  that  its  tendency  is  most  per- 


19 

nicious.  Here  I  would  be  content  to  close  my  letter 
— beseeching  the  Lord  to  open  your  eyes,  and  the 
eyes  of  our  dear  people  who  have  been  decoyed  away 
from  us  by  your  vain,  though,  I  admit,  sincere  repre 
sentations — but  your  letter  turns  to  personal  matters, 
upon  which,  lest  you  should  be  offended  if  I  were 
silent,  I  beg  to  spend  a  few  words. 

First. — You  reproach  me  for  -challenging  this  dis 
cussion  ;  but  this  I  leave.  If  I  were  in  the  strict 
sense  of  the  term  "  the  challenger"  as  I  said  before, 
it  would  be  only  conformable  to  my  ordination  vow. 

Secondly. — You  go  back  to  what  transpired  at  the 
Clifton  meetings ;  all  I  shall  say  to  this  is,  that  / 
am  surprised  at  your  venturing  to  allude  to  the  sub 
ject,  after  your  shrinking  in  the  manner  you  have 
done  (I  allude  to  our  correspondence)  from,  on  the 
one  hand,  the  vindication  of  yourself  from  the  un- 
charitableness  which,  on  the  testimony  of  your  own 
brother,  Hargrove.  I  alleged  against  you ;  or,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  honest  confession  of  your  fault  as  a 
follower  of  Jesus. 

Thirdly. — You  do  not  understand,  you  say,  my 
regretting  that  this  is  not  a  viva  voce  discussion, — 
time,  manner,  and  place  being  left  entirely  to  me. 
On  this  I  beg  to  observe  that,  independent  of  my 
unsettled  circumstances  in  the  ministry  at  that  time, 
and  which  occurred  to  disturb  my  original  design 
and  wish,  and  of  this  you  were  duly  apprised,  when 
I  came  maturely  to  reflect  upon  the  novel  position  I 
should  occupy  in  going  to  Hereford,  or  any  other 
place  where  your  party  was,  to  argue  against  you,  as 
though  my  brethren  in  the  ministry  stationed  there 
were  not  fully  competent,  if  they  approved  of  such  a 
course,  to  enter  upon  it  themselves,  I  recognized  it 
as  providential  that  the  alternative  of  the  press, 
through  which  without  any  indelicacy  I  could  meet 


20 

you,  was  suggested  by  you  instead  of  the  platform. 
Not  but  that  if,  in  the  providence  of  God,  you  or 
any  of  your  party  broaching  your  schismatical  views 
came  within  the  sphere  of  labour  under  my  control, 
I  would  for  a  moment  hesitate  to  challenge  you  to 
oral  discussion.  I  think  it  a  sad  pity  when  it  is  a 
legitimate  course  to  adopt,  that  my  reverend  brethren 
do  not  pursue  it,  though,  as  I  told  you,  a  most  valued 
brother  said  he  thought  it  would  be  making  top 
much  of  you. 

Fourthly. — With  regard  to  the  publication  of  our 
correspondence,  I  shall  go  as  far  back  as  you  please. 
It  was  really  for  your  sake,  your  first  letters  were  so 
unchristian  and  slovenly,  as  well  as  that  they  related 
to  personal  matter,  that  I  proposed  omitting  them ; 
and  if  you  name  any  medium  in  England  through 
which  the  whole  correspondence  can  appear,  /  am 
perfectly  content.  I  think  the  Statesman  would  be 
available  for  Ireland. 

I  remain,  my  dear  sir, 

Yours  in  Christian  truth  and  love, 
JAMES  KELLY. 


21 


Stafford,  Feb.  26,  1839. 
DEAR  MR.  KELLY, 

I  am  glad  we  are  at  last  launched  in  the 
subject ;  it  is  a  great  relief  to  my  spirit,  though  not  a 
pleasant  task  in  itself.  I  received  your  packet  from 
Dublin  in  London,  I  suppose  by  private  hand,  and  sit 
down  at  once  to  answer  it,  having  ran  it  over  as 
I  came  down  again  here. 

Your  letter  has  completely  justified  to  me  the 
ground  I  took  in  my  last  letter  to  you ;  satisfactory, 
if  not  to  you,  at  least  to  others,  whose  minds  were 
anxious  on  the  subject.  All  your  present  letter  goes 
on  the  assumption  exactly  of  what  I  refused  to 
acknowledge  in  nay  last — no  attempt  being  made  on 
your  part  to  prove  it.  In  replying  to  the  question, 
Why  I  left  the  Church  of  England  ?  I  replied,  not 
that  the  world  was  in  the  Church  of  England,  as  you 
say — no  such  thing  at  all;  but  that  I  found  the 
system  I  was  mixed  up  with  to  be  the  world,  and  not 
the  Church  of  God  at  all.  That  is  a  very  distinct 
thing  from  worldly  people  being  in  the  Church. 

I  said  to  you  very  plainly  that  your  question 
assumed  that  the  Establishment  was  the  or  a  Church, 
which  I  did  not  admit.  Now  this  is  a  very  plain 
ground ;  it  is  to  me  precisely  the  ground  of  import 
ance  ;  and  a  plain  truth  which,  when  once  appre 
hended,  frees  the  conscience  of  many  an  anxious 
person.  The  position  in  which  you  desired  to  place 
me  is  also  evident  from  the  expression,  you  will  take 
up  "  my  aspersions  of  the  Church  of  England."  I 


22 

have  no  pleasure  in  casting  any  aspersions  on  it ;  to 
free  my  own  and  others'  conscience  from  all  that  may 
be,  or  tend  to  evil,  I  do  desire.  Further,  sir,  I  have 
to  admit  that  the  manifested  progress  of  Popery,  of 
which  the  system  of  the  Church  of  England  is  the 
instrument,  renders  me  less  jealous  and  less  anxious 
to  avoid  the  plain  expression  of  what  one  may  feel 
painfully,  and  yet,  from  ten  thousand  associations,  be 
unwilling  to  declare,  lest  some  rude  Edomite  might 
suppose  for  a  moment  one  felt  with  them.  My  mind 
has  long  admitted  its  tendency,  and  I  have  acted  on 
it.  The  signs  of  it  are  too  publicly  apparent  not  to 
call  forth  at  least  some  additional  warning  voice.  If 
mine  be  so  very  feeble  and  despised,  as  I  am  sure  it 
is,  may  the  Lord  give  it  truth  and  affection,  and 
therefore  His  own  force.  The  Oxford  tracts  and  their 
prevalence  cannot  but  have  drawn  your  attention,  as 
they  have  of  Bishops,  and  even  newspapers ;  and 
recently  wre  have  had  a  very  remarkable  sign  of  the 
times, — the  highest  ecclesiastical  authority  in  the 
country  pronouncing  a  definite  judgment  that 
prayers  for  the  dead  are  not  inconsistent  with  the 
doctrines  of  the  Church  of  England.  You  may  say 
this  is  not  right :  her  godly  ministers  protest 
against  it.  Be  it  so.  They  cannot  help  it ;  and  if 
they  say,  we  declare  it  is  not  right,  then  is  the  judg 
ment  of  God  on  them,  because  they  will  not  plainly 
act  on  and  abide  by  what  is  right,  and  renounce 
what  is  wrong.  What  is  the  resource  from  the  evil 
proposed  by  the  Record  ? — An  appeal  to  the  Privy 
Council !  What  a  condition  -for  the  Church  of  GOD 
to  be  placed  in,  that  when  a  heresy  comes  in,  and  is 
sanctioned,  its  appeal  is  to  the  Privy  Council  to  get 
rid  of  it !  But  I  allude  to  this  merely  as  a  sign ; 
and  whether  the  Church  exculpate  herself  or  not,  a 
sign  it  is  to  them  that  have  eyes  to  see. 


23 

I  believe,  dear  sir,  this,  that  at  the  time  of  the 
Reformation  two  great  elements  entered  into  the 
composition  of  the  Church  of  England,  as  it  is  called  : 
one,  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  GOD  in  the  preached 
word,  which  was  directed  against  the  Church  of  Eng 
land,  or  of  Rome  in  England  then  subsisting,  and 
which  was  carried  on  by  a  system  of  irregularities — 
Latimer,  Bernard  Gilpin,  and  a  host  of  others,  many 
whose  names  are  better  known  in  heaven  than  on 
earth,  preaching  and  teaching  all  about  the  country, 
without  regard  to  parish  or  any  thing — but  which 
was  the  power  of  light  against  the  power  of  darkness, 
and  that  was  blest.  The  other  element  was  partly 
through  the  fears  of  Churchmen,  and  mainly  through 
the  interference  of  the  Crown  and  secular  power — a 
system  in  which,  in  order  to  maintain  unity  in  the 
whole  country,  and  that  even  to  conciliate  Roman 
Catholics  for  political  purposes,  under  Queen  Eliza 
beth,  a  vast  mass  of  association  with  Roman  Catholic 
forms  and  the  value  of  ordinances  was  preserved  and 
asserted,  by  which  a  connexion  with  the  great  apos- 
tacy  was  kept  up ;  which,  although  the  power  of 
truth  and  the  providence  of  God  may  have  a  long 
while  hindered  its  effect,  is  now  beginning  distinctly 
and  publicly  to  show  itself,  and  will,  I  have  no  doubt 
— woe  is  me  that  I  should  have  to  say  it — result  in  this 
once  comparatively  happy  country  being  immersed  in 
and  given  up  to  darkness  and  opposition  to  GOD. 
Can  you  suppose,  sir,  that  this  gives  me  satisfaction 
or  pleasure  in  saying  it?  The  Lord  knows  who 
grieves  over  it  most — those  who  sanction  the  system 
that  leads  to  it,  or  such  as  in  sorrow  of  heart  have 
gone  out  without  the  camp,  though  bearing  his  re 
proach,  and  in  word  and  work  become  a  witness, 
however  feeble. 

A  man  cannot,  while  acting  in  and  sanctioning  a 


24 

system  which  involves  these  evils,  honestly  bear  wit 
ness  against  the  evils  he  partakes  of  and  upholds. 
The  whole  system  is  thoroughly  woven  together. 
He  subscribes  his  assent  and  consent  to  all  and  every 
thing  contained  in  it.  Satan,  under  divine  permis 
sion,  has  been  allowed  to  force  the.  adoption  of  all  or 
none ;  and  makes  the  single  sentence,  or  word,  or 
even  form  of  apparel,  as  necessary  to  unity,  or  to 
living  honestly  in  the  Church,  as  justification  by 
faith  or  any  thing  else.  This  is  the  position  of  a 
minister  of  the  Establishment :  it  cannot  be  denied. 
Mr.  Head,  near  Exeter,  is  a  public  instance  lately  of 
the  truth  of  what  I  say.  But  though  the  truth 
might  be  preached  by  individuals,  which  I  do  not 
controvert,  the  consequence  of  the  preservation  of 
this  Popish  parochial  unity  was  the  entire  forfeiture 
by  the  Establishment  of  the  title  to  being  a  Church 
at  all — not  merely  by  accident,  but  by  its  very 
essence  and  system.  There  was  a  transfer  of  all  the 
inhabitants  of  a  parish  to  a  Protestant  form  from  a 
Popish,  but  no  gathering  of  saints  at  all.  It  was 
matter  of  legal  penalty  not  to  go  to  church.  The 
parochial  centre  was  there ;  the  minister  the  law 
provided  was  there ;  the  legal  right  to  seats  was 
there ;  the  whole  framework  of  ordinances  for  the 
whole  parish  was  there ;  and,  I  repeat,  there  was  a 
legal  penalty  for  not  attending.  These  are  matters 
of  historical  fact.  The  whole  population,  as  such,  were 
transferred  in  geographical  divisions  to  another  form 
of  worship,  and  there  was  no  gathering  of  the  saints, 
though  there  was,  to  a  considerable  extent,  the  truth 
preached. 

That  was  the  system  of  the  Church  of  England, 
not  its  abuse.  Those  who  refused  to  come  were 
termed  Popish  recusants,  and  dealt  with  as  such ;  and 
those  whose  consciences  refused  submission  were  very 


25 

extensively  subjected  to  punishment  and  imprison 
ment.  And  this  is  still  the  boasted  principle  of  the 
Establishment.  The  toleration  that  there  is,  forced 
on  by  the  consciences  of  others,  has  in  nowise  altered 
the  principle  of  the  Establishment.  Her  boast  is, 
that  she  provides  religious  instruction  for  the  whole 
population  of  the  country :  the  truth  of  this  we  may 
shortly  inquire,  but  it  is  her  boast;  but  when  I 
begin  to  seek  what  is  meant  by  religious  instruction, 
I  find  this  a  most  deceptive  and  inadequate  state 
ment.  Her  system,  be  there  instruction  or  not,  be 
there  bad  or  good,  is  a  system  of  ordinances  by 
which  the  whole  population  are  received  as  Christian, 
whether  they  believe  or  not,  and  are  dealt  with  as  such 
by  her  ordinances,  with  which,  according  to  her 
directions,  they  are  all  bound  to  comply ;  so  that 
those  who  do  not  are  called  recusants,  dissenters,  and 
schismatics.  So  that  it  is  really  a  provision,  not  for 
the  instruction  of  all,  but  for  calling  all  Christians, 
whether  they  are  so  or  not.  Do  I  go  into  a  town  or 
country  parish,  if  there  should  not  be  any  dissenting 
body,  it  would  be  the  boast  that  they  were  all  Church 
of  England  people — though  a  Christian  minister 
within  her  pale  would  perhaps  avow  he  was  satisfied 
there  was  not  one  who  was  a  Christian,  or  knew  the 
Lord,  amongst  them,  and  would  preach  to  them  as 
entirely  unconverted  people,  and  often  does  so  very 
faithfully. 

You  say  that  discipline  is  to  be  exercised.  In  fact, 
it  is  not,  nor  could  be  scripturally :  if  it  were,  it 
would  be  merely  to  make  the  world  decent,  not  to 
keep  the  Church  holy ;  and  discipline  with  unbe 
lievers  is  merely  entirely  deceiving  the  souls  of  all — 
the  height  of  confusion  and  absurdity.  My  assertion 
then  is,  that  the  Establishment  is  not,  unless  in  self- 
assumed  responsibility,  the  Church,  or  a  Church  at 


26 

all, — is  not  a  body  that  God  owns  as  such,  save  for 
judgment.  And  yet  she  treats  as  schismatics  those 
who  separate  from  her  pale. 

This  short  remark  sets  this  clear.  If  a  man  left 
the  Church  of  God,  he  was  out  of  the  manifested 
body  of  God's  saved  people  altogether.  But  farther, 
if  a  man  at  Corinth  left  the  Church  of  Corinth,  he 
left  the  Church  of  God — he  left  God's  assembly. 
Could  that  be  said  of  the  Church  of  England?  I 
find  no  such  thing  as  a  national  Church  in  Scrip 
ture.  Is  the  Church  of  England — was  it  ever  God's 
assembly  in  England?  I  read  of  the  Churches  of 
Galatia,  which  was  a  province  or  country — that  is, 
God's  assemblies  in  that  country  ;  but  the  very  idea 
of  an  assembly  of  God  is  lost  in  the  claim  and  boast 
of  the  Establishment. 

Now,  dear  sir,  instead  of  this  being  an  aspersion 
on  the  Church  of  England,  it  is  her  boast.  In  her 
effort  to  build  new  Churches  now — may  the  Lord 
turn  it  to  blessing  by  sending  the  truth  into  them, 
for  He  is  sovereign,  and  not  tied  to  our  ways  or  any 
but  His  own — her  plea  is  to  keep  pace  with  the  popu 
lation,  not  with  the  growth  and  extension  of  the 
Church  of  God.  Such  is  the  practical  evidence  of  a 
fact  too  notorious  to  require  much  proof. 

If  you  refer  to  the  Irish  canons,  I  think  the  sixth 
(I  have  but  my  Bible  with  me  here  and  a  borrowed 
liturgy),  you  will  find  that  the  parishioners  are  to  go 
to  the  sacrament  so  often,  or  to  be  forced  by  penalty 
of  law.  An  analogous  canon,  but  not  quite  so  violent 
in  form,  but  the  same  in  principle,  will  be  found  in 
the  English  collection.  What  has  been  the  conse 
quent  history  ?  for  I  may  be  told  that  these  are  obso 
lete  ;  for  when  we  turn  to  facts,  we  are  told  that  they 
are  abuses ;  when  we  turn  to  documents,  we  are  told 
they  are  obsolete.  But  facts  and  documents  alike 


27 

prove  that  in  the  principle  of  the  Establishment,  "  the 
Church  and  State  are  but  different  aspects  of  the 
same  body,"  to  use  the  expression  of  one  of  her  dis 
tinguished  defenders.  Hence  I  am  relieved  from  the 
thought  altogether,  save  in  sorrow  for  the  saints  in 
her  pale,  of  leaving  the  Church  of  God,  when  I  cease 
to  be  of  the  Establishment.  If  you  are  not  the 
Church  of  God  in  England — and  such  a  pretence  is 
idle — then,  save  the  importance  of  avoiding  the 
deceiving  myself  and  others,  my  having  nothing  to 
say  to  you  can  be  of  no  sort  of  consequence.  You 
tell  me  to  remember  that  you  did  not  say  the  Church. 
If  you  are  not,  as  far  as  England  goes,  the  sooner  I 
have  done  with  what  pretends  to  be,  and  is  not,  the 
better.  It  seems  to  me  to  be  an  awful  thing  to  pretend 
to  be  the  Church  of  England,  if  you  are  not  the  Church 
of  God  there.  Whose  Church  are  you  ?  or  what  new 
thing  have  you  introduced  ? 

These  are  questions  which  ought  to  be  answered 
before  charges  of  schism  and  dissent  are  launched  out 
so  readily  against  those  who  cannot  form  their  con 
sciences  on  the  model  of  a  Church  which  is  not  the 
Church  of  God.  How  is  it  schism  to  leave  you,  if  you 
are  not  the  Church  of  God  ?  What  is  schism  ?  Would 
it  be  schism  to  divide  Turks,  or  to  divide  Christians 
from  them  ?  Would  it  be  schism  to  seek  the  unity 
of  all  saints,  apart  from  the  world  ?  Were  the 
Establishment  blameless,  to  force  a  weak  Christian's 
conscience  on  an  indifferent  point  would  be  schism. 
But  what  do  I  find  in  the  history  of  the  Establish 
ment  ?  Why  that  in  order  to  enforce  unity,  or  rather 
uniformity,  and  that  even  in  apparel  (and  that  can 
hardly  be  necessary  for  the  unity  of  the  Spirit), 
nearly  two  thousand  of  her  godly  parochial  ministers 
were  rejected  at  once.  If  it  be  said,  this  was  by  Act 
of  Parliament,  not  by  the  act  of  tb«  Church,  I  answer, 

B2 


28 

then  have  you  for  secular  reasons  made  yourselves 
the  slaves,  the  helpless  slaves,  of  whatever  the  world 
chooses  to  impose  upon  you ;  and  that  in  the  most 
important  point  of  ecclesiastical  discipline.  And  the 
unhappy  excuse — what  a  plea  for  one  who  is  jealous 
for  the  actual  real  maintaining  of  Christ's  honour  in 
the  Church  ! — that  the  Parliament  and  King  are  part 
of  the  Church  !  Who  made  them  its  judicial  visitors  ? 
But  even  this  poor  excuse  is  taken  away  now,  and 
we  have  the  modern  evidence  that  Roman  Catholics, 
Socinians — in  short,  the  world,  can  dispose  of  the 
whole  ecclesiastical  arrangements  of  the  country ;  and 
a  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  can  get  up  and  say 
he  has  considered  the  state  of  the  country,  and  it 
can  spare  ten  bishoprics,  and  they  are  taken  away. 
This  may  seem  to  your  minds  order;  but  to  us 
the  authority  of  Christ  over  His  Church  seems  cast 
to  the  winds  by  it,  and  His  honour  despised.  And 
I  cannot  but  feel  it  preferable  in  ever  so  lowly 
and  despised  circumstances,  and  that  without  the 
camp,  in  ever  so  much  acknowledged  weakness, 
to  wait  humbly  for  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit, 
and  the  word  of  God,  in  the  sorrow  into  which 
all  this  worldliness  has  cast  the  Church  of  God. 

If  I  be  asked  by  what  authority  I  do  these  things, 
my  answer  is  an  appeal  to  the  plain  righteousness  of 
the  case,  and  the  refusal  on  such  a  charge  as  schism 
to  reply  to  the  inquiry  whether  the  Establishment 
is  the  Church  of  God  or  not,  or  even  give  a  plain 
answer  whether  they  consider  her  baptized  children 
regenerate  or  not.  If  I  be  told  as  to  the  Act  of 
Uniformity  that  it  has  ceased  to  be  binding,  I  ask  by 
what  authority  ?  Is  schism  to  be  permitted  by  Act 
of  Parliament  ?  When  the  Act  of  Uniformity,  that 
great  public  act  of  schism,  was  found  politically 
intolerable,  the  authority  which  had  tried  to  force 


29 

unity  in  a  worldly  way,  sanctioned,  according  to 
Church,  notions,  schism  in  a  worldly  way. 

Such  is  the  history  of  the  Church  of  England.  To 
turn  to  Scripture  or  its  idea  of  a  Church,  no  one 
thing  the  least  like  it  can  be  traced  in  the  New  Tes 
tament,  or  Old  either.  When  you  speak  of  the 
world  being  in  the  Church,  in  the  sense  of  it  as 
referred  to  in  Scripture,  it  could  not  be  in  the  Esta 
blishment.  I  admit  there  were  false  professors — but 
how  was  this  ?  While  the  Church  was  in  a  state 
which  Scripture  recognized  at  all,  I  read  of  false 
brethren  coming  in  unawares  :  this  could  not  happen 
in  the  Establishment.  There  is  nothing  for  them  to 
come  into  unawares.  All,  false  and  true,  are  bound 
to  go  there ;  and  if  they  preserve  a  good  worldly 
character,  welcome  in  theory,  and  without  it  even  in 
practice.  In  Scripture  I  find  a  within  and  without — 
a  direction  to  judge  them  that  are  within.  This  state 
of  things  does  not  exist  in  the  Establishment.  Her 
aim  and  boast  is  to  have  the  whole  population  icithin. 
I  repeat,  there  is  no  pretence  of  being  a  Church  at  all. 
And  really,  sir,  when  you  deny  that  the  openly  pro 
fane  and  ungodly  are  in  the  Church  of  England,  in 
your  own  sense  of  it,  you  make  an  assertion  of  a 
very  strange  character  to  those  who  are  familiar  with 
facts.  People's  consciences  must  answer  this  for 
themselves.  Will  you  allow  me  to  ask  you,  and  beg 
you  to  read  it  over,  Is  the  Commination  Service 
intended  for  the  members  of  the  Church  of  England, 
or  for  those  without  ?  for  believers  or  unbelievers  ? 
for  people  under  the  law  or  gospel  ?  But  I  will  not 
suffer  myself,  in  the  Lord's  mercy,  to  be  led  away 
from  great  principles.  I  believe  it  was  meant  in 
honest  hatred  of  sin.  I  honour  this.  But  on  what 
ground  it  can  be  defended  by  a  minister  of  the 
Church  of  England  now,  it  is  hard  to  tell.  Were  I 


to  use  an  argumentum  ad  hominem,  I  could  remind 
you  that,  in  the  homilies,  the  right  use  of  ecclesias 
tical  discipline  is  one  of  the  three  marks  whereby  th( 
true  Church  may  be  known.  How  this  consists  witl^ 
the  Church  of  England  being  a  true  Church,  anc 
avowing  what  it  does  in  the  Commination  Service,  i: 
hard  for  a  simple  mind  to  tell. 

You  can  now  pretty  well  understand  why  I  speak 
not  of  the  world  being  in  the  Church  of  England,  but 
of  its  being  the  world,  and  not  the  Church  at  all.  It 
is  notorious  that,  if  they  be  not  actually  dissenters, 
the  population  of  a  parish,  town,  or  county,  if  they 
be  in  pitch  darkness,  are  all  members  of  the  Church 
of  England,  so  called.  They  would  call  themselves 
so.  They  are  called  so,  and  boasted  of  by  their 
ministers  as  such.  They  are  entitled  to  be  received 
as  such,  if  not  notoriously  profligate,  though  they 
may  not  be  able  to  tell  you  who  Jesus  was,  and  deny 
in  their  ignorance  every  truth  of  the  Gospel.  And 
that  this  is  a  fact,  and  not  a  fiction,  is  known  to 
every  one  acquainted  with  the  state  of  the  country  : 
that  is,  the  world  behaving  themselves  so  as  not  to 
shock  public  decency,  are  entitled  to  be  received  at 
communion,  because  the  system  rests  on  ordinances, 
not  on  faith.  And  a  minister  faithful  as  to  the  truth 
he  preached  would  address  the  whole  congregation 
in  the  services  of  the  Church  of  England  as  his  bre 
thren  and  as  the  Church ;  and  when  preaching  to 
them,  perhaps  honestly  and  faithfully  tell  them  they 
were  all  unconverted,  and  unless  they  repented  they 
would  all  perish.  In  a  word,  he  would  address  them, 
when  he  told  his  own  mind,  as  faithfully  serving 
Christ  in  the  Spirit,  as  unbelieving  sinners;  and 
when  he  recited  the  Church's  forms,  and  told  hers, 
as  congregated  saints.  Which  is  right  ?  But,  first, 
which  is  true  ?  Who  is  the  faithful  minister  (I  put 


31 

it  to  your  own  conscience),  the  man  who  in  a  dark 
parish,  or  as  to  the  great  body  of  every  parish, 
preaches  the  Gospel  to  them  as  sinners — poor,  lost  sin 
ners,  or  the  minister  who  treats  them  all  as  the  con 
gregated  Church  of  God  ?  The  latter  minister,  on 
your  own  statement,  and  the  clear  avowal  of  the 
Prayer  Book,  acts  in  the  mind  of  the  Church  of 
England. 

The  truth  is,  you  have  two  irreconcileable  ele 
ments  at  work  within  her  pale — truth  in  the  hearts 
of  many  of  her  ministers,  and  in  a  feeble  measure  in 
her  Articles  ;  and  a  system  of  old  bottles,  which  can 
not  bear  the  new  wine  of  the  kingdom.  In  these 
times  of  God's  dealings  they  cannot  both  go  on 
together. 

I  say,  then,  that  the  constitution  is  worldly,  because 
she  contemplates  by  her  constitution — it  is  her  boast 
— the  population,  not  the  saints. 

If  circumstances  have  driven  many  outside  her  pale, 
she  treats  them  as  dissenters  and  schismatics,  and  so 
do  you,  and  therefore  in  principle  avow  and  admit 
the  charge.  The  man  who  would  say  that  the  Church 
of  England  is  a  gathering  of  saints,  must  be  a  very 
odd  man,  or  a  very  bold  one.  The  parishioners  are 
bound  to  attend  by  her  principles.  Are  they  all 
saints  in  theory  ?  If  you  say  yes,  I  answer,  then  it 
is  not  God's  theory,  and  judgment  is  pronounced  on 
the  question. 

But  there  are  other  points  connected  with  this 
point,  of  theory  and  discipline,  which  are  to  me 
very  important. 

We  are  habitually  told  not  to  judge,  and  this 
sounds  well ;  but  it  is  a  very  awful  and  anti-gospel, 
and  at  the  same  time  a  very  hollow  principle.  True 
it  is  that  I  am  not  to  pass  a  human  judgment  on  a 
brother,  as  regards  God's  final  estimate  of  him ;  nor 


32 

to  say,  he  being  before  me  as  such,  as  to  God's  pre 
sent  acceptance  of  him.  This  is  clear ;  but  to  treat 
all  as  Christians  because  they  have  been  baptized  in 
their  infancy,  and  connected  with  the  formularies,  is 
a  very  uncharitable  deception,  and  you  know  that  as 
a  Christian  minister  you  do  not.  The  system  of 
your  Church  may  do  it,  but  I  am  persuaded  your 
heart  does  not.  It  could  not  if  the  Spirit  of  Christ's 
love  be  there,  neither  then  should  our  acts  or  words. 
They  forget  that  Christianity  begins  with  this,  "  The 
love  of  Christ  constrains  me,  because  ice  thus  judge, 
that  if  one  died  for  all,  then  were  all  dead."  And  if 
a  system  of  ordinances  have  concealed  these  truths ; 
if  the  Church  has  learnt  to  rest  in  the  ordinances  in 
lieu  of  life  and  its  necessity ;  it  is  just  in  the  practical 
state  of  apostacy  from  which  I  have  to  flee,  in  love 
to  my  own  soul  and  that  of  others. 

Next,  I  believe  that  the  notion  that  I  cannot  recog 
nize  brethren,  as  such,  is  an  abominable  delusion  of 
Satan,  to  the  destruction  of  the  grand  witness  of 
Christ  on  the  earth.  I  am  told  not  to  judge  who  are 
and  who  are  not.  I  answer,  the  practical  recognition 
of  them  is  the  principle  of  the  dispensation.  Know 
ing  that  all  are  dead,  the  recognition  that  any  are 
alive  is  the  joy  of  charity.  Their  corporate  union  and 
worship  is  Christ's  witness  in  the  earth,  "that 
they  may  be  one,  that  the  world  may  believe  that 
Thou  hast  sent  me."  And  though  the  disregard 
of  the  unity  of  worship  of  the  saints,  known  to  each 
other  as  such,  may  seem  to  a  carnal  man  as  charity, 
it  really  destroys  all  the  first  springs  of  holy  affec 
tion.  What  would  come  of  family  affections  if  all  were 
reduced  to  uncertainty  as  to  who  was  a  brother  and 
who  was  not  ?  How  can  I  greet  with  cordial  affection 
as  of  one  heart  and  one  mind  my  brethren  in  the 
Lord,  if  I  do  not  and  am  not  to  know  who  they  are  ? 


33 

Is  there  not,  according  to  Scripture,  to  be  some  set 
of  people  who  are  all  of  one  heart  and  one  mind  ?  Is 
not  charity  injured,  and  God's  witness  of  love  from 
each  injured  and  destroyed  by  this  cold  and  heartl<  ss 
doctrine,  that  I  am  not  to  judge  who  are  brethren 
and  who  are  not  ?  Love  the  brethren,  says  the  Spirit 
of  Grod.  Nay,  I  am  told  you  must  not  judge  who 
are  and  who  are  not.  The  first  precept  of  charity  is 
annulled  by  this  system,  "  Hereby  shall  all  men 
know  that  ye  are  my  disciples,  if  ye  have  love  one  to 
another."  How  can  this  great  witness  and  test  of 
discipleship  be  manifested  if  there  be  not  a  mutual 
recognition  by  the  disciples  of  the  Lord  as  such? 
This  fair  form  of  worldly  charity  is,  I  believe,  a  very 
evil  delusion  of  the  enemy.  And  is  it  not  the  fact 
you  do  judge,  you  preach  to  many  as  unconverted, 
and  you  converse  with  others  as  saints  ?  You  must 
do  so  if  you  have  the  Spirit  of  Christ. 

Further,  as  to  discipline,  there  is  not  otherwise  a 
body  capable  of  discipline  as  led  of  the  Spirit  of  Grod, 
by  which  alone  it  can  be  rightly  exercised.  Dis 
cipline  by  a  body  of  unconverted  persons  is  ridicu 
lous.  A  remark  of  your  friend  Mr.  M'Neil  is  an 
evidence  of  this.  He  says,  speaking  of  those  who 
complained  of  mixed  communion,  "  Have  you  fol 
lowed  the  Scriptures?  If  your  brother  has  driven 
you  from  participating  in  this  ordinance,  he  has  cer 
tainly  trespassed  against  you."  This  is  a  poor  and 
strained  way  of  taking  a  brother's  trespass  against 
me,  and  it  is  besides  a  piece  of  sophistry ;  for  my 
difficulty  is  not  that  my  brother  has  trespassed,  but 
that  you  have  by  your  system  gathered  a  heap  of 
people  who  are  not  brethren  at  all,  and  would  reject 
and  scorn  the  title  of  saints  in  heart  and  life,  so  that 
it  is  a  very  poor  sophistry.  But  let  that  pass.  "  Have 
you  gone  to  him  alone?"  says  Mr.  M'Neil,  "then 
B  3 


34 

taken  two  or  three  more  ?  and,  if  that  failed,  then 
told  it  to  your  minister  ?"  "Why  "  your  minister  "  ? 
because  the  use  of  the  scriptural  direction  would 
have  laid  bare  the  inconsistent  and  absurd  position 
he  was  in.  If  he  had  said,  tell  it  to  the  Church  or 
assembly,  every  straightforward  person  would  have 
seen  its  absurdity :  there  was  really  no  Church  to  tell 
it  to.  But  to  be  in  a  position  which  obliges  one  to 
change  the  word  of  God,  is  just  the  expression  of 
unwilling  consciousness  that  the  word  of  God  con 
demns  my  position.  It  condemns  it  in  the  very 
point  at  issue  between  us.  Thus  holy  discipline  is 
destroyed,  as  well  as  charity,  by  the  world  being 
called  the  Church;  and  "put  out  from  among 
yourselves  that  wicked  person "  is  as  impracticable 
as  "  love  the  brotherhood."  Everybody  knows  the 
fact. 

Now  as  to  one  or  two  objections  you  make.  First, 
you  refer  to  Israel.  There  was  abuse,  you  say,  but 
they  were  not  to  leave  it.  In  the  first  place,  we  are 
not  Jews,  but  Christians.  Judaism  was  an  elect 
nation ;  there  could  be  no  such  thing  as  leaving  it : 
Christianity  is  not,  but  a  gathering  of  saints.  God 
has  not  recorded  His  name  in  the  English  nation ; 
but  wherever  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in 
His  name,  there  is  Jesus  in  the  midst  of  them. 
What  the  temple  was  to  a  Jew,  the  gathering  of  the 
saints  is  to  me.  My  complaint  of  the  Establishment 
is  that  it  is  not,  and  never  was,  a  gathering  of  saints. 
If  a  man  ceased  to  be  a  Jew,  he  ceased  to  be  of  God's 
people  altogether.  That  nation  and  its  ordinances 
were  wholly,  solely,  and  exclusively  God's  people, 
sanctuary,  and  place  :  to  leave  them  was  to  apostatize 
from  God.  They  were  gathered,  not  in  spiritual 
worship,  but  to  carnal  ordinances,  imposed  not  by 
conversion  of  heart,  but  by  Jewish  parentage.  The 


35 

Church  of  God  alone  is  analogous  in  one  place.  The 
Establishment  has  no  pretence  to  be  what  Israel  was 
as  God's  only  place  of  abode.  Where  Judaism  and 
Christianity  are  entirely  different  from  each  other  in 
principle,  in  naturalism,  and  obligation  of  carnal 
ordinances,  there  it  has  followed  Judaism,  and  then 
uses  this  as  an  argument  why  it  should  not  be  left. 
If  this  argument  proves  anything,  it  proves  its 
apostacy.  Two  or  three  gathered  together  in  Christ's 
name  has  the  authority  of  unity  which  Israel  had  of 
old,  not  a  sorry  imitation  of  that  which  the  Gospel 
treats  as  beggarly  elements,  and  now  equivalent  to 
idolatry  (see  Gal.  iv.)  and  carnal  ordinances.  Israel, 
I  repeat,  was  a  national  election ;  Christianity  is  not. 
The  laws  of  the  country  were  God's  own  laws,  the 
presence  of  God  was  there,  and  the  abuses  and  cor 
ruptions  did  not  alter  that.  A  person  could  not  leave 
it,  and  be  in  the  place  of  God's  worship  and  God's 
ordinance.  Now  the  place  of  God's  worship  and 
God's  ordinance  is  where  two  or  three  are  gathered 
together  in  Christ's  name,  and  this  the  Establish 
ment  is  not,  but  a  provision  of  ordinances  for  the 
population  in  confessed  imitation  of  Judaism. 

Next  you  refer  to  the  seven  Churches.  This  there 
is  more  occasion  to  answer  specially,  as  it  is  the 
common  resort  of  argument  on  the  question.  The 
simple  answer  is,  they  were  God's  Churches  or  assem 
blies  in  the  place  mentioned,  and  they  could  not  be 
left ;  corruptions  are  no  ground  for  leaving  the 
Church  of  GOD.  The  Church  of  GOD  cannot  be 
left,  and  a  man  be  in  the  path  of  salvation  in  so 
doing.  These  were  the  Churches  of  GOD — the 
assemblies  of  GOD  in  those  different  towns — gather 
ings  of  saints,  although  carelessness  had  introduced 
corruption.  The  Establishment  is  not  this  at  all. 
Were  the  Apostle  to  address  an  epistle  to  the  Church 


36 

of  GOD  which  is  at  Liverpool,  or  London,  there  is 
no  gathered  body  distinct  from  the  world  who  could 
receive  and  act  upon  the  letter.  Where  the  epistle 
says,  Ye  have  among  you  such  and  such,  and  calls 
for  repentance,  were  they  not  to  put  them  out,  or 
would  they  otherwise  have  repented  ?  Where  is  the 
body,  then,  which  could  act  thus,  when  you  are 
preaching  to  an  indiscriminate  heap  of  unconverted 
people  ?  In  a  word,  there  was  a  known  body  which 
could  act  by  the  leading  of  the  Spirit  of  GOD.  There 
was  no  direction  to  leave  these  Churches,  because 
they  were  Churches.  The  Establishment  has  no  such 
claim,  and  I  do  not  leave  it  properly,  but  have  no 
thing  to  say  to  it,  because  it  is  not  one.  The  Esta 
blishment  does  not,  nor  ever  did,  stand  on  the  ground 
of  these  Churches  or  local  assemblies  of  God  at  all, 
and  has  no  principle  of  their  structure,  order,  or  con 
stitution.  I  should  think  it  a  great  sin  to  leave  a 
Church  of  God  because  corruptions  were  found  in  it ; 
but  the  Establishment  is  a  great  national,  secular 
system,  and  not  the  Church  of  God  at  all. 

Another  assertion  you  make  is,  I  have  evil  in 
myself,  and  that  I  cannot  leave,  and  therefore  it  is  a 
hopeless  thing  to  seek  purity.  This,  forgive  me  for 
saying  it,  is  an  ugly  argument.  There  is  no  hope : 
we  will  continue  to  do  evil.  But  it  is  a  poor  piece 
of  sophistry.  I  cannot  leave  the  evil  in  my  flesh,  so 
I  remain  in  the  body.  I  can  leave  the  evil  around 
me,  so  I  am  to  remain  in  that  too.  You  will  admit 
this  is  not  very  strong  reasoning.  But  more  plainly, 
the  Lord  says,  "  Come  out  from  among  them,  and  be 
ye  separate,  and  touch  not  the  unclean  thing ;  and  I 
will  receive  you,  and  ye  shall  be  my  sons  and  daughters, 
saith  the  Lord  Almighty."  He  does  not  say,  Come 
out  from  your  body.  The  Lord  says,  "If  a  man 
purge  himself  from  these,  he  shall  be  a  vessel  made 


37 

unto  honour,  fit  for  the  master's  use."  I  cannot 
have  done  with  my  body,  though  I  may  mortify  it 
and  treat  it  as  dead,  through  grace  and  infinite 
mercy.  The  Lord  says,  "  From  such  withdraw  thy 
self."  I  cannot  from  my  body.  The  Lord  says, 
speaking  (I  believe  you  will  agree  with  me)  of  these 
latter  days — days  it  may  be  not  fully  ripened,  still 
they  are  now  the  last  days — "  From  such  turn  away." 
From  my  body  I  cannot  turn  away.  The  answer 
simply  then  to  this  is,  that  the  Lord  has  commanded 
me  to  come  out  and  be  separate  from  the  world ;  He 
has  not  commanded  me  to  come  out  of  my  body.  Is 
your  argument  really  a  righteous  one  in  this  ? 

One  only  remark  I  believe  remains  in  this  part : 
your  objection  to  ceasing  to  do  evil  before  we  know 
to  do  good — taking,  as  you  call  it,  a  leap  in  the  dark. 
Is  it  taking  a  leap  in  the  dark  for  a  Christian  ceasing 
to  do  known  evil,  because  he  does  not  yet  know  all 
the  Lord's  subsequent  will  concerning  him?  Are 
we  to  say,  I  will  not  act  on  what  I  do  know,  till  you 
tell  me  all  my  course  on  to  glory  ?  I  have  seen  the 
Lord  thus  continually  exercise  His  children,  giving 
light  enough  to  make  a  thing  a  matter  of  plain 
Christian  obedience,  and  not  show  all  the  happy,  and 
blessed,  and  full  consequences,  till  faith  acted  on 
that.  It  is  just  a  holy  and  excellent  trial  of  faith. 
He  says,  in  principle,  I  am  the  door.  The  mind  may 
say,  where  to  ?  The  Lord  answers,  /  am  the  door : 
and  wherever  the  soul  finds  Christ  or  the  will  of 
Christ,  it,  if  walking  in  faith,  trusts  that,  and  the 
blessing  follows.  It  soon  goes  in  and  out,  and  finds 
pasture.  You  seem  to  forget  the  praise  of  Abraham's 
faith  was,  He  went  out,  not  knowing  whither  he  went. 
It  is  better  to  trust  God  in  doing  His  will,  than  the 
consequences  which  doing  His  will  may  produce, 
however  blessed.  Now  surely  it  is  of  Christ  and  the 


38 

will  of  Christ  to  cease  from  known  evil.  If  you  call 
this  taking  a  leap  in  the  dark,  Christ's  will — and 
surely  it  is  His  will  to  leave  known  evil — is  not  dark 
ness  to  us,  but  light,  for  which  our  poor  foolish  souls 
are  thankful.  Nor  shall  he  that  followeth  Him  walk 
in  darkness,  though  he  may  only  know  that  in  the 
very  next  footsteps  Christ  has  gone  before  him. 
And  if  you  would  know  our  experience,  sir,  we  have 
not  found  it  darkness,  but  blessed  light ;  we  have 
found  our  own  weakness,  and  the  poverty  and  ruin 
of  the  Church ;  but  we  have  found  marvellous  and 
abundant  light  in  the  Lord,  though  light  affliction 
for  a  moment  might  accompany  it. 

As  to  the  Corinthians,  though  the  principle  is 
unaffected  by  it,  it  is  perfectly  plain  that  the  worst 
among  them  was  a  Christian,  though  a  fallen  one. 
The  habits  of  the  Establishment  seem  to  have  con 
founded  decency  of  morals  and  deportment  with 
the  very  faith  of  the  Church  of  GrOI).  As  to  the 
Philippians,  that  corruption  and  apostacy  were  then 
rapidly  flowing  in  on  the  Church  of  Grod  is  unques 
tionable.  I  do  not  see  that  these  people  were  at 
Philippi,  and  therefore  there  is  no  consequence  to  be 
drawn  from  the  passage.  With  regard  to  Jude  (if 
you  do  not  believe  that  we  are  wandering  stars, 
reserved  for  the  blackness  of  darkness  for  ever,  un 
godly  men  before  ordained  to  this  condemnation, 
turning  the  grace  of  Grod  into  lasciviousness) ,  you  are 
not — forgive  the  saying  so — quite  honest  in  quoting 
it.  Do  you  believe  this  ?  But  there  is  a  little  cir 
cumstance  in  this  epistle  to  which  this  convenient 
word  "  separate  themselves  "  seems  to  have  blinded 
those  who  quote  it  in  the  Establishment ;  and  this  is, 
that  these  persons  had  crept  in,  not  gone  out.  This 
you  will  admit  is  a  material  point.  They  were  cor- 
rupters  come  into  the  once  pure  Church,  not  saints 


39 

gone  out.  They  feasted  with  them.  They  were 
spots  in  their  feasts  of  charity.  Your  charge  against 
us  is  that  we  are  gone  out.  Yea,  and  because  we 
feared  to  feed  ourselves  without  fear  where  evil  was. 
I  think  if  you  examine  the  word  "  separate  them 
selves  "  (a7ro£iO|Ot£ov7-£e)  with  the  context,  you  will  find 
a  very  different  force  in  it  from  that  which  you 
attach  to  the  English  one,  as  a  convenient  placard  to 
the  eye,  against  those  whom  you  condemn — to  a  well- 
instructed  mind  one  of  no  great  difficulty. 

And  why  do  you  say  you  find  separatists  in  bad 
company  ?  I  read,  "  These  be  they  who  separate 
themselves,  sensual,  having  not  the  Spirit."  Do  you 
believe  in  fact,  as  an  honest  man,  that  these  latter 
characters  apply  to  the  greater  majority  amongst 
ourselves,  or  the  professed  members  of  the  Church  of 
England  ?  And  just  allow  me  to  ask  you  also,  why 
you  state  in  the  outset  that  I  complain  of  the  world's 
being  in  the  Church,  when  you,  in  speaking  of  the 
seven  Churches,  give  a  reason  why  "  our  party  "  say 
the  Establishment  is  no  Church  at  all?  All  the 
character  you  give  yourself  of  alternate  tenderness 
and  faithfulness,  and  our  comparative  enjoyment  by 
selfishly  quitting  the  family,  I  pass  by  ;  great  com 
parative  enjoyment  indeed  I  believe  we  have  had, 
not  in  selfishly  pleasing  ourselves.  But  the  point  is, 
What  is  God's  will  ?  One  charge  is,  that  you  have 
called  that  the  family  which  is  not  the  family  at  all. 
And  if  you  have  lifted  up  your  eyes  and  seen  the 
plain  of  Jordan,  that  it  was  well  watered  everywhere, 
and  then  found  yourselves  in  Sodom  vexing  your 
righteous  souls,  for  such  I  admit  there  are,  you  have 
nothing  to  boast  of  in  that  sort  of  patience.  We 
prefer  the  place  of  Abraham,  and  give  it  all  up  to 
you,  trusting  that  the  Lord  will  deliver  you  too ; 
but  see  no  motive  to  follow  your  example,  or  to 


40 

associate  ourselves  with,  that  on  which  the  Lord's 
judgment  is  coming — and  coming  on  it  you  yourself, 
I  bless  Grod,  do  not  deny  that  it  is. 

I  have  now,  in  reply  to  the  earlier  part  of  your 
letter,  spoken  of  the  great  principle  on  which  I  rest, 
as  an  obedient  servant  of  Christ,  in  not  recognizing 
the  Establishment  as  the  Church.  I  must  now — a 
much  more  disagreeable  and  painful  task — refer  to  the 
plainer  facts  of  the  case,  and  some  of  your  own  docu 
ments,  showing  its  working,  and  how  it  is  mixed  up 
with  the  canonical  principles  of  the  Establishment. 
I  have  preferred  resting  first  on  the  great  principle, 
partly  because  I  am  replying  to  your  letter,  which 
does  so,  and  partly  because  the  plea  of  there  being 
abuses  does  not  enter  into  the  question.  The  real 
subject  is  fairly  before  us ;  and  effects,  what  you  call 
abuses,  act  most  directly  upon  the  conscience,  and 
therefore  are  most  material  in  this  question ;  for  all 
healthful  action  is  action  by  a  conscience  led  of  Grod's 
Spirit  and  the  Word.  And  if,  in  the  whole  arrange 
ments  of  a  system,  there  be  a  constant  violation  of 
the  laws  of  Christ  and  His  will  and  righteousness  in 
the  Church,  it  becomes  impossible  for  a  righteous 
man  to  act  in  it  or  with  it.  This,  I  repeat,  is  a 
much  more  painful  part  of  the  subject.  It  is  plea- 
santer  far — oh,  how  much  so — to  keep  the  soul  in  the 
unsullied  regions  of  Christ's  blessedness ;  and  one 
has  to  watch  one's  treacherous  heart,  lest  one  should 
begin  to  rejoice  in  iniquity,  because  it  proves  one 
against  whom  we  are  contending  to  be  in  the  wrong ; 
and  I  feel  that  one  is  not  fit  to  speak  of  evil  to 
another,  unless  we  can  bear  its  burden  in  sorrow  of 
heart  before  the  Lord,  as  our  own  burden  in  their 
behalf,  at  least  for  those  that  are  saints,  beloved  of 
Grod,  the  pure  and  holy  One.  Controversy  tends  to 
destroy  estimate,  and  to  make  us  prove  rather  than 


41 

cover  the  sins.  Still  you  have  compelled  me  to  state 
the  facts,  which  are  plainly  inconsistent  with  God's 
righteousness  in  the  Church  of  God. 

In  the  first  place,  then,  pastorships,  or  what  hold 
their  place  in  the  system,  are  publicly  bought  and 
sold,  or  at  least  the  right  to  appoint  them.  At  this 
moment  the  Corporation  livings  are  on  sale.  I  re 
member  a  town  where  the  next  presentation  to  a 
living  was  sold  to  enable  the  Corporation  to  build 
(or  pay  for)  a  theatre.  I  have  one  now  with  me 
copying  this,  for  whom  a  living  was  bought  as  pro 
vision  for  him  as  a  younger  son,  and  he  then  of  course 
to  be  brought  up  at  a  University  for  the  ministry. 
But  the  placards  of  auctioneers  and  the  advertise 
ments  of  newspapers  are  evidence  that  the  pastor 
ships  of  the  Church  of  England  are  bought  and  sold 
in  the  market  like  other  property ;  nay,  if  I  am  to 
believe  Mr.  M'Neil,  they  are  consequently  appointed 
because  they  are  unfit  (see  his  letters  on  the  Church, 
in  a  note  I  think  to  page  104).  Do  you  think  this 
consistent  with  the  order  of  the  Church  of  God  ? 
You  will  tell  me  this  is  an  abuse.  Is  it  not  sanc 
tioned  by  the  courts  of  law,  by  the  ecclesiastical 
courts,  by  the  institution  of  the  bishops,  so  that  the 
Church  of  England  treats  any  one  else  but  the 
person  so  holding  it  as  an  intruder  and  schismatic  ? 
It  is  the  consequence  of  that  organized  connexion 
with  the  State  which  makes  it  the  National  Church — 
the  Establishment. 

There  is  another  thing  beside  that :  some  one  has 
a  legal  secular  right  so  to  present,  giving  secular 
advantages,  and  therefore  temporally  cognizable  as  a 
right  by  the  State.  It  is  the  horrid  price  you  pay 
for  your  specific  and  formal  character.  I  do  not 
understand  how,  if  all  the  spiritual  and  temporal 
authorities  of  the  system  treat  as  an  intruder  and  a 


42 

schismatic  any  one  else  than  the  person  so  appointed, 
the  appointment  can  be  called  an  abuse.  If  you  say 
it  is,  comparing  it  with  the  Church  of  Grod  as  dis 
played  in  the  word,  we  are  agreed  indeed ;  but  then 
it  is  in  this  abuse  that  the  system  and  order  of  the 
Establishment  are  entirely,  and  fatally  for  its  cha 
racter  as  a  Church,  at  variance  with  what  we  find  in 
the  word  of  Grod.  But  this  is  exactly  what  presses, 
and  justly  presses,  on  the  consciences  of  the  Lord's 
people,  and  compels  them  to  disown  her  authority 
and  her  state.  You  may  tell  me  that  such  or  such 
instances  are  abuses ;  but  I  say  that  it  is  just  as 
abhorrent  to  the  principles  of  the  Church  of  the 
living  Grod  to  have  a  good  man  or  a  society  buy  up 
livings  as  to  have  an  infidel  do  so.  Do  you  think 
an  infidel  ought  to  have  the  right  to  present  any  one 
to  the  pastorship  of  a  place  ?  Perhaps  indeed  by  the 
system  of  the  Establishment  there  may  be  no  saint 
there,  but  by  the  system  of  the  Establishment  it  is 
perfectly  competent  for  him  to  do  so  :  he  may  be 
seized  of  or  purchase  the  advowson,  and  the  bishop 
must  admit  his  right,  and  institute  his  nominee,  and 
treat  all  else  as  schismatics  and  intruders.  You  will 
say  his  nominee  must  be  a  clergyman — be  it  so  ;  but 
by  reason  of  the  system  of  national  advantage,  the 
bishop  is  bound  to  ordain,  if  there  be  no  legal  reason 
to  the  contrary  :  and  supposing  the  clergy  to  be  all 
faultless,  do  you  think  it  is  the  system  of  the  Church 
of  Grod  that  an  infidel  should  have  the  right  of 
choosing  the  pastor  of  a  place  ?  How  would  such 
a  system  have  appeared  at  Corinth  or  Ephesus  ?  Is 
it  in  principle — I  do  not  talk  of  abuses — the  system 
of  the  Church  of  God  ?  But  it  is  the  system  of  the 
Church  of  England.  Her  system  is  a  system  of  pa 
rochial  geographical  divisions,  to  which  certain  legal 
rights,  privileges,  and  emoluments  are  attached.  This 


43 

is  her  boast  as  contrasted  with  what  she  calls  dissent, 
by  reason  of  which  the  appointment  to  these  geogra 
phical  divisions  is  vested  as  a  right  or  privilege  in 
some  one  or  another,  it  matters  not  who.  Now  I  say 
this,  let  it  be  ever  so  well  ordered,  is  not  the  system 
of  the  Church  of  Grod  at  all.  Mr.  M'Neil  says  this  is 
a  disgusting  ingenuity  of  abuse.  How  is  the  legal 
authorized  system  of  the  Church  as  such  ?  I  leave 
the  hard  words  with  him ;  I  have  only  to  say  if  this 
be  the  system,  it  is  not  the  system  of  the  Church  of 
the  living  Grod. 

And  now,  sir,  will  you  show  me  one  document  or 
formulary  of  the  Church  which  says  the  patronage  of 
livings  and  other  benefices,  or  the  sale  of  advowsons, 
is  an  abuse,  or  disallowed  by  the  Establishment  ?  If 
you  can,  I  can  only  say,  to  gain  the  world's  advan 
tages  you  have  reduced  yourself  to  an  impotency  of 
doing  right,  and  that  is  no  place  for  a  Christian  to 
remain  in.  Further,  I  have  heard  it  asserted,  as 
a  matter  of  triumph  by  evangelical  ministers,  that 
there  are  probably  near  three  thousand  evangelical 
ministers  now  in  England — that  is,  ministers  who, 
they  reckoned,  held  the  Grospel  of  Christ,  and  were 
Christian  men.  There  are,  I  suppose,  about  twelve 
thousand  ministers  in  England,  more  or  less.  Now 
what  is  the  nature  of  the  system  which,  under  plea 
of  providing  instruction  for  all,  and  charging  all  not 
within  her  pale  as  schismatics,  has,  when  her  state 
was  boasted  of  as  remarkably  improved  and  under 
blessing,  provided  that  three-fourths  of  the  population 
should  be  taught  contrary  to  the  Gospel  ?  and  that 
whoever  did,  under  the  blessing  of  Grod's  holy  Spirit, 
go  and  preach  it,  these  should  be  denounced  as 
schismatics  and  intruders  ? — that  three-quarters  of  the 
pastors  of  the  Church  of  Grod,  according  to  them  (if 
not,  avow  you  are  not  the  Church  of  Grod,  and  cease  to 


44 

talk  of  schism  and  dissent)  should  not  be  Christians 
at  all.  These  are  things  inexplicable  as  a  state  con 
sistent  with  being  the  Church  of  God,  to  one  who 
has  read  the  word  of  God,  and  drawn  his  ideas 
therefrom,  and  not  from  habit  or  tradition.  Indeed, 
sir,  there  are  little  expressions  habitual  with  ministers 
of  the  Establishment  which  show  they  are  not  con 
versant  with  the  idea  of  ministering  in  the  Church 
of  God.  I  read,  "  our  people,"  "  our  dear  people," 
and  hear,  "  my  flock,"  and  "  why  do  you  intrude  on 
my  flock?"  Who  made  them  your  people,  or  your 
flock  ?  An  apostle  would  not,  nor  the  Spirit  of 
God,  have  called  them  so.  He  would  have  spoken 
of  the  Lord's  people,  and  the  flock  of  God.  How 
could  a  servant  of  Christ,  ministering  holily  in  what 
ever  gift  God  had  given  him — an  Apollos  at  Corinth, 
or  Priscilla  and  Aquilla  at  Ephesus,  or  anywhere  else 
— have  been  intruders  on  the  flock  of  Christ  ?  They 
were  part  of  it,  wherever  they  were,  and  to  serve  in 
it  as  able  and  bound  so  to  do.  But  all  is  altered  with 
you.  You  have  not  even — forgive  the  word — the 
ideas  connected  with  it ; — your  speech  betrays  you. 
And  why  ?  because  you  are  a  minister,  even  if  true, 
of  such  a  parish  in  the  Church  of  England — your 
flock  perhaps  not  Christian,  nor  the  Church  of  God 
at  all — not  a  minister  of  the  Church  of  God.  Again, 
sir,  Who  appoints  the  chief  pastors  of  the  Church  of 
England  ?  In  fact,  the  Prime  Minister  of  the  day, 
for  any  reason  perhaps  that  suits  his  convenience  ; 
the  fact  is  well  known,  and  facts,  sir,  are  important 
to  conscience.  The  Church  of  God  ought  not  to  be 
trifled  with  by  theories,  while  the  sheep  of  Christ  are 
actually  scattered.  It  seems  to  me  to  be  a  very  evil 
sign,  when  the  Spirit  is  pressed  by  the  actual  scatter 
ing  and  wrong  done  to  Christ's  sheep,  to  be  told 
there  is  such  a  document  which  shows  the  theory  of 


45 

my  system  is  quite  right :  these  are  abuses.  The 
Spirit  of  Christ  cares  for  the  sheep  of  Christ,  dear 
sir,  and  not  for  neglected  scraps  of  paper.  But  I 
take  the  theory,  for  I  wish  to  avoid  resting  at  all  011 
abuses.  The  king  appoints  them.  If  you  tell  me 
there  is  a  conge  d'elire,  Mr.  M'Neil  shall  answer  you 
in  the  note  previously  quoted,  that  the  king  does 
really  appoint,  for  by  the  theory  he  nominates  the 
person  to  be  so  elected.  In  Ireland  they  are  ap 
pointed  directly  by  the  king's  letters  patent.  What 
part  of  the  system  of  the  Church  of  God  is  this  ? 
And  let  me  here  remark,  that  an  appeal  to  Church 
of  England  documents  is  in  many  respects  a  very 
fallacious  mode  of  judging,  for  the  most  material  and 
distinctive  characteristics  of  her  system  are  not  found 
there  at  all.  The  work  of  ordering,  governing,  and 
directing  the  Church  is  entrusted  to  persons  chosen 
by  the  head  of  the  secular  authority  of  the  country  ; 
and  here,  again,  the  whole  principle  and  theory  of  the 
Church  of  God  is  contravened  and  set  aside,  not  by 
the  abuses,  but  by  the  order  of  the  Establishment. 
How  can  I  own  them  as  bishops  (supposing  me  a 
rigid  Episcopalian)  appointed  by  God,  when  I  know 
they  have  not  been  in  theory  so  appointed  ? — that 
the  whole  is  a  mere  secular  affair?  You  tell  me 
they  must  be  clergymen,  and  be  thirty  years  of  age. 
Is  every  clergyman  of  thirty  competent  to  be  the 
chief  director  of  the  Church  of  God  ?  Is  that  God's 
theory,  or  is  He  the  endower  with  needful  gifts  for 
His  own  work  ?  One  who  believes,  then,  God  to  be 
the  author  and  gatherer  of  His  own  Church,  and  the 
divine  orderer  of  its  government,  can  find  neither 
the  body  nor  the  guidance  or  order  of  that  Church 
in  the  system  of  the  Establishment ;  and,  as  Mr. 
M'Neil  justly  says,  no  reform  remedies  this,  while 
the  principle  continues.  The  effects  shock  the  con- 


46 

science ;  the  principle  is  judged  by  the  spiritual  mind 
taught  by  and  formed  on  the  word  of  God. 

Supposing  a  child  of  God  in  a  parish  where  the 
system  of  the  Church  of  England  has  placed  a 
minister  who  does  not  know  the  Gospel,  but  quite 
preaches  the  contrary  ;  and  in  the  communion  of  the 
Church  there  is  no  one  who  owns  the  Gospel  on 
which  communion  is  founded :  here  are  the  effects 
which  try  the  spirit.  But  the  person  is  bound  to 
abide  and  hear  error  taught  and  souls  deceived,  and 
to  own  as  one  body,  and  thereby  help  to  deceive 
them,  those  who  are  entirely  unconverted,  because  by 
the  theory  of  the  Church  of  England  he  is  Christ's 
minister  and  they  are  the  Church.  If  such  a  person 
does  not,  he  is  a  schismatic  and  dissenter.  Supposing 
two  or  three  in  the  same  circumstances,  and  they 
cease  to  own  them  who  by  their  profession  of  doctrine 
are  not  believers,  as  ministers  and  the  Church,  and 
they  meet  because  Christ  has  said,  "  wherever  two  or 
three  are  gathered  together  in  my  name,  there  am  I 
in  the  midst  of  them,"  they  would  be  set  down  as  wilful 
schismatics  ;  but  according  to  the  word  of  God,  they 
would  be  really  the  Church  of  God  in  that  place,  let 
them  be  ever  so  feeble,  and  have  no  minister  at  all — 
despised  perhaps  by  those  who  had  thousands  to  fill 
their  aisles,  and  the  respectability  of  ecclesiastical 
associations  to  clothe  their  forms,  but  not  of  God. 

The  promise  of  the  Lord  outweighs  to  faith  all 
these  charms  on  the  imagination — these  goodly  stones 
and  gifts ;  and  how  strong  they  are  my  own  heart 
well  knows.  I  speak  not,  then,  of  abuses ;  but  will 
you  say  that  it  is  the  theory  of  the  Church  of  God 
that  the  King  should  appoint  the  chief  pastors  or 
bishops  of  the  Church  of  God  by  his  letters  patent ; 
or  whether  it  be  the  system  or  principle  of  the 
Church  of  God,  or  compatible  with  it,  that  the  ap- 


47 

pointment  of  the  pastors  should  be  in  Landlords, 
Corporations,  Universities,  the  Grown,  or  whoever 
may  buy  them;  and  whether  you  are  to  be  content 
with  the  scattering  and  grieving  of  Christ's  sheep 
produced  by  such  a  system — a  system  sought  to  be 
enforced  by  the  secular  arm,  to  the  expulsion  of 
thousands  of  devoted  ministers ;  and  then  what  is 
called  schism  tolerated  by  Act  of  Parliament,  because 
the  social  effects  were  mischievous — a  system  which 
contemplates  not  the  Church  of  God,  but  the  popu 
lation,  and  secularizes  the  Church  of  God,  by  forcing 
the  population  to  be  all  one  with  it  ?  And  let  me 
add  this  question  :  Can  you,  while  I  do  not  admit 
the  propriety  of  staying  a  day  in  connexion  with 
such  evil  in  a  system,  by  your  own  confession  not  the 
Church  of  God,  can  you  give  the  smallest  rational 
hope  of  the  change  of  the  principle  and  theory  from 
which  all  the  evil  flows — that  the  king  nor  the  land 
lords,  shall  not  nominate  the  pastors,  nor  advow- 
sons  sold  ?  Can  you  say  that  such  a  system  is  the 
system  of  the  Church  of  God,  according  to  the  word 
of  God  ?  But  I  have  said  enough  to  show  the  prin 
ciple  on  which,  in  conscience  before  God,  I  act,  and 
must  disown  it  as  standing  before  me  as  the  Church 
of  God ;  and  to  dispel,  I  trust,  however  feeble  my 
thought  (and  I  admit  it  humbly  and  sorrowfully 
before  God),  the  prestige  of  a  sort  of  hallowed 
obscurity,  soon  to  merge,  I  am  fully  persuaded,  in 
the  darkness  of  Popery,  which,  perhaps,  by  its  claims 
and  influence,  may  deliver  the  nominal  Church  from 
the  incubus  which  presses  down  the  Establishment 
as  it  is,  and  satisfy  the  desires  of  the  Puseyite  school 
— men  who,  though  I  believe  honest  (for  I  know 
their  views  well),  are  as  inconsistent  as  they  are 
mischievous ;  for  the  secular  bondage  of  the  Church 
is  a  very  Babylon  in  the  mind  of  an  honest  theoretic 


48 

successionist.  I  would  add  a  little  word  to  them  as 
well  as  to  you,  that  it  is  all  but  perfectly  certain  that 
the  root  of  the  English  succession  was  an  uncon- 
secrated  man.  I  once  pursued  the  point  with  a  good 
deal  of  research,  and  thus  by  their  system  they  will 
be  easily  thrown  when  it  is  pressed  home,  and  they 
ripen  a  little,  into  the  necessary  arms  of  undisguised 
Popery.  Such  is  the  prospect  which  your  cherished 
Establishment  is  engendering  for  us — not  willingly,  I 
freely  admit,  in  the  minds  of  many  of  her  members, 
but  helplessly,  because  she  has  tied  herself  to  the 
car  of  the  State,  not  to  dependence  upon  GOD  ;  and 
wherever  its  interested  or  careless  wheels  roll  on,  she 
must  go,  or  cease  to  be  the  Establishment.  Her 
efforts,  therefore,  are  to  control  the  State,  not  to 
follow  God,  because  she  is  bound  and  governed  by  it 
— not  obedient  in  freedom  and  simplicity  to  Him. 
"  She  is  my  sister,  not  my  wife,"  acquired  Abraham 
cattle  and  Egyptian  riches  in  abundance. 

I  would  now  turn  to  the  documents  of  the  Esta 
blishment  on  the  two  main  points  connected  with  the 
subject  I  am  upon — the  constitution  and  membership 
of  the  body,  and  the  ordering  of  the  ministry.  I 
have  already  referred  to  the  Canons,  with  which  the 
Rubrics  concur,  which  require  the  attendance  of  the 
parishioners — "  every  parishioner  " — at  the  Lord's 
Supper  so  often  in  the  year,  and  treat  as  recusants 
and  schismatics  all  absenting  themselves  or  impugn 
ing  any  part  of  the  system.  But  there  is  a  point 
which  lies  deeper  than  this,  and  gives  not  its  relative 
but  positive  character  to  the  system — those  docu 
ments  which  describe  its  members,  those  within,  not 
those  without,  the  assumption  of  which  was  quite 
necessary  to  the  other.  Now  these  documents  show 
that  the  ecclesiastical  system  of  the  Establishment  is 
founded  on  the  efficacy  of  ordinances,  not  of  faith, 


and  thus  is  enabled  in  theory  to  embrace  the  whole 
population,  and  treat  them  as  Christians,  without 
reference  to  faith  at  all ;  and  that  any  operation  of 
the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  heart,  save  as  communicated 
by  an  ordinance,  does  not  come  within  its  scope 
of  instruction,  or  introduction  to  full  membership. 
If  I  am  told  it  cannot  judge  but  by  fruits,  be  it  so  ; 
but  these  do  not  either  form  any  part  of  the  question 
of  membership :  a  member  who  is  a  notorious  evil 
liver,  is  refused  communion  in  theory,  but  that  is  all. 
First,  as  you  are  aware,  the  child  is  pronounced 
regenerate  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  Sometimes  it  is 
attempted  to  say  that  this  is  a  change  of  state,  not  of 
personal  condition.  This  is  an  idle  effort.  Were  I 
told,  according  to  the  fathers,  regenerate  means  bap 
tized — though  abuse  of  words  produces  much  mischief 
if  it  were  merely  meant  to  say  they  are  baptized, 
and  thereby  personally  admitted  into  the  pale  of  the 
visible  Church — my  present  argument  would  not  hold : 
baptized  persons  are  certainly  baptized.  But  I  say 
this  is  an  idle  effort.  The  congregation  are  to  pray 
that  God  will  grant  to  the  child  that  thing  which  by 
nature  he  cannot  have;  that  he  may  be  baptized 
with  the  Holy  Ghost — an  expression  itself  full  of 
confusion,  but  certainly  something  positive,  and  per 
sonally  spiritual :  again,  that  he  may  be  sanctified 
with  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  he,  being  delivered  from 
God's  wrath,  may  be  received  into  the  ark  of  Christ's 
Church,  and  being  steadfast  in  faith,  &c. :  again, 
Give  thy  Holy  Spirit  to  this  infant,  that  he  may  be 
born  again,  and  made  an  heir  of  everlasting  salvation. 
The  congregation  are  told  they  have  prayed  God  to 
release  him  of  his  sins,  sanctify  him  with  the  Holy 
Ghosfc,  and  give  him  the  kingdom  of  heaven  and 
everlasting  life ;  and  Christ,  they  are  told,  has  pro 
mised  to  grant  them :  and  passing  by  other  consis- 

c 


50 

tent  expressions,  after  the  rite,  it  is  stated,  the  child 
is  regenerate ;  and  they  pray  he  may  lead  the  rest  of 
his  life  accordingly,  and  then  give  hearty  thanks  that 
it  has  pleased  the  Father  to  regenerate  the  infant 
with  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  to  receive  him  for  His  own 
child  by  adoption.  What  other  terms  could  you  use 
for  a  saint  quickened  by  God,  and  made  actual  par 
taker  of  divine  life  ?  The  prayer  is  changed  when 
there  has  been  previous  private  baptism  into  "  that 
he  being  born  again — Give  that  he  may  be  ;"  and  it 
is  then  stated  that  he  is  by  baptism  regenerate.  In 
the  former  service  the  expression  is  used,  that  he  may 
receive  remission  of  his  sins  by  spiritual  regeneration  : 
again,  confusion  of  thought  as  to  an  infant,  but  defi 
nite  in  the  extent  of  what  is  attributed  to  baptism. 
The  baptism  of  such  as  are  of  riper  years  seems  to  me 
to  seal  the  confusion,  but  that  is  not  the  question  now 
to  occupy  us.  In  the  Catechism  the  child  is  taught 
that  he  was  made  a  member  of  Christ,  a  child  of  God, 
and  that  by  baptism  ;  and  therein  it  was  promised  he 
should  believe — the  Scripture  saying  we  are  children 
of  God  by  faith,  not  by  ordinances.  The  child  con 
fesses  he  is  bound  to  believe,  and  keep  God's  holy 
will  and  commandments,  which  he  will,  and  thanks 
God  he  is  in  this  state  of  salvation.  Now  here  faith 
in  certain  articles,  and  keeping  the  commandments, 
are  obligations  on  the  child,  he  being  (on  the  proxies 
undertaken  for  him)  made  a  child  of  God  by  the 
baptism  itself  already,  where  he  assented  too  unquali 
fiedly  that  he  would  keep  the  commandments.  And 
the  promise  of  faith,  afterwards  they  are  stated  to 
be  bound  to  perform.  The  Sacrament  also  he  is 
taught  expressly  was  the  means  by  which  he  received 
the  inward  and  spiritual  grace  (are  not  these  words 
plain  ?)  of  a  death  unto  sin,  and  a  new  birth  unto 
righteousness ;  and  this,  anomalous  and  inconsistent 


51 

as  it  is,  is  clearly  the  doctrine  of  the  framers  of  these 
services  and  this  system;  for  the  strict  sense  and 
definition  of  a  sacrament  is  declared  in  the  homilies 
to  be,  that  the  forgiveness  of  sins  is  annexed  and  tied 
to  the  visible  sign.  It  is  there  said  that  absolution  is 
not  a  sacrament,  because  though  there  is  forgiveness 
of  sins,  there  is  no  visible  sign  instituted  by  Christ ; 
ordination  is  not,  because  though  there  is  a  visible 
sign,  there  is  no  forgiveness  of  sins ;  and  that  there 
are  only  properly  two  sacraments,  because  there  are 
only  two  where  the  forgiveness  of  sins  is  annexed  and 
tied  to  the  visible  sign. 

Let  me  call  to  your  memory  that  I  am  not  ad 
ducing  these  statements  to  prove  the  faults  of  the 
Liturgy,  but  the  principle  on  which  the  Establish 
ment  incorporates  the  whole  population  into  Christian 
membership,  believing  or  unbelieving,  affirming  them 
to  be  regenerate  by  the  ordinance,  and  then  making 
the  belief  of  certain  articles  incumbent  on  them  on 
another's  promise. 

Next,  the  child  is  to  be  brought  to  be  confirmed  so 
soon  as  it  can  say  the  Creed,  the  Lord's  Prayer,  and 
the  Ten  Commandments,  in  the  vulgar  tongue,  and  is 
able  to  answer  the  Catechism  set  forth  for  that  pur 
pose.  That  Catechism  sets  forth  and  has  taught  him 
that  he  is  a  child  of  God  by  baptism  already,  and 
acknowledges  he  is  bound  to  believe  and  to  do  as  has 
been  promised  for  him — articles  which,  though  of 
course  containing  facts  of  Christianity,  tell  him 
nothing  really  of  the  way  of  a  sinner's  salvation  at 
all,  for  even  in  the  interpretation  he  is  taught  that 
all  mankind  are  redeemed,  and  clearly  they  are  not 
all  saved ;  and  he  is  made  to  rest  on  the  promises 
which  ruined  Israel  under  Mount  Sinai :  "  All  that 
the  Lord  hath  spoken  we  will  do  " — an  undertaking 
which,  because  of  its  perfection,  works  death  to  the 
c  2 


52 

sinner ;  and  lie  is  taught  the  Lord's  Prayer.  I  would 
remark,  in  passing,  that  the  instruction  as  to  what  he 
learns  in  the  articles  of  his  belief  is  objectionable  even 
as  articles,  because  creation  is  ascribed  to  the  Father 
only  as  His  act;  and  then  redemption  to  Grod  the 
Son,  as  if  He  had  no  part  in  creation,  but  had  only 
a  distinct  act  of  redemption  as  His.  But  this  by-the- 
bye.  The  instructions  as  to  duty  I  have  nothing  to 
remark  on,  save  that  the  knowledge  of  the  Father,  as 
His  child  should  know  Him,  is  nowhere  found  in  the 
Catechism.  In  a  word,  what  is  properly  Christian 
faith  is  found  in  it  nowhere,  though  many  topics  of 
Christian  truth  are  referred  to. 

The  Sacraments  I  have  already  spoken  of,  save  to 
note  that  it  is  stated  that  the  promises  of  Grod  are 
made  to  them  in  the  sacraments,  and  whatever  arti 
cles  may  be  given  credence  to,  promises  IN  A  SACRA 
MENT  are  the  only  personal  resting-place  which  is 
proposed  to  the  child :  he  is  to  believe  in  promises 
made  in  that  sacrament.  This  preparation  being 
made,  he  is  to  be  brought  to  the  bishop,  he  having 
there  asserted  that  he  is  bound  to  believe,  and  that 
lie  will  keep  the  commandments.  It  is  repeated  that 
they  had  been  regenerated  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
been  given  the  forgiveness  of  all  their  sins ;  and  thus 
after  confirmation  they  are  introduced  to  the  Com 
munion,  being  now  in  full  membership  (and  why  not, 
if  they  are  regenerate  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ?),  and  now 
confirmed.  And  all  her  members  are  called  upon  by 
the  Establishment  as  Christians,  as  Mr.  M'Neil  justly 
agrees,  to  partake  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  The  very 
people  to  whom  the  same  person  would  preach,  as 
sinners,  I  believe  very  faithfully,  to  repent  and  turn 
to  Grod,  and  to  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that 
they  might  be  saved. 

Thus  we  have  evidence  as  to  the  body,  how  the 


53 

population — the  parishioners — are  fictitiously  made 
the  Church ;  and  while  individuals  may  preach  the 
Gospel,  the  body  rests  on  a  system  of  ordinances 
which  makes  the  whole  body,  the  whole  population, 
by  a  fiction  preserved  to  their  burial,  a  body  of  rege 
nerate  Christians.  If  these  services  be  compared 
with  the  system  of  Popery,  and  the  order  of  their 
administration,  then  not  a  moment's  hesitation  can 
be  entertained  of  what  (though  doubtless  purged  of 
many  details)  the  meaning  and  principles  of  them 
are.  Of  the  fact  that  the  body  of  communicants  are 
not  really  Christians,  no  question  is  or  can  honestly 
be  maintained:  but  the  principle  of  the  Establish 
ment  being  that  all  parishioners  should  come,  and 
orderly  provision  by  her  previous  services  being  made 
that  they  should,  it  becomes  not  wrong  that  they 
should  be  there,  but  their  positive  fault  and  sin  that 
they  are  not :  they  are  bound  to  come,  believers  or 
not ;  and  thus  is  the  principle  of  the  Church  of  (rod 
laid  prostrate  altogether.  And  Mr.  M'Neil  presses 
it  as  the  first  act  of  obedience,  should  there  have  been 
previous  disobedience  all  the  week ;  and  the  rule  of 
the  Establishment  would  apply  to  an  infidel  who  was 
not  a  notorious  evil  liver,  and  the  fiction  be  kept  up 
by  his  presence  being  taken  as  profession.  This  then 
is  the  principle  of  the  Establishment  as  to  the  body  : 
the  effect  is  to  scatter  the  saints  of  God,  grieve  and 
gall  their  consciences,  and  then  reproach  them  with 
dissent  and  schism. 

I  am  now  to  refer  to  the  documents,  upon  which  I 
would  only  remark  as  to  the  former  point  that  all  the 
daily  services  go  on  the  same  principle  of  all  the 
parishioners  being  good  Christian  people.  It  is  vain 
to  allege  that  a  service  is  to  be  made,  and  must  be 
for  Christian  people.  The  fact  of  the  Establishment 
is,  that  they  have  made  the  Christian  people  for  the 


54 

service,  which  is  a  matter  generally  left  out  of  sight 
in  their  plea  for  this.  Who  warranted  them  in  doing 
this  ?  or  what  does  such  a  making  amount  to  ?  A 
reference  to  the  homilies  and  canons  will  abundantly 
confirm  the  statement  that  this  is  the  principle  of  the 
Establishment.  But  to  apply  myself  to  the  docu 
ments  as  to  the  ministry,  we  have  seen,  as  I  said,  the 
facts  (these  are  notorious)  that  the  Crown  and  secular 
persons  and  bodies  present  to  livings  and  bishoprics, 
and  that  young  men  are  brought  up  to  them  as  to  a 
lucrative  profession,  and  that  they  are  bought  for  that 
purpose.  And  you  cannot  show  a  single  document 
by  which  these  things  can  be  shown  to  be  an  abuse : 
they  are  strictly  legal  by  the  system  of  the  Establish 
ment.  But  the  two  documents  I  shall  refer  to  are 
the  twenty-third  and  twenty-sixth  articles,  which 
give  the  authorized  form  to  the  ecclesiastical  part  of 
it.  The  first  states  that  those  we  ought  to  judge 
lawfully  called  and  sent,  which  be  chosen  and  called 
by  men.  Do  I  quote  this  wrongly  ?  Here  then  we 
get  a  principle  formally  laid  down  which  makes  men 
the  choosers  and  callers  to  this  work.  They  have 
authority  given  to  call  and  send  ministers  into  the 
Lord's  vineyard.  Now  I  see  the  Lord  directing  the 
apostles  to  pray  the  Lord  of  the  harvest  to  send 
labourers  into  His  harvest,  and  it  was  the  householder 
who  hired  the  labourers  into  the  vineyard.  It  is  fur 
ther  stated,  that  it  is  not  lawful  for  any  man  to  take 
upon  him  the  office  without  it.  Provision  is  made  for 
the  consequence  of  this  human  calling  in  the  twenty- 
sixth.  Sometimes  evil  men  have  chief  authority  in  the 
ministration  of  the  word  and  sacraments ;  and  though 
it  may  be  right  to  see  to  this,  yet  if  it  be  not  seen  to, 
they  minister  by  Christ's  commission  and  authority, 
and  are  to  be  attended  to  even  in  hearing  the  word  of 
Grod,  though  perhaps  what  they  preach  is  contrary  to 


55 

all  God's  truth  :  and  thus,  to  maintain  the  authority 
of  the  system,  and  the  validity  of  ordinances  where 
there  is  no  grace,  as  far  as  man  goes,  souls  are 
jeoparded,  and  the  people  subjected  to  all  manner  of 
false  teaching  as  of  Christ's  commission.  Do  you 
believe  that  Christ  has  really  sent  a  man  to  preach 
who  is  not  a  Christian,  and  does  not  preach  the 
Gospel  at  all  ?  If  not,  what  is  the  meaning  of 
Christ's  commission  ?  and  why  this  care  to  maintain 
the  authority  of  those  called  and  sent  by  man,  even 
when  they  are  evil,  but  to  maintain  the  validity  of  a 
system  of  ordinances  which  rests  on  man  where  there 
is  confessedly  not  the  grace  of  Christ?  I  may  be 
referred  to  the  Ordination  Service,  where  the  person 
says  he  is  called  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  Be  it  so  :  but 
there  are  articles,  on  the  one  hand,  to  hinder  any  one 
from  acting  in  that,  unless  he  has  man's  sanction  and 
authority  for  doing  it ;  and,  on  the  other,  if  it  be 
quite  false,  and  the  man  a  pretender,  or  careless,  or 
a  hypocrite,  there  are  articles  to  maintain  his  autho 
rity,  as  of  equal  validity  by  Christ's  commission,  as 
if  he  really  were ;  otherwise  it  would  be  clearly  im 
possible  to  regard  him  as  the  minister  of  the  parish, 
which  by  law  they  must,  and  treat  those  as  dissenters 
and  schismatics  who  have  been  perhaps  called  by  the 
Holy  Ghost,  but  have  not  submitted  to  avow  their 
receiving  the  Holy  Ghost  from  a  bishop,  whom  the 
king  or  his  minister  has  appointed.  Do  you  believe 
every  bishop  the  king  appoints  has  power  to  confer 
the  Holy  Ghost  ?  If  not,  surely  it  is  an  awful  thing 
to  pretend  to  receive  it  at  his  hands.  We  are  told, 
first,  the  bishops  are  securities  against  any  not  really 
ministers  intruding,  and  that  we  are  liable  to  this 
evil ;  and  then,  where  the  fact  is  notorious  that  the 
vast  body  are  not  ministers,  and  are  absolutely  op 
posed  to  the  Gospel,  are  not  called  by  the  Holy 


56 

Ghost,  but  enter  it  as  a  profession,  we  are  told  that, 
they  having  avowed  they  are  led  by  the  Holy  Grhost, 
through  their  own  hypocrisy  and  fault,  the  Church 
has  done  all  she  can.  Well,  then,  the  plea  of  this- 
security  is  folly — save,  observe,  to  authenticate  as 
ministers ;  and  the  only  lawful  ministers  of  the  place 
those  who  are  not  ministers  at  all.  This  is  all  it 
does.  The  call  of  the  Holy  Grhost  does  in  itself 
necessarily  remain  in  the  bosom  of  him  who  asserts 
it,  but  by  his  ordination  the  man  is  authenticated 
before  the  truth  of  his  calling  by  the  Holy  Grhost  is 
proved. 

I  have  now  I  believe,  dear  sir,  gone  through  what 
the  documents  of  the  Establishment  present,  and  her 
legal  authorized  proceedings,  which  do  not  appear 
upon  the  face  of  her  documents,  but  which  are  just  her 
form  and  constitution  as  an  Establishment,  in  order 
to  judge  as  to  my  continuance  within  her  pale  as 
recognizing  her  as  the  Church  of  Grod.  If  you  avow 
she  is  not  the  Church  of  Grod,  then  I  feel  no  claim, 
upon  my  soul  on  her  part  at  all ;  but  your  assertion 
of  schism  or  dissent  in  not  being  of  her,  assumes  a 
very  important  character  indeed,  because  it  pretends  that 
she  is.  The  framers  of  her  canons  and  constitutions 
who  took,  if  unfounded,  very  clear  and  decided 
ground  as  to  this,  were  well  aware  of  this,  and  there 
fore  honestly  denounced  and  excommunicated  all  who 
questioned  or  impugned  it.  And  this  is  the  point 
you  must  meet,  if  you  mean  to  hold  the  consciences 
of  Grod's  children.  That  party  feeling,  early  habits, 
and  natural  associations,  and  in  many  cases  personal 
attachment,  may  hold  a  multitude  within  her  pale,  I 
do  not  question. 

I  do  not  think  you  can  charge  my  letter  with 
aspersions,  nor  with  evading  the  discussion.  The 
ground  I  have  taken  is  clear  and  distinct  on  which 


57 

my  mind  rests,  not  without  sorrow — I  should  grieve 
if  it  did — but  in  perfect,  joyful,  thankful  peace  of 
conscience  as  to  the  position  in  which  divine  mercy 
and  grace  has  placed  me,  and  a  clear  though 
very  sorrowful  judgment  as  to  the  point  at  issue. 
Save  as  to  the  responsibility  which  every  false  as 
sumption  casts  on  the  party  making  it,  I  cannot  own 
it  as  "  The  Church"  or  a  Church  at  all,  but  as  a 
system  by  which  the  saints  of  Grod  have  been  and  are 
scattered,  and  which  I  firmly  believe  is  the  channel 
of  the  country  into  Popery,  by  the  importance  it 
gives  to  ordinances,  and  the  sanction  of  that  which  is 
in  word  and  not  in  power,  and  the  hindering  the 
corporate  manifestation  of  the  children  of  Grod,  and 
their  fully  following  the  Light.  The  providence  of 
Grod  in  this,  and  the  judgment  which  it  will  close  in, 
though  matter  of  undoubting  certainty  to  my  mind, 
confirming  my  faith,  and,  where  occasion  is  given, 
matter  of  mine  and  others'  testimony,  is  not  directly 
the  ground  of  conscience,  and  to  that  in  direct  argu 
ment  I  have  here  confined  myself. 

As  to  selfishness  and  pride,  and  the  like,  as  being 
merely  a  question  of  motives,  I  feel  it  not  to  the 
point  to  argue  them.  As  to  your  appeals  to  our 
brotherly  love  to  remove  the  degeneracy  of  the 
Church  of  England,  my  answer  is,  I  cannot  spend 
my  strength  on  correcting  what  is  in  principle  wrong, 
— it  is  lost  labour.  It  is  not  degeneracy :  it  is  the 
system  and  principle  of  it  as  to  its  incorporation, 
government,  and  principle  of  ministry  (though  indi 
viduals  may  be  good  men  and  Christians  who  minis 
ter)  ,  which  I  believe  contrary  to  the  mind,  word,  and 
will  of  Grod.  This  was  not  the  case  with  Israel — the 
principle  and  system  were  Grod's  own  there  :  not  the 
case  with  Sardis  and  Thyatira — the  principle  and 
system  were  Grod's  own  there  too ;  and  therefore 
c  3 


58 

degeneracy  claimed  service,  and  not  departure ;  for 
it  would  have  been  departure  from  the  principles  of 
God's  gathering  and  assembly  in  the  two  dispensa 
tions.  By  being  of  the  Establishment,  I  feel  I 
should  be  in  a  state  of  departure  from  the  principles 
of  God's  gathering,  not  by  being  out  of  it.  Nothing, 
I  think,  can  be  clearer  than  this  distinction. 

When  you  talk  of  the  Establishment  being  a  com 
pany  whose  title  to  the  Christian  character  is  almost 
defaced  save  to  the  eye  of  charity,  I  can  hardly  think 
you  serious.  Do  not  you,  do  not  all  real  ministers 
of  Christ  acting  in  charity,  preach  to  the  mass  of 
them  as  unconverted  and  unbelievers?  Do  you 
think  them  uncharitable  ?  I  do  not.  But  when  you 
state  that  the  shining  graces  of  individuals  are  ob 
scured  by  this  company,  but  that  they  attract  notice 
when  they  come  out  and  stand  apart  in  a  little  body, 
YOU  just  state  the  grand  excellency  of  doing  so ;  and 
God's  principle  of  dealing  with  a  poor,  ruined,  sin- 
clarkened  world.  God  does  not  light  a  candle  to 
put  it  under  a  bushel,  but  on  a  candlestick :  "  A  city 
set  on  a  hill  cannot  be  hid."  "Let  your  light  so 
shine  before  men,  that  they  may  see  your  good 
works,  and  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven." 
The  method  and  principle  you  accuse  us  of  following, 
then,  are  God's  own,  with  this  precise  object.  The 
ascribing  of  motives  to  us  in  acting  on  it  I  leave  in 
your  own  hands. 

As  to  staying  in  the  hospital,  it  sounds  fair,  but 
our  objection,  dear  sir,  is  to  staying  in  the  tombs. 
You  are  preaching  to  them,  at  least  the  great  mass 
of  them,  as  dead  in  sins.  Are  you  not  ?  Certainly 
in  charity  and  truth  you  ought  to  be.  Well,  we 
agree  with  you  as  to  the  mass  that  are  in  the  great 
broad  road;  only  we  do  not  then  come  down  and 
join  them  as  brethren  actually  in  the  road  to  glory ; 


59 

bound  to  avow  that  they  are  heirs  of  it,  in  partaking 
of  that  one  loaf  at  least  three  times  a  year,  and 
assuring  them  they  are  children  of  God,  members  of 
Christ,  and  inheritors  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
An  hospital  is  for  a  people  that  are  alive. — Is  it  not  ? 
Do  you  believe  that  the  mass  of  the  Establishment 
are  alive  to  Grod  ?  In  fact,  your  statement  about  the 
hospital  is  merely  playing  on  our  feelings. 

I  hardly  know  how  to  answer  your  exhortation  to 
us  to  search  and  try  our  ways.  You  tell  us  that  we 
were  "thriving  in  the  Establishment ;"  then,  "that 
ihough  the  tares  are  more  like  wheat,  we  are  only 
closer  bound  to  them  still ;"  and  "  where  people  not 
•unlike  our  party  have  been  brought."  I  can  only 
say  they  are  all  pleasant  assumptions  or  suggestions 
on  your  part.  We  have  deeply  felt  and  found  our 
own  weakness,  and  the  condition  to  which  the  prin 
ciples  of  the  system  of  which  you  form  a  part  have 
reduced  the  Church  of  Grod.  But  in  this  weakness 
we  have  found  Grod  faithful,  and  very  merciful  and 
gentle  with  us  too ;  and  in  spite  of  our  infirmities, 
enlargement  and  comfort  of  heart,  and  growth  and 
liberty,  and  ability  in  some  increased  measure  to  feel 
sympathy,  deep  and  conscious  sympathy,  for  the 
whole  Church  of  GOD — even  for  that  part  of  it 
which  is  in  the  Establishment,  and  a  safeguard  too, 
through  His  mercy,  from  the  many  ruinous  prin 
ciples  which  are  flowing  in  from  different  quarters, 
both  in  the  Church  of  God  and  in  the  world.  Our 
own  weakness  and  imperfection  I  trust  we  are  freely 
and  fully  ready  to  admit,  and  be  humbled  for ;  for 
my  own  part  I  avow  it,  without  hesitation ;  but  in 
the  path  of  righteousness  and  God's  will  we  know  at 
least  where  strength  lies.  But  enough  of  ourselves : 
you  have  compelled  me  thus  far  to  be  a  fool. 

I  might  have  appealed  to  Mr.  Kelly,  at  Clifton, 


60 

for  the  refutation  of  some  of  your  suggestions ;  but 
I  pass  on  to  the  charge  of  latitudinarianism,  and  it 
is  only  striking  to  my  mind  how  evil  and  systematic 
habits  hinder  simple  understanding  and  subjection 
to  God's  blessed  word  and  ways.  But  first  as  to  one 
or  two  charges.  You  charge  us  with  having  Baptists, 
Psedobaptists,  Anninians,  and  Calvinists,  Hillenna- 
rians,  Anti-Millennarians,  and  even  Quakers.  Well, 
are  there  not  Pcedobaptists,  Arminians,  Calvinists, 
Millennarians,  Anti-Millennarians,  in  the  Establish 
ment,  and  teaching  too  ?  And  Quakers  have  been 
received  there  too  :  also  they  have  been  with  us,  and 
have  been  baptized,  as  became  them,  from  the  cir 
cumstances  they  were  placed  in.  The  only  differ 
ence,  then,  on  this  point,  is  as  to  the  existence  of  these 
various  views  in  the  minds  of  those  amongst  us; 
they  being  real  Christians,  we  should  undoubtedly 
feel  it  wrong  to  shut  them  out,  and  rejoice  we  can 
walk  together  in  love.  There  is  only  this  additional 
difference,  that  there  is  not,  through  mercy,  amongst 
us  a  vast  body  of  members  who  have  no  faith  at  all. 
And  I  think  you  would  find  more  unity  of  mind 
amongst  us  than  amongst  yourselves;  nay,  it  was 
your  complaint  at  Clifton,  that  we  were  all  so  made 
up  in  one  mind,  that  wherever  you  met  us  you  just 
heard  the  same  testimony  from  us  all ;  and  when  you 
had  heard  one,  you  had  heard  all.  Others  have  made 
the  same  complaint.  We  are  thankful  the  Lord  has 
kept  us  thus  hitherto,  and  lean  on  His  mercy  to  be 
preserved  in  this  unity.  As  to  not  being  able  to 
baptize,  I  have  only  to  say  you  are  quite  mistaken, 
and  that  we  do  so  when  the  occasion  arises.  That 
some  are  Baptists,  so  called,  and  some  Psedobaptists 
amongst  us,  is  very  true ;  but  by  the  Lord's  mercy 
we  have  felt  the  unity  of  Christ's  body  more  import 
ant  than  the  unity  of  judgment  on  this  point ;  and 


61 

each  person,  without  any  hindrance  to  charity,  acts 
in  this  as  he  believes  according  to  the  mind  of  GrOD. 
Would  you  exclude  a  Baptist  from  the  Lord's  table 
with  you,  were  he  disposed  to  go  ?  We  have  acted 
on  the  principle  of  this  word,  "  Whereto  ye  have 
already  attained,  let  us  walk  by  the  same  rule,  let  us 
mind  the  same  thing."  "If  in  any  thing  ye  be 
otherwise  minded,  Grod  shall  reveal  this  also  unto 
you."  We  have  found  most  happy  peace  and  flow 
of  charity  in  it ;  we  do  not  pretend  to  have  attained 
perfect  light  in  all  that  Grod  reveals. 

Next,   sir,   you   should  have   been    surely   more 

giarded  on  reading  the  17th  chapter  of  John's 
ospel,  in  talking  of  "  the  popular  idol,  unity."  I 
think,  sir,  deference  to  the  word  of  Grod  should  have 
made  you  attach  more  importance  to  it.  That  the 
world  is  imitating  it  by  latitudinarianism  I  know ; 
such  is  Satan's  guile  often,  and  I  am  not  now  deny 
ing,  for  I  fully  believe  it,  its  existence ;  but  the  allu 
sion  is  rather  an  unfortunate  one.  Are  Churchmen 
or  the  brethren  engaged  in  carrying  on  this  latitu 
dinarianism  of  which  you  cite  Irish  national  schools 
as  the  example  ?  I  believe  the  latitudinarianism  you 
speak  of  is  the  principle  of  infidelity  and  atheism ; 
but  I  know  that  the  authorities  of  the  Establishment 
were  the  means  of  its  introduction  into  Ireland. 
Somehow  they  were  able  to  exclude  near  three  thou 
sand  godly  men  for  a  garment  in  1662,  but  unable  to 
hinder  the  introduction  of  public  latitudinarianism  in 
1828.  Was  it  the  brethren  or  the  public  supporters 
and  champions  of  the  Church  who  announced  that 
the  reading  of  the  Scriptures  in  the  schools  was  a 
vital  defect,  because  it  was  contrary  to  the  principles 
of  the  Roman  Catholic  religion  ?  I  do  not  introduce 
these  things  I  trust  as  recriminations.  I  have  already 
said  I  believe  modern  latitudinarianism  is  just  athe- 


62 

ism  and  infidelity  in  its  worst  and  perhaps  basest 
shape ;  nor  am  I  aware  of  its  existence  amongst  the 
brethren,  but  on  the  contrary  the  strongest  testimony 
I  know  against  its  real  evil.  But  I  believe  the  nar 
row  sectarianism  of  the  Church  as  to  rules  of  forms, 
and  its  extreme  latitudinarianism  in  introducing  by 
these  forms  a  mass  of  unconverted,  careless  persons — 
careless  unbelievers — within  its  pale,  has  given  occa 
sion  to  the  existence  of  this  latitudinarianism,  and  a 
plea  for  those  who  have  the  worst  spirit  of  it  to 
attack  that  of  which  the  Establishment  bears  the 
name  as  more  conscientious  than  it.  Do  you  think, 
sir,  an  infidel  cannot  act  on  the  minds  of  men  in 
charging  bigotry  where  godly  men  are  excluded  from 
Christ's  Church  for  the  shape  or  form  of  clothes — 
clean  contrary  to  the  apostolic  rule? — and  that  a 
handle  is  not  given  such  to  ridicule  the  picture  of 
holy  pastorship  when  the  sale  of  their  appointments 
and  the  education  for  them  as  one  of  the  professions 
are  notorious  facts,  however  the  advocates  of  the 
Establishment  may  excuse  or  colour  them  ?  It  is  an 
.awful  time,  and  I  would  press  upon  you  a  time  near 
judgment,  when  the  conscience  or  moral  judgment  of 
infidels  is  in  advance  of  the  practice  of  that  which 
carries  the  name  of  religion  as  the  Establishment. 
Such  is  its  effect ;  and  thus  while  it  feels  the  effect  of 
latitudinarianism  as  inconvenient,  it  strengthens  its 
hand  by  the  position  and  character  which  it  holds 
before  them.  It  is  this  want  of  godliness  and  hea 
venly  character  in  the  Church  which  has  given  the 
world  the  occasion  to  legislate  for  it.  Persecution 
there  might  be,  but  not  legislation  for  a  body  who 
only  sought  heaven  and  renounced  the  world  really. 
You  may  charge  us,  as  they  did  Jeremiah,  with 
weakening  the  hands  of  all  the  men  of  war  in  the 
city,  but,  by  the  help  of  the  Lord,  we  would  not 


63 

cease  from  our  testimony,  nor  join  the  Edomites,  but 
be  alike  strangers  to  what  you  call  your  Zion,  and 
keep  aloof  from  all  that  at  bottom  hate  it ;  not  be 
cause  it  is  corrupt,  but  because  it  is  nominally  the 
house  of  God. 

But  having  thus  far  replied  to  the  charge  of  latitu- 
dinarianism,  your  statements  as  to  the  possibility  of 
going  beyond  the  foundation  in  teaching  have  to  be 
noticed.  And  here  it  is  remarkable  how  habits  con 
trary  to  Scripture  obscure  the  judgment ;  and  while 
we  are  judged  as  if  to  set  aside  ministry,  the  real 
value  of  ministry  is  lost  in  the  mind  of  one  who  rests 
on  Establishment  and  creeds.  The  truth  is,  sir, 
Establishment — that  is,  men's  support  and  a  creed — 
has  taken  the  place  in  your  mind  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
and  of  truth.  One  would  suppose  that  the  person 
who  made  the  remarks  you  do,  did  not  really  believe 
that  there  was  any  Holy  Grhost  really  to  guide,  ani 
mate,  control,  order,  and  provide  ministry  in  the 
Church;  no  Saviour  to  nourish  and  cherish  it  as 
His  own  flesh.  This  is  our  dependence  (however 
feeble  and  faltering  our  dependence  may  be),  that 
He  will  guide  us  into  all  truth — truth  treasured  up 
in  the  word  of  God,  but  into  which  we  have  daily 
to  be  guided,  and  all  of  which  is  before  us  in  the 
word.  You  might  say  of  yourselves,  who  have  a 
limited  standard  of  truth  which  you  subscribe, 
"  Where  our  creed  ends,  error  begins."  But  we  have 
no  limit  to  our  creed,  but  the  whole  wisdom  of  the 
Bible;  unless  our  own  want  of  spirituality,  which 
must  ever  hinder.  "We  are  open  to  receive  and  thirst 
for  all  truth.  If  you  say,  What  is  to  keep  you  from 
error  ?  we  should  watch  against  it  on  the  very  same 
principle  that  an  apostle  did  (I  do  not  say  with  the 
same  power),  but  we  can  lean  only  on  GOD  to  keep 
us  from  it ;  and  we  trust  He  will,  and  are  sure  He 


64 

will  while  we  humbly  wait  on  Him.  You  have,  on 
the  contrary,  trusted  a  creed — so  have  the  foreign 
ecclesiastical  bodies ;  and  what  is  the  consequence  ? 
Error,  justification  by  works,  and  neology — here  in 
three-fourths  of  the  pulpits  of  the  country,  abroad  in 
eight-tenths.  Creeds  cannot  give  living  truth  to  the 
soul,  nor  can  they  secure  truth  beyond  the  compiler 
of  them,  even  in  form.  You  have  kept  a  measure  of 
truth  in  a  book,  but  nothing  more :  your  body  has 
fallen  into  error  ruinous  to  souls  just  as  much  as  even 
those  you  declaim  against ;  and  remember  that  even 
Neology  and  Socinianism  prevailed  more  where 
creeds  were  than  where  they  were  not.  I  have  not 
found  the  advocates  of  liturgies  and  creeds  quite 
honest  on  this  point;  and  if  they  boast  of  this 
country  and  the  wisdom  of  its  Churchmen  (not  the 
continuing  grace  of  Glod),  the  answer  is,  It  was 
dark  as  others ;  and  it  was  grace,  not  creeds,  which 
revived  the  Lord's  work,  and  that  not  quite  within 
the  regulations  and  limits  of  the  Church,  I  think  you 
must  admit.  But  as  regards  ourselves,  if  you  can 
not  distinguish  between  the  unity  of  GOD's  saints 
on  one  foundation,  and  that,  if  you  please,  as  you 
rather  slightingly  say,  in  the  blood — yes,  the  pre 
cious  blood  of  Christ — and  latitudinarianism ;  if  your 
system  of  uniformity  without  unity  have  reduced  you 
to  this  state  of  mind,  I  can  only  sorrow  for  it.  If 
you  call  the  unity  of  God's  children  a  popular  idol, 
we  are  sorry  you  are  in  such  a  state  of  mind ;  with 
us  it  is  a  cherished,  deeply  cherished  object,  because, 
in  heart  and  principle  at  least,  we  are  led  by  Him 
"  who  gave  Himself  not  for  that  (His  own)  nation 
only,  but  that  He  might  gather  together  in  one  the 
children  of  God  which  were  scattered  abroad :"  and 
that  the  Holy  Ghost  leads  us  to  seek  to  keep  the 
unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace,  in  that  by 


65 

one  Spirit  we  are  all  baptized  into  one  body — all  one 
body,  as  partakers  of  that  one  loaf;  and  the  prayer 
of  Jesus  has  sounded  in  our  ear  a  voice  that  subdues 
our  thoughts,  "  that  they  all  may  be  one,  that  the 
world  may  believe."  We  may  fail  in  the  object — we 
cannot  be  wrong  in  the  desire.  But  that  the  unity 
of  God's  children  (this  alone  we  desire)  is  a  popular 
idol,  sounds  to  us  like  a  stranger's  voice,  not  that  of 
the  Good  Shepherd,  and  we  flee  from  it.  If  you 
speak  of  confining  ourselves  to  one  truth,  and  teach 
ing  no  more,  this  assertion  must  be  meant  for 
strangers.  Have  you  found  this  to  be  the  case? 
One  truth,  the  redemption  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus, 
I  trust  will  ever  hold  undisguised  prominency ;  but 
do  you  think  those  who  have  been  much  amongst  us 
are  less  taught  than  those  who  have  not  been  ? — are 
less  acquainted  with  scriptural  truths  ?  This  is  not 
a  usual  charge,  whatever  the  value  of  knowledge  may 
be ;  for  I  believe  grace  is  far  more  important,  though 
truth  be  most  blessed ;  but  our  principle  is  this,  sir : 
Whenever  the  first  great  truth  of  redemption — in 
a  word,  whenever  Christ  has  received  a  person,  we 
would  receive  him.  That  false  brethren  may  creep  in 
unawares  is  possible.  If  the  Church  be  spiritual, 
they  will  soon  be  made  apparent,  but  as  our  table  is 
the  Lord's,  not  ours,  we  receive  all  that  the  Lord 
has  received,  all  who  have  fled  as  poor  sinners  for 
refuge  to  the  hope  set  before  them,  and  rest  not  in 
themselves,  but  in  Christ,  as  their  hope.  We  then 
afterwards  teach  them  as  they  are  able,  according  to 
the  grace,  and  knowledge,  and  wisdom  we  have 
received — all  the  truth  we  have  received  at  God's 
hands ;  and  here  it  is  that  ministry  comes  in.  We  do 
not  make  a  creed,  but  Christ  the  ground  and  term  of 
union ;  but  trusting  to  the  help  and  ever- watchful 
and  ready  care  of  the  Lord  over  us,  and  the  true  and 


66 

real  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  the  Comforter,  seek 
and  give  all  the  instruction,  exhortation,  comfort, 
and  when  need  arises  rebuke  in  love,  we  are  enabled. 
One  may  lay  the  foundation,  and  all  that  are  on  it 
we  receive,  and  another  build  thereon ;  and  they  must 
take  heed  how  they  build  thereon.  You  may  say, 
But  there  will  be  false  teachers.  So  God  has  taught 
us,  and  all  your  plans  will  not  prevent  it ;  but  the 
grace  of  God  will  overrule  it,  enable  us  to  detect  them 
by  the  word,  and  turn  it  to  good;  and  your  plans  only 
hinder  your  leaning  on  that  which  is  effectual — a  spirit 
of  constant  dependence.  There  will  be  heresies — there 
must  needs  be,  says  the  Apostle — that  they  which 
are  approved  may  be  made  manifest.  In  a  word, 
sir,  your  plan  is  to  take  the  Church  of  GOD  out  of 
the  field  of  faith  and  dependence,  and  thereby  lead 
it  away  from  the  constant  and  blessed  energies  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  make  it  lean  on  something  else. 
But  the  truth  is,  God  is  most  gracious,  and  faithful, 
and  blessed  in  His  careful  mercy,  though  you  may 
not  trust  Him.  He  knows  that  we  have  but  a  little 
strength ;  and  though  He  has  graciously  permitted 
that  which  may  exercise  and  strengthen  our  faith, 
He  has  never  suffered  us  to  be  tempted  above  that 
we  are  able,  but  rather  set  before  us  an  open  door. 
The  Lord  keep  us  in  the  word  of  His  patience,  and 
men  or  Satan  shall  in  vain  seek  to  shut  it. 

We  do  then  receive  on  the  one  great  truth  of 
Christ's  salvation  all  that  through  divine  grace  be 
lieving  it  are  converted  to  God.  And  we  then, 
having  ministry  of  truth,  build  them  up  according  to 
what  God  has  given  us.  That  there  is  imperfection 
in  the  teaching  I  do  not  deny,  for  we  are  all  imper 
fect.  But  I  do  not  think,  dear  sir,  if  you  are  ac 
quainted  with,  and  your  mind  is  based  on  Scripture, 
you  can  object  on  principle  to  this  as  unscriptural.  I 


67 

think  you  would  find  amongst  us  the  very  opposite 
to  latitudinarianism — a  strong  desire,  prayer  for,  and 
search  after  unity  among  the  saints  of  GTOD  ;  and  the 
careful  and  diligent  teaching  of  the  measure  of  truth 
we  have  received.  And  if  you  say  no  good  thing 
can  come  out  of  Nazareth,  we  will  count  it  only  pre 
judice,  and  say,  "  Come  and  see." 

As  to  our  banishing  of  error,  we  have  abundant 
provision  in  the  word  of  Grod,  if  we  have  grace  to  do 
it ;  and  on  this  we  lean :  without  it  clearly  we  can  do 
nothing.  You  assert  that  the  Scripture  is  insufficient 
for  this,  precisely  on  the  same  ground  as  the  Roman 
Catholic  does.  We  have  no  stealthy  standard  at  all ; 
we  openly  condemn  every  discovered  error.  We  be 
lieve  not  in  the  infallibility  of  the  clergy,  and  the 
insufficiency  of  the  Scripture,  and  the  sufficiency  of 
humanly  composed  creeds,  which  is  your  ground. 
You  say,  with  the  Roman  Catholic,  that  a  Socinian 
could  appeal  to  the  written  word.  Could  he  ?  Do 
you  say  he  could  ? — But  we  believe  in  the  sufficiency 
of  the  Scripture,  and  the  grace,  energy,  and  power 
of  the  Spirit — the  Comforter,  to  keep  out  error  from 
the  Church,  so  as  to  guide  us  in  the  truth. 

This  is  a  very  grave  question — I  believe  the  ques 
tion  between  us ;  yet  I  would  not  willingly  my  so ; 
for  I  believe  it  to  be  the  question  between  apostacy 
and  the  special  point  of  truth  now.  But  you  have 
put  yourselves  on  this  ground :  you  deny  either  the 
sufficiency  of  Scripture,  or  the  grace  of  the  Spirit  to 
use  it  under  the  faithfulness  of  our  blessed  Head's 
love  to  the  Church.  On  this,  in  all  our  weakness,  we 
lean.  You  say,  "  If  you  say  in  the  written  word," 
wrell,  the  Socinian  professes  to  find  his  there  too.  Did 
you  never  hear  this  from  other  mouths,  arguing 
against  Protestant  platforms,  or  clergymen  else 
where  ?  I  tremble, — nay,  but  it  confirms  my  faith 


68 

when  I  see  arrows  drawn  from  such  a  quiver.  You 
say,  "  Would  you  receive  a  Roman  Catholic  ?"  If  a 
Roman  Catholic  really  "extolled  Jesus  "  as  a  Saviour, 
and  His  one  sacrifice  of  Himself  as  the  sole  putting 
away  of  sin,  he  would  have  ceased  to  hold  the  error 
and  delusion  by  which  the  enemy  has  misled  some 
souls  (who  are  still  I  would  trust  precious  to  Jesus), 
he  would  have  ceased  to  be  a  Roman  Catholic  in  the 
evil  sense  of  the  word,  and  on  these  terms  only  could 
he  be  with  us.  I  repeat,  then,  we  receive  all  that 
are  on  the  foundation,  and  reject  and  put  away  all 
error  by  the  word  of  Glod,  and  the  help  of  His  ever 
blessed,  ever  living,  and  ever  present  Spirit.  If  you 
have  neutralized  the  Church's  energies  by  mixing  it 
with  the  world,  so  as  to  be  unable  to  do  this,  it  is  matter 
of  sorrow  surely,  not  of  boast.  Justification  by  works 
is  preached  in  the  majority  of  pulpits  to  souls.  You 
refer  me  to  a  scrap  of  paper  which  the  poor  people 
have  never  read,  so  that  your  provision  against  error 
is  null.  Such  preaching  would  not  be  borne  for  one 
time  by  one  single  person  professing  to  be  a  minister 
amongst  us ;  and  to  your  suggestion,  "  God  knows 
what  mischief  you  may  inflict  upon  them,"  my  only 
answer  is,  "  Grod  knows  what  mischief  you  have  in 
flicted'  upon  them."  The  stranger's  voice,  sir,  has 
been  heard  in  hundreds  of  pulpits  of  the  Establish 
ment.  Has  it  not  ?  "Well,  the  sheep  have  fled  from 
it.  Do  you  rebuke  them?  you  may  tell  them  to 
stay  and  hear  it.  They  dare  not,  by  virtue  of  their 
weakness  and  timidity.  It  is  not  the  Shepherd's 
voice :  their  safety  is  in  flight,  not  in  pretended 
strength  or  artificial  reasonings.  You  have  scattered 
the  sheep  by  your  system,  and  as  yet  your  conscience 
is  not  awakened.  I  have  little  hope  that  it  will  be, 
or  rather  the  change  is  impossible.  Parliament  is 
your  legislator,  not  yourselves, — a  body  I  suppose 


69 

you  would  charge  with  evil  enough  now :  I  thank 
God  I  have  nothing  to  say  to  it.  It  is  really  a  little 
too  bad  to  be  told  we  cannot  testify  the  second  ad 
vent,  and  the  agency  of  the  Spirit.  Forgive  me  if 
I  ask  how  you  could  really  honestly  say  this,  when 
they  are  the  two  great  topics  to  which  testimony 
among  us  has  been  specially  directed — to  urge  which 
meetings  have  been  held  both  yearly  and  wherever 
God  has  opened  a  door ;  so  that  our  adversaries  have 
charged  us  with  being  a  Millennarian  Church,  and 
Irvingites,  on  account  of  these  two  topics  being  so 
much  held  up  before  the  saints  ?  But  I  need  hardly 
answer  this  charge.  A  charge  that  the  brethren  can 
not  teach  the  second  advent,  and  the  agency  of  the 
Spirit,  will  have  but  small  weight,  unless  to  show  you 
were  a  little  hard  set  for  an  argument. 

As  to  "  Where  is  your  security  for  continuing  to 
exclude  error  ?"  I  reply,  In  God  alone  is  continuance. 
We  have  found  error  in  your  teaching,  which  is  ex 
cluded  from  amongst  us  now.  So  far,  we  have  clear 
gain,  for  we  were  continuing  in  error  while  with 
you.  But  nothing  but  grace  will  keep  us  onward. 
This  may  seem  a  poor  dependence  to  you ;  it  is  our 
only  one.  I  press  this  point,  sir.  When  Paul  said 
that  after  his  decease  grievous  wolves  should  enter 
in,  not  sparing  the  flock ;  yea,  that  of  their  own  selves 
men  would  arise  teaching  perverse  things,  to  draw 
away  disciples  after  them ;  he  desired  them  to 
watch,  and  remember  how  he  had  not  ceased  night 
and  day  with  tears  to  warn  every  man ;  and  then, 
stating  that  his  own  hands  had  ministered  to  his 
necessities,  and  that  he  had  showed  them  how  that 
so  labouring  they  ought  to  support  the  weak,  he 
commends  them  to  God  and  the  word  of  His  grace, 
which  was  able  to  build  them  up,  and  give  them  an 
inheritance  among  them  that  are  sanctified.  To 


70 

what  lie  apostolically  commanded  them  we  look,  to 
God,  and  the  word  of  His  grace ;  and  we  would  en 
deavour  as  far  as  possible,  as  far  as  we  have  grace, 
to  watch,  and  by  His  own  blessed  mercy  we  have  in 
our  feeble  measure  done  so.  "Without  His  grace  we 
are  sure  we  should  go  astray ;  but  we  lean  upon  it, 
and  in  the  trial  consequent  on  the  absence  of  apos 
tolic  energy,  here  forewarned  of  by  the  blessed  and 
zealous  servant  of  the  Lord,  we  have  endeavoured  in 
principle  to  turn  to  and  use  that  to  which  He  has 
directed  us.  If  you  think  creeds  more  efficacious, 
our  answer  might  be,  they  have  not  proved  so. 
Witness  all  the  different  Protestant  Establishments, 
and  indeed  the  whole  professing  Church  in  its  depar 
ture  from  the  faith  once  delivered.  But  my  answer 
goes  further,  and  I  say  the  ground  of  your  appeal  to 
them  is  that  of  the  insufficiency  of  Scripture,  a  re 
currence  to  other  means  of  securing  truth,  or  there 
with  a  practical  denial  of  the  presence  of  the  Spirit 
of  Grod — the  Spirit  of  truth,  the  Comforter — to  use  it. 
Here  we  openly  take  a  plain  ground  against  the 
principles  or  apostacy  of  Catholicism,  and  the  iden 
tically  same  ground  taken  by  the  defenders  of  the 
Establishment.  We  are  on  ground  of  the  very  last 
importance  to  the  Church  of  Grod  now.  You  rest  in 
tradition  in  some  shape,  ancient  or  modern,  it  mat 
ters  not.  I  do  not :  I  rest  under  divine  grace — my 
only  hope  for  unworthy  and  helpless  sinners,  in  the 
perfect  sufficiency  of  the  word,  and  the  presence  of 
the  Spirit  in  the  Church,  according  to  the  faithful 
ness  of  Grod.  This  I  believe  is  a  cardinal  point  for 
the  Church  of  Grod  now — this  great  and  blessed  truth 
being  taken  in  connexion  with  it,  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  present  with  the  Church,  abiding  for  ever. 
Popery  and  the  Establishment  take  ecclesiastical  suc 
cession  and  creeds,  and  assert  together  that  the  Bible 


71 

is  not  an  all-sufficient  guide,  leaving  quite  aside  the 
continual  presence  of  the  Holy  Grhost.  Tradition 
and  successional  authority  are  their  resource;  and 
let  me  add  that  you  cannot  even  plead  here  that  you 
refer  to  tradition,  or  authority,  or  some  other  resource 
than  Scripture  and  the  Holy  Grhost,  merely  for  rites 
and  ceremonies ;  we  are  discussing  creed*  here.  Your 
argument  is,  that  it  is  insufficient  in  practice  for  mat 
ters  of  faith,  and  to  banish  error — assuming,  as  I  have 
surely  title  to  do,  the  faithfulness  of  Grod  by  His 
Spirit.  If  you  deny  it,  do  so  openly.  I  see  no  re 
ference  to  it  in  your  letter,  or  that  on  which  your 
system  rests.  As  to  this,  my  answer,  then,  to  this 
charge  is,  we  admit  of  no  heterodoxy,  but  all  Chris 
tians.  If  you  ask,  How  can  you  do  this  ?  I  answer, 
By  the  word,  and  Spirit,  and  grace  of  God.  Your 
system  receives  the  population,  and  calls  unity  a 
popular  idol,  and  (Mr.  M'Nett  being  witness)  is 
arranged  so  as  to  appoint  pastors,  because  they  are 
unfit.  The  fact  he  admits ;  and  I  have  already  asked 
you,  is  not  the  person  so  appointed  recognized  as  the 
only  lawful  minister  of  the  parish,  and  all  else  in 
truders  ?  instituted  by  the  Bishop  as  such,  recognized 
by  the  ecclesiastical  court  as  such,  and  by  every 
authority  (except  the  Lord's)  in  the  country  ? 

If  you  say  the  Bishop  cannot  help  it,  I  say,  "  Just 
so,  because  it  is  the  legal  system,  and  not  an  abuse 
of  it  at  all." 

I  can  apprise  you,  if  public  rumour  has  not,  that 
the  members  Avho  have  increased  our  fellowship  lat 
terly,  have  been,  I  think  I  may  say  chiefly  (at  least 
in  England)  from  among  dissenters,  feeling  the  evil 
of  their  system  as  well  as  of  yours — at  any  rate  quite 
as  large  a  number,  and  of  the  Establishment  very 
many,  by  the  conversion  to  Grod  often  of  those  long 
accepted  as  members  among  you ;  in  ether  cases  of 


72 

poor  neglected  souls,  to  whose  ears  the  truth  had 
never  reached  by  that  which  claims  to  provide  for  all 
as  of  the  Church  of  England.  But  the  most  remark 
able  accessions,  and  the  action  of  our  testimony 
among  Christians,  has  been  de  facto  chiefly  among 
dissenters.  Two  dissenting  ministers  who  came  to 
the  Clifton  meeting  to  get  all  the  good  they  could, 
and  not  to  challenge  us  all,  and  banish  away  all  our 
errors,  found  happy  and  joyful  liberty  in  fellowship 
with  us,  and  we  with  them ;  and  this  testimony  I 
trust  will  spread.  Many  Christians  from  the  Esta 
blishment  also  have  found  their  joy  and  fellowship 
along  with  us. 

When  you  speak  of  our  violating  our  principles 
by  teaching  other  than  what  is  common,  as  I  have 
already  stated,  it  is  only  that  you  do  not  know  them. 
If  you  mean  "  by  authoritatively  setting  them,  forth, 
as  lords  over  their  faith,"  certainly  we  disclaim  it. 
As  helpers  of  their  joy  we  teach  all  we  can :  we  will 
teach  or  be  taught  by  you,  if  you  can  edify  us  in  the 
Lord,  and  be  thankful  for  it.  If  God  has  given  you 
any  gift,  we  are  there  in  no  dilemma  at  all :  we  meet 
on  the  ground  of  the  foundation,  Christ;  and  we 
learn,  and  as  Grod  has  enabled  any,  teach  all  that  is 
in  the  "Bible,  trusting  Grod  to  keep  us  from  error ;  and 
if  "  there  must  needs  be  heresies,"  trusting  it  shall 
be  through  His  grace  that  they  which  are  approved 
may  be  made  manifest.  This  continual  responsibility 
of  the  Church  in  its  perpetual  conflict  with  Satan, 
not  yet  cast  down  and  bound,  you  seem  to  have  lost 
sight  of,  or  to  suppose  that  you  can  provide  for  the 
exclusion  of.  But  then  the  Church  must  lose  its 
heavenly-mindedness  and  character,  for  we  do  wrestle 
with  spiritual  wickedness  in  heavenly  places  ;  and  all 
the  profit  of  the  exercise  of  faith,  and  the  deeper 
acquaintance  with  the  whole  armour  of  Grod,  and  the 


73 

faithfulness  of  the  Grod  who  gave  it,  and  gives  it  to 
us  still. 

I  believe  only  one  material  point  remains  unno 
ticed  still,  on  which  indeed  many  preceding  facts  and 
statements  bear,  honouring  the  Holy  Grhost,  which 
introduces  in  your  letter  the  question  of  ministry. 
The  facts  to  which  the  system  you  advocate  leads 
have  been  already  noticed,  and  if  you  think  the  sale 
of  advowsons,  the  giving  of  the  appointment  of  the 
chief  pastors  or  bishops  into  the  hands  of  the  Crown, 
honouring  the  Holy  Grhost's  rule  in  the  Church,  cer 
tainly  there  are  many  (such  as  the  Irish  Christian 
Journal  describes  as  having  morbid  consciences)  who 
cannot.  This,  I  say,  which  is  the  regular  order  of 
the  Establishment,  the  constitution  of  it,  is  not 
honouring  the  Holy  Grhost.  It  is  not  merely  there 
being  the  fact  of  an  ordained  ministry.  I  see  nothing 
like  an  appointment  of  elders  in  an  existing  body  of 
Christians,  in  the  ordaining  young  men  of  twenty- 
three  or  twenty-four,  in  the  nomination  of  a  pastor 
who  has  got  an  appointment  from  some  lord  of  the 
manor,  or  his  being  made  a  priest,  presbyter  if  you 
please,  on  the  same  appointment.  You  do  not  arro 
gate  to  yourselves,  you  say,  the  selection  of  your 
ministers,  but  you  give  them  authority  to  exercise 
their  gift,  when  they  say  they  are  called,  and  the 
bishop  has  ascertained  by  certain  testimony  they  are 
of  good  morals,  not  heretics,  and  can  answer  in 
Latin.  Now  supposing  this  sufficient  and  right 
(both  of  which  I  entirely  deny,  and  say  that  it  is 
entirely  unscriptural,  and  opposed  to  Scripture,  but 
it  would  lead  me  into  another  large  question),  you 
do  in  the  appointment  of  this  person  to  some  cure, 
not  by  the  Spirit,  but  by  a  landlord,  preclude  others 
from  exercising  their  gift  there  in  the  Church,  and 
thereby,  as  the  appointment  is  secular,  and  you  dis- 


74 

honour  the  Holy  Ghost  in  that,  so  the  direction  of" 
the  word  of  God,  "  as  every  man  hath  received  the 
gift,  so  minister  the  same,  as  good  stewards  of  the 
manifold  grace  of  Grod,"  is  set  aside.  It  is  not,  "  he 
that  teacheth  let  him  wait  on  his  teaching,  he  that 
exhorteth  on  his  exhortation."  All  gifts  must  be 
assumed  to  be  in  the  secularly  appointed  minister,  or 
the  Church  deprived  of  them.  This  is  what  I  call 
dishonouring  the  Holy  Ghost.  Again,  when  you 
speak  of  not  selecting  ministers,  what  is  your  system  ? 
You  have  divided  the  country  into  ten  thousand  pa 
rishes.  Who  has  authorized  you  to  say  that  the  Holy 
Grhost  would  raise  up  just  ten  thousand  ministers  at 
all  times  to  minister  by  His  help  and  power  in  these 
parishes  ?  Yet  by  your  system  you  are  bound  to 
provide  for  them,  and  in  order  to  the  attainment  of 
this,  secular  advantages  are  attached,  and  titles  of 
nomination  put  into  the  hands  of  interested  persons. 
This  I  call  dishonouring  the  Holy  Grhost,  "  who  dis 
tributes  to  every  man  severally  as  He  will."  It  all 
hangs  on  the  same  great  system,  that  it  is  the  world, 
and  not  the  Church.  Suppose  your  ecclesiastical 
authorities  sincere,  though  I  do  not  admit  their  title 
at  all,  they  are  administering  a  system  which  sets 
quite  aside  the  sovereign  ministry  of  the  Holy  Grhost 
in  distributing  as  He  will.  The  ten  thousand  pa 
rishes  are  to  be  filled ;  men  have  a  secular  right  to  fill 
them,  or  to  sell  their  title.  This  is  not  waiting  on, 
honouring,  or  owning  the  authority  and  only  power 
of  the  Holy  Grhost  to  bless  and  minister  by  vessels 
of  His  appointing  and  qualifying  in  the  Church.  And 
then,  when  thus  filled,  the  Holy  Ghost's  title  to  raise 
up  one  to  teach  in  one  of  them,  or  to  exhort  in  one  of 
them  (though  indeed  they  are  not  Churches  at  all),A 
is  positively  denied,  such  an  one  is  disorderly  and' 
schismatic.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  limited  by  your 

,-*,.- 


75 

system  to  the  ten  thousand  clergy,  and  their  curates 
perhaps,  and  is  assumed  to  provide  them  for  the 
nomination  of  the  owners  of  advowsons,  and  none 
else.  I  am  not  speaking  this  lightly,  for  I  believe 
it  is  a  most  horrible  and  crying  dishonour  done  to 
the  Holy  Grhost.  If  I  were  to  speak  to  the  majority 
of  your  clergy  of  the  "  Holy  Grhost  distributing  to 
every  man  severally  as  He  will,"  they  would  account 
me  an  enthusiast  and  a  fanatic ;  or  to  the  owners  of 
advowsons,  of  His  raising  up  elders  and  pastors  of  His 
selecting  and  appointment,  they  would  treat  me  as 
wild  and  dissenting.  Their  affair  was  their  rights, 
and  they  exercise  them. 

Where  there  are  ten  thousand  offices  specifically 
to  fill,  and  an  education  to  fill  them  provided  as  a 
qualification,  it  is  a  profession,  and  not  a  ministry 
depending  on  the  Holy  Grhost,  distributing  as  He 
will.  The  statement  that  a  man  is  moved  to  it  comes 
in  by-and-by,  and  itself  lumps  all  possible  ministries, 
to  the  exclusion  of  all  others,  into  one  nominally  a 
deacon's,  and  then  an  elder's — very  excellent  offices 
in  their  place,  but  neither  of  them  really  undertaken, 
or  ought  not  to  be,  at  that  age ;  neither  of  them  pro 
perly  or  necessarily  ministries  of  the  word,  though 
they  may  be  united  with  them.  But  this  nifty  be 
called  confusion,  not  dishonour  to  the  Holy  Grhost, 
and  is  only  collaterally  connected  with  the  question. 
But  while  I  might  turn  to  abuses  enough  to  drive 
almost  an  infidel  from  the  professed  Church  in  dis 
gust,  were  I  to  turn  to  the  preparation  for  the 
ministry  at  the  universities,  I  confine  myself  to  the 
plain  facts  and  arrangements  of  the  system.  These 
abuses  indeed  are  its  genuine  consequences,  because 
it  has  been  made  a  regular,  settled,  lucrative  profes 
sion  :  it  must  be  if  the  Church  goes  by  a  geographical 
division  of  the  population,  not  the  gathering  of  the 
D  2 


saints.  But  the  plain  facts  and  arrangements  of  the 
system  permit  no  one  to  preach  save  those  called  by 
man,  and  who  have  received  authority  from  man ;  so 
that  in  the  principle  of  it  St.  Paul  could  not — for  he 
asserts  the  contrary  principle — provide  livings  for  so 
many,  say  ten  thousand  ministers,  whether  the  Holy 
Grhost  has  called  them  or  not,  and  forbid  any  else  to 
exercise  it,  so  much  so  that  a  bishop  cannot  ordain 
without  a  nomination,  though  the  man  would  profess 
that  he  was  called  and  moved  by  the  Holy  Grhost 
still.  They  are  educated  for  it,  without  possibly 
knowing  whether  they  will  be  so  moved  or  not,  being 
designed  for  the  ministry  or  for  a  living  by  their 
parents  as  boys ;  and  when  placed  there,  their  one 
gift,  if  they  have  any,  must  exclusively  be  exercised 
— a  pastor  with  perhaps  no  saints,  or  a  young  evan 
gelist  with  old  Christians  to  feed,  and  this  regulated 
by  secular  appointment.  There  is  not  then  the  least 
reference  to  owning  or  following  the  Holy  Grhost  as 
the  source  of  authority,  and  various  gifts  in  the 
Church  of  Grod ;  and  if  he  should  act  without  this 
secular  system,  his  work  is  treated  as  disorderly.  I 
say,  then,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  not  really  honoured 
at  all  in  this  system.  To  make  a  parcel  of  young 
men,  educated  for  the  purpose,  come  and  say  they  are 
moved  by  the  Holy  Grhost,  when  it  is  in  nine  cases 
out  of  ten  secular  and  family  arrangements  which 
have  induced  it,  I  do  not  think  this  honouring  the 
Holy  Grhost ;  nor,  if  all  really  were,  do  I  believe  that 
it  would  be  honouring  His  authority,  His  paramount 
authority  in  the  Church  of  Grod.  I  challenge  you  to 
show  me  anything  the  least  like  the  organization  of 
the  Church  of  England  in  the  Scripture — a  parochial 
arrangement  of  the  population,  justified  by  a  set  of 
written  documents  that  they  are  Christians,  which 
all  are  called  on  to  use. 


77 

As  regards  what  you  state  of  the  Clifton  meeting, 
you  must  know  that  it  was  not  an  assembly  of  the 
saints  as  a  Church  for  teaching  or  worship  at  all, 
but  a  private  meeting  to  which  we  were  all  invited 
by  the  two  persons  who  arranged  it,  and  yourself  in 
like  manner.  I  see  nothing  inconsistent  in  their 
asking  such  as  they  thought  likely  to  edify  to  lec 
ture  and  pray  as  a  morning  service,  or  indeed  any 
other  arrangement  they  might  make,  provided  those 
individually  called  on  felt  disposed  and  led  to  do  it. 
No  such  thing  is  ever  done  when  the  brethren  meet 
for  worship ;  all  who  can  edify  the  Church  may 
speak,  subject  to  the  apostolic  rule  for  order.  If  any 
taught  error,  or  acted  in  the  flesh,  it  would  be  sub 
ject  to  righteous  discipline,  or  any  other  fleshly  act. 
The  Scripture,  if  we  have  grace  to  use  it,  we  find 
abundantly  sufficient  for  this  :  we  recognize,  more 
over,  distinct  and  ordinary  abiding  gifts,  as  it  is  said 
"  there  were  certain  teachers  in  the  Church."  If 
you  think  the  Spirit  of  (rod  cannot  make  good  His 
power  by  the  word  spoken  in  the  conscience,  or 
detect  error,  and  the  pretence  of  the  flesh,  you  have 
a  blessed  truth  to  learn. 

How  do  you  know  we  have  not  fasting  and  prayer 
when  any  special  work  may  be  on  hand,  or  any  bro 
ther  to  be  commended  to  the  Lord  for  any  special 
service?  Is  it  right  to  assume  the  truth  of  such 
charges  ?  We  may  have  been  deficient,  but  had  you 
been  among  us,  you  would  have  known  that  fasting 
and  prayer  have  often  and  often  been  the  resource 
and  comfort  of  our  souls  before  Grod  in  any  various 
circumstances,  and  sometimes  merely  to  seek  more  of 
His  presence  and  blessing.  I  dare  say  we  have  not 
done  it  sufficiently,  nor  as  we  ought. 

We  have  no  election  of  ministers  at  all,  so  that  all 
your  remarks  on  this  are  gratuitous.  Grod  in  His 


mercy  lias  provided  us  with  many  who  have  been  a 
comfort  to  our  souls,  and  spread,  I  trust,  much  truth 
by  them ;  we  find  still  the  harvest  plenty,  and  the 
labourers  few,  and  therefore  earnestly  pray  the  Lord 
of  the  harvest  to  send  forth  labourers  into  His  har 
vest.  Whatever  He  gives  we  shall  receive  thankfully, 
and  if  any  special  work  arises  to  which  they  may  be 
called,  be  ready,  I  trust,  to  recommend  them  to  the 
grace  of  God  for  it. 

The  way  you  speak  of  authority  hindering  the 
Spirit  shows  you  understand  our  principles  in 
nothing.  Time  authority  is  by  the  Spirit  just  as 
much  as  any  other  gift,  and,  instead  of  hindering,  is 
one  service  of  it.  That  the  Church  is  in  the  same 
order  and  energy  as  to  this  as  in  apostolic  days,  we 
do  not  pretend,  as  you  do ;  though  the  majority  of 
your  authorities,  from  the  nature  of  their  appointment 
^  which  ilr.  M'Neil  says  is  by  an  iniquity  of  abuses 
truly  disgusting),  are  not  from  the  Spirit  at  all,  and 

generally  opposed  to  the  truth.  We  believe  the 
hurch  to  have  fallen  and  gone  astray.  Your  con 
dition  is  the  plain  evidence  of  it.  We  do  not  pretend 
to  have  competency  to  set  it  all  right,  but  to  act  in 
righteousness,  strengthening  those  things  that  remain 
ready  to  perish,  and  to  walk  in  love,  which  is  the 
bond  of  perfectness.  We  do  not  say  we  can  restore 
the  Shechinah,  or  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  nor  the 
Ark  of  the  Covenant ;  but  we  will  do  all  we  can  that 
the  word  of  God  authorizes  and  enables  us,  by  the 
Holy  Ghost,  even  yet  with  the  Church  to  do.  You 
pretend  to  all  these  things,  but  we  say  they  are  false ; 
and  that  is  worse  than  nothing — a  wretched  picture 
which  the  spiritual  eye  detects  as  not  even  like  the 
scriptural  originals. 

I  believe  I  have  answered  all  the  questions,  charges, 
and  observations  in  your  letter.  If  I  have  not  tired 


79 

you,  I  certainly  have  myself :  but  I  could  not  answer 
your  questions  and  charges  lightly,  and  a  short  ques 
tion  perhaps  involved  the  investigation  of  important 
principles ;  but  I  have  endeavoured  to  confine  myself 
to  what  was  properly  in  answer  to  your  statements, 
and  not  diverge  into  others,  though  perhaps  im 
portant  topics.  Though  you  have  in  nowise  followed 
your  proposed  plan  of  certain  questions  which  I  was 
to  answer,  I  have  fairly,  I  trust,  gone  into  all  which 
your  paper  suggests,  not  as  a  mere  arguer,  but  on 
the  substantial  grounds  of  the  merits  of  the  question, 
for  it  is  not  a  mere  question  between  us.  The 
enemies  of  the  Establishment  might  be  displeased 
with  me  that  I  have  not  run  through  its  abuses, 
and  I  have  not  wished  to  do  so.  It  is  hard  to  be 
occupied  with  dirt,  and  not  get  dirty.  I  am  per 
suaded  we  have  not  much  business  with  evil,  save 
in  direct  spiritual  denunciation  of  it  when  actually 
before  us,  or  warning  against  it.  I  havo  dealt  with 
the  principles  of  the  system,  which  I  believe  deprives 
it  of  the  title  to  present  itself  to  the  consciences  as 
the  or  a  Church  of  God,  and  make  it  guilty  of  much 
dishonour  done  to  His  name.  I  am  not  conscious 
of  having  used  an  ungracious  or  harsh  expression, 
nor  even  ascribed  motives  to  any.  I  believe  there 
are  many  saints  within  its  pale.  You  will  not  have 
any  aspersions  to  answer,  unless  stating  acknow 
ledged  facts  are  such.  You  will  hardly  accuse  me 
of  evading  discussion,  though  I  have  endeavoured  to 
•onfine  myself  (under  the  Lord's  guidance)  to  what 
[  proposed,  answering  your  questions.  At  any  rate, 
I  have  stated  the  ground  on  which  my  mind  actually 
rests,  as  regards  the  particular  points  you  have  re 
ferred  to.  That  the  gross  and  palpable  consequences 
met  with  in  every-day  life  act  on  the  conscience,  I 
admit,  ind  so  in  the  Lord's  merc^  it  will  be  with 


80 

multitudes  unable  to  trace  the  principles.  But  any 
poor  saint  conversant  in  Scripture  is  soon  convinced 
by  practical  comparison  that  the  Church  of  England 
is  not  the  Church  of  God,  by  what  he  meets  every 
day  in  his  own  parish ;  and  it  requires  an  uncommon 
deal  of  theology  and  tradition  to  show  how  it  is,  and 
many  a  chain  put  upon  plain  conscience  :  as  when  I 
go  to  the  parish  church  on  what  is  called  Sacrament 
Sunday,  or  Easter,  and  am  told  I  am  bound  to  own 
all  I  find  there  as  Christians,  when  I  know  well  all 
the  other  days  of  the  year  they  make  no  pretence 
to  it ;  and  am  perhaps  plainly  told  by  my  minister, 
if  he  knows  the  truth,  all  the  other  days  in  the  year 
that  they  are  not,  and  the  difference  pressed  upon 
me.  However  you  have  the  principles  and  system 
here,  not  even  its  consequences.  And  I  ask  you, 
does  the  Establishment  contemplate  having  all  the 
population  within  her  ordinances,  or  distinctly  ga 
thering  together  in  one  the  children  of  God  which 
are  scattered  abroad  ?  The  latter  I  would  desire 
and  seek  ;  preaching  to  all.  In  whose  hands  is  the 
appointment  of  the  pastors  of  the  Establishment  as 
instituted  and  recognized  by  the  bishops  themselves  ? 
If  the  Holy  Ghost  be  He  who  gives  and  orders  the 
gift  of s  pastorship,  and  their  exercise,  on  what  au 
thority  do  you  divide  the  country,  without  reference 
to  the  actual  presence  of  living  faith,  into  ten  thou 
sand  and  some  one  hundred  portions,  and  assign  a 
pastor  to  each,  to  the  exclusion  of  all  other  spiritual 
gifts  ?  Do  you  de  facto  acknowledge  the  mass  of 
members  of  the  Establishment  as  really  Christians  ? 
Ought  there  to  be  any  body  to  whom  it  could  be  said 
that  they  should  love  one  another  with  a  pure  heart 
fervently,  seeing  they  had  obeyed  the  truth  through 
the  Spirit,  to  the  unfeigned  love  of  the  brethren  ? 
Ought  the  saints  of  God  to  be  gathered  together  in 


81 

unity  ?  I  have  written  offhand,  trusting  to  the  Lord 
my  God  to  direct  and  guide  me,  as  indeed  my  letter 
will  witness.  I  do  not  think  I  have  omitted  any 
point  in  your  letter. 

Believe  me  truly, 

Yours  in  the  Lord, 

J.  N.  D. 

I  have  written  to  the  Record,  I  confess  with  little 
hope  at  any  rate  of  their  putting  so  long  letters  as 
these  in.  I  do  not  write  to  the  Patriot,  not  wishing 
to  have  the  appearance  of  identifying  myself  with 
what  I  have  seen  of  its  spirit.  I  shall  hardly  be 
suspected  of  this  with  the  Record.  But  if  you  will 
write  to  the  Patriot,  who  will  be  above  suspicion  on 
that  side,  I  should  have  no  objection.  The  Patriot 
is  more  opposed  to  us  at  this  moment  than  the 
Record. 


D  3 


82 


The  remainder  of  Mr.  Kelly's  letter,  dated  Dublin, 
March  18t/i,  1842,  referred  to  in  the  Introduction, 
with  some  notes  in  reply  by  Mr.  J.  N.  Darby. 


I  DID  remind  you  that  in  my  former  letter  putting 
you  on  the  defensive,  as  you  wished,  I  asked  you  not 
why  you  had  left  THE  Church,  but  why  you  had  left 
the  Church  of  England.  What  I  wished  was  to  avoid 
"  begging  the  question."  You  knew  what  body  the 
phrase  "  Church  of  England"  denoted,  and  that  you 
had  left  it.  I  wanted  to  ascertain  your  reasons  for 
leaving  it;  but  although  I  used  the  common  term 
"  Church  of  England,"  I  did  not  intend  to  give  up 
the  point  that  the  body  thus  denominated  was  the 
CHURCH  or  GTOD  in  ENGLAND  ;  and  however  you 
are  disposed  to  exclaim  at  my  intolerance,  this  is  my 
position.  I  cannot  allow  the  title  "Church"*  to 
apply  to  your  union  of  Plymouth  brethren,  as  you 
are  called,  or  to  any  class  of  separatists  ;  at  the  same 
time  when  I  unchurch  you  collectively,  I  do  not  un 
christian  you  individually.  I  may  admit  that  those 
members  of  Parliament  who  attend  political  unions 
are  bond  fide  members ;  but  this  is  a  very  different 
thing  from  admitting  that  the  meeting  is  a  meet- 

*  I  feel  it  to  be  of  little  importance  what  name  is  given  to  those 
who  meet  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  provided  they  follow  faithfully  the 
word  of  God. 


83 

ing  of  Parliament.  Thus  my  belief  concerning  you 
and  all  dissenters  is  that  you  may  individually  be 
Christians,  but  your  meetings  are  schismatical — a 
sinful  rending  of  the  body  of  Christ  ;*  and  a  meeting 
of  this  kind,  though  composed  of  Christians,  is  not  to 
be  confounded  with  the  Church  of  Grod  meeting  in 
the  name  of  Jesus. 

I  would  now  briefly  touch  on  the  contents  of  your 
letter  in  general,  calculated  as  they  are  to  make 
unreflecting  Christians  impatient  of  what  is  their 
path  of  duty,  namely,  adhering  to  the  Church  of 
England. 

And  first  allow  me  to  say  that  you  confound  the 
question  of  the  establishment  of  the  Church  with  its 
constitution.  The  establishment  of,  that  is,  in  other 
words,  the  receiving  the  State  f  into  the  Church,  with 
the  interference  naturally  allowed  to  the  State  in 
certain  ecclesiastical  arrangements,  has,  I  admit, 


*  According  to  this,  the  Church  of  England  is  the  hody  of  Christ, 
and  those  not  of  the  Church  of  England  are  not  of  the  body  of  Christ ; 
"rending  the  body  of  Christ"  may  alarm  timid  consciences,  but 
neither  the  expression  nor  the  idea  are  scriptural ;  the  body  of  Christ 
cannot  be  rent — His  sheep  may  be  dispersed,  and  the  national  system 
has  abundantly  succeeded  in  that. 

f  It  is  singular  how  false  systems  darken  the  intelligent; e.  To  a 
person  who  has  learnt  to  think  with  Scripture,  "  receiving  the  State 
into  the  Church  "  presents  no  conceivable  idea.  Put  the  assembly  of 
believers,  or  "  the  assembly  of  God,"  in  place  of  "  the  Church,"  and 
what  is  the  meaning  of  "  receiving  the  State  into  the  assembly  of 
God  ? "  God  may  add  such  as  should  be  saved,  three  thousand  souls 
may  be  added  to  the  Church,  false  brethren  may  creep  in — in  a  word, 
men  or  souls  may  be  received  in,  but  how  the  State  can  be  received 
in  it  is  impossible  to  conceive.  And  what  is  "  the  interference 
naturally  allowed  to  the  State,"  when  the  Holy  Ghost  can  alone 
really  govern  and  act  in  the  power  of  God  ?  It  is  easy  to  talk  of 
ecclesiastical  arrangements,  and  "  naturally  allowed,"  when  the  title 
of  Christ  and  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  are  forgotten  ;  but  that 
the  State  should  interfere  in  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  very 
unnatural  to  those  who  are  accustomed  to  look  at  the  Church  as  the 
Church  of  God,  where  all  that  is  real  is  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 


84 

through  the  tin  watchfulness  of  the  Church,  led  to  many 
evils,  just  as  the  accession  of  men  of  rank  and  fortune 
creeping  into  your  little  community  might  operate  un 
favourably  upon  it,  and  hinder  its  efficiency  for  good. 
But  establishment  is  not  the  essence  of  the  Church  ;  its 
truth  and  apostolicity,  as  it  came  not  from  the  State, 
nor  is  maintained  by  it,  so  neither  can  it  be  taken 
away  by  the  State.  Should  the  State,  that  is  the 
Queen  and  her  executives,  to-morrow  forsake  the 
Church  of  England,  and  adopt*  one  of  the  sects  of 
the  day,  suppose  yours,  making  the  profession,  &c., 
you  require — and  I  see  not  how  you  could  decline 
this  union — the  Church  of  England  would  not  •  cease 
to  be  the  Church  of  God.  Her  endowments  might  be 
rapaciously  seized  on,  her  buildings  for  worship 
alienated  from  her  use,  the  different  orders  of  her 
ministers  proscribed,  her  members  reduced  to  meet 
in  a  "  little  upper  chamber,"  but  still  might  she,  and 
I  trust  would  she,  be  Grod's  chosen  witness  in  the 
land  :  laicstablished  she  might  be,  but  not  unchurched. 
Parliament,  with  all  its  vaunted  omnipotence,  could 
not  reach  to  this.  You  may  perhaps  take  an  excep 
tion  to  this  assertion,  from  the  fact  to  which  you 
allude  of  ten  bishoprics  in  Ireland  having  been 
extinguished  by  Parliament ;  but  I  maintain  this 
could  not  have  been  done  had  the  Church  herself 
been  faithful,  and  for  her  disloyalty  to  her  glorious 
Head  in  this  matter  much  chastening  has  fallen,  and 
I  am  persuaded  will  fall  on  her.  Her  language  to 
the  State  when  this  aggression  was  threatened,  ought 


*  The  Queen  could  not  adopt  the  brethren,  as  they  are  called.  If 
through  the  grace  of  God  the  Queen  he  converted,  and  take  her  place 
among  God's  children,  she  does  it  not  as  Queen,  but  as  any  other 
sinner  saved  by  grace,  though  God's  children  will  render  her,  and 
even  every  subordinate  magistrate,  all  honour  in  the  place  in  which 
God  has  set  them  as  rulers. 


85 

to  have  been — what  many,  though  not,  alas,  the 
majority  of  her  members  felt — "  You  may  confiscate 
our  properties,  though  it  is  personal  robbery  ;  you 
may  grasp  our  diocesan  and  parochial  revenues 
throughout  the  country,  though  it  is  sacrilege ;  but 
you  must  not  dare  to  lay  your  hands  on  the  ark,  or 
spiritual  functions :  as  the  Church  of  Grod,  we  shall, 
despite  of  all  pains  and  penalties,  maintain  the  suc 
cession  of  our  ministers."  Such,  I  say,  should  have 
been  the  language  of  the  Church  on  the  occasion  in 
question,  followed  up,  if  necessary,  by  the  election  of 
bishops  to  the  condemned  sees  as  they  fell  vacant. 
Her  sin  has  been  that  she  submitted  to  the  usurpa 
tion  of  the  State,  in  not  keeping  up  the  succession  of 
her  chief  pastors  ;  yea,  that  she  did  not  exercise  dis 
cipline  in  excommunicating  the  perpetrators*  of  so 
presumptuous  an  act,  even  though  the  highest  per 
sonage  in  the  realm  might  have  become  thereby 
involved. 

But  I  ask,  did  not  the  Church  of  Thyatira  act 
somewhat  after  the  same  manner,  when  her  great 
Head  thus  speaks  to  her  :  "  Notwithstanding  I  have 
a  few  things  against  thee,  because  thou  sufferest  that 
woman  Jezebel,  which  calleth  herself  a  prophetess,  to 
teach  and  to  seduce  my  servants  to  commit  formation, 
and  to  eat  things  sacrificed  unto  idols  "  (Rev.  ii.  20)  ? 
Yet  you  admit  Thyatira  to  have  been  a  true  Church 
of  God.  I  do  beg  the  attention  of  our  readers  to 
this.  The  Church  of  England,  it  is  acknowledged 
with  sorrow,  does  suffer  the  State  to  encroach  too 
much  on  sacred  things,  but  the  Church  of  Thyatira 
connived  f  at  similar  evil.  And  if  you  say  that  this 

*  And  among  the  rest  all  the  hishops,  who,  as  lords  spiritual,  figure 
among  the  enactors  of  the  Bill. 

f  flow  the  Church  of  Thyatira  connived  at  similar  evil  I  am  at  a 
loss  to  discover.  That  assembly  of  God  was  fearfully  culpable  in  not 


86 

was  consistent  with  the  latter  being  a  true  Church 
of  God,  why  not  say  the  same  in  regard  to  the 
former  ? 

Let  our  readers  remember  you  have  subscribed  to 
this  scriptural  principle,  that  we  are  not  to  leave  a  true 
Church  because  of  corruption  in  her ;  and  I  fear  not  the 
effect  of  your  letter  upon  them,  for  the  denial  that 
the  Church  of  England,  whose  martyrs  are  before 
the  throne  of  Grod,  is  a  Church  at  all,  is  so  monstrous, 
and  the  reasoning  to  prove  it  from  the  adventitious 
circumstance  of  her  being  established  so  inconclusive, 
that  every  one  must  see  the  untenableness  of  the  po 
sition  which  reduces  its  dependers  to  such  shifts,  such 
revolutionary  assertions. 

I  consider  that,  with  these  observations,  all  your 
allegations  concerning  the  appointment  by  irreligious 
statesmen  to  offices  in  the  Church  are  fully  disposed 
of.  They  relate,  I  repeat,  to  the  question  of  the 
Church's  establishment,*  the  arrangement  of  which 
may  be  more  or  less  prejudicial  to  her ;  but  they 
touch  not  her  essential  character  as  a  true  apostolic 
Church ;  and  moreover  let  it  not  be  forgotten  that, 
though  an  infidel  minister  may  nominate  to  bishop- 

exercising  discipline  when  seductive  errors  were  taught  by  one  pre 
tending  to  be  a  prophetess.  The  Establishment  makes  ail  the  uncon 
verted  Christians  in  a  lump,  and  ascribes  to  the  State  and  other 
authorities,  as  a  civil  right,  the  nomination  of  all  those  who  have  places 
of  pastors  and  other  authorities  in  her  pale.  The  Church  of  Thyatira 
was  very  guilty,  but  was  a  guilty  Church  ;  the  Establishment  is  all 
the  world  in  England,  having  substituted  a  civil  arrangement  for  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  I  cannot  discover  the  analogy.  To  use 
the  expression  of  an  eloquent  foreigner,  "  the  Establishment  has  made 
of  unfaithfulness  an  institution." 

*  Establishment  or  not,  it  is  the  fact  that  the  bishops  and  priests 
are  presented  to  their  places  by  the  persons  alluded  to.  There  lies 
the  whole  point.  That  act  of  revolt  against  the  authority  of  the 
Spirit  is  the  legal,  the  only  legal  position  of  a  member  of  the  Esta 
blishment,  and  he  treats,  according  to  the  writer,  as  schismatics  all 
who  do  not  acquiesce  in  it. 


87 

rics,  yet  lie  must  select  for  the  dignity  from  amongst 
those  whom  the  Church  herself  has  sanctioned  with 
her  confidence,*  so  that  if  the  Church  were  faithful 
to  the  word  of  her  God,  the  bishops  laying  hands 
suddenly  on  no  man,  she  might,  notwithstanding 
her  connexion  with  the  State,  defy  its  deteriorating 
influence. 

I  come,  secondly,  to  your  strictures  on  the  Bap 
tismal  Service  of  the  Church.  And  here  I  would 
request  our  readers  to  observe  the  important  place 
the  ordinance  occupies  in  the  New  Testament,  stand 
ing  as  it  does  in  relation  to  every  blessed  feature  of 
the  divine  life  in  the  souls  of  believers.  For  ex 
ample,  as  to  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  we  read,  "Arise 
and  be  baptized,  and  wash  away  tliy  sins  "  (Acts  xxii. 
16).  As  to  our  identification  of  Christ  in  His  death, 
"  we  are  buried  with  Him  by  baptism  unto  death " 
(Rom.  vi.  4).  As  to  the  participation  with  Him  in 
His  resurrection  life,  "  wherein  also  ye  are  risen  with 
Him,  through  the  faith  of  the  operation  of  God"  (Col. 
ii.  12).  As  to  the  "  unity"  even  of  the  Church,  about 
which  you  say  so  much,  we  find  it  also  associated 
with  baptism,  "for  by  one  Spirit  are  we  all  baptized 
into  one  body"-^  (1  Cor.  xii.  13).  Now  is  not  this 
continual  connexion  of  baptism  with  the  operations 
of  the  Spirit  of  (rod  an  ample  warrant  for  the  im 
portance  assigned  to  it  in  the  Liturgy  of  the  Church 
of  England  ?  whilst  strongly  contrasting,  I  must  add, 
with  the  liberalism  of  your  party,  which  leaves  its 

*  The  Church  has  sanctioned  with  her  confidence,  for  what  ?  to 
be  a  hishop  or  the  pastor  of  such  a  flock  •  If  Nero  or  Domitian  had 
appointed  Diotrephes  Bishop  of  Ephesus  or  pastor,  would  that  have 
been  the  sanctioned  act  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  or  John,  whose  surname 
was  Mark  ?  or  Luke  ?  or  any  other  ?  "Would  not  such  an  act  have  a 
deteriorating  influence  ? 

f  "  Baptized  by  one  Spirit "  is  not  the  baptism  of  water,  but  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is  the  true  power  of  unity. 


88 

reception  or  rejection  an  open  question.*  As  to  the 
efficacy  ascribed  to  the  ordinance  by  the  Church  of 
England,  in  that  after  its  administration  we  "  thank 
God  for  regenerating  the  person  baptized  "  (and  I 
take  these  words  in  their  plain  obvious  sense),  it  is 
quite  consistent,  I  conceive,  with  the  word  of  Grod, 
for  the  foregoing  passages,  tracing  back  as  they  do 
the  spiritual  life  of  Christians  to  baptism  as  its  source, f 
certainly  indicates  the  efficacy  of  the  ordinance  in  their 

*  There  are  those  among  the  brethren  who  are  not  content  with 
the  baptism  which  they  received  in  infancy,  and  have  thought  it  more 
scriptural  to  have  adults  baptized  on  their  believing ;  thus  the  manner 
or  circumstances  of  baptism  have  been  differently  judged  of  by  many 
amongst  them ;  but  instead  of  its  being  an  open  question,  I  never 
heard  of  baptism  itself  being  a  question  at  all  among  them.  A  few 
who  left  the  Quaker  body  naturally  passed  individually  through  this 
question,  that  body  not  receiving  the  Sacrament ;  but  it  was  only  to 
lead  them  to  attach  due  importance  to  it. 

f  None  of  these  passages  trace  spiritual  life  to  baptism.  They 
speak  of  the  position  in  which  believers  were  placed  by  baptism  as 
their  formal  entrance  into  Christianity  by  a  public  confession,  but 
none  attribute  life  to  baptism  as  its  source  :  "  Of  His  own  will  begat 
He  us  by  the  word  of  truth."  It  would  be  singular  if  it  were  the 
cise,  that  the  Apostle  should  thank  God  that  he  baptized  none,  God 
having  sent  him  not  to  baptize  (not  therefore  that  life  might  be 
received),  but  to  preach  the  Gospel,  the  reception  of  which  in  the 
heart,  it  appears,  by  the  quickening  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
does  not  communicate  life,  though  it  be  the  power  of  God  unto 
salvation«ito  every  one  that  believeth.  "He  that  hath  the  Son 
hath  life."  It  may  be  true  that  he  who  refuses  to  confess  the  Son 
in  baptism,  is  not  to  be  counted  as  having  life ;  but  to  speak  of 
baptism  as  the  source  of  life  would  be  quite  a  sufficient  error  to  oblige 
the  rejection  of  the  Established  system,  as  in  its  root  papist  and 
heretical ;  it  is  an  essential  and  vital  point.  It  is  a  source  of  life  too, 
hypothetical  on  the  secret  of  election  it  appears,  without  any  action 
on  the  conscience,  or  testimony  of  the  word  of  God.  Hence  also 
every  case  of  conversion  or  regeneration  of  adults  in  these  countries, 
at  least  in  the  pale  of  the  Establishment,  is  absolutely  false.  Such  a 
thing  cannot  exist,  for  being  proved  elect  by  their  fruits  and  the  seal 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  it  is  evident,  according  to  the  writer,  that  they 
have  been  regenerated  at  their  baptism.  All  his  preaching  of  the 
truth,  that  souls  may  be  begotten  to  God  by  the  word,  is  false  from 
beginning  to  end,  for  all  th"  elect  who  are  there  have  been  already 
regenerated  in  their  baptism.  Would  he  tell  them  so— the  drunkards, 


89 

case — that  is,  of  the  real  Church,  the  elect  of  God. 
But  who  are  we  to  discriminate  between  them  and 
the  non-elect  ?  We  cannot  do  it,  and  therefore  in 
the  judgment  of  charity  we  speak  of  all  as  being 
regenerated.  In  a  word,  we  speak  of  the  visible 
Church  in  terms  that  belong  to  the  elect  Church, 
because  we  cannot  distinguish  them,  and  that  this  is 
scriptural  see  the  Apostle's  language  concerning  the 
Israelites  of  old  :*  "  They  did  all  eat  the  same  spiritual 
meat,  and  they  did  all  drink  the  same  spiritual  drink, 
for  they  drank  of  that  spiritual  Rock  that  followed  them, 
and  that  Rock  was  Christ :  but  ivith  many  of  them  God 
was  not  well  pleased,  for  they  were  overthrmcn  in  the 
tvilderness"  (1  Cor.  x.  3 — 5).  Here  we  perceive  the 

fornicators,  avaricious— that,  if  elect,  they  have  been  regenerated 
already  really  at  their  baptism,  and  of  course  cannot  be  so  again  ? 
they  have  only  to  mend  their  ways  ?  Where  faith  com.es  in  it  is  hard 
to  tell ;  but  these  regenerate  persons  are  as  to  their  hearts  unbelievers, 
and  perhaps  oppose  the  truth  of  God  strongly.  But  to  what  a  laby 
rinth  does  error  introduce  us.  Or  would  he  say  that  these  unhappy 
sinners,  or  the  self-righteous,  who  are  really  just  as  bad,  can  never 
be  regenerate,  and  cannot  be  among  the  elect  ?  Alas,  alas,  where  does 
systematic  error  lead  him  to  whom  the  system  is  truth! 

*  Why  does  the  writer  omit  the  part  of  the  verse  that  relates  to 
baptism  which  does  not  hint  at  anything  spiritual  ?  "  They  were  all 
baptized  to  Moses  in  the  cloud  and  in  the  sea."  To  apply  figuratively 
— and  in  the  part  of  the  passage  quoted  it  is  avowedly  a  figure — the 
name  of  the  thing  signified  to  the  sign,  is  altogether  another  thing 
from  affirming  its  efficacy  in  the  individual  who  partakes  of  it.  This 
latter  is  what  the  writer  attempts  to  justify  as  to  his  use  of  the  pas 
sage  he  here  quotes  for  it,  having  omitted,  as  we  have  seen,  the  part 
relating  to  baptism.  The  Article  of  the  Church  of  England  itself  will  be 
a  complete  refutation ;  it  takes  pains  to  make  the  distinction  Mr.  Kelly 
would  do  away.  Article  28  is  entitled,  ''  Of  the  wicked  who  eat  not 
the  body  of  Christ  in  the  use  of  the  Lord's  Supper."  Although  they 
carnally  press  the  Sacrament  with  their  teeth,  yet  in  nowise  are  they 
partakers  of  Christ.  The  writer's  view  is  merely  the  opus  operato 
doctrine  of  the  Papists  applied  to  the  elect — not  a  tittle  else.  The 
passage  in  the  Corinthians  is  to  s-how  that  men  may  partake  of  sacra 
ments  and  not  of  life.  Mr.  Kelly  uses  it  to  show  that  we  may  rightly 
affirm  life  of  all  those  who  partake  of  the  sacraments.  It  is  a  sin 
gular  perversion  of  the  passage  to  the  exact  opposite  of  its  intention. 


90 

participation  of  Christ,  which  belonged  in  reality  only 
to  some,  predicated  of  all,  because  all  partook  of  the 
sacramental  sign.  It  would  be  well,  my  dear  sir,  if, 
before  you  revile  the  Church  of  England  for  the 
vocabulary  she  employs  in  this  and  her  other  formu 
laries,  you  had  examined  the  Scriptures  more  ac 
curately  ;  it  might  have  changed  your  scorn  into 
reverence  to  observe  that  invariably  the  receiving 
of  the  sign  is  spoken  of  in  language  belonging  to  the 
reception  of  the  thing  signified. 

The  next  thing  to  which  it  occurs  to  me  to  allude 
is  your  reference  to  my  expression  "  the  popular  idol, 
unity"  by  which  you  seem  greatly  shocked;  but 
why?  Is  there  not  such  a  thing  ?  Are  not  men 
of  all  classes  endeavouring  to  coalesce  for  the  pro 
motion  of  their  favourite  object,  by  foregoing  the 
assertion  of  inconvenient  truths  ?  and  is  not  this  a 
characteristic  of  your  party?  Look,  for  instance, 
at  the  ordinance  I  have  been  just  speaking  of,  bap 
tism  ;  because  its  scriptural  use,  as  introductory  to 
the  Church,  is  adverse  to  the  sentiment  of  some 
among  you,  it  is  omitted.  The  same,  if  you  were 
consistent,  would  apply  to  your  preaching,  for  there 
being^no  agreement  among  you  as  to  what  con 
stitutes  "  the  truth,''''  beyond  the  elementary  point 
devotionally  held  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  to  proceed 
further  in  the  Christian  faith  would  tend  to  hazard 
the  maintenance  of  your  unity,  and  so  there  could 
not  be  edification.  But  you  are  inconsistent,  happily 
for  this  end :  accordingly,  though  in  a  covert  way, 
uniting  to  undervalue  baptism,  on  which  Grod  lays 
such  stress,  you  have  a  secret  Shibboleth,*  I  repeat, 
made  up  of  other  things,  which  gives  you  a  sort  of 


"We  have  a  public  Bible,  the  sufficiency  of  which  the  writer  seems 
to  call  in  question. 


91 

latitude  in  your  teaching.  Were  it  not  for  this  secret 
Shibboleth,  you  could  not  exclude  even  the  Popish 
priest,  if  he  chose  to  be  one  of  you,  for  he  could  say 
he  believed  in  Christ  as  the  Saviour  of  sinners,  the 
Lamb  of  God ;  but  then  you  have  set  it  down  in  your 
minds  that  the  doctrines  of  Popery  are  an  abomina 
tion — that  is,  you  have  your  Thirty- nine  Articles,  your 
interpretation  of  truth,  though  not  printed;  and  there 
fore,  if  he  got  up  to  teach  you  about  the  sacrifice  of 
the  mass,  you  would  silence  him,  and  put  him  from 
unong  you.  In  short,  if  you  acted  consistently  with 
/our  boast  that  you  have  no  creeds  or  interpreta- 
ions  of  truth  among  you,  then  you  could  have  no 
unity — at  least  it  would  only  be  that  of  different 
Colours  in  the  dark ;  and  thus  whereinsoever  you 
nave  unity,  by  acting  inconsistently,  it  is  obvious  your 
system  cannot  get  the  credit  of  it. 

As  we  are  upon  the  subject  of  the  unity  of  the 
Church,  allow  me  to  add  that  the  passage  in  John 
xvii.  21,  upon  which  you  lay  such  emphasis,  I  mean 
our  Lord's  prayer  that  they  may  be  one,  &c.,  does 
not  contemplate  the  Church  in  her  present  state,  dis 
persed  through  the  world,*  but  rather  in  her  future 
glory  which  awaits  her  at  the  coming  of  hftj"  Lord. 

*  "  Dispersed  through  the  world."  But  the  Saviour  gave  Him 
self  to  gather  into  one  the  children  of  God  which  are  scattered 
abroad,  or  dispersed  through  the  world.  The  Lord  does  not  speak 
there  of  gathering  into  one  in  heaven,  for  no  question  could  be  as  to 
that ;  He  speaks  of  an  economy  distinct  from  the  nation.  He  gave 
Himself  for  the  nation,  and  to  gather  the  children  of  God  into  one. 
"  There  is  one  Spirit,  and  one  body."  which  applies  to  this  world, 
because  the  Apostle  speaks  of  what  the  joints  supply  for  the  increase 
of  the  body,  as  elsewhere  of  the  members  suffering  with  each  other. 
Also  the  passage  in  John  is  in  contrast  with  the  unity  in  glory;  the 
Saviour  prays  that  those  that  believe  through  their  word  may  be  one, 
that  the  world  may  believe,  and  then  adds,  "  The  glory  which  Thou 
hast  given  me  I  have  given  them,  that  they  may  be  made  perfect  in 
one,  that  the  world  may  know." 


92 

Then  indeed  shall  she  be  manifestly  one  in  union 
with  her  glorious  Head,  and  then  will  the  world  be 
lieve  that  the  Father  sent  Him.  Your  interpretation 
antedates  this  consummation. 

One  remark  more,  and  I  shall  have  done.  You 
misrepresent  me  in  saying  that  by  my  plan,  or  rather 
the  Church's,  "  I  would  take  the  Church  of  (rod  out 
of  the  field  of  faith  and  dependence  on  the  energies 
of  the  Holy  Grhost."  Such  is  not  the  case.  I  would 
have  the  most  implicit  faith  exercised,  and  the  Holy 
Grhost  honoured  in  all  His  offices  by  the  child  of  Grod, 
but  I  see  not  that  the  use  of  means  is  incompatible 
with  this.  The  Holy  Ghost  icorks  by  means.  Paul, 
who,  as  you  quote,  in  the  prospect  of  perverse  men 
arising  after  his  decease  to  deceive  the  Ephesian 
Church,  commended  "to  Grod  and  the  word  of  His 
grace  "  as  the  real  safeguard,  omits  not  to  instruct 
Timothy,  who  presided  over  that  Church ;  thus,  "  The 
things  that  thou  hast  heard  of  me  among  many 
witnesses,  the  same  commit  thou  to  faithful  men, 
who  shall  be  able  to  teach  others  also  "  (2  Tim.  ii.  2). 
In  like  manner  Peter  says,  "  Moreover  I  will  endea 
vour  that  ye  may  be  able  after  my  decease  to  have 
these  things  always  in  remembrance."  According  to 
you,  no  provision  ought  to  be  made  for  future  exi 
gencies  in  the  Church  of  God,  but  all  should  be  left 
to  the  Spirit  when  the  crisis  comes ;  and,  consistently 
with  this,  we  should  not  multiply  copies  of  the  word 
of  Grod  by  printing,  using  that  human  invention, 
type  ;*  but  the  Holy  Grhost  should  be  expected  to 
speak  orally  in  the  various  assemblies  of  believers, 

*  Does  the  writer  mean  to  place  the  use  of  the  word  of  God  on 
the  same  ground  with  human  arrangements,  and  learning,  and 
academies,  and  the  education  of  young  men  for  a  profession  who 
perhaps  are  not  faithful  at  all,  as  if  that  was  the  ministry  of  the 
Church  of  Christ  ? 


03 

using  some  individual  as  his  organ,  and  thus  super 
seding  our  ingenuity ! 

Let  me  tell  you,  my  dear  sir,  it  is  not  honouring 
the  Holy  Ghost  to  disdain  the  helps  which  prudence 
and  experience  suggest  for  preserving  the  precious 
deposit  of  the  faith,  and  maintaining  the  unity  of 
the  Church  ;  it  is  rather  tempting  and  grieving  Him. 
Satan  would  have  God  honoured  thus  when  he  plied 
Jesus  with  his  artful  reasoning,  that  if  He  were  the 
Son  of  God  He  should  cast  Himself  down  from  the 
pinnacle  of  the  temple ;  but  Jesus  replied,  "  Thou 
shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord  thy  God."*  True  faith 
will  depend  on  God  in  the  use  of  all  lawful  means ; 
and  in  regard  to  the  edification  of  the  Church,  will 
not  risk  it  by  abolishing  all  form  of  sound  words,  and 
preparation  for  the  ministry,  and  then  leaving  that 
ministry  open  to  all  who  may  choose  to  take  it  upon 
them,  running  before  they  are  sent ;  but  putting  into 
requisition  f  every  reasonable  precaution,  will  then 

*  Tempting  God,  was  making  essays  to  try  whether  the  Lord  was 
among  them,  saying,  "  Is  the  Lord  indeed  amongst  us  ? "  not  a 
humble  confidence  that  He  was,  and  therefore  doing  His  will  being 
based  on  that  confidence. 

t  It  is  hard  to  see  how  educating  young  men  for  the  ministry, 
without  knowing  whether  God  has  called  them  at  all,  and  fcen  wait 
ing  upon  God  for  His  blessing,  is  a  reasonable  precaution.  In  the 
national  system  young  men  are  educated  for  the  ministry,  and  after 
wards  called  upon,  when  their  life  has  received  this  direction  as  a 
profession,  to  declare  that  they  are  called  of  God.  I  find  it  hard  to 
call  this  a  reasonable  precaution,  if  I  believe  the  Holy  Ghost  to  be 
the  only  real  source  of  ministry.  Besides,  reasonable  precautions  are 
a  very  precarious  ground,  when  our  point  is  to  follow  Ihe  word  of 
God.  There  is  no  precaution  like  obedience.  All  thnt  this  sentence 
means  is,  that  when  man  has  arranged  things  according  to  his  own 
wisdom,  then  he  will  expect  God  to  bless.  That  which  is  condemned 
by  the  writer  puts  God's  blessing  and  will  first,  and  looks  to  that  as 
the  source  of  comfort  and  edification.  The  fact  is,  that  every  one 
who  wills  enters  on  what  is  called  the  ministry  of  the  Establishment, 
if  he  has  a  decent  education  in  a  college,  and  a  decent  character,  or 
three  persons  to  say  he  has ;  whereas  what  is  condemned  admits  no 


94 

wait  upon  Grod  for  His  blessing,  which  alone  can 
prosper,  and  this  is  as  compatible  with  dependence  on 
God's  grace,  as  the  culture  of  the  soil  and  the  scatter 
ing  of  the  seed  is  with  dependence  on  His  providence. 

I  perceive  that,  whereas  I  intended  only  a  few  short 
notes,  I  have  been  drawn  out  to  write  a  long  letter ; 
I  shall  now  close,  leaving  you  to  have  the  last  word, 
if  you  please,  before  going  to  press. 

If  you  like,  by  the  way,  you  may  answer  to  our 
readers  the  following  queries  : — 

I. — Where  was  the  Church  of  Grod  in  England  at 
the  time  of  the  Reformation?*  and  was  that  Church 
identified  with  the  use  of  creeds,  and  an  ordained 
ministry  separate  from  the  people  ?  If  so,  are  you 
not  separatists  from  the  Church  ? 

II. — How  are  teachers  appointed  among  you?f 
Is  it  competent  to  any  one  who  feels  he  has  the  gift 
to  stand  up  and  minister  in  the  word,  and  then  if 
he  teach  Socinianism  how  can  you  consistently  silence 
him?  May  he  not  say+  he  speaks  in  the  Spirit  as 
well  as  you ;  and  thus  are  not  all  your  meetings  for 
worship  and  edification  liable  to  become  arenas  of 
controversy  ?  And 

ministryJmt  that  which  flows  from  the  gift,  and  presence,  and  power 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Which  is  most  scriptural  ? 

*  Scattered  by  the  wickedness  of  men  and  the  unscriptural  inter 
vention  of  princes,  having  been  never  in  Saxon  England  founded  on 
any  true  basis,  it  was  buried  under  the  heaps  of  Popery,  from  which 
it  never  half  emerged. 

f  As  in  the  Ephesians,  Christ  gave  some  apostles,  some  prophets, 
some  pastors  and  teachers.  What  passage  warrants  their  appoint 
ment  by  men  ? — "Let  two  or  three  speak,"  says  the  Apostle,  "  and 
let  the  rest  judge." 

J  The  Socinian,  as  well  as  the  Church  of  England,  so  called,  is  to 
be  judged  by  the  word  of  God.  "  If  a  man  come  and  bring  you  not 
this  doctrine,  neither  receive  him  into  your  house,  nor  bid  him  God 
speed."  The  writer  seems  to  forget  that  there  is  a  word  of  God  by 
which  what  men  say,  and  all  their  pretensions  to  the  Spirit,  or  to  be 
the  Church  of  God,  are  to  be  judged  of. 


95 

III. — Is  it  a  hindering  of  the  Spirit  of  Grod  to 
provide  against  this  confusion  by  submitting  the 
pretensions  of  gifted  persons  *  to  such  an  officer  in 
the  Church  as  Titus,  appointed  "  to  set  in  order  the 
things  that  are  wanting,  and  ordain  elders  in  every 
city  "  (Titus  i.  5)  ?  And, 

IV. — Pray  who  is  this  officer  among  you  ? 

A  clear  and  concise  answer  to  these  questions  will 
I  am  sure  be  acceptable  to  all  our  readers. 

Praying  that  in  these  times  of  temptation  through 
division,  God  may  render  the  perusal  of  this  corre 
spondence  (so  humble  at  least  on  my  part)  profitable 
to  His  children, 

I  remain,  my  dear  sir, 

Yours  in  Christian  truth  and  love, 
JAMES  KELLY. 


*  It  was  not  to  such  an  officer  that  this  task  is  allotted  in  the 
word  of  God.  Next  I  deny  that  Titus  was  any  constituted  officer  in 
the  Church,  or  other  than  a  temporary  delegate  of  the  Apostle.  The 
20th  of  Acts  proves  that  all  application  of  the  title  of  diocesan  epis 
copacy  to  Timothy  is  utterly  false,  for  the  Apostle  puts  the  elders  on 
their  own  responsibility,  without  the  smallest  reference,  and  to  the 
exclusion  of  any  such  officer.  Such  delegate  of  apostolic  authority 
does  riot  exist,  because  the  Apostle  is  not  here  to  delegate  hia,  what 
ever  the  various  measure  of  gift  may  be.  Episcopal  pretelftion  to  it 
is  to  be  avoided  for  a  very  simple  reason,  that  the  power  does  not 
exist,  and  the  kingdom  of  God  is  in  power.  If  those  who  are  called 
bishops  in  the  Establishment,  or  in  Popery,  examine  the  qualifica 
tions  and  source  of  mission  of  Timothy  and  Titus  as  given  by  the 
apostles,  a  very  small  share  of  modesty,  not  to  say  of  truth,  would 
make  them  resign  all  pretensions  to  being  in  the  same  position. 
Their  service  after  all  was  very  different  in  its  character,  but  in  both 
instances  temporary.  Do  the  archbishops  or  bishops  seriously  pre 
tend  to  confer  the  Holy  Ghost  on  men  marked  out  by  prophecy,  when 
a  bishop  named  by  the  prime  minister  is  consecrated  ?  It  is  serious 
trifling  with  these  subjects — a  grave  thing  to  pretend  to  give,  or  to 
have  received,  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  above  all  to  take  one's  place  in 
the  Church  of  God  as  doing  so.  I  tremble  in  thinking  of  the  respon 
sibility  ;  and  the  facts — the  Lord  keep  me  from  judging. 


WORKS    BY   J.    N.    D. 

Evidence  from  Scripture  of  the  Passing  Away  of  the  Pre 
sent  Dispensation.     3d. 

Divine  Mercy  to  the  Church  and  to  Israel.     6d. 

Considerations  on  the  Religious  Movements  of  the  Day.  fid. 

French  New  Testament.     A  New  Translation.     3s.  &  4s. 

German  New  Testament.     New  Translation,     4s. 

Synopsis  of  Books  of  Bible.    Vuls.  1-4,  cloth,  each,  7s.  fid. 

Dialogues  on  theEssays  and  Reviews    2nd  ed.  8vo,  cl.,  5s. 

Nature  and  Unity  of  the  Church  of  Christ.     3d. 

Is  the  Law  the  Rule  of  the  Christian's  Life  ?     3d. 

Separation  from  Evil  God  s  Principle  of  Unity.     Id. 
i'  On  Ministry;  its  Nature,  Source,  Power,  &c.     6d. 
9  Resurrection!  the  Fundamental  Truth  of  the  Gospel.     2d. 
i    Dispensation  of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven.     2d. 

Reflections  on  the  Present  Ruin  of  the  Church.     2d. 
;    The  Gifts  of  the  Spirit  remaining  among  the  Saints.     2d. 

Christian  Liberty  of   Preaching  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.    2d. 
'  •  The  Claims  of  the  Church  of  England.     Is'  fid. 

A  Letter  to  the  saints  in  London,  as  to  the  Presence  of  the 

'*  Holy  Ghost  in  the  Church.     2d. 

Exposition  of  Matchup  xxiv,  xxv.     3d. 
f   Notes  on  the  Book  $  Revelations.     Cloth,  2s, 

Melchisedec  Priesthood  of  Christ.     2d. 

The  Believer  enterjjpg  into  God's  Rest      Id. 

A  Dialogue  on  Christian  Perfection.     fid. 

The  Irrationalism  of, Infidelity.     Clotii,  6s. 

Notes  and   Expositions.     Cloth,  Is.  (;d. 

Two  Warnings  and  an  Example.      Id. 

Substance  of  a  Lecture  on  John  v.     Id. 

A  Lecture  on  Prophecy      2d. 

Gosp*\  Sermons.     Is.  fid. ;   cloth,  gilt,  2s. 

God's  Grace  and  Man's  Need.     Id. 

Inspiration  of  the  Scriptures.    New  ed.,  with  additions,    fid. 


On  the  Aposiacv.     l|d. 
What  is  t lie  Church?     3d. 
Superstition  not  Faith.    _d. 
Types  of  Leviticus.     3d. 
A"  Collection  of  Tracts.    3s. 
Eternal  Punishment.     Id. 


Discipline.     l|d. 
The  Feasts,     fid. 
Father  and  Prodigal.     Id. 
Romans  viii,  andix.     2d. 
Notes  on  the  Offerings.    2d. 
Obedience      2d. 
On  Worship.     3d. 
The  Rapture  of  the  Saints      fid 
Brethren  and  their  Reviewers.     Gd. 
The  Righteousness  of  God.     Gd. 

Further   Remarks   upon   Righteousness  and    Law:    with 
Answers  to  Different  Objections.     6d. 


