a 
A 
Al 
S) 
) 
“2] 
Zi 
b 
cy 
be 
Fa 
= 
a 
S) 
| 
ai 


THE MOST 


ELOQUENT SERMONS 


OF THE 


GREATEST LIVING PREACHERS;~ 


REY. Wi, MORLEY PUNSHON, DD. 


REV. HENRY WARD BEECHER. ' 
REV. C. H. SPURGEON. 


CONTAINING 


SELECT PULPIT ORATIONS DELIVERED ON VARIOUS OCCASIONS, FROM A 
GREAT VARIETY OF TEXTS OF SCRIPTURE, AND INCLUDING DR. 
PUNSHON’S FAMOUS “FAREWELL SERMON,” PREACHED 
IN THE METROPOLITAN CHURCH, TORONTO, 

PREVIOUS TO HIS DEPARTURE 
FOR ENGLAND; 


WITH 


PORTRAITS AND BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES OF EACH DIVINE; 


AND 


An Introduction to Dr. Punshon’s Sermons, 


BY THE REV. W. H. MILBURN, 


REVISED AND CORRECTED BY THE RESPECTIVE AUTHORS, 


TORONTO, ONT. 
PUBLISHED BY A. H. HOVEY & CO. 


GENERAL AGENT FOR NEW Brunswick—R. A. H. MORROW, Sr. Joun, N.B. 
1873. 


PUBLISHERS’ NOTICE. 


THE Publishers having been repeatedly solicited to issue a Collection of Ser- 
mons by DR. PUNSHON, have deemed the occasion of his departure from 
Canada—the field of his recent successful labors~-an appropriate one for 
complying with this urgent request. 

Sincerely regretted by hosts of admiring friends, that earnest and eloquent 
preacher of Divine truth has departed from our midst, perhaps never to return. 
The Publishers beg leave, therefore,’ to offer the present collection of his Ser- 
mons (which is the only extensive collection ever published), carefully collated 
and revised, with the hope that it may serve as a MEMORIAL VOLUME of our 
departed friend. To make it more acceptable to all denominations, and to 
afford an opportunity for a comparison of the relative merits of our greatest 
living preachers, late and select sermons of Beecher and Spurgeon have been 
added ; and to the thousands of admirers in Canada of these three great pulpit 
orators, the publishers beg leave most respectfully.to dedicate the work, with 


the hope that it may carry to its readers the richest blessings imaginable. 


TORONTO, JULY, 1873. 


ction of Ser- 
arture from 


ate one for 


d eloquent 
r to return, 
of his Ser- 
lly collated 
ME of our 
ns, and to 
Ir greatest 
have been 
eat pulpit 
ork, with 


le, 


CONTENTS. 


PUNSHON’S SERMONS. 


PAGE 


INTRODUCTORY MEMOIR OF DR. PUNSHON ....cccsseseee « 


I, 
II. 


MEMORIES OF THE WAY ...ccccccccccccsccccccccccveccses 
THE BELIEVER’S SUFFICIENCY... cccccccsccccccccccese 


. THE MISSION OF THE PULPIT .....ccecrcccccccccececees 
. SOLICITUDE FOR THE ARK OF GOD.....ccccccesccccecs 
. THE INCARNATION OF CHRIST .......ceceee coccecceees 
. ZEAL IN THE CAUSE OF CHRIST .......cccccccsccedtecee 
. THE CHRISTIAN'S INHERITANCE ....... ees eeeecvees eee 


THE HEAVENLY CONQUEROR ...cccccccccccccccsescccess 


. THE CHRISTIAN’S DEATH, LIFE, PROSPECTS & DUTY 


THE APOSTLE'S GROUND OF TRUST .....ccccscccecccees 


. THE EFFECTS OF PIETY ON A NATION...ccccccccceceee 
. THE PROPHET OF HOREB—HIS LIFE AND ITS LESSONS arr 


FAREWELL SERMON e@eeeeeeee eee @eeceoeoeeeeeoeeec eos eeeeveeeeeeene 


BEECHER’S SERMONS. 


MEMOIR OF HENRY WARD BEECHER .........ccecccsevcccees 


I, 


IT, 


Ill. 


IV. 
V. 
VIL 


PMO REPAID Gy icc la sancdceesiiplesocsohvenseetectewsesces 
EXTERIOR AND INTERIOR DIVINE PROVIDENCE ..... 
REASON IN RELIGION. «..cstevessdocsncscossscscssessnsaps 
TUTE WOE OR’ LOWALS.. «isasueucdcnesssenvsVércsnnscanecosan 
THE HARMONY OF JUSTICE AND LOVE ......seaeseeees 
LOVE, THE COMMON LAW OF THE UNIVERSE..)..... 


ix 
21 
39 
58 
77 


195 


251 


267 
271 
290 
308 
328 
35° 
373 


o-_ 


iV CONTENTS, 


SPURGEON’S SERMONS. 
PAGE 


MEMOIR OF REV. C. H. SPURGEON......cccccecscecceecese « © 40K 
I, TRAVAILING FOR SOULS ...cccscccccsccecccescsccvceseses 405 

II, YOUR OWN SALVATION, ..cccccecccccccccccecececcccssecee 425 
Ill, THE SIN OF GADDING ABOUT .... ccccsccecccccsccvseees 44g 


IV. NUMBER ONE THOUSAND, OR ‘‘BREAD ENOUGH AND 
TO MAND” Bi FEeKELOCERUNEACEEELC CERREE SERRE REL CUREEEEHES 454 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


PORTRAIT OF DR. PUNSHON......0eceeeeeeeeeeesRONMTISPIECE. 
CHURCH .....e00- eeebavete RSV CEREGEMSORENCEbS SHERRY EROS vageRedade-0Oe 
THE ‘HOLY, BIBLE.” ..ccccccccscccccccees hPL ER aR eeveereeteseee AiO 
CHRIST REBUKING THE PHARISEES........... wet beconneeeeniae 
THE ASCENSION .......000. CeeRECbeReVeedED cachbverceuhtieesenecnune 
PORTRAIT OF HENRY WARD BEECHER.......... ohecctn mee 
CHRIST BLESSING LITTLE CHILDREN.......scccceeesessseeees 270 
CHRIST BEARING THE CROSS ......ceeeesses be daxeecciaeeucneee eee 
GUUROEE cic cksccscccsssesespecsecce Lismiveceneccm bonne 
PORTRAIT OF REV. C. H. SPURGEON........45 evens beV Vee rcne ee 
COURGH i cssvcdernseeecaues ple etree rag weer, Cree reer ee 
“SUFFER LITTLE CHILDREN TO COME UNTO ME."......0++ 424 
MARTYRDOM OF LATIMER,.ccccccccccccccseccceescccccccevecece 498 he 


eeree 


| 
v2) 


og Ee eee ee 
CREME 
STIS ET & 


AL 


WILLIAM MORLEY PUNSHON. 


—— 


INTRODUCTION. 


MEMOIR OF DR. PUNSHON, 


BY REV. WM. H. MILBURN. 


aN a bright sunshiny morning I drove from my 
lodgings, Little Ryder Street, St. James’, two or 
three miles in a south-westerly direction to Brixton 

~— Hill Wesleyan Chapel. The edifice was that day to 
be dedicated to the worship of Sey God, and the’ 

reacher on the occasion was the Rev. Witt1am Moriry 

unsHON. I had heard much of him, and was naturally de- 
sirous to listen to one who was called the most eloquent of 
living Wesleyan preachers, 

As I reached the chapel in advance of the time for com- 
mencing the service, I entered the vestry, where I was 
introduced, among others, to the preacher I had come to 
hear. He seemed a man about five feet ten inches in height, 
rather inclined to corpulency, with by no means a striking 
or expressive face when in repose, and possessed of a voice 
rather husky and not at all prepossessing. 

His dress was that of ail Wesleyan ministers in England, 
closely approaching the style of the clergy of the established 
church—the invariable white neck-tie surmounting the uni- 
form of black. The appointed hour arrived and we entered 
the chapel. 

The prayers of the church of England—excepting the 
pie were read by the superintendent of the circuit from 

A 


x INTRODUCTION, 


a desk on one side of the chancel. Mr, Punshon then mounted 
a desk on the other side of the chancel, gave out a hymn, and 
offered a brief extemporaneous prayer, 

His reading was not at all impressive, and I began to 
wonder whether, indeed, he could be an orator. In truth, I 
had been so often disappointed that I had almost come to 
regard a reputation for eloquence as prima facie evidence 
against a man’s possessing it, and I was tempted to think in 
this case, that I was once more befooled. The preacher took 
his text and proceeded with the discourse. <A brief exegetical 
introduction was followed by the announcement of the points 
he meant to treat. The arrangement of ‘the sermon was 
textual, methodical and Wesleyan. The English take far 
less latitude in such matters than we. The Wesleyans are 
Wesleyans indeed, imbued with the spirit and almost ad- 
hering to the letter of our Great; Founder. Well-nigh every 
sermon has its three heads, and each head its three sub- 
divisions, and at the conclusion of the third “thirdly,” comes 
a close, searching, and practi¢al application. This style 
seems to be considered almost indispensable to orthodoxy, 
and forms a striking contrast to the large, often latitudin- 
arian, and frequently helter-skelter freedom of style allowed 
in this country, where all manner of truth, and even untruth, 
is preached from any text that may be selected, under the 
plea that the style is “ topical.” 

The form of the English pulpit obliges the preacher to ad- 
here to a pulpit manner. It is modelled upon the shape of 
the little wooden boxes we see in Roman Catholic churches 
in this country, affording room for one person only—access 
to it being gained by a long flight of winding stéps, and 
when you have toiled to the dizzy height, you find yourself 
overlooking the galleries, and perched, perhaps twenty feet 
above the floor, Not a little self-control must be practiced 
by the preacher, and he is compelled, whether he will or 
not, to pay a good deal of attention to the laws of gravita- 
tion, and other decorous regulations, or the stern penalty of 
a tumble may be enforced upon him. 

The platform of this country (for our pulpits are nothing 
more), in its slight elevation above the floor, its nearness to 
the people, its susceptibility to impression from the audience, 
and the vantage-ground it affords the preacher for imbuing 


the | 
upon 
the e 
of the 
sym 
’ Th 
after 
illust 
as we 
life, 1 
To 
to mq 
and | 
of wa 
Engl 
some 
me, 
stanc 
tages 
while 
in ilh 
of th 
of aX 
Chris 
them 
educ 
tions 
terin 
me) 
or 5 
T 
man 
flow 
bett 
thos 
ture 
L 
a st 
he ° 
vol 
dai 


1mounted 
lymn, and 


began to 
n truth, I 
b come to 
evidence 
» think in 
ther took 
xegetical 
ne points 
mon was 
take far 


ullowed 
truth, 
ler the 


‘to ad- 
ape of 
urches 
“access 
s, and 
urself’ 
y feet 
cticed 
rill or 
avita- 
lty of 


thing 
288 to 
ence, 
Ung 


INTRODUCTION. xi 


the hearers with his own sympathies, is a great advance 
upon the English desk, and a near approach to the amdo of 
the early Church. The difference, as to the standing-ground 
of the preachers of the two countries, is significant—almost 
symbolic—of the difference of their styles, 

The English seem to fancy that our method, in its reach 
after the people, its disloyalty to technical rule, its range of 
illustration, and its disuse of a strict theological phraseology, 
as well as in its free adoption of the language of common 
life, borders upon a reprehensible louseness. 

To the American, on the other hand, the close adherance 
to models, the almost single variation between a dogmatic 
and horatory style, and the employment of a limited range 
of words, not so much Scriptural as conventional, make the 
English pulpit appear formal. No doubt each could learn 
something of advantage from the other; and it seemed to 
ine, that Mr. Punshon occupied the enviable position of 
standing midway between the two, with many of the advan- 
tages of both. He is systematic, yet untrammelled, and 
while technical in his arrangement, he is still free and varied 
in illustration, Confining himself to the legitimate themes 
of the pulpit, he at the same time does not despise the use 
of canceat literature. His aim seems to be to make men 
Christians—either to convert them from sin, or to establish 
them in holiness, not to teach them political economy, to 
educate them in esthetics, to afford them brilliant disquisi- 
tions in metaphysical science, or to enforce on them the flat- 
tering assurance, that the private soul (that is, the essential 
me) is higher and grander than society, state, church, law, 
or Scripture 

The staple of his discourses, when I heard him, concerned 
man’s spiritual and eternal welfare, and did not consist in 
flowers, stars, breezes or clouds. I should say that he is 
better read in the writings of St. Paul and St. dole. than in 
those of the Gnostics, and that he holds the canon of Scrip- 
ture to be binding upon men, as arule of faith and practice. 

As to politics, | have a suspicion (but I can only state it as 
a suspicion, for I heard himsay nothing on the subject) that 
he prefers the English Revolution of 1688 to the French Re- 
volution of 1789; and that he holds the powers that be are or- 
dained of God, and not of the Devil; and therefore if he taught 


Xi INTRODUCTION. 


anything on the subject, that he would teach fealty to the 
constitution of the land in which he lives, loyalty to the law, 
obedience to constituted authority, as the duty of every good 
citizen, and not, that insubordination and revolution are the 
crowning glories ot every regenerate soul. He is liberal, 
but his liberality is not the equivalent of a contempt for or- 
thodoxy; and while some of his countrymen may esteem 
him a progressive, I hardly think his progressiveness consists 
in the recently exounded doctrine of consistency, “be true 
to yourself to-day--no matter what you said or did yester- 
day "—that is to say, progress and the weathercéck are one 
and the same thing. 

As Mr. Punshon advanced in his discourse on that pleas- 
ant June morning, an occasional emphasis, applied with 
judgment, betokened the practical speaker, and the finish 
of his sertences betrayed thorough preparation. As he 
warmed to his work, quickening at the sdme time the gait 
of his articulation, you found him gaining a strong hold not 
only upon your attention but upon your feelings; and you 
discovered that underneath the ample and rather loose folds 
of adipose tissue with which his outer nan is invested, there 
are great stores of electrical power. He possesses that 
attribute indispensable to the orator, for which we have no 
better name than magnetic. You are rocted as by a spell, 
and surrender for a time the guidance of your own thoughts. 
You have dropped the helm of your mind, for a more skiltul 
pilot has for the nonce taken your place at the tiller. 

Occasionally, you find the speaker’s power over you going 
to such lengths as to control your respiration, and you 
breathe as he breathes, or as he gives you liberty. Whoever 
has known the delicious pain of a long, deep inhalation— 
half a sigh of relief, half a welcome ot the outer world for 
the time forgotten—while listening to a speaker with such 
rapt earnestness that every faculty of mind and sense is con- 


centrated in the one act of hearing, has felt what oratory is. - 


Te has felt it, but can he describe it? He might as weil 
attempt to describe the ‘thrill of love or rapture. I doubt 
not Mr. Punshon has showed many people what oratory is, 
and made them to know the power of the orator; but I 
uestiun much if he can teach them the power of his art, or 
how to analyze and define it. It is not the power of intel- 


ealty to the 
to the law, 
every good 
tion are the 
> is liberal, 
mpt for or- 
aay esteem 
ess consists 
y, “be true 
did yester- 
ick are one 


that pleas- 
plied with 
| the finish 
n. Ags he 
ne the gait 
ix hold not 
}; and you 
loose folds 
sted, there 
esses that 
e have no 
by a spell, 
thoughts. 
ore skiltul 
er. 
you going 
and you 
Whoever 
1alation— 
world for 
with such 
ase is con- 
ratory is. - 
t as weil 


"9 
IS art, or 
' of intel- 


INTRODUCTION. Xiil 


lect, for I have seen and heard nothing from him extraor- 
dinary as an intellectual production. It does not lie in his 
taste—I am not sure if that would bear the test of rigid 
criticism. It is not in the exhibition of stores of learning; 
his life has been too busy and practical to enable him to gain 
great stock of lore. It is not in the tricks of a charlatan or 
the skill of an actor, for Mr. Punshon is a sincere, devout, 
and godly man. ‘The charm of eloquence retreats from 
the scrutiny of analysis as life retires from the knife of the 
anatomist. 

Before he has reached his major “thirdly,” it is all over 
with your independent consciousness; you have yielded at 
discretion, and are the prisoner of his feeling. I am half in- 
clined to believe that his own intellect is in the same plight, 
aud that memory acts as the warder of the brain, under writ 
from the lordly soul. You have thrown criticism to the 
dogs; your ear has exchanged itself for an eye; the bone and 
flesh of your forehead become delicately thin, as the lamin 
of the cornea, and your brain seems endowed with the power 
of the iris. You enjoy the ecstacy: of vision, and as the 
speaker stops you recover yourself enough to feel that you 
have had an apocalyptic hour. 

It seems to me that the true measure of eloquence is found, 
not so much in what is said as in what is suggested ; not so 
much: in the speaker's ability to convey to you an idea, as to 
suffuve you with the glow of a sentiment; not so much in 
the truth which is uttered, as in the soul behind the truth, 
of which you become, for the time, a sharer. 

Mr. Punshon is much more of an orator than any man I 
heard in England. In society he is simple, quiet and genial; 
his excellent good sense atid unaffected piety deliver him 
from the snares of egotism, and the foolish weakness of self- 
conceit. The chalice of praise turns many a great man’s 
head. The goblets which both the English and American 

ublic have offered to Mr. Punshon are huge and brimming; 

ut if the contents have affected him I have not discovered 
it. J have an idea that he gives close and scrupulous heed 
to the Apostle’s admonition, “ Let no man among you think 
more highly of himself than he ought to think, but let him 
think soberly, righteously, according as God has dealt to 
every man the measure of faith.” 


a 


INTRODUCTION. 


Mr. Punshon is not as robust as he ‘ooks. He is not able 
to study closely more than three hours at a time, and tre- 
quently not more than that out of the twenty-four hours, 
He prepares himself for the rostrum and pulpit with the 
most scrupulous and exhaustive care. I should say that the 
greater part of his sermons and lectures are committed to 
memory, and delivered almost word for word, as they were 
beforehand composed. His recollection is, therefore, at once 
quick and tenacious. This plan, while it insures a higher 
average of public performance and saves him from man 
mortifying failures, at the same time shuts him out from the 
ground of highest power. 

Mr. Punshon was born (I now quote from reliable autho- 
rity) on the 29th of May, 1824, and successfully passed 
his examination for the Wesleyan ministry in the year 1845. 
He is a native of Doncaster, and is related on the mother’s 
side, to the Morleys of that town, and since of Hull, Sir 
Tsanc Morley being his uncle. The only child of his parents, 
he early displayed that wonderful memory for which he is 
now so remarkably distinguished, and a propensity to store 
it with facts which rarely interest mere boys. At the Don- 
caster Grammar School, where he was educated, he is said 
not to have displayed any surprising proficiency ; but when 
still a child he was able to name nearly all the members of 
the House of Commons, with the places for which they sat, , 
and the color of their politics. 

In early life he associated himseif w:th the Wesleyan 
Methodists, to which religious body his fa.aily belonged ; 
but public affairs continued to be his ruling passion, and the 
most surprising thing is, that his oratory, instead of adorn- 
ing the Methodist chapel, should not have been electrifying 
the chapel of St. Stephen. When his grandfavher and uncles 
removed to their establishment in Hull, he was placed in 
their counting-house as junior clerk. He may have had 
talents for business, but his inclination ran in another direc- 
tion. During the three years that he was supposed to be 
making out invoices and footing up ledgers, he was absorbed 
in newspapers; and the only account he cared to keep was 
of the way in which the representatives of ihe people voted 
in parliament. 

In the debates nobody was better posted up. The 


S not able 
bP, and tre- 
ur hours, 
with the 
vy that the 

itted to 
hey were 
, 4t once 
a higher 
bm many 
from the 


le autho- 
passed 
Par 1845, 
mother’s 
Hull, Sir 
parents, 
ich he ig 
to store 
the Don- 
» is said 
ut when 
nbers of 
hey sat, ‘ 


esleyan 
longed 3 
and the 
adorn- 
rifyine 
uncles 
ced in 
re had 
' direc- 
to be 
sorbed 
Pp was 
voted 


The 


INTRODUCTION. XV 


temptation of a daily newspaper was irresistible; and while 
the other clerks were deep in figures, he was culling figures 
of speech from the orators of the Reformed Parliament— 
watching the opening genius of Gladstone and Macaulay, 
noting the maturer excellences of Peel and Palmerston, and 
marking the finest flights of Shiel and O’Connell for his 
own. The predilections of a young politician are seldom of 
much importance; but it so happened that young Punshon’s 
devotion to newspaper studies threw him into the society of 
three young men who were earnest disciples of the then 
newly born conservative opinions of Sir Robert Peel and his 
adherents, and who held weekly meetings to strengthen each 
other in their political faith, Once a month one of them 
read a paper to the rest on a given subject; and though not 
more numerous than the celebrated knights of the thimble 
of Tooley Streci, they called themselves “'The Menticultural 
Society.” Two of the three survive, one being a Wesleyan 
minister, and the other aclergyman of the Established Church. 
In these weekly discourses and monthly lectures, Mr. Punshon 
first distinguished himself'as possessed of those faculties which 
have made him eminent. Nor did he and his associates con- 
fine themselves to politics; for there is in existence a small 
volume of poetry which they published conjointly, and to 
which Mr. Punshon contributed a piece entitled “The 
Orphan,” of considerable promise. About the same time he 
received, under the ministry of the Rev. Samuel Romilly 
Hall, those impressions which resulted in his religious con- 
version. He then became a Sunday school teacher, and 
subseauently a local preacher. He began to preach when 
he was eighteen years of age, and exhibited much ability in 
the pulpit.. His first attempt was made at Ellerby, near 
Hull, and it was so successful as to cause the sermon to live 
in the memory of at least some who heard it, for they talked 
about it years afterward, when Mr. Punshon visited the 
place. Under such circumstances there could be little doubt 
that his vocation was not in the counting-house. But still he 
was kept in the commercial circle, for from his relatives in 
Hull he was sent to an uncle at Sunderland, to follow up the 
pursuit on which he had entered. 
_ But the books in which he delighted were neither ledger 
nor day-books, His refined fancy and polished taste made 


Xvi INTRODUCTION. 


him an ardent admirer of the sublime and beautiful in litera- 
ture, and at the same time his religious views led him to 
employ his talents more than ever in the preaching of the 
Gospel ; and as certain rivers are lost in morasses, we lose 
sight of his commercial career somewhere among the coal- 
pits and iron-works of the North. 

During these events he had been bereaved of both 
parents ; and his grandfather, at length convinced that secu- 
lar business was not his vocation, made liberal arrangements 
for his being trained for the ministry in the Wesleyan Insti- 
tution, after a preliminary course of instruction at the house 
of his uncle, the Rev. Benjamin Clough, at Deptford. 

There, however, he did not long remain; it being found, 
probably either that his genius was ill-suited to the res- 
traints of an academical course, or that by self-culture, and 
the help of his ministerial relative, he had attained a profi- 
ciency which, with talents such as his, superseded a more 
formal training. In the spring of 1845 a secession of the 

arishioners from the Episcopal Church at Morden, Kent, 

ormed the nucleus of a Wesleyan church in that town, and 
Mr. Punshon was invited to accept the pastoral cha ze of 
the seceders. He complied with the request, and under his 
ministry their numbers so greatly increased that. a commo- 
dious chapel was erected, and always well filled. It was 
only for a short time, however, that he remained in this 
place, for in the autumn of the same year the Conference, 
under whose jurisdiction the Morden church seems to have 


‘eome, sent him to Whitehaven, where he resided two years, 


and attracted large congregations. From thence, in 1847, 
he was removed to the city of Carlisle, and two years after- 
ward to Newcastle-on-Tyne. In both of these great centres 
of population Mr. Punshon at once acquired a worthy name, 
and became a mighty power for good, as well as at Sunder- 
land, Gateshead, Shields, and the other towns of the dis- 
trict, where he never had to preach or lecture to empty, or 
only partially occupied pews and benches. While stationed 
at Newcastle, being then in his twenty-fifth year, he mar- 
ried a daughter of Mr. Vicars, of Gateshead, a very esti- 
mable and highly accomplished lady, whose premature death 
in 1858 threw the darkest shadow across Mr. Punshon’s 
path, just when he had been appointed to a Metropolitan 


I RR a 
sic toa aaa 


in litera- 
1 him to 
g of the 
we lose 
the coal- 


of both 
hat secu- 
gements 
an Insti- 
, house 


g found, 
the res- 
ure, and 
| &@ profi- 
@ more 
1 of the 
1, Kent, 
vn, and 
1a ze of 
nder his 
ommo- 
It was 
in this 
erence, 
o have 
years, 
1847, 
8 after- 
entres 
name, 
under- 
he dis- 
ty, or 
ioned 
» mar- 
V esti- 
death 
shon’s 
olitan 


XVil 


INTRODUCTION, 


circuit, where enlarged usefulness and new honors awaited 
the gifted and ardent ambassodor of Christ ; when most 
unwelcome, the King of Terrors came and took the angel 
of the pastor’s home away, to her sister-spirits in glory. 

From Newcastle Mr. Punshon was removed in 1851 to 
Sheffield, and thence to Leeds in 1855. It was while he was 
at Sheffield that the fame of the preacher became noised 
abroad; and his services were soon in very frequent request 
for special sermons, and also for lectures. It was, we be- 
lieve, in the character of a lecturer that he appeared for the 
first time in London, some twenty years ago. We well 
recollect the circumstance of his standing upon the platform 
of Exeter Hall, to discourse to the members of the Young 
Men’s Christian Association on the Prophet of Horeb. It 
was not, strictly speaking, a lecture; but an oration of ex- 
treme brilliancy, suited in a high degree to captivate the 
minds and find its way to the affections of a youthful audi- 
ence; and we never remember to have heard such rapturous 
applause as that with which the thousands there assembled 
greeted each glowing period. The whole of the oration 
was delivered memoriter, and with extraordinary fluency ; 
and such was the literal fidelity with which the speaker 
had followed the manuscript, which was either in his pocket 
or at home, that when it shortly afterward appeared in 
print, it would have been difficult for the most retentive 
memory of the closest listener to have pointed out a sen- 
tence that the lecturer had not uttered. By this single 
performance Mr. Punshon established a Metropolitan repu- 
tation outside his own denomination, which was increased 
some two or three years afrerward by his second lecture in 
Exeter Hall, before the same Association, on the Immortal 
Dreamer, John Bunyan ; and, later still, by that most master- 
ly oration on the Huguenot, which tens of thousands in almost 
all parts of England and America have listened to with 
unbounded delight. 

The following ten years of the great preacher's life 
were devoted to the preaching of the Gospel in the various 
cities and towns of Great Britain and Ireland. During this 
period he visited all of the larger places, and many of less 
note. His reputation was now becoming thoroughly estab- 

lished as one of the leading pulvit orators of Great Britain, 


Se LSP IAI TL LET EDEN TAD AER As BITTE iDEA i 


Xvill INTRODUCTION. 
and the simple announcement of his intention to fill the 
pulpit on any occasion, was sufficient to crowd the edifice 
to its utmost capacity. Occasionally he appeared upon the 
rostrum as & lecturer—a field which allows greater scope to 
his imagination, and one in which his genius seems equally 
at home as in the pulpit. 

It was during these years that Mr. Punshon made a 
tour of Continental Europe, visiting France, the Rhine, 
Switzerland, Italy, ete. This period of reereation, though 
one of rest and enjoyment to the indefatigable preacher, 
was not by any means without its beneficial results to the 
religious and literary world, for the orator has drawn largely 
from his experiences at this time for illustrations in his 
discourses ; and his lecture of “ Florence and her Memo- 
ries,” was suggested by his adventures in that city. 

But Mr. Punshon’s fame had by this time spread beyond 
the narrow confines of the two islands in which his labours 
had up to this time been principally spent. His reputation 
had crossed the broad expanse of the ocean, and an earnest 
desire was expressed on this side of the water that they 
might be permitted to listen to the appeals of the eloquent 
divine. Yielding to these solicitations, Mr. Punshon deter- 
mined to visit the United States and Canada, and sailed for 
Canada in the spring of 1868. His career among us is too 
well known to need any extended notice here. His eloquence 
was equal to the expectations, and his reputation was fully 
maintained. He achieved a great success, and was chosen 
in 1869 President of the Wesleyan Conference of Canada, 
He preached and lectured in a great number of the cities 
and towns of the Dominion, and was instrumental in infus- 
ing a new life, and enlarged vigor and membership, into 
the Wesleyan Churches throughout the country. One of 
his noted achievements was the projection, and subsequent 
successful erection, through his earnest and unflagging zeal, 
of the famous ‘“ Metropolitan Church” in Toronto, a 
costly and beautiful structure, unsurpassed in architec- 
tural effect by any church on the Continent. This noble 
edifice stands a monument alike to the indefatigable energy 
of Dr. Punshon, and to the liberality of the citizens of 
Toronto, | 
While residing in Toronto, Mr. Punshon was married 


ee EL 
«ls ens cc a cla ities - 


) fill the 
ne edifice 
upon the 

scope to 
3 equally 


made a 
+ Rhine, 
, though 
reacher, 
s to the 
| largely 
18 in hig 
’ Memo- 


beyond 
labours 
outation 
earnest 
iat they 
loquent 
1 deter- 
jled for 
3 is tao 
quence 
as fully 
chosen 
Janada, 
e cities 
. infus- 
p, into 
One of 
equent 
g zeal, 
ito, a 
chitec- 
noble 
nergy 
ens of 


arried 


INTRODUCTION. xix 


to the sister of his late lamented wife—a marriage formerly 
forbidden by English law, but since rendered legal by more 


liberal enactments. Mr. Punshon was destined, however, 
to undergo the anguish of another domestic affliction, and 
shortly after followed this wife also to the grave. He was 
blessed with several children by his first marriage—three 
sons and onedaughter. The University of Cobourg conferred 
upon Mr. Punshon, during his residence in Canada, the 
degree of Doctor of Divinity. 

Dr. Punshon made several visits to the United States, 
lecturing and preaching, and on every occasion was greeted 
with the acclamations of his audiences. Offers of very high 
salaries, however, failed to induce him to settle in the 
States, though repeatedly solicited by a people who are 
never slow to appreciate talent, or to remunerate it with a 
fitting reward, But his associations there, as he informs 
us, were of the most pleasant and agreeable nature. 

On Sabbath morning, the 11th of May, 1873, Dr. Punshon 
delivered his farewell sermon, at the Metropolitan Church, 
in Toronto, previous to his departure for England. In a 
pathetic and touching address, he urged his hearers to 
steadfastness and increased zeal in the cause of Christ, that 
his labour amongst them might not prove to have been in 
vain ; and in conclusion, in simple and touching language, 
which drew tears to many ar eye, he bade them an earnest 
and affectionate farewell. The people of Canada will offer 
a fervent prayer, in which not Wesleyans alone, but all 
denominations will join, that this painful separation may 
be but for a brief term ; and also, that wherever Dr. Pun- 
shon’s lot may be cast, and wherever his labours may be 
spent, that lot may be one of continued happiness and pros- 
perity, and those labours crowned with an abundant 
measure of success, to the honour and glory of God, aud 
the furtherance of His kingdom upon earth. 

With one or two exceptions, perhaps there is no living 
minister possessed of so much popular power as Mr. Pun- 
shon. It’ is something wonderful and grand to witness the 
spell of his genius upon miscellaneous audiences of from 
three to five thousand people. In the pulpit he is unques- 
tionably a master, and only second to a very few preachers 
of the age. So accurate and elaborate is almost every 


xX ' INTRODUCTION, 


sentence, and so appropriate and polished every illustiative 
simile, that it may be confidently said he writes out and 
commits to memory every sermon that he delivers. What- 
ever he undertakes, he does well. Whether it is in the 

reaching of an ordinary sermon in a Methodist chapel, or 
in the delivery of an ostensibly popular discourse in some great 
public building, or as taking part in the meeting of some 
benevolent or religious association, or as a lecturer occu- 
pying the rostrum before thousands of delighted hearers, 
he is always earnest, always energetic, always effective. 
Vigorous, inventive, and impassioned, he adapts himself to the 
versatile tastes of his auditory, not by any apparent effort, 
but by simplicity and strength, and by speaking right out 
the thoughts that are in him. He rouses every passion, 
touches every emotion, and awakens every sympathy in 
the hearts of his hearers. 

With God’s blessing, Dr. Punshon has yet, according to 
the English standard, full twenty of his best years before him. 
May he have length of days and fullness of power, so that 
he shall continue to grow in favor with God and man, is the 
hearty wish of his friend, 

W..H. Mirzvrn. 


Brooxtyn, N.Y., June, 1873. 


io ha Qe a 


tl 
a 
il 
Vv 
fl 
re 
c 
t 
( 
( 
] 
( 


lust: ative 
out and 
What- 
is in the 
hapel, or 
me great 
of some 
er occu- 
hearers, 
effective, 
elf to the 
it effort, 
ight out 
passion, 
athy in 


rding: to 
ore him. 
so that 
, 1s the 


BURN, 


NR a 
eM GL SES 
: Ce \ 


PUNSHON’S SERMONS. 


OP 


I. 
MEMORIES OF THE WAY. 


“And thou shalt remember all the way which the Lord thy God led thee 
these forty years in the wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove thee, to 
know what was in thine heart, whether thou wouldst kcep his command- 
ments, or no.’’—DeEvtT. viii. 2. 


4| PECULIAR solemnity would be attached to 
these words in their original utterance, espe- 

eat cially in the mind of the person who uttered 
them, for they were spoken under the shadow of 
approaching departure. Last words are proverbially 
impressive, and these were among the last words of the 
veteran Moses to the people of his charge and love. 
There had grown in his heart a strong affection for the 
children of Laval during his forty year’s administration 
of their affairs. He had watched over them with fatherly 
tenderness, and had guided chem through the intrica- 
cies of the desert, to the borders of the promised land. 
Often had he been wearied by their murmurings, often 
had he been provoked by their unbelief. He had been 
alternately the object of their mistrust and of their 
confidence, of their jealousy and of their enthusiasm, 
and yet their very waywardness only seemed the more 
warmly to endear them ; and, with a love stronger than 
death, he loved them unto the end. Aware that, by 


See a = re 


ee 


99 MEMORIES OF THE WAY. 


his unadvised speaking at the waters of Meribah, he 
had barred his own entrance into Canaan, and ani- 
mated with a passion for the welfare of his people, 
intenser as the time of their separation drew nearer, ne 
gathered them upon the plains of Moab, and in solemn 
and weighty words retraced the path they had trod, 
warned them against their besetting dangers, and 
exhorted them to fidelity in Jehovah’s service. In the 
midst of this advice, the words of the text occur, sum- 
moning them, so to speak, to take a mental pilgrimage 
over all the track which they had travelled, and to 
conneet it with beneficial uses which might influence 
their future lives. Such a review of the past is always 
wise and salutary when it is conducted in a becoming 
and prayerful spirit, and to such a review of the past, 
therefore, it is that we invite you to-day. We may not 
unprofitably accompany the children of Israel in their 
review of the way which they had trod; we may learn 
lessons in their company which may effectually benefit _ 
ourselves. In order that we may preserve some sort of 
system in our contemplations, we will notice, in the 
first instance, the remembrance of the way; secondly, 
the purpose of God’s providence in the journey; and, 
thirdly, the uses of the memory. 

I. In the first place, the REMEMBRANCE OF THE WAY. 
“Thou shalt remember all the way which the Lord thy 
God hath led thee these forty years in the wilderness.’ 
It is a wonderful faculty, this faculty of memory. Its 
acts seem to be of the nature of miracles wrought con- 
tinually for the conviction of unbelief. We cannot 
expound its philosophy, nor tell its dwelling-place, nor 
name the subtle chords which evoke it from its slum- 
bers. A snatch of music in the street, the sight of a 
modest flower or of an old tree, a word dropped casu- 
ally by a passer-by, a face that flits by us in the hurry- 
ing crowd, have summoned the.gone years to our side, 
and filled us in a moment with memories of divinest 
comfort or of deepest sorrow. The power of memory is 


eribah, he 
, and ani- 
8 people, 
hearer, he 
In solemn 
had trod, 
ers, and 
» In the 
ur, sum- 
Igrimage 
, and to 
Influence 
is always 
ecoming 
the past, 
may not 
in their 
ay learn 
r benefit | 
e sort of 
», In the 
condly, 
y; and, 


E WAY. 
brd thy 
‘ness,’”’ 
y. Its 
It con- 
annot 
e, nor 
slum- 
of a 
casu- 
urry- 
side, 
rinest 
ory ig 


MEMORIES OF THE WAY. 23 


lasting and is ‘fluential. A kindness has been done in 
secret; but that seed, dropped into the soil of memory, 
has borne fruitage in the gratitude of years. A harsh 
word or an inflicted injury, flung upon the memory, 
has rankled there into lawlessness and into sin. Oo 
man can be solitary who has memory. The poorest of 
us, if he have memory, is richer than he knows, for by 
it we can reproduce ourselves, be young even when the 
limbs are failing, and have all the past belonging to us 
when the hair is silvery and the eyes are dim. How 
can he be a sceptic or a materialist, for whom memory 
every moment raises the dead, and reses to surrender 
the departed years to the destroyer; communes with 
the loved ones though the shroud enfolds them; and 
converses with cherished voices which for long years 
have never spoken with tongues? I had almost said, 
but that I know the deep depravity of the human heart, 
how can he sin who has memory? For thoygh the mur- 
derer may stab his victim in secret, far from livin cane 
nesses, and may carefully remove from the polluted 
earth the foul traces of his crime, memory is a witness 
that he can neither gag nor stifle, and he bears about 
with him in his own terrible consciousness the blasted 
immortality of his being, Oh, it is a rare and a divine 
endowment! Memories of sanctity or sin pervade all 
the firmament of being. There is but the flitting 
moment in which to hope or to enjoy, but in the calen- 
dar of memory that moment.is all time. This, then, is 
the faculty which the Jewish law-giver calls up into 
exercise : “ Thou shalt remember all the way which the 
Lord thy God hath led thee these forty years in the 
wilderness.” And in truth there could be no grander 
history, nor one richer in instruction, than theirs. From 
the time when they groaned in bondage, and their cry 
went up to God, until now, when, after forty years’ 
vicissitudes, they stood upon the threshold of the land 
of Canaan, each day would have its wonder and its lesson. 
They had been led by a way which they knew not; they 


2+ MEMORIES OF THE WAY. 


had seen the laws of nature suspended, and the mechan- 
ism of the firmament disorganized on their behalf. In 
Egypt they had quailed beneath the very Omnipotence 
which had delivered them, and they had crouched 
trembling at the base ot Sinai, while ever and anon 
loomed through the darkness the flashings forth Of the 
Divinity within. Sustained by perpetual miracle, 
delivered with an outstretched arm, with the barrenness 
behind and the plenty before them, they were to 
“remember the way which the Lord had led them in the 
wilderness.” 

Brethren, our own, if we will only think of it, has 
been an instructive history. There is much in the life 
of each of us, in its rest, and in its change, in its hazard, 
and in its deliverance, which will repay us if we revisit 
it to-day. Be it ours to recall the past, to recover the 
obliterated circumstance, to abide again at each halting 
place of our journey, to decipher the various inscrip- 
tions which the lapse of time has fretted almost to 
decay, to remember, as the Israelites, the way which the 
Lord hath led us. 

1. There would be in their history, in the first place, 
the remembrance: of favor, and by consequence of joy. 
All through their course they had had very special 
manifestations of the power and goodness of God. He 
had brought them out with a high hand from the pride 
and tyranny of Pharaoh, he had cleared a path for 
them through the obedient waters, the heavens had 
rained down sustenance, the rock had quenched their 
thirst; Jehovah’s presence had gone with them through 
the tangled desert path, by day in guiding cloud, 
by night in lambent flame; their raiment had not 
~ waxed old upon them, neither their foot swelled, for 
forty years. He had spoiled their enemies in their 
sight. Sihon, king of the Amorites, and Og, king of 
Bashan, had fallen before his power. When the law- 
giver gathered the tribes in the plains of Moab, he 
could say: ‘Not one thing of all that the Lord your 


€ mechan- 
ehalf. In 
nipotence 
crouched 
and anon 
rth of the 

miracle, 
arrénness 
were to 
em in the 


of it, has 
n the life 
's hazard, 
ve revisit 
over the 
" halting 
inscrip- 
Imost to 
hich the 


st place, 

of joy. 
special 
1d. He 
he pride 
ath for 
ns had 
od their 
hrough 

cloud, 
ad not 
led, for 
1 their 
cing of 
1e law- 
ab, he 
1 your 


MEMORIES OF THE WAY. 95 


God hath spoken hath ever failed;’’ and there was 
not a murmur in the host, and there was not an indi- 
peer in the congregation that could either gainsay 
or deny. 

Brethren) there could not fail to be great and grate- 
ful rejoicing in this remembrance of the loving kind- 
ness of the Lord. That loving kindness has compassed 
us from the first moment of our existence until now, 
and by his favor he hath made our mountain to stand 
strong. [would call up before you to-day those scenes 
in your history upon ts you are apt to dwell with 


joyous and grateful memory. Think of the gracious 


Providence who cared for your infancy, and who pre- 
vented your doings in youth; think of the unexpected 
deliverances, the unlooked for surprises of blessing 
with which you have been visited; pause before the 
various stones of help which you have erected in the 
course of your journey; remember the stores of glad- 
ness inexhaustible and constantly operating, that have 
been poured upon you by the bounty of your heavenly 
Father; the joy of your heart, the joy peculiar to your- 
selves, the natural and inevitable outflow of childhood’s 
sportiveness and glee, the joy of enlarging knowledge, 
the joy of some new discovery of the beautiful, of some 
keener thirst after the true; the joy of travel, the sight 
of earth’s great cities, fair landscapes, and spots 
renowned in song and story; the joy of home, ot 
parents whose love has cast a spell upon your after- 
lives, from which you would not be disenchanted if 
you could—brother, and sister, and wife, and husband, 
names that mean more to the heart, a thousand-fold, 
than they can ever mean to the ear; friends that knew 
you and that understood you, those twin souls who 
bore with your weaknesses without chiding, and who 
entered into your dreams with sympathy. The joy of 
meetings, and of farewells, and of that which came 
between more sweet than each. The joy of the Church; 
victory over some besetting temptation; glad season 
A2 ; 


re 


4 


26 ‘MEMORIES OF THE WAY. 


of Christian fellowship which can never be forgotten; 
sermons that seemed, in their exquisite adaptedness, 
as if they had been made for you, to counsel in per- 
plexity, to comfort in trouble; sacramental occasions 
when, in no distempered vision, you “saw heaven 
opened, and the Son of Man standing upon the right 
hand of the throne of God.” The joy of usefulness, 
the gladness which thrilled through you when you 
succored the distressed, or were valiant for the truth, 
or pitied and reclaimed the erring, or flung the gar- 
ment of praise over sume bewildered spirit of heavi- 
ness. The joy that has sprung for you out of sorrow, 
and has been all the brighter for the contrast; deliver- 
ance from danger which threatened to be imminent, 
recovery from sickness that seemed as though it were 
about to be mortal; the lightnings that have let the 
glory through the clouds; the flowers that you have so 
often plucked from tombs. Call up the mighty sum 
of gladness now, and as, subdued and grateful in the 
memory, you think of your past times, many a lip will 
quiver, and many a heart be full, as you remember the 
way which the Lord hath Jed you in the wilderness. 

2. There would, secondly, be in their history the 
remembrance of sin, and by consequence of sin, the remem- 
brance of sorrow. Nothing is more remarkable as a 
fact, and more illustrative of the depravity of the 
human heart, than the frequency with which the 
children of Israel sinned. Only three days after the 
wonderful interposition at the Red Sea, their murmur- 
ings began. The miracle at Marah, although it 
appeased their thirst, failed to inspire their confidence, 
for they tempted God again at the Waters of Strife, 
Although the manna fell without ceasing, they lusted 
after the fleshpots of Egypt. Their whole history, in- 
deed, is a record of perpetual sin, a perpetual lapse, 
now into jealousy, and now into sensualism, now into 
unbelief, and now alas, into idolatry. These repeated 
transgressions, of necessity, introduced them to sorrow, 


forgotten; 
aptedness, 
el in per- 
occasions 
v heaven 
the right 
sefulness, 
vhen you 
the truth, 
, the gar- 
of heavi- 
f sorrow, 
> deliver. 
nminent, 
1 it were 
e let the 
1 have go 
‘hty sum 
ul in the 
lip will 
nber the 
ness, 
ory the 
P remem~ 
le as a 
of the 
ch the 
er the 
urmur- 
gh it 
dence, 
Strife, 
lusted 
'y, in- 
lapse, 
v into 
eated 
row, 


> ‘HE WAY. 27 
MEMORIES OF T 


‘lety ‘okes 
suffercd, in almost every variety, the stro 
es eis displeasure. They were aay: ay me 
enive Peilenens; che were devoured by, Sey set 
ae ie ae ‘rebellious sons of Korah; a 
Lc Acti not forth with their hosts to bil : aor 
fe fled discomfited and crestfallen before ee Si 
tet enemies. Their journey was et hata a 
d dangerous. Bereavement visite phan spa 
‘a One after another the head of each fami ly Hs i 
alacant and fell, until of all those who niger 
stalwart ‘and sinewy men, only Oe Fue 
other spirit, remained to enter into he ye 
ras and of rest ; and the very lawgive1 a oO ca up 
the exercise of the memory, and the few ol Sear 
hose brows the almond tree was flcuris ng, ay 
an tered here and there among .the tribes, ee ee 
thei i ads must bow, their frames. dissolve in ¢ - 4 
aie van-standard of the host could be unfur “ 
withi the borders of the promised land. There ae | 
be fail to be subdued and pensive sie in t : 
pet of ih fertile uilehden, whith twelve eel 
s its sorrowful side, too, ck | 
ere os remember to-day. All sorrow, _ Ale 
comes originally from sin, but there is son fees ne 
which we inherit from no personal transgres ml 
beg has been handed down to us, a sad en a of 
adiietiig a disastrous nelaentipen' Ha Pa a a 
he remembrance of suc sore 
far pack a the history of every one diveu nad tants 
ou were cruelly treated in youth, anc ye : oe 
think of it now without shuddering. er at 4 
bitter disappointment made your Sart rte 
e early unkindness came like a frost- 1 ipo 
rou ion young hopes, just when you were gin g 
fo tt dulge them. Perhaps a long sickness meh you 
Fine and you suffered the illness of i re a 
and you wondered whether the cheek would eve 


a 


28 MEMORIES OF THE WAY. 


again in the ruddiness of health, and whether the elas- 
tic pulse would ever bound and swell through the veins. 
Perhaps there are other memories—most likely there 
are—so dense in their darkness as to cast all the rest 
into a relief of lesser shadow. The first breaking up 
of your homes, the stroke that swept you into orphan- 
hood, or that took away the desire of your eyes with a 
stroke, or that cast you upon a cold world’s charities 
for work and bread. Call up these mernories, though 
the heart bleeds afresh as you think of them. They 
have their uses; they need not be summoned for the 
first time in vain. And then the memory of sin—don’t 
hide it, don’t be cowardiy about it; confront your 
yesterdays, not in defiance, but in penitence and 
prayer; your long resistance to the strivings of the 
Toly Spirit, the veiled impertinence with which you 
refused to hearken to a father’s counsel and were deaf 
to the entreaties of a mother’s prayers. The sins of 
your youth, which, though you humbly trust are par- 
doned by the grace of God, plague you still, like the 
scars of some old wound, with shooting pains in many 
achange of weather. Your unfaithfulness since the 
Lord called you, your indulgence since your conversion 
in things you dared not for your lives have done while 
you were seeking mercy. How you have cherished 
some secret idol, or forborne to deliver them that were 
drawn to death, or dwelt in your ceiled houses, intent 
only upon your own agegrandizement and pleasure, 
while the house of God lay waste. Call up these 
memories, do not disguise them ; they will bow you in 
humility before God. 

This is the memory of the way. “Thou shalt re- 
member all the way which the Lord thy God hath led 
thee.” All the way—it is necessary that all the way 
should be remembered—the hill of difficulty as well as 
the vailey of humiliation, the time of prosperity as well 
as the time of pain. Necessary for ou: advantage that 
we may understand our position, learn the lessons of 


er the elag- 
‘h the veins, 
ikely there 
all the rest 
reaking up 
1to orphan- 
eyes with a 
’s charities 
es, though 
2m. They 
ned for the 
sin—don’t 
front your 
tence and 
128 of the 
vhich you 
were deaf 
1€ sins of 
st are par- 
I, like the 
5 in many 
since the 
nversion 
ne while 
herished 
hat were 
s, intent 
pleasure, 
p these 
vy you in 


halt re- 
a led 
he wa 

well Ms 
as well 
oe that 
sons of 


MEMORIES OF THE WAY. 


providence and grace; necessary that we may con- 
struct a narrative, for every event in our history is con- 
nected and mutually interpreted; necessary that we 
may trace the outworking of Jehovah’s plan in the 
successive achievements of our lives. “And if by the 
memory of joy you are impressed with God’s benefi- 
cence, kept in cheerful piety, and saved from the foul 
sin of repining; and if by the memory of sorrow you 
are moulded into a gentler type, taught a softer sym- 
pathy, and receive a heavenward impulse, and antici- 
pate a blessed reunion; if by the memory of sin you 
are reminded of your frailty, and rebuked of your pride, 
stimulated to repentance and urged to trust in God— 
then it will be no irksomeness, but a heaven-sent and 


- precious blessing that you have thus ‘“‘remembered the 


way that the Lord hath led thee in the wilderness.” 

II. I come, secondly, to notice the PuRPossEs oF Dr- 
VINE PROVIDENCE IN THE JOURNEY. These are stated 
to be three: “ to humble thee and to prove thee, to 
know what was in thine heart, whether thou wouldst 
keep his commandments or no.” The passage tells us 
that in all God’s dealings with the children of Israel, 
whether he corrected them in judgment or enriched 
them with bounty, there were purposes at work—pur- 
poses of spiritual discipline, intended to induce self- 


searching and the improvement of their hearts and 


lives. 

1. The first purpose that is spoken of is to induce 
humility—“ to humble thee.’” Every event, alike in their 
deliverance from Egypt, and in their passage through 
the wilderness, was calculated to show them their own 
feebleness, and their constant dependence upon a high 
and upon a superior power. What could human might 
have effected for them in the way of securing their de- 
liyerance from Egypt? ‘Their spirits were broken by 
long years of slavery; the iron had not only gyved their 
limbs, it had entered into their soul. They had not 
the heart, any one of them, to strike for freedom; and 


30 | MEMORIES OF THE W.2Y. 


if they had even meditated a rising, they were a people 
of such divided counsels, and so distrustful of each 
other, that it would have been but a paroxysm of frantic 
rebellion, which would have rooted the Pharaohs on 
the empire, and have riveted upon themselves the yoke 
of a more bitter bondage. When the permission for 
departure was wrung reluctantly from the plague- 
stricken king, what could human might have availed 
for them, when he repented of his momentary gracious- 
ness, and pursued after them in hot haste, and they 
were on the borders of the Red Sea, with the giant 
waves barring their progress, and a host of ferocious 
enemies behind? Everything in their experience 
taught them their dependence upon God. They were 
led through a region that no adventurer had ever ex- 
plored, no foot had ever trod. When they pitched 
their tents at eventide, they knew not at what hour 
they should strike them, nor whether they should 
strike them at all; there might be forced years of en- 
campment in that one spot; there might be forced 
marches and rapid progre-s; but they had no control 
over it: as the pillar went, and wherever the pillar 
went, they went; and as they sounded forth their matin 
song of praise, there was not a man in the whole con- 
gregation that could tell through what rocky clefts or 
woody defiles the echoes of the vesper hymn would 
sound. Their supply was as miraculous as their guid- 
ance. No plough had turned up the soil, no river 

murmured by their side, they had never yazed for forty 
years upon one solitary blossom of the spring-time, nor 
had tne golden grain ever once in their sight bent grace- 
fully to the sickle ci the reaper: they were fed with 
‘manna, which they knew not. ; 


‘When faint they were and parched with drought, 
Water at his word gushed out.” 


Oh! it is the world’s grandest illustration of man’s 
absolute feebleness and of God’s eternal power. 600,000 


sre a people 
ful of i 
n of frantic 
haraohs on 
es the yoke 
nission for 
he plague- 
we availed 
Y gracious. 
, and they 
the giant 
' ferocious 
experience 
"hey were 
d ever ex.-, 
y pitched 
vhat hour 
Vy should 
rs of en- 
be forced 
0 control 
the pillar 
elr matin 
hole con- 
clefts or 
In would 
eir guid- 
no river 
for forty 
Ime, nor 
t grace- 
ed with 


4 


MEMORIES OF THE WAY. 31 


fighting men, beside women and children, led by 
Divine leadership, and fed by Divine bounty, for the 
space of forty years. Brethren, the dealings of Provi- 
dence with ourselves are intended to show us our de- 
pendence upon God, and to humble us in the dust 
under his mighty hand. Weare very proud sometimes, 
and we talk about our endowments, and we boast 
largely of what wo have done, and what we intend to 
do; but we can do absolutely nothing. The athletic 
frame—how soon can he bring itdown! The well en- 
dowed heritage—how soon can he scatter it! The 
mental glance, keen and piercing—how soon can he 
bring upon it the dimness and bewilderment of years! 
We cannot, any one of us, bring ourselves into being ; 
we cannot, any one of us, sustain ourselves ia being he 
a moment. Alas! who of us can stay the spirit, when 
the summons has gone forth that it must die? Weare 
free; we cannot help feeling that we are free; and yet 
we can as little help feeling that our freedom is 
bounded, that it has a horizon, something that indicates 
a watchful Providence outside. How often have we 
aimed at building for ourselves tabernacles of remem- 
brance and of rest, and we have gazed upon the build- 
ing joyfully as it progressed to completion, and then 
the breath of the Lord has blown upon it, and it has been 
scattered, and we have been turned adrift and shelter- 
less; and, lo! dwellings already provided for us of 
firmer materials and of more excellent beauty, upon 
which we bestowed no labor nor thought. And so it 
is with all the matters of human glory. The strong 
man rejoiceth in his strength, and magnifieth himself 
in the might of his arms, but the Lord hath made him 
- strong ; the wise man glorifieth himself in his intellect, 
but the clear perception, and the brilliant fancy, and 
the fluent utterance, these are God’s gifts; the rich 
man rejoiceth in his riches, but the prudence to plan, 
and the sagacity to foresee, and the industry to gather, 
these are the bestowments of God. 


ee 


32 MEMORIES OF THE WAY. 


Ah! why will men sacrifice to their own net, and 
burn incense to their own drag, when they have abso- 
lutely nothing which they have not received ; and when 
every gift cometh from the Father of light, with whom 
there is no variableness, neither shadow of turning ? 
And in the realm of morals, and in the spiritual life, 
our feebleness is the same. A conscience void of 
offence, a good report of those that are without a heay- 
enly purpose or a holy resolve, the inner purification or 
the comely outgrowth of a beneficent life—we are poor 
to compass them. We acquire them only by our 
dependence upon God. Have you learned this lesson, 
this deep, hard lesson of humility? Forty years’ sins 
you have committed! have they humbled you in the 
presence of God? Forty years’ chastenings have cor- 
rected you! have they humbled your pride or fretted 
you into greater audacity of rebellion? Forty years’ 
mercies have blessed you! have they excited your 
gratitude or inflated your vanity ? Brethren, we must 
be humbled, if we would be happy. It was in the 
Valley of Humiliation, you remember, that the lad that 
had the herb heart’s-ease in his bosom kept his serene 
and his rejoicing home. 

2. Then the second purpose of God’s providence in 
the journey is to prove us. The idea seems to be, that 
a skilful chemist employs tests for the purpose of ana- 
lysis, and to discover the composition of that which he 
examines, so God uses the occurrences of life as a moral 
touchstone, to discover the tendencies and inclinations 
of man. Thus we read God did tempt, test, try, prove 
Abraham, requiring from him a sacrifice, excessive and 
apparently cruel, in order that he might know the 
strength of his servant’s faith, and of his filial fear. 
There were many of those testing circumstances in the 
history of the children of Israel. They were tested by 

their mercies, as when, feeling the manna insipid, they 
lusted after the flesh-pots of Egypt; they were tested 
by their duties; they were tested by their calamities, as 


net, and 
ave abso- 
and when 
th whom 
urning ? 
‘tual life, 
void of 
t a heay- 
cation or 
are poor 

by our 
s lesson, 
ars’ sins 
1 in the 
ive cor- 

r fretted 

y years’ 

sd your 
fe must 
in the 
lad that 
serene 


nee in 
be, that 
bf ana- 
ich he 
moral 
ations 
prove 
e and 
vy the 
fear. 
oe 
ed b 
Meee 
ested 
@8, ag 


MEMORIES OF THE WAY. 33 


at the Ind Sea, and in the confticts with the hosts of 
Amalek. ‘hey were tested by their companions, as 
when they formed unholy league with Midianite 
idolators, and brought upon themselves that swift 
destruction which Balak wished for, but which the 
cowardly Balaam dared not for his life invoke. Breth- 
ren, God has his crucible still. In ow past lives we 
shall find circumstances that have tried ourselves, and 
we shall remember the results of the trial sometimes 
with devout gratitude, oftener with unfeigned shame. 
Our afflictions have tried us, and we have thought that 
we have done well to be angry, and we have arraigned 
the proceedings of God at the bar of our limited reason 
(solemn mockery of judicature!) when, perhaps, the 
reflection of to-morrow would Lave approved what the 
distrust of to-day was so ready to condemn. Our 
duties have tried us. We have felt the shrinking of 
the flesh, and the result has been sometimes their 
reluctant and sometimes their spiritless discharge. 
Other people have keen unjust or unkind to us; we 
have met with ingratitude or with treachery: our own 
familiar one, in whom we trusted, has betrayed us ; 
slander has been busy belching out her calumnies 
against our fair fame; all these things have tested our 
patience, our endurance, our meekness, our long-suffer- 
ing, and, like Moses, we have spoken unadvisedly, or, 
like the disciples, we have hadto pray, “‘ Lord, increase 
our faith,’”’ before we could grasp the large and princely 
idea of forgiveness to seventy times seven. Often 
companionships have tried us, and we have shown how 
small has been our self-reliance and how easily we have 
taken the hue and mould of the society in which we 
were thrown, and how a pointed finger, or a sarcastic 
laugh, or a lip scornfully curled, can shame the man- 
hood out of us, and make us very cowards in resisting 
evil, or in bearing witness for God. Thus have we 
been, thus has God proved us in the wilderness, and if 
we are in earnest for heaven, and if we have in any 


34 MEMORIES OF THE WAY. 

measure profited by the discipline, we shall be thankful 
for the trial. Placed as we are in a sinful world, 
exposed to its every-day influences, whether of good or 
evil, we need ‘a piety which can maintain itself in all 
circumstances, and under every pressure. The trial 
will be a matter of choice, preferred by every godly 
and valiant Christian soldier. He feels as though that 
were an inglorious heaven that was won without a 
sacrifice and without a toil; he knows that the pro- 
mise is not that he shall pass through the wilderness 
without the sight of an enemy; it is a better promise 
than that—that we shall never see an enemy that we 
cannot master, and that by God’s grace we cannot 
completely overcome; and he had rather don his armor 
for afoeman worthy of his steel, for an enemy that will 
at once prove his own valor and show the resources of 
the Captain of his salvation, than he would don it in 
order to prance in the gorgeous apparellings of some 
holiday review. Oh! believe me, the piety which the 
world needs, which the church needs, and which we 
must have if we would be approved of our Great 
Master, must not be that sickly sentimentality which 
lounges on ottomans, and discusses social and moral 
' problems while it is at éase in Zion; it must be the 
hardy principle pining in inaction, robust from healthy 
exercise, never so happy as when it is climbing up the 
slopes of some difficult duties, and has the breeze from 
the crest of the mountain stirring amid its waving hair ; 
and happy, thrice happy, will it be for you if, as the 
result of the inspection, you can say, as David did, 
“Thou hast proved my heart and thou hast visited me 
in the night ; thou hast tried me and shalt find nothing. 
I am purposed that my heart shall not transgress, con- 
cerning the works of men; by the word of thy lips I 
have kept me from the paths of the destroyer.”’ 

' 8. And then the third purpose of Providence in the 
journey is “to know what was in thine heart—whether 
thou wouldest keep his commandments or no.” The 


e thankful 
ful world, 
of good or 
self in all 
The trial 
ery godl 

ou pipe 
vithout a 
| the pro- 
vilderness 
r promise 
7 that we 
Te cannot 
his armor 
’ that will 
ources of 
don it in 
}of some 
rhich the 
vhich we 
ir Great 
ty which 
1d moral 
st be the 

healthy 

y up the 

eze trom 

ng hair; 

, as the 
id did, 

sited me 


e 


MEMORIES OF THE WAY. 35 


human heart is a microcosm—~a little world, containing in 
itself all the strifes, and all the hopes, and all the fears, 
and all the ventures of the larger world outside. The 
human heart! who can unravel its mystery, or decipher 
its hidden law? The smile may play upon the lip, 
while beneath there is the broken, burning heart; and, 
on the other hand, the countenance may have shadow 
of anxiety, while the sunlight dances gaily on the soul. 
The human heart! Human knowledge can give us very 
little acquaintance with it; such knowledge is too won- 
derful tor man; it is high, and he cannot attain unto it ; 
but there is One who knows it, and knows all its tortuous 
policy, and all its sinister motive, and he is anxious that 
we should know it, too, and one purpose of his provi- 
dential dealings with us is, that we may know what is 
in our heart; and yet of all sciences none is so difficult 
of attainment as this same science of self-knowledge. 
Whether it be from the deceitfulness of the object of 
study, or whether it be from the morbid reluctance, 
almost amounting to fear, with which men shrink from 
acquaintance with themselves, there are few that have 
the bravery to pray, “ Lord, make me to know myself.” 
Indeed, it were a hideous picture if it were suddenly 
unveiled in the preseuce of us all. When the Lord 
would show Ezekiel the abominations of Jerusalem, he 
led him through successive chambers of imagery, upon 
the walls of which were portrayed their loathsome and 
unworthy doings. Ah! if our enormities were to be 
thus tapestried in our sight, who of us could bear the 
disclosure? There was deep self-knowledge and deep 
humility in the word of the old reformer, who, when he 
saw a criminal led off amid the jeers of the multitude to 
be hanged at Tyburn, turned around sighing, and said: 
“There, but for the grace of God, goes old John Brad- 
ford.” There is a very affecting illustration of what can 
lurk unsuspected in the human heart, in the 8th chapter 
of the 2nd book of Kings :; “And Elisha came to Damas- 
cus; and Ben-hadad, the king of Syria, was sick; and it 
\ 


a a 


d 


36 MEMORIES, OF THE WAY. 


was told him, saying, The man of God is come hither. 
And the king said unto Hazael, Take a present in thine 
hand, and go, meet the man of Lod, and inquire of the 
Lord by him, saying, shall I recover of this denen So 
THazael went to meet him, and took a present with him, 
even of every good thing of Damascus, forty camels’ 
burden, and came and stood before him, and said, Thy 
son, Ben-hadad, king of Syria, hath sent me to thee, 
saying, Shall I recover of this“disease ? And Elisha said 
unto him, Go, say'unto him, Thou mayest certainly 
recover. [The disease itself is not fated to destroy thee, 
there is no decree of that k’iid.] Howbeit the Lord hath 
showed me that he shall surely die. And he settled his 
countenance steadfastly, until he was ashamed; and the 
man of God wept. And Hazael said, Why weepeth my 
lord. And he answered, Because I know the evil that 
thou wilt do unto the children of Israel ; their strongholds 
wilt thou set on fire, and the.» young men wilt thou slay 
with the sword, and wilt dash their children, and rip up 
their women with child. And Hazael said [shocked at 
the bare mention of such atrocities], But what, is thy 
servant a dog, that he should do this great thing ?”’ But, 
as the old divine quaintly says, “the dog did it after all.” 
Brethren, there lurks this danger in us ali; there is no 
superiority of character in ourselves; there is no firmer 
power of resistance to evil. In our unaided strength we 
are no better fortified against the extremes of iniquity 
than many around us who now wa.low in the atrocities 
of crime. That speculative merchant, whose affairs had 
become hopelessly embarrassed, and who, in the vain 
hope of retrieval, olied the too ready pen of the forger, 
and in that sad moment forfeited the probity, of years— 
how sad must have been his reflections when, to use his 
own expressive words, he “ agonized on,” when he thought 
that he should transmit to his children nothing but the 
heritage of a blasted name, and that those children would 
have an up-hill struggle all the way through life, their 
own blamelessness being a small matter against the ter- 


me hither, 
ent in thine 
tire of the 
isease? So 
i with him, 
rity camels’ 
said, Thy 
1e to thee, 
Elisha said 
, certainly 
stroy thee, 
Lord hath 
settled his 
; and the 
epeth my 
evil that 
rongholds 
thou slay 
d rip up 
locked at 


re is no 
o firmer 
moth we 
iniquity 
trocities 
airs had 
€ vain 
forger, 
years— 
use his 
hought 
ut the 

would 

>, their 

ne ter- 


MEMORIES OF THE WAY. 37 


rible opprobrium of their father’s misdoings, He who 
continues in the feast until wine inflames him, imagines 
that he can tread without danger upon the giddy verge 
over which multitudes have fallen; but, by little and 
little, he cherishes the unappeasable thirst for drink until 
it becomes a morbid physical malady, and, frantic and 
despairing, he rushes down into a drunkard’s grave. 
That youth who, at the solicitation of some gay com- 
panion, ventures, for the first time, into the foul hell of 
a gaming-house, and who joins in the perilous hazard, 
would scoff at the prophet who should tell him that, a 
few years hence, a gambler and a spendthrift, he should 
live in poverty anddieinshame. That young man who, 
to gain funds, perhaps, for the Sunday excursion, or for 
the night’s debauch, took the money from his master’s 
till with the conscientious intention of replacing it at the 
time of the quarterly supply, little thought that that 
deceitful heart of his would land him in a felon’s dock, 
or, upon the deck of the transport ship, waft him to 
areturnless distance from his country and his home. 
Brethren, from a thousand causes of disaster and of 
shame with which our experience can furnish us, and 
which we read in the history of every day life, it becomes 
us, with godly jealousy watching over our own hearts, to 
guard against the beginnings of evil; and as we think of 
blighted reputations and of ruined hopes—of many once 
fair, and innocent, and scrupulous, and promising as we 
—as we gaze upon the wreck of many a gallant vessel 
stranded by our side, which we saw steaming out of the 
harbor with stately pennons—let us remember that in us 
there are the same tendencies to evil, that it is grace— 
only grace—which hath made us to differ, and that each 
instance of calamity and sin, while it evokes our pity— 
not our scorn—for those that have so grievousl, erred, 
should proclaim in solemn admonition to ourselves, 
‘Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he 
fall.” ‘To know what is in thine heart, whether thou 
wouldest keep his commandments or no.” | 


38 MEMORIES OF THE WAY. 


III. If you have thus travelled in the way that you 
have trodden, there will be MANY UsEs OF THE MEMORY 
which we cannot stay to particularize to-day. You will 
know more of God at the conclusion of your visit than 
you did at the commencement, You will behold in the 
way both the goodness and the severity of God—the 
severity which a sin wherever it is io be found, 
the goodness which itself provides a substitute and finds 
a Saviour. Where do you not find him rather? There 
was the stream gushing forth from the smitten rock— 
was there not ?—and the perishing and thirsty Israelites 
were happy. “ They drank of the rock that followed 
them, and that rock was Christ.” There was the brazen 
serpent, the symbol of accepted propitiation in the wil- 
derness of sin. ‘‘ As Moses lifted up the serpent in the 
wilderness, even so hath the Son of Man been lifted up, 
that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but 
should have everlasting life.” Oh, as you gather up 
those memories—the memory of joy, the memory of 
sorrow, the memory of sin—as you remember the good- 
ness and the loving kindness of the Lord, his faithful- 
ness to fulfil his promises, his tenderness, which your 
repeated rebellions have not caused to fail—gather up 
yourselves in one earnest consecration of flesh and spirit, 
which I take to be the best consecration of the house 
which you now dedicate to God—living temples, pillars 
in the house of God, that sl'»'l go out no more forever. 


ly that you 
HE MEMORY 
You will 
visit than 
hold in the 
~ God—the 
be found, 
e and finds 
rr? There 
ten rock— 
y Israelites 
ut followed 
the brazen 
n the wil- 
ent in the 
lifted up, 
erish, but 
gather up 
emory of 
the good- 
s faithful- 
ich your 
ather up 
nd spirit, 
he house 
8, pillars 
orever, 


~~ 


Js Bier WLC 


BENE Ate XS. 


II, 
THE BELIEVER’S SUFFICIENCY. 


“Not that we are sufficient of ourselves to think anne as of our- 
selves ; but our sufficiency is of God.’’—2 ConINTHIANS, lii, 5, 


HE promise contained in these words is one of 
the most encouraging and one of the most 
eeee} comprehensive in the ‘Bible. lt is the essence 
of all Christian experience; it is the moral which the 
Sriptures continually inculcate, and it stands in the 
heraldry of heaven as the motto on the believer’s arms, 
The all-sufficiency of Gud has been the support and 
comfort of the faithful in all ages of the Church. On 
this rock Abraham built his hope; to this refuge in all 
times of trial the sweet Singer of Israel fled; by this 
confidence the great Apostle of the Gentiles was constantly 
and perseveringly upheld. The all-sufficiency of God 
gives strength to patience, gives solidity to hope, con- 
stancy to endurance, gives nerve and vitality to effort. 
The weakest believer, with this gyeat treasure in possess- 
ion, is enabled to go steadily forward, sacrificing no duty, 
resisting all sin; and, amidst every horror and every 
humiliation, feeling within him the still, clear light of 
life. To this the most eminent saints are indebted for 
all they enjoy, for all they are enabled to perform; and 
though assailed by various foes without, and by various 
fears within, by this they can return from every conflict, 
bearing the spoils of victory; and as with the trophies of 
their triumph they erect the grateful Ebenezer, you may 
see this inscription written upon them all: “ Having 


row F_—E 


~ 


© 
a ~ * 1 ¢ ¢ 
ES AN ra 


40 THE BELIEVER’S SUFFICIENCY. 


obtained help of God, we continue unto this day,” 
feeling most deeply the impotency of the nature the 
inherit, and penetrated with the sense of the difficulties 
by which they are surrounded. When faith isin exercise, 
they point to this as a never-failing source of strength; 
and in the course of their untried and unswerving 
pilgrimage, this is their language: ‘ Let the wise man, 
if he will be so foolish, trust to his wisdom; let the rich 
man glory in his wealth; let the proud man vaunt his 
own dignity; let the trifler make the world his defence ; 
we dare not trust to such refuges of lies, we dare not 
build upon foundations that are palpably insecure. We 
feel our own nothingness; but we feel vur own might, 
because our sufficiency is of God. 

From the commencement of the chapter out of which 
these words are taken, we learn that the same exclusive- 
ness of spirit existed in the days of Paul which exists in 
certain quarters now, and that the same charge—that of 
false apostleship—was brought against him that has since 
been so plentifully flung at eminent ministers of Jesus 
Christ. It is no small consolation to ‘find that we are 


living God; not in tables of stone (nor anything so hard), 
but in fleshy tables of the heart; and such trust have we 


0 this day,” 
nature the 
1e difficulties 
is in exercise, 
of strength ; 
unswerving 
€ wise man, 
let the rich 
n vaunt his 
1is defence ; 
e dare not 
secure. We 
own might, 


t of which 
e exclusive- 

exists in 
ve—that of 
at has since 
rs of Jesus 
hat we are 
ostie, how- 


‘oundine a 
ythine but 
“whom he 
ecegs as a 
‘ourselves, 
néndation 
: e are 
Ives, your 
ment—ye 
1d read of 
‘ed to be 
not with 
it of the 
Ye) hard), 
have we 


bi 
i! 


THE BELIEVERS SUFFICIENCY. Al 


through Christ to Godward;” then, so anxious is he 
even in this moment of his triumphant vindication to 
avoid all appearance of boasting, that he puts in a great 
disclaimer: “not that we are sufficient of ourselves to 
think anything of ourselves; all that, whether in us as 
subjects or by us as the instruments, has been done by 


the sovereign power of God, who also hath made us able © 


ministers of the New Testainent, not of the letter, but of 
the Spirit; for the letter killeth, but the Spirit giveth 
life.’ The Apostle in these verses unfolds the great 
secret both of ministerial call and of ministerial efficiency. 
It is God, not man, that makes, not finds, able ministers 
of the New Testament. The tones of his voice are heard, 
saying to them, “Son, go work to-day in my vineyard.” 
And it is a remarkable fact, one which we should never 
forget, that this voice is never heard in a heart where 
there is no faith; consequently, the prime qualification 
for a minister of the Christian religion is the heart that 
has been melted by its love, and a consciousness which 
has felt it in its power. Without this, all else is unavail- 
ing; the attainment of the most profound and extensive 
knowledge, the grasp of the loftiest and most scholarly 
intellect, the possession of the most commanding eloquence, 
the treasures of the most imperial fancy, the research of 
the most accomplished scholar, all these are useless, worse 
than useless, if they be not consecrated by the Spirit of 
the Holy One; only the trappings that decorate the 
traitor, and make his treason yet the fouler; only the 
weapons of more imminent danger, and the portents of 
more terrific andappalling ruin. The most distinguished 
minister within the compass of the Catholic Church, 
however eminent he may be, however signally his labors 
have been blessed, has reason to remember, every moment 
of his ministerial career, “I am nothing, less than 
nothing; but my sufficiency is of God.” The contfortable 
and scriptural doctrine contained in the text is not more 
true of ministers, of whom it was immediately spoken, 
than of Christians in general, to whom it may be properly 


Bl 


4 


42 THE BELIEVER’ SUFFICIENCY. 


applied. The station is different, the strength is the | 
same. Your sufficiency, as well as ours, is of God. To | 


take the words in this extended sense, we may find in 


them matter of profitable meditation, by considering | 
first the nature of this sufficiency and then the authority | 


which believers have to expect this sufficiency for them- 
selves. 

I. First, the sufficiency of God may be considered 
either as PROPER, Or COMMUNICATED. Ly his essential, or 
proper sufficiency, we mean that he is selt-existent, self- 
sufficient, independently happy; angels and men may 
declare that they cannot increase his glory; it is eternal, 
underived, perfect. He has said rr will never give 
it to another. There was no necessity in his nature im- 
pelling him to create the universe; he could have existed 
alone, and he did exist alone, long before the everlastin 
silence was broken by a human footstep, or sitaveunied 
by a human voice; and that Divine solitude was the 
solitude of matchless happiness. The best praises, there- 
fore, the most extensive services of his worshippers, are 
but reflections of the glory which dwells originally in 
himself. But it is of the sufficiency of God in relation 
to his creatures that it 1s our province especially to speak. 
And it is in this sense that God is good to all, and his 
tender mercies are over all his works. 

1. He is sufficient, in the first place—let us take low 
pou fitst—for the preservation of the universe which 

as hands have made. From the sublime account which 
the Scriptures give us of creation, we learn that the 
heavens were made by him, and all the host of them by 
the breath of his mouth; and as we know that nothing 
earthly has within it the power to sustain itself, we are 
further assured that he upholdeth ali things by the same 
word of his power. It is by this ever breathing word, 
constantly in exercise, that the sun shines, that the moon 
walks in brightness, that the stars pursue their courses in 
the sky; the clouds are marshalled by his divine decree, 
and when he uttereth his voice there is a multitude of 


ngth is the 
f’ God. To 4 
nay find in 
considering 
e authority 
’ for them- 


considered 
‘ssential, or 
stent, self- 
men may 
18 eternal, 
never give 
nature im- 
ve existed 
Vverlastin 
iterrupted 
> was the 
ses, there- 
ppers, are 
yinally in 
n relation 
to speak, 

» and his 


ake low 
6 which 
it which 
hat the 
hem b 
nothing 
| We are 
he same 
& word, 
€ moon 
rses in 
decree, 
ude of 


THE BELIEVER’S SUFFICIENCY. 43 


waters in the heavens. Reason looks at this systematic 
and continuous regularity, and admires it, and refers it 
to the operation of second causes, and argues very philo- 
sophically about the nature and fitness of things; but 
piety looks through the complications of the mechanism 
to the hand that formed it. The universe is to her but 
one vast transparency, through which she can gaze on 
God; her pathway and her communion are on the high 
places of creation, and there, far above all secondary and 
subordinate agencies, she discovers the hiding of his 
power. The symmetry of nature is to her more beautitu. 
because God has produced it. The deep harmonies of 
the systems come more tunefully upon her ear because 
the hand of the Lord has awakened them. 


‘*What though no real voice nor sound 
Amid the radiant orbs be found ? 
In faith’s quick ear they all rejoice, 
And utter forth a noble voice, 
For ever singing as they shine, 

‘The hand that made us is Divine,’”” 


And what a contemplation does this open to us of the 
majesty and power of God! Who can understand it? 
The planets are kept in their orbits, and the seasons 
continually alternate. Old Ocean dashes himself upon 
the shore, and every day finds “hitherto” written upon 
the sand, and the mad surge respects it. The earth 
yields her increase ; vegetable life is evolved; circula- 
tion takes place throughout the animal system ; man 
walks and lives, and all these diversified operations are 
produced at one and the same moment, perpetuated 
from one moment to another by the simple word of God. 
Extend your conceptions still further; take hold of the 
far-reaching discoveries of astronomy. Glance at the 
numberless suns and systems that are scattered in the 
broad field of immensity, and remembor (for there is no 
Scripture against it, and probabilities are strongly in, 
favor of the opinion), that they are all inhabited by de- 
pendent creatures somewhat like ourselves. Glance at 


a= 3 


44. THE BELIEVERS SUFFICIENCY. 


the almost infinite variety of existences with which we 
are acquainted—whether we walk the earth, or cleave 
the air, or swim the sea—connect with all these the 
Scriptural announcement that these are but parts of his 
ways, and how little a portion is known of them; and 
then how thought shrinks from the aggregate! how the 
brain recoils from the contemplation of the sum! and we 
may well finish the quotation, and say, “ The thunder of 
his power, who can understand?” All our reasonings 
upon the subject only serve to demonstrate that man by 
searching csnnot find out God. Could you, with the 
swiftness of a sunbeam, dart yourselves beyond the limits 
of the known creation, and for ages upon ages continue 
your pilgrimage in infinite space, you would never—who 
can grasp that thought? it is too large for us—never be 
able to reach a place where God is not, never light upon 
a spot where this glorious Being is not essentially and 
influentially present. The whole universe is one vast 
laboratory of benevolent art, over every department of 
which the Deity presides—a sanctuary, every part of 
which the Divinity inhabits—a circle, whose circumfer- 
ence is unfathomed, and whose every section is filled with 
God. But I stop here just for a moment, to remind you 
of the thrill that comes through the heart of the believer, 
when, after this exhibition of boundless and colossal 
power, he can go home, singing-— 


‘* This all-sufficient God is ours, 
Our Father and our love.” 


Our sufficiency is of God. 

2. Then, secondly, and chiefly, he is sufficient for the 
preservation and for the perpetuity of the Gospel plan, 
in the salvation and ultimate happiness of every indi- 
vidual believer. Christianity is not to be viewed by us 
merely as a moral system; that were to place it on a 
level with the speculations of Confucius, and Socrates, 
and others. It is something more, it is a course of 
Divine operations, We are not to regard it as a mere 


THE ,BELIEVERS SUFFfCIENCY. 45 


1 which we ethical statement of doctrine made known to us by a 
1, or cleave @ bundle of books; we must remember the Divine a ency 
] these the always, by which it is conducted and inspired. e ob- 
parts of his @ served before, that no mere man has the power to produce 
them; and @ an abiding change upon the hearts of his hearers. 
te! how the Human eloquence is a mighty thing, I know; human 
m! and we reason is a persuasive and powerful thing, I know ; under 
thunder of certain favorable conjunctures of circumstances, they have 
reasonings @ sometimes achieved mighty results. They can shame a 
1at man by Herod, they can make a Felix tremble, they can almost 
i, with the J persuade an Agrippa to become a Christian, but they can 
1 the limits dono more. I know that immense multitudes have been 
28 continue swayed by the power of a single tongue. The passions 
ever—who have become excited, either to madness or to sympathy, 
—never be either to deeds of lawless aggression, or to deeds of high 
light upon & emprise ; but then there is only a transient mastery ob- 
tially and — tained. We read of a harp in the classical fables of old, 
> one vast @ which, when the winds swept it, was said to discourse 
rtment of jf sweet strains; but then, unhappily, the breeze and the 
y. part of (@ music died away together. So it is with the triumph of 
circumfer- @ the orator: the moment the voice of the speaker ceases 
filled with (@ the spell is broken, the charm is dissipated; reflection 
“aind you @ begins to remonstrate against excitement, and the whole 
> believer, @ affair is forgotten, or comes upon the soul only as the 


| cologsal @ memory of some pleasant song. Nay, truth, celestial 
4 truth, can produce no abiding change. Pardon and 
sanctification are not the necessary consequences of state- 

ments of doctrine. Scripture cannot produce them ; the 

truth may appear in all its cogency and in all its power 

before the mind—it may appear so clear as to extort an 


; forthe | acquiescence in what it propounds; but it is uninfluen- 
pel plan, 4 tial; it lacks energy, and it lacks a self-appliant power. 
ry indi- | It may enlighten—that is its province—it can never save. 
sd by us =| Without the Spirit it is useless; let the Spirit animate it, 
2itona | anditis the power of God. Hearers who sit under the 
ocrates, .# ministrations of the truth without the Spirit. may be 


urse of | likened to a man standing upon the brow of a hill which 
‘@mere | commands the prospect of an extensive landscape. The 


46 THE BELIEVER’S SUFFICIENCY. 


varied beauties of flood and field are before him; nature 
is clad in hex richest Jivery, there is every variety calcu- 
lated to interest and to inspire; rugged rocks frown as if 
they would keep sentinel over the sleeping valley ; the 
earth yields her increase, the crystal streamlet leaps 
merrily along, impressions of the beautiful are every- 
where visible, there is just one drawback to the picture, 
and that one drawback is, that the man who stands upon 
the summit of the hill is blind. That is precisely the 
state of the case in refereuce to truth in the Bible. It is 
there in all its grandeur, but the man has no eyes to see 
it. Let the Spirit come and take the scales away and 
shred off the spiritual ophthalmia, and he sees the !and- 
scape stretching before him in all its hues of beauty, and 
his soul is elevated and he feels the full rapture of the 
scene. Prevailing truth, therefore, is not of the letter 
but of the Spirit, for “the letter ki!leth, but the Spirit 
giveth lite.” This Spirit it is that is promised for the 
carrying out of the Gospel, and it therefore must be suc 
cessful. I know there is a good deal of difficulty about 
his mode of procedure: God’s word must be fulfilled, that 
is one thing ; man’s freedom must be maintained, that is 
another thing. Man is a moral agent; God has endued 
him with talents and invested him with an immense 
delegation of power, and in the distribution of these 
talents and in the exercise of that power, he has said, in 
effect, Let him alone; he may do as he lists—just as he 
lists. He is allowed, for the present, to act as if he had 
no superior, but for all he is holden finally most strictly 
responsible. But no coercion is applied, no force is ever 
in any conceivable instance made use of. One of our 
most eloquent senators once said, that an Englishman’s 
cottage was his castle. The winds may whistle through 
every crevice, and the rains penetrate through every 
cranny, but intéd that cottage the monarch of England 
dare not enter against the cotter’s will, That is just the 
state of the case between Christ and the human soul. He 
has such a respect for the will of that immortal tenant 


1m 5 nature 
ety caleu- 
s frown as if 
valley ; the 
inlet leaps 
are every- 
the picture, 
tands upon 
ecisely the 
ible. It ig 
eyes to see 
} away and 
3 the land- 
eauty, and 
ure of the 
the letter 
the Spirit 
od for the 
ist. be suc- 
lty about 
illed, that 
d, that is 
3 endued 
immense 
of these 
said, in 
St as he 
he had 
t strictly 
e is ever 
> of our 
shman’gs 
through 
h ever 
ngland 
just the 
He 
tenant, 


THE BELIEVER’S SUFFICIENCY. 47 
that he has placed within us, that he will never force an 
entrance. Ie will do everything else; he will knock at 
the door— 


“* He now stands knocking at the door 
Of every sinner’s heart ; 
The worst need keep him out no more, 
Nor force him to depart.” 


But he will not force an entranee. Often, disappointed 
and grieved, he turns away from those whom he would 
fain have enriched and saved, saying, ‘Ye will not 
come unto me, that ye may have life.” But notwith- 
standing all this formidable opposition, the Gospel, as 
the adminstration of God’s truth, backed by the energy 
of the Holy Spirit, shall finally triumph. We can con- 
ceive of no enemies more subtle, more malignant, more 
powerful than those which it has already encountered 
and vanquished. Memory cheers us onward and bids 
hope to smile, God is with the Gospel; that is the 
great secret. She does not trust in her inherent energy; 
she does not trust in her exquisite adaptation to man’s 
every necessity and peri); she does not trust in the in- 
defatigable and self-denying labors of her ministers; 
God is with the Gospel, and under his guidance she 
shall march triumphantly forward, ge lepie every 
enemy, acquiring a lodgment in every heart, reclaiming 
the world unto herself, until she has consummated her 
victory in the ecstasies of a renovated universe, and in 
that deep and solemn moment when the Son, who gave 
his life a ransom for all, shall see of the travail of his 
soul and be abundantly satisfied. O brethren! what a 
comfortable doctrine is this! If this Gospel is to be 
conducted fr>m step to step in its progressive march to 
conquest, do you not see how it guarantees individual 
salvation and individual defencé by the way ? 

Where art thou in the chapel to-night (would that I 
could discover thee!) timid and discouraged believer 
who art afraid of the fatigues of climbing the Hill 


48 THE BELIEVER’S SUFFICIENCY. 


Difficulty, and crouchest back abashed and cowering 
at sight of the lions in front of the Palace Beautiful ? 
Lift up thy head, be not discouraged; thy sufficiency is 
of God. What frightens thee? Affliction? God is thy 
help. Persecution? God is thy crown. Perplexity? 
God is thy counsel. Death? God is thy everlasting 
life. Only trust in God, and all shall be well. Lite 
shall glide thee into’ death, and death shall glide thee 
into heaven. “ Who (asks the exulting Apostle, in the 
Sth of Romans), who shall separate us from the love of 
Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or famine, or 
nakedness, or peril, or sword?” That is rather a dark 
catalogue; but mark how the Apostle answers it: 
“Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors.” 
It is not a drawn battle; night does not come on to 
separate the combatants; we have not to send a herald, 
us they used to do in ancient warfare, to ask permission 
| to bury our dead; wedo not come from the field with 
the dishonored banner trailing in the dust, and the armor 
hacked, scarred with the wounds we have gotten in the 
fight. ‘‘We are more than conquerors.” Oh, the roy- 
alty of that language !—“ more than conquerors, through 
him that hath loved us. For I am persuaded that 


neither death”—he puts that first, because it generally 4 
threatens believers most—*“ neither life,” which is really ; 
amore solemn and a more perilous thin# than death, 4 
rightly considered—“ neither death, nor lite, nor angels” 4 

—if any of them should forget themselves so far as to . . 
come and preach another Gospel and try to deceive the of 
very elect— neither principalities nor powers” — for 7 om 
although the captain of the hosts of darkness may plant — . 
all his most formidable battery against us, he cannot joo 
shake the palisades of strong salvation, nor snatch away 

a solitary sheep from the fold of the great Sliepherd. ‘ Bt 
‘No, nor things present”—+though those things present SE 
may include famine, nakedness, peril and sword—“ no, 4 be 
nor things to come”—though, in those things to come, b 
there may be an originality of diabolism never dreamed ,;| . 


cowering 


eautiful 2 
ciency is 
tod is thy 
rplexity ? 
erlasting 
ll. Lite 
ide thee 
», in the 
love of 
nine, or 
-a dark 
vers it: 
uerors,”’ 
e on to 
herald, 
Mission 
ld with 
e armor 
in the 
1e roy- 
srough 
d that 
nerally 
really 
death, 
ngels” 
as to 
ve the 
— for 
plant 
annot 
away 
herd, 
esent 
¢ no, 
ome, 
med 


THE BELIEVER’S SUFFICIENCY. 49 


of ye-—* and no creature”—nothing but sin, and that is 
not a creature, that is a foul excrescence, a vile avurtion 
upon the universe of God—keep clear of that—and ‘no 
creature shall he able to separate vou from the love of 
God, which is in Christ Jesus ou. Lord.” Qh, the bless- 
edness, the ineffable blessedness of being in the love of 
God! The blessedness of an approving conscience, the 
blessedness of increasing knowledge, the blessednees of 
complete victory, the blessedness of Gospel peace, the 
blessedness of perfect love! I do not know what that sea 
of glass means about which we read in the Revelation ; I 
do not pretend to an intimate acquaintance with Apoca- 
lyptic disclosures; but I know nothing that can better 
imagine the deep, serene, reposing, kingly rapture ot the 
spirit that has finished its course with joy. It is a sea of 
glass; it hath no billows; not a breath ever, by any 
possibility, ruffles it. And on this sea of glass, as on a 
wide and waveless ocean, the believer stands forever, 
chanting eternally the song of Moses andthe Lamb. Oh, 
lift up your heads and come back to Zion with singing, 
and let this be the burden of your song: 


“Let doubt then, and danger my progress oppose, 
They only make heaven more sweet at the close; 
Afflictions may damp me, they cannot destroy, 

For one glimpse of His love turns them all into joy. ° 
And come joy, or come sorrow, whate’er may befall, 
One hour with my God will make up for it all.” 


It were very little use our talking in this strain to you, 
if you were to find out, after all, that it was some aristo- 
cratical blessing, some privilege reserved only for the 
peerage of the faithful, for the favored ones in the family 
of the King of kings. 

II. I come, secondly, to notice THE AUTHORITY WHICH 
BELIEVERS HAVE TO EXPECT THIS SUFFICIENCY FOR THEM- 
seLves. And, very briefly, we have a right to expect it, 
because it is found and promised in the Bible. Every 
believer, the moment he becomes a believer, becomes an 
inheritor of the promises. The Bible is not my Bible, 


50 THE BELIEVER’S SUFFICIMNCY. 


nor your Bible—it is our Bible. It is common property ; 
it belongs to the universal Church. We have no sym- 
pathy, of course, with those who would monopolize this 
sacred treasure, and keep this light of the Gospel burn- 
ing, and that, with a precious dimness, only in the study 
of the priest, or fettered, as it used to be, like & curiosity, 
to the altars of the Church. Thank God, these days of 
darkness are forever gone by. And yet there is a Church, 
somewhere, hit le Christian, which denies to its 
members the light and comfort of the Bible, in direct 
oppo:ition to the command of Him who has said to every 
one, “Search the Scriptures,” thus most absolutely exalt- 
ing itself against all that is called God. Oh, most foul 
corruption! Deprive us of the Bible! As well forbid 
us to gaze on the jewelled sky, or to be fanned by the 
winged and searching air. Deprive us of the Bible! 
Call it sin for us to look at the sun, and to bask in the 
blaze of his eniivening beams. The very same hand 
which launched yon orb upon his ocean of light, and 
bade him shine upon the evil and upon the good, has 
sent this orb into the world, and has sent it on purpose 
that it may be a ldmp to all our feet and a lantern to all 
our paths. We devoutly thank the good Spirit of the 
Lord, that he put into the minds of our forefathers to 
protest against so flagrant and monstrous an impiety ; 
and, thank God, we are Protest-ants still. We cannot 
afford to be thus robbed of our birthright, to be thus 
cheated out of our inheritance, to be thus bsasely swindled 
out of the possession of the Book of God. It is the 
legacy of the Apustle’s labor; the bulwark of the con- 
fessors’ faith ; the purchase of the martyr’s blood. Thank } 
God for the Bible. Let us prove that we love it, by q 
drawing from it all the comfort and blessing, and guid \: 
ance, and warning, which its heaven-inspired pages are 
calculated to afford. Well, we have a right, each of us ' 
— if we are in Christ—we have a right to expect this 4 
sufficiency, because it is promised in the Bible We . © 
gather it from the declarations of Scripture. Listen to a 


ECE ET RIO 


SSS 


property ; 
> NO sym- 
lize thig 
pel burn- 
he study 
urlosity, 
» days of 
Church, 
8 to its 
n direct 
to every 
ly exalt- 
10st foul 
l forbid 
by the 
ible! 
in the 
e hand 
it, and 
d, has 
urpose 
1 to all 
of the 
ners to 
piety ; 
Cannot 
e thus 
indled 
is the 
€ con- 


THE BELIEVER’S SUFFICIENCY. 51 


them, they are yours: “ Thus saith the Lord who created 
thee, O Jacob, who formed thee, O Israel, Fear not, [ 
have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name.” 
What a beautiful thought thatis! Just get the meaning 
and beauty out of it. How many thousands of believers, 
thousands upon thousands of believers, have there been 
in the world from the beginning of its history until now 
—thousands in the patriarchal ages who looked through 
the glass, and who saw, dimly, the streak of'the morning 
in the distance, and, even with that streak of light, were 
glad—thousands, in the prophetical times, who disccrned 
it in the brightness of a nearer vision—thousands who 
basked in its tull-orbed lustre, when Christ came into the 
world—thousands upon thousands, since that time, who 
have washed their robes and made them white in the 
blood of the Lamb—thousands, who are now upon the 
earth, working out their salvation with fear and trembling 
—thousands upon thousands that shall come into the 
Church in the time of its milleni:l glory, when the gates 
of it shall not be shnt day nor night, because the porter 
shall have no chance of shutting them, the people crowd 
in so fast. Now get all that mass of believers, past, 
present, and future, a company that noman can number; 
and to each of them God comes in this promise, and says, 
“IT have called thee by thy name, [ know all about thee” 
—that is, I have not a merely vague, indefinite knowledge 
of thee ; as an individual believer [ know thy name, I 
could single thee out of millions, I could tell the world 
all thy solicitudes, and all thy apprehensions, and all thy 
hopes, and all thy sorrows—“ I have called thee by thy 
name.” Qh, precious promise! Take it to your hearts. 
“T have called thee by thy name; thou art mine; when 
thou passest through the waters I will be with thee ; and 
through the rivers”’—deeper than the waters— the 
shall not overflow thee. When thou walkest throug 
the fire thou shalt not be burned, neither shall the flames 
kindle upon thee.” Listen again: ‘The Lord God is a 
sun and shield”—light and protection; that nearly em; 


52 THE BELIEVER’S SUFFICIENCY. 


braces all our wants—“ he will give grace and glory.” 
Is there anything left out? And if there are any of you 
so perversely clever and so mischievously ingenious in 
multiplying arguments in favour of your own despair, 
that you can conceive of some rare and precious blessing 
that is not wires up either in grace or glory— No 
good thing will he withheld from them that walk up- 
rightly.” ‘ Fear not, for I am with thee; be not dis- 
mayed, for I am thy God.” “Cast all thy care’— 
“ Nay,” the rebel heart says, “There is some little of it 
I must bear myself; something that has reference to the 
heart’s bitterness, that it alone knoweth; or to the heart’s 
deep, dark sorrow, with which no stranger intermeddles 
_—that I must bear myself.” ‘Cast al/ thy care upon 
me, for I care for thee.’ What! distrustful still? Can 
you not take God at his word? Hark! he condescends 
to expostulate with you upon your unbelief: “ Why 
sayest thou, O Jacob, and speakest, O Israel, my way is 
hid from the Lord’—how often have you said that in the 
time of your sorrow! you know you have— my way is 
hid from the Lord, my judgment is passed over from my 
God. Hast thou not known, hast thou not heard, that 
the everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of 
the earth, fainteth not, neither is weary. There is no 
searching of his understanding. He giveth power to the 
faint.” He does not merely take his swoon away and 
leave him weakly, he makes him strong. “He giveth 
power to the faint, and to them that have no might he 
increaseth strength.” Are you still dissatisfied 

The God who knows human nature, knows how much 
better a teacher example is than precept, and so, spark- 
ling upon the pages of his holy truth, he has left us 
many bright instances of his interposition on behalf of 
his saints. Abraham rises early in the morning, goes a 
three days’ journey with the son of his love, intending all _ 
the while, with set and resolute purpose, to offer him in 
sacrifice to the God of heaven. Arrived at the place of 
their destination, all the ritual preparations are made: 


1 glory,” 
y of you 
— in 
espair 
lodat , 
y—*No 
valk up- 
not dis- 
care” — 
tle of it 
e to the 
e heart’s 
meddles 
re upon 
ean 
escends 
6c Why 
’ Way is 
tin the 
way is 
om my 
d, that 
ends of 
e is no 
to the 
by and 
iveth 
rht he 


much 
spark- 
eft us 
alf of 
Foes a 
ee. 
1m 1n 
Ace of 
ade: 


58 


THE BELIEVER’S SUFFICIENCY. 


the altar is prepared; the willing victim, unresisting, is 
bound; the sacrificial knife is lifted; no escape, then, 
surely! But man’s extremity is God’s opportunity, and 
the ram is caught in the thicket by its horns, and God’s 
grace is sufficient—none too much—but sufficient still. 
‘he children of Israel are brought to the borders of the 
Red Sea, hotly pursued by the flower of the Egyptian 
army ; the troops are close upon them in the rear: the 
Red Sea stretches before them—the inaccessible hills of 
Baal-Zephon tower on the right hand and on the left. 
What are they to do? There seems no possible chance 
of escape. Oh! what are the laws of gravitation when 
the Lord works for his people? He who made them can 
alter them at pleasure. The waters erect themselves on 
either hand, and the bed of the ocean is their triumphal 
pereny: God’s grace is sufficient still. Nehemiah, 
ike a true-hearted patriot as he was, set to work to 
rebuild the delapidated wallstof Jerusalem. But he 
began, like sume of his successors, in troublous times; 
Sanballat and Tobiah came to fight against the workmen ; 
they were so hard beset, that they had to work with 
sword in the one hand and trowel in the other; God’s 
grace was sufticient, and the second Jerusalem rose up in 
majesty upon the site of the ruins of the first. What! 
not satisfied yet? Surely that musc be an almost invin- 
cible unbelief that these instances will not overcome. 
What is it you say? ‘Oh, but these are all instances 
taken from the Old Testament times ; the age of miracles 
is over now—we are not now to except such interpositions 
on behalf of God’s people.” Well, let us try again. 
Come out of the light of Scripture a little into the light 
of common life. Tred softly as you enter that house, 
for it is a house of mourning; a large family surround 
the bedside of a dying parent; that parent is a Christian, 
and knowing in whom he has believed, he is not afraid to 
die. But he has a large family, and the thought that he 
shall leave them without a protector, the thought of the 
forcible disruption of all social ties, presses upon his 


= « 


THE BELIEVER’S SUFFICIENCY. 


o4 


spirit, and when you look at him, there is a shade of 
sadness upon his countenance; but you gaze awhile, and 
you see that sadness chased away by a smile. What has 
wrought the change? What? Why, a ministering 
angel whispered to him: ‘“‘ Leave thy tatherless clildren ; 
I will preserve them alive.” He hails the promiser. 
Faith cries out: “It is he, it is he; my God is present 
here.” Heenjoysrapt and high communion with celestial 
visitants, and thus that chamber of death becomes the 

ate of heaven.’ You pass by that house the next morn- 
ing: the half-closed shutter and the drawn blind tell you 
that he was and is not. You enter—the widow is sitting 
in sorrow; the first deep pang is scarcely over. The 
tones of her husband’s voice, with which she has so long 
been familiar, rush, in all the freshness of yesterday, upon 
her soul, and she is worn with weeping. But she, too, is 
a Christian, and she flies to the Christian’s refuge, and 
her eye traces those comfortable words: “Thy Maker is 
thine husband—the Lord of Hosts is his name.” It is a 
dark hour ; it has been a dark day; and the darkness has 
gathered, and settled, and deepened as the day wore :n, 
and now at eventide there is soft and brilliant light, 
because her sufficiency isof God. You pass by the house 
again when about a week has elapsed. The last sad rites 
have been performed ; the funeral bell, with its suppressed 
and heavy summons, sounding like the dividing asunder 
of soul and body, has tolled; the very clay of her hus- 
band has been torn from her embrace. He has died in 
somewhat struitened circumstances; he was the sole de- 
pendence of the family, and, with aching head and 
throbbing heart, she sits down to calculate about her 
future subsistence; her heart begins to fail her, but, 
before she gives way to despair, she consults a friend ; he 
is a Wise man, one upon whom the influences of the Holy 
Spirit have operated longs and he gives her the testimony 
of a long lifes of experience: “I have been young, and 
uow am old, yet I have not seen the righteous forsaken, 
nor his seed begging bread.” Dashing away the tears 


in C 
your 
reco 
66 
be s 
it W 
God 
ror 
Or | 
look 
ang 
Oh | 
we | 
Just 
gun 


and 


shade of 
hile, and 
W hat has 
inistering 
clildren ; 
promiser, 
3 present 
_eclestial 
ymes the 
xt morn- 
tell you 
is sitting 
er. The 
s 80 long 
ay, upon 
e, too, is 
ige, and 
Maker is 
It isa 
ness has 
yore (nN, 
t light, 
he house 
bad rites 
pressed 
asunder 
er hus- 
died in 
sole de- 
nd and 
but her 
r, but, 
nd; he 
e Holy 
imony 
y, and 
saken, 
tears 


. 
ia 


THE BELIEVER’S SUFFICIENCY. 55 


that had blinded her, she struggles and labors on, and 
feels that though it is her darkest hour, her sufficiency is 
still:of God. That is no uncommon care: J have not 
drawn largely upon the extravagance of an imaginative 
fancy to bring it out. I could go into many of our 
sanctuaries and bid yov listen to one, as with a glad heart 
and free, sings the converted sinner’s anthem: ‘“O Lord, 
I will praise thee; thou wast angry with me, but thine 
anger is turned away, and now thou comfortest me.” 
Then I could bid you listen to the experience of another, 
but faltering and low, for he is just recovering from recent 
illness: “I was brought low, and he heiped me; he 
saved me even from the gates of death.” And then we 
could point you to a third, and say: “This poor man 
cried, and the Lord heard him, anc saved him out of all 
his troubles.” And where aie the damnatory clauses that 
forbid you to partake of these blessings? What statute 
of limitations is there that bars you from the enjoyment 
of this great and gracious heritage? Brethren, are you 
in Christ? Then all- that belongs to the covenant is 
yours. Yours is the present heritage, yours is the future 
recompense of reward. 

“ Our sufficiency is of God.” Isitso? Then you will 
be sustained in trial; you won’t succomb to its power; 
it won’t over-master you; you will regard it as sent of 
God, intended to work lessons and changes of some 

rovidential discipline within you. You will be grateiul 
or it; you will know that when it comes, although it 
looks harsh and repulsive outside, you have entertained 
angels unawares, you will find after it has gone away. 
Oh! we learn many lessons when the head is low, that 
we do not learn in the heyday of prosperity and blessing. 
Just as it is in the natural world: you know when the 
sun is set, the stars come out in their placid beauty, and 


‘Darkness shows us worlds of light 
We never saw by day;”’ 


and we should never have known they were there if the 


ae = 4 


56 THE BELIEVER’S SUFFICIENCY. 


darkness had not come. So in the night of God’s pro- 
vidential dispensations, the stars of the great promises 
come shining out, broad and bright upon the soul; and 
we rejoice in their light and go on our way rejoicing. 
Or, changing the figure, in the glad summer time, when 
the leaves are on the trees, we go out, such of us as can 
get into the country—we go out into the thick woods 
and walk under the trees in shadow, and their branches 
interlace above us, and the leaves are green and glossy; 
and so thick above that we cannot see the sky dirongh. 
and then we forget that there is another world, and our 
hearts are revelling in all pleasure and all blessedness of 
this. But when the blasts of winter come and scatter 
the leaves doi, then the light of heaven comes in 
~ between, and we remember that here we have no contin- 
uing city, and are urged to seek one that is to come. 
Oh! take hold of God’s sufficiency then, and go bravely 
to the meeting of trial, and you will find that trial, 


“*God’s alchemist old, 
Forges off the dross and mold, 
And leaves us rich with gems and gold.”” 


Is your sufficiency of God? Then it will animate you to 
duty. Listen to this confession of weakness: “ Unto me 
who am less than the least of all saints, is this grace 
given.” Less than the least! What a pressure of weak- 
ness there must have been upon that soul!. Listen to 
this exulting consciousness of power: “I can do all 
things through Christ that strengtheneth me.” They are 
the antipodes of sentiment—are they not? Weakness 
the most helpless and feeble—power the most exultant 
and proud; and yet that confession of weakness, and that 
exultiug consciousness of power, were the utterance of the 
same lips, and the expression of the experience of the 
same individual. What made the difference? In the 
one case he relied upon his own resources; in the other, 
he took hold of the sufficiency of God. Take hold of the 
sufficiency of God, and nothing will be able to resist you ; 


yours 
orde 
he be 
of tl 
hind 
fling 
be a 
kind 
little 
Bret 
than 
sufi 
fort! 
binc 
clos 
unt 
to t 
tim 


sak 


70d’s pro- 
; promises 
soul ;- and 
rejoicing, 
me, when 
us aS can 
ck woods 
branches 
d Bossy : 
through ; 
and our 
edness of 
id svatter 
comes in 
0 contin- 
to come, 
) bravely 
ial, 


€ you to 
nto me 
is grace 
of weak- 
isten to 

do all 
hey are 
eakness 
xultant 
nd that 
e of the 
of the 
In the 
other, 
of the 
Bt you ; 


THE BELIEVER’S SUFFICIENC™. 57 


you will go forward strong in the Lord, and in the power 
of his might, overcoming sin and overcoming evil in its 
every form, and planting for yourself and for your Master 
an heritage of blessing in this world and in that one which 
is to come. 

“ Our sufficiency is of God.” Is there a poor strag- 
gling sinner that is rejoicing to think that the minister 
has forgotten him, and that while he has been endeavor- 
ing to bring out all the heart of the text—privilege and 
promise exceeding great and precious, for the benefit of 
believers---no word of warning can be extracted out of it 
for those that are yet ungodly? Wait a little. What is 
the lesson you are to learn from the subject? Just this: 
that there is a sufficiency in God to punish. All his 
attributes must be equally perfect. He must be just, as 
well as the free and generous justifier of him that believ- 
eth in Jesus. Oh, I beseech you, tempt not against 
yourselves that wrath which needs only to be kindled in 
order to burn unto the lowest hell. ‘ Kiss the Son, lest 
he be angry, and ye perish from the way.” Perish out 
of the way—just as men fling away any obstacle or 
hindrance that interrupts their progress, so shall God 
fling the wicked out of the way. “ vam the Son, lest he 
be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is 
kindled but a little. But a little—oh, it will need but a 
little kindling to doom you to the perdition of hell. 
Brethren, you need not perish: there is a sufficiency, 
thank God! there is a sufficiency in Christ tosave. Our 
sufficiency is of God. And with this promise that I fling 
forth into the midst of you, and pray that God would 
bind it as a spell of sweet enchantment on your souls, I 
close my words to-night: ‘ Wherefore he is able to save 
unto the uttermost”—to the uttermost of human guilt— 
to the uttermost of human life—to the uttermost of human 
kg May God save your souls, for the Redeemer’s 
sake! 


Se - « 


IIL. 


THE MISSION OF THE PULPIT. 


‘‘ Therefore, seeing we have this ministry, as we have received mercy, 
we faint not; but have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not 
walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully; but by 
manifestation of the truth commending ourselves to every man’s conscience 
in the sight of God.” —2 Cor. iv., 1, 2. 


Cats HIS is the Apostle’s recorded judgment as to 
2461 the mission of the ministry which he had re- 
eM ceived of the Lord J esus, and the duties of which 
he discharged with such singular fidelity and zeal. In 
the preceding chapter, he magnifies its superiority alike 
of glory and of substantial usefulness over the dispensation 
of the law, and then in a few weighty words separates 
himself entirely from all false barset era and establishes 
himself, upon the ground of holy character and exalted 
office, as Heaven’s high remembrancer among the na- 
tions—a true witness for God amidst a dark and alien 
world. He takes care, at the very outset, to assure those 
to whom he speaks, that he is of the same nature, and 
originally of the same sinfulness, as themselves: ‘ There- 
fore seeing that we have received this ministry, as we 
have received mercy, we faint not.” We are not—as if 
he had said—a distinct order of beings: there is no 
natural superiority of character which might make the 
minister proud, or which might make the hearer distant, 
and callous, and unsympathizing. We once were sinners ; 
we have yet the memory of bondage; we have received 
mercy, and are anxious to tell to others the tidings that 


r. 


ceived mercy, 
ishonesty, not 
fully ; but by 
n’s conscience 


ent as to 
ie had re- 
8 of which 
zeal. In 
rity alike 
spensation 
separates 
pstablishes 
d exalted 
oe the na- 
and alien 
sure those 
ure, and 
** There- 
'y, as we 
ot—as if 
bre is no 
ake the 
distant, 
sinners ; 
received 
ngs that 


THE MISSION OF THE PULPIT. 59 


have led to our redemption. As we have received mercy 
we faint not, but have renounced the hidden things of 
dishonesty, the secret immoralities of pagan priests; not 
walking in crattiness, not retaining our hold upon the 
consciences of men by deceivableness of unrighteousness, 
and by juggling, lying wonders; not handling the Word 
of (Zod deceitfully, not preaching an adulterated truth or 
a flexible Gospel; not pliant to the prejudices, or silent 
to the vices of those who hear us; “but, by manifesta- 
tion of the truth, commending ourselves to every man’s 
conscience in the sight of God.” 

All this, affirmed by the Apostle of the ministry of 
olden time, may be affirmed of the ministry of reconcilia- 
tionnow. That ministry, wickedly maligned on the one 
hand, imperfectly fulfilled on the other hand, has yet its 
mission to the world. The unrepealed command still 
stands upon the statute-book: ‘‘ Go ye into all the world, 
and preach the Gospel unto every creature.” And it isa 
prayer often earnestly and passionately uttered by those 
on whom its obligations have fallen, that, repudiating 
artifice and idleness, they may, by manifestation of the 
truth, commend themselves to every man’s conscience in 
the sight of God. I purpose, God helping me, briefly to 
notice from these words—in the first place, the business 
of the ministry ; secondly, the instrumentality which it 
ene and thirdly, the thought that hallows it. 

. Tur Ministry—this is my first position—nas A BUSE 
NESS WITH THE WoRLD. It is the Divinely-appointed 
agency for the communication of God’s will to man. As 
a Divine institution it advanced its claims in the be- 
ginning, and in no solitary instance have they been re- 
linquished since. This Divine authorization and enact- 
ment are still in force. The Bible says, when Christ 
ascended up on high, “he led captivity captive, and re- 
ceived gifts for men; and he gave some apustles, and 
some prophets, and some evangelists, and some pastors 
and teachers, for the perfecting of the saints, for the work 
of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ.” 


——  « 


60 THE MISSION OF THE PULPIT. 


There ight be sometaing special, perhaps, in this 
original commission, but the principle of its Divine origin 
is evidently presented as the principle of the ministry 
itself; for St. Paul, who was not then called, who speaks 
of himself afterward as one born out of due time, 
earnestly and anxiously vindicates the Heavenly origin of 
his apostleship: ‘I certify you, brethren, that the Gospel 
which was preached of me is not of men; for I neither 
received it of men, neither was I taught it but by the 
revelation of Jesus Christ.” This it is which is the 
elevation of the Christian r:inistry, which exalts it far 
above human resources and human authority. It travels 
on in its own majestic strength—Heaven-mspired and 
heaven-sustained. Moreover, the same passage which 
tells us ‘of the institution of the ministry announces its 
duration, and tells of the period when it shall be-no longer 
needed—till we all come, in the unity of the faith and of 
the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man— 
unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. 

This period, thus divinely appointed for the cessation 
of the ministry, has obviously not yet arrived. The 
world sees but little yet of millennial glory; there is yet 
an alienated heart in its debased and rebel tribes; there 
is nothing in the pursuits which it follows, nor in the 
natural impulses which move it, to incite to holy aim or 
to induce spiritual living. It has no self-suggestive 
memory of God. It has passions as blind and powerful, 
and a willas perverseas ever. Death is in the midst of it, 
and, though the corpse may be sometimes embalmed with 
spices, or tricked out with flowers, or carried ’neath 
obsequious plumes to burial, the chill is at its heart, the 
breath of the plague is in the tainted air, and there is need, 
strong and solemn need, for the anointed witness who 
may stand between the living and the dead, that the 
plague may he stayed. There are some, I know, who 
tell us that the mission of the pulpit is fulfilled. They 
acknowledge that, in the earlier ages, in the times of com- 
parative darkness, when men spelt out the truth in 


, in this 
ine origin 
P ministry 
rho speaks 
due time, 
y origin of 
he Gospel 
I neither 
ut by the 
ich is the 
alts it far 
It travels 
pired and 
ee which 
unces its 
no longer 
ith and of 
et man— 
ft Christ. 
cessation 
d. The 
ere is yet 
2s; there 
or in the 
y alin or 
lggestive 
oowerful, 
idst of it, 
ned with 
d ’neath 
eart, the 
e is need, 
less who 
that the 
yw, who 
They 
of com- 
Tuth in 


THE MISSION OF THE PULPIT. 61 


syllables, it did a noble work; but the world has out- 
grown it, they tell us; men need neither its light nor its 
warning ; the all-powerful Press shall direct them, the 
educational institute shall assis! them in their upward 
prapsts, they shall move onward and upward under the 
guidance of the common mind. And, while this is the 
ery of infidelity and indifferentism, there are some among 
ourselves who have partially yielded to the clamor. They 
have deplored (as who must not ?) the apparent ineffective- 
ness of existing agencies, the feebleness of the efforts for 
evangelical aggression, and, in their eagerness to con- 
ciliate prejudice and disarm opposition, they have com- 
promised somewhat the high tone of Christian teach- 
ing, and have studiously avoided the very terminology of 
the Bible, so that the great truths of God’s will and man’s 
duty, of Christ’s atonement and the sinner’s pardon, of 
the Spirit’s work and the believer’s growth—those old 
gospels whose sound is always music and whose sight is 
always joy, are hardly to be recognized, as they are hidden 
beneath profound thought, or veiled within affected 
phrase. But the Divine institution of the ministry is not 
to be thus superseded. It has to do with eternity, and 
the matters of eternity are paramount. It deals and 
would grapple with the inner man; it has to do with the 
deepest emotions of the nature, with those instincts of 
internal truths which underlie all systems, from which a 
man can never utterly divorce himself, and which God 
himself has graven on the soul. So far as they work in 
harmony with its high purpose, it will hail the helpings 
of all other teaching ; but God hath given it the monarchy, 
and it dare not abdicate its throne. The opposition that 
you sometimes meet with of worldliness and infidelity to 
the pulpit, if you analyze it, you find that though it may 
have derived from the oppressions of priestcraft in bygone 
ages somewhat of plausibility and force, it is but one 
phase of the method in which the human heart discovers 
its rooted and apparently unconquerable enmity to God. 
Hence it is one of the worst symptoms of the disease 


4 


62 THE MISSION OF THE PULPIT. 


which the ministry has been calculated and instituted to 
remove. The teaching of the political agitator, of the 
philanthropic idealist, of the benevolent instructor—why 
are they so popular? The teaching of the religious 
minister—why is it so repulsive to the world? Mainly 
from this one fact, that the one reproves, and the other 
exalts human nature—the one ignores, the other insists 
upon the doctrine of the Fall. You will find, in all the 
schemes for the uplifting of man not grounded on the 
Bible, the exaltation of his nature as it is, lofty ideas of 
perfectibility, assertions that it needs neither revelation 
nor heavenly influence to guide it in the way of truth. 
Thus the Gospel is presented only as one among many 
systems which all men may accept or reject at pleasure. 
Its restraints are deemed impertinence, its reproots 
unnatural bondage. The talk of such teaching is fre- 
quently of rights, seldom of duties. They are compli- 
mented on their manliness who ought to be humbled for 
their sin, and, by insidious panderings to their pride, 
they are exhorted to atheism, self-reliance, or habitual 
disregard of God. Both kinds of teaching, the worldly 
and the religious alike, aim at the uplifting of the nature. 
But then they look at it from different standpoints, and, 
of course, they apply to it different treatment. The one 
is an endeavor to exalt the nature without God ; the other 
would take hold of his strength and work to the praise of 
his glory. The one regards humanity as it once was 
before sin had warped it, able to tower and triumph in 
its own unaided strength—the other sees it decrepit or 
ailing, the whole head sick and the whole heart faint ; 
and yet, ry the balm of Gilead, to be restored to pristine 
vigor. The one deeming that no confusion has come 
upon its language, nor shame upon its many builders, 
would have it pile up its Babel towers until they smite 
the skies—the other sees the towers in ruins, splintered 
shaft and crumbling arch bearing witness that they were 
once beautiful exceedingly, and that by the grace and 
skill of the heavenly A edifiact, they may grow up again 
into a holy temple in the Lord. 


stituted to 
or, of the 
‘tor—why 
religious 
Mainly 
the other 
ler insists 
in all the 
ed on the 
VY ideas of 
evelation 
of truth. 
ng many 
pleasure, 
reproots 
g is fre- 
, compli- 
nbled for 
air pride 
hattnaal 
worldly 
> Nature, 
nts, and, 
The one 
he other 
raise of 
1ce was 
mph in 
repit or 
t faint ; 
pristine 
S come 
lilders, 
' smite 
intered 
y were 
e and 
again 


THE MISSION OF THE PULPIT. 63 


It is absolutely necessary, in this age of manifold 
activities and of spiritual pride, that there should be this 
ever-speaking witness of man’s feebleness and of God’s 
strength. And, however mich the opposition against the 
ministry may tell, and it does tell, and it ought to tell, 
ayainst the vapid and frivolous, against the idle and insin- 
cere, it is a powerful motive for the institution of the 
ministry itself; just as the blast that scatters the acorns, 
roots the oak the more firmly in the soil. So long as 
men are born to die, so long as the recording angel 
registers human guilt, so long as human responsibility 
and retribution are unheeded truths, so long as there is 
one solitary sinner tempted by the black adversary, so 
Jong will the ministry have a busixess with the world; 
and it is the earnest prayer of those who have undertaken 
it that they may in some humble measure, in all fidelity 
and with dauntless courage, with genial sympathy, with 
pure affection, be witnesses for God. like that glorious 
angel whom the evangelist saw with the light upon his 
wings, having the everlasting Gospel to preach unto 
every nation and people and tongue. 

II. I observe, secondly, THE BUSINESS OF THE MINISTRY 
18 MAINLY WITH THE CONSCIENCE OF MEN. Every man has 
a conscience; that is, a natural sense of the difference 
between good and evil—a principle which does not con- 
cern itself so much with the true and false in human 
ethics, or with the gainful and damazing in human for- 
tunes, as with the right and wrong in human conduct. 
Call it what you will, analyze it as you may—a faculty, 
an emotion, a law—it is the most important principle in 
our nature, because by it we are brought into sensible 
connection with, and sensible recognition of, the moral 
government of God. It has been detined sometimes as a 
tribunal within a man for his own daily and impartial 
trial; and in its various aspects it answers right well to 
all the parts of a judicial tribunal. It is the bar at which 
the sinner pleads; it prefers the accusation of transgres- 


sion ; it records the crime; it bears witness to guilt or. 


64 THE MISSION OF THE PUL PIT. 


innocence ; and as a judge it acquits or condemns. Thus 
taking cognizance of moral actions, it is the faculty which 
relates us to the other world; and by it God, retribution, 
eternity, are made abiding realities to the soul. As by 
the physical senses we are brought into connection with 
the physical world, and the blue heavens over it, and the 
green earth around us, are recognized in their relation to 
ourselves; so by this moral sense of conscience we see 
ourselves, in the light of immortality, responsible crea- 
tures, and gain ideas of duty and of God. How mighty 
is the influence which this power has wielded, and yet 
continues to wield in the world! There are many that 
have tried to be rid of it, but there is a manhood at its 
heart which murder cannot kill. There are many that 
have rebelled against its authority, but they have acknow- 
ledged its might notwithstanding, and it has rendered 
them disturbed and uneasy in their sin, There are mul- 
titudes more that have fretted against its wholesome 
warnings ; and often when, because it has warned them 
of danger or threatened them with penalty—they have 
tried to stifle and entomb it, it has risen up suddenly into 
a braver resurrection, and pealed forth its remonstrances 
in bolder port and louder tone. But for its restraint, 
many of the world’s reputable ones would have become 
criminal, But for its restraint, many of the world’s 
criminals would have become more audaciously bad. It 
has spoken, and the felon, fleeing when no man pursued 
him, has been chased by ». falling leaf. It has spoken, 
and the burglar has paled behind his mask, startled at 
his own footfall. It has spoken, and the coward assassin 
has been arrested in his purpose, and has paused irresolute 
ere he has struck the blow. Its vindictive and severe 
upbraiding after the sin has been committed has often 
lashed the sinner into agony, and secured an interval of 
comparative morality by preventing sin for a season. It 
has been the one witness for God amid the traitor facul- 
ties—single but undismayed, solitary but true. When 
the understanding and the memory, and the will and the 


ins. Thus 
ty which 
tribution, 
l Ag by 
tion with 
t, and the 
elation to 
€ we see 
ible crea- 
Vv mighty 
and yet 
any that 
0d at its 
any that 
acknow- 
rendered 
are mul- 
10lesome 
ed them 
ey have 
nly into 
strances 
estraint, 
become 
world’s 
vad. It 
pursued 
spoken, 
tled at 
assassin 
esolute 
severe 
s often 
rval of 
yn. It 
facul- 
When 
nd the 


THE MISSION OF THE PULPIT. 


affections, had all consented to the enticements of evil, 
conscience has stood firm, and the man could never sin 
with comfort until he had drugged it into desperate 
repose. It has been the one dissentient power among 
the faculties, like a moody guest among a company of 
frantic revellers, whom they could neither conciliate nor 
expel. When God’s judgments have been abroad in the 
world, and men would fain have resolved them into 
ordinary occurrences or natural phenomena, conscience 
has refused to be satisfied with such delusive interpreta- 
tions, and, without a prophet’s inspiration, has itself 
deciphered the handwriting as it blazed upon the wall. 
It has forced the criminal oftentimes to dolly himself 
up to justice, preferring the public shame of the trial and 
the gallows-tree to the deeper hell of a ~onscience aroused 
and angry. Yes, and it has constrained from the dying 
sinner a: testimony to the God he has insulted, given 
when the shadows of perdition were already darkening 
upon the branded brow. 

Oh, brethren, that must be a mighty power which has 
wrought and which is working thus! And it has wrought 


and is working in you; and, as such, we acknowledge it. © 


We can despise no man who has aconscience. Although 
‘with meanness and with sin he may largely overlay it, 
we recognize the majestic and insulted guest, and are 
silent and respectful as in the presence of a fallen king. 
Wesee the family-likeness, although intemperance has 
bloated the features and has dulled the sparkle of the eye. 
There is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of the 
Almighty giveth him understanding. ow it is with 
this faculty in man that the minister has mainly to do. 
His work, his business, is to bring out the world’s con- 
science in its answer to the truths of Divine revelation. 
Recognizing in it something which can respond to its own 
duty, the ministering witness without will constantly 
appeal to the answering witness within. Regarding all 
other faculties, however separately noticeable, as avenues 
gnly to the conscience, he will ain constantly at the ears 


——- = 


66 THE MISSION OF THE PULPIT. 
of the inner man. To come short of this is to come short 
of duty. To fail in this is to fail in a work which our 
Master has given us to do. We should form but a very 
unworthy estimate of our own high calling if we were to 
aim at the sels! hg of any subordinate faculty, and 
that accomplished, sit down as if our work were done, 
The minister may appeal to the intellect—of course he 
may. All thanks to him if he clear away difficulties 
from the path of the bewildered. All thanks to him if 
he present truth in its symmetry of system, and in all the 
grand and rounded harmony of its beautiful design. But 

e must press through the outworks to the citadel, 
through the intellect to the conscience, that the understand- 
ing, no longer darkened, may apprehend the truth, and 
that the apprehended truth may make the conscience 
free. The imagination may be charmed by the truth, 
which is itself beauty; but only that it may hold the 
mirror up to conscience, to see its own portrait there 
photographed directly from on high, and which, with 
such marvellous fidelity, gives all the scars upon the 
countenance, and every spot and wrinkle upon the brow. 
The passions may be roused by the truth, which is the 
highest power—not that areute may swoon away under 
terrific apprehensions of wrath, or only or mainly that 
people may escape hell and enter heaven, but that the con- 
science may resolve on a holy life, that there may result 
the comely outgrowth of a transformed and spiritual 
character, and that through the impending fear of per- 
dition and the promised water of life, a man may issue 
into the wealthy place of confidence in God, assimilation 
to his image that attachment to right which would cleave 
fast to it, even were its cause hopeless and its friends 
ie and that perfect love which casteth out all possible 
ear. 

It is not the intellect, then, but the conscience—not the 
imagination, but the conscience—not the passions, but 
the conscience—to which the minister is to commend 
himself in the sight of God. If he speaks to the intellect, 


ome short 
which our 
uta very 
e were to 
ulty, and 
are done, 
course he 
ifficulties 
to him if 
in all the 
en. But 
citadel, 
lerstand- 
uth, and 
nscience 
e truth, 
hold the 
it there 
ch, with 
pon the 
ie brow. 
1 is the 
y under 
nly that 
the con- 
y result 
piritual 
of per- 
ly issue 
ulation 
cleave 
friends 
ossible 


not the 
is, but 
amend 
ellect, 


THE MISSION OF THE PULPIT. 67 


the philosopher can rival him. If he speaks to the 
imagination, his brightest efforts pale before the dazzling 
images of the poet’s brain. If he speaks to the passions, 
the political demagogue can do it better. But, in his 
power over the conscience, he has a power which no man 
shares. An autocrat undisputed, a czar of many lands, 
he can wield the sceptre over the master-faculty of man. 
Oh! very solemn is the responsibility which thus rests 
upon the religious teacher. To have the master-faculty 
of man with'n his grasp; to witness of truths that are 
unpopular and repulsive; to reprove of sin, and of 
righteonsness, and of judgment; to do this with his own 
heart frail and erring, with the moral conflict battling in 
his own spirit the while. ‘ Who is sufficient for these 
things?” breaks often from the manliest heart in its seasons 
of depression and unrest. But there is a comfort broad 
and strong, and I feel that comfort now supporting 
me. While pained by my own unworthiness, and by the 
trifling of multitudes over whom ministers weep and 
earn—pained by the short-sighted and self-complacent 
indifference of the shurck and the world—pained by 
the thousand difficulties which Satan always puts in the 
way of the reception of the truth as it is in Jesus; I say 
there is a comfort of which I cannot be deprived: that 
all the while there is a mysterious something moving in 
you—in you all—barbing the faithful appeal, pointin, 
the solemn warning, striking the alarum in ‘the sinner’s 
soul. There! listen to that! That belongs to thee. 
That heart so callous and ungrateful—it is thine. That 
sin that the minister reproves—thou hast committed it. 
That doom so full of agony and horror—thou art speeding 
to it. How wilt thou escape the damnation of hell? 
Many a time and oft, when the minister without has gone 
sheafless to his home, and in tears has offered his com- 
plaint, “Who hath believed our report?” the minister 
within, by God’s grace has been a successful harvest-man, 
and gathered sheaves into the garner; and often when, 
to the eye of the human minister, there has been no 


4 


SF ae pee CRRA sink Re 


68 THE MISSION oF THE PULPIT. 


ripple on the waves, deep in the depths of the soul have 
swelled the billows of the troubled sea; and in the 
keenest acknowledgment of the truth he was endeavoring 
to impress, men’s consciences have borne him witness, 
their thoughts meanwhile accusing, or else excusing one 
another. 

Again, the great instrumentality which God has em- 
powered us to use is the truth. You will have no diffi- 
culty in understanding what the Apostle means by the 
truth, because he calls it ‘“‘the word of grace,” and “our 
Gospel.” The revelation of God in Christ, the life and 
teaching and wondrous death of Jesus, was the truth, 
alone adapted to the supply of every need, and the 
rescue from every peril. The Apostle was no ordinary 
man. Well-read in the literature of the times, observant 
of the tendencies and the inclinations of man, he would 
be ready to acknowledge truth everywhere. He knew 
that there had been truth in the world before. He would 
see it in Pagan systems, gleaming faintly through encum- 
bered darkness. Fragments of it had fallen from 
philosophers in former times, and had been treasured up 
as wisdom. It had a somewhat healthy circulation 
through the household impulses and ordinary concerns of 
men. But it was all truth for the intellect, truth for 
social life, truth for the manward, not the Godward 
relations of the soul. The truth which told of God, 
which- hallowed all morality by the sanctions of Divine 
law, which provided for the necessities of the entire man, 
was seen but dimiy in uncertain traditions. Conscience 
was aslave. If it essayed to speak, it was overdone by 
clamor, or hushed by interest into silence. The higher 
rose the culture, the deeper sank the character. The 
whole world seemed like one vast valley, fertile and gay 
with flowers, but no motion in the dumb air, not any 
song of bird or sound of rill; the gross darkness of the 
inner sepulchre was not so deadly still, until there came 
down a breath fron: heaven that brought life upon its 
wings, and breathed that life into the unconscious heaps 


> soul have 
nd in the 
deavoring 

witness, 
using one 


d has em- 
P no difti- 
ns by the 
and “our 
e life and 
he truth, 
and the 
ordinary 
Dbservant 
he would 
te knew 
Le would 
h encum- 
en from 
sured up 
rculation 
1¢erns of 
ruth for 
rodtward 
of God, 

' Divine 
re man, 
science 
lone by 
higher 

. “be 
nd gay 
ot an 

of the 

e came 
pon its 
heaps 


THE MISSION OF THE PULPIT. 69 


of slain. Thus, when. Christ came with i ib atid 
purity and freedom, all other truth seeme oa Nd 
from it a clearer light and a richer adapta sire 
ordinary instincts of right and wrong re iii 
into @ Keener discernment, and tiielite 7 So 
spiritual sensibility. The Gospel hes le a ea 
morality; the Gospel established a more ¢ a ro ai ite 
the Gospel shed out a more genial nega ence. rosielei 
old systems had looked at man as a hal ries ; “a 
one side of his Aa a a “a neti : ae of his 
‘0 the earth. The Gospel took bi 
Pastis, both as lying baile npc oy } bis ones * 
aven, Love to man—the or ) ie 
te es of ray day, ts iy pti a oe 
he feet-of the good Samaritan, 
tania upon errands of mercy—love man bri a 
known in its fullness until the Gospel , inne 
shalt love thy neighbor” was a command of o Pike ree 
the Jews first ih es tise punta rattle 
contracted the affection. The Tit scene ae 
the Samaritan, but one within his own — : p Panis 
sphere. But when love to God came, like a q 
imothey leading out her daughter by the mia oe 
wondered at the rare he Se be : Fou fest 7 
their notice so long; and when th rh enmit 
that from that master-love the streams 0 love 
bile tea forth in ceaseless and in dager aay 
And the Gospel is just the same now. eae ped 
inspiration of ordinary kindnesses, and o - ye Alpes : 
and rippling happiness of life. It is the ye 1 orgie : 
the truth for man’s every exigency, anc 4 li 
peril—blessing the body and saving 9 hae ae _ 
truth, then, which we are to commen hahah 1 ee 
conscience, we understand the truth as i = mph ec 
the truth which psieaeagartes Mo join pda — 
» of it; the truth which reveals 
Galle euie from it; the truth which leads Bc par. 
doned spirit upward to holiness and heaven. ) 


a 


70 THE MISSION OF THE PULPIT. 


are to bring that conscience and that truth in connection 
with each other; that is the great business for which we 
are gathered here. In order that there may be the bring- 
ing of the one into connection with the other, there must 
be variety in all truth, suited to the various states in 
which the conscience of the hearers may be found. 

Now, for the sake of argument, we may take it that 
there are three stages in which nearly the whole of the 
consciences of humanity are ranged: those whose con- 
sciences are slumbering, torpid, inert, lifeless; those 
whose consciences are quick, apprehensive, alarmed; and 
those whose consciences have passed through those former 
stages, and are now peaceful, happy, and at rest. 

1. Firsc, there are some consciences that have no appre 
hension of God—no spiritual sensibility at all. It is a 
very sad thought that this has been, and continues to be, 
the condition of the vast majority of mankind. Think 
of the vast domain of paganism, where the truth of God 
is lost for lack of knowledge, with its monstrous idols, 
fertile of cruelty, and its characters exemplifying every 
variety of evil. You may look through universal history ; 
you can see the track of passion in the light of the flames 
which it has kindled; you can see the works of imagina- 
tion throned in bodiless thought, or sculptured in breath- 
ing marble ; you can see the many inventions of intellect 
on every hand, but for conscience placed on its rightful 
seat, and Senne its legitimate authority, you look 
almost in vain. Even in Christian England there are 
multitudes of whom it may be said that God is not in all 
their thoughts, to whom conscience is a dull and drowsy 
monitor, who live on from day to day in the disregard of 
plainest duties, and in habitual, hardening sin. Are 
there not some here? It may be you go to your place of 
worship, but to little purpose ; you are rarely missed from 
your accustomed seat, but you have trifled with conscience 
until it rarely troubles you, and when it does, you pooh- 
pooh it as the incoherences of a drunkard, or the ravings 
of some frantic madman. Brethren, I do feel it a solemn 


connection 
which we 
the bring- 
here must 
States in 
nd, 
Ke it that 
ble of the 
hose con- 
8S; those 
med: and 
bse former 
t 


O appre- 

It is a 
les to be, 

Think 
1 of God 
us idols, 
ng every 
history ; 
ne flames 
imagina- 
1 breath- 
intellect 
rightful 


science 
l pooh- 
avi ngs 
30lemn 


71 


THE MISSION OF THE PULPIT. 


duty to manifest God’s arousing truth to you. I appeal 
to the moral sense within you. You are attentive to the 
truth ; the Word is suffered to play around your under- 
standing ; I want it to go deeper. i accuse you fearlessly 
of heinous and flagrant transgression, because you have 
not humbled yourselves before Heaven; and God, in 
whose hands your breath is, and whose are all your ways, 
you have not glorified. I charge you with living to 
yourselves, or that, going about to establish your own 
righteousness, you have not submitted yourself to the 
righteousness of God. I arraign you as being guilty of 
base ingratitude, inasmuch as when Christ was offered, 
the just for the unjust, that he might bring you to God, 
you refused to hearken. And you have trodden under 
foot the blood of the covenant, and counted it an unholy 
thing. I accuse some of you, moreover, of trying to 
secure impunity by your vile treatment of God’s inward 
witness. You have deposed conscience from its throne; 
you have tried to bribe it to be a participator with you 
In your crimes; you have overborne it by interest, or 
business, or clamor, or pleasure; you have limited its 
scrutiny to the external actions, and not allowed it to sit 
in judgment over the thoughts and intentions of the inner 
man. When it has startled you, you have lulled it to 
sleep, and you have done it on purpose that you might 
the more easily and the more comtortably sin. Brethren, 
I am not your enemy because I have told you the truth. 
That very conscience which you have insulted bears me 
witness that it is the truth which I now minister before 
you. I warn you of your danger. Oh! I would not 
fear to shake you roughly if I could only bring you 
to a knowledge of vourselves. It is a sad and disastrous 
thought that there are some consciences here so fatally 
asleep that they may never be roused except by the peal 
of the judgment trumpet or by the flashing of the penal 
fires. 
2. Then there are some whose consciences are aroused, 
and who are going about, it may be, in bitterness of soul. 


oe 


72 TILE MISSION OF THE PULPIT. 


You have seemed, perhaps, hard and impenetrable, but 
there has been a terrible war in your soul. Your con- 
science has been at work; iit is at work now. Oh! i 
have a power over you from this fact—that I have got 
an ally in your own bosom testifying to the truth of the 
things I speak before you. You may fret against that 
power, but you cannot rob me of it. You cannot get 
, the barb out; all your endeavors to extract it only widen 
and deepen the wound. My brother, oh! let me mani- 
fest Christ’s redeeming truth to thee. Christ has died ; 
all thy wants may be supplied through his wondrous 
death. Is thy heart callous and ungrateful? He has 
exalted the law and made it honorable. Hast thou dis- 
honored justice? He has satisfied its claims. Hast thou 
violated law! He has lifted up the majesty of its equity. 
Is there in thy spirit unrest and stoernn? Come to him; 
thy conscience is like the Galilean lake—it shall hear 
him, and there shall be a great calm. Doth the curse 
brood over thee, and calamity appal thy soul? Flee to 
his outstretched arms, and as thou sobbest on his bosom 
lear his whispered comfort: “There is, therefore, now 
no condemnation unto them that arein Christ Jesus, who 
walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.” See the 
clouds disappear, the tempest hath passed by, the storms 
rage no longer; lift up thy head, serene, peaceful, smiling, 
happy. Let us hear thy experienze: “In whom I have 
redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of 
sin, according to the riches of his grace.” 

3. But some of you have got still further, and are 
happy wn the sense of the fedeemer’s love. You are in the 
fairest possible position for the true soul-growth day by 
day. You rejoice in Clurist Jesus now. You have victory 
over the carnal mind now. A!l antagonistic powers are 
made subject now. Conscience has resumed its authority, 
and is sensitive at the approach of ill, and eager for the 
completed will of God. I rejoice to manifest God’s dis- 
cipling, training, growing, comforting, nourishing truth 
to you. Self is not the master-principle within you now; 


rable, but 
Your con- 
~ Oh! { 
have got 
th of the 
inst that 
nnot vet 
ily widen 
me mani- 
has died : 
vondrous 

He has 
thou dig- 
[ast thou 
‘8 equity, 
to in: 


8 bosom 
re, now 
sus, who 
See the 
P storms 
Smilin 

I pi 
pness of 


nd are 
e in the 
day by 

ictory 
ers are 
hority, 
or the 
N’s dig- 
truth 
now; 


THE MISSION OF THE PULPIT. 73 


you are not paralyzed by craven fear. There is a good 
land and fair before you. Rise to the dignity of your 
heritage. What a future awaits you! to ie dey by day 
more like God, to have day by day bright visions of the 
throne, day by day increased power over sin, increased 
rogress toward heaven, increased fellowship with the 
Divine: and then when the tabernacle falls down there 
opens another seene—angelic welcomes, the King in his 
beauty, and a house not made with hands eternal in the 
heavens. 

II. “By manifestation of the truth commending our- 
selves to every man’s conscience in the sight of God.” 
In THE sient or Gop. Al: that is the thought that hal- 
lows it. All our endeavors for the enlightenment of the 
ignorant are under the felt inspection of Almighty God. 
His eye marks the effort; his voice, “I know thy works,” 
is constantly in-spoken to the soul. It is necessary that 
we should feel this in order to fit us for our duty. If we 
do not feel this we shall have no courage. Depend upon 
it, the heroism which the pulpit needs, which it never 
needed in this world’s history so much asit needs to-day— 
the heroism which the pulpit needs, which the ministr 
must have, will not be wrought in the soul unless this 
thought be there. There is somuch to enslave aman— 
the consciousness of his own unworthiness and weakness, 
in his best and holiest moments; the love of approbation 
which, from a natural iastinct, swells often into a sore 
temptation ; the reluctance to give offence lest the ministry 
should be blamed, the anxiety as to what men think of 
him and say of him—oh! how often have these things 
checked the stern reproof or faithful warning, made a 
preacher: the slave instead of the monarch of his con- 
gregation, and instead of the stern, strong, fearless utter- 
ance of the prophet, made him stammer forth his lispings 
with the hesitancy of a blushing child. Depend upon it, 
it is no light matter ; it requires no common boldness to 
stand single-handed before the pride of birth, and the 


4 , pride of rank, and the pride of office, and the pride of 


cl 


74 THE MISSION OF THE PULPIT. 


intellect, and the pride of money, to rebuke their trans- 
gressions, to strip off their false confidence, and tear away 
their refuges of lies. But ifa man have it burned into 
his heart that he is speaking in the sight of God, he will 
do it—yes, he will. God-fear will banish man-fear. He 
will feel that for the time the pulpit is his empire and the 
temple is his throne, and, like another Baptist, he will 
thunder out his denunciations against rich and poor 
together, with his honest eyes straight flashing into 
theirs, “ Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.” 

“In the sight of God.” Give him that thought, and 
he will be tender as well as brave ; he will look upon his 
congregation as immortal, and will see in each one before 
him (oh, that thought is overwhelming !) an offspring of 
the Divine, an heir of the Everlasting ; and in this aspect 
of it he will tremble before the majesty of man; he will 
be awe-struck as he thinks of trying to influence them for 
eternity. There will be no harshness in his tones, there 
will be no severity in his countenance. If the violated 
law must speak out its thunders, it will be through 
brimming eyes and faltering tongue. He will remember 
his own recent deliverance. Like Joseph, he will scatter 
blessings round him with a large and liberal hand; but 
there will be no ostentation, there will be no vanity ; 
for he will remember that he is but the almoner of 
another’s bounty, and that his own soul has only just 
been brought out of prison. He will be. like one ship- 
wrecked mariner who has but just got upon a rock, and 
is stretching out a helping hand to another who yet 
struggles in the waters ; but he that is on the rock knows 
that the yawning ocean rages and is angry, near. Oh! 
let us realize that we are in sight of God, and we shall 
have larger sympathies for man, we shall have more of the 
spirit of Him who came eating and drinking, who was a 
friend of publicans and sinners. There will be no fierce 
rebukes, no proud exclusivism, no pharisaical arrogance 
then. The sleeper will not be harshly chided; the re- 


monstrance of affection will yearn over him, “My q 


‘i 
ei 


i 


reali 
Thon 
be uO 
mem 
again 
whetl 
shall 
souls. 
exten 
attent 
Wes 
to the 
and | 
allegi 
doing 
are dc 
thing 
there 
go 0% 
weak 
letter 
bring 
tinct 
life-w 
and 4 
heed. 
away 
sort ¢ 
indus 
earn 
it. 


air trans- 


ear away 
ned into 
, he will 
sar, He 
» and the 
. he will 
nd poor 
ng into 
perish.” 
cht, and 
upon his 
e before 
pring of 
iS aspect 
he will 
them for 
2s, there 
violated 
through 
member 
l scatter 
1d; but 
vanity ; 
oner of 
nly just 
ne ship- 
ck, and 
vho yet 
: knows 
Oh! 
ve shall 
e of the 
O was a 
0 fierce 
rogance 
the re- 


“My . 7 
@ 


7 


OF 


THE MISSION OF THE PULPIT. 


< 


brother, my brother!” and the tear will gather in the 
eye as the invitation is given, or the regret is breathed, 
“Ye will not come unto me that ye may have life ;” 
“Come, all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will 
give you rest.” 

“Tn the sight of God.” That will help us to persevere. 
We shall be constant as well as brave and tender, if we 
realize continually that we are in the sight of God. 
Thongh difficulties multiply, this will prevent us from 
becoming weary and faint in our minds; we shall re- 
member him who endured the contradiction of sinners 
against himself; and, through perverseness or obstinacy, 
whether men will bear or whether men will forbear, we 
shall labor on for the cause of Christ and for the good of 
souls, We shall not be satisfied with good report, with 
extensive popularity, with decorous congregations, with 
attention settled, and seriousness upon every countenance. 
We shall want souls. We shall press right away through 
to the great end of restoring the supremacy of conscience, 
and bringing the disordered world back again to its 
allegiance to God. This is our life-work, and we are 
doing it day by day—unfaithfully, imperfectly, but we 
are doing it. Moral truth upon the mind of man is some: 
thing like a flat stone in a churchyard, through which 
there is a thoroughfare, and hundreds of pattering feet 
go over it day after day. Familiarity with it has 
weakened thes impression, and time has effaced the 
lettering. But God has sent us with a friendly chisel to 
bring it out again into sharpest, clearest, crispest, dis- 
tinctest outline before the spirits of men. This is our 
life-work ; and we are laboring on amid the driving sleet 
and pelting rain; jostled now and then by the rude and 
heedless passenger; fitfully looked at by,those who flit 
away to the farm and the merchandise; regarded with a 
sort of contemptuous admiration by those who admire our 
industry, while they pity our enthusiasm. Patient, 
earnest workers, we must labor on, and we intend to do 
it. God helping, the ministry of reconciliation will 


76 THE MISSION OF THE PULPIT. 
+ 

continue to be proclaimed, within reach of every man in 
this land, Sabbath after Sabbath, universally, unto those 
who will come, without money and without price. And 
everywhere we shall have our reward. I, for my part, 
cannot labor in vain. What think you would sustain me 
under the pressure of the multiplied excitement and 
multiplied sorrow and labor, but the thought that I cannot 
labor in vain? The words I have just spoken have been 


launched into your ears, and have lodged in your con- 


scien. «, av! I cannot recall them. Simple, well-known 
Bible»: .:« have gone into your conscience, and I cannot 
recall ‘:.. But they shall come up some day. You 
and I may ney: meet again until we stand at the judg- 
ment-seat of God. They shall come up then—then— 
and, verily, I shall have my reward. shall have it 


when some fsir-haired child steps out to spell out the 
syllables vpon the flat stone, and goes away with a new 
purpose formed in his heart. I shall have it when some 
weather-beaten man, bronzed with the hues of climates 
and shades of ‘years, takes the solemn warning, numbers 
his days, and applies his heart unto wisdom. I shall 
have it in the welcome given to my ascending spirit by 
some whom I first taught, it may be unworthily, to swell 
the hosanna of praise, or to join with holy sincerity in all 
the litanies of prayer. I shall have it in the smile that 
wraps up all heaven in itself, and in those tones of kind- 
ness which flood the soul with ineffable music— Well 
done, thou good and falthful servant ; enter thou into the 
joy of thy Lord.” I leave with you and the Spirit—I 
dare not trust you alone—the Word of his grace, praying 
that He who alone can apply it, may give it life and 
power. 


cat hois 
Ses 


fers. 


a 


sas 


ui 
ioe 


Ay 
for his 


th 
they 
mar¢ 
ing 1 
thei 
douk 
for t 
has 

the - 
to hi 
man 
Aph 
war. 
blan 
and 
of I 
the: 
of 1 
the 

off 

Das 
the 
the 
is 0 


ry man in 
unto those 
ice. And 
r my part, 
sustain me 
ment and 
t I cannot 
have been 
your con- 
ell-known 
1I cannot 
ay. You 
the judg- 
—then— 
ll have it 
ll out the 
ith a new 
hen some 
climates 
numbers 
I shall 
spirit by 
7, to swell 
rity in all 
mile that 
-of kind- 
—* Well 
uinto the 
Spirit—I 
, praying 
t life and 


REN ry A Pee RE EN pe oe ee RT eT Me ee Ea aia Re 
Fr ce a eh ce ET EE CN aT eT ee 


IV. 
SOLICITUDE FOR THE ARK OF GOD. 


‘And when he came, lo, Eli sat upon a seat by the wayside watching 
for his heart trembled for the ark of God.”’—1 Sam. iv, 18, 


WALAT news from the battle-field?—for the Philis- 
asi) tines are out against Israel, and the’ Israelitish 
a armies are marshalled, and have | »ne forth unto 
the fight. A few days ago a reverse bete: them, but 
they have sent for a fancied talism:', «1 they are 
marching now with the ark of God in ‘ei midst, deem- 
ing that its presence in their camp will a..ure victory to 
their side. There is expectation in t) > streets of Shiloh, 
doubt and hope alternating in the spir.is of its townsmen ; 
for though the ark is a tower of strength, yet their defeat 
has disheartened them, and dark rumors, moreover, of 
the Lord’s kindled anger, and of sad prophecies alleged 
to have been spoken, are rife among the people; so that 
many a glance is strained wistfully toward the plains of 
Aphek, whence the couriers may bring tidings of the 
war. There are quivering lips in the city, and cheeks 
blanched with sudden fear; for the tidings have come, 
and they are tidings of disaster and of shame: the glory 
of Israel have fallen upon its high places; the shield of 
the migbty hath been vilely cast away; thirty thousand 
of the people have fallen with a great slaughter; and 
the sacred symbol of their faith itself has been carried 
off in triumph by the worshippers of Ashtaroth and 
Dagon. Loud is the wail of the widows, and terrible 
the anguish of the remnant that are left, oppressed by 
the national dishonor. But yonder, near the gate, there 
is one feeble old man, with silvered hair and sightless 


: aa 


78 SOLICITUDE FOR THE ARK OF GOD. 


eyes, before whom, as each mourner passes, he subdues 
his sorrow into silence, as in the presence of grief that 
is mightier than his own. It is thi, the high priest of 
God; he hears the tumult, but is yet unconscious of its 
cause. But now the messenger comes in hastily \o 
unfold his burden of lamentation and of weeping. ‘And 
the man said unto Eli, I am he that came out of the 
army, and | fled to-day out of the army. And he said, 
What is there done my son?” Oh, terrible are the 
tidings that are now to come upon the heart of that old 
man, like successive claps of thunder. ‘And the messen- 
ger answered and said, Israel is fled before the Philistines” 
—here the patriot mourns—“ and there hath been also 
_ a great slaughter among the people’—here the spirit of 
the judge is stricken—“‘ and thy two sons also, Hophni 
and Phineas, are dead”—here the father’s heart bleeds. 
Strong must have been the struggle of the spirit under 
the pressure of this cumulative agony, but it bears nobly 
up. Ah, but there is a heavier woe behind: “And the 
ark of God is taken. And it came to pass when he made 
mention of the ark of God”—not till then, never till then 
—‘ that he fell from off the seat backward by the side of 
the gate, and his neck brake, and he died.” The grand 
old man: he may have been feeble in restraint and 
criminal in indulgence, but there is majesty about this 
his closing scene which redeems his errors and shrines 
him with the good and true. The patriot could survive 
the dishonor of his country; the judge, though weeping 
sore, could be submissive under the slaughter of the 
people; the father, his heart rent the while with remorse- 
ful memories, could have upborne under the double 
bereavement; but the saint swooned away his life when 
deeper affliction was narrated of the disaster that had 
happened to the ark of God. “And it came to pass that 
when he made mention of the ark of God that he fell 
from off the seat backward by the side of the gate, and 
his neck brake, and he died.” 

Brethren, this is just the character, the type of charac- 
ter, that we covet for the churches of to-day —men of 


Lt) ii ee 


ieee er 


Lae iat 


> subdues 
yrief that 
priest of 
sus of its 
lastily \o 
yr “And 
ut of the 
he said, 
are the 
that old 
2 messen- 
ilistines” 
een also 
Ad of 
Tophni 
t bleeds. 
it under 
rs nobly 
And the 
he made 
till then 
e side of 
ie grand 
unt and 
out this 
_ shrines 
survive 
weeping 
- of the 
remorse- 
double 
fe when 
hat had 
ass that 
he fell 
ite, and 


charac- 
men of 


st 


4 
43 
es 


Stee No ICEL ee, ee ae 


pn 


en ee se ae ee 


SOLICITUDE FOR THE ARK OF GOD. 79 


broad souls, large-hearted and kindly in their human 
sympathy, bating not a jot in ail earthly activities and 
philanthropy, but reserving their highest solicitudes for 
the cause and service of the Lord Jesvs Christ. ‘ An 
impossible combination,” scoffers are ready to observe, 
“and unlovely even if it were possible.” The narrow 
fanaticism will contract the human affection; the man 
will be so absorbed in the possibilities of the shall-be as 
to forget the interests of the now; he will live in a 
world of the ideal, and the life that now is, and that 
presses upon us so ineessantly on every side, will degene- 
rate into a brief history of dwarfed charities and aimless 
being. Nay, surely not so my brother. That love must 
ever be the kindliest, even on its human side, which has 
the furthest and most open vision. That cannot be either 
a small or a scanty affection which takes eternity within 
its scope and range. The Christian, the more he realizes 
his Christianity, and embodies it, becomes of necessity 
pach cr by an affection, bounded only by the limits of 
umanity. : 


‘Pure love to God its members find— 
Pure love to every son of man.” 


And this love, which the thought of eternity thus makes 
indistructible, is raised by the same thought above the 
imperfections which attach themselves to individual cha- 
racter, so that it sees the broad stamp of humanity 
everywhere, and discovers, even in the outcast and 
trembling sinner, an heir of the Everlasting, an offspring 
of the Divine. | 

And this, the perfection of character, is the character 
which we covet for you. You will find very many in- 
stances in Scripture in which, in words full, full to over- 
flowing, of the warmest human affection, regard for the 
spiritual is discovered, not in ostentatious obtrusion, but 
in developments of incidental beauty, to be the reigning 
passion of the soul. Who can for a moment doubt the 
strong human affection of the beloved disciple, who, lov- 
ing at first, drank in a deeper lovingness as he lay upon 


80 £°LICITUDE FOR THE ARK OF GOD. 


the Master’s bosom, and to whom, as the fittest for such 
a mission, was committed the charge of that meek suf- 
ferer with a sword in her heart—the sad and saintly 
mother of our Lord? Listen to his salutation to Gaius the 
well-beloved: “I wish above all things ”—this is my 
chiefest and most fervent desire—‘I wish above all 
things that thou mayest prosper and be in health, even 
as thy soul prospereth.” ‘his is the principal thing after 
all. Remember David and all his afflictions. See the 
persecuted monarch fleeing from his infuriated and bitter 
enemies, hunted like a hart upon the mountains, lodged, 
with small estate and diminished train, in some fortress of 
Engedi or in some cave of Adullam! Of what dreams 
he in his solitude?) What are the memories that charge 
his waking hours? Does he sigh for the palace and the 
purple, for the sceptre and the crown? No— Hark! His 
royal harp, long silent, trembles again into melody ! 
* How amiable ure thy tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! 
My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth, for the courts of the 
Lord ; my heart and my flesh crieth cut for the living 
God.” See him again when he is crossing the brook 
Kedron, when the hearts of his people have been stolen 
from him by his vile and flattering son; when he has lost 
his crown and is in danger of losing his life; what is his 
chieftest anxiety in that time of adversity, and in that 
crisis of peril? “And the king said unto Zadok, carry 
back the ark of God into the city. If I shall find favor 
in the eyes of the Lord he will bring me again, and show 
me both it and his habitation.” As if he had said, “‘ The 
ark of God—all that is tender and all that is sacred are 
in my history associated with the ark of God— carry 
back the ark of God into the city. I am hunted like a 
hart upon my own mountains; I have no longer a spectre 
of achat ; [am going upon a precarious expedition ; I 
know not what may become of me. Oarry back the ark. 
Don’t let it share our fortune; don’t let it be exposed 
to insult and pillage, and the chances of war. Carry 
back the ark carefully. Whatever becomes of me, carry 


oo iin ah wera 


bac 
exilé 
stra 


am 
fait 
was 
coved 
stra 
ther 
Zio 
chat 
tian 
affed 
mor 
afte 
hatl 
Ap 
life 
witl 
Lor 
‘@ 
spir 
wot 
hea 
Bec 
its 
bre 
anc 


for such 
1eek suf- 
d saintly 
taius the 
is is my 
bove all 
Ith, even 
ing after 
See the 
1d bitter 
_ lodged, 
rtress of 
; dreams 
t charge 
and the 
‘Kk! His 
nelody ! 
Hosts ! 
Ss of the 
> living 
> brook 
1 stolen 
has lost 
atis his 
in that 


red are 
— carry 
like a 
spectre 
lon ; I 
le ark, 
(posed 
Carry 
carry 


roi) aoe oe EMA ec ee ee eT No a ME ee NEM cee 
2 Aiea ieee ine aaa aa c po - Sia aca ag my : 2 


Veeco. 5 


SOLICITUDE FOR THE ARK OF GOD, $1 


back the ark of God into the city; though I wander in 
exile, lie down in sorrow, and am at last buried in the 
stranger's grave.” But what need of multiplying ex- 
amples? It was his religious home, the metro ols of 
fuith, the place which God’s presence had hallowed, which 

was referred to when the happy Israelite, rejoicing in re- 

covered freedom, and remembering long years of bondage, 

struck his harp and sang, “ By the rivers of Babylon 

there we sat down; yea, we wept when we remembered 

Zion.” And this, I repeat it, brethren, the perfection of 
character, is the character we covet for you. As Chris- 

tians you are bound to cultivate it. tt is the highest 

affection in heaven: ‘The Lord loveth the gates of Zion 
more than all the awellings of Jacob.” It is the highest 
affection of the incarnate Son: “ The zeal of' thine house 
hath eaten me up.” It is the highest affection of the 
Apostle, the highest style of man: “ Neither count I my 
lite dear unto myself, so that I might finish my course 
with joy, and the ministry which I have received of the 
Lord Jesus, to testity the Gospel of the grace of God.” 

Oh, that God would raise up amongst us Elis in our 
spiritual Israel, who, with reverent and earnest solicitude, 
would have their hearts tremble for the ark of God. His 
heart trembled for the ark of God, and wherefore? 
Because the ark of God was in peril. In peril from 
its enemies—in greater peril from its friends. And, 
brethren, the cause and kingdom of Christ, pure religion 
and undefiled before God and the Father, the faith for 
which we are valiantly and constantly to contend, is in 
this hazard to-day. It also is in peril: in peril from its 
enemies; in greater, deeper, deadlier peril from its 
friends. 

These are the pcints which I will “ndeavor, briefly, 
God helping me, to illustrate on the present occasion. 

I. In the first place, tum ark oF GoD Is IN PERIL FROM 
ITs ENEMIES. There never was a period, perhaps, when 
the ark of God was carried out into a hotter battle, or 
was surrounded by flercer elements of antagonism. 


82 SOLICITUDE FOR THE ARK OF GOD. 


There is, for instance, zdolatry, holding six hundred mil- 
lions of our race in thrall. Idolatry, which has succeeded 
in banishing from their perceptions all thought of the 
true God—-which holds all that vast world of mind under 
the tyranny of the vilest passions, and under the dark 
and sad eclipse both of intellectual and spiritual 
knowledge. 

There is, again, ¢mposture, reigning in Mohammedan 
realms over one hundred anc forty millions. of souls; 
imposture, accommodated with the most exquisite inge- 
nuity to the prejudices of the population among which it 
was to spread, complimenting Moses to cajole‘the Jew, 
speaking respectfully of Jesus to seduce the nominal 
Christian, offering a voluptuous heaven to the licentious 
Pagan, and gathering in the indifferent by the wholesale 
conversion of the sword—-imposture thus founded and 
perpetuated over some of the fairest provinces of the globe 
in foul and ferocious despotism until now. : 

There is, again, superstition, the corruption of Christi- 
anity by Greek and papal admixtures, blinding the world 
with the utter falsehood of half truths, dazzling the senses 
and emusculating the understanding, trafficking in sin 
as in merchandise, and selling escape from its penalties 
cheap. Imposture, under whose strange system atheist 
and libertine, infidel and Jew, may join hands together 
and with equal rights wear the sacred garments, and, in 
robes upon which the cross is broidered, may gather to- 
gether to make war against the Lamb. 

There is, again, skepticism, that cold and soulless thing, 
that mystery of iniquity, which doth already work, chil- 
ling the ardor of the church and hardening the unbelief 
of the world — skepticism, bribing intellect to sustain it 
with sophistry, and genius to foster its errors, and poetry 
to embalm them in song—skepticism, that travels 
through the universe in search of truth and beauty, that 
it may enfeeble the one by its misgivings, and blight the 
comeliness of the other by its wintry breath. 

All these, enemies of Christianity from the beginning, 


hdred mil- 
succeeded 
ht of the 
ind under 
the dark 
spiritual 


ammedan 
of souls ; 
site inge- 

which it 
‘the Jew, 

nominal 
licentious 
Wholesale 
nded and 
the globe 


” Christi- 
he world 
he senses 
g in sin 
penalties 
1 atheist 
together 
, and, in 
ther to- 


ss thing 
rk, chil- 
unbelief 
ustain it 
1 poetry 

travels 
ity, that 
izht the 


inning, 


Se sail ties 


SOLICITUDE FOR THE ARK OF GOD. 83 


and retaining their ancient hate against it, now are the 
Philistines of its spiritual field. ‘They are not content, 
as in former times, with holding their own; they have a 
resolute purpose of aggression. They have habit, and 
numbers, and prejudice on their side; they have warriors 
and a priesthood, zealous and valiant in their service. 
They have no chivalry about them to restrain them from 
any style of warfare. They smart under multiplied de- 
feats, and they know that in the heart of every man in 
the world there ave interests and sympathies in their favor. 
There is reason, then, is there not, for that cry, ‘ Men of 
Israel, help!” there is reason, strong and solemn reason, 
why the Elis of our Israel should sit by the wayside, 
watching for their hearts tremble for the heart of God. 
It is not necessary to enlarge upon this point. I do not 
want to preach specially to-night in reference to these ex- 
traneous matters— matters, | mean, extraneous to the 
Church of Christ, which hinder the progress of the work 
of God in the world. I want to come nearer home in 
discussing our second point : 

II. Just as it was in the days of Israel, so it is now — 
THE ARK OF GoD IS IN STRONGER, DEEPER, DEADLIER PERIL 
FROM ITs FRIENDS. Vainly might the Philistines have 
fought, vainly might the foe have striven, if there had 
not been in the heart of the camp the springs of deep 
and destructive evils, if the chosen children of Israel 
had not been traitors and unworthy of themselves. And 
there are, if you will only examine into the subject, strange 
analogies subsisting between the causes which prevented 
the victory of Israel of old, and the.causes which operate 
with such fearful disaster against the progress of the truth 
of God to-day. 

1. In the first place, there was in the camp of Israel of 
old the presence of superstition, a blind reliance upon 
external forms. The Israelites, though their lives were 
loose and their devotions theretore iniquity, felt safe in 
the prospect of the battle, because they had the presence 
of the ark, At other times they cared nothing about it, 


{ 
| 
| 
| 
' 
i 
| 
: 


RS > 
SLR EE I LE EG OL I CIO LA AI 
eT OS Se eee rey 


S4 SOLICITUDE FOR THE ARK OF GOD. 


were indifferent altogether as to its welfare; but in the 
hour of danger, they rallied round it as an amulet of 
strength, and in place of contrition before God, and in 
place of humblings on account of sin, they vaunted that 
the Lord was in the midst of them, and conveyed what 
they deemed to be the symbol of his presence with arro- 
gant and obtrusive gladness to the camp. And it is to 
be feared, brethren, that there is much of this vain and 
formal confidence clogging our piety now. Are there not 
hanging upon our skirts, ostensibly one with us in fellow- 
ship and spirit, many of whom we stand in doubt before 
God, and over whose defective consistency we mourn’ 
Nay, are we not all conscious, each for himself —let the 
spirit of searching come in —:- are we not all conscious of 
compromise, if not, indeed, of betrayal? Our chureh, 
our organization, our influence, the decorum of our ser- 
vices, the activity of our agencies, an attractive ministry, 
a respectable gathering, a well-furnished sanctuary, a 
well-replenished treasury —have not these stolen our 
hearts away from the Divine, the spiritual, the heavenly ? 
Our spirit — bounds it after the Divine Spirit as it once 
did? Our ear—listens it as intently for his whispers ? 
Our eye—has it as keen an insight for his coming? 
Or is the very symbol of his dwelling, which, in the olden 
time, transformed the wilderness from the sepulchre into 
the home, become an occasion of sin, if not an object of 
idolatry ¢ Oh, for some brave old Hezekiah to come 
amongst us and write Nehushtan upon the mutilated brass, 
and break it into pieces before God! Do not mistake us; 
we are no iconoclasts, to dissolve all organizations, and 
mutilate the whole and perfect symmetry of truth, and 
with distempered zeal to tear away the inscriptions on her 
holy and beautiful house. We rejoice in precious ordi- 
nances, and crowded sanctuaries, and in those grand insti- 
tutions of benevolence which redeem our age from lethargy, 
But when the trust of the individual or of the church is 
placed in these things, God’s Holy Spirit is dishonored, 
and the life of our religion becomes of dwarfed growth 


cs Saeriebaalt 


but *n the 


mulet of 


d, and in 
nted that 
red what 
ith arro- 
1 it is to 
vain and 
here not 
n fellow- 
bt before 
mourn / 
let the 
scious of 
chureh, 
our sger- 
linistry, 
uary, a 
len our 
avenly ? 
it onee 
hispers ? 
soming } 
1e ol den 
hre into 
bject of 
0 come 
d brass, 
ake us; 
ns, and 
th, and 
-on her 
Ss ordi- 
d insti- 
hargy, 
urch is 
nored, 
rrowth 


Se ES ree ae : = 
= aa Ricci Ae ite 


EES PART Ss FD pease 3 - ii 


SOLICITUDE FOR THE ARK OF GOD. 85 


and sickly habit, from the very care with which we 

screen it from the breath of heaven. Brethren, are there 

not in the Divine Word many intimations of the ten- 
dency which we now deplore, to let the very highest and 
holiest customs degenerate into the indifference of for- 

malism? That the brazen serpent lifted up in the 
wilderness received in after ages idolatrous homage, I 
have already reminded you. And such was the danger 
of idolatry to the children of Israel, that God would not 
trust any one of them to be present at the funeral of their 
great lawgiver. No human eye must witness his obsequies, 

but in solitar ry possession of his God-prepared sepulchre, 

the lordly lion stalked, and the bald old eagle flew. The 
combined power of healing and of speech constrained the 
worship of the men of Lystra for the Apostles Barnabas 
and Paul. Maltese superstition, which had branded him 
as a murderer whom the viper stung, in sudden reaction 
deified him when he declined to die. And in the time of 
the Saviour, the temple had become a house of merchan- 
dise; anise and cummin were of more account than 
righteousness and truth, and enlarged phylacteries and 
public prayers, and a countenance preternaturally sad, 

were the low and degenerate substitutes for a renewed 
heart and holy life. And, brethren, it becomes us solemnly 
to be on our guard in this matter, "for the same tendency 
exists still. The formal and the careless will creep into 
our worship, and, if we are not watchful, will eat out the 

heart of our religion, If as individuals, our trust is in 
our attendance on religious ordinances, or our participa- 
tion of sacramental emblems in our fellow ship in church 
communion, or the comeliness of our external mo ‘alities, 
and if, in the strength of these, unfurnished with the 
higher gifts of the Divine Spirit, we go out to dare the 
dangers “and fight the battles of our daily life ; and if, as a 
church, as a contederaey of Christian people, we talk about 
our numbers, and our agency, and our influence, what 
are we doing but perpetr ating — perpetr ating, t00, with 
still greater aggravation and. enormity - the error and 


" By . ray. 
de analtl 


8G SOLICITUDE FOR THE ARK OF GOD. 


the sin of the people of Israel of old? We carry the ark 
into the battle, but we leave the God of the ark behind 
us; and there is strong and solemn need that the Elis of 
our Israel should sit by the wayside, watching, for their 
hearts tremble for the ark of of God. 

2. I observe, secondly, that there was inconsistency in 
the camp of Israel. The times were times of apostasy 
and of idolatry; the priests, who should have been the 
leaders of the people, committed abominable iniquity ; 
there were sensuality and oppression in the service of the 
holy shrine, so that men abhorred the offering of the 
Lord, and, by consequence, the whole land became infected 
with the contagion of this evil example. There was still 
an affectation of reverence for the sanctuary, and of 
attachment to the ark; but the Lord of the sanctuary and 
the God of the ark were not ‘no true objects of worship 
and of love. And is it not so largely now? Are there 
not amongst those who habitually gather themselves for 
worship, numbers, not, perhaps, consciously insincere, but 
strangely defective? and numbers more—spots in our 
feasts of charity—who come among us like so many 
whited sepulchres, all symmetry without, but all rotten- 
ness within; .Achans, whose rapacious covetousness can 
hardly hold itself from the prey: Reubens, whose unstable 
souls are luring themselves to their own destruction : 
Judases, with fawning lip, ind grasping hand, but hiding 
in the coward heart the guilty purpose of betrayal? Are 
there not such amongst us? Yes, there are those who 
intrude themselves into our assemblies, eluding all human 
scrutiny, wearing the garb of sanctity, and remaining in 
theirimposture, perhaps, until some overwhelming pressure 
crushes them, and brings scandal upon the cause that 
they have dishonored. And in public life are we not 
accustomed to hear a noisy zeal for the holy name of God 
on the part of men who rarely use it except in impreca- 
tion and in blasphemy—ostentatious helpings on of the 
ark by those in whose esteem it figures only as an 
imposing thine for public procession, or as a relic of 


, 
‘ 
| 
a 


Taste ail eames 


sant 
re} 

imy 
cally 
ind 


in b 


may 
the 
the 
the 
wil 
his 
wh ( 
con 
feeb 
kno 
wa 
thr 
wor 
mus 
atta 
that 
ren 
upo 
bee 
tiot 
the 
con 
and 
bee 
wit 
rat! 
rea 
sin 
mo 
it | 
the 
pe 


y the ark 
kK behind 
ie Elis of 
for their 


tency in 
apostasy 
been the 
niquity ; 
ce of the 
x of the 
infected 
was still 
and of 
lary and 
worship 
‘e there 
lves for 
ere, but 
in our 
) many 
rotten- 
i@Ss Can 
nstable 
uction: 
hiding 
¢ Are 
ee who 
human 
ing in 
ressure 
e that 
ve not 
of God 
preca- 
of the 
as an 
slic of 


/ 
z 
‘ 
{ 
‘ 


SOLICITUDE FOR THE ARK OF GOD. 87 


sanctity to be unveiled to the curious in some hour of 
rejoicing and of display? Brethren, this inconsistency 
imperils alike our own salvation and the progress of the 
cause of God. The Church must be consistent, etry 
individual in the Church must be sincere and thorough 
in his piety, before the work is done. It may be, or it 
may not be, that there is the hypocrite here to-night— 
the systematic and habitual impostor—who has assumed 
the garb of godliness that he may the better sin; if 
there be, in God’s name let him forsake his hope, for it 
will perish, and let him at once, before the hail sweeps 
his refuges of lies away, seek mercy of that Saviour 
whom he has insulted and betrayed. And what is our 
condition? Grey hairs have come upon us, signs of 
feebleness, tokens of lassitude and age, and we have not 
known it. Oh! a more sincere and decisive godliness is 
wanted from us all, if we would either pass untarnished 
through the terrible temptations of the worid, or be found 
worthy to bear the vessels of the Lord. Brethren, we 
must resolve that whatever of insincerity may bave 
attached to our profession shall at once be forsaken, aifd 
that we will from this time forward, God helping us, 
renew our baptismal vows, and be valiant for the truth 
upon the earth. If in our pursuit of pleasure there las 
been the indulgence of frivolity, and perhaps of licen 
tiousness—if in our high-reaching ambition for renew: 
there have been oppression and time-serving, and the 
concealment of principle, and practices that are corrupt 
and unworthy—if in our labor for comp ‘ence there has 
been compliance with unhallowed custom, or complicity 
with wrong—if we! have followed the maxims of trade, 
rather than the maxims of truth—if there has been over- 
reaching and cupidity in our commereial life, we have 
sinned, and our profession of religion only makes our sin 
more truly scandalous, and more completely sin. And 
it behooves us all now, from this very hour, to put away 
the sin from us with loathing, and fall humbled and 
penitent before God. We must have heliness—inner and 


88 SOLICITUDE FOR THE ARK OF GOD. 


vital heart-holiness—if we would cleave unto the Lord 
with full purpose of heart. 

Brethren, when I see out in the broad world the 
palpable inconsistencies of professors-of religion—a man 
devout in the sanctuary and detestable at home, saintly 
on the Sabbath ana sordid all the week, ostentatious in 
the enterprises of benevolence, but grinding his own 
workmen and tyrannical to the poor—when I see a man 
whose citizenship is ostensibly in heaven, distance the 
keenest worldling around him in the race of fashion, or 
in the strife for gold—when I see a man, whose religion 
teaches the divinest charity, censorious in his spirit, and 
narrow in his soul—when I see a man, to whom God has 
given a fortune in stewardship, grudging to dispense to 
him that is in want; when I see a man, whose Divine 
Saviour rebuked his own disciples for intolerance, pro- 
fessing to follow his footsteps, and yet harshly excluding 
thousands from his fold; or when in the world of opinion 
I see religion represented as vindicating the most mon- 
strous atrocities, as preaching eternal reprobation, as 
advocating an accursed system of slavery, as upholding 
an ageressive war—whwat have I to think but, as it was 
in the days of ancient Israel, the ark of God is carried 
out by the uncircumcised to battle, ani there is need— 
strong, solemn, and passionate need—that the Elis of our 
Isracl should sit upon the wayside, watching, for their 
hearts tremble for the ark of God. 

8. And then there was in the third place—and it is the 
last particular that I shall mention—there was in the 
camp of ancient Israel enadzfference. I do not mean to 
say thet there was not a sort of patriotism—a natural 
and common wish for victory—a desire to free themselves 
irom the Philistine thrall. But patriotism, to be real and 
to be hallowed, must have all-heartedness; and this was 
lacking. They had no confidence in their leaders; there 
Was aiicag them the element of dis-union. The laxity 
et thei: lives had of necessity enfeebled somewhat their 
moral p. ‘uciples, so that the high and chivalrous inspira- 


ie 


4 
H 


% 
batons tt 


tions 


werd 
into 
cons 
stric 
bret} 
hear 
to tl 
type 
an 
come 
that 
respeé 
armd 
God 
heed 
drow 
their 
in th 
seen. 
mock 
of th 
the E 
able 
fhe 8 
the ¢ 
its in 
victil 
bretl 
divir 
God. 
and | 
been 
altog 
ro 
Paik 
bidd 
holiz 


the Lord 


vorld the 
I—a man 
@, saintly 
‘atious in 
his own 
ee A Man 
‘ance the 
shion, or 
. religion 
irit, and 
. God has 
pense to 
e Divine 
nce, pro- 
xcluding 
f opinion 
ost mon- 
ation, as 
holding 
as it was 
s carried 
5 need— 
is of our 
or their 


it is the 
s in the 
nean to 
natural 
bmselves 
‘eal and 
his was 
; there 

laxity 
at their 
inspira- 


% 
‘i 


SOLICITUDE FOR THE ARK OF GOD. 89 


tions of the true lover of his country were emotions that 
were above them and beyond them. Hence, they went out 
into the battlefield, but they went with paralyzed arms; 
conscience made cowards of them, and, recreant and panic- 
stricken, they fled at the first attack of the foe. And, 
brethren, can their be any question that a lack of whole- 
hearted earnestness is one of the chief sources of peril 
to the ark of God to-day? Oh, if Laodicea is to be the 
type of the Church, it is no wonder that the world sneers 
and perishes! If religion, clad in silken sheen, has be- 
come a patronized and fashionable thing — a something 
that men cleave to as they cleave to the other items of a 
respectable life—something that they wear as a sort of 
armorial bearing for which they pay small duty either to 
God or man — it is no wonder that the world should be 
heedless of the message, and should subside into the 
drowsy monotony in whieh the messengers dream away 
their lives. Brethren, the poisonous trees do little harm 
in the vineyard ; they are uprodted as soon as they are 
seen. It is the barren trees, that cumber the ground and 
mock the husbandman, that are the curses of the vineyard 
of the Lord. Cases of flagrant apostasy but little hinder 
the progress of the work; their inconsistency is so pal- 
pable and manifest. ‘They are the true hinderers, under 
the shadow of whose luxury, and idleness and frivolity, 
the Church sits at ease in Zion, while they are eating out 
its inner life as the vampire sucks out the life-blood of the 
victim that it is all the while fanning with its wings. Oh, 
brethren, we need all of us a baptism for a deeper and 
diviner earnestness, that we may bear our testimony for 
God. We are a witnessing Church; thisis our character 
and our mission. But, alas! our witness has sometimes 
been feeble and has sometimes been false. We have been 
altogether too secular and too selfish. We have not been 
prophets—not we; but stammering, hesitating, blushing 
children, ashamed of the message that our Father has 
bidden us deliver. We have sought morality rather than 
holiness, serenity rather than sacrifice, smooth things to 
02 


90 SOLICITUDE FOR THE ARK OF GOD. 


conciliate the world rather than strong things to conquer 
the world. We have: been content to grasp all the world’s 
wealth and honor that we could, and then, in the great 
wreck, some on boards and some on broken pieces of the 
ship, to get ourselves safe to land, rather than, treighted 
with heavenly treasure, to cast anchor in the fair haven 
with colors flying, and amid the glad welcome of the 
multitudes on shore. Oh, there is room, brethren, indeed 
there is, for the taunt of the infidel: “ Ye Christians are 
as infidel as I am; ye do not believe in your own system ; 
if you did, like a fire in your bones, it would burn you 
into action, if by any means you might save some.” 
Oh! everything around us is rebuking this lethargic and 
this professional piety. Everything is in earnest—suns 
in their constant shining, and rivers in their ceaseless 


flow: the breeze that stops not day nor night to bear § 


health upon its wings, the spring tripping up the winter, 
the seed-time hastening on the harvest—all are activity, 
faltering nut, any one of them, in the sure and steady 
purpose of their being. Error is in earnest; Pagans are 
self-devoted; Mohammedanisin has her resolute and 
valiant sons; Popery compasses sea and land to make one 
prosleyte ; infidels walk warily and constantly, scattering 
the seeds of unbelief. Society is in earnest; the sons of 
enterprise do not slumber; the warriors—how they hail 
the clarion call, and rush eagerly into the battle; the 
students—how they consume the oil of the lamp and the 
oil of life together; Mammon’s votaries—are they the 
laggards in the streets? Oh, everything around us seems 
to be lashed into intensest energy, while we—ingrates 
that we are, God forgive us!—with the noblest work in 
the universe to do, and the most royal facilities to do it 
with ; with the obligations of duty, and gratitude, and 
brotherhood, and fellowship; with the vows of disciple- 
ship upon us; with death at our doors and in our homes ; 
and with the sad, wailing sound, as if it came from places 
where men were and are not: “No man hath cared for 


wy xsoul”--we are heedless and exclusive, selfish and 


, 
° o 
a “i ® ’ 
\ i ‘ , \ 
' 5 : Ms . ) \ 
y : aN 


e " ze = « bie: 
Seasick Areca teint cape diatiats Aaa er 


to conquer 
the world’s 
the great 
eces of the 
, treighted 
fair haven 
me of the 


‘en, indeed | 


tistians are 
mn system ; 
burn you 
ve some.” 


hargic and @ 
nest—suns | 


r ceaseless 


ht to bear 3 


the winter, 7 
re activity, | 
nd steady | 


Pagans are 
solute and 
Db make one 
scattering 
he sons of 
they hail 
attle; the 
p and the 
they the 
(1 us seems 
—iIngrates 

work in 

to do it 
tude, and 
pf disciple- 
uw homes ; 
‘om places 
cared for 
lfish and 


SOE RR OEE ay 


+ : 
ey oe cee 


SOLICITUDE FOR THE ARK OF GOD. 91 


self-aggrandizing, and, worst of all, as self-satisfied with 
our grudged obedience, and our scanty effort, and our 
heartless prayer, as if no sinners were in peril and as if no 
Christ hed died. Andisit really so? Has that mightiest 
motive lost its power? Is Mammon really more potent 
than Messiah? Has the crucifix a holier inspiration than 
the cross? Is it true that war can move men’s passions, 
and science stimulate their souls, and trade intensify their 
energies, and ambition flame their blood? and is Christi- 
anity nothing but a worn-out spell—a dim memorial of 
ancient power—an extinguished volcano, with no fire 
slumbering in its mighty heart? Is it true? Thy cross, 
O Jesus, has it lost its magnetism? does it no longer draw 
all men unto thee? Thy love, O Saviour, boundless, 
unfathomable, all-embracing, doth it constrain no longer 
the souls for whom thy blood was shed? It is yours to 
answer these questions; do it as in the sight of God. 
But, oh! when we see the terrible indiffererce around 


us—when we see the contrast between the intensity of . 


our beliefs and the smallness of our doings for Christ— 
what wonder is it that the Elis of our Israel, who, with 
all their faults, feel their heart-strings quiver in solicitude 
for the interests of Zion, should sit by the wayside, watch- 
ing, because their hearts tremble for the ark of God ? 

May God the Holy Ghost come down, and write these 
truths upon the hearts of all, for his name’s sake ! 


Pram 


~~ 


COG 


eS: 


V. 


THE INCARNATION OF CHRIST. 


‘‘Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he 
also himself likewise took part of the same.”—HEp, ii. 14. 


OME eighteen hundred years ago, in the land 
y) of Judah, and in the city of Jerusalem, a strange 
restlessness had come upon the public mind. If 
a stranger just about that time had visited the 
Holy City, and had made himself acquainted with the 
inner life of its inhabitants, he would have found them 
all engrossed with one absorbing theme. It had super- 
seded, as a matter of interest, commerce, and conquest, 
and the intrigues of faction, and the subjects of or- 
dinary politics. It had become the unconfessed hope 
of matrons, and the deep study of earnest men. So 
prevalently had i! spread, that it became identified 
with every thinxing of the Hebrew mind, and with 
every beating of the Hebrew heart. This topic was 
the advent of a Deliverer who had been promised of 
God unto their fathers, Their holy books contained 
circumstantial directions, both as to the signs of his 
coming, and as to the period about which he might be 
expected to appear, and these various prophecies con- 
verged to their fulfilment. There were rumours, 
moreover, of certain meteoric appearances, which in 
Eastern countries were deemed the luminous heralds 
of the birth of a great king; and the heart of many a 
patriot Jew would ‘throb more quickly, as in his vain 


drea 
in V 
ers fl 
expe 
in a 
have 
sus } 
prov 
tus 4 
each 
to hi 
influ 
little 
thou 
laid 
In t 
born 
him 
and 
ange 
lehet 
tial } 
peas 
over 
was 
of fo 
ellec 
rifts 
ahi 
a vO 
JOY- 
full 
and 
for ° 
the 
—$S 
Sav 


E 


T. 


nd blood, he 


the land 
a strange 
mind. If 
isited the 
with the 
und them 
ad super- 
conquest, 
ets of or- 
sed hope 
men. So 
identified 
and with 
jopic was 
Dmised of 
ontained 
ns of his 
might be 
cles con- 
rumours, 
which in 
s heralds 
many a 
his vain 


) 
B 
“ 


THE INCARNATION OF CHRIST. 93 


dream of material empire he saw the Messiah, already, 
in vision, triumphing over his enemies, and his follow- 
ers flushed with the spoil. In the midst of this national 
expectancy, events of strong significance were occurring 
in a quarter from which the eyes of the world would 
have turned heedlessly or in scorn. The national cen- 
sus was decreed to be taken throughout the Jewish 
provinces of the Roman empire in the time of Augus- 
tus Cesar. In obedience to the imperial enactment, 
each man, with his household, went up for enrollment 
to his own—that is, his ancestral city. The inwonted 
influx of strangers had crowded the little inn in the 
little city of Bethlehem, one of the least among the 
thousands of Judah; so that the out-buildings were 
laid under tribute to furnish shelter to later comers. 
In the stable of that mean hostelry a young child was 
born. There was nothing about him to distinguish 
him from the ordinary offspring of Jewish mothers, 
and yet, at the moment of his birth, a new song from 
angel harps and voices rang through the plains of Beth- 
lehem, and ravished the watchful shepherds with celes- 
tial harmonies. Small space had passed ere wondering 
peasants beheld a star of unusual brightness hovering 
over that obscure dwelling; and by and by the inn 
was thrown into confusion by the arrival of a company 
of foreigners from afar off—swarthy and richly appar- 
elled, who made their way to the stable with costly 
gifts and spices, which they presented to the new-born 
babe, and bowed the knee before him in homage, as to 
a voyal child. Rapidly flew the glad tidings of great 
joy--passed from lip to lip, until the whole city was , 
full of them—scorned by haughty Pharisees with scofts 
and doubting—hailed by the faithful few who waited 
for the consolation of Israel—agitating all classes of 
the people—startling the vassal monarch on his throne 
—‘ Unto you is born this day in the city of Davida 
Saviour who is Christ the Lord.” , 
Brethren, it is ours in this day to rejoice in the bless- 


- wae GRD OY eager ie ei 
ox ER SSE a ee 
ie eR 
a ELLA IIT OE NERS 
PANT aU Ei cocoa SE 
cama av OR 
SAR EO i 
st 
Be Dah 


‘O 
qh 
< oe ; ,, SG 
 . ¢ “s 
Vay S. 


AY 
Ve, 


~* 

Ww, & 
<& 

4 

Y SX 


ray sf all sil <j) =I c= Pale 
ai == >= fox 

eS ane ae . = 

= a td aggga.,3 —— | i= = 

$$ oll =I) ay 

we =S= > = 

Ef: 


94 THE INCARNATION OF CHRIST. 


ing which on that day descended on mankind. Blind- 
ness, indeed, hath happened unto Israel, so that they 
see not the glorious vision. And there are many 
among ourselves to turn away their eyes from the 
sight. But the advent of the Saviour has been the 
chiefest joy of the multitudes who once struggled like 
ourselves on earth, and who now triumph through his 
grace in heaven; and multitudes more, rejoicing in his 
true humanity, and happy in their brotherhood with 
Immanuel, cease not to thank God for the unspeak- 
able gift that “‘forasmuch as the children are partakers 
of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part 
of the same.” 

The great fact, of course, which the Apostle wishes 
to impress upon us, is our Saviour’s assumption of hu- 
manity. And there are certain salient characteristics 
of that incarnation, upon which, in order that we may 
have it presented in all its aspects of-blessing before 
our minds, we may not unprofitably dwell. 

I. We observe, in the first place, then, that tHE 
SAVIOUR’S ASSUMPTION OF }TUMANITY WAS AN ACT OF 
INFINITE CONDESCENSION. It is obviously impossible 
thatthe language in which the Apostle here refers to 
Christ could be used legitimately of any being possessed 
essentialy of the nature of flesh and blood. The lan- 
guage before us, applied to any mere man, even the 
holiest, even the most heroic, would be impertinent 
and without meaning. There is obviously implied the 
fact of his pre-existence, and of his pre-existence in a 
nature other and higher than that which he assumed, In 
a subsequent verse the implication is further made, that 
this pre-existence was in a nature other and higher than 
the angelic. For in his descent from the highest to re- 
cover and save, he took not hold on angels—they per- 
ished without redemption and without hope; but he 
took hold ou the seed of Abraham. In the former 
chapter the Apostle rather largely. illustrates his supe- 
riority to the angel: “When he bringeth in the first- 


sac i gi gies ica a 
i eo duces aad Hie Bice sine: 


Blind- 
at they 
e many 
om the 
been the 
bled like 
ough his 
g in his 
od with 
nnspeak- 
artakers 
bok part 


» Wishes 
n of hu- 
teristics 
we may 
y before 


at THE 
ACT OF 
00 ssible 
‘efers to 
ssessed 
‘he lan- 
ven the 
rtinent 
lied the 
ice ina 
ned, In 
le, that 
er than 
t to re- 
ey per- 
but he 
former 
3 supe- 
e first- 


ee 


ON, OD 


a ae ad 


Pe ok 


Sn ease 


THLE INCARNATION OF CHRIST. 95 


begotten into the world, he saith, Let all the angels of 
God worship him.” Just as when a crown prince goes 
a travel into some foreign realm, all the choicest of the 
nobility are selected to wait upon his bidding, and fol- 
Jow in his train, so when He bringeth his first-begotten 
into the world—a foreign realm to him—he says, “ Let 
all the angels of God ’”’—all the principalities and powers 
in heavenly places—worship, bow down to, wait upon, 
minister to him. Again, ‘of the angels he saith, Who 
maketh his angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of 
fire. Butunto the Son he saith, Thy throne, O God, 
is forever and ever; a sceptre of righteousness is the 
sceptre of thy kingdom.” From the scope and tenor 
of these passages—indeed, from the scope and tenor of 
the Apostle’s entire argument, we are swift to conclude, 
and we are bold to affirm, the proper and unoriginated 
Godhead of the Saviour; that it was God made man 
for man to die.. Yes, brethren, that stoop of illimitable 
graciousness was from the highest to the lowest. And 
in mysterious union with the child-heart of that uncon- 
scious babe the veiled Divinity slumbered, That weary 
and hungry traveller along the journey of life—it was 
Jehovah’s fellow! That meek sufferer, whose head is 
bowed to drink the cup of bitterness to the dregs—it 
was the true God, and eternal life! Strange marriage 
between the finite and the infinite; incomprehensible 
union between the divine and human ! 

There are scoffers in the world, I know, who dismiss 
the mystery of the incarnation, and deride it as the fig- 
ment of fancy, or as the vision of fanaticism. They are 
of two kinds mostly: some who try everything by the 
standard of their own ideas, and who exalt their own 
reason—at best of no great tallness, and which prejudice 
has dwarfed into yet pigmier stature—into absolute 
dictatorship over the realm of mind; and others more 
degraded, who seek a license for their desperate wicked- 
ness amidst the scepticisms of a still more desperate 
infidelity, who dismiss the narrative of the incarnation 


96 THE INCARNATION OF CHRIST. 


because it is a mystery, something that is not patent to 
the senses, which they aver to be the only means of 
knowledge. All the while they live in a mysterious 
world where there are thousands of secrets which their 
hearts cannot unravel, In the ordinary resources of life, 
in the daily benefits which Providence pours forth un- 
grudgingly, they take their churlish share of blessings 
whose wherefore they understand not. They are them- 
selves a mystery, perhaps, greater than aught. They 
cannot, anyone of them, understand that subtile organism 
which they call man, nor how that strange essence or 
principle, which they call life, floods them every moment 
with rapture; and yet, with marvellous inconsistency, 
credulous on matters where no mystery might be expected 
to abide, they are sceptical in matters where mystery 
exists of necessity, and where the absence of it would be 
a suspicious sign : “For canst thou by searching find out 
God ; canst thou find out the Almighty unto perfection ?” 

Brethren, the incarnation of Christ is a mystery—an 
inexplicable and solemn mystery. But were there no 
mystery, on the other hand, think you, in the event of 
Christ being a mere man? How stands the case? There 
is an individual obscurely born; reared in village humble- 
ness ; looked on by his kindred according to the flesh with 
coldness, if not with dislike ; with no aristocratic conner- 
tions, with no noble patronage ; telling to all to whom he 
ministered, with a strange candor, that he required absolute 
service ; that he had no preferments in his gift ; that he 
had no bribes to win the allegiance of the sordid ; that it 
was more than likely, if they followed him, that they 
would have to forsake all else, to part at once with all that 
was lucrative and all that was endearing ; to be secluded 
from ecclesiastical privilege ; to be traduced by slander ; to 
be hunted by persecution ; nay, to hold lite cheap, for 
whosoever killed them, in the blind zeal of his partisan- 
ship, thought he had done God service. Now, look at that 
individual. In spite of all these disadvantages, by the 
mere force of his teaching and of his life, he gathers a 


patent to 
means of 
hysterious 
lich their 
Ss Of life, 
forth un- 
blessings 
ire them- 
t. They 
organism 
sence or 
moment 
sistency, 
expected 
mystery 
vould be 
find out 
ection 2” 
ery—an 
here no 
vent of 
- There 
1um ble- 
sh with 
conner- 
hom he 
bsolute 
hat he 
that it 
t they 
ull that 
cluded 
ler; to 
up, for 
rtisan- 
at that 
yy the 
1ers a 


THE INCARNATION OF CHRIST. 97 


multitude of followers ; charms the fisher from the lake ; 
charms the soldier from the standard ; charms—strangest 
of all—the publican from the loved seat of custom; and 
not only these, who might, perhaps, be imagined to risk 
little by the venture, but charms the physician from his 
practice, the scholarly student from the feet of his master, 
the ruler from his pride and‘ luxury, the honorable coun- 
sellor from the deliberatigns of the Sanhedrim. The chief 
authorities combine against him ; but his doctrine spreads, 
His name is attainted as a traitor; but he is held dearer 
than .ever. His death gratifies his bloodthirsty and 
relentless foes ; but his disciples rally, and his cause lives 
on. His tomb is jealously guarded and hermetically sealed, 
but it is somehow found empty notwithstanding. He 
shows himself alive by many infallible proofs. He soars, 
after forty days, from the crest of a mountain, and he has 
established an empire in the minds of thousands upon 
thousands, which promises to be extensive as the world, 
and to be permanent as time. And you ask us to believe 
that all this could be accomplished by the unaided resources 
of a mere man like ourselves? Were not that a mystery 
than all other mysteries greater and surpassing far ? Then, 
look at that individval in the days ofhis flesh. He exerts, 
on the testimony of numerous and unexceptionable wit- 
nesses, miraculous power. He has power over the 
elements, for the winds are still at his bidding, and the 
lawless sea obeys him. He has power over inorganic matter 
and over vegetable life, for he blasts the fig-tree by a 
syllable, and five loaves and two fishes swell up, as he 
speaks, into a royal repast for full five thousand men. He 
has pewer over the ferocious passions, for he strikes down 
the advancing soldiery, and at his glance the foul demoniac 
is still, He has power over sickness, for the numbed limbs 
of the paralytic quicken, as he speaks, into strengthened 
manhood, and the leprosy scales off from its victim, and 
leaves him comely as a child. He has power over death, 
for at his word the maiden rises from her shroud ; and the 
young man stops at the gate of the city to greet his mercy 


98 THE INCARNATION OF CHRIST. 


on his way to burial; and weeping sisters clasp their 
ransomed brother, a four hours’ dweller in the tomb. And 
you ask us to believe that all this can have been accom- 
plished by the unaided resources of a mere man like 
ourselves! Were not that a mystery than all other 
mysteries greater and surpassing far? “Ah,” but say 
some, “he was a good man, we,acknowledge; a great 
teacher, a model man, a representative man, the highest 
man, God specially honoured him. He may almost be 
said, indeed, to have had an inferior and derived Divinity. 
It is no wonder, therefore, that he should thus perform 
miracles, and that he should’ thus have founded a, domin- 
ion.” Nay, pardon me, but this only deepens the mystery 
for this model man, whose frown was dismissal from his 
presence, of whose imitable morals, Rosseau, the infidel, 
said, that if the life and death of Socrates were those of an 
angel, the life and death of Jesus were those of a God— 
this model man claimed all his life to be Divine, made the 
impression of his pretensions upon the minds of the Jews 
so strong that they stoned him for blasphemy, received 
Divine honors without once rebuking the offerers, 
“thought it not robbery to be equal with God,” and dis- 
tinctly predicted that he should come again in the clouds of 
heaven. Oh, Jesus of Nazareth cannot possibly be simply 
a good and benevolent man. There is no escape from this 
alternative—no middle position in which he can abide—he 
is either an imposter or God. Now, unbeliever, you who 
dismiss the mystery of the incarnation, and treat it with 
solemn scorn or with derisive laughter,'solve thismystery of 
your own. You pass through life in your pride and in 
your scepticism, scouting this mystery of Godhead, and 
yet shut up to the far greater mystery—either a good man 
who has spoken falsehood, or an imposter who has cheated 
the world. But we, with reverent trust, and from the low- 
est depth from which gratitude can spring, can say, 
“Great is the mystery of godliness, God manifest in the 
flesh.” 

II. I observe, secondly, THE SAVIOUR’'S ASSUMPTION OF 


THE INCARNATION OF CHRIST. 9 


sp_ their HUMANITY WAS NOT ONLY CONDESCENDING, BUT VOLUN- 
b. And TARY. This, indeed, follows inevitably from the foregone 
aecom- | conclusion of his Divinity. Being Divine, he could be 
nan like under no restraint of overwhelmning necessity. To 
Ul other accommudate the theological language to human infirmity, 
but say | we are apt to speak of God sometimes as if influenced by 
a great external things. But really it is not so; every Divine act 
highest is spontaneous and self-originating. Jesus Christ, there- 
most be fore, could be under the bond of no possible obligation. 
Divinity. § Law was himself in spoken precept. Justice was himself 
perform engraven on the universe. Mercy was himself, the 
,, domin- radiation of his own loving-kindness upon his people. 
mystery § Kvery decision of wisdom, every administration of physical 
rom _ his soverpment, every act of omnipotence, was his own; not 
> Infidel, in independent action, but in the harmonious ur .on of the 
se of an Divine nature. It is manifest, so far as his Divine nature 
1 God—  @ was concerned, that his assumption of humanity must have 
nade the | been disinterested and voluntary ; the strong upwelling of 
he Jews § his tenderness for the hapless creatures he had made. 
received | There is something in the spontaneity of his offering which 
offerers, | redeems it from the suspicion of injustice, and which 
und dis- | vindicates the Father from the accusations of those who 
loudsof =| charge him with vindictiveness and cruelty. It would 
esimply =| seem, indeed, as if the Saviour had foreseen, in the days of 
rom this 3 _séihis flesh that there would rise audacious rebels, who would 
ide—he | thus cast a slur upon his Father’s kindness, for he defends 
ou who ’ him by anticipation: “Therefore doth my Father love me, 
it with @ because I lay down my life, that I might take it again. No 
stery of | man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I 
and in | have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it 
ad, and | again.” 
odman | But as to the human nature which vicariously suffered, 
cheated q you remember that at the time there was the proposition 
helow- || _ of incarnation, there was also the proposition of equivalent 
an say, | recompense. The promise of the joy was coeval with the 
in the q prospect of suffering. Hence the Apostle: “Who for the 


a joy that was set before him endured the cross, despising 
ON OF } the shame.” A world ransomed from the destroyer, a 


100 THE INCARNATION OF CHRIST. 


mediatorial kingdom erected upon the ruins of earth’s 

spoiled thrones, a name that is above every name, honored 
in heaven by prostrate obedience and undying song, 
honored on earth by every confessing lip and every 
bending knee—this was the joy set before him ; and for 
the sake of all this he endured patiently the cross, de- 
spised, looked down with holy contempt upon, mysterious 
and inconceivable shame. Besides, there can be no 
availableness in exacted suffering. There is something in 
the voluntariness of the incarnation which at once exalts 
our reverence and augments our affection for our Surety 
and Friend. We judge of the excellency of virtue by the 
willinghood with which it is practised. We cannot enter 
into a proper comparison, because we are all under the 
bond of one common obligation ; but we all know that 
the virtue shines the most brightly which is practised 
amidst hazard and suffering, rather than that which is 
accorded where duty is inviting, and where obedience is 
profitable. Viewed in this light, what a wealth of disin- 
terested generosity there is in the incarnation of Christ. 
The voice was heard from the midst of the throne : “Here 
Iam; sendme. LoIcome. In the volume of the book 


it is written of me, todo thy will,O my God.” In another’ 


passage : “I delight. to do thy will.” “N ow, just think of 
what the will of God in this instance comprehended. The 
veiling the essential glory, the tabernacling in human 
flesh, the homeless wandering, the pangs of desertion and 
treachery, the abhorred contact with evil, the baptism of 
fire, beside the crown of sorrow, the dread hiding of the 
Father’s countenance in portentous eclipse. And into this 
more than Egyptian darkness Jesus delighted to enter, for 
the sake of fallen man. When he assumed the form of a 
servant, and, actually incarnate, entered upon the work of 
redemption, it was with no reluctant step, in no hireling 
spirit. It was his meat and his drink ; as necessary and 
pleasing to him as his daily sustenance, to do the 
will of his Father which was in heaven. Steadily 
pursuing one purpose, he was heedless of all that hindered; 


f earth’s 
honored 
ig song, 
1 every 
and for 
oss, de- 
rsterious 
be no 
thing in 
e exalts 
Surety 
> by the 
ot enter 
der the 
ow that 
ractised 
rhich is 
lence is 
f disin- 
Christ. 
: “Here 
le book 
vnother® 
link of 
| The 
human 
on and 
tism of 
of the 
1to this 
ter, for 
m of a 
ork of 
ireling 
y and 
lo the 
eadily 
Jered; 


101 


THE INCARNATION OF CHRIST. 


he felt irrepressible longings for its accomplishment; and 
his soul was like a prisoned bird, that dashes itself for 
freedom against the grating of the cage: “I have a baptism 
to be baptised with; how am I straitened till it be ac- 
complished,” Steadily pursuant of that purpose, he was 
heedless of all that hindered. Now passing through a 
threatening mob, now turning from an offered crown, now 
resisting wisely the temptations of the enemy, now casting 
behind him the more dangerous, because more affectionate 
remonstrances of his disciples, and now repelling the sug- 
gestive aid of twelve legions of angels from heaven. Oh, 
as sinners like ourselves, at far off, reverent distance, 
watch him in his redemptive course—as, one wave after 
another wave, the proud waters go over his soul, and he 
dashes of the spray, and holds on his course, unfaltering 
and steady, to the end—with what depth of gratitude 
should we render him the homage of our hearts, and with 


‘what earnestness and self-accusation should we take to 


ourselves the burden of every melancholy sigh! 


‘For all his wounds to sinners cry— 
I suffered this for you. ”’ 


IIT. I observe, thirdly, the SAVIOUR’S ASSUMPTION OF 
HUMANITY WAS NOT ONLY CONDESCENDING AND VOLUN- 
TARY, BUT IT WAS COMPLETE. It was no mock assump- 
tion of humanity. The whole nature was taken on. He 
had a human body with all its infirmities; he had a 
human soul with its completeness of faculty, and its ca- 
pability of endurance, with its every capacity, with its 
every affection. There were three reasons which seemed 
to render this entire assumption of human nature neces- 
sary. It was necessary, first, because the man had sinned, 
and upon the man, therefore must come the brand of Jeho- 
vah’s displeasure. It was necessary, secondly, that the 
world might have the best, and utmost manifestation of 


God, and that humanity, too gross and bewildered to com- 


prehend ideas that were purely spiritual, might see in the 
Incarnate Son the highest embodied possibility of being. 


ae = 


102 THE INCARNATION OF CHRIST. 


It was necessary, thirdly, that the felt need of the people 
in all ages of the world’s history might be supplied—the 
need of perfect pureness, allied to perfect sympathy—of 
the strength which was omnipotent to deliver, married to 
the tenderness that was brave and deep to feel. The com- 
plete humanity of Jesus has been attested by abundant 
authentications. In every legitimate sense of the word 
he was a man with man. He did not take our sinful 
nature upon him; that is on) an inseparable accident of 
humanity; it came in after the creation, and it should go 
out before the end. Therefore in every legitimate sense 
of the word, he was man with man. He was born help- 
less as other children are. His early years were spent in 
the house of his reputed father, working at his handicraft 
for bread. He grew in wisdom and in stature as other 
children grow ; not at once, but by the slow ripening of 
years developed into the maturity of man. When he en- 


tered on his public ministry and went out among his’ 


fellows, he sustained, as they did, the relationships of 
mutual dependence and help. He was no self-elected re- 
former. He was no turbulent inflamer of unholy passions. 
Faulty as was the government under which he lived, he 
was a loyal subject, paid the tribute money. without mur- 
murihg, and submitted himself to every ordinance of man. 
He was no dark ascetic; he was a brother of the multi- 
tudes, mingling in all the grief and cheerfulness of life. 
If men invited him to their houses, he went and sat down 
with them at their boards. If they asked him to their 
marriage festivals, he graced them with his presence, and 
turned the water into wine;and mingled his tears with theirs 
when the light of their homes was quenched, and when 
some loved one was suddenly withdrawn. His care for 
them who trusted him ceased not with bis own danger, for, 
having loved his own, he loved them to the end. His filial 
affection was conspicuous throughout every part of his life, 
and shone radient as a star through the darkness of his 
agony. He was the man Christ Jesus. How is it that 
you identify him with ournature? What are the peculiar 


he people 
lied—the 
athy—of 
1arried to 
The com- 
abundant 
the word 
ur sinful 
cident of 
should go 
ate sense 
brn help- 
b spent in 
andicraft 
as other 
ening of 
n he en- 
ong his: 
ships of 
ected re- 
passions. 
lived, he 
ut mur- 
of man. 
> multi- 
of life, 
it down 
0 their 
ice, and 
h theirs 
1 when 
are for 
yer, for, 
is filial 
his life, 
of his 
it that 
eculiar 


THE INCARNATION OF CHRIST. 103 


characteristics »y which you understand that such a one 
is partaker of humanity? Does human nature hunger? 
He hungered in the plain where the delusive fig-tree grew. 
Does human nature thirst? He felt the pang sharply on 
the cross. Is human nature wearied under the pressure 
of travelling and of toil? He sat thus upon the well. 
Does human nature weep unbidden tears? Pity wrung 
them from him as he gazed upon the fated and lost Jeru- 
salem; and sorrow wrung them from him at the grave 
where Lazarus lay. Does human nature shrink and fear 
in the prospect of impending trial, cowering beneath the 
apprehended peril, and pray that dread pangs may be 
spared it? In the days of his flesh, when he poured out 
his supplications with strong crying and tears, “he was 
heard, in that he feared.” He was the man Christ. Come, 
ye seekers after the sublime, behold this man—marred 
enough by sorrow, but not at atall by sin; decorated with 
every grace, yet disfigurec. by no blemish of mortality; ray- 
ing out warmth and life into the hearts and homes of men; 
with not an act that you can trace up to selfishness, and 
not a word that you can brand as insincere; with his 
whole life of kindness, and his death an expiation—behold 
the Divine Man! Talk of the dignity of human nature— 
it is there, and you can find it nowhere in the universe be- 
side. “The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,” the 
skill to make canvas speak, or marble breathe, or to play 
upon men’s hearts as upon harp of many tunes, the mad 
ambition that would climb to fame, by slopes where the 
trampled lie,and where the red rain drops from many a 
heart’s blood—what are claims to his! Hush, ye candi- 
dates for greatness, and let him speak alone. Erase meaner 
names from thy tablets, thou applauding world, and chron- 
icle this name instead. Shrine it in your living hearts, 
those of you who trust in his atonement, and who come by 
his mediation unto God; grave it there deeper than all 
other names—the man Christ Jesus. 

IV. I observe, fourthly, THE INCARNATION OF THE 


‘SAVIOUR WAS NOT ONLY CONDESCENDING. AND VOLUNTARY, 


oe = 4 


104 THE INCARNATION OF CHRIST, 


AND COMPLETE, BUT IT WAS ALSO, AND CHIEFLY, ATONING.— 
The great purpose for which he came into the world 
could not be properly accomplished but through death. 
It was through death that he was to destroy him that had 
the power of death, that is, the devil. Intimations of this 
had come previously into the world, in the visions of seers, 
from the lips of prophets, in the adumbrations and typical 
shadowings of some great Offerer, who, in the end of the 
world, should appear to put away sin by the sacrifice of 
himself. All other purposes, however seperably noticeable, 
because subordinate and subsidiary to this Hence Christ 
did not become partaker of flesh and blood that he might 
give to the world a spotless example. Although holiness, 
illustrious and unspotted, does beam out from every action 
of his life, he was not incarnate in order that he might im- 
press upon the world the teachings of pure morality ; 
although such were the spirftuality of his lessons, and the 
power with which he taught them, that. “never man spake 
like this man.” He did not assume our nature merely that 
he might work his healing wonders, showing‘ before the 
bleared vision of the world, omnipotence in beneficent 
action. All these things, however seperably noticeable, 
were not vast enough or grand enough to have brought the 
Saviour from heaven. Miracles, precepts, kindnesses, all 
these were collateral blessings—flowers that sprung up, as 
at the tread of the fabled goddess, wherever he appeared. 
Large and full in his sight, through all the years of. his 
incarnate’ life, more distinctly, more vividly, in the last 
years of his ministry, loomed the shadow of the-figure of 
the cross: “That is the end of my toil; that is the consum- 
mation of my purpose. I am straitened till I get to that; 
I have not fulfilled my mission, and expressed all the 
Divine energy that Iam to pour out upon the world, until 
I reach that. There is the goal of all my endeavours; 
there I see my true office before me—the surety of insol- 
vent humanity, the friend of a forsaken race, the refuge 
and succour of endaugered man.” If you will think for a 
while, you will see how all the other characteristics of the, 


ONING,—— 
he world 
th death. 
that had 
18 of this 
of seers, 
typical 
d a the 
crifice of 
bticeable, 
e Christ 
e might 
holiness, 
y action 
ight im- 
norality ; 
and the 
an spake 
ely that 
fore the 
sneficent 
ticeable, 
ight the 
asses, all 
g up, as 
ppeared, 
s of. his 
the last 
igure of 
consum- 
to that; 
all the 
d, until 
AVOUTS ; 
' insol- 
refuge 
k for a 
3of the, 


THE INCARNATION OF CHRIST. 105 


incarnation converged here, and were each of them 
necessary in order to give this, the master-purpose, its 
efficacy and its power. It was necessary that a being of 
holy estate should condescend, Divinity sustaining 
humanity under the pressure of agony, and imparting 
to humanity a plentitude of atoning meritoriousness. 
It was necessary that the offering should be voluntary, 
because there could be no availableness in exacted suf- 
fering; and the offering must be profoundly willing 
before it could be infinitely worthy. It was necessary 
that the whole nature should be taken on, because the 
man had sinned, and the man must die; and as huma- 
nity, in its federal representative, the first Adam, had 
been drawn to death, so humanity, in its federal repre- 
sentative, the second Adam, might have the free gift 
coming upon all men unto justification of life. 

Now, you see how far we have got in our search for 
an accepted propitiation. We have got a willing vic- 
tim. e have got a willing victim, in the nature that 
had sinned ; we have got a willing victim, in the nature 
that had sinned with no obligation of his own, and all 
whose merit, therefore, could be to spare for the redemp- 
tion of the sinner. Justice herself required only 
another exaction, and that is, that this willing victim 
should be free from taint, whether of hereditary or ac- 
tual crime. Now, the miraculous conception freed 
from the hereditary taint of human nature ; and, thus 
freed from hereditary defilement, he was born, not of 
blood; not in the ordinary method of human generation, 
nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but 
of God. And he moved about in the midst of his fel- 
lows in an atmosphere of impurity, yet escaping its con- 
tagion. Like the queenly moon shining down upon 
the haunts of beggars, and dens of thieves, yet preserv- 
ing its chastity and its brilliance dulinwateed he moved. 
among the scum and offscouring of human society, and 
could say, “‘ Which of you convicteth me of sin ?” He 
was holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners 3 

D1 


Lo 4 


106 THE INCARNATION OF CHRIST. 


evoking from heaven its attesting thunders ; charming 
the wondering earth with spotlessness which it had 
never seen before; and (crown of triumph!) wringing 
from baffled demons the reluctant acknowledgement, 
«¢ We know thee who thou art, the Holy One of God.” 
Here, then, is the perfected offering—a willing victim ; 
2 willing victim in the nature that had sinned, and free 
from taint, free from obligation, man’s eternal Saviour, 
God’s incarnate Son. Follow him in the shadow of 
his passion. Close upon the agony of Gethsemane 
came his arrest by the treachery of one whom he had 
honored. Patiently he bears the ribaldry and insult in 
the dishonored judgement-hall of Pilate. Wearily he 
treads the pathway to Calvary, bearing his own cross. 
Now, the cross is reared. The multitude are gathered 
about the hiliof shame. The nails are fastened into 
the quivering flesh ; and in agony and torture ebbs his 
pure lifeaway. The last ministering gngel leaves him, 
for he must tread the wine-press alone. Darkness gath- 
ers suddenly round ; and—oh, mystery of mystery !— 
the Father hides his face from the Beloved. Darkness 
deepens in the sky and in the mind—how long, the 
affrighted gazers know not. A cry bursts through the 
gloom, sharp, shrill, piercing. All is silent—it is fin- 
ished! The night, that had climbed up strangely to 
the throne of noon, as suddenly dispersed. The mul- 
titude, that eager and wondering had gathered round 
the hill of shame, separated to their several homes, 
talking about the tradgedy they had witnessed. 
The moon rose on high as calmly as if the sua had not 
set on a scene of blood. But, oh ! what a change those 
few hours had wrought in the fortunes of the world. 
Christ had uied, the just for the unjust, that he might 
bring us to God. Go, tell it to that despairing sinner 
—that man, I mean, who has the cord about his neck, 
and the pistol at his throat, who is just about to escape 
from the terrible harrowings of an alarmed conscience, 
by the dreadful alternative of self-murder. Go to him; 


harming 
th it had 
wringing 
lgement, 
of God.” 
¥ victim ; 
and free 
Saviour, 
aadow of 
hsemane 
n he had 
insult in 
sarily he 
vn cross. 
gathered 
1ed into 
ebbs his 
ves him, 
ess gath- 
stery |— 
Darkness 
ong, the 
hugh the 
-it is fin- 
ngely to 
he mul- 
d round 

homes, 
tnessed. 
had not 

e those 
e world. 
le might 
io sinner 
is neck, 
D escape 
science, 
to him ; 


THE INCARNATION OF CHRIST. 107 


be quick; tell him he need not die, for Christ has died, 
has died to bear his sins away. Proclaim salvation 
from the Lord for wretched dying men. Sound it out 


from the summit of that hill-side of Calvary, and let the * 


sister hiils echo it, until round the earth has spread the 
rapturous hosanna—Saivation ! Go with it to the 
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and 
naked ; it is just the thing they need—Salvation ! 
Ring it out through every avenue of this vast metropo- 
lis of a world, till it rouse the slumbering dust, and 
awake the coflined dead—Salvation! Takeit to your 
own hearts—be sure of that; and, in the fullness of 
your own experience, let us hear your song: ‘‘ There 
1s, therefore, now no condemnation to them that are in 
Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after 
the Spirit.” 

How is it with you, brethren? How is it with you 
to-night ? Have you any personal interest in the in- 
carnation of the Saviour ? iias the realizing change 
by which you are enabled to understand the purposes of 
the Saviour’s advent come upon your heart? Have the 
purposes of his advent been fulfilled in your experience? 
He came “ to destroy him that had the power of death,” 
that is, the devil—to counter-work him on his own 
ground ; is he slain in you—vanquished and overcome 
in you? He came “to deliver hem who through fear 
of death were all their lifetime subject te bondage ;”’ 
are you freed trom the tyranny ? Have you entered 
into the liberty wherewith Christ has promised to make 
you free? He has accomplished his purpose. Many 
a one has gone blithely to the stake in the name of 
Jesus ; many a one has marched steadily with eyes 
open to meet the last enemy, trusting in Jesus. No, 
not much fear of death about Stephen, when in the 
gloom ot that fierce council he looked up and saw 
heaven opened, and the Son of Man standing at the 
right hand of the throne of God, and ail that were in 
the council, looking steadfastly on him, saw his face as 


108 YHE INCARNATION OF CHRIST. 


it had been the face of an angel. Not much fear of 
death in Paul. That is more patent to your experi- 
ence, perhaps ; for he was a blasphemer once, we know 
' a persecutor once, an injurious manonce; but he 
obtained mercy, and he is presented in what I take to 
be one of the sublimest passages of Scripture: “I am 
in a strait betwixt two’’—frail, erring, sinfu!, mortal 
man poised, so to speak, in balance between both worlds, 
having the choice of either, and not knowing which to 
take—“‘I am jn a strait betwixt two, having a desire to 
depart and to be with Christ, which is far better ;”’ but 
to remain in the flesh is more needful for you.” Not 
much fear of death there. He came “to deliver them 
who, through fear of death, were all their life-time sub- 
ject to bondage.” How is it with you? Does the 
Spirit take of the things of Christ and show them to 
you? Does he witness to you of your own personal 
adoption intu the family of God? Ifycn hesitate to 
say that, can you say, as the old woman in Scotland said, 
when questioned upon the fact of her adoption: “I 
can say this: either I am changed or the world is 
changed.” Can yousay that? Has the cautery begun 
its work: Is the proud flesh getting eaten out by the 
live coal from the altar? Areyou ceasing to do evil 
and learning to do well—bringing forth fruits meet for 
repentance? Do you hate sin with ev r-increasing 
hatred, and press forward to the cultivatiow of the things 
that are of good reportand lovely ? Alas! it will be 
sad for you if the incarnation of Christ should be to you 
a mystery forever, if there be no light coming upon his 
purposes, no experience of the fulfilment of them in 
your own hearts. Oh, seel: first the kingdom of God 
and his rigteousness. Hallow this dedicatory service by 
the dedication of your own hearts to God. Let there be 
this sacrifice, a living sacrifice, holy end acceptable, 
which is your reasonable service. 


oR 
iy 
3 
‘t 
is 
he 
‘ 
ty ths 
BY a 
“ee 
qi ot 


. fear of 
-experi- 
va igay 
but he 
take to 

“T am 

mortal 
worlds, 
Thich to 
lesire to 
r;”’ but 
”? Not 
er them 
me sub- 
oes the 
them to 
yersonal 
itate to 
nd said, 
on: “I 
vorld is 
y begun 
; by the 
do evil 
1eet for 
reasing 
> thing's 
will be 
e to you 
pon his 
hem in 
of God 
vice by 
here be 
sptable, 


ZEAL IN THE CAUSE OF CHRIST. 


‘Kor whether we be beside ourselves, it is to God; or whether we be 
sober, it is for your ceuse. For the love of Christ constraineth us; be- 
cause we thus judge, that if one died for all,,;then were all dead; and that 
he died for all, that they who live should not henceforth live unto them- 
selves, but unto him who died for them, and rose again.’’—2 Cor. v, 18-15. 


any particular cause to know the tactics of his 

adversary. He will be the better prepared for 
the onset, aad repel the attack the more easily. Fore- 
warned of danger, he will intrench himself in a position 
from which it will be impossible to dislodge him. The 
Apostie Paul posessed this advantage in a very eminent 
degree. In the earlier years of his apostlesiip, the Jew 
and the Greek were the antagonists with whom he had 
to contend. Having been himself a member of the 
straitest sect of the Jews, he knew full well the 
antipathy with which they regarded anything which 
set itself by its simplicity in contrast with their 
magnificent ritual; and he knew also the haughty 
scorn with which they turned away from what 
they deemed the unworthy accessories of the 
Nazarene. And, well read as he was in classic literature, 
and acquainted with all the habits and tendencies of the 
Grecian mind, he could readily understand how the 
restraints of the Gospel would be deemed impertinent by 
the voluptuous Corinthian, and how the philosophic 
Athenian would brand its teachers mad. And yet, 
rejoicing in the experimental acquaintance with the 
Gospel, he says, for his standing-point of advantage: 


g Mail is always an advantage for the advocate of 
N y) 
Z a 


110 ZEAL IN THE CAUSE OF CHRIST. 


5 


block and to the Greeks foolishness, but to them that are 
called, the power of God and the wisdom of God.” And 
in the words of the text, addressing some of those very 
Corinthians upon whom the Gospel had exerted its power, 
he seems to accept the stigma and vindicate the glorious 
madness: ‘For whether we be beside ourselves, it is to | 
God: or whether we be sober it is for your cause. For & 
the love of Christ constraineth us; because we thusjudge | 
that if one died for all, then were all dead: and that he | 
died for all, that they who live should not henceforth live 
unto themselves, but unto him who died for them, and 
rose again.” The great purpose of the Apostle in these 
words is to impress upon us the fact that the cause of 
Christ in the world, sanctioned by the weight ofso many 
obligations, fraught with the destinies ofso many millions, | 
should be furthered by every legitimate means; that for 4 
it, if necessary, should be employed the soberest wisdom; } 


“ We preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumbling- , yo 


ook 


and for it, if necessary, the most impassioned zeak. He § doe 
vindicates the use of zeal in the cause of Christ by the = wa 
three following considerations ; First, from the condition 4 sov 
of the world; secondly, from the obligations of the | exe 
Church; and, thirdly, from the master-motive of the > fro 
Saviour’s constraining love. To illustrate and enforce <) me 
this apostolic argument, as, not inappropriate to the 5; — 
object which has called us together, will be our business = 9 — 
for a few brief moments to-night. "sia 
I, The Apostle argues and enforces the use of zeal in > an 
the cause of Christ, in the first place, from THE CONDITION = ~— of 
OF THE woRLD. The Apostle speaks of the world asin | wi 
a state of spiritual death. He argues the universality of — co 
this spiritual death from the universality of the atone-  - in 
ment of Christ. “For the love of Christ constraineth me 
us, because we thus judge, that it one died for all, then th 
were all dead”—dead in sin, with every vice luxuriant _ al 
and every virtue languishing; dead in law, judicially in _ a 
the grasp of the avenger; nay, “condemned already,” 7 a 


and hastening to the second death. We need not remind > ol 


tumbling- 
n that are 
d.’ And 
hose very 
its power, 
> glorious 
s, it is to 
use. For 
hus judge 
1 that he 
forth live 
hem, and 
in these 
cause of 
"80 Many 
millions, 
that for 
wisdom ; 
eak. He 
t by the 
ondition 
, of the 
> of the 
enforce 
> to the 
business 


zeal in 
DNDITION 
ld as in 
sality of 
Pp atone- 
traineth 
ll, then 
xuriant 
ially in 
ready,” 
remind 


ZEAL IN THE CAUSE OF CHRIST. 111 


you that this is by no means the world’s estimate of its 


own condition. It is short-sighted, and, therefore, self- 
complacent. There is a veil over its eye; there is a 
delusion at its heart. In that delusion it fancies itself 
enthroned and stately, like some poor lunatic, an imagi- 
nary monarch under the inflictions of its keeper. The 
discovery of its true position comes only when the mind 
is enlightened from on high. ‘“ We thus judge,” not 
because there is in us any intuitional sagacity, or any 
prophetical foresight, by which our judgment is made 
more accurate than the judgment of others; but the 
Holy Spirit has come down, has wrought upon us—has 
shown us the plague of our own hearts—and from the 
death within we can the better argue the death which 
exists around. And that this is the actual condition of 
the world, Scripture and experience combine to testify. 
The Bible, with comprehensive impartiality, concludes 
all “under sin;” represents mankind as a seed of evil- 
doers—“ children that are corrupters ;”—sheep that have 
wandered away from the Shepherd and Bishop of their 
souls. In the adjudication of Scripture there is no 
exemption from this common character of evil, and 
from this common exposure .9 danger. The man of 
merciful charities, and the woman of abandoned life 
—the proudest peer, and the vilest serf in his barony 
—the moralist observer of the decalogue, and the man- 
slayer, red with blood, all are comprenended in the broad 
and large denunciation: ‘“ Ye were by nature children 
of wrath, even as others.” And out in the broad world 
wherever the observant eye travels, you have abundant 
confirmation of the testimony of Scripture. You have it 
in your own history. The transgressions and’sins which 
constitute this moral death abound in our age no less 
than in any former age of mankind. There are thousands 
around you who revel in undisguised corruption. Theve 
are thousands more externally reputable who have only 
a name to live. You have this confirmation in the nations 
of the Continent—some safely bound by the superstition 


112 ZEAL IN THE CAUSE OF CHRIST. 
of ages; others subsiding into a reactionary skeptic'sm, 
You have this confirmation further away in the countries 
which own Mohammedan rule, and cherish the Moham- 
medan’s dream—where you have unbridled lust, and a 
tiger’s thirst for blood. You have this confirmation in 
the far-off regions of heathenism proper, where the nature, 
bad in itself, is made a thousand-fold worse by its religion 
—where the man is the prey of every error, and the 
heart the slave of every cruelty—where men live in 
destruction, and where men die in despair. Travel where 
you will, visit the most distant regions, and search under 
the shadow of the highest civilization—penetrate into the 
depths of those primeval forests, into whose original 
darkness you might have imagined the curse would hard] 
penetrate, and the result is uniformly the same. Death 
is everywhere. You see it, indeed, in all its varieties; 
now in the rare and fading beauty which it wears just 
after the spirit has fled from the clay, when its repose 
seems the worn-out casket, which the soul has broken, and 
thrown away ; now, when there is shed over it a hue of 
the sublime, and it is carried amid tears to burial; and 
now, when corruption has begun its work, and its ill odor 
affects the neighborhood, and spreads the pestilence—you 
see it in all its varieties, but uniformly death is there. 
We gather from our melancholy pilgrimage no vestige 
of spiritual life. Mourners go about the streets, and there 
are mourners over many tombs. 

Although, as we have observed just now, a thorough 
and realizing estimate of the world’s condition comes 
only when the judgment is enlightened from on high, 
the wise men of the world, the minds that have in all 
ages towered above their fellows, have felt an unsatisfac- 
toriness for which they could hardly account; they have 
had a vague and morbid consciousness that all was not 
right somehow, either with themselves or with their race ; 
they have met with disturbing forces, signs of irregularity, 
tokens of misery and of sin that have ruffled, somewhat, 
the philosophic evenness of their minds. Each in hig 


=) 


4 ry 
a4to 


nr 
n 


ed2aeaer Ke 


oD ee ee ee Se a 


skeptic'sm, 
e countries 
1e Moham- 
ust, and a 
mation in 
the nature, 
its religion 
r, and the 
en live in 
avel where 
arch under 
ite into the 
e original 
uld hardl 
e. Death 
varieties ; 
wears just 
its repose 
roken, and 
a hue of 
vial; and 
its ill odor 
nce—you 
. is there. 
10 vestige 
and there 


thorough 
on comes 
on high, 
ive in all 
nsatisfac- 
they have 
was not 
leir race ; 
gularity, 
mewhat, 
h in hig 


ZEAL IN THE CAUSE OF CHRIST. 118 


own way, and from his own standpoint, has guessed at 


the solution of the problem, and has been ready with a 
suggested remedy. The peoples are imbruted; educate 
them. The nations are barbarous; civilize them. Men 
grovel in sensual pleasure; cultivate the esthetic faculty ; 
open up to them galleries of pictures; bring them under 
the humanizing influences of art. Men groan in bond- 
age; emancipate them, and bid them be free! Such are 
some of the tumultuous cries that have arisen from earnest 
but blind philanthropists, who have ignored the spiritual 
part of man’s natu's, and forgotten altogether the God- 
ward relations of his soul. All these, as might have been 
expected, valuable enough as auxiliaries, worth some- 
thing to promote the growth and comfort of a man when 
life has been once imparted, tail, absolutely fail to quicken 
the unconscious dead. In all cases the bed has been 
shorter than that a man could lie on it, and the covering 
narrower than that he could wrap himself init. The 
inbred death lay too deep for such superticial alchemy ; 
corpses cannot by any possibility animate corpses; and 
the compassionate bystander from other worlds, sickened 
with the many inventions, might be constrained to cry, 
“ Arid all this tumult of the human, O for something 
Divine! And the Divine is given—Christ has died for 
allmen. There is hope for the world’s life. This is a 
death whereby we live; this is a remedy commensurate 
with existing need, and intended entirely to terminate 
and extinguish that need. 

That squalid savage, whose creed is a perpetual terror, 
and whose life is a perpetual war—Christ hath died for 
him. That fettered and despairing slave, into whose soul 
the iron has entered, valued by his base oppressor about 
on a par with the cattle he tends, or with the soil he 
digs—Christ hath died for him. That dark blasphemer, 
who lives in a familiar crime, whose tongue is set on fire 
of hell, whose expatriation would be hailed by the 
neighborhood around him as a boon of chiefest value— 
Christ has died for him, That dark recluse, whom an 


114 


ZEAL IN THE CAUSE OF CHRIST. 


awakened conscience harasses, and who, in the vain hope 
of achieving merit by suffering, wastes himself with 
vigilant penance well-nigh to the grave—Christ has died 
for him. Oh, tell these tidings to the world, and it will 
live. Prophesy of this name in the motionless valley, 
and the Divine Spirit who always waits to do honor to 
Jesus, will send the affatus from the four winds of heaven, 
and they shall leap into life to his praise. 

Now take these two points. Think, in the first place, 
of the condition of the world—-a condition so disastrous, 
that nothing but death ean illustrate it—a condition 
which prostrates every faculty, which smites the body 
with unnumbered cruelties, which dwarfs the mind with 
prejudices or distorts it into unholy passion, which 
banishes the soul and mind within aman in hopeless 
estrangement from happiness and God; and then think 
of the death of Christ, providing for the furthest need, 
overtaking the utmost exile, pouring its abundant life 
upon the sepulchred nations, diffusing light, liberty, hope, 
comfort, heaven: and I appeal to your enlightened judg- 
ment whether you are not bound, those of you who believe 
m Jesus, to labor for the world’s conversion with intensest 
energy and zeal. Oh, if temporal miseries elicit sympathy, 
and prompt to help; if the anxieties of a neighborhood 
gather around a drowning child, or are fastened upon the 
rafters of a burning house, where, solitary and imploring, 
stands a single man, already charred by the flame, how 
much of sympathy, of effort, of liberality, of zeal, of 
prayer, are due to a world lying in the wicked one, and 
panting after the second death! You will agree with 
me, that there is more than license for the poet’s words: 


‘6On such a theme, 
Tis impious to be calm!” 


And you will rejoice—will you not ?—to take your stand, 
to-night by the Apostle’s side, and to cry, when men 
deem your zeal impertinence and your efforts fanaticism, 
“Tf we be beside ourselves, it is to God: and it we be 
sober, it is for your cause.” — 


vain hope 
mself with 
t has died 
ind it will 
ess valley, 
y honor to 
of heaven, 


irst place, 
disastrous, 
condition 
} the body 
nind with 
nN, which 
1 hopeless 
en think 
1est need, 
idant ‘life 
tty, hope, 
ned judg- 
10 believe 
intensest 
yrmpath 
Weahoadt 
upon the 

ploring, 

e, how 

zeal, of 
ne, and 
ee with 
s words: 


r stand, 
en men 
aticism, 
we be 


a iar 2 a 


ZEAL IN THE CAUSE OF CHRIST. 115 


IT. The Apostle argues the necessity for zeal in tho 
cause of Christ, secondly, from THE OBLIGATIONS OF THE 
cnuron, in that he died for all, that they should live— 
should not henceforth live unto themselves, but for him 
who died for them and rose again. The Apostle’s argu- 
ment is this—none of us has life in himself; if we live at 
all, we live by imparted life ; we live because life has been 
drafted into our spirits from on high. Then it is not our 
own; it belongs to Him who has purchased it for us with 
his own blood, and we are bound to employ it in his 
service, and for his glory. This also is the conclusion of 
an enlightened judgment. We judge this as well as the 
other, and this is in accordance with the whole tenor of 
Scripture. Time would fail us to mention a tithe of the 
passages in which devotion—the devotion of the heart and 
of the service of God, are made matter of constant and 
of prominent demand. I will just mention one passage 
that may serve as an illustration of all: “I beseech you 
therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye give 
your bodies as a living sacrifice.” Have you ever gauged 
the depth of consecration that slumbers in the heart of 
those words—“ a living sacrifice ;” to be absolutely and 
increasingly devoted to God, as if the knife were at the 
throat, and the lite-hlood streamed forth in votive offering ? 
Nay, better than that; because the life-blood could stream 
out but once, but the living sacrifice may be a perpetual 
holocaust, repeated daily for a lifetime—a living sacrifice, 
holy and acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable 
service. From the doctrine of this passage, and of num- 
berless others kindred to it, it would appear that the 
regenerate heart is not at liberty to live for itself, nor to 
aim supremely at its own gratification ; it must live for 
him who has “died for it, and who has risen again.” 
You cannot fail, I think, to perceive that compliance with 
this exhortation is utterly antagonistic to the ordinary 
procedure of mankind. 

In an age of urganization against idolatry, there is one 
proud, rampant idolatry which retains its ascendency 


FIP 


116 ZEAL IN THE CAUSE OF CHRIST. 
amongst us. Selfishness is the most patronized idolatry 
in the world. It is the great image whose brightness is 
exceedingly terrible, and before which all men bow; it 
is a throne, and an empire, and the likeness of a kingly 
crown ; it equips armies and mans armaments to gratify 
its lust of power. Fastnesses have been explored and 
caverns ransacked to appease its thirst for yold. It pre- 
sides over the council of kings and over the diplomacy of 
cabinets; for it the merchant-man grindeth down his 
manhood, for it the treader-under-foot of nations marcheth 
in its might and in his shame; its votaries are of all 
handicratts — of the learned professions, and of every 
walk in life. It hath sometimes climbed on to the 
et leas and perverted judgment there. The 
cowled monk hath hidden it beneath his robe, and it 
hath become for him an engine of oppression, and it hath 
occasionally robed itself in holy vestments, and entered 
the priest’s office for a morsel of bread. No grace nor 
virtue of humanity is free from its contamination. It 
has breathed, and patriotism has degenerated into partis- 
apship ; it uas breathed, and friendship has been simu- 
lated for policy; it has breathed, and charity has been 
blemished by ostentation ; it has breathed, and religion 
has been counterfeited for gold; its sway is a despotism 
— its territory wherever man hath trodden, and it is the 
undisputed anarch of the world. Now it is against this 
principle in human nature, throned within us all, dog- 
gedly contesting every inch of ground, that Christianity 
goes forth to combat. The Gospel absolutely refuses to 
allow self to be the governing power, and assaults it in 
all its strongholds with precepts of sublime morality. To 
the selfishness of avarice it goes up boldly, even while 
the miser clutches his gold, and says: “ Give to him that 
asketh of thee, and from him that would borrow of thee 
turn not thou away.” To the selfishness of anger it ad- 
dresses itself, even when the red spot is yet on the brow 
or the angry : “ Let not the sun go down upon thy wrath ;” 
‘Bless them that curse you, pray for them that despite- 
fully use you and persecute you.” To the selfishness of 


prid 
hond 
let 
selfis 
66 L 
thin 
crit 


of 
witl 
who 
that 
hov 
like 
mor 
I 
in tl 
to t 
is h 
80 8 
nove 
Hov 
ing 
shri 


od idolatry 
® 3 
ightness is 
mn bow; it 
fa kingly 
to gratify 
lored and 
J. It pre- 
lomacy of 
down his 
marcheth 
are of all 
of every 
on to the 
re. The 
e, and it 
1d it hath 
d entered 
vrace nor 
tion. It 
ito partis- 
Pen simu- 
has been 
| religion 
lespotism 
l it is the 
aAinst this 
all, dog- 
ristianity 
efuses to 
Its it in 
lity. To 
Pn while 
him that 
r of thee 
er it ad- 
he brow 
wrath ;” 
despite- 
hness of 


ZEAL IN THE CAUSE OF CHRIST. 117 


pride, even in its haughtiness and arrogance, it says: “ In 
honor preferring one another, be clothed with humility, 


let each esteem another better than himself.” To the 
selfishness of indifference to the concerns of others, 
“Look not on thine own things, but likewise upon the 
things of others;” and to the selfishness of souls and 
criminal neglect of the great salvation, it speaks in tones 
of pathos which that must be a callous heart that can 
withstand, * Ye know the graces of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
who, though he was rich, yet for our sins he became poor, 
that we, through his poverty, might be made rich.” Oh, 
how small, alongside of august and heavenly precepts 
like these, are the sublimist maxims of any merely ethical 
morality ! 

It is said that, once, during the performance of a comedy 
in the Roman theatre, one of the actors gave utterance 
to the sentiment, “I am a man; nothing, therefore, that 
is human, can be foreign to me,” and the audience was 
so struck by the disinterestedness, or so charmed by the 
novelty, that they greeted it with thunders of applause. 
How much greater wealth of kindly wisdom and prompt- 
ing to unselfish action lies hidden in the Gospel of Christ, 
shrined there is every-day utterances passed by the most 
of us very slightingly by! Ob! let there be anything 
like the genial practice of this divine morality, and the 
world would soon lose its aspect of desolation and of blood ; 
oppression and over-reaching, and fraud and cruelty, 
would be frowned out of the societies of men, and this 
earth would be once more an ample and a peopled paradise. 
By selfishness, as we have thus endeavored to describe it, 
we mean that grasping, monopolizing spirit which gets 
all and gives nothing; heedful enough of its own fortunes, 
careless of the concerns and interests of others. This is 
the principle in our nature which Christianity opposes, and 
with which it ceaselessly wages war. But there is a sort 
cf selfishness which, for the sake of distinction, we may 
call self-love, which is instinctive, and therefore innocent 
—that merciful provision by which we are prompted to 


WIA 


118 ZEAL IN THE CAUSE OF CHRIST. 


the care of our own lives and to the avoidance of every- 
thing that would disquiet or abridge them. This principle 
in our nature Christianity encourages; to this principle 
Christianity addresses itself: and hence it has connected, 
married in indissoluble union, man’s chieftest duty and 
man’s highest pleasure. Godliness is profitable unto all 
things, having the promise of the life that now is. What 
has the dark, morbid, unhappy sensualist to do with it ? 
Godliness hath the promise of the life ‘‘ that now is,” as 
well as ‘‘that which is to come.” In keeping thy com- 
mandments there is a present reward. ‘ ‘Take my yoke 
upon you and learn’ of me, for I am meek and lowly in 
heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls; for my yoke 
is easy and my burden is light.” “In thy presence there 
is fullness of Joy: at thy right hand there are pleasures 
for evermore.” Just as it is in man’s physical organiza- 
tion, and its adaptation to the material world around him, 
when body and mind ‘are alike in heaith, we can neither 
eat, nor drink, nor talk, nor walk nor sleep, nor sing, nor 
perform any of the commonest actions of life, without a 
sensation of pleasure; so it is in the spiritual life; there 
is pleasure in its every motion. There is pleasure even 
in the sting of penitence; it is 
‘A godly grief and pleasing smart, 
That melting of a broken heart.” 

There is pleasure in the performance of duty; there is 
pleasure in the enjoyment of privilege; there is pleasure 
in the overcoming of temptations, a grand thrill of hap- 
piness to see trampled under foot a vanquished lust or slain 
desire ; there is pleasure in the exercise of benevolence ; 
there is pleasure in the opportunity of prayer. Hence 
it is that the Apostle seeks to rivit the sense of personal 
obligation, by the remembrance of personal benefit. 
“We thus judge, that he died for all, that they 
which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, 
but unto him who”—owns them? No. Claims them ? 
No. Will judge them? No; but —“to him who died 
for thei and rose again.” Gratitude is to be the best 


yf every- 
principle 
principle 
nnected, 
luty and 
unto all 


3 What 


with it? - 


w is,” as 
shy com- 
my yoke 
lowly in 
my yoke 
ice there 
pleasures 
rganiza- 
ind him, 
| neither 
ing, nor 
thout a 
2; there 
re even 


there is 
pleasure 
of hap- 
or slain 
olence ; 
Hence 
ersonal 
benefit, 
t they 
selves, 
them ? 
o died 
he best 


ZEAL IN THE CAUSE OF CHRIST. 119 


prompter to our devotion. Those who live to Christ, 
those who live by Christ, will not tamely see his altars 
forsaken, his Sabbaths desecrated, his name blasphemed, 
the blood of the covenant wherewith he was sanctified 
accounted an unholy thing. Brethren are you of that 
happy family? Have you obtained life from the dead 
through his name? Then you are bound to spend it for 
his honor, and, watching with godly jealousy for every 
possible opportunity of doing good, to spend and be spent 
for them who have not yet your Master known. I call on 
you to answer this invocation ; it belongsto you. There is 
no neutrality, believe me,in this war—and if there be some 
of you that would like to be dastardly and half-hearted 
trimmers, you will find by and by that you have got the 
hottest place in the battle, exposed to the cross-fire from 
the artillery of both parties. [I call on you decisively to- 
night to answer this invocation. Call up before your 
minds the benefits you have individually received; think 
of the blessings which the death of Christ has procured 
for you—the removal of the blighting curse which sha- 
dowed all your life, the present sense of pardon, mastery 
over self and over sin, sight in the day of your activity, 
and songs in the night of your travail; the teaching 
Spirit to lead you into still loftier knowledge, and the 
sanctifying spirit to impress upon you the image of the 
heavenly; that Divine fellowship which lightens the 
present, and that majestic hope which makes the future 
brighter tar. Think of the benefits which the resurrec- 
tion of Christ has conferred upon you; light in the sha- 
dowed valley, the last enemy destroyed, support amid the 
swellings of Jordan, a guide upon the hither side of the 
flood, angelic welcomes, the King in his beauty, and “a 


house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.” - 


And then, as the sum of favor is presented, and gratitude 
arises and the fire burns, and the heart is full, and the 
frame quivers with the intensity of its emotions, just 
rem ‘mber that there is a, world lying in the wicked one, 
that there are multitudes, thousands upon thousands, in 


120 ZEAL IN THE CAUSE OF CHRIST. 
your own city, at your own doors, for whom the Saviour 
died, who never heard his name; that there are multi- 
tudes for whom he has abolished death: who have never 
felt his resurrection’s power. Let your tears flow; better, 
far better a tear for God’s sake and the world’s sake than 
the hard-heartedness and darkness of sin. Lift up your 
voice inthe midst of them; lift it up, be not atraid. ae 
unto the cities of Judah, “ Behold your God.” Men will 
call you mad, but you can give the Apostle’s answer, “ If 
we be beside ourselves, it is to God; if we be sober, it 
is for your cause.” 

III. The Apostle argues the necessity of zeal in the 
cause of Christ, in the third place, from the master motive 
of tHE Saviour’s constrainine Love. ‘The love of 
Christ constraineth us ”— forces us along, carries us away 
as with the impetuosity of a torrent, or rather as when 
cool heavens and favoring air speed the vessel steadily to 
the haven. Love is at once man’s most powerful motive 
and his highest inspiration, both in the life that now is 
and that which is to come. From love to Christ spring 
the most devoted obedience, the most untiring efforts in 
his service. There are other springs of action, 1 know, 
by which men are influenced to a profession of religion. 
Interest can occasionally affect godliness from sordid 
aims, and behave itself decorously amid the respectabili- 
ties of the temple-going and alms-giving religion ; but it 
will give its arm to any man that goes down to the house 
of Rimmon; and if there is a decree that at the sound 
of all kinds of music they are to fall down before another 
image which has been erected in the plains of Dura, they 
will be the most obsequious benders of the knee. Men 
sometimes practice obedience under the influence of fear. 
A sudden visitation, a prevailing epidemic, an alarming 
appeal, will strike into momentary concern ; but when the 
indignation is overpast, and the craven soul has recovered 
from its paroxysms of terror, there will often be a relapse 
into more than the former atrocities of evil. Convictions 
of duty may and sometimes will induce a man, like an 


Saviour 
: multi- 
e never 
- better, 
ke than 
up your 
id. Sa 

fen will 
ver, “If 
sober, it 


in the 
‘motive 
love of 
is away 
8 when 
adily to 
motive 
now is 
; spring 
orts in 
know, 
eligion. 
sordid 
setabili- 
; but it 
e house 
sound 
another 
a, they 
Men 
of fear. 
arming 
hen the 
overed 
relapse 
rictions 
ike an 


ZEAL IN THE CAUSE OF CHRIST. 121 


honest Pharisee of the olden time, to observe rigidly the 
cnactments of the law; but there will be no heart in his 
obedience, and no holy passion in his soul; but let the 
love of God be shed abroad in his heart by the Holy 
Ghost given unto him, let there be a perception of love 
in God, let there be a sight of the Crucified as well as 
of the cross, and there will bea disinterested, and cheer- 
ful, and hearty obedience. Zeal for God will become at 
once a passion and a principle, intensifying every purpose 
into ardor, and filling the whole soul with the vehemence 
of absorbing desire. This is the emotion from whose 
natural and inevitable outflow the Apostle vindicates 
impassioned zeal, 

pinions are divided as to whether the constraining 
love spoken of in the text, refers to Christ’s love to us or 
to our love to him, which the sense of his love has 
enkindled in the soul. I do not think we can go far 
wrong if we take both meanings, inasmuch as no prin- 
one of exposition is violated, and as we need the pressure 
of a combination of motive, that we may be zealously 
affected always in this good thing. Ye, then, if there 
are any of you here who need rousing to energy in the 
service of Christ, think of his love to you; how rich its 
manifestations, and how unfeigned; how all other love of 
which it is possible for you to conceive shrinks in the 
comparison! There have been developments in the 
histories of years of self-sacrificing affection, which has 
clung to the loved object amid hazard and suffering, and 
which has been ready even to offer up life in its behalf. 
Orestes and Pylades, Damon and Pythias, David and 
Jonathan, what lovely episodes their histories give us 
amid a history of selfishness and sin! Men have canon- 
ized them, partly because such instances are rare, and 
party because they are like a dim tape of redemption 
ooming from the ruins of the fall. e have it on in- 
spired authority, indeed, “Greater love hath no man 
than this”—this is the highest point which man can 
compass, this is the culminating point of that affection 


D2 


LaF 


2 ZEAL IN THE CAUSE OF CHRIS". 


which man can by possibility attain, the apex of his 
loftiest pyramid goes no higher than this—“ greater love 
hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for 
his friend; but God commendeth his love toward us, in 
that while we were yet sinners Christ died for us.” A 
brother has sometimes made notable efforts to retrieve a 
brother’s fortunes, or to blanch his sullied honor; but 
there is a Friend that sticketh closer than a brother. A 
father has bared his breast to shield his offspring from 
danger, and a mother would gladly die for the offspring 
of her womb; but a father’s affection may fail in its 
stren2th, and yet morerarely a mother’s in its tenderness. 


‘ST saw an aged woman, bowed 
*Mid weariness and care; 
Time wrote in sorrow on her brow, 
And ’mid her frosted hair. 


‘¢ What was it that like sunbeam clear 
O’er her wan features ran, 
As, pressing toward her deafened ear, 
I named her absent son ? 


‘What was it? Ask a mother’s breast, 
Through which a fountain flows, 
Perennial, fathomless, and blest, 
By winter never froze. 


‘“What was it? Ask the King of kings, 
Who hath decreed above, 
What change should mark al? earthly things 
Except a mother’s love!” 


And “can a woman forget her sucking child, that she 
should not have compassion on the son of her womb? 
Yea, the; may forget, yet will I not forget thee.” O 
Jesus of Nazareth, who can declare thee? “ Herein is 
love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and 
sent his Son to be a propriation for our sins.” Think of 
that love—love which desertion could not abate—love 
which ingratitude could not abate—which treachery 
could not abate—love which death could not destroy— 
love which, for creatures hateful and hating one another, 
stooped to incarnation, and suffered want, and embraced 


x of his 
ater love 


trieve a 
or; but 
her. A 
ne from 
ispring 
il in its 
derness. 


e” O 
erein is 
us, and 
hink of 
e—-love 
eachery 
pstroy— 
nother, 
braced 


ZEAL IN THE CAUSE OF CHRIST. 


death, and shrank not even from the loathsomeness and 
from the humiliation of burial; and then, with brimming 
eye, and heart that is full, and wonder “ Why, such love 
tome?” you will indeed be ungrateful if you are not 
stirred by it to an energy of consecration and endeavor, 
which may well seem intemperate zeal to the cool 
reckoners with worldly wisdom. Then take the other 
side of the argument ; take it as referring to your love to 
Christ, which the sense of his love has enkindled in the 
soul. The deepest affection in the believing heart will 
always be the love of Jesus. The love of home, the love 
of friends, the love of letters, the love of rest, the love of 
travel, and all else, are contracted by the side of this 
master-passion. “ A little deeper,’ said one of the 
veterans of the first Napoleon’s old guard, when they 
were probing in his bosom for a bullet that had mortally 
wounded him, and he thought they were getting some- 
where in the region of the heart—“‘a little deeper and 

ou willfind the Emperor.” Engraven on the Christian’s 

eart deeper than all other love of home or friends, with 
an ineffaceable impression that nothing can erase, you 
find the loved name of Jesus. Oh! let this affection 
impel us, and who shall measure our diligence or repress 
our zeal! Love is not bound by rule; there is no law 
that can bind it; it is never below the precept, it is 
always up to the precept, but it always has a margin of its 
own. It does not calculate, with mathematical exacti- 
tude, with how little of obedience it can escape penalty 
and secure recompense ; like its Master it gives in princely 
style; it is exuberant in its manifestations; there 1s 
always enough and to spare. Andif meaner motive can 
prompt to heroic action—if from pure love of science 
astronomers Gan cross ocean familiarly, and dare encounter 
dangers, just that they may watch in distant climes the 
transit of a planet across the disc of the sun—and if 
botanists can travel into inhospitable climes and sojourn 
among inhospitable men, only to gather specimens of their 
gorgeous flora—and if, with no motive but love of country, 


4 


IIIA 


124 ZEAL IN THE CAUSE OF CHRIST. 


and no recompense save bootless tears and an undying 
name, a Willoughby could sacrifice himself to blow up 
a magazine, and a Sarkeld could fire the Cashmere Gate 
at Delhi, surely we, wit obligations incomparably higher, 
with the vows of profession on our lips, with death busy 
in the midst of us, and souls going down from our doors 
into a joyless and blasted immortality, ought to present 
our life-blood, if need be, for the cause of Christ, and fov 
the good of souls. Let the scoffers spurn at us as the 
will ; we are far superior to such poor contumely.. Heave 
applauds our enthusiasm, and we can vindicate it in the 
Apostle’s words: “ If we be beside ourselves, it is to God ; 
and if we be sober, it is for your cause.” 


undying 
blow up 
ere Gate 
y higher, 
rath busy 
ur doors 

present 
, and for 
Ss as the 

Heave 
it in the 


sto God; 


THE CHRISTIAN’S INHERITANCE. 


‘“‘Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that 
I desire beside thee. My flesh and my heart faileth: but God is the 
strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.’’—PsaLm Ixxiii. 25, 26, 


AY flesh and my heart faileth.” Who does not 
(AYA | understand that? It is the common lot—the 
wee3} uniform and continual experience of the race. 

“The voice said, Cry. And he said, What shall I cry? 

All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the 

flower of the field; the vrass withereth, the flower fadeth, 

because the spirit of ths Lord bloweth upon it; surely 
the people is grass.” This announcement of mortality, 
coming thus solemnly in a vcice from heaven, finds its 
echo in the experience of mortals themselves; for how- 
ever they may attempt to disguise it—with whatever 
study, perseverance, and hypocrisy they may conceal their 
feelings—it is an undeniable and startling truth that the 
living know that they must die. Death, my brethren, is 
atheme of mighty import. Eloquence has been exhausted 
upon the wide-spread magnitude of its desclation; there 
is not a place where human beings congregate which 
does not tell them that they are mortal. Is it a family? 

Death enters and makes household memories painful, and 

turns home into the dwelling of the stranger. Is it a 

market-place? It is a busy, stirring throng which fills it 

as ever, but they are new faces that meet the eye, new 
voices which fall.upon the ear. Is it a congregation ? 

Our fathers, where are they? The prophets, do they 


126 THE CHRISTIAN’S INHERITANCE. 


live forever? Is it a world? Every thirty years its 
mighty heart is changed in continual supercession; one 
generation comes upon the heels of another, and the 
bones of our fathers form the dust on which we tread. 
And yet, strange to say, there is an almost universal 
listlessness upon the subject, and the saying of the poet 


seems well-nigh to be verified, that 
*¢ All men think all men mortal but themselves.” 


Look at the man of the world—does not he seem as if 
he thought he should live forever—as if he thought only 
on the paltry, perishable matters with which bea atin 
to be surrounded? Circumstances may indeed now and 
then occur in his history which may compel a transient 
recognition of eternity: his eye may perhaps rest upon 
the Bible, or a funeral procession may cross his path as 

he walks the streets of the city, or a passing bell, with 
its slow and solemn tolling, may break suddenly upon his 
ear, and the thought comes on his mind for a moment 
that there may possibly be such a thing as death. But 
it was but for amoment; it was astray thought of eternit: 

—one whose advances are at once forbidden as an ‘enreel 
come intruder ; he was ruffled for awhile—taken aback for 
an instant—but time passed away, and he has become as 
still, and as slumbering, and as senseless as_ before. 
Brethren, we might rebuke that insensibility from the 
records of ancient history. It is recorded of Alexander, 
the conqueror of one world, that he wept bécanse there 
was no other world to conquer. Alas! men now-a-days 
have sadly degenerated ; they have no such ambition, they 
mourn over no such cause of grief. However, there is, 
brethren, whether men reck of it or not, there is another 
world to conquer. The battle is not with the confused 
noise of war, or garments rolled in blood; the enemies 
are not flesh and blood, but principalites and powers, and 
the rulers of the darkness of this world, and spiritual 
wickedness in high places. The prize is not an earthly 


ears its 
on; one 
and the 
e tread. 
niversal 
he poet 


m as if 
tht only 
appens 
ow and 
ansient 
st upon 
path ag 
l, with 
pon his 
noment 
- But 
ternit’ 
unwel- 
ack for 
ome as 
before, 
mm the 
ander, 
yh 
a-days 
, tie 
re is, 
10ther 
ifused 
emies 
3, and 
ritual 


wthly 


127 


THE CHIRISTIAN’S INHERITANCE. 


crown, but a kingdom of whose brilliancy the Macedonian 
never knew. Yet many never enter this battle-field, and 
many who do, after a he brief and ineffectual struggles, 

row tired, and ingloriously lay down their arms. 

rethren, we are anxious that you should not be thus 
cowardly in the day of battle; we wouid have you quit 
yourselves like men and be strong; and we know of 
nothing that is better calculated to arouse your fortitude 
and bring into play that high and fearless heroism which 
we are sahaviee by the Apostle to add to our faith, than 
the consolation of the words of the text, bringing before 
us, as they do, the Christian’s personal inheritance, and 
hope, and future prospects: “ Whom have I in heaven 
but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire 
beside thee. My flesh and my heart faileth: but God is 
the strength of my heart, and my portion forever.” 

We need not spend time in endeavoring to prove to 
you, that it is one characteristic of the wicked that “God 
is not in all his thoughts,” He may not go so far as 
openly to deny either his being or intelligence, but could 
you search his heart you would discover it to be a matter 
of the supremest indifference. A faint whisper of the 
Divine existence never obtrudes itself into his schemes, 
whether of aggrandizement or pleasure ; and he is content, 
so far as he 1s concerned, to enjoy the uncared-for inheri- 
tance of this world. Nay, oftentimes his presumption is 
more galling and flagrant still: aspiring to be his own 
deity, he pays homage to himself, and with Eastern devo- 
tion does he worship at the shrine of his idol. 

How, then, was this stray spirit to be won back to 
God? This was the question which engaged the Divine 
attention, and the answer to which became to the angelic 
host a matter of mystery and wonder. The law was un- 
doubtedly powerless; it ‘had been broken, its require- 
ments flagrantly violated, and wherever man went it 
proscribed him a fugitive and a rebel. Moreover, it is 
the tendency of the law rather to irritate than to heal — 
rather to beget unfriendliness than tenderness toward the 


128 THE CURISTIAN’S INHERITANCE. 


law-giver in the breast of the criminal. Hence you may, 
bring God before the sinner’s mind in his character of a 
God of judgment; you may manifest to the sinner the 
frowns of his angry countenance; you may collect all 
the arguments of terror which language can gather; and 
you may arm these arguments of terror with additional 
energy by descanting on the thunder of his power; you 
may set before him the horrible spectacle of his own ‘im- 
pending death, and the unknown horrors of that eternity 
which is on the other side; you may disquiet him with 
all these appliances (and it is auite right he should 
be disquieted); you may induce a partial reformation of 
life and character (and it is necessary that he should re- 
form); you may set him trembling at tle power of the 
lawgiver (and a thousand times rather let him tremble 
than sleep); but where, in the midst of all this, is there 
obedience to the first and great c.mmandment? Is the 
love of God shed abroad in his heart? ILas it dawned upon 
the darkness of his mind? has its gentle influence acted 
like a salutary and composing charm over his alarmed 
breast? No; all your appliances have failed, there has 
been no conviction implanted except the conviction of 
fear. The thunders of executive justice and the power 
of judicial vengeance have failed to impress his faust: 
there it is, like a fortress, firm, impregnable, granite-like 
on its adamantine rock ; and that which was intended to 
draw the soul into closer communion *v God has only 
driven him to a more hopeless distance from God. How, 
then, was the stray spirit to be won back to God? Oh, 
brethren, ‘“ what the law could not do, in that it was weak 
through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the like- 
ness of sinful flesh””— mark the words; not in the reality 
of sinful, but in the Z¢keness of sinful, though in reality 
of human — “ in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, 
condemned sin in the flesh.” By the mysterious incarna- 
tion of the Mighty One all difficulties were removed. 
The dignity of the throne remained unsullied, while the 
milder beams of mercy were madg to fall upon it; and 


God a 
justific 
ing Ol 
atone 
mome 
tion is 
of Isr 
unred 
beast 
now ¢ 
enter} 
the hd 
speak 
the be 
and t 


forcib 
i 
ANOE 
for w] 
sion O 
powel 
gift f 
the né 
sibilit 
it can 
loftie 
addit 
impe 
level 
abov 
the e€ 
right 
light 
The 
frow 
fact, 
Spur 


rou may, 
ter of 
ner the 
lect all 
er; and 
ditional 
Pr; you 
Dwn im- 
eternity 
m with 
should 
tion of 
buld re- 
of the 
remble 
s there 
Is the 
d upon 
acted 
larmed 
ere has 
tion of 
ower 
eart ; 
ite-like 
ded to 


129 


THE CHRISTIAN’S INHERITANCE. 


God could at once be just, and yet the free and generous 
justitier of them that believe in Jesus. The all-compris- 

ing offering of the Saviour’s blood made at once an 

atonement, an at-one-ment between God and man. The 

moment the man exercises faith in Christ the reconcilia- 

tion is complete. The Lord is his defence; the holy one 

of Israel his refuge; and he whoa while ago was an alien, 

unredeemed and desolate —a worthy companion of the 

beast in his lair, a fit follower on the serpent’s trail —is 

now clothed, in his right mind, careering along in the 

enterprise of godliness, a fellow-citizen of saints and of 
the household of God. And this brings us immediately to 

speak of our present meditation, God as the recompense of 
the believing soul. ‘ Whom have I inheaven but thee.” 

and there is none upon earth that I desire beside thee ? 

We find three thoughts my dear brethren, which tend 
forcibly to impress this matter upon our minds. 

I. In the first place, Gop 1s tae CurRisTIAN’s INHERIT- 
ANCE AS THE LIGHT OF HIs INTELLECT. There is nothing 
for which man is more accountable than for his posses- 
sion of mind —for his improvement and abuse of those 
powers with which the mind is gifted. It is a beneficent 
gift from a beneficent Being, but, then, by partaking of 
the nature of the immortal, it entails upon him the respon- 
sibilities of an immortal also. Few are the subjects which 
it cannot penetrate ; difficulties but urge it to a course of 
loftier efforts, and, like the avalanche of snow, it gains 
additional momentum from the obstacles that threaten to 
impede it. Our position is this; Mind never finds its 
level, never finds its rest, until itis fixed upon the things 
above; active, inquiring, speculative, impassioned ; like 
the eagle towering from his erie on the cliff, its course is 
right upward to the sun, and in the beams of uncreated 
light alone it finds its home, and its kindred, and its joy. 
The great purpose of man in the present world is to pass 
from a passive to an active state of being. And it is, in 
fact, this transition, effected by the agency of the Holy 
Spirit, which is that regeneration of whichScripture speaks, 


130 THE CHRISTIAN’S INHERITANCE. 
By nature, man is under the dominion of habit; the 
Spirit brings him under the dominion of principle. By 
nature, a man exercises himself in all his doing without 
reference to God; in grace, the Spirit dwells in the heart 
as the sanctifier and the guide. By nature, a man, under 
temporary impulses of master-passions, may put forth 
energies which awe the world, but they are of the earth, 
earthy; but the Spirit, so to speak, implants heavenl 
ideas in his mind, and he gets power and capacity to think 
of God. By nature, the man cleaves to the dust, is con- 
versant only with what is contemptible and low, and at 
last sinks into perdition ; in grace he draws himself up to 
his full stature, asserts his native royalty, and, as a heaven- 
born and heaven tending subject, claims kindred with the 
King of the other world. In fine, by nature the man 
walks in darkness, the shadows of the night are around 
him, and he knoweth not whither he goeth; in grace, the 
morning has broken delightfully on the steps of the travel- 
ler, and he is revived and invigorated by the light of day. 

Brethren, there is one point here which, if you are all 
like-minded with myself, you will hail with no common 
satisfaction. I am loth to part with those I love; I am 
loth to regard them as strangers, because they change their 
residence, and are just gone to live on the other side of 
the stream. I won't pay death the compliment of telling 
him he has divided the Churc’», He cannot do that. 
There is only one army of the living God: 


‘*Part of the host have crossed the flood, 
And part are crossing now;”’ 


but it is one army ; there is but one body growing up into 
Christ — its living head. The head and the upper mem- 
bers in heaven and lower members on earth; but itis but 
one system and one body; and at no very distant period 
the whole body shall be drawn into the upper sanctuary, 
and stanc out to the gaze of the admiring universe in the 
full stature of the perfect man. I hail with joy, therefore, 
anything that has a tendency to bring me even in thought 


near 
minis 
tiding| 


The 


heave 
on ea 
sole i 
that 
the la 
game 
this 4 
the n 
of ou 
forgo 
and f: 
of wh 
And, 
night 
implc 
truth 
thin 
in th 
thing 
fall, ° 
upon 
with 
ever! 


it; the 
le. 
without 
he heart 
n, under 
ut forth 
he earth, 
eavenl 
to thin 
, 18 con- 
r, and at 
lf up to 
heaven- 
ith the 
he man 
around 
ace, the 
e travel- 
; of day. 
lL are all 
;ommon 
>; [am 
ge their 
side of 
telling 
o that. 


up into 
r mem- 
tis but 
; period 
ctuary, 
in the 
srefore, 
hought 


THE CHRISTIAN’S INHERITANCE. 131 
near to the loved and gone before. T welcome as the 
ministering angel the voice of kindness which brings me 
tidings from the realms where my friends are reposing. 
The thought, then, that gives me such satisfaction, is 
this, that now, even now, clogged as we are by the frailty 
and weakness of the body, we and those departed ones 
who have died in the faith are walking in the same light. 
We are told that the Lord is the light of his people in 
heaven; we know that the Lord is the light of his people 
on earth. We ate told that the glory of the Lord is the 
sole illumination of the heavenly Jerusalem ; we know 
that the glory of the Lord illummates the earthly Zion ; 
the lamp of light above, the spirit of light beneath—the 
same light, for they are both God. There is a beauty in 
this conception—don’t you see it ?—because it gives us 
the notion of alliance; it repudiates the idea of this earth 
of ours as cast off from God’s fatherhood, a shrouded and 
forgotten thing. It takes hold of it in its degradation, 
aud fastens round it one end of the chain, the other end 
of which is bound to the throne of the Everlasting himself. 
And, oh! is it not a beautiful thought, ay, while here to- 
night in the sanctuary we are opening our Bibles, and 
imploring, the Spirit of God to shine down upon the 
truth, faith looks through the clouds—and they are very 
thin ones —and sees a host of bright spirits above, engaged 
in the same employment, desiring to look into the same 
things. We are one with them afterall. The light may 
fall, the light does tall, with a more gushing flood-tide 
upon their eyes, but itis the same light. There they are, 
with the Great Teacher in the midst of them, porin 
everlastingly upon the tale of pleading love. Suc 
students and such a teacher, who would not join; and, 
as the light of the intellect, adopt at once and forever 
the words of the text: “Whom have I in heaven but 
thee? and there is noneupon the earth that I desire beside 


thee.”’ 
II. And then again, Gop 1s THE CHRISTIAN’s INHERIT- 


ANOE, not only as the light of his intellect, but as TH 


T4274 


: 
aA A 
at 


132 THE CHRISTIAN’S INHERITANCE. 


REFUGE OF HIS CoNscIENCE. Whenever human nature 
reflects on God, it must reflect on him as an object of 
distrust and dread. We think of him as a being of 
unimagined power, of enormous power ; we are ignorant, 
moreever, how he stands affected toward us—and the 
fancy ot ignorance will always be found to be the fancy 
of fear. The uncertainty in which the manner of his 
existence is shrouded, the vast extent of his creation, the 
wise and sage policy of his government, the retirement 
in which he dwells, the clouds and darkness that are 
round about his footstool, the inscrutable majesty which 
surrounds his throne—all these things have a tendency to 
inspire us with alarm,so that we may say with Job, 
“When I consider, I am afraid of him.” The case might 
have been different in the primeval,paradise, when the 
Lord walked in the garden in the cool of day; but ever 
since he has withdrawn himself from mortal society, 
mortals view him with dismay ; and the Athenians only 
spoke the language of unassisted reason, when they 
reared their altar “ to the unknown God.” 

And if we appeal to nature, to the external world, to 
remove this distrustfulness of God, we shall find ourselves 
but little benefited. This, you know, is one of the ver 
tritest prescriptions of the Theophilosophers and Latitu- 
dinarians of the present day. ‘“ Gotonature,” they say ; 
“look at the external world ; see everything around you ; 
look there, and see written with’ pleasing characters that 
one great lesson of the universe, that God is love.” Well, 
I will go to the external world, if such is to be the theme. 
I look around me, and I discover many things upon which 
the eye can gaze, to which the ear can listen, upon which 
the heart can dwell, which rejoices me when I| think that 
the God that made them all is surely a God of love. 
There are the smiling landscapes, and beautiful enamelled 
earth, and soft music of the summer’s breeze, and the 
loud laugh of the bounding stream, aad the innocence of 
domestic enjoyments and ennobling principles, and the 
peace and love and animation which cluster around the 


hearth 
ful th 
surel: 
ing fic 
thund 
societ 
ana t 
all, de 
tions 
that t 
can té 
about 
dence 
voice 
me t 
then 
conj 
of ma 
base 
fact i 
and 2 
habit 
the |. 
and | 
love, 
view 
and | 
heav 
so lo 
his ] 
from 


of | 


nature 
ject of 
being of 
norant, 
and the 
e fancy 
r of his 
on, the 
rement 
at are 
which 
ency to 
h Job, 
might 
en the 
it ever 
ociety, 
s onl 

ther 


rid, to 
rselves 
ie very 
Latitu- 
Y Say ; 
1 you ; 
8s that 
Well, 
heme, 
which 
which 
k that 
love. 
1elled 
d the 
1ce of 
d the 
d the 


THE CHRISTIAN’S INHERITANCE. 133 


hearth-stone of many a cottage home. Oh, it isa delight- 
ful thought that the God who made all these things, is 
surely a God of love! Ah, but then there are the sweep- 
ing floods, and the resistless tempests, and the mighty 
thunder, and the jealousies and heart-burnings of domestic 
society, and the wholesale slaughters of aggressive war, 
and the wrath of the devouring pestilence, and, to crown 
all, death, grim and ghastly death, crushing the genera- 
tions as the moth is crushed. What am I to believe, but 
that the God of the universe is a mighty judge? Nature 
can tell me nothing then. She just tosses my poor mind 
about in the most distressing alternations, first of confi- 
dence, and then of dread. And yet often when the mild 
voice of Christianity—rather of natural religion—assures 
me that God is love, I am not disposed to believe it. But 
then there is a reason for this. ‘Chisisnot, like the other, 
conjured up out of the land of shadows, the mere result 
of man’s intellect or of speculatian and theories ; it has its 
base and origin in the secrecies of his own nature. The 
fact is, in every mind there is a law of right and wrong, 
and along with it a consciousness that that law has been 
habitually violated. There is a restless apprehension of 
the law and the Law-giver, a dread foreboding of guilt 
and judgment; anda man cannot believe that God is 
love, while his conscience tells him «hat that God is to be 
viewed as anenemy. The comforting voice of reason 
and of religion may testify to the benevolence of God in 
heaven ; but so long as there is a secret misgiving within— 
so long as there is the yet unsettled controversy between 
his Maker and himself, all ideas of confidence are banished 
from his mind, and, like Adam of old, in the very slyness 
of his crime, he would hide himself from his Maker 
among the trees of his garden. 

And here it is that Christianity comes to our assist- 
ance, just as she always does when we most need her, 
and one feels the force of those deep and thrilling words 
—‘ Behold the Lamb of God, that taketh away the sins 
of the world.” This told of a Saviour, and a Saviour 


134 THE CHRISTIANS INHERITANCE. 


who has borne his cross and carried his sorrow, the man 
looks about him for the unwonted spectacle, puts off his 
fainting for awhile, gazes at the illustrious victim, and 
“ Who is it?” he cries: “who is that mighty one that 
has come down to the rescue? Who is it that has ago- 
nized in the garden, that has bled under the scourge, 
and died upon the cross? Who is it?” Why, who 
should it be but the very Being whom he has so basely 
and so ungratefully insulted ? and with the grace of love 
and the tenderness of the man Christ Jesus, there is 
blended the majesty of the King of kings. Oh, he 
cannot doubt after that; that is an argument likely to 
overturn all his skepticism. He looks at the cross, and 
sees that God is righteous; but he looks at the Crucified, 
and he sees that God is love; and, with clasped hands 
and streaming eyes and grateful heart, he sings, “ Whom 
have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth 
that I desire beside thee.” 

III. And then, again, Gop 1s THE Curist1An’s InuERIT- 
ANCE, ALSO AS THE REST OF HIS souL. The restlessness of 
human ambition has become proverbial. It is grasping 
as the leech, insatiable as the grave. The moment one 
scheme has succeeded, it pants for the enjoyment of 
another. The moment it has scaled one eminence of 
fancied bliss, its cry is “ up,” ay, from the summit of the 
Alps. “O that I had the wings of the dove, and then 
would I fly away and be at rest.” This restless craving 
for something better than earth, although it is the com- 

anion of our fallen nature, very plainly tells us an 
important truth—that the earth and its concerns can 
never satisfy an immortal spirit. It pants for something 
higher, something more refined, something more intel- 
lectual, something more like God. That which alone 
can satisfy, can fill the immortal mind, must be some- 
thing in which it can feel secure, and something with 
which it can be satisfied ; for to be secure is to be safe, 
and to be satisfied is to be happy. 

1, Take the first thought, then—that of security. We 


are in § 
feel the 
tutelar 
us fro 
—not i 
but inte 
our hea 
of Isre 
Omnip 
idea sh 
likely 1 
of afilic 
swiftly 
tents O 
in the 

what 3 
bittern 
belovec 
domest 
bleediz 
have | 
paralle 
saying: 
pile 3 
wind, 

Blesse 


he man 
off hig 
m, and 
ne that 
as ago- 
ourge, 
VY, who 
basely 
of love 
here ig 
Dh, he 
kely to 
ss, and 
cified, 
hands 
Whom 
n earth 


HERIT- 
ness of 
‘asping 
nt one 
ent of 
nee of 
of the 
1 then 
raving 
> com- 
us an 
18 can 
ething 
intel- 
alone 
some- 
- with 
» safe, 


We 


THE CHRISTIANS INHERITANCE, 135 


are in a dangerous world; at every step of our track we 
feel the necessity of celestial guardianship, and that 
tutelary and sustaining influences should be shed upon 
us from on high. Well, let us once get it into our hearts 
—not into our heads simply by an intellectual conviction, 
but into our hearts asa happy alliance—let us get it into 
our hearts that the Lord is our defence and the Holy One 
of Israel our refuge, and what can make us afraid ? 
Omnipotence pledged in our behalf! Why, the very 
idea should make heroes of us all! He may, he most 
likely will have to pass through the frrnace; the hand 
of affliction may be laid upon him; the wind may sweep 
swiftly over the desert, rocking to and fro the canvas 
tents of his earthly shelter ; but you can hear him crying 
in the pauses of the storm— “ It is the Lord; let him do 
what seemeth to him good.” He may have to suffer the 
bitterness of bereavement; death may deprive him of the 
beloved of his soul; there may be the breaking up of the 
domestic homestead; the fresh laceration of the already 
bleeding spirits, and the tearing asunder of hearts that 
have grown together; but, in the midst of this un- 
paralleled suffering, you can hear his unmoved faith, 
saying—“ The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken 
awa ”’—-not the Chaldean, nor the Sabean, nor the whirl- 
wina, nor the flood—‘ Tue Lorp hath taken away. 
Blessed be the name of the Lord.” A fiercer flood may 
roll upon him, a heavier wave may threaten to overwhelm 
him, the fires of vengeance may be poured, on his head, 
but even in death’s grasp his failing voice is heard— 
“ Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. Whom 
have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth 
that I desire beside thee.” if 

2. And then take the next thought, that of happiness. 
The question of man’s chief good has’been in all ages 
speculated upon and determined. All the theorizers on 
the subject have been convinced of this—that it could 
consist in nothing inferior. And so far they are right. 
That which alone can fill the immortal mind, must have 


126 THE CHRISTIAN’S INHERITANCE, 


some analogy to the constitution of that mind; and it 
must therefore be steadfast, proof against the fitfulness 
of ever-changing circumstances; not here to-day and 
vanished when we need it to-morrow ; not present in the 
summer time when the breezes blow, and failing in the 
winter time when the blast of the hurricane comes down; 
but steadfast, always the same and always available, 
And it must be progressive, keeping pace with the soul, 
lasting as long as the soul, keeping abreast with it in its 
triumphal march to holiness and God. Well, there are 
many candidates in the field. Just bring them to the 
test-stone for awhile. Pleasure is a candidate, and she 
brings before the soul a very glowing description of her- 
self and her ways. She tells him that the voice of the 
siren shall make music in his ears, and that the loud 
laugh of festivity shall be heard in his dwelling, that the 
voice of song and dance and carnival shall yield him suc- 
cession of delight. But he asks, “Is she steadfast ?” 
And he hears that she never enters the chambers of sor- 
row, has no comfort for the dark slumber and hopeless 
winter of age. A bird of passage, she flaps her giddy 
wings in the sunshine, but at the first approach of the 
stormy season speeds her flight into more favored climes. 
Then honor is a candidate, and she tells him of a wreath 
of laurels, of the swellings of the heart as it listens to its 
own praise, and of the untold happiness of being the 


conversation of the world. But he asks, “Is she stead-. 


fast?” And they tell him that chaplets of distinction 
often fade in a night; they tell him that the most fickle 
thing in the fickle universe is popular applause—how the 
same lips that shouted ‘“ Hosanna to the Son of David !” 
shouted shortly afterward, “ Orucify him! crucify him!” 
and how the mob-idol of. to-day bas often been the mob- 
victim of to-morrow. Then wealth is a candidate; and 
she tells him of the pleasure of hoarding, of the joys of 
possession, of the pomp, and power, and flattery, and 
obsequiousness which money can procure. But he asks, 
“Ts she steadfast ?” He hears that she brings with her 


her OY 
than-t 
like t 
flies a 
thoug 
of his 
of its 
WwW 
peen 
claim 
and e 
from 
the w 
gon O 
path 
sunsh 
and W 
and 
alwa 
of the 
many 
of 80: 


nd; and t 
C fitfulnesg 
0-day and 
sent in the 
ne in the 
nes down; 
available, 
the soul, 
nh it in itg 
there are 
em to the 
, and ghe 
bn of her- 
ce of the 
the loud 
, that the 
im sues 
adfast 2” 
I's of sor- 
hopeless 
er gidd 
sh SF mi 
1 climes, 
a wreath 
nS to its 
eing the 
1e stead-. 
tinction 
st fickle 
how the 
Javid !” 
y him !” 
1e mob- 
e; and 
Joys of 
‘y, and 
le asks, 
ith her 


THE CHRISTIAN’S INHERITANCE, 137 


her own discontent ; that the cares of keeping are worse 
than-the cares of getting; that often in times of panic, 
like the scared eagle, wealth takes to itself wings and 
flies away ; and even if a man enjoy it all his life long, 
though failure and panic may not come to strip the lord 
of his property, death shall come and strip the property 
of its Ierd. 

Well, then, ‘after all these, the joys of earth, have 
been tried and severally found wanting, God brings his 
claims before the mind, offering to be the soul’s refuge 
and everlasting home. True itself, it does not shrink 
from the test. God’s aids are steadfast, they avail in 
the winter as well a: in the summer ; in the dark sea- 
son of adversity as well as when the sun shineth on the 
path ; when frost depresses the spirit as well as when 
sunshine fills it with laughter ; when friends troop up 
and when friends forsake equally ; when fortune smiles 
and when the world turns the cold shoulder. Are they 
always the same? Arc they not? Oh! ifthe decorums 
of the sanctuary would permit it to-night, are there not 
many of you who could rise up in your deep baptism 
of sorrow and sing in the words of the poet ?— 

‘¢ When our sorrows most increase, 
Then his richest joys are given ; 
Jesus comes in our distress, 
And agony is heaven,” 
Are they progressive ? Will they last as long as th 
soul? Will they keep young as it does, and keep 
pace with it as it travels along toward holiness and 
God! Oh, yes! for before all the immense and varied 
landscape of blessings upon which the eye can rest, 
existed the fullness of Deity; beyond it, stretching 
forth, a broad, fathomless infinity— 


** An ocean of love and of power. 
Which neither knows measure nor en.” 


3. Passing over several topics that might be worthy 
of our meditation, just let us glance for a moment at 
Bl 


138 THE CHRISTIAN’S INHERITANCE. 


the support offered to the Christian in the hour and article 
of death. Come with me, then, will you? it will do 
you good. Come with me to the Christian’s death- 
bed ; and if there is a cold-hearted and skeptical infidel 
of your acquaintance, bring him with you, that he may 
learn at once the worthlessness of human pride and the 
glory of the God of love. Stretched upon a couch lies 
the poor sufferer— | 


‘* Whose weak, attenuated frame 
Shows naught of being but a name.”’ 


Is this the man—is this the being who but a little while 
ago towered in all the strength of his pride? Is this 
clenched hand that which clasped yours in friendship 
but a little while ago? Ah, how true it is that he 
cometh forth as a flower and is cut down! But what 
is it fills that closing eye with such unwonted bright- 
ness? What is it that kindles that pallid cheek into 
‘such angelic animation ? Ah! there is a mightier than 
you, and a mightier than death ; there is God in that 
death-chamber.. There is an awe and a solemnity 
which tells of the presence of God. Listen ! listen to 
the unfaltering firmness with which that voice sings : 
“My flesh and my heart faileth; but God is the 
strength of my heart, and my portion forever.’”’ Is that 
enthusiasm? Are these the accents of frenzy ? Does 
madness talk so calmly ? Has the prospect of dissolu- 
tion no chilling influence? Can a fictitious excitement 
support the soul at such an hour? Ah! that is a 
stout-hearted hypocrisy that can brave the agony of 
dying. But here is triumph in death. Stoicism boasts 
of her examples ; patriotism has a long list of worthies, 
for whom the world has woven garlands of undying 
bloom. Buthere is a man, a poor, frail, erring, insig- 
nificant man, going with his eyes open, with the full 
consciousness of his position, down the dark valley, to 
meet, to grapple with, and to master his last enemy. 


There 

challeng 
spectac 
power ¢ 
him, th¢ 
the last 
its feebl 


There i 
accesslo 
And thé 
music a 
mysteri 
awhile, 
nation ¢ 
on his h 
suffered 
takes tk 
giver, a 
hear, fc 
Lord, t: 
palm, w 
append 
thou ar 
thee ?” 
break ¢ 
is filled 
unto us 
glory.” 
me die 
be like 
pray tl 
the rig 
righte: 


d article 
will do 
8 death- 
1 infide] 
he may 
and the 
uch lieg 


le while 
Is this 
endshi 
that he 
it what 
bright- 
ek into 
ler than 
in that 
lemnity 
sten to 
sings : 
is the 
Is that 
Does 
lissolu- 
tement 
at is a 
ony of 
boasts 
rthies, 
dying 
insig- 
1e full 
ley, to 
nemy. 


THE CHRISTIAN’S INHERITANCE. 139 


There is a spectacle of the morally sublime that I 
challenge the wide universe to equal. And this sublime 
spectacle is not of the wisdom of men; it is just the 
power of God. But while we have been talking about 
him, the man has died; the last convulsion is. past ; 
the last breath is drawn ; the last pulse has completed 
its feeble throb— 


‘¢ Oh change, oh wondrous change ! 
There lies the soulless clod ; 

The sun eternal breaks ; the new immortal wakes— 
Wakes with his God.’ 


There is high festivity in the realms of the blest at the 
accession of another member to the rejoicing family. 
And the harpers harping with their harps rest in their 
music awhile, and the angels, who pry forever into the 
mysteries of God, take holiday from their researches for 
awhile, and all heaven is gathered to witness the coro- 
nation of the rejoicing believer as the crown is placed 
on his head by the Master for whom he has done and 
suffered so much. Ah! what strange act is that? He 
takes the crown and casts it again at the feet of the 
giver, and he says, assigning his reason—listen, we shall 
hear, for the music is still just now—what is it? “ Ah, 
Lord, the harp, and the robe, and the crown, and the 
palm, what are all these tome? These are only the 
appendages ofthe recompense. Thou art my reward ; 
thou art my portion ; whom have I in heaven itself but 
thee ?” And then the harpers harping with their harps 
break out again, they can holdin no longer, and heaven 
is filled as with an irrepressible gush of melody, “ Not 
unto us, not unto us, brut unto thy name be all the 
glory.”” And that is the end. Who does not say, “ Let 
me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end 
be like his ?’”’ Ah, but there are many people that 
pray that prayer, who would like to die the death of 
the righteous, but who do not like to live the life ofthe 
righteous. But they go together ; believe me they go 


140 THE CHRISTIAN’S INHERITANCE. 


together. Ifyou would die the death of the righteous, 
you must live the life of the righteous, even a life of 
faith in the Son of God, “ who hath loved you and 
given himself for you.” There are some in this 
assembly to-night, who are not living the life of the 
righteous: you have not given yourselves unto Christ 
and his people, and there is no hope of that death for you, 
There is another death which I dare not trust myself 
to describe—-scenes of agony over which I draw the 
veil—the very thought of which freezes the vitals and 
curdles the blood! Oh! come to Jesus; do not tempt 
upon yourselves any such doom as that. Get Christ for 
you all. ‘TI live,” as says the rejoicing Apostle; “ yet 
not I, but Christ liveth in me’’—so shall everything 
lead you up to God. It could not lead you to under- 
value the life you now live; it would not make you 
love less this beautiful world ; everything around you 
will only have mystic meanings which will be inter- 
preted. only by Christ; you will be led thus from 
nature up tonature’s God. Then, as you pass through 
scenes of beauty and blessedness, your full heart, 
taking refuge in the language of poesy, will sing— 


‘* Lord of earth, thy forming hand 

Well this beauteous frame hath planned : 
Woods that wave, and hills that tower, 
Ocean rolling in :1ts power ; 

All that strikes the gaze unsought, 

All that charms the lonely thought. 

Yet, amid this scene so fair, 

Oh ! if thou wert absent there, 

What were all those joys to me ; 

Whom have I on earth but thee ?”’ 


Then, travelling through the path of your pilgrimage, 
God, your own God, will bless you, and will wipe away 
all tears from your faces, and will uplift you in the 
endurance and prepare you for the duties of life ; and 
your pilgrimage will go on calmly ; mellow eventide 
will come upon you, yet at eventide there shall be 
light. The last stroke will be struck, the last enemy 


encount 
ranks oO 
age to t 
in the 

same— 


May 
his nan 


ghteous, 
Bn life of 
you and 
in this 
b of the 
0 Christ 
for you, 
t myself 
raw the 
tals and 
bt tempt 
hrist for 
5 14 yet 
prything 
D under- 
hke you 
nd you 
@ i1nter- 
is from 
through 
| heart, 


Or— 
Fo 


‘image, 
e away 
in the 
>3; and 
rentide 
all be 
enemy 


THE CHRISTIAN ’S INITERITANCE. 141 


encountered, the last change realized, and amid the 
ranks of the ransomed you pass to pay your first hom- 
age to the throne, and even then, taking refuge again 
in the language of poesy, will your thoughts be the 


same— 


‘* Lord of heaven, beyond our sight 
Rolls a world of purer light; 
Where, in loves’s unclouded reign, 
Parted hands are clasped again ; 
Martyrs there and seraphs high, 
Blest and glorions company ! 
While immortal music rings 

From unnumbered seraph strings. 
Oh, that scene is passing fair ! 

Yet if thou wert absent there, 
What were all those joys tome ? 
Whom have I in heaven but thee ?”” 


May God bring us all to sing that song forever, for 
his name’s sale. 


VIII. 


THE HEAVENLY CONQUERER. 


‘ And I saw, and behold a white horse; and he that sat on him hada 


bow; and a crown was given unto him; and he went forth conquering 
and to conquer,’’—REV. Vi., 2. 


H,.OW animating is the sound of war! How easily 
4) can it awaken the ardors of the unrenewed and 
3 4} unsanctified heart of man! There is no pro- 
fession in which he can gain more renown and applause 
than in the profession of arms Jt is the birthplace of 
what men call glory. Custom has baptised it honour- 
able; it carries with ita pomp and a circumstance of 
which other professions are destitute; it has nerved 
the arm of the patriot, it has fired the genius of the 
painter, it has strung and swept the poet’s lyre; nations 
have bowed before its shrine, and even religion has 
prostituted herself to bless and consecrate its banners. 
etit must not be forgotten that for the most part 
human conquerers are just murderers upon a grand 
scale—mighty butchers of human kind. Their victories 
are won amid extermination and havoc; their track is 
traced in ruin; there is human life upon their laurels; 
and if they wish to acquire a name, they have got one; 
let them glory as they can in its possession—the voice 
of blood proclaims it from the ground,and it is vaunted 
from earth to heaven by the wailings of orphaned hearts, 
and by the deep execrations of despair. The sacred 
writings, however, tell us of one conquerer whose vic- 
tories were peacefully achieved, whose battles were 


- teach 


ploodl 
by blo 
who 18 
just fo 
the fu 
media 
quent 
adver 
and r¢ 
this y 
the fo 
O mo 
in th 
meek 


ter O 
palac 
hes 
from 
his 8] 
apoc 
al 
then 
ful | 
ness 
corr 


of ¢ 


him had a 
Ponquering 


v easily 
ved and 
no pro- 
pplause 
lace of 
honour- 
ance of 
nerved 
of the 
nations 
on has 
anners, 
it part 
grand 
ctories 
‘ack ig 
wurels ; 
[ one ; 
voice 
unted 
earts, 
acred 
> Vic- 


were 


THE HEAVENLY CONQUEROR. 143 


bloodlessly won; or ifhis onward march was discoloured 
by blood, it was his own. It is the Lord Jesus Christ 
who is thus evidently set before us; he who “died the 
just for the unjust, that he might bring usto God.” In 
the fulfillment of the various duties connected with the 
mediatorial office which he had undertaken, he is fre- 
quently represented as going out to battle against his 
adversaries, as routing them by the word of his mouth, 
and returning in exultation and triumph. Instances of 
this you will easily and at once remember. Thus, in 
the forty-fifth Psalm: ‘“‘Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, 
O most mighty, with thy glory and thy majesty. And 
in thy majesty ride prosperously because of truth, and 
meekness, and righteousness; and thy right hand shall 


' teach thee terrible things.’’ Again, in the eleventh chap- 


ter of Luke: “ When a strong man armed keepeth his 
palace, his goods are in peace: but when a stronger than 
he shall come upon him and overcome him, be taketh 
from him all his armor wherein he trusted, and divideth 
his spoils.” And yet, again, according to the mysterious 
apocalypses of the Book of Revelation, ‘‘Then shall all 
make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome 
them.” It matters not how numerous or how power- 
ful his enemies may be—alike over the powers of dark- 
ness with their legioned hosts of foes—alike over the 
corruption of the human heart with all its ramifications 
of depravity—alike over the false systems into which 
the corruption has retreated, as into so many garrisoned 
and fortified towns, “‘a crewn is given unto him, and 
he goeth forth conquering and to conque¥.” It is not 
my intention to enter into all the details of this igter- 
esting and absorbing strife. I should just like to con- 
centrate your attention upon one phase of the conflict 
—the battle of the old serpent the devil, the great origin 
of evil, under whose geueralship the others are mustered 
and to whose commands they submittingly bow. Be- 
hold, then, the combat beyond all others important— 
the combat between Christ and Satan for the human soul, 


las 


144 THE HEAVENLY CONQUEROR. 


and, as you trace the progress of the fight, remember 
with encouragement, and say that ‘He goeth forth con- 
quering and to conquer.” It will be necessary, in 
order that we have the whole matter before us, that we 
introduced the cause of strife, the batile, and the victory. 

I. As tothe cause of strife. You know that when 
the all-comprising benevolence of God found heaven 
too small for the completion of his vast designs, this 
earth arose in order and in beauty from his forming 
hands. After by his Spirit he had garnished the 
heavens, and scattered upon the fair face of nature the 
labor of his hand and the impress of his feet, as the 
fairest evidence of Divine workmanship, the last and 
most excellent of his works below, he made man in his 
own image, after his own likeness. The soul then, was 
the property of him by whom it was created, who 
imparted to it its high and noble faculties, by whom, 
notwithstanding its defilement, it is still sustained, and 
from whom proceed the retributions which shall fix its 
doom forever. Man was created in possession of that 
moral purity, that absolute freedom from sin, which 
constituted of itself assimilation to his Maker’s image. 
And so long as he retained that image, so lons was he 
the Divine property, and the Divine portion alone. 
But the moment he sinned, the moment of the perver- 
sion of his nature, of the estrangement of his faculties, 
of the alienation of his heart, he came under a different 
tenure, and became a vassal of a different lord. 

Satan himself, once an inhabitant of the high realms 
of glory, but hurled from that giddy height for diso- 
bedience and pride, was mysteriously permitted to 
tempt our first parents in the garden, with the full 
knowledge, on their part, that, standing as they did in 
their representative, and public character, if they fell 
the consequences of that one transgression were en- 
tailed upon all their posterity With the circumstances 
of the original temptation you are of course familiar, 
and the issue of it you have in that one verse in the 


book 
art ¢ 
field 
eat al 
trave 
a law 
fect Y 
creat 
was i 
is al 
foolis 
can ¢ 
of the 
he fol 
to, th 
devil. 
yrepal 
rae 
and h 
know 
circu) 
the e' 
luck 
ter! 
of th 
porte 
man 
all h’ 
the | 
the } 
ever 
facu 
evel 
and 
of t 
had 
hell 
. mai 


remember 
forth con. 
ssary, in 
, that we 
e victory, 
iat when 
1 heaven 
gns, this 
ormin 
hed the 
iture the 
t, as the 
last and 
in in his 


‘ealms 
diso- 
od to 
e full 
id in 
y fell 
» en- 
unces 
iliar, 
_ the 


- Iain cause of this celestial war. 


145 


THE HEAVENLY CONQUEROR. 


book of Genesis: ‘Because thou hast done this, thou 
art cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the 
field ; aper thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou 
eat all the days of thy life.”’ This tells us of the con- 
travention—the direct contravention—of a known law: 
alaw which God, as the supreme Creator, had a per- 
fect right to institute; alaw which man, as a dependent 
creature, was under binding obligations to obey. It 
was instituted avowedly as a test of obedience; and this 
is all we would answer to the labored sarcasms of 
foolish infidelity. Any wayfaring man though a fool, 
can curl his lip and declaim against the insignificanee 
of the act from which such mighty issues sprang; but 
he forgets that the moment the temptation was yielded 
to, there was in human nature a very incarnation of the 
devil. Under that demoniacal possession the man was 
prepared for any iniraction, from the eating of the for- 
bidden fruit to the subversion of an almighty throne; 
and he who, under such circumstances, would violate a 
known command, however trifling, would not, if the 
circumstances had been equal, have shrunk away from 
the endeavour to scale the battlements of heaven, and 
luck the crown of divinity from the very brow of the 
ternal. Hence it was, by yielding to the suggestions 
of the tempter, and to his infamous temptation, that the 
portals of the palace were flung wide open for the strong 
man armed to enter; and hither, alas! he came with 
all his sad and fearful train, enthroning himself upon 
the heart, setting up his image, as Bunyan hath it, in 
the market-place of the town of Man-soul; fortifying 
every avenue, filling every chamber, corrupting every 
faculty, enervating every inhabitant and announcing 
every moment the symbols of his own resolve to grasp 
and hold it forever. Here then is in brief the cause 
of this celestial strife. The soul, a colony of heaven, 
had been taken usurped possession of, by the powers of 
hell, and the effort to restore it to allegiance was the 


146 THE HEAVENLY CONQUEROR. 


Still further to impress you with the weighty causes 
of the strife, let us remind you for a moment of the 
character of the government, thus by daring usurpation 
acquired. The dominion which Satan exercises over 
the human soul is despotic in its character. Heis,nota 
monarch, he is an autocrat; he admits no compromise, 
he brooks no rival, he pours his uncleanness upon every 
part, and reigns supremely over every power and every 
faculty of man. True, the man is not always conscious 
of his slavery; that is one of the cunningest secrets of 
his power, that he persuades his vassels that they are 
free, and their offended language to any one who 
questions the fact is, ““ We be Abraham’s children that 
were never in bondage to any man.” He brands them 
as his own, and then, content to wear his badge, they 
may choose their own trappings. He has no uniform. 
Some of his soldiers are in rags and others in purple, 
and his very choicest veterans have stolen the livery of 
heaven. There is not one within the compass of the 
whole human family who is not subject to his authority, 
naturally led captive by the devil at his will. And 
then, this government of Satan over the human soul is 
not only despotic but degrading. Slavery in any form 
is essentially connected with degradation, and in the 
case before us the connection must be regarded as the 
most palpable and emphatic of all, The essence and 
exaltation cf moral dignity are assimilations to the 
image of God. Whatever recedes from that image 
must of necessity debase and degrade. Now the course 
of man’s life, as it has been, ever since the fall, a course 
of contrast and increasing recession from God, 
presents a spectacle of moral degradation which is 
grievous to behold; the whole nature has fallen; the 


understandiug has become darkened, and is conversant [ 


only with what is contemptible and low; the affections, 
which once soared sublimely upward, now cleave to 
worldly objects, objects that perish in the using; the 


passions have become loyal servants ot the usurper, and} 


keep 
palace 
fierce 
fondes 
scienc 
intoxi 
upon - 
withir 
man v 
the u 
raving 
tion t 
duced 
its aff 
more 
pened 
out, a 
grows 
consté 
the 
pable 
and | 
ad 
ra 
Rae : 
is it n 
orgies 
fiend 
You 
the 1 
mock 
enous 


ty causes 
ht of the 
surpation 
iseg over 
eis not a 
promise, 
bon every 
nnd every 
conscious 
secrets of 

they are 
one who 
dren. that 
nds them 
dge, they 
uniform. 


n purple, § 


» livery of 
iss of the 
authority, 
ill, And 
an soul is 
any form 
nd in the 
led as the 
gence and 
os to the 
lat image 
che course 
|, acourse 


m God, f 


which is 
allen; the 


onversant § 


affections, 
cleave to 
sing; the 


irper, and : 


THE HEAVENLY CONQUEROR. 147 


keep their zealous patrol in the court-yard of his 
palace; the will, which once inclined to good, is now 
fierce and greedy after evil; imagination revels in 
fondest dalliance with sin for its paramour; and con- 
science intoxicated with opiate draughts, and in that 
intoxication smitten with paralysis, gazes hopelessly 
ipon the desolation; or if at times stirred by the spirit 
within, it breaks out with a paroxysm and terrifies the 
man with its thunder, he is persuaded to regard it as 
the incoherence of some meddling drunkard, or the 
ravings of some frantic madman. Such is the condi- 
tion to which the usurpation of the evil one has re- 
duced the human soul. It is first earthly, scraping 
its affluence or its pleasure together; and then, yet 
more degrading, there is the transformation that hap- 
pened to Nebuchadnezzar, the heart of a man is taken 
out, and the heart of a beast is put in; and then, as like 
grows to like, and as a process of assimilation is 
constantly going on, it grows into its master’s image; 
the mark of the beast becomes more distinct and pal- 
pable, every feature stands confessed of Satan’s obscene 
and loathsome likeness, and there is a living proof of 
the truth of the scale upon which Scripture has 
graduated man’s increasing degeneracy. First earthly, 
then sensual, then devilish. This is a fearful picture; 
is it not? Ah! you see the man, or his bacchanalian 
orgies, or his midnight prowl, but you do not see the 
fiend that dogs his steps and goads him to destruction. 
You see the degradation of the nature that once bore 
the image of God, but you do not see the jibing, 
mocking demon that is behind. You trace intelligibly 
enough the infernal brand, but you cannot hear the 
peals of infernal laughter as the arch-devil, looking 
down upon the soul that he has stormed, exults in the 
extremity of the disgrace and glories in the pollution 
of the fallen. 

The government of Satan over the human soul is not 
only despotic and degrading, but destructive. Sin and 


148 THE HEAVENLY CONQUEROR. 


punishment are inseparably allied; the powers of dark- 
ness, although mysteriously permitted a certain amount 
of influence, are themselves in punishment, ‘reserved 
in chains under darkness until the judgment of the 
great day.” A man who transgresses, since no coer- 
cion comes upon the freedom of his will, must necessarily 
be regraded as willful; he is under the curses of a violated 
law, nay, condemned altogether, for “the wrath of God 
abideth upon him.” God will “pour out indignation, 
and wrath, and tribulation, and anguish upon every soul 
of man that doeth evil; upon the Jew first, and also upon 
the Gentile ;” for ‘ce is no respect of persons with God. 
I am speaking to unconverted sinners to-night; to some 
of refined and delicate sensibility, shocked at the ribaldry 
of the vulgar, and at the licentiousness of the profane. 
I tell you there is no respect of persons with God. If 
you flee not to a high and mighty Redeemer, if you re- 
pose not in present reliance upon Christ, for you there 
remaineth nothing but a death whose bitterest ingredient 
is that it can never die, but that it has eternity about it, 
eternity beyond it, and eternity within it, and the curse of 
God, upon it, fretting it and following it forever. 

Thank God, there is a promise of a perfect and delight- 
ful deliverance from this thraldom under which man has 
been groaning. Christ has come down cn purpose to 
‘deliver and ransom him, and he goeth forth conquering 
and to conquer. In the counsels of the eternal Godhead, 
in ype of the temptation of Satan and of the thrall- 
dom and depravity of man, Christ was induced to work 
out a counteracting scheme, by which the beautiful lan- 
guage of ancient prophecy, the prey of the mighty should 
be taken away and the lawful captive delivered. The 
first intimation of this scheme was given just when the 
first shadow of sin swept over the world. ‘The seed of 
the woman shall bruise the serpent’s head.” From that 
time there was a continued series of operations, in the 
good providence of God perpetuated for thousands of 
years, all tending to the fulfillment of this original pro- 


mise, : 
last 1n 
foreto 


ness oO 
that 
began 
fL. 
the st 
cation 
this ? 
the a 
Nazar 
submi 
Omni 
in heg 
upon 
powe 
is no 
know 
it. I 
and it 
nature 
getic 
perme 
strong 
langu 
used - 
histor 
of ws 
from 
separ’ 
bat w 
the s] 
the v 
were 
of lig 
imme 
tion | 


s of dark- 
1 amount 
‘reserved 
not of the 


no coer- 
ecessarily 
a Violated 
h of God 
lignation, 
very soul 
also upon 
vith God. 
; to some 
> ribaldry 
profane. 
God. If 
f you re- 
you there 
ngredient 
about it, 
e curse of 


. 

1 delight- 
man has 
urpose to 
nquerin 
Podheert 
he thrall- 
L to work 
tiful lan. 
y should 
ed. The 
when the 
e seed of 
rom that 
s, in the 
sands of 
inal pro- 


THE HEAVENLY CONQUEROR. 149 


mise, and the achievement of this original plan. At 
last in the fullness of time — the time by prophet seers 
foretold, and by believing saints expected — in the full- 
ness of time, the Son of God was incarnated in the nature 
that had sinned, and then it was that the battle in earnest 
began. ‘ 

fL. Look, then, at the Divine Saviour, “stronger than 
the strong man armed,” invested with far higher qualifi- 
cations, and wielding far mightier power. And how is 
this? He isthe babe in Bethlehem, the rejected wanderer, 
the arranged rebel, the scourged and spit upon, the 
Nazarene, the crucified. But these are only voluntary 
submissions, and in the deepest humiliation there slumbers 
Omnipotence within. ‘ All power is given unto Me, both 
in heaven and in earth,” and this power is all enlisted 
upon the side of salvation and of mercy. It is not the 
power of the lightning, that blasts while it brightens ; it 
is not the power of the whirlwind, whose track is only 
known by the carnage and desolation that it leaves behind 
it. It is the power of the water rill, that drops and drops, 
and in its dropping melts the most stern and difficult of 
nature’s forces. It is the power of light ; it flows in ener- 
getic silence, you cannot hear it as it flows, and yet it 
permeates and illumines all. He is strong, but he is 
strong to deliver; he is mighty, but, in his own powerful 
language, he is “ mighty tosave.” It oiten happens — it 
used to do so more frequently than it does now —in the 


history of the strifes of nations, and of the harsh scenes | 


of war, that the interests of spectators was drawn aside 
from hostile ranks to two courageous champions, who 
separated themselves trom opposing armies for single com- 
bat with each other, and the fate of armies appeared to 
the spectators as nothing compared with who should be 
the victor in this individual strife. O! conceive, if it 
were possible; a single combat between the rival princes 
of light and darkness, the grand, the transcendent, the 
immeasurable issue of which shall be the ruin or redemp- 
tion of the human soul! I cannot limn it; I cannot bring 


150 THE HEAVENLY CONQUEROR. 


it fairly be*oe you; the subject is too mighty: and yéta 
thought or two may not inaptly illustrate the battle that 
is now Lefore us. 

See, then, the lists are spread ; the champions are there, 
Eager angels crowd around, for they have an interest in 
the strife, and they are anxious to tune their harps to the 
anthems of regeneration again. Exulting demons are 
there, flushed with the high hopes they dare not name, 
that vaunt of a ruined universe and of a peopled hell. 
This is no gentle passage-at-arms; this is no gorgeous 
tournament, or mimic fight, or holiday review; the 
destines of a world of souls are trembling in the balance 
now — depend for weal or woe upon the issue of this 
mortal strife. 

The first grapple seems to have been in the temptation 
in the wilderness ; for at the commencement of our 
Saviour’s public ministry the enemy endeavoured to tempt 
the second Adam after the same fashion as he had tempted 
the first; and when wearied with labor, and exhausted 
with endurance and suffering from the pangs of hunger 
and of thirst, he brought before him a similar order of 
temptation to that which had been successful in the gar- 
den of Eden. Ah! but there was a mightier Adam in 
human flesh this time with whom he had to deal. Grasp- 
ing the sword of the spirit, with its trenchant blade, he cut 
asunder the flimsy sophistries of the tempter’s weaving, 
and the discomfitted demon went baffled away; and 
angels came and ministered unto Jesus—fanned with 
their ambrosial wings his burning brow, and poured their 
offices of kindness upon his fatigued and sorrowing 
soul. 

Defeated, but not conquered, the enemy returned to 
the charge ; and the next grapple was in the performance 
of meracles. It is customary in ordinary warfare, you 
know, whenever a fortress is taken, for the conqueror to 
garrison it with his own soldiers, and leave some trusty 
captain in charge. The enemy appears to have acted 
upon this plan, and in token of his uswped authority 


2 


over tl 
enter 1 
the wo 
vexed 
Sebast 
exorcis 
in moo 
out fro 
their @ 
have ¥ 
thou ¢ 
The 
Be 8 
as 
Imagir 
breast 
would 
pensed 
on; he 
there i 
comple 
let the 
cruel t 
terribl 


f eig 
sory f 


course, 
counte 
sin be 
becaus 
O! to 
upon t 
about 
royalt; 
finishe 

The 
the rvs 
ig con 


; and yeta 
battle that 


are there, 
interest in 
arps to the 
emons are 
not name, 
pled hell. 
) gorgeous 
jew; the 
1e balance 
ne of this 


emptasion 
t of our 
dto tempt 
d tempted 
exhausted 
of hunger 
order of 

the gar- 
Adam in 
. Grasp- 
de, he cut 
weaving, 
ray; and 
ed with 
ired their 
orrowing 


urned to 
formance 
are, you 
queror to 
ne trusty 
ve acted 
huthority 


THE HEAVENLY CONQUEROR. 151 


over the human race, he caused certain of his servants to 
enter into the bodies of men. When Christ came into 
the world they brought unto him those that were grievously 
vexed with the devils. He sat down before some of their 
Sebastopols of the evil one, and as speaking by that high 


| exorcism, he at once dislodged the intruders ; and as, some 


in moody silence, and others with piteous cries, they rushed 
out from the places they had agonized, we can trace in 
their complaining the confession of their defeat : ‘ What 
have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God. Art 
thou come to torment us before the time ?” 
The next was the death grapple. And was the cham- 
ion smitten? Did he bend beneath that felon’s stroke? 
as there victory at last for the powers of hell? 
Imagine, if you can, how there would be joy in the 
breast of the evil one when the Saviour expired ; how he 
would exult at that victory which had more than recom- 
pensed the struggle of four thousand years. Hours roll 
on; he makes no sign; day and night succeed each other; 
there is no break upon the slumber—their victory appears 
complete and final. Shall noone undeceivethem? No; 
let them enjoy their triumph as they may. It were 
cruel to disturb a dream like that, which will have so 
terrible an awakening. But we, brethren, with the light 
of eighteen hundred years streaming down upon that 
gory field, understand the matter better. He died, of 
course, for only thus could death be abolished; he was 
counted with transgressors, of course, for thus only could 
sin be forgiven; he was made a curse for us, of course, 
because thus only could he turn the curse into a blessing. 
O! to faith’s enlightened sight there is asurpassing glory 
upon that cross. He was never so kingly as when girt 
about with that crown of thorns ; there was never so much 
royalty upon that regal brow as when he said, “ It is 
finished,” and he died. 
There only remains one more grapple, and that was in 
the rising from the dead and ascension into heaven. It 
is considered the principal glory of a conqueror, you 


TA 


152 THE HEAVENLY CONQUEROR. 


know, not merely that he repels the aggressive attacks of 
his enemy, but when he carries the war into that enemy’s 
camp- and makes him own himself vanquished in the 
metropolis of his own empire. This Christ did by con. 
cealing himself for a while within the chambers of the 
grave. We cannot tell you much about the battle, for it 
was a night attack, it took place in darkness; but we can 
tell the issue, because on the morning of the third day 
the sepulchre was empty, and the Redeemer had gone 
forth into Galilee. This was culy like the garmering up 
of the fruits of the conflict. Thecross had settled it. It 


was finished when he said it was, upon the eross; but J 


this was a sudden surprise in the camp, when the guards 
were drawn off, and the soldiers carousing in the flush 
of fancied victory. By death he had abolished death— 
him that had the power of death. By his resurrection 
he spoiled principalities and powers; and then le went 
up that he might “make a show of them openly.’ You 
ean almost follow him as he gees, and the challenge is 
given as he rises and nears tne gates of the celestial city: 
“Who is this that cometh*from Edom with dyed garments 
from Bozra? this that is glorious in his apparel travelling 
in the greatness of his strength?’ And then comes the 
answer: “I that speak in righteousness, mighty to save.” 
“ Lift up your heads, O ye gates; and be ye lifted up ye 
everlasting doors; and the — of glory shall come in. 
Who is this King of glory? The Lord strong and mighty, 
the Lord mighty in battle. Lift up your heads, 0 ye 
gates; even lift them up ye everlasting doors; and the 
King of glory shall come in.” 


‘** And through the portals wide outspread 
The vast procession pours.”’ 


And on he marches through the shining ranks of the 
ransonied, until he gets to the throne and points to the 
captives of his bow and spear, and claims his recom- 
pense. And “there is silence in heaven;” and there is 
given unto him “a name that is above every name; that 


at the 
tongue 
father. 
and no 
crown. 
III. 
gained 
unchar 
The 
was su 
of his 
earth 
the co 
by dyi 
tinned 
always 
Why, : 
any on 
and ex 
there 1 
bench, 
ple, pi 
togeth 
came. 
cution 
wolves 
a time 
of the 
fagots, 
fire in 


And 1 


' manife 


only j 
every 
not fo 
and ar 
mind | 
vassal: 


re attacks of 
hat enemy’s 
shed in the 
lid by con. 
bers of the 
attle, for it 
but we can 

third day 
r had gone 
amering up 
tiled it. It 


| the guards 
n the flush 
ied death— 
resurrection 
en he went 
nly?” You 
challenge is 
lestial city ; 
od garments 
al travelling 
comes the 
ity to save.” 
lifted up ye 
ll come in, 
ind mighty, 
eads, 0 ye 
8; and the 


inks of the 
ints to the 
his recom- 
nd there is 
1ame; that 


+ eross; but | 


THE HEAVENLY CONQUEROR. 153 


at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, and every 
tongue confess that he is Lord, to the glory of God the 
father.” It is finished. Now he rests from his labors, 
and now he sheathes his sword, and now he wears his 
crown. 

III. Just a word or two upon the victory that he 
gained. It was complete, it was benevolent, it was 
unchanging. 

The attack which the Saviour made upon the enemy 
was such as to tear away the very sources and energies 
of his power. Mark how each fresh onset, whether from 
earth or hell, has only enhanced his glory and brightened 
the conqueror’s crown. He vanquished in his own person 
by dying, and in the person of his followers he has con- 
tinued to manifest that indestructible energy which was 
always manifest just when it seemed to be overthrown. 
Why, at the commencement of Christianity would not 
any one have thought that a breath would annihilate it 
and exterminate the name of its founder forever? And 
there they were—Cesar on the throne, Herod on the 
bench, Pilate in the judgment hall, Caiaphas in the tem- 
ple, priests and soldiers, Jews and Romans, all united 
together to crush the Galilean, and the Galilean over- 
came. And so it has been in all ages untilnow. Perse- 
cution has lifted up her head against the truth; war- 
wolves have lapped up the blood of God’s saints, and for 
a time silenced. the witness of confessors, and the testimony 
of the faithful has gone upward amid the crackling of 
fagots, and the ascending flame has been the chariot of 
fire in which rising Elijahs have mounted to heaven. 
And not merely is the completeness of this triump) 


; manifested in the aggregate, but in the individual. Not 


only is every man brought into a salvable state, but 
every part of every man is redeemed. The poor body is 
not forgotten: it is taught to cast off the grave clothes 
and anticipate an everlasting residence in heaven. The 
mind crouches no longer; it emancipates itself from its 
vassalage and stands erect in the liberty wherewith Christ 


E2 


154 THE HEAVENLY CONQUEROR. 


made it free. And the whole man, who was a while ago 
an alien, degraded and desolate, a fitting companion of 
the beast in his lair, a worthy. follower in the serpent’s 
trail, is now “clothed and in his right mind,” careerin 
along in the enterprises of godliness, a fellow-citizen wit 
saints and the household of God. 

And then the triumphs of the Saviour are benevolent 
too. Tell me not of human glory, it is a prostituted 
word, Tell me not of Agincourt, and Cressy, and 
Waterloo, and of the high places of Moloch worship, 
where men have been alike both priests and victims, 
One verse of the poet aptly describes them all: 


‘¢ Last noon beheld them full of lusty life, 
Last eve in beauty’s circle proudly gay, 
The midnight brought the signal sound of strife ; 
The morning marshalling in arms ; the day 
Battle’s magnificently stern array, 
The thunder clouds close o’er it, which when rent, ss 
The earth is covered quick with other clay, 
Which her own clay shall cover, heaped and pent, 
Rider and horse, friend and foe, in one rude burial blent.’’ 


But what is it to be seen in the time of the Lord’s victory ? 
Plains covered with traces of recent carnage, and of recent 
havoc? What is there to be heard in the time of the 
Lord’s victory? Orphans wailing the dead, widows be- 
moaning those that have departed? No, but a voice 
breathing down a comfortable word to men: “ They 
shall neither hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, 
saith the Lord.” ‘The procession of this conqueror con- 
sists of saved souls, and eternity shall consecrate the scene. 

And then the triumphs of the Saviour are not only 
complete and benevolent, but wnchanging. The things 
that are now are very transitory. The sand of the desert 
is not more unstable; the chaff of the summer threshing- 
floor is not more helpless on the wind; but the Saviour’s 
triumphs brighten with the lapse of time; their lustre 
time can tarnish not, nor death itself destroy. O! think 
of the multitude that have been already saved! think of 
the multitude who went up in the early ages of the 


Chur 
who | 
time f 
souls 
birth 
into 1 
from 
have ] 
the m 
salvat 
greate 
the til 
not be 
of shit 
Jubile 
Limit 
Talk 
the so 
with ¢ 
tield. 
throu; 
has ti’ 
fect a 
trium 
exulti 
and tl 
hallel 
the ot 
of all 
An 
of the 
your | 
1s NO 
inten 
hotte 
both 
Lord. 


tion | 


while ago 
panion of 
serpent’s 
careerin 
izen wit 


enevolent 
‘ostituted 
ssy, and 
worship, 
victims, 


ti? 


victory ? 
of recent 
e of the 
lows be- 
a voice 
“ They 
ountain, 
bror con- 
e scene. 
hot only 
e things 
he desert 
reshing- 
baviour’s 
r lustre 
! think 


think of 
is of the 


THE HEAVENLY CONQUEROR. 155 


Church with its enrichments of blessings; think of those 
who had been taken off to heaven betore they ever had 
time to sin after the similitude of Adam’s transgression— 
souls ransomed by the blood of atonement taken from 
birth under the wing of the quivering cherub right away 
into the realms of blessedness and rest; think of those 
from the time of the Saviour’s incarnation until now who 
have passed through death triumphant home; think of 
the multitudes now upon earth that are working out their 
salvation with fear and trembling; think of the still 
greater multitudes that shall yet press into the Church in 
the times of its millennial glory, when the gates of it shall 
not be shut day or night, because there chall be no chance 
of shutting them, the people crowd in so fast. O whata 
Jubilee in heaven ! f gathering of emancipated spirits ! 
Limit the extent of the atonement! Who dares do it? 
Talk about Christ dying for a few scattered families of 
the sonsof men merely! Why, it isto charge my Saviour 
with cowardice, and bring a slur upon his conduct in the 
field. If there be-one solitary soul the wide universe 
through for whom Christ did not die, over that soul death 
has triumphed, and the conquest of my Saviour is imper- 
fect and incomplete. O! he seems to stand in his 
triumphal chariot, in the very centre of the universe, with 
exulting heaven before and with tormented hell behind ; 
and there is not an unconquered rebel there but the glad 
hallelujahs of the one, and the solemn acquiescences of 
the ees peal out the universe’s anthem, ‘“‘ He is Lord 
of all. 

And now which side are you? Pardonthe abruptness 
of the question, but answer it to your consciences and to 
your God notwithstanding. Whichside are you? There 
is no neutrality in this war, or if there be one here that 
intends to preserve a dastardly neutrality, he will get the 
hottest of the battle, and be exposed to the cross-fire of 
both sides. Which side are you? Do you belong to the 
Lord, or the Lord’s enemies? Ask yourselves that ques- 
tion in the sight of God. I never knew, until I looked 


156 THE HEAVENLY CONQUEROR. 
upon it in this aspect, the force and power of a certain 
question which the Saviour presented in the days of his 
flesh, I have admired the capacities of the human soul, 
that it hasa memory that can recall the past, imagination 
that can penetrate the future: that it has a will that no 
man can tame, that it has immortality as its heritage. 
But I see all heaven in earnest there, and all hell in 
earnest yonder, and the prize of the conflict is one poor 
human soul; and then I sce, as 1 never saw before, what 
an intensity of emphasis there isin the awful inquiry : 


“© What shall it profit a man if he shall gain the whole 


world, and lose his own soul ¢” Brethren, how shall it be 
with you? “ Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the 
world, is the enemy of God;” and the doom of the 
enemies of God is brought betore us in the Bible: “ Bring 
hither those mine enemies that would not I shouid reign 
over them, and slay them beforeme.” On which side are 
you? There is one passage that I should just like to 
bring before you, which has always appeared to me to be 
one of the most fearful in the whole compass of the book 
of God: “ When the unclean spirit is gone out of a 
man”—mark ‘it, it does not say when he is driven out, it 
does not say when he is dispossessed by superior powers ; 
but the awful idea, almost too awful to be entertained, is 
that there are some people in this world of ours of whom 
Satan is so sure that he can leave them for a while, 
per-ectly certain that they vill sweep and garnish his 
house in his absence, and prepare it for seven other spirits 
more inveterate and cruel—“ When the unclean spirit is 
gone out of a man he walketh through dry places, seek- 
ing rest, and findeth none. Then he saith, 1 will return 
unto my house.” O mockery of that quietempire! “To 
my house.” The tenancy has not chenged; he knows 
full well there is too much Jove of the master’s service in 
the heart of the man for that. “I will return into my 
house from whence [ came out; and when he is come he 
findeth it empty, swept and garnished. Then goeth he, 
and taketh with himself seven other spirits more wicked 


than 
last 
horri 
but t 
and t 
wick 
one j 


passa 
ou a 
hel 
bag 
1e go 
it sh 
and i 
ou 
heat 3 
the d 
the I 
of In 
utter! 


Chris 


. certain 
’s of his 
ian soul, 
rination 
that no 
leritage, 

hell in 
he poor 
‘e, what 
nquiry ; 
e whole 
all it be 
1 of the 
of the 
Bring 
d reign 
side are 
like to 
1e to be 
1e book 
it of a 
| out, it 
ower’ $ 
ined, is 
’ whom 
while, 
‘ish his 
r spirits 
pirit is 
» seek- 
return 
Sse DG 
knows 
vice in 
ato my 
bme he 


THE HEAVENLY CONQUEROR, 1357 


than himself, and they enter in and dwell there; andthe 
last state of that man is worse than the first.” Oh 
horrible! horrible! Not merely to have Satan as a guest, 
but to sweep and garnish the house that he may come in, 
and that he may bring with him seven other spirrts more 
wicked than himself. And are youdoing that? Is there 
one in the presence of God to-night to whom this awful 
passage will apply? Oh, I thank God I can preach to 
you a present salvation in the name Jesus. Be delivered 
from that bondage of yours, for Christ has come down on 
purpose that he may deliver, and that he may rescue, and 
he goeth forth conquering and to conquer. “ Ask, and 
it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, 
and it shall be opened unto you.” There s salvation for 
you from the power of death, and from the thralldom 
and ascendency of besetting sin, and from the grasp of 
the destroyer. There is salvation for you in Christ Jesus 
the Lord. Wherefore he is able to save to the uttermost 
of human guilt, to the uttermost of human life, to the 
uttermost of human time. May God help you, for 
Christ’s sake. 


AG 

RF, 

. \Witres 
a) 


ay) 


ert, 
in 

ay lt 

EA) 


i 


\ 


IX. 


THE CHRISTIAN’S DEATH, LIFE, PROSPECTS, 
AND DUTY. 


‘¢ Set your affections on things above, not on things onthe earth. For 
yeare dead, and your life is hid with Christ inGod.”’ When Christ, who 
is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory.”--Co1.- 
LOSSIANS iii, 2, 3, 4. 


— 


heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter, and that they 
were “ complete in Christ, who is the head of all princi- 
pality and power.” Lest, however, by these considerations, 
any of them should be exalted above measure, he urges 
them that they live unto God, tells them that although freed 
from the yoke of ccremonial observance, their obligation 
to obey was as strict and as binding as ever, and though 
no longer impelled by slavish and spiritless fear, the love 
of Christ should constrain them to closer evangelical 
obedience. There is no antinomianism, brethren, in the 
Gospel ; it tells us that faith without works is dead ; that 
however largely it may talk about its knowledge of the 
better land, however it may imagine itself to be exalted 
through the abundance of. its revelations, if it do not 
work by love and purity of heart, if it do not exert a 


transfo 
js NO 8¢ 
mimic 
pressit 
ae 
le ma 
for the 
consec 
if ye 
tion 
power 
Savio 
and ti 
above 
there, 
the th 
seat ‘f 
He th 
its per 
aftecti 
For ys 
When 
also a’ 
The 
the Cl 
prospe 
of pre 
it ma 
i ay 
For, 
some\ 
that h 
Wasi 
have 
Was | 
from 
migh 


And 


, 
f 


arth. For 
hrist, who 
ry.”=-Oo1- 


valuable 
the Col- 
Ovenant 
11s them 
that the 
purpose, 
is of the 
hat they 
1 princi- 
erations, 
16 urges 
oh freed 
ligation 
though 
the love 
ngelical 
, In the 
d; that 
e of the 
exalted 
do not 
exert a 


THE CHRISTIAN’S DEATH, LIFE, ETC. 159 


transforming influence upon the character and life, there 
js no soundness in it, and it is but a specious and delusive 
mimickry of the faith which saves. The Apostle, in im- 
pressing this fact upon their minds, takes hallowed 

round; heseems to remind them of their privileges, that 
f. may the more effectually insist upon their duty, and 
for the grandeur of their blessings, he urges their entire 
consecration to God. “If ye then be risen with Christ,” 
if ye be merged from the obscurity of the old dispensa- 
tion unto the strength and beauty of the new, if ye have 
power over sin, if by virtue of communion with your 
Saviour, ye are justified by faith, sanctified by the Spirit, 
and travelling to heaven, “seek those things that are 
above ;” be at home in heaven; let your desires cluster 
there, and let there be a gathering of vour hopes around 
the throne; let your affections fasten upon that radiant 
seat “ where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God.” 
He then repeats the exhortation, and assigns reasons for 
its performance, in the language of the text, “ Set your 
affections on things above, not on things on the earth. 
For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. 
When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye 
also appear with him in glory.” 

There are four things presented to us in these words: 
the Christian’s death, the Christian’s life, the Christian’s 
prospects, and the Christian’s duty ; an ineffable blending 
of precept and promise, upon which, for a few moments, 
it may profit us to dwell. 

I. The first thing that strikes us is the Christian’s death. 
“For,” says the Apostle, “ye are dead.” Is not this 
somewhat of a paradox? Does not Christ say expressly, 
that he came not to destroy men’s lives, but to save them ? 
Was it not one of the purposes of his coming, that we might 
have life, and that we might have it more abundantly 3 
Was it not one of the designs of his incarnation, that 
from the fountain of this own underived existence, he 
might replenish the veins of man, even to life everlasting ? 
And yet, when we enter upon his service, the very first 


160 THE CHRISTIAN’S DEATH, 


thing we are told to do is to die. Who shall solve the 
enigma? Only the Scripture, by becoming, as it always 
does, the authorized and satisfactory interpreter of itself. 
In St. Paul’s Epistle to Timothy, you find this remark. 
able expression; “She that liveth in pleasure is dead 
while she liveth.” You have no difficulty in understand. 
ing that to mean dead in spiritual things. In that 
pleasure-loving heart there beats no pulse for God; in 
that spirit, around which the world has flung the spells of 
its witchery, there is no desire for heaven; the pleasures 
of sense engross it, and, although compassed by the re. 
alities of the other world, its very existence is treated as 
a question or a fable. , Now, just the reverse of this 
morally considered, will explain to us the state of the 
Christian when the Apostle tells us he is dead. The fact 
is, that between the flesh and the spirit, there is a bitter 
and irreconcilable enmity; the one cannot exist in the 
presence and by the side of the other. That which has 
been garnished for the temple of the Lord, must not be 
profaned by an idol. Distinct and solemn, and authori- 
tative is the inspired announcement, ‘“ Whosoever will 
be the friend of the world is the enemy of God.” Impiety 
has entered into an unholy compact to amalgamate these 
two, to adjust their claims, to give them a division of 
service; but it is a covenant with death — it shall be dis- 
annulled; it is an agreement with hell—it shall not 
stand. Religion peals out her refusal of such reluctant 
allegiance, lays the grasp of her claim upon the entire 
nation, and tells us in tones of power, “‘ Ye cannot serve 
God and mammon.” The Christian, then, who is a 
Christian indeed, regards the world as if it were not, and 
continually endeavors to exemplify that his life and con- 
versation are in heaven. His differences from the world 
may not, indeed, be apparent to a superficial observer; he 
goes to and fro among the people like other men; he 
takes an interest in the ever-shifting concerns that are 
passing in the world around him ; and yet he is dead to 
the world all the while. TLow are you to find it out? 


Jesus 
sufte: 


upon 
Chris 
their 
bafil 
tomlk 
apos' 
two 

char 
stoic 
coul 
agal: 
mad 
ineft 
trutl 
now 
fami 
cont 
buoy 


solve the 
s it always 
r of itself 
8 remark. 
re is dead 
nderstand. 
In that 
‘God ih 
he spells of 
pleasures 
by the re. 
treated as 
Be of = this 
ate of the 
The fact 
is a bitter 
ist in the 
hich hag 
ust not be 
1 authori- 
yeVer will 
’ Impiety 
nate these 
ivision of 
all be dis- 
shall not 
reluctant 
he entire 
not serve 
who is a 
not, and 
and con- 
the world 
erver; he 
men; he 
that are 
} dead to 
1 it out? 


LIFE, PROSPECTS AND DUTY. 161 


Try him with some question of difficulty; set his duty 
before him, and let that duty be painful, and let it involve 
some considerable deprivation of gain or of pleasure; 
and with self-sacrificing devotion, he will obey the truth, 
and glory in the trial. Mark him in the midst of cireum- 
stances of discouragment and woe, when waters of a full 
cup are wrung out to him ; he is sustained by an energy 
of which the world wotteth not, nerved with a principle 
to which it is an utter stranger; richer blood animates 
him, loftier inspirations sparkie from his eye, and though 
surrounded by the things of sense, and of course in some 
sort influenced by their impressions upon him, he tells 
you plainly that he seeks a country, nay, that he has 
already “ risen with Christ,” and that he lives in the land 
which is at once his treasury and his home. 

We may illustrate the Apostle’s meaning again by a 
reference to another passage ; that in which he speaks of 
“always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord 
Jesus.” The primary reference of the Apostle is to the 
sufferings which himself and his compatriots were called 
upon to undergo in attestation of the resurrection of 
Christ, The enemies of the cross, those who were doing 
their utmost to destroy Christianity, were perplexed and 
baffled by the disappearance of the Saviour from the 
tomb; and to account for the mystery, they charged the 
apostles with the felony of their master’s body. Thus 
two statements were put forth directly opposite in 
character and tendency; the rulers said the body was 
stoiu.:; the apostles said the body had risen. The latter 
could not be disproved; but so intense was their hostility 
against the Nazarene, that persecution and power were 
made use of—compendious, but, happily in this case, 
ineffectual arguments—to silence the proclaimers of the 
truth. The Apostle refers to this in the words that are 
now before us, and tells them in effect that though 
famine might draw the fire from his eye, and long- 
continued suffering might repress and undermine the 
buoyancy of his spirit, and though his flesh might creep 


162 THE CHRISTIAN’S DEATH, 


and quail beneath the pressure of these agonies, and 
though in all these ways he might bear about in the body 
the dying of the Lord Jesus, yet, by the patience with 
which those sufferings were borne, by the consolations 
which abounded in the midst of them, nay, by the fact 
of the sufferings themselves, he could point to his marred 
and shattered body, and say that not the dying only, but 
the life, the immortal life of Jesus was every moment 
manifested there. But we are not disposed to limit this 
bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus to 
apostolic times. It is not a thing of one generation 
merely. We.::re not now called upon, as were our fathers, 
to do it in the furnace; the fires of outward persecution 
have well-nigh forgotten to burn; but it has an existence 
still as actual and as constant as in days of yore. The 
Christian does so every moment of his life, because every 
moment of his life he exercises faith in Christ. And his 
faith is not only active and appropriating, but realizing 
in its tendency : it not only unfolds to him the riches and 
confers en him the blessings of the mighty offering ; it 

aints it as a living vision before the eye of his mind. 

arting back through two thousand years of past time, 
it places him in the midst of the crowd gathered at the 
crucifixion, aye, at the very foot of the cross. He sees the 
victim; there is no delusion in the matter; he walks 
along the thronged and bustling streets; men cross his 


path in haste, speeding away, the one to his farm and the 


other tc his merchandise ; he converses with a thousand 
beings, he transacts a thousand things; but that scene is 
ever before him; as the magnet of his highest attractions, 
his eye always trembles to the cross, and in the midst of 
evidence fresher every moment he joins in the centurion 
language, his glad language too, “Truly this man was 
the Son of God.” With such a spectacle as‘that before 
him, how can he live unto the world? With the glances 
of so kina an eye constantly beaming upon him, how can 
his desires be on earth? Heaven claims him, for his 
treasure and his heart are there. Nay, so entirely does 


this de 
that is 
that, ai 
“ erucl 
spectat 
He has 
and th 
the Sa 
world 
the si 
heart i 
in Chr 
This 
gays 0 
when 
allow 
alive 
or this 
chang 
world, 
its flee’ 
selves, 
decisic 
wri. 
truth 
“ond 
that s 
the er 
or fin 
state— 
devel 
natur 
before 
The | 
“ther 
corn | 


nary 


Man 


nies, and 
the body 
nce with 
isolations 

the fact 
iS Marred 
only, but 
moment 
imit this 
| Jesus to 
Pneration 
n fathers, 
secution 
pxIstence 
ve. The 
Ise every 
And hig 
realizing 
ches and 
ring ; it 
1s mind, 
ist time, 
d at the 
sees the 
e walks 
ross his 
and the 
housand 
scene is 
‘actions, 
nidst of 
mnturion 


nan was 
t before 
glances 
LOW can 
for his 


ly does 


LIFE, PROSPECTS AND DUTY. 1€3 


this death unte sin—for I suppose you have found out 
that is what we mean—take possession of the Christian, 
that, as the Apostle in another place expresses it, he is 
“crucified with Christ.” He is not only an anxious 
spectator, he is something more, he is a living sacrifice. 

e has his cross. As Christ died for sin, he dies to sin, 
and they both conquer by dying. As by the dying of 
the Saviour, the power of death was destroyed, and the 
world was freed from his dominion, so by the dying of 
the sinner, the principle of evil is dethroned, the new 
heart is gained, and the man becomes “a new creature 
in Christ Jesus.” 

This is what we imagine the Apostle to mean when he 
says of Christians, “ Ye are dead;” and as it is only 
when we have thus died that we can be truly said to live, 
allow us to ask you if you are thus dead unto sin and 
alive unto God? Have you realized this death unto sin, 
or this birth unto righteousness? Has this deep, abiding 
change passed upon you? Orare you still living to the 
world, the circle of this life your bounded prospect, and 
its fleeting enjoyments your only reward? Examine your- 
selves, brethren, and may the Spirit help you to a right 
decision ! 

“II. We pass upward from the truth of death to the 
truth of life. ‘For ye are dead,” says the Apostle, 
“and your life”’—a life that you have notwithstanding 
that seeming death—* is hid with Christ in God.” In 
the creation of God there seems to be nothing absolute 
or final; everything seems rather in a rudimentary 
state—a state in which it is susceptive of increase, 
development, expansion, improvement. It is so in 
nature. The seed is cast into the earth; years elapse 
before there are the strength and shadow of the tree. 
The harvest waves not in its luxuriant beauty at once; 
“there is first the bi4de, then the ear, after that the full 
corn in the ear.” And what is thus possible in the ordi- 
nary processes of nature is capable of spiritual analogies. 
Man ends not in his present condition. The very imper- 


WA 


164 THE CHRISTIAN’S DEATH, 

fections with which it is franght, shadow forth a mightier 
being. It would seem as if glimpses of this great truth 
shot across the minds of the sages of ancient Greece and 
Rome. It is interesting to watch their minds in their 
various and continual operations, especially when, as it 
were, brought out of themselves, to see them struggling 
with some great principle just glowing upon them from 
the darkness of previous thought, to see them catching 
occasional glimpses of truth in the distance, and pressing 
forward, if haply they might comprehend it fully. It 
must have been in une of those very ecstasies that the 
idea of immortality first dawned upon them; for, after 
all, crude and imperfect as their notions were, they must 
be regarded rather as conjecture than opinion. It was 
reserved for Christianity, by her complete revelations, to 


bring life and immortality to light, to unfold this master. | 


purpose of the Eternal Mind, and to give permanence 
and form to her impressions of the life that dies not. 
You remember that the inspired writers, when speaking 
about the present state of being, scarcely dignify it with 
the name of life, compared with the life to be expected; 
but they tell us there is provided for us, and awaiting us, 
a life worthy of our highest approbation, and of our most 
cordial endeavor; a life solid, constant, and eternal. 
This is the promise “ which he hath promised us ”—as if 
there were no other, as if all others were wrapped up in 
that great benedictiou— this is the promise which he 
hath promised us, even eternal life ;” and of this life they 
tell us that it is “hid with Christ in God.” 

It is hidden, in the first place, in the sense of secrecy; 
it is, concealed, partially developed; we do not know 
much about it. Hevslation has not been minute in her 
discoveries of the better land, Enough has been revealed 
to confirm our confidence and to exalt our faith. The 
outlines of the purpose are sketched out before us, but 
the details are withheld. Hence, of the life to come the 
Apostle tells us that ‘ we know in part, we see as through 
a glass darkly;” through a piece of smoked glass like 


that thro 
senses Ca 
beyond t 
patties he 
in searcl 
me” Lr 
revel in 
she may 
is, aS tO | 
lite still, 
concelve 
approacl 
And we 
ence. 


| joyed thi 


to explai 
ones, Wh 
the chan 
with the 
tudes tal 
silent chk 
between 
vate the 
even the 
secrecy, 
The eye 
“led witl 
life to ec 
into blin 
the bala 
gone, 
fuller 3 
efticient 
bring an 
of God. 
and I 
secrecy 
that it t 


A mightier 
reat truth 
reece and 
S in theip 
hen, as it 
struggling 
hem from 
catching 
l pressing 
fully. It 
that the 
for, after 
they must 
» It was 
lations, to 


rmanence 
dies not. 
speaking 
y it with 
2xpected; 
aiting us, 
our most 

eternal, 


ed up in 
vhich he 
life they 


secrecy ; 
ot know 
e in her 
revealed 
th. The 
us, but 
ome the 
through 
lass like 


is master. | 


LIFE, PROSPECTS AND DUTY. 165 


that through which we look at an eclipse ofthe sun; our 
senses can give us no information concerning it, tor it is 
beyond their province; reason cannot find it out, for it 
battles her proudest endeavors. We may go to the depth 
in search of this wisdom: ‘the depth saith, It is not in 
me.” Imat&ination may plume her finest pinion, and 
revel in the ideal magnificence she can bring into being; 
she may so exalt and amplify the images of the life that 
is, as to picture forth the life that will be; it is a hidden 
lite still, for it hath not entered into the heart of man to 
wonceive it; shadows dense and impervious hang on its 
approach ; clouds and darkness are round about its throne. 
And we are equally destitute of information from experi- 
ence. None of those white-robed companies, who have en- 
joyed this life from the beginning, have been commissioned 
to explain to us its truths; none of those now venerable 
ones, who have travelled the road, who have experienced 
the change, have returned; they come not full fraught 
with the tidings of eternity to tell to the heedful multi- 
tudes tales from beyond the grave. Those dark and 
silent chambers effectually cut off all communication 
between the mortal and the changed. We may interro- 
vate the spirits of the departed, but there is no voice, not 
even the echo of our own. We do not complain of this 
secrecy, because we believe it to be a secrecy of mercy. 
The eye of the mind, like the eye of the body, was daz- 
“led with excess of light; and if the full realities of the 
life to come were to burst upon us, we should be dazzled 
into blindness; there would be a wreck of reason, and 
the balance of the mind’s powers would be irrecoverably 
gone, Moreover, we walk by faith, not by sight, and a 
fuller revelation would neutralize some of the most 
cficient means for the preservation of spiritual life, and 
ning anarchy and discord into the beautiful arrangements 
of God. Thus is this hiding beneficial to believers. Yes, 
and I will go further than that: to the sinner it is a 
secrecy of mercy. Wonder not at that. Imagine not 
that it this vacant area could be filled to-day witha spirit 


166 THE CHRISTIAN S DEATH, 


of perdition, with the thunder scar of the Eternal on his 
brow, and his heart writhing under the blasted immor-. 
tality of hell, then surely if he could tell the secrets of 
his prison-house those who are now among the impeni- 
tent would be affrighted, and repent and turn. “TI tell 
you nay, for if they hear not Moses and the prophets 
neither would they be persuaded though one were to rise 
from the dead.” 

Just another thought here on this head. Especially is 
this life hidden in the sense of secrecy, in the hour and 
the article of death. An awful change passes upon one 
we love, and who has loved the Lord Jesus Christ. He 
Jooks pale and motionless; we see not the glances of his 
eye, we hear not the music of his voice, and as he lies 
stretched breathless in his slumbers, it is very difficult to 
believe that he is not dead. ‘ But he is not dead, but 
sleepeth.” Can you credit it, O ye mourners? Is there 
no chord in your stricken hearts, ye bereaved ones, that 
trembles responsive to the tone, “he is not dead, but 
sleepeth?” His life is with him yet as warm, and as 
young, and as energetic as in days gone by; only it is 
hidden “ with Christ in God.” We mouin you not, ye 
departed ones that have died in the faith, for ye have 
entered into life. Natural affection bids us weep, and 
give your tombs the tribute of a tear, but we dare not 
recall you. Ye live; we are the dying ones; ye live in 
the smile and blessing of God. Our life is “hid with 
Christ in God.” | 

And then it is hidden, secondly, not only in the 
sense of secrecy, but in the sense of security, laid up, 
treasured up, kept safely by the power of Christ. The 
great idea seems to be this: the enemy of God, a lion 
broken loose, is going round the universe in search of 
the Christian’s life, that he may undermine and destroy 
it; but he cannot find it; God has hidden it; it is hid- 
den with Christ in God. It is a very uncertain and pre- 
carious tenure upon which we hold all our possessions 
here; everything connected with the present life is fleet- 


ing; ple 
are, by 
fruitless 
them w 
withered 
and as 
are sure 
wall, an 
but awh 
liness, 0 
that the 
tendency 
future li 
time affe 
mortal y 
can avai 
subtile a 
it is sec 
safest pl 
to Chris 
with his 
his love. 
glory pa 
enter an 
hidden ? 
never fa 
pledged 
we will 
of suspic 
from a Vv 
our unr 
sumptuc 
may do | 
war; bu 
for it is 
prospect 
heart-ws 
suffer tc 
based uy 


1 on his 
immor- 
ecrets of 
impeni- 

**"L tell 
prophets 
‘e to rise 


cially is 
our and 
pon one 
ist. He 
es of his 
; he lies 
ficult to 
ead, but 
Is there 
1es, that 
ead, but 
, and as 
uly it is 
not, ye 
ye have 
ep, and 
lare not 
live in 
lid with 


* In the 
laid up, 
t. The 
d, a lion 
sarch of 
destroy 
, is hid- 
vad pre- 
sessions 
is fleet- 


7 it ig secure. 


LIFE, PROSPECTS AND DUTY. 167 


ing; plans formed in oversight and executed in wisdom 
are, by adverse circumstances, rendered abortive and 
fruitless; gourds grow for our shade, and we sit under 
them with delight; the mildew comes, and they are 
withered ; friends twine themselves around our affections, 
and as we come to know them well and love them, they 
are sure to die; and upon crumbling arch, and ruined 
wall, and battlemented height, and cheeks all pale that 
but awhile ago blushed at the praise of theiz own love- 
liness, ol? Lime has graven in the word of the preacher, 
that there is nothing unchangeable in man except his 
tendency to change. But it is a characteristic of the 
future life, that it is that which abideth; the lapse of 
time affects not those who live eternally; theirs is im- 
mortal youth ; no enemy, however organized and mighty, 


2 can avail to deprive them of it; no opposition, however 


subtile and powerful, can wrest it from him with whom 
Where is it hidden? With Christ; the 
safest place in the universe surely, for anything belongin 

to Christ’s people. Where he is, in that land irradiate 

with his presence, and brightening under the sunshine of 
his love; on that mountain whose sacred inclosure Gou's 
glory pavilions, and within which there shall in nowise 
enter anything that shall hurt or destroy. Where is this 
hidden? In God, in the great heart of God, who is 
never faithless to his premise, and whose perfections are 
pledged to confer it upon persevering believers. Oh, 
we will not fear. Unbelief may suggest to us its thoughts 
of suspicion and warning ; fear may shrink back appalled 
from a way so untried and dangerous ; passion may stir 
our unruly elements in our too carnal minds, and pre- 
sumptuously fight against our faith; our ancient enemy 
may do his best to aggravate into intenser force the giant 
war; but we will not fear; our life shall be given to us, 


§ for it is hidden with Christ in God. Even now, in the 


prospect, we feel a joy of which the world wotteth not— 
heart-warm, fervent, entrancing, a joy which we may 
suffer tv roam unchecked in its raptures because it is 
based upon the truth divine, : 


168 THE CHRISTIANS DEATH, 


III. We pass on, thirdly, to the Christian’s prospects, 
“When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall 
ye also appear with him in glory.” 

These words imply two things: first, enjoyment; and 
secondly, manifestation. 

They imply, first, enjoyinent. We observed before, 
that revelation has not been minute in her discoveries ot 
the better land; we have the outlines of the purpose 
before us, but the details are withheld; and yet enough 
is revealec not *:«reiy to fulfill, but to exalt our highest 
hopes. Tis: *\s litudes under which the recompense is 
presented in “>. ture cannot fail to fill us with antici- 
pations of the most “°lightful kind. It is brought before 
us, you remember, as an inheritance, incorruptible, and 
undefiled; as a paradise ever vernal and blooming ; and, 
best of all, amid those trees of life there lurks no serpent 
to destroy ; as » country through whose vast reyion we 
shall traverss with untired footsteps; and every fresh 
revelation of beauty ‘will augment our knowledge, and 
holiness, and joy ; asa city whose every gate is of jewelry, 
whose every street is a sun-track, whose wall is an im- 
mortal bulwark, and whose ever-spreading splendor is 
the glory of the Lord; as a temple through which gusts 
of praise are perpetually sweeping the anthems of undying 
hosannas ; above all, as our Father’s house where Christ 
is, Where our elder brother is, making the house ready 
for the younger ones, where all we loveis clustered, where 
the outflowings of parental affection thrill and gladden, 
and where the mind is spell-bound, ‘for aye, amid the 
sweet sorceries of an everlasting home. Is there no 
enjoyment in images like these? Does not the very 
thought of them make the fleet blood rush the fleeter 
through the veins? And yet these and far more are the 
prospects of the Christian: knowledge without the shadow 
of an error, and increasing throughout eternity; friend- 
ship that never unclasps its hand, or relaxes from its 
embraces; holiness without spot or wrinkle, or any such 
thing ; the pyesence of God in beatific and imperishable 


visiO 


to ma 
The 
enjoy 
pear, 
‘The 
den ; 
say it 
and ¥ 
ye als 
admir 
appea 
tlans 
great 
can bh 
and ¥ 
advan 
at the 
Perha 
it may 
disdai 
robe t 
your t 
God. 
ones | 


throne 


confes 
asham 
the he 
© Bel 
sons < 
that is 
are W 
Apost 
God ; 
geon 
scorn 
geon, 
F 


rospects, 
en shall 


nt; and 


| before, 
veries of 
purpose 
enough 
highest 
pense is 
1 antici- 
1t' before 
ble, and 
1g; and, 
) serpent 
yion we 
ry fresh 
ge, and 
jewelry, 
an im- 
ndor is 
ch gusts 
ndying 
e Christ 
se ready 
d, where 
rladden, 
mid the 
nere no 
ne very 
p fleeter 
are the 
shadow 
friend- 
rom its 
ny such 
rishable 


LIFE, PROSPECTS AND~ DUTY. 169 


vision, combine to make him happy each moment, and 
to make him happy forever. 

Then these words imply manifestation as well as 
enjoyment. ‘ When Christ, who is our life, shall ap- 
pear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory.” 
The world says: “ You talk about your life being hid- 
den ; the fact 1s, it is lost; it is only a gloss of yours to 
say it is hidden.” But it is not lost, it is only hidden; 
and when Christ, who has it, shall appear, “ then shall 
ye also appear,” to the discomfiture of scoffers and to the 
admiration of all them that believe; then shall ye also 
appear with him in glory. The worldling looks at Chris- 
tians now, and, in some of his reflective moods, ' 3 finds a 
great difference between them, but it is a diiere ce he 
cai hardly understand. With his usual short-:'ghi..’ness, 
and with his usual self-complacency, he i»a;ines the 
advantage to be altogether upon his own side; he looks 
at the outside of the man, and judges fool’sh judgment. 
Perhaps he glances at his garments, and the, ae tattered, 
it may be, and homely, and he turns away with affected 
disdain. Ah! he knows not that beneath that beggar’s 
robe there throbs a prince’s soul. Wait a while; bide 
your time ; stop until the manifestation of the sons of 
God. With what different feelings will earth’s despised 
ones be regarded at the bar of judgment and before the 
throne divine! How will they appear when they are 
confessed, recognized, honored, in the day when he is 
ashamed of the wicked, and when the hell beneath and 
the hell within will make them ashamed of themselves ¢ 
“ Beloved,” says the rejoicing Apostle, ‘‘ now are we the 
sons of God;” that is something, that is no mean gift, 
that is no small bestowment, to have that in hand; “now 
are we the sons of God.” “Salvation,” it is as if the 
Apostle had said, ‘is a small thing, a thing unworthy of 
God ;” it is a small thing to take a captive out of a dun- 
geon and turn him loose upon the cold world’s cruel 
scorn; it is a grand thing to take a captive out of a dun- 
geon, and set him on a throne; and that is done with all 
Fl 


170 THE CHRISTIAN’S DEATH, 


those who believe on Jesus: being justified by faith, they 
have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. 
“ And if children ” (for they have received the adoption 
of sons), “then heirs, heirs of God, and joint-heirs with 
Christ.” Oh! salvation is not to be named in connection 
with the grand, the august, the stately splendor, the son- 
ship, which is given unto those who put their trust in 
Christ. ‘ Beloved, now are we the sons of God; but it 
doth not yet appear what we shall be; so transcendant, 
so surpassing is the recompense, that we cannot conceive 
it now; “it doth not yet appear what we shall be;” it 
doth not yet appear even to ourselves; we shall be as 
much astonished at the splendor of the recompense as 
any one beside. Oh! when we are launched into the 
boundless, when the attentive ear catches the first tones 
of heaven’s melody, when there burst upon the dazzled 
eye the earliest glimpse of beatific vision, how shall we 
be ready almost to doubt our own identity—“ Is this I? 
It cannot be the same. Is this the soul that was racked 
with anxiety and dimmed with prejudice, and stained 
with sin? Is this the soul whose every passion was its 
tempter, and that was harassed with an all-absorbing fear 
of never reaching heaven? Why not an enemy molests 
it now; not a throb shoots across it now; those waters 
that used to look so angry and so boisterous, how peace- 
fully they ripple upon the everlasting shore; and this 
body, once so frail and so mortal, is it, can it be, the 
same? Why, the eye dims not now; the cheek is never 
blanched with sudden pain ; the fingers are not awkward 
now; but, without a teacher, they strike the harp of 
gold, and transmit along the echoes of eternity the song 
of Moses and the Lamb. This is conjecture you say; 
not, we hope, unwarranted; but even now, dark as our 
glimpse is, unworthy as our conceptions are of the pro- 
mised recompense, there is enough to exalt us into the 
poet’s ecstasy, when, throned upon his own privilege, he 
sings: 


I 


sire. 

Chris 
appe! 
thing 
exceé 
quest 
sole 

tions 
in tl 
pleas 
is 0s 

deme 
dign 
have 
and 4 
itis ] 
the e 
thing 
seare 
avari 
devo 
their 
the 1 
that 

it ow 
dista 
joy t 
up ¥ 
been 
your 
awal 
your 
eart] 


ith, they 
3 Christ. 
adoption 
eirs With 
nnection 
the son- 
trust in 
; but it 
cendant, 
conceive 
be;” it 
ll be as 
yense as 
into the 
rst tones 
dazzled 
shall we 
this I? 
s racked 
stained 
was its 
ing fear 
molests 
} waters 
r peace- 
nd this 
be, the 
is never 
wkward 
harp of 
he song 
DU Say ; 
as our 
he pro- 
to the 
ege, he 


LIFE, PROSPECTS AND DUTY. 171 


‘On all the kings of earth 
With pity we look down ; 
And claim in virtue o. our birth, 
A never-fading crown.” 


IV. And now, then, you are ready for the duty, I am 
sure. “Tor your lifeis hid with Christ in God. When 
Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also 
appear with him in glory.” “Set your affection on 
things above.” Oh; how solemnly it comes, with all this 
exceeding weight of privilege to back it! It silences the 
question urged, it overrides gainsay ; it is emphatic and 
solemn, and to the Christian resistless. ‘Set your affec- 
tions on things above.” For a Christian to be absorbed 
in the gainfnlness of the world, or fascinated by its 
pleasures, is at once a grievous infatuation and a sin. It 
is as if a prince of high estate and regal lineage were to 
demean himself in the haunts of beggars, to the loss of 
dignity and imperilling the honor otf his crown. What 
have you, the blood-royal of heaven, to do with this vain 
and fleeting show? Arise, depart ; thisis not your rest ; 
itis polluted. And yet how many of you have need of 
the exhortation this morning, “Set your affections on 
things above?” Have you not—now let the spirit of 
searching come unto you—have you not, by your cupidity, 
avarice, and huckstering lust of gain, distanced the world’s 
devotees in what they had been accustomed to consider 
their own peculiar walk? Have you not trodden so near 
the line of demarcation between professor and profane, 
that you have almost trodden on it, and almost trodden 
itout? Have you not, strangely enamored of visions of 
distant joy, postponed as uninfluential and unworthy, tlre 
joy that abideth, or, like the man in the allegory, raked 
up with a perseverance that in aught else might have 
been laudable, the straws beneath your feet, while above 
your head there glittered the diadem of glory | Oh, 
awake! arise! this is not yourrest; itispolluted. ‘Set 
your affections on things above, and not on things on the 
earth.” If riches be your possession, be thankful for 


172 THE CHRISTIAN’S DEATH, 


them; do all the good with them you can; if friends 
make music in your dwelling, regard them as rose-leaves 
scattered upon life, and by and by to drop from life away, 
Seek for bags that wax not old, friends that neither weep 
aor change in the unintermitting reunions of heaven’s 
own glory. 

How does this prospect: of glory breathe encourage- 
ment to the soul in the sad season of bereavement! ‘“ He 
that believeth in Jesus”—this is the-promise— though 
he were dead, yet shall he live, and whosoever liveth and 
believeth on Jesus shall never die.” Still sounds that 
great utterance of the Master running along the whole 
line of being, heard over the graves of the loved, amid 
rustling leaf and fading flower, and withering grass, and 
dying man, “ He that liveth and believeth in Jesus shall 
never die.” Orphan, believest thou this? Widow, from 
whom the desire of thine eyes has been taken away with 
astroke, believest thou this? Ah! some of us have got 
friends safe-housed above the regions of the shadow and 
the storm, but we would not bring them back again. 
We would sing for them the hallowed pan : 


* By the bright waters now thy lot is cast, 
Joy fpr thee! happy friend ; thy bark hath passed 
The rough sen’s foam. 
Now the Jong yearnings of thy soul are stilled, 
Home, home ! 
Thy peace: is won, thy heart is filled ! 
Thou art gcue home.,”’ 


But we can listen to the voice which they find time to 
whisper to us in some of the rests of the music: “ Beye 
therefore followers of us who now, through faith and 
patience, are inheriting the promises.” 

Some of you have not got, perhaps, to the realization 
of this promise yet. There is a misgiving within; there 
is a yet unsetcled controversy between your Maker and 
yourself. You have not seen Jesus; you have not heard 
the pardoning voice or felt the power of the reconciling 
plan. Oh, come to Christ. To-day the Holy Spirit of 


Chris 
Chris 
ing t 
this ] 
heart 
with 
he is 
Rede 
a pre 
way 
univ 
taste 
fitful 
very 
loo 
it mé 
besie 
to be 
to W 
high- 
Son. 
all th 
lang 
to co 
wine 
I ma 
the « 
hell 
Abr 
and 
Bibl 
spirl 
that 
of ‘hi 
torm 
lost 
hear 


thin 


riends 
leaves 
away, 
‘weep 
aven’s 


Irage- 
“ He 
hough 
h and 
that 
whole 
anid 
s, and 
s shall 
, from 
r with 
ve got 
W and 
again, 


ne ty 
Be ye 


and 


ation 
there 
and 
eard 
ling 
it ot 


thine? Don’t put that question away. Ask yourselves 


LIFE, PROSPECTS AND DUTY. 173 


Christ is here, waiting to take of the precious things of 
Christ, and to show them unto you; waiting this morn- 
ing to do honor to Jesus. Hallow the consecration of 
this house by the consecration of the living temple of your 
hearts. God is no longer the unknown God, to be viewed 
with servile apprehension, or followed with slavish dread ; 
he is God in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, 
Redemption is no longer a theorem to be demonstrated, 
a problem to be solved, a riddle to be guessed by the 
wayward and the wandering: it is the great fact of the 
universe that Jesus Christ hath, by the grace of God, 
tasted death once for every man. ercy is no Jonger a 
fitful and capricious ex. cise of benevolence; it is the 
very power, and justice, and truth of God. A just God: 
look that out in the Gospel dictionary, and you will find 
it means a Saviour. Heaven is no longer a fortress to be 
besieged, a city to be taken, a high, impregnable elevation 
to be scaled; it is the grand metropolis of the universe, 
to which the King, in his bounty, has thrown up a royal 
high-road for his people, even through the blood of his 
Son. Oh, come to Jesus with full surrender of heart, and 
all these blessings shall be yours. Some do not hold this 
language; they belong to this world, and are not ashamed 
to confess it. ‘* Bring fresh garlands; let the song be of 
wine and of beauty ; build fresh and greater barns, where 
I may bestow my fruits and goods.” but then cometh 
the end. ‘The rich man died and was buried, ‘and in 
hell lifted up his eyes, being in torment; and seeth 
Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom; he cried 
and said”—the only prayer that I know of, the whole 
Bible through, to a saint or angel, and that by a damned 
svirit, and never answered—“I pray thee, father Abraham, 
that thou wouldst send Lazarus that he may dip the tip 
of ‘his finger in water, and cool my tongue, for I am 
tormented in this flame.” Listen to it, the song of the 
lost worldling in hell. Who,will set ittomusic? Which 
heart is tuning for it now? Sinner, is it thine? Is it 


174 THE CHRISTIAN’S DEATH, LIFE, ETC. 
. 


and your consciences in the sight of God, and then come, 
repent of all your sins, flee for refuge to the hope that is 
laid before you in the Gospel, trusting in serene and child- 
like reliance upon Christ. Only believe, and yours shall 
be the heritage in the world to come. 


T 


* But 
Yes, dow 
knowle 
all thing 
PIANS ii 


come, 
that is 
1 child- 
rs shall 


X. 


THE APOSTLE’S GROUND OF TRUST. 


‘ But what things were gain to me, those 1 counted loss for Christ. 
Yes, doubtless, and [ count all things but loss for the excellency of the 
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord ; for whom I have suffered the loss of 
all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ,’”,-—Puiuire- 
PIANS iii. 7, 8. 


ary LERE can be no sense of bondage in the soul 
74a) when the tongue utters words like these. 
: Albeit they flow from the lips of a prisoner, 
they have the true ring of the inner freedom, of the 
freedom which cannot be cribbed in dungeons. They 
are the expressions of a far-sighted trust which yields 
te no adverse circumstances, which endures, as seeing 
him who is invisible, in the confidence of quiet power. 
There was avery tender relationship subsisting between 
Paul and the Philippian Church. They had sent 
Epaphroditus to visit him in his prison at Rome, to 
bear him their sympathies, and to administer their 
liberality, in his hour of need; and in return for their 
kindness, and as a token of his unfailing love, he ad- 
dressed them this epistle. It is remarkable that it 
contains no solitary word of rebuke, that it recognizes 
in them the existence of a grateful and earnest piety, 
and that it aims throughout at their consolation and 
encouragement. In the commencement of the present 
chapter he warns them against certain Judaizing 
teachers, who would fain have recalled them to the 
oldness of the letter, and who made the comandments 
of God of none effect by their tradition. ‘Beware of 


176 THE APOSTLE’S GROUND OF TRUST. 


dogs, beware of evilworkers, beware of the concision,” 
He telis them that the true seed of Abraham, the royal 
heritors of the covenant, are those who worship God in 
the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no 
confidence in the flesh. He proceeds to remind them 
that if there were benefit in external trusts, he stood 
upon a vantage-ground of admitted superiority. 


“Though I might also have confidence in the flesh. If 


any other man thinketh that he hath whereof he might 
trust in the flesh, I more : Circumcised the eighth day, 
of the stock of Israel, ot the tribe of Benjamin, an 
Ifebrew of the Hebrews ; as touching the law, a Phari- 
see ; concerning zeal, persecuting the Church ; touching 
the righteousness which is in the law, blameless.”’ But, 
putting all this aside, renouncing these grouuds of con- 
fidence as carnal and delusive, resting in sublime 
reliance upon Christ, he records the noble declaration 
of the text, at once the enduring testimony of his own 
faith, and the perpetual strength of theirs. ‘ But what 
things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ. 
Yea, doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the 
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord ; 
for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do 
count them but dung, that I may win Christ.”” We can 
conceive of no testimony better calculated than this to 
cheer the timid, or to confirm the wavering, to silence 
the misgivings of the doubtful, or cause the inquiring 
soul to sing for joy. All the conditions which we can 
possibly desire in order to render testimony accredited 
and valuable, are to be found here. It is not the 
utterance of a man of weak mind, infirm of purpose 
and irresolute in action, whose adhesion would damage 
rather than further any cause he might espouse. It is 
Paul, the Apostle, who speaks, the sharp-witted stu- 
dent of Gamaliel, a match for the proudest Epicurean, 
versed in scholastic subtilties and in all the poetry and 
phiiosophy of the day, with a mental glance, keen as 
lightning, and a mental grasp as strong as steel. It is 


not t 
hasty 
its prd 
with 
aroun 
utter@ 
fetters 
catio1 
attach 
the so 
whicl 
soariy 
upon 
It is 1 
awed 
event 
jOys, 
would 
speak 
he do 
ledge 
alike 
his ec 
his jc 
stone 
Areo 
it sti 
witlis 
becat 
almo 
it ne 
alike 
and ° 
bar ¢ 
tried 
lot, ° 
sprit 
glow 


Cision,” 
he royal 
God in 
ave no 
nd them 
he stood 
riority, 
esh. If 
micht 
th da y, 
in, an 
Phari- 
buching 
” But, 
of con- 
ublime 
Aration 
is own 
1t what 
Christ. 
‘or the 
Lord ; 
and do 
Ve can 
this to 
silence 
uiring 
ve can 
edited 
ot the 
Irpose 
MA 
It is 
| stu- 


rean, 
y and 
mn as 
It is 


THE APOSTLE’S GROUND OF TRUST. 177 


not the utterance of youth, impassioned and, therefore, 
hasty ; sanguine of imagined good, and pouring out 
its prodigal applause. It is Paul, the man, who speaks 
with ripened wisdom on his brow, and gathering 
around him the experience of years. It is not the 
utterance of the man of hereditary belief, bound in the 
fetters of the past, strong in the sanctities of early edu- 
cation, who has imbibed a traditional and unintelligent 
attachment to the profession of his fathers. It is Paul, 
the some-time persecutor, who speaks, the noble quarry 
which the arrows of the Almighty struck down when 
soaring in its pride. It is he who now: rests tenderly 
upon the cause which he so lately labored to destroy. 
It is not, finally, the utterance of inexperience, which 
awed by the abiding impression of one supernatural 
event, and haying briefly realized new hopes and new 
joys, pronounces prematurely a judgment which it 
would afterwards reverse. It is Paul, the aged, who 
speaks, who is not ignorant of what he says and whereof 
he doth affirm, who has rejoiced in the excellent know- 
ledge through all the vicissitudes of a veteran’s life ; 
alike amid the misgivings of a Church slow to believe 
his conversion, and amid the dissipation and perils of 
his journeys ; alike when first worshipped and then 
stoned at Lystra, in the prison at Philippi, and in the 
Areopagues at Athens ; alike when in the early council 
it strengthened him, “born out of due time,” to 
withstand to the face of Peter, the elder Apostle, 
because he was to be blamed, and when, melted into 
almost womanly tenderness on the sea-shore at Miletus 
it nerved him for the heartbreaking ot that sad farewell ; 
alike when buffeting the wintry blasts of the Adriatic, 
and when standing silver-haired and solitary before the 
bar of Nero. It is he of amplest experience who has 
tried it under every conceivabie circumstance of mortal 
lot, who, now that his eye has lost its early fire, andthe 
spring and summer are gone from him, feels its genial 
glow in the kindly winter of his years. Where can we 


178 THE APOSTLE’'S GROUND OF TRUST. 
find testimony more conclusive and valuable? Hear 
it, ye craven spirits, who would dastardly forswear the 
Master, and let it shame you into Christian manhood ! 
Hear it, ye bruised and tender souls, that dare hardly 
venture faith on Jesus, and catching inspiration and 
courage from it, let your voices be heard : 


‘** Hence, and forever from my heart, 
I bid my doubts and fears depart, 
And to those hands my soul resign, 
Which bear credentials so divine,” 


In the further exhibition of this passage to-night, we 
ought to refer, in the first place, to the Apostle’s insuf- 
ficient grounds of trust, and secondly, to the compen- 
sating power of the excellency of the knowledge of 
Christ. I greatly fear, however, that the first part of 
the subject will be all that I can manage to compass 
within the time allotted for this evening’s service. 
Our remarks will, therefore, mainly dwell upon the 
grounds of trust which the Apostle here repudiates: 
‘‘ What things were gain to me, those I counted loss 
for Christ.” 

There is someth.ng remarkable in the way in which 
the Apostle refers to the past, and the respectful man- 
nei in which he speaks of the faith of his fathers, and 
of his youth. Itis often a sig: rather of servility than 
of independence when mex viify their former selves. 
The Apostle had not renounced Judaism in any moment 
of passion, nor in any prejudice of novelty. Strong 
convictions had forced him out of his old belief. He 
had emerged into a faith purer and more satisfying far. 
But there were memories connected with the fulfilled 
dispensation which he would not willingly let die. 
There were phases of his own inner life there. For 
long years, Judaism had been to him his only inter- 
preter of the divine, the only thing which met a 
reilgious instinct, active beyond that of ordinary men. 
‘The grounds of trust which he now found to be insuf- 


ficient, 
rogres 
shadow 
hung a 
and traf 
the pat 
by hims 
in sens 
His bre 
and ha 
was in 
amid 
presen¢ 
the Ap 
garcasn 
that th 
no long 
and lil 
atter t 
) sobut hes 
was no 
which 
affirm 
the yet 
things 
Christ 
the re’ 
here r 
the as) 
cling 1 
their | 
then, 
which 
The 
“Cire 
first, | 
of the 


? Hear 
vear the 
inhood ! 
hardly 
10n and 


ght, we 
S insuf. 
orapen- 
dge of 
part of 
Ompass 
BOrvice, 
on the 
diates : 
ted loss 


. which 
{ man- 
rs, and 
ty than 
selves, 
loment 
Strong 
f. He 
ing far. 


met a 
- men. 
insuf- 


THE APOSTLE’S GROUND OF TRUST. 


ficient, had been the halting-places of his soul in its 
rogress from the delusive to the abiding, from the 

shadowy tothe true. He could not forget that there 

hung around the system he had abandoned, an ancient 

and traditional glow: it was of God’s own architecture ; 

the pattern and its gorgeous ceremonial had been given 

by himself in the Mount ; all its furniture spoke of him 

in sensuous manifestation and magnificant appeal. 

His breath had quivered upon the lips of its prophets, 

and had lashed its sneers into their sacred frenzy. He 

was in its temple service, and in its holy of holies; 

amid shapes of heavenly sculpture, the light of his 

presence ever rested in merciful repose. How could 

the Apostle assail it with wanton outrage or flippant 

sarcasm ? ‘True, it had fulfilled its mission, and now 

that the age of spirituality and power had come, it was 

no longer needed ; but the halo was yet upon its brow, 

and like the light which lingers above the horizon long 
after the setting of the sun, there shone about it a dim 
but heavenly splendor. While, however, the Apostle 
was not slow to confess that there was glory in that 
which was to be done away, he was equally bold in 
affirming its absolute worthlessness in comparison with 
the yet greater glory ofthat which remained. ‘ What 
things were gain to me, those I counted loss for 
Christ.” It will be found, I think, to be remarkable in 
the review of the grounds of trust, which the Apostle 
here repudiates, how much there is kindred to them in 
the aspects of modern faith, and how multit des now 
cling to them with tenacity, and hope to find in them 
their present and eternal gain. Let us remind you, 
then, for a few moments, of the catalogue of trusts 
which the Apostle tried and repudiated, 

The first thing he mentions, is sacramental efficacy. 
“Circumcised on the eighth day.” He names circumcision 
first, because it was the early and indispensible sacrament, 
ofthe Jewish people, the seal of the Mosaic covenant, the 


, = 


180 THE AVOSTLE'S GROUND OF TRUST. 
distinguishing badge of the Israelites from all other nations 
of mankind. Moreover, he tells us he had the advantagy 
of early initiation : “ ‘ireumcised the eighth day.” The 
Gentile proselytes could, of course, only observe the rite at 
the period of conversion, which might be in manhood or 
inage. But Paul was hallowed from his youth, from the 
eighth day of his life introduced into the federal arrange. 
ment, and solemnly consecrated to the service of the Lord. 
He was not insensible to this external advantage, but he 
Joes not hesitate to proclaim it worthless as a ground of 
acceptance with God. There are multitudes by whom 
baptism is regarded in the same reverent light as was cir- 
cumcision by the Jews of old. If they do not absolutely 
rejoice in it, as the manner of some is, as the instrument 
of their regeneration, at least they have a vague notion of 
a benefit which they deem it to have conferred, and are 
living on the unexhausted credit of their parents’ faith and 
prayer. If, in adult age, they make any profession of 
religion, it is by partaking of the Eucharist, whose elements 
they invest with mystic and transforming power. There 
is no inward change i in. therm. They are conscious of no 

ainstaking and daily struggle with corruption. They 

ave no contlict for a@ master y over evil. No perceptible 
improvement passes upon their conduct ana habits from 
their periodical communions. And yet, absolutely, their 
only hope for the future, springs from the grace of the 
baptismal font, and from the eflicacy of the sacramental 
table; for they persuade themselves into the belief that as 
by the ordinance of baptism there was a mysterious con- 
veyance +o them of the title-deeds of an inheritance, so by 
the excellent mystery of the Lord’s Supper, they are as 
inexplicably ripened into meetness for its possession. 

Brerhrea, we would not under-value the ordinances of 
God's ap pola cing, We are not insensible to the benefit 

when beli\:2¢ parents dedicate their offspring unto God, 

when the h er of parental iaith rests upon the ark of the 
covenant, aii claims that there should be shed out upon 
the little ones the spiritual infinences of the Holy Ghost. 


(hiefest ¢ 
oul with 
holy com 
the power 
for +h beto 
ions have 


gust not J 


he beatif 
jivinely ¢ 
wives, bu 
nointed 
wid with 


p00 powel 


ism, and 


| Holy Ku 


as grounc 
hat t unbel 
ve devout 
0 atoning 
the soul t 
your live 
lie, for 
wakening 
and the 
harred, 
accounte 
thy pres 
first Grou 
Passin 
repudiat 
stock. of 
Hebrew 
prov red 1 
Jewish 
also obs 
that he 
therefor 
those h 


er Nations 
dvantagy 
ny.” The 
the rite at 
nhood oy 
from the 
arrange. 
the Lord, 
ye, but he 
round of 
dV whom 
was Cir. 
bsolutely 
strument 
notion of 
,and are 
faith and 
ssion of 
elements 
| There 
us of no 
. They 
rceptible 
its from 
ly, their 
e of the 
amental 
f that as 
OUS Con- 
e, so by 
"are as 
session. 
nces of 
benefit 
to God, 
§ of the 
it upon 
Ghost. 


fons have trooped up to the heavenly festival. 


THE APOSTLE'S GROUND OF TRUST. 181 


(hiefest among our religious memories, treasured in the 
oul with a delight which is almost awe, are some of these 
holy Communions, when—the life infused into the bread, 
the power into the wine—Christ has been evidently set 
wth before his grateful worshippers, and strong consola- 
But it 
gust not be forgotten that all the graces of ordinances, all 


a he beatific and inspiring comforts which flow through 


livinely appointod services, are not in the services them- 
vives, but in the fullness of the loving Saviour, the 
mointed one in the vision of Zachariah, without whom 
ind without whose Spirit they could have neither efficacy 
jor power. Precious as are the collateral benefits of bap- 


§ ism, and hallowing as are the strength and blessing of the 
| Holy Eucharist, we do solemnly proclaim them worthless 


is grounds of acceptance before God. Hear it, ye baptized, 
jut unbelieving members of our congregation? Hear it, 
ve devout and earnest communicants ! Secraments have 
io atoning virtue, no value at all except as avenues to lead 
the soul to Christ; and if, in a trust like this, you pass 
your lives, and if, in the exercise of a trust like this, you 
lie, for you there can remain nothing but the agonizing 
wakening froma deception that will have outlasted life, 
and the ery wailed from the outside of a door, forever 
barred, “We were early dedicated unto thee! were 
accounted as thy followers; we have eaten and drank in 
thy presence ; Lord, Lord, open unto us.” That is the 


first ground of trust which the Apostle here disclaims. 


Passing on in the catalogue, we find that the second 
vepudiated confidence is an honoured parentage, “Of the 
stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of the 
Hebrews.” To have been circumcised the eighth day, 
proved that he had been born of parents professing the 
Jewish faith: but, inasmuch as the Gentile proselytes 
also observed the rites of circumcision, it did not prove 
that he had been descended of the family of Israel. He, 
therefore, shows that in purity of lineal descent, 1n all 
those hereditary honours upon which men dwell with 


182 THE APOSTLE’S GROUND OF TRUST. 


pride, he could boast with the proudest of them all. He 
was of the stock of Israe!. But ten of the tribes hed re- 
volted from their allegiance to Jehovah, had soiled their 
nobility by their vices, had entered into degrading 
companionship with surrounding idolaters. He, therefore 
reminds them further, that he was of the tribe of Benjamin: 
illustrious, because it had given the first king to Israel: 
more illustrious, because, at the apostasy of Jeroboam it 
maintained purity of Divine worship, and held itself faith- 
ful among the faithlessness of many. Moreover, he had 
not been introduced into the federal re lationship by 
personal adoption nor by the conversion of his fathers 
There had been in his ancestry no Gentile intermarriages 
he was “a Hebrew of the Hebrews.” His ginaablegy 
was pure on both sides, There was no bar sinister in his 
arms. He was a lineal inheritor of the adoption, and the 
glory, and the covenant. There was much in all this on 
which in those times the Apostle might have dwelt with 
pride ; men, generally vaunt those honors which are theirs 
by birth. 

It was no light thing surely, then, to belong to nobility 
that could trace its far descent from the worthies of the 
older world, to have for his ancestors those anointed and 
holy patriarchs who trod the young earth when un- 
wrinkled by sorrow, undimmed by crime, untouched by 
the wizard wand of time ; to have in his veins the same 
biood that marched pr oudly over the fallen ramparts of 
_Jerizho, or that bade the attrighted sun stand still at 
Gibeon, or that quailed beneath the dread thunders of the 
mount that burned, And yet all this accumulated pride 
of ancestral honor the Apostle counted “loss for Christ.” 
Foe the Jews prided themselves on their descent from 

braham, you may gather from many passages of Scrip- 
~ You remember when our Saviour was conversing 
with them on the inner freedom, he was rudely interrupted 
with the words,“ We be Abraham's children ; we were 
never .n bondage to any man.” And that they regarded 
this descent from Abraham as in some sort a passport to 


heave 
« Thin 


to our 
is able 
are m 
than t 
stifling 
the Ha 
been 
mosph 
into tl 
Loo 
bankry 
“ Afflic 
an inte 
purple 
which 
able ec 
pleasu 
of Bab 
to his 
lem ! 
with e 
testific 
doom, 
the bi 
examy 
parent 
the fa 
Nov 
ye wh 
you 0 
here, 
solem: 


hall. He 
s hed re- 
iled theiy 
legrading 
therefore 
Benjamin : 
0 Israel : 
oboam it 
elf faith- 

ae had 
ship by 

5 fathers 
arriages : 
meaology 
ter in his 
, and the 
l this on 
relt with 
re theirs 


nobility 
as of the 
ited and 
hen un- 
ched by 
he same 
parts of 
still at 
rs of the 
ed pride 
Christ.” 
nt from 
f Scrip- 
iversing 
srrupted 
ve were 
egarded 
sport to 


THE APOSTLE’S GROUND OF TRUST. 183 


heaven, we may gather from the Saviour’s rebuke: 
“Think not to say within yourselves, we have Abraham 

to our father, for I say unto you, that of these stones God 

is able to raise up children unto Abraham.” And there 

are multitudes now, brethren, who have no better hope 

than this. There are many in this land of ours who are 

stifling the misgivings of conscience, and the convictions of 
the Holy Spirit, with the foolish thought that they have 

been born in a Christian country, surrounded with an at- 

mosphere of privilege, or are the sons “ of parents passed 

into the skies.” 

Look at that holy patriarch, forsaken of kindred, 
bankrupt in property, and slandered in reputation, 
“ Afflicted greviously and tempted sore,’ and yet holdipg 
an integrity as fast in his sackcloth as ever he did in his 

urple, and amid terrible reverses blessing the goodness 
which but claimed the gift it gave! Mark that honor- 
able counsellor, pious amid cares of state, and pomps, and 
pleasure, walking with God amid the tumult and luxury 
of Babylon, and trom the companionship of kings speeding 
to his chamber that had its lattice open toward Jerusa- 
lem! Listen to that preacher of righteousness, as now 
with earnest exhortation, and now with blameless life, he 
testifies to the whole world, and warns it of its coming 
doom, and then, safe in the heaven-shut ark, is borne by 
the billows of ruin to a mount of safety. What sublime 
examples of consistency and piety are here! Surely, if a 
parent’s faith can avail for children anything, it will be in 
the families of Noah, Daniel, and Job ! 

Now, listen—listen—ye who rest on traditional faith, 
ye who are making a raft of your parents’ piety to float 
you over the dark, stormy water into church fellowship 
here, and into heavenly fellowship ig cig to the 
solemn admonition : “Though these three men, Noah, 
Daniel, and Job, were in it, as I live they deal ‘deliver 
but their own souls by their righteousness, saith the Lord 
God.” Alas ! if the grandson of Moses was an idolatrous 
priest ; if the children of Samuel perverted judgment and 


184 THE APOSTLE’S GROUND OF TRUST. 


took bribes ; if David, the man after God’s own heart, 
mourned in hopeless agony over Absalom dead ! how sad 
the witness that religion is not a hereditary possession ! 
how appalling the danger lest you, children of pious 
parents, nursed in the lap and surrounded with the at- 
mosphere of godliness,, should pass down into a heritage 
of wrath and sorrow, aggravated into intenser hell for you 
hy the remembrances of the piety of your fathers! That 
is the second ground of trust which the Apostle disclaims, 
Passing on in the catalogue, we find that the next 
repudiated confidence is religious authority. “As touch- 
ing the law, a Pharisee.” This was not the first time the 
Apostle had made this affirmation. You remember that 
before the tribunal of the high priest, he aftirmed, with a 
not unholy pride, “ I am a Pharisee, the son of a Phari- 
see.” And, at Agrippa’s judgment-seat, he appealed even 
to the infuriated Jews whether he had not, according to 
the straightest sect of their religion, lived a Pharisee. 
And, indeed, there was much in those early times which 
an honest Pharisee might be excused for counting gain. 
The word has got in our days, to he regarded as a sort of 
synonym for all that is hypocritical and crafty ; but a 
Pharisee in the Jewish times, an honest, earnest Pharisee, 
was a man not to be despised. In an age of prevailing 
indifference, the Pharisee rallied around him all the godly, 
religious spirit of the time. In an age of prevailing scep- 
ticism, the Pharisee protested nobly against the free 
thinking Sadducee, and against the courtly Herodian. In 
an age of prevailing laxity, the Pharisee inculeated by 
precept at all events, austerity of morals and sanctity of 
life. There might be ostentation in his broad phylacter- 
ies ; at all events, it showed he was not ashamed of the 
texts which he had traced out upon the parchment. A 
love of display might prompt the superb decorations with 
which he gilded the tombs of the prophets ; at all events, 
and that is no small virtue, he had not ceased to honor the 
memory of righteousness. There might be self-glory in 
his fasts, rigidly observed, and in his tithes, paid to the 


utterm 
the ma 
repeat 
honest 
this als 
The 
whose 
tisansh 
people 
even t 
should 
are apt 
isms, 
approv 
in the 
that is 
must n 
are sp 
warnin 
The 
to live 
must, | 
indivic 
times, 
censor 
strug 
somett 
ances, 
a spas 
praye 
sitting 
for re 
ing t 
abun¢ 
crash 
religi 
solemn 
gatio 


n heart, 
how sad 
Session ! 
f pious 
the at- 
heritage 
for you 
! That 
isclaims, 
he next 
s touch- 
ime the 
yer that 
, with a 
, Phari- 
ed even 
ding to 
harisee, 
$ which 
ig gain. 
sort of 
> but a 
harisee, 
Vailing 
godly, 
gs scep- 
he free 
in. In 
ted by 
tity of 
rlacter- 
of the 
nt. A 
s with 
vents, 
10r the 
ory in 
to the 


THE APOSTLE’'S GROUND OF TRUST. 
$ 

uttermost farthing ; at all events, there was recognition of 

the majesty, and obedience to the letter of the law. I 

repeat it, in those early times there was much which an 

honest Pharisee might be excused for counting gain. But’ 

this also the Apostle “ counted loss for Christ.” 

There are multitudes now, I @eed not remind you, 
whose trust is their orthodoxy, whose zeal is their par- 
tisanship, whose munition of rocks is their union with the 
people of God. There is some danger, believe me, lest 
even the tender and hallowed associations of the Church 
should weaken the sense of individual responsibility. We 
are apt to imagine, amid the round of decorous external- 
isms, when the sanctuary is attractive and the minister 
approved, when there is peace in the borders and wealth 
in the treasury, when numbers do not diminish, and all 
that is conventionally excellent is seen, that our own piety 
must necessarily shine in the lustre of the mass, that we 
aré spiritually healthy, and need neither counsel nor 
warning. 
~The Church to which we belong, perhaps, has “ a name 
to live ;” and we imagine that the life of the aggregate 
must, in some mysterious manner, imply the life of the 
individual, And though our conscience reproach us some 
times, and though we are frivolous in our practice, and 
censorious in our judgment of others, and though in our 
struggle with evil, the issue is sometimes compromise and 
sometimes defeat, although attendances at religious ordin- 
ances, an occasional and stifled emotion under a sermon, 
a spasm of convulsive activity, a hurried and heartiess 
prayer, are deem the whole of our religion—we are 
sitting in our sealed houses, we pass among our fellows 
for reputable and painstaking Christians, and are dream- 
ing that a joyous entrance will be ministered to us 
abundantly at last. O, for thunder pealing words to 


crash over the souls of formal and careless professors of 


religion, and startle them into the life of God! I do 
solemnly believe that there are thqusands in our congre- 
gations, in different portions of the land, who are thus 


¥2 ? 


© 


li 


14 


w 
e ay. 
Pry es 

— 


1.25 


IMAGE EVALUATION 
TEST TARGET (MT-3) 


N 


Ti 


yw 


23 WEST MAIN STREET 
WEBSTER, N.Y. 14580 


fn 
~ 5 n 
‘& 
dy 


(716) 872-4503 


186 THE APOSTLES GROUND OF TRUST. 


a 

dead while they are seeming to live; and with all fidelit 
I would warn you of your danger. It is a ghastly sich’ 
when the flowers of religious profession trick out a mortal 
corpse. It is a.sad entombment when the church op 
chapel is the vault of the coffined spirit, ‘ dead in tres. 
passes and sins.” That is the third ground of trust which 
the Apostle here disclaims. 

Passing on in the catalogue, we find that the fourth 
repudiated confidence is intense earnestness, ‘ Concerning 
zeal, persecuting the Church.” There was much in this 
that would awake .a responsive chord in the heart of ‘ 
bigoted Jew. The Apostle tells us he was present at the 
martyrdom of Stephen; and in his zeal for the repression 
of what he deemed to be « profane mystery, he made 
havoc of the Church, reac out threatenings and 
slaughter, and persecuted unto the death. Often, indeed 
did the sad memory press upon him in his after lite, bow. 
ing him to contrition and tears. “I am less than the 
least of the apostles, that am not meet to be called an 
apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God.” But 
there is incontestable evidence in all this of his zeal for 
the Jewish faith, that he did not hold the truth in un- 
righieous indolence, but that he exerted himself for its 
promulgation ; that devotion with him was not a surface 
sentiment, nor an educational necessity, but a principle 
grasping, in the strong hand of its power, every energy 
of his nature, and inlibered with the deepest affections of 
his soul. And there was much in all this, which men 


around him were accustomed to regard as gain; but this. 


also he esteemed “as loss for Christ.” 

I know no age of the world, brethren, when claim for 
the gainfulness of zeal, abstract zeal, would be more 
readily conceded than in the age in which we live 
Earnestness, it is the god of this age’s reverence. Men do 
not scrutinize too closely the characters of the heroes they 
worship. Mad ambition may guide the despotic hand; 
brain may be fired with dark schemes of tyranny; the 
man may be a low-souled infidel, or a vile seducer ; he 


may b 
stained 
a nich 
an un 


_ shippe: 


devote 
ee 
of you 
dented 
which 
achiev 
indom! 
earnest 
with c] 
is no 
masses 
appetit 
Which 
else wi 
every 
In po! 
earnes 
earnes 
Suchi 
vacille 


fidelity 
ly sigh; 
A Mortal 
urch or 
in tres- 
st which 


P fourth 
cerning 
h in this 
art of a 
t at the 
pression 
€ made 


surface 
rinciple 

energy 
tions of 
ch men 


but this: 


laim for 
Ye more 
ve live, 
Men do 
es they 
: hand ; 
ny; the 
cer; he 


THE APOSTLE’S GROUND OF TRUST. 187 
may be a poet stained with licentiousness, or a warrior 
stained with blood; let him be but earnest, and there is 
a niche for him in the modern Pantheon. And, as it is 
an understood principle that the character of the wor- 


shippers assimilates to the beings they worship, the 


devotees have copied their idols, and this is an earnest 

e. The trade spirit is in earnest ; bear witness, those 
of you who have felt its pressure. Hence the unprece- 
dented competitions of business; hence the gambling, 
which would rather leap into wealth by speculation, than 
achieve it by industry ; hence the intense, the unflagging, 


indomitable, almost universal gree of gain. Men are 


earnest in the pursuit of knowledge. The press teems: 
with cheap, and not always wholesome, literature. Science 
is no longer the heritage of the illuminati, but of the 
masses. lhe common mind has become voracious in its 
appetite to know; anda cry has gone up from the people 
which cannot be disregarded, “Give us knowledge, or 
else we die.” It is manifest in all departments and in 
every walk of life. Men live faster than they used to do. 
In politics, in science, in pleasure, he is, he must be 
earnest who succeeds: He must speak loudly and 
earnestly who would win the heedful multitudes to listen. 
Such is theimpetuosity of the time, that the timid and the 
vacillating find no foothold on ‘the pavement of life, and 
are every moment in peril of being overborne and jostled 
aside, trampled down beneath the rude waves of the 
rushing and earnest crowd. 

While such general homage is paid to earnestness what 
wonder if some people should mistake it for religion ; 
and if a man should imagine that, because he is zealous 
in the activities of bencvlence, warmly attached to certain 
church organizations, and in some measure sympathetic 
with the spiritual forces which they embody, he is realiy 
a partaker of the undefiled religion of the Bible? And 
I must go further than this, The tolerance—take it. to 
yourselves those who need it—the tolerance with which 
believers in Christ—those who are really members of the 


188 THE APOSTLE'S GROUND OF TRUST. 


Church, and have “ the root of the matter” within them 
—the tolerance with which they talk about, and apologize 
for “the zealous but unconverted adjuncts of the 
Church,” tends very greatly to confirm them in their 


error. Oases throng upon one’s memory and conscience | 


as we think upon the subject. 

There is aman—he has no settled faith at all in the prin- 
ciples of Christian truth; he is cast forever upon a sea 
of doubt and darkness; “ever learning, yet never able 
to come to the knowledge of the truth.” He may consider 
without acting, till he dies. But what says the tolerant 
spirit of the age? “ He is an earnest thinker, let him 
alone; he has no faith in the Bible; he has no faith in 
anything certain, settled, and indisputable, but he is an 
earnest thinker ; and, although life may be fritted away 
without one holy deed to ennoble it, if he live long 
enough, he will grope his way into conviction by and by.” 

There is another man; he is not all we would wish him 
to be; he is unfrequent and irregular in attendance upon 
the ordinances of God’s house; he is not always quite 
spiritually-minded ; we should like to see him less grasp- 
ing in his bargains; but he is an earnest worker, a zealous 
partisan, an active committee-man, and we hope all will 
ye right with him in the end. 

There is another man, and more chivalrous in his sense 
of honor; he is known to hold opinions that are danger- 
ous, if not positively fatal, upon some vital subjects of 
Christian truth. But he is an amiable man; he is very 
kind to the poor; he has projected several measures of 
amelioration for their benefit; the widow blesses hiin when 
she hears hisname. He is an earnest philanthropist ; and, 
thus sheltered in the shadow of his benevolence, his 
errors pass unchallenged, and have a wider scope for mis- 
chief than before. 

I do solemnly believe that there are men who are 
confirmed in their infidelity to Christianity by the tri- 
bute thus paid to their. zeal. It may be that some in- 
fatuated self-deceivers pass out of existence with a lie in 


their r 
been 
is this 
Apostl 
thing 
from p 
the ob: 
intrins} 
do witl 
an aug 
may bé 
madme 
brands 
selves. 
Dive 
have ¢ 
the wi 
heart 
exteusi 
opinior 
nature 
and to 
body t 
putabl: 
tar—-if 
the he: 
profite 
the hot 
go out 
the A] 
Yet 
ceremi 
which 
the Je 
purit 
Hoole: 
daily 
they ¢ 


n them 
ologize 
of the 
n their 


science | 


he prin- 

a sea 
er able 
onsider 
olerant 
let him 
faith in 
ie is an 
d away 
ye long 
nd by.” 
ish him 
6 upon 
8 quite 
| grasp- 
zealous 
ull will 


is sense 
langer- 
ects of 
is very 
ures of 
a when 
t; and, 
ce, his 
or mis- 


ho are 
he tri- 
me in- 
lie in 


THE APOSTLES GROUND OF TRUST. 


their right hand, because earnestness, like charity, has 
been made to “cover a multitude of sins.” Since there 
is this danger, it is instructive to find out what is the 
Apostle’s opinion of mere earnestness. It may be a good 
thing—there can be no doubt of that—when it springs 
from prompting faith, and constraining love, and when 
the object on behalf of which it exerts its energies is 
intrinsically excellent. It is a noble thing; we cannot 
do without it; it is at once the pledge of sincerity and 
an augury of success. It may be a good thing, but it 
may be a blasphemy; just the muscle in the arm of a 
madman, that nerves his frantic hand to scatter fire- 
aed and arrows, and death; but do not deceive your- 
selves. 

Divers gifts may have been imparted to you; you may 
have discrimination of the abstruse and the profound ; 
the widow may bless your footsteps, and the orphan’s 
heart may sing for joy at your approach; the lustre of 
extensive benevolence may be shed over your character ; 
opinions may have rooted themselves so firmly in your 
nature that you are ready to suffer loss in their behalf, 
and to covet martyrdom in their attestation, giving your 
body to be burned. But, with all this earnestness, indis- 
putably earnest as you are, if you have not charity, divirier 
far—-if you have not “faith that works by love and purifies 
the heart”—earnest, indisputably earnest as you are, it 
profiteth you nothing; your confidence will fail you in 
the hour of trial ; its root is rottenness, and its blossom will 
go out as dust. That is the fourth ground of trust that 
the Apostle here disclaims. 

Yet again, and finally. The next ground of trust is 
ceremonial blamelessness, “Touching the righteousness 
which is in the law, blameless.” The Apostle’s zeal for 
the Jewish faith was rendered more influential by the 
purity of his life. There are some whose zeal is but a 


cloak for licentiousness, and who shamefully violate, in . 


daily practice, the rescripts of the religion for which 
they contend. But the Apostle was not one of those im- 


189 


190 THE APOSTLES GROUND OF TRUST. 


pious fanatics; he had been in sincerity and truth a Jew, 
so rigid and. inflexible in his adhesion to the laws of Moses 
that he was esteemed a pattern, and rejoiced in as a pillar 
of the truth. Not that before God the most devout 
Pharisee had anything whereof to glory, but that, in the 
eyes of men, who judge in short-sightedness, and who 
judge in error, he passed for a reputable and blameless 
man. And this, also, the most ordinary, the most wide- 
spread ground of false confidence, the Apostle counted 
“loss for Christ.” 

I need not remind you, I am sure; how deep in the 
heart of man, resisting every attempt to dislodge it, self- 
righteousness lurks and broods; and how men come to 
regard themselves, in the absense of atrocious crime, and 
in the presence of much that is humanizing and kindly, 
as ripening for the kingdom of heaven. And it is no 
marvel—I do not think it one jot of a marvel—if we con- 
sider what the usages of society are, and the verdicts it 
passes on the virtues and vices of the absent. 

There is a tribunal out among men that never suspends 
its sessions, and that is always estimating themselves by 
hemselves, and comparing themselves among themselves, 

and so is not wise. From acting as judge in some of 
these arbitration cases of character, by acting as an arbiter 
himself, the man comes to know the standard of the 
world’s estimation, and how it is that it comes to its 
decisions; and, in some reflective mood, possibly, he tries 
himself by it, and, looking down below him, he sees, far 
beneath him in the scale, the outcast and the selfish, the 
perfidious, the trampler upon worldly decencies, and the 
scandalously sinful. And then he looks into his own 
ease, and he sées his walk through life, greeted with the 
welcome of many salutations, that his name passes un- 
challenged, his integrity vouched for among men. Then 
he looks into his own heart, and finds it is vibrating to 
every chord of sympathy; triends troop around him with 
proud fondness; children “climbs his knees, the envied 
kiss to share.” 


a one 
many 
the ha 
head 
unive 
your 
masse 
not fe 
descr 
silence 
he li 
there 


ad ew, 
DT Moses 
@ pillar 
devout 
’ in the 
d who 
amelegg 
Bt Wide. 
ounted 


in the 
If, selt. 
ome to 
e, and 
kindly, 
t is no 
we con- 
dicts it 


spends 
lves by 
nsel ves, 
ome of 
arbiter 
of the 
| to its 
1e tries 
es, far 
th, the 
nd the 
8 own 
th the 
es un- 
Then 
ing to 
1 with 
nvied 


THE APOSTLE’'S GROUND OF TRUST. 191 


It is no marvel, I say, if a man accustomed to such 
standards of arbitration, should imagine that the good- 
ness which has been so cheerfully acknowledged on earth, 
will be as cheerfully acknowledged in heaven, and that 
he who has passed muster with the world so well, will 
not be sent abashed and crest-fallen from the judgment- 
seat of God. 

And there is nothing more difficult than to rouse such 
a one from his dangerous and fatal sluniber. There are 
many, who, thus building on the sand, have no shelter in 
the hour of the storm. You may thunder over the man’s 
head all those passages which tell of the radical and 
universal depravity of our race. Yes, and he admires 
your preaching, and thinks it is wonderfully good for the 
masses, but it has no sort of application tohim. He does 
not feel himself to be the vile and guilty creature you 
describe; he has an anodyne carried about with him to 
silence the first misgiving of the uneasy conscience, and 
he lies down in drugged and desperate repose. And 
there are many, it may be, who continue in this insidious 
deception, and are never aroused except by the voice of 
the last messenger, or by the flashing of the penal fires. 
That is the last ground of trust which the Apostle dis- 


elaims. 


And now of the things that we have spoken, what is 
the sum ? 
the ordinances of the Christian Church ; you may have 
come of a long line of spiritually illustrious ancestry, and 
be the sons “ of parents passed into the skies ;” youmay 
give an intellectual assent to the grand harmony of 
Christian truth; you may be zealous in certain activities 
of benevolence, and in certain matters connected even 
with the Church of God itseif; you may have passed 
among your fellows for a reputable and blameless man, 
against whom no one would utter a word of slander, and 
in whose presence the elders stand up in reverence, as 
you pass by; and yet, theremay pile upon you—(O God, 
send the word home!)—there may pile upon you all the 


Just this. You may be early initiated into | 


192 THE APOSTLE’S GROUND OF TRUST. 


accumulation of carnal advantage and carnal endowment ; 
you may gain all this world of honor, and lose your own 
soul. “And what shall it profit a man if he gain the 
whole world, and lose his own soul ?” 

[have no time, as I imagined, to dwell upon the com- 
pensating power of the excellency of the knowledge of 
Christ. There is this compensation, however, ‘“ What 
things were gain to me,” says the Apostle, “those I 
counted loss for Christ. Yea, doubtless, and I count all 
things .but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of 
Christ Jesus my Lord.” This compensation runs through 
creation ; it seems to be aradical law both in the physicai 
and spiritual government of God. You see it in things 
around you. Aman climbs up to high place, and calumny 
and care go barking at his heels. There is beauty, 
dazzling all beholders, and consumption, “like a worm i’ 
the bud, preying upon its damask cheek.” There is 
talent, dazzling and enrapturing, and madness waiting to 
pounce upon the vacated throne. 

Oh, yes, and there is a strange and solemn affinity, too, 
ia the Bible, between crimeand punishment. I can only 
indicate just what I mean. The Jews rejected Christ, 
perseveringly rejected Christ; and one of their pleas, 
you remember, was, “If thou let this man go, thou art 
not Oesar’s friend ;” and to conciliate the Roman power, 
they rejected Christ. That was their crime; what was 
their punishment? The Romans did come, by and by, 
and “ took away their place and nation.” Pharaoh issued 
his enactment, that all the male children of Israel should 
be drowned: that was the crime; what was the punish- 
ment? Pharaoh and his host were drowned in the waters 
of the- Red Sea by and by. Hezekiah took the ambassa- 
dors of Babylon through the treasure-chambers of silver 
and gold, ostentatiously showing them his wealth: that 
was the crime ; what was the punishment? The treasures 

of silver and gold went off captive to Babylon by and by. 
David, in the lust of his power, took the census of the 
people, and numbered them: that was the crime; what 


was the 


people 
sources 
fondly. 
And, 
those W 
of heav 
and cr 
compass 
Who a 
who on 
proseri b 
the san 
the ark 
waters 
taberna 
camp, © 
those Ww 
in the r 
ing the 
door,’ W: 
with th 
Father 
gathere 
door is 
strange 
What | 
ceive a 
whethe 
Oh! 
Christ. 
living» 
accept 
proclai 
able an 
“T dete 
and hit 
fasten 


4), ment ‘ 
pur OWn 
a1n the 


pdee of 
hrough 
nysical 
things 
lumny 
beauty, 
yorm j’ 
ere is 
ing to 


'Y, too, 
n only 
Jhrist, 
pleas, 
yu art 
ower, 
it was 
id by, 
issued 
hould 
Inish- 
raters 


THE APOSTLES GROUND OF TRUST. 193 


was the punishment? The pestilence fell upon the 
people whom David had numbered, and dried up the 
pie of the strength in which he had boasted so 
fondly. 

And, just to remind you of another case, who are 
those who are represented as standing at the barred gate 
of heaven, krfocking, frantic and disappointed, outside, 
and crying in tones of agony that mortal lips cannot 
compass now, thank God! ‘Lord, Lord, open te us.” 
Who are they? Not the scandalously sinful, not those 
who on earth were alien together—outcast altogether— 
proscribed altogether from the decencies and decorum of 
the sanctuary of God. No; those who helped to build 
the ark, but whose corpses have been strewed in the 
waters of the deluge; those who brought rafters to the 
tabernacle, but who, as lepers, were thrust out of the 
camp, or as transgressors, were stoned beyond the gate ; 
those who, on earth, were almost Christians ;- those who, 
in the retributions of eternity, are almost saved ; behold- 
ing the Church on earth through the chink of the open 
door, watching the whole family as they are gathered, 
with the invisible presence and the felt smile of the 
Father upon them; beholding the family as they are 
gathered, beatific, and imperishable, in heaven; but the 
door is shut. Almost Christians! almost saved! Oh 
strange and sad affinity between crime and punishment ! 
What is your retribution to be? “ Every one shall re- 
ceive according to things he has done in the body, 
whether they be good, or whether they be bad.” 

Oh! come to Christ—that is the end of it—come to 
Christ. Hallow this occasion by dedicating yourselves 
living temples unto the Lord, He will not refuse to 
accept you. Mark the zeal with which the Apostle Paul 
proclaimed the truth: mark the zeal, the love, indomit- 
able and unfailing, with which he clung to the Master— 
“T determined to know nothing among men but Christ, 
and him crucified.” Oh rare and matchless attachment! 
fastening upon that which was most in opprobium and 


194 THE APOSTLE’S GROUND OF TRUST. 


in contumely pe men. Never did the earnest student 
of taro as he came away from some Socratic 
pre ection, utter his affirmation, “I am determined to 
<now nothing among men save Socrates, and him 
poisoned ;” never did enraptured youth listen to the 
persuasive eloquence of Cicero, and utter his affirmation, 
“T determined to know nothing among men save Cicero, 
and him proscribed.” But Paul takes the very vilest 
brandg of shame, and binds it about his brow, as a diadem 
of glory: “I determine to know nothing among men but 
Christ, and him crucified.” Yes, that is it, “‘ Christ, and 
him crucified.” ‘God forbid that I should glory, save 
in the cross.” In the cross is to be our chiefest glory. 
Trust that cross for yourselves; take hold of it; it is 
consecrated. In all circumstances of your history, in all 
exigencies of your mortal lot, take firm hold of the cross, 
When the destroying angel rides forth upon the cloud, 
when his sword is whetted for destruction, clasp the cross ; 
it shall bend over you a shield and a shade ; he will relax 
his frown, and sheath his sword, and pass quickly harm- 
lessly by. When you go to the brink of the waters, that 
you are about to cross, hold up the cross; and by magic 
power they shall cleave asunder, as did ancient Jordan 
before the ark of the covenant, and you shall pass over 
dry-shod and in peace. When your feet are toiling up 
the slope, and you arrive at the gate of heaven, hold up 
the cross, the angels shall know it, and the everlasting 
doors shall unbar themselves, and you may enter in. 
When you pass through the ranks of applauding seraphim, 
that you may pay your first homage to the throne, pre- 
sent the cross, and lower it before the face of the Master, 
and he for whose sake you have borne it, will take it 
from you, and replace it with a crown. : 


4 


TH 


“And 
this once 
destroy i 


when 
tence, 
suspen 
Passin; 
volves, 
4 which, 
tion. 
enligh: 
It is n 
we fol] 
wail of 
it is me 
worsh: 
peerag 
the pa 
of hu 
find G 
and tk 
to the 
the pi 
or gre 


Socratic 
oined to 
nd him 
to the 
rmation, 
e Cicero, 
Pry Vilest 
a diadem 
men but 
rist, and 
ry, save 
plory. 
it; it is 
ry, in all 
he cross, 
e cloud, 
ne Cross ; 
vill relax 
ly harm- 
ers, that 
y magic 
| Jordan 
ASS Over 
iling up 
hold up 
rlasting 
mnter in. 
raphim, 
ue, pre- 
Master, 
| take it 


t student 


XI. 


THE EFFECTS OF PIETY ON A NATION. 


“ And he said, O, let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak yet but 
this once: peradventure ten shall be found there. And he said, I will not 
destroy it for ten’s sake.—GENESIS xviii. 32. 


v 
OST remarkable and most encouraging is this c“ 
instance of prevailing prayer. It might well [ate 

e3| stimulate us to the exercise of sublimer faith 

when we behold a mortal thus wrestling with Omnipo- 
tence, wrestling with such holy boldness that justice 
suspends its inflictions, and cannot seal the sinner’s doom. 
Passing over that, however, with all the doctrines it in- 
volves, there is another thought couched in the text, to 
which, at the present time, I want to direct your atten- 
tion. The history of nations must be regarded, by vi 
enlightened mind, as the history of the providence of God. 
It is not enough, if we would study history aright, that 
we follow in the track of battles, that we listen to the 
wail of the vanquished and to the shout of the conquerors ; 
it is not enough that we excite in ourselves a sort of hero 
worship of the world’s foster-gods, the stalwart and noble 
peerage of mankind ; it is not enough that we trace upon 
the page cf history the subtile and intricate developments 
of human character. To study history aright, we must 
find Godin it, we must always recognize the ever-present 
and the ever-acting Divinity, working all things according 
to the council of his benevolent and holy will. This is 
the prominent aspect in which history ought to be studied, 
or grevious dishonor is done to the Universal Ruler, and 


. 4 
4 Youd 
aw / 


> 


196 THE EFFECTS OF PIETY ON A NATION. 


intense injury is inflicted upon the spirits of men. God, 
himself, you remember, has impressively announced the 
. and danger of those who regard not the works of the 

ord, nor the operations of his hands. The history of 
ancient Israel, for instance, the chosen people, led by the 
piller of cloud by day, and by the piller of fire by night, 
through the marching of that perilous wilderness, what 
was it but the successful development, in a series of won- 
drous deliverances, of the ever-active providence of God? 
There were some things in that history which, of course, 
were incapable either of transfer or repetition ; but the 
history itself’ included, and was ordained to set forth 
certain prominent principles for the recognition of all 
nations ; principles which were intended to assert the rights 
of God, and to assert the obligations of his creatures; 
principles which are to be consummated in their evolution 
amid the solemnities of the last day. It was so in the 
case of Sodom, punished as an example of God’s chosen 


people. Their transgressions had become obduracy, 


their obduracy had blossomed out into punishment; but. 


a chance in the Divine government yet remained to them ; 
peradventure there might have been ten righteous in the 


city. If there had been ten righteous in the city, those . 


pious men would have been the substance, the essence, 
the strength of the devoted nation; for them, on their 
account, for their sakes, the ‘utter ruin of the land might 
have been averted, and through them, after the Divine 
displeasure had passed by, there might have sprung up 
renewed stren th and recovered glory. We may fairly, 
I think, take this as a general principle, that pious men 
in all ages of the world’s history, are the true strength of 


the nations in which, in God’s providence, they are privi- © 


. ledged to live; oftentimes averting calamity, oftentimes 
restoring strength and blessing, when, but for them, it 
would have lapsed and gone for ever. This is the prin- 
ciple which I propose, God he!ping me, to apply for a 
moment to our own times, and to the land in which we 
live ; and in order to give the subject a great deal of a 


wactice 
jous m 
tent ma 
to insur 
I, In 
they wl 
who see 
possibl 
charact 
seed thé 
that are 
In orde 
thus ass 
of pra 
will jus 
In t 
themse 
from 8 
influenc 
gin, in | 
righteo 
is espe 
pious n 
promin 
as in n 
for con 
their p 
that ir 
flagran 
exist, ¢ 
of sw 
system 
forsake 
met Wi 
and .r 
agains 
scarce 
unveil 


God, 
need the 
KS Of the 
istory of 
1 by the 
Y night, 
8s, what 
of wor. 
of God ? 

course, 
but the 
et forth 
of all 
he rights 
patures ; 
olution 
D in the 
s chosen 
duracy, 
nt; but 
> them ; 
3 in. the 


, those * 


ssence, 
1 their 
| might 
Divine 
ing up 
fatrly, 
ls men 
igth of 
privi- ' 
itimes 
em, it 
| prin- 
for a 
ch we 
l of a 


THE EFFECTS OF PIETY ON A NATION, 197 


wactical character, I will, in the first place, paint the 
jious men, and then show the effect which the consis- 
tent maintenance of a course of piety may be expected 
to insure. 

I, In the first place, who are the pious men? Who are 
they whom God, who never judges in short-sightedness, 
who sees the end from the beginning, and who cannot 
possibly be decieved or mistaken in his estimate of human 
character, who are they whom God designates, “ the holy 
seed that shall be the substance thereof ”—the pious men 
that are the strength of the nations in which they live ? 
In order to sustain the honorable appellation which is 
thus assigned, men must cultivate habits of thought and 
of practice that are appropriate to such a character. I 
will just mention two or three particulars. 

In the first place, they are pious men who separate ° 
themselves avowedly and at the utmost possible distance 
from surrounding wickedness. Men are placed under the 
influence of religion, in order that they may separate from 
sin, in order that they may be governed by the habits of 
righteousness and true holiness, In times when depravity 
is especially flagrant, there is a special obligation upon 
pious men to bring out their virtues into braver and more 
prominent exercise, regarding that surrounding depravity 
as in no wise a reason for flinching, or for cowardice, or 
for compromise, but rather for the augmented firmness of . 
their purity. Now, it cannot for one moment be doubted, 
that in the times in which we live iniquity does most 
flagrantly abound. There is not a sin which does not 
exist, and exists in all rankness and impurity. Because 
of swearing the land mourns. Gor’s Sabbaths are 
systematically desecrated, his sanctuaries contumeliously 
forsaken, his ordinances trampled under foot, his ministers 
met with the leer oftentimes due to detected conspirators, 
and regarded as banded traitgrs, who have conspired 
against the liberties of the world. The lusts of the flesh 
scarcely Affect to conceal their filthiness, everywhere 
unveiling their forms, and everywhere diffusing their 


198 THE EFFECTS OF PIETY ON A NATION. 


pestilence. We do not venture upon any sort of com- 
parison, we do not venture to compare the aggregate 
depravity of this age with the depravity of any age that 
has preceded. Wedo not affirm the general fact, that 
the heart of man is “ deceitful and desperately wicked,” 
and that the depravity we see around us, the exhibition 
of the carnal mind, “which is enmity against God,” is 
most fearfully aggravated by the ebundance of privilege 
py which the people aresurrounded. Now, itis the duty, 
I repeat, of those who would have God’s estimate of them 
as p.ous men, that they should regard this depravity as 
invoking them to bear the testimony of unsullied and 
spotless holiness. Let the exhortations on this matter 
which are scattered throughout the pages of the Bible 
be solemnly pondered. “ Be not conformed tothis world, 
‘ but be ye transformed according to the renewing of your 
mind, that ye may prove what isthat good and acceptable 
and perfect will of God.” ‘“ Abstain from the appear- 
ance of evil.” In times when depravity is especially 
flagrant, donot even borrow of the garments of falsehood ; 
do not let there be any meretricious semblence of that 
which is hateful in the sight of God. Abstain from the 
appearance of evil. Come out of it so thoroughly that 
the fellowships and intercourse of social life do not seduce 
you into a sort of complicity. ‘“ Be not partakers of other 
men’s sins. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful 
works of darkness, but rather reprove.” ‘ Be ye not 
unequally yoked together with unbelievers, for what 
fellowship hath light with darkness, and what concord 
hath Christ with Belial, and what part hath he that 
believeth with an infidel?” ‘‘Cleanse yourselves from all 
filthiness of flesh and spirit; perfecting holiness in the 
fear of God.” 
You will not fail to perceive that the whole of these 
penare have one aim, and one summons, and that is 
oliness ; holiness, as spotless in the secrecy of individual 
consciousness a. in the jealous watch of men; holiness 
shrined in the heart and influencing benignly and trans- 


forming 
more ch 
that ma 
cial inte 
minded 
which ¢ 
transact 
the han 
more I 
holiness 
the fron 
lustre e 
that the 
that he | 
to the 
holiness 
otligatic 
with its 
circums 
hesitate, 
his coun 
God. 
Secon 
men, yo 
of Chris 
widely- 
very W. 
“ once 
country 
practice 
Christis 
theory 
and boi 
Are } 
the dar 
active € 
hearten 
account 


of coln- 
Peregate 
age that 
ict, that 
vicked,” 
hibition 
od,” is 
Drivilege 
he duty, 
of them 
AVItYy as 
ied and 
} matter 
1e Bible 
is world, 
of your 
ceptable 
appear: 
pecially 
sehood ; 
of that 
‘om the 
ily that 
t seduce 
of other 
fruitful 
ye not 
r what 
concord 
he that 
from all 
3in the 


yf these 
that is 
lividual 
noliness 
| trans- 


THE EFFECTS OF PIETY ON A NATION, 199 


forming the entire character; holiness, that is something 
more chivalrous than national honor ; holiness, something 
that maintains a higher standard of right than commer- 
cial integrity ; holiness, something that is more noble- 
minded than the conventional courtesies of life; holiness, 
which comes out in every-day existence, hallowing each 
transaction, taking hold of the money as it passes through 
the hand in ordinary currency, and stamping upon it a 
more noble image and ‘superscription than Cesar’s; 
holiness written upon the bells of the horses and upon 
the frontlet of the forehead, an immaculate and spotless 
lustre exuding, so to speak, from the man in daily life, so 
that the world starts back from him, and tells at a glance 
that he has been wit!: Jesus. Now, brethren, it is to this, 
to the exercise and maintenance of this unflinching 
holiness, that you are called. Here is the first prominent 
otligation of pious men. You are to confront every evil 
with its exact and diametrical opposite ; and he who in 
circumstances like these in which we stand, ventures to 
hesitate, or ventures to parley, brand him as a traitor to 
his country, a traitcr to his religion, and a traitor to his 
God. 

Secondly, if you would be what God regards as pious 
men, you must cultivate firm attachment to the doctrines 
of Christian truih. There is brethren, in our day, a very 
widely-diffused defectiveness of religious profese‘on, a 
very widely-diffused departure trom the:faith thet was 
“once delivered to the saints.” This is a Christian 
country. Men call it so, 1 know; but there is in daily 
practice a strange and sad departure from the precepts of 
Christianity—ay, on the part of men by whom the 
theory of this being a Christian country is most noisily 
and boisterously maintained. 

Are you strangers to the presence in the midst of us of 
the dark and subtile spirit of unbelief; a venal press and 
active emissaries poisoning the fresh blood of youth, dis- 
heartening the last hope ot age, and which, if their own 
account of the circulation of their pernicious principles is 


aan toe 


# 


200 THE EFFECTS OF PIFTY ON A NATION. 


to be relied upon, has already tainted hundreds of 
thousands with that infectious venom whose poison lies 
not in the destruction of the body? True, it is for the 
most part bland, conciliatory, plausible, rather than 
audacious and braggart, as in former times, veiling its 
deadly purpose in song orinstory. But the dagger is not 
the less deadly because the haft is jewelled, and infidelity 
is not the less infidelity, not the less pernicious, not the 
less accursed, because genius has woven its stories to adorn 
it, and because fancy i wreathed it into song. 

Are you strangers to the avowed denial on the part of 
some ot the divinity and atonement of our Lord Jesus 
Christ? to the man-exalting opinion which relies for its 
own salvation upon the piled up fabric of its own righte- 
ousness, or which throu h the flinty rocks of self-righteous 
morality, would tunnel out a passage to the eternal 
throne ¢ 

Are you strangers to the workings of the grand apostasy 
darkening the sunlight of the Saviour’s love, dislucating 
the perfection of the Saviour’s work, hampering the 
course of the atonement with the frail entangled frame- 
work of human merit, restless in its endeavors to regain 
its ascendency, crafty, and vigilant and formidable as 
ever ? 

Are you strangers to the heresy which has made its 
appearauce in the midst of a body once deeming itself 
the fairest offspring of the Reformation, and which would 
exclude thousands from covenanted mercies because they 
own not priestly pretentions, and conform not to trad?. 
tional rites 2 

Are you strangers in the other quarter of the horizen 
and of the sky, to dark and lowering portents that have 
come over with rationalistic and German infidelity ? 
Brethrer, there is a duty, solemn and authoritative rest- 
ing upon the pious men that they hold fast that which 
was ‘ once delivered to ihe saints.” Let the exhortations, 
too, on this matter, be carefully pondered. “ Beno more 
children tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine, 


a 


by the 
they li 
not eas 
in the 
in the 
earnest 
cation, 
there 2 
grace, 
others, 
and th 
unswe! 
nation 
nothing 
And 
estimat 
In tim 
upon a 
unity 
not me 
in the - 
You m 
is on tl 
and m¢ 
decent 


when 1 

Whe 
engagi 
donot: 
or the 
one be 
but w 
peace, 
procur 
solemn 
there ¢ 
been a 


deed t. 


ce 


dreds of | 


Oison lies 
is for the 
1er than 
eiling its 
ger is not 
infidelity 
» not the 
to adorn 


le part of 
rd Jesus 
es for its 
nN righte- 
‘ighteous 
. eternal 


apostasy 


locating 
ring the 
d frame- 
(0 regain 
dable as 


made its 
ng itself 
h would 
use they 
o trad:: 


horizon 
1at have 
fidelity ? 
ive rest- 
At waich 
rtations, 
no more 
octrine, 


THE EFFECTS OF PIETY ON A NATION. 201 
by the slight of man and cunning craftiness whereby 
they lie in wait to betray.” “Stand fast”—not loose, 
not easily shifted, having a firm foundation—“ stand fast 
in the faith onze delivered unto the saints.” Be “ rooted 
in the faith;” be “grounded in the faith;” contend 
earnestly for the faith.” Brethren, here is another invo- 
cation, and it is solemnly binding upon you. And while 
there are some around us that would rob Christ of his 
grace, and others that would rob Christ of his crown, and 
others, more royal felons, that would steal both the one 
and the other, let it be ours to take our stand firm and 
unswerving by the altars of the truth; let our determi- 
nation go fourth to the universe, “I determined to know 
nothing among men, save Jesus Christ and him crucified.” 

And, then, thirdly, if you would be pious men as God 
estimates piety, you must cultivate cordial, brotherly love. 
In times like these, there is a solemn obligation resting 
upon all “ who hold the head” to cultivate the spirit of 
unity with all “who hold the head.” . By unity, we do 
not mean uniformity. There is none, there can be none 
in the free universe of God. You have ic not in nature. 
You may go out into the waiving woodland, when death 
is on the trees, and you may prune their riotous growth, 
and mold, and shape, and cut them into something like a 
decent and decorous uniformity; but the returning spring, 
when it comes, will laugh at your aimless labor. 

Wherever there is life, there will be found variety of 
engaging forms which attract and fascinate the eye. We 
donot mean uniformity, therefore ; the harmony of voices, 
or the adjustment of actions, the drowsy repetition of 
one besief, or the harmonious intonation of one liturgy, 
but we mean “the unity of the spirit in the bond of 
peace,” which we are to intensely labor to maintain and 
procure. Jet the exhortations on this matter also be very 
solemnly pondered. ‘A new commandment,” so that 
there are eleven commandments now ; the decalogue has 
been added to by this new commandment, which is, in- 
deed the substance and essence of all the rest. “ A new 


902 THE. EFFECTS OF PIETY ON A NATION. 


commandment give I unto you, that ye love one another,” 
“‘ Be kindly affectioned one to another, in brotherly love, 
in honor preferring one another.” Nay, the Apostle dogg 
not hesitate to set it down as one of the surest eyij. 
dences of Christian discipleship. ‘We know that we have 


assed from death unto life, because we love the brethren,” , 


ompliance with these exhortations is always imperative, 
especially ne alta in seasons of national danger, 
Everything that is ominous, everything that is solemn, 
everything that is portentious around us, must be refard- 
ed as an earnest call to Christians to live together in love, 
This love is to be cherished everywhere—to be cherished 
towards those who are members of the same section of 
the universal Church. Here, of course, there should be 
no orphan’s heart. Here, all should feel themselves mem- 
bers of the commonwealth. There should be a rejoicing 
with those that do rejoice, and a weeping with those that 
weep ; and, as by electric fire, the wants and the wishes 
‘of the one should be communicated to, and acknowledged 
by the whole, that it should not only be cherished in our 
own communion, but toward all who hold “the unity of 
the spirit in the bond of peace, and in righteousness of 
life.” Wherever Christ is ackuowledged, his grace mag- 
nified, his crown vindicated, his law made honorable— 
wherever the service of Christ is the aim, and the glory 
of Christ is the purpose, there the Church should know 
as Christian and should hail as brethren. This duty is 
one that has been scandalously neglected in the times in 
which we live; and that neglect has darkened the aspect 
and augmented the perils of the times. Brethren, we 
must all amend if we would not betray. And when the 
Church of Christ shall combine in heart as in spirit one, 
then shall the great building of the universe progress. 
God shall smile upon the workmen, “the glory of the 
latter house shall exceed the glory of the former,” and 
the whole “ building fitly framed together shall grow up 
into a holy temple of the Lord.” 
Then, fourthly, if we would be pious men as God 


estim: 
sprea 
Maud 
spoke 
jnto o 
oftens 
One, | 
throne 
quence 
every\ 
every’ 
Now, 
ber of 
nothin 
persev 
below. 
deprax 
can th 
wh at ¢ 
its pov 
treasw: 
utterly} 
must | 
and re 


+» They 


and s§ 
They : 
entire 
They : 
it is in 
effort, 
them ; 
import 
prayer 
you or 
it with 
is irra 
is fool: 
here is 


another,” 
erly love, 
»stle does 
rest evi- 
t we have 


rethren,” | 


perative, 
danger, 
solemn, 
e refard- 
r in love, 
sherished 
ection of 
should be 
ves mem: 
rejoicing 
hose that 
1e Wishes 
owledged 
ed in our 
unity of 
usness of 
race Mag- 
norable— 
the glory 
nid know 
s duty is 
times in 
he aspect 
hren, we 
when the 
spirit one, 


THE EFFECTS OF PIETY ON A NATION. 203 


estimates piety, we must be zealous in endeavor for the 
spread of the Gospel, and for the conversion of the 
world. The errors and the crimes of which we have 
spoken, render this essential. We have but to gather 
into our minds the contemplation of guilt so heinous, so 
offensive that it rises up in the presence of the Holy 
One, and calls for vengeance as he is seated upon his 
throne; then, we have but to remember the conse- 
quences of that guilt, everywhere producing misery, 
everywhere drying up the sources of spiritual affluence, 
everywhere exposing to the unending perditions ot hell. 
Now, brethren, nothing—and I would speak as one mem- 
ber of the army summoning others to the battle-field— 
nothing will avail but the combined, and devoted, and 
persevering exertions of the members of the Church 
below. How else shall we attempt to gripe with the 
depravity around us? Parliamentary enaétments, what 
can they do? Threats to atiright, or bribes to seduce, 
w! at can they do? Patronage in all its prestige, and all 
its power, all that can be possibly brought out of State 
treasury or of State influence, what are they? Availless 
utterly without the power and Spirit of God. No; there 
must be a band ot faithful men who are thus renovated 
and redeemed going forth in the name of the Lord. 


¢They must sustain the ministry in existing pastorates, 


and spread it wherever it has never been established. 
They must support institutions for the education of the 
entire man, institutions based upon the Word of God. 
They must become themselves preachers of “ the truth as 
it is in Jesus ;” by prayer, by influence, by example, by 
effort, they must display all the grace which has redeemed 
them; and especially they must all in earnest, repeated, 
importunate supplicat: 1.5 besiege the throne of grace in 
prayer. There is another summons, the last I shall give 
you on this matter to-night, and you are now to answer 
it with intense energy, with intense zeal. Coldness here 
is irrational. Ardor here is reason. Indifference here 
is foolishness. Earnestness, or, if you will, enthusiasm 
here is the highest and sublimest wisdom. 


204 THE EFFECTS OF PIETY ON A NATION. 


If you would be pious men, therefore, as God estimates 
piety, you are to come out from the world and to be 
separated from it; you are to hold fast the doctrines you 
have received; you are to cultivate to each other the 
tenderest brotherly love; and you are to be energetic in 
heart for the conversion of the world. 

II. I come now, secondly and briefly, to notice the 
effects which we are warranted in expecting such conduct 
as this tu insure. This is the doctrine of the text, that 
Sodom would have been spared if the ten righteous men 
had been there. Pious men are presented to us, there- 
fore, as the safety of the nation in which they live. 
This is very beautifully presented in several other parts 
of Scripture. You have it, for instance, in the prophecy 
of Isaiah, Ixv. 8,9: ‘‘ Thus saith the Lord, As the new 
wine is found ‘in the cluster, and one saith, Destroy it 
not; for a blessing is in it; so will I do for my servants’ 
sakes, that I may not destroy them all. And I will bring 
forth a seed out of Jacob, and-out of Judah an inheritor 
of my mountains; and mine elect shall inherit it, and my 
servants shall dwell there.” Then, again, in the prophecy 
of Malachi, iii, 10, 11: “Bring ye all the tithes into 
the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, 
and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I 


will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you» 


out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to 
receive it. And [ will rebuke the devourer for your 
sakes, and he shall not destroy the fruits of your ground, 
neither shall your vine cast her fruit before the time in 
the field, saith the Lord of hosts.” 

We see here the development of the general principle 
for which we contend, that God preserves nations for the 
sake of pious men. The annals of the past show how 
very frequently he has put to naught statesmanship, 
fleets, and armies, and has rendered honor to truth, 
meekner’ and righteousness. This I do solemnly believe 
to be the case in our own land in this crisis of its affairs, 
and I am bold to affirm my conviction, that the destinies 


of En 
in tl 
their 
eminé 


weapt 
108 
re tp é 
I app 
tempd 
Let p 
come 
evang 
is at 
their 
begins 
felt. te 
cal ag 
theori: 
men 
straint 
Let 
dom o: 
on the 
other 
by ext 
and ra 
other 
its ow: 
the th: 
care tc 
which 
mand 
world 
liberty 
and w. 


timates 
d to be 
nes you 
her the 
yetic in 


tice the 
conduct 
xt, that 
us Men 
, there- 
ey live. 
ar parts 
rophecy 
he new 
stroy it 
ervants’ 
ill bring 
heritor 
and my 
rophecy 
es into 
> house, 
sts, if I 


bur you» 


pugh to 
or your 
ground, 
time in 


rinciple 
for the 
pw how 
hanship, 
b truth, 
believe 

affairs, 
lestinies 


THE EFFECTS OF PIETY ON A NATION. 205 


of England and of the British Empire are at this moment 
in the hands of its pious men. If they be faithful to 
their high trust and to the vocation to which they are 
eminently and signally called, nothing can harm us; no 
weapon that is formed against us shall ever be able to 
prosper. I think this might be made out from the history 
of the past, both as to temporal and spiritual matters, 
I appeal to you whether it is not manifest that the 
temporal interests of a nation are bound up in its piety ? 
Let pious men prevail in a land, let the population be- 
come imbued with the spirit and with the leaven of 
evangelical godliness, what is the consequence? Order 
is at once preserved. As their holiness spreads, as 
their unworldly yet earnest example manifests itself and 
begins to be felt, sounder views prevail. The moral is 
felt to exert a supremacy over the secular; the politi- 
cal agitator, the infidel demagogue, the philosophical 
theorist, are scouted as physicians of no value; and 
inen everywhere learn to submit to the orderly re- 
straints and the well-regulated government of law. 

Let pious men prevail, and they will ‘xeep up the free- 
dom ofa land. Ido not mean that crouching emasculation 
on the one hand, nor that ribald licentiousncss on the 
other hand, which have both been dignified by the name 
by extreme political parties; but I mean well-ordered 
and rational liberty; liberty which respects the rights of 
other people at the same time that it asserts and vindicates 
its own; liberty which with one hand renders to Czesar 
the things that are Ceesar’s, and with the other hand takes 
care to render to God the things that are God’s; liberty 
which honors men as men, just because the Divine com- 
mand tells it to “honor ail men,” and because, all the 
world over, there is nothing so royal as a man. That 
liberty will be preserved wherever pious men are found, 
and wherever the example of these pious men begins to 
spread itself among people. 

And, then, pious men will preserve the prosperity of a 
land. There is a false prosperity which must be aban- 


206 THE EFFECTS OF PIETY ON A NATION. 


doned; there is a false honor which must be speedily 
forsworn; but that prosperity which is substantial and 
abiding will remain under the influences of piety. Art 
will minister then not to luxury but to truth; science 
will minister then not to infidelity but to truth; commerce 
will minister then not to selfishness but to benevolence; 
and other realms shall render to us their unbought and 
unpurchasable homage, and the sons of our‘country, in 
their not unholy pride, may wave their banner to the 
wind, with the motto on it: 


‘‘ He is the freeman whom the truth makes free, 
And ali are slaves besides.”’ 


Yes, brethren, it is Britain’s altar and not Britain’s throne, 
Britain’s Bible and not Britain’s statute book, that is the 
great, and deep, and strong source of her national pros- 
perity and renown. Do away with this; suffer that 
tidelity with which, in some humble measure, we have 
borne witness for God, to be relaxed ; let our Sabbaths be 
sinned away at the bidding of unholy or mistaken mobs; 
let us enter into adulterous and unworthy alliance with 
the man of sin ; let us be traitors to the trust with which 
God has invested us, to take care of the ark of the Lord, 
and the crown will lose its lustre, the peerage its nobility, 
and the senate its command ; all the phases of social rank 
and order will be disjointed and disorganizad; a lava tide 
of desolation will overwhelm all that is consecrated and 
noble, and angels may sing the dirge over a once great, 
but now hopelessly fallen people: “the glory is departed 
from Israel, because the ark of God is taken.” Keep fast 
by that ark, hold it—hold your attachment to it as the 
strongest element of being, and there shall be no bounds 
to the sacred magnificence of our nation; but the fires 
of the last day, when they consume all that is perishable 
and drossy, may see us with the light of the Divine 
presence gleaming harmlessly around our brow, and in 
our hand the open law fer all the nations of mankind. 

Those are temporal benefits. And, then, let. there be 


pious 
secure 


erroné 
not, a 
the S 
be no 
been | 
of Go 
of thos 
the m 
the fir 
silence 
imper 
and nd 
and it 
rejoici 
bribe 
reach 
tremb 
and e 
aposta 
sliders 
createc 
summi 
had iss 
God ; 
And 
be sec 
greatel 
A false 
it may 
soul, ai 
as you 
crowds 


cross y 
their ac 
diaboli 
of hell 


speedil 
mI an 
y. Art 
science 
mmerce 
yolence ; 
yht and 
itry, in 
to the 


s throne, 
at is the 
1al pros- 
fer that 
we have 
baths be 
n mobs; 
ce with 
h which 
1e Lord, 
obility, 
ial rank 
ava tide 
ted and 
e great, 
eparted 
eep fast 
as the 
bounds 
he fires 
ishable 
Divine 
and in 
ind. 
here be 


THE EFFECTS OF PIETY ON A NATION. 207 


pious men in the land, and spiritual benefits will also be 
secured. There will, for instance, be the defeat of 
erroneous opinions. Truth, when the Spirit inspires it 
not, abstract: truth, is weak and powerless. Truth, with 
the Spirit in it, is mighty, and will prevail. There can 
be no fear as to the result, because the world has never 
been left, and will never be left without the active Spirit 
of God. Falsehood breaks out impetuously, just like one 
of those torrents that leap and rattle over the summit of 
the mountain after the thunder-storr, overwhelming in 
the first outbreak, but dying away into insignificance and 
silence by and by ; truth is the little spring that rises up 
imperceptibly and gently, and flows on, unostentatious 
and noiseless, unti! at last navies are wafted on its bosom, 
and it pours its full volume of triumphant waters into the 
rejoicing sea. So it will be with truth; wealth cannot 
bribe it, talent cannot dazzle it, sophistry cannot over- 
reach it, authority cannot please it; they all, like Felix, 
tremble in its majestic presence. Let pious men increase, 
and each of them will become a centre of holiness ; 
apostates will be brought back to the Church, poor back- 
sliders will be reclaimed into new-found liberty and new 
created privilege, and there will be a cry like that on the 
summit of Carmel after the controversy was over, and 
had issued in the discomfiture of Baal, “ The Lord, he is 
God; the Lord, he is God.” 

And, then, better than all that, salvation of souls will 
be secured. The conversion of a soul is an infinitely 
greater triumph than the eradication of a false opinion 
A false opinion may be crushed, and the man that holds 
it may be in imminent spiritual peril ; convert the man’s 
soul, and his opinions will come right by and by. Oh, if 
as you go from this place to-night, you were to behold the 
crowds of tempters and tempteresses to evil that will 
cross your path as you travel homeward, if you think of 
their activity, of their earnestness toproselytize in the grand 
diabolical army, and to makesevenfold more the children 
of hell than they are themselves, and if you think of the 


208 THE EFFECTS OF PIETY ON A NATION, 


apathy of the faithful, of the scantiness of effort, of the 
failure of faith, of the depression of endeavor, of the laxity 
of attachment on the part of believers in Jesus, surel 
there is enough to make you abashed and ocnifounded 
Brethren, I should like, if I could, to bring before you 
one solitary soul, to fasten your attention upon that soul, 
to transfix it as with a lightning glance before you, so 
that you might trace it in its downward path, see it as 
habit crusts it over, and selfishness rejoices over it, and 
the foul fiend gloats upon it in mockery, and disease, 
prematurely induced, comes upon it, and death waits for 
his prey, and hell is moved from beneath to meet it at its 
coming, and that you should follow it down into those 
dark and dread abodes, which man’s pencil painteth not, 
and of which man’s imagination, thank God, cannot con- 
ceive! Oh! draw the curtain over that; we cannot bear 
the sight! But as you think of the real spiritual peril in 
which not one, not a family—Oh! if there were but a 
family, all London would be awake for its deliverance— 
but there is a world in danger—not one, not a family, not 
an island, not a continent, but a world—if I could only 
fasten that upon your consciences to-night, each one of 
you would surely goaway with tearful eye and glad heart, 
glad that you were able to do anything for God, and 
would not rest without saying, “For Zion’s sake I will 
not hold my peace, and for Jerusalem’s sake, I will not 
rest until the righteousness thereof go forth as the bright- 
ness, and the salvation thereof as the lamp that burneth.” 

Just one parting word. Ifyou would do all this, you 
must be pious yourselves; but do not be among the 
number of those who busy themselves in the externalisms 
of godliness, and are in some measure active in connec- 
tion with the Church of God, but are out of Christ, aliens 
themselves from the commonwealth of Israel. If you are 
not personally pious, you will be accomplices in drawing 
down the thunderbolt, and chargeable to that extent with 
your country’s ruin, and the ruin of souls. Come to 
Christ now; let all your past iniquity be forgotten and 


rt, of the 
the laxity 
us, surel: 
founded 
fore you 
that soul, 
© you, 80 
» 8€@ It as 
er it, and 
d disease, 
Waits for 
et it at its 
into those 
nteth not, 
nnot con- 
nnot bear 
al peril in 
ere buta 
rerance— 
mily, not 
ould only 
ch one of 
lad heart, 
God, and 
ke I will 
[ will not 
e bright- 
yurneth,” 
this, you 
ong the 
rnalisms 
1 connec- 
st, aliens 
f you are 
drawing 
ent with 
Jome to 
tten and 


THE EFFECTS OF PIETY ON A NATION. 209 


forgiven as you bow before him in humiliation and in tears ; 
he will not refuse you; he will not cast you out. Then 
enter upon a life of piety in spite of all that scoffers say. 
Ah! religion is not so mean a thing as infidels represent 
itto be! They curl the lip of scorn at us, and we can bear 
that; they flash the eye of hate at us, and we can bear 
that, as long as God looks upon us with complacency, as 
long as he has promised to crown us as conquerors in 
heaven, for which, by our spiritual conflicts and victories, 
we shall have come prepared. Oh, it is no mean thing. 
The saint, the righteous man, the pious believer in Jesus, 
isa patriot as well as asaint. The worldling may sneer 
and scorn, but we have a noble revenge, for it is pious 
men that have kept the conflagrating elements away from 
this long doomed world up to the present moment of its 
history; and if the ten righteous had not been in this 
enormous Sodom, long ere now would the firebrand of 
destruction have struck it that it might be consumed in its 
deserved ruin. Thank God, there is hope for the world 


et. 

. When the prophet in depression and in sorrow was 
saying, “I, even I, only am left, the prophet of the Lord,” 
God pointed him to seven thousand that had never bowed 
the knee to Baal; and there are faithful ones in the secret 
places of the world yet, palm-tree Christians growing up 
in unexpected places, amid sandy soil and with no 
companionship, who are flourishing in godly vigor and 
earnest in persevering prayer. There is hope for the 
world yet. Oh, for the increase of these pious men! Be 
you of the number of this unostentatious but valiant host. 

o you pant for fame? You can find it here. Young 
men, there are some of you in the presence of God that 
have ambition high bounding ia your hearts, who feel the 
elasticity of youth within you; who feel that the flight of 
your soaring spirit is not the flight of the flagging or the 
breathless ; that there is something still within you that 
pants for a distinction other than you have yet attained; 
oh come to Christ, enlist yourselves in his service, be 


ma 


210 THE EFFECTS OF PIETY ON A NATION. 


soldiers of the cross, fight moral battles, and yours shall 
be the victory. To you the Church is looking; your 
fathers, worn out with labor, exhausted with the vicissi- 
tudes and the victories of years, are passing rapidly away, 
and they are wondering where their successors are, 
They have gone from us; just when we were expecting 
for them higher fields and wider triumphs, the fiery 
chariot came and they were not, and nothing was left for 
us but to cry as we followed the track of the cavalcade, 
in our hopelessness, almost in our agony, “ My father, 
my father, the chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof.” 
Oh! thank God, they have flung their mantles down, 
and it is for you to catch them, to robe yourselves to-day 
in the garments of the holy departed, and like them, to 
do and die. 


urs shal] 
1B} your 
16 VICI ssi- 
lly away, 
Ors are, 
xpecting 
he fier 

8 left for 
walcade, 
y father 
thereof” 
§ down, 
8 to-day 
hem, to 


s 


( C.®» ee 
Wea” 


XII. 


THE PROPHET OF HOREB—HIS LIFE AND 
ITS LESSONS. 


‘Elijah, the Tishbite, who was of the inhabitants of Gilead,’’—1 
Kinas, xvii. 1, 


a = WHE mountains of the Bible will well repay the 
Ve a| climber. There is a glorious prospect from 
ema) their summits, and moral bracing in the breath- 
ing of their difficult air. 

ost of the events in Bible history, which either 
embody great principles, illustrate Divine perfections, 
or bear impressively upon the destinies of man, have 
had the moments for the pedestals of their achievement 
Beneath the arch of the Covenant-rainbow the lone 
ark rested upon Arrarat; Abraham’s trial, handed 
down the high faith of.the hero-father, and typing the 
greater sacrifice of the future time, must be ‘on one of 
the mountains” in the land of Moriah; Aaron, climb- 
ing heavenward, is ‘“unclothed and clothed upon” 
amid the solitudes of Hor; and where but on the crest 
of Nebo could Moses gaze upon the land and die? If 
there is to be a grand experiment to determine between 
rival faiths—to defeat Baal—to exhalt Jehovah, what 
spot so fitting as the excellency of Carmel? It was due 
to the great and dread events of the Saviour’s history 
that they should be enacted where the world’s broad 
eye could light upon them, hence he is transfigvred 
“on the high mountain apart,”’ on Olivet he prays, on 


sg 
wo 
‘ea , 


212 THE PROPHET OF HOREB, 


Calvary he dies; and, at the close of all,: in the 
splendors of eternal allotment, amid adoring angels 
a and perfected men, we cheerfully “come to Mount 
Zion.” 
heen Precious as is the Scripture in all phases of its 
Dons appearance, the quality which, above ail others, invests 
bias it with a richer value, is its exquisite adaptation to 
every necessity of man. Professing itself to be his 
infallible and constant instructor, it employs all modes 
of communicating wisdom. ‘The Man of our coun- 
sel” is always at hand, in every condition and in 
every peril. But we learn more from living exemplar 
than from preceptive utterance. The truth, which has 
not been realised by some men of like passions with 
ourselves, comes cold and distant like a lunar rainbow. 
It may furnish us with correct notions and a beautiful 
system, just as we can learn proportion from a statue, 
but there needs the touch of life to influence and to 
transform. Hence, not the least impressive and salu- 
tary Bible teaching is by the accurate exhibition ot 
individual character. A man’s life is there sketched 
out to us, not that side of it merely which he presents 
to the world, which the restraints of society have modi- 
fied, which intercourse has subdued into decorousness, 
and which shrouds his meaner self in a conventional 
hypocrisy; but his inner life, his management of the 
trifles, which givethe sum of character, his ordinary 
and household doings, as well as the rarer seasons of 
exigency and of trial. The whole man is before us, and 
we can see him ashe is. Partiality cannot blind us, 
nor prejrdice distort our view. Nothing is exagge- 
rated, nothing is concealed. His defects are there—his 
faltering and depressions--his mistrusts and betrayals 
—like somany beacons glaring their warning lights upon 
our path. His excellencies are there—his stern integ- 
rity and consistent walking, his intrepid wrestling 
and heroic endurance—that we may be followers of his 
patience and faith, and ultimately share his crown. So 


l, in the 
1g angels 
0 Mount 


es of its 
"8, lavests 
tation to 
to be his 
all modes 
yur coun- 
1 and in 
exemplar 
vhich has 
ions with 
rainbow. 
beautiful 
a statue, 
ce and to 
and salu- 
bition ot 
sketched 
presents 
e modi- 
‘ousness, 
ventional 
t of the 
ordinary 
asons of 
P us, and 
lind us, 
exagge- 
sere—his 
etrayals 
its upon 

integ- 
restling 
8 of his 
mn. So 


HIS LIFE AND ITS® LESSONS. 2138 


marked and hallowed is this candor, that we do not 
wonder at its being alleged as an argument for the 
book’s divinity. The characters are all human in their 
experience, although divine in their portrayal. They 
were men those Bible worthies, world renowned, 
God-smitten princely men, towering indeed in meral, 
as Saul in physical, stature above their fellows, 
put still men of like passions with ourselves—to the 
game frailties incident—with the same trials battling— 
by the same temptations frequently and foully over- 
come.. Their perfect humanness is, indeed, their strong- 
est influence and greatest charm. Of what avail to us 
were the biography of an angel, could you chronicle 
his joys in the calm round of heaven? There could be 
no sympathy either of condition or experience. 

But the Bible, assuming the éssential identity of the 
race, tells of man, and the “ one blood” of all nations 
Jeaps up to the thrilling tale. There is the old narra- 
tive of lapse and loss; the tidings, ancient and unde- 
caying, of temptation, conflict, mastery, recompense. 
In ourselves there have been the quiverings of David’s 
sorrow, and the stirrings of David’s sin. We, perhaps, 
like Elijah, have been by turns confessor and coward— 
fervent as Peter and as faithless too. The heart 
answers to the history, and responsive and struggling 
humanity owns the sympathy, and derives the bles- 
sing. 

id is a Strange history, this history of the Prophet 
Elijah. Throughout the whole of his career we are 
attracted aimost more by his inspiration than by him- 
self. We are apt to lose sight of the man in the 
thought of the Divine energy which wielded him at its 
terrible or gentle will. The unconsciousness of self 
which is the distinctive mark of the true seer, is always 

resent with him—in his manliest and in his meekest 
ours—in his solitary prayer in the loft at Zarephath, 
in his solemn sarcasm on the summit of Carmel—when 
he flushes the cheek of a dead child, or pales the brow 


214 THE PROPHET OF HOREB, 


of a living king. He is surrendered always to the in- 
dwelling God. He always seems to regard himself ag 
a chosen and a separated man—lifted, by his vonsecra. 
tion, above the love.or the fear of his kind—forced 
ever and anon, upon difficult and perilous duty— 
a flying roll, carven with mercy and with judgment— 
an echo rather than an original utterance—“ tine 
voice of one,” not “one,” but “ the voice of one cry. 
ing in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the 
Lord ?” 

How abruptly he bursts upon the world. We know 
nothing of his birth, nothing of his parentage, nothing 
of his training. On all these matters the record is pro- 
foundly silent. He is presented to us at once, a full- 
grown and authorative man, starting in the path of 
Ahab sudden as the lightning, energetic and alarming 
as the thunder. ‘Elijah the Tishbite, who was of the 
inhabitants of Gilead.” This is all. And it is all we 
need. What reck we of his ancestry? He is royal in 
his deeds. Obscure in his origin, ‘springing probably 
from the herdsmen or vine-dressers of Galilee, regarded 
by the men of Tishbe as one of themselves—a little 
reserved and unsocial withal—his person, perhaps, held 
in contempt by the licentious court, and his intrusions 
stigmatized as annoying impertinence, he held on 
his highway notwithstanding, performed stupendous 
miracles, received large revelations, and at .last, tired 
ot the world, went up to heaven in a chariot of fire. 
How often have we seen the main fact of this story 
realized in latter times! Men have looked at the trap- 

ings of the messenger—notat the importof his message. 

heir faculty of appreciation has been greviously im- 
paired. A prophvt has leaped into the day with his 
burden of reproof and truth-telling, but he has not been 
clad i silken sheen, nora speaker of smooth things, 
and the world has gone on to its merchandise, while the 
broken-hearted seer has retired into the wilderness to 
die. A poet has warbled out his soul in secret, and 


to the in. 
imself ag 
vonsecra- 
—forced 
s duty— 
lgment— 
ce—* the 
"one ery- 
’ of the 


Ve know 
, nothing 
rd is pro- 
ce, a full- 
e path of 
alarming 
‘as of the 
is all we 
royal in 
probably 
regarded 
-a little 
aps, held 
trusions 
held on 
tpendous 
st, tired 
of fire. 
his story 
he trap- 
essage, 
sly im- 
vith his 
ot been 
things, 
hile the 
rness to 
ret, and 


HIS LIFE AND ITS LESSONS. 915 


discoursed most exquisite music—but, alas! it has been 
played among the tombs. <A glorious iconoclast has 
come forth among the peoples, “expecting that they 
would have understood how that the Lord by him had 
sent deliverance,” but he has been met by the insulting 
rejoinder, “ Who made thee a ruler and a judge?” 
Thus, in the days of her nonage, because they lacked 
high estate and lofty lineage, has the world poured con- 
tempt upon some of the choicest of her sons. “A 
heretic !’’ shouted the furious bigotry of the Inquisition. 
“ And yet it moves,” said Galileo—resolute even in the 
moment of enforced abjuration, for the immutable truth. 
A scoffing to Genoese bravos, grandees of Portugal, 
and the court of England, Columbus spied the log ot 
wood in its eastward drifting, and opened up America 
—the rich El Dorado of many anancient dream. ‘An 
empiric !’’ shouted all the Doctor Sangradoes of the 
time, and the old physiologists hated Harvey with an 
intensely professional hatred, because he affirmed the 
circulation of the blood. ‘A Bedfordshire tinker !” 
sneered the polite ones, with a whiff of the otto of roses 
as if the very mention of his craft was infragrant ; 
‘What has he to do to preach, and write books, and set 
up for a teacher of his fellows?” But glorious John 
Bunyan, leaving them in their own Cabul-country, 
dwelt in the land of Beulah, climbed up straight to the 
presence of the shining ones, and had “all the trumpets 
sounding for him on the other side.” Sidney Smith 
wrote at, and tried to write down “the consecrated 
Cobbler,” who was to evangelize India; but William 
Carey shall live embalmed in memories of converted 
thousands long after the witty canon of St, Paul’s is 
forgotten or is remembered only as a melancholy 
example of genius perverted and a vocation mistaken. 
“ A Methodist !” jested the Godless witlings of Brazen- 
nose; “A Jacobin!’’ reiterated the makers of silver 
shrines; ‘A ringleader in the Gordon Riots !” said the 
Romanists whose errors he had combated; and the 


216 THE PROPHET OF HOREB, 


formalistic churchmanship ot that day gathered up 
its gentilities, smoothed its ruffled fringes; and 
with a dowager’s stateliness, flounced by “‘ on the other 
side ;’”’ and reputable burghers, the “ canny bodies” of 
the time, subsided into their own respectabilities, and 
shook their heads at every mention of the pestilent 
fellow; but, calm-browed and high-souled, John 
Wesley went on until a large portion of his world. 
parish rejoiced in his light, and wondered at its lumin- 
ous and ardent flame. And if it be lawful to speak of 
the Master in the same list as his disciples, who, how- 
ever excellent, fall immeasurably short of their Divine 
Pattern, He was called a Nazarene, and there was the 
scorn of a world couched in the contemptuous word. 

There are symptoms, however, of returning sanity. 
Judicial ermine and archiepiscopal lawn robing the sons 
of tradesmen, and the blood of all the Montmorencies— 
fouled by mesalliance with crime—cooling itself in a 
common prison, are remarkable signs of the times. 
Men are beginning to feel conscious, not, perhaps, that 
they have committed a crime, but that they have been 
guilty of what in the diplomacy of Talleyrand was con- 
sidered worse—that is a blunder. Whether the chivalry 
of feudalism be extinct or not, there can be no question 
that the villenage of feudalism is gone. Common men 
nowadays question the wisdom of nobilities, correct 
the errors of cabinets, and do not even listen obse- 
quiously to catch the whispers of kings. That is a 
strong and growing world-feeling which the poet em- 
bodies when he siugs: 


‘¢ Believe us ! noble Vere de Veres, 
From yon blue heavens above us bent, 

Phe grea old gardener and his wife 
Smile at the claims of long descent. 


However it be, it seems to me 
Tis only noble to be good— 
Kind hearts are more thancoronets, 
And simple faith than Norman blood,” 


hon 


opp 
be | 


Wh 
vid 

whe 
his ¥ 
of h 
and 

conf 
nobl 
the e 


his ne 
plum 
succo 
white 
powe 
tion 1 
moul 
come: 
fossil: 
{3 Has 
earne 
Has | 
he th 
boldn 
escuti 
giant 
apost 
ennol 
essay 
my si 
large 


1ered up 
eS; and 
che other 
odies”’ of 
ties, and 
pestilent 
1, John 
8 world. 
‘3 lumin. 
speak of 
ho, how- 
ir Divine 
» was the 
; word. 
g sanity. 
the sons 
‘encies— 
elf in a 
e times, 
aps, that 
ave been 
as con- 
chivalry 
question 
on men 
correct 
en obse- 
hat is a 
poet em- 


HIS LIFE AND ITS LESSONS. 217 


Not that rank has lost its prestige, nor royalty its 
honor, Elevated station is a high trust, and furnishes 
opportunity for extensive usefulness. The coronet may 
be honored or despised at the pleasure of the wearer. 
When the rank is larger than the man, when his indi- 
viduality is shrouded behind a hundred coats-of-arms, 
when he has so much of the blood of his ancestors in 
his veins that there is no room for any generous pulses 
of his own, why, of course, he must find his own level, 
and be content to be admired, like any other piece of 
confectionery, by occasional passers-by ; but when the 
noble remembers his humanity, and has sympathy for 
the erring and encouragement for the sincere— 


‘* When, all the trappings freely swept away 
The man’s great nature leaps into the day,” 


his nobility men are not slow to acknowledge—the cap and 
plume bend very gracefully over the sorrow which they 
succor, and the jewelled hand is blanched into a heavenlier 
whiteness when it beckons a struggling people into the 
power and progress of the coming time. The great ques- 
tion which must be asked of any new aspirer who would 
mould the world’s actiyities to his will, is not, Whence 
comes he ? but, What is\he ? There may be some semi- 
fossilized relics of the past who will continue to insinuate, 
“Has he a grandfather ?”?' But the great world of the 
earnest and of the workers thunders out, “ Has he a soul ? 
Has hea lofty purpose, a single eye, a heart of power? Has 
he the prophet’s sanctity and inspiration. as well as his 
boldness and fervor ? Never mind the bar sinister on his 
escutcheon—has he no bar sinister in his life? Has hea 
giant’s strength, a hero’s courage, a child’s simplicity, an 
apostle’s love, a martyr’s will? ‘Then is he sufficiently 
ennobled.” If I, a Gospel charioteer, meet him as he 
essays, trembling, to drive into the world, what must be 
my salutation? Artthou of noble blood? Is thy retinue 
large ? thy banner richly emblazoned? thy speech plausi- 

G2 


218 THE PROPHET OF HOREB, 


ble ? thy purpose fair? No—but “Is thy heart right » 
If it be, give me thy hand. 

A prominent feature in the Prophet's character, one 
which cannot fail to impress us at every mention of his 
name, is his singular devotion to the object of his great mis. 
sion. He was sent upon the earth to be the earth’smonitoy 
of God. This was his life-purpose, and faithfully he fyJ. 
filled it. Rising above the temptations of sense—ready at 
the bidding of his Master to crucify natural affection— 
sternly repressing the sensibility which might interfere 
with duty ; trampling upon worldly interest, and regard- 
less of personal aggrandizement or safety, he held on his 
course, unswerving and untired, to the end. God was his 
object in everything, to glorify God, his aim ; to vindicate 
God, his miracles; to speak for God, his message; to 
exhibit God, his life. As the rod of Moses swallowed up 
the symbols of Egyptian wizardry, so did this consuming 
passion in Elijah absorb each meaner impulse, and each 
low desire. His decision rarely failed him, his consistency 
never. He “halted not between two opinions.” He 
spurned alike the adulation of a monarch and of a mob, 
He neither pandered for the favor of a court, nor made 
unworthy compromise with the:dolators of Baal. Heaven’s 
high remembrancer, he did a true man’s work in a true 
man’s way, with one purpose and a “ united” heart. 

Although many parts of this character cannot, on 
account of his peculiar vocation, be presented for our 
imitation, in his unity of purpose and of effort he fur- 
nishes us with a noble example. This oneness of principle 
—freedom from tortuous policy—the direction of the ener- 
gies to the attainment of one worthy end—appears to be 
What is meant in Scripture by the “single eye,” dzods— 
not complex—no obliquity in the vision—looking straight 
on—taking in one object at one time. And if we look 
into the lives of the men who have vindicated their right 
to be held in the world’s memory, we shall find that all 
their actions involve from one comprehensive principle, 
and converge to one magnificent achievement, Consider 


the 
eat, 
od 1 
bring 
mind, 
tive # 
ing ™ 
lishme 
of cou 
agenc 
of the 
deavo} 
benefe 
purpos 
subord 
and 8 
has inf 
within 
poses, 
of silve 
great 1 
the sm: 
ing-Hoc 
the oth 
same | 
endeav 
benefic 
harmo 
conten 
whole | 
edition 
formed 
to the ; 
comple 
be a he 
in the. 
ing Pc 
in the 


t, right ”” 


acter, one 
on of his 
great mis- 
*smonitor 
vy he fii]. 
—ready at 
ffection— 
- interfere 
id regard- 
ald on his 
1 was his 
vindicate 
essage ; to 
lowed up 
onsuming 
and each 
nsistency 
ons.” He 
of a mob, 
mor made 
Heaven’s 
n a true 
rt. 
mnnot, on 
1 for our 
he fur- 
principle 
the ener- 
ars to be 
éniovs— 
r straight 
we look 
eir right 
that all 
principle, 
Consider 


HIS LIFE AND ITS LESSONS. 219 


the primitive apostles. There you have twelve men, 
greatly diverse in character, cherishing each his own taste 
and mode of working, laboring in different localities, and 
bringing the one Gospel to bear upon different classes of 
fant and yet everywhere—in proud Jerusalem, inquisi- 
tive Ephesus, cultured Athens, voluptuous Rome—meet- 
ing efter many years in that mightiest result, the estab- 
lishment of the kingdom of Christ. Much of this issue is 
of course due to the Gospel itself, or rather to the Divine 
agency which applied it, but something also to the unity 
of the messengers, their sincere purpose, and sustained en- 
deavor. And so it is in the case of all who have been the 
benefactors of mankind. They have had some master- 
purpose, which has molded all others into a beautiful 
subordination, which they have maintained amia hazard 
and suffering, and which, shrined sacredly in the heart, 
has influenced and fashioned the life. If a man allow 
within him the play of different or contradictory pur- 
poses, he may, in a lifetime, pile up a head of gold,abreast 
of silver, thighs of brass, and feet of «‘ay, but it is but a 
great image after all. It crumbles at the first touch of 
the smiting stone, and, like the chaff of the summer thresh- 
ing-floor, its fragments are helpless on the wind. If, on 
the other hand, a man’s doings grow out of one and the 
same spirit, and that spirit be consecrated to holy 
endeavor, they will interpenetrate and combine into 
beneficient achievement, and stand out a life-giving and 
harmonious whole. This oneness of design for which we 
contend, is distinctive of the highest developments of the 
whole family of genius, A book may run through many 
editions, and fascinate many reviewers. but it must be in- 


s formed by one spirit, new correspondences must be revealed 


to the esthetic eye, and it must appear “in the serene 


| completeness of artistic unity,” ere it can settle down to 


be a household word in the family, or a hidden treasure 


; inthe heart. In whatever department “the beauty-mak- 


ing Power” has wrought—in the bodiless thought, or 
in the breathing marble; in the chef-doeuvres of the 


220 THE PROPHET OF HOREB, 


artist, or in the conceptions of the architect; whether 
Praxiteles chisels, Raffaelle paints, Shakspeare deline. 
ates, or Milton sings—there is the same singleness of 
the animating spirit. Hamlet, Paradise lost, and Fes. 
tus: the Greek Slave, and the Madonna ; the Coliseum 
and Westminster Abbey ; are they not, each in its kind 
creations to which nothing can be added with advantage, 
and from which, without damage, nothing can be taken 
away ? 

hae of that other Book—our highest literature, as well 
as our unerring law—the glorious, world-subduing Bible, 
do we not feel the same? In its case the experiment has 
been tried. The Apocryphal has been bound up with the 
Inspired, like “ wood, hay, and stubble,” loading the rich 
fret-work of a stately pile, or the clumsy work of an 
apprentice superadded to the finish of a master. Doubt- 
less instruction may be gathered from it, but how it 
“ales its ineffectual fires” before the splendor of the 
Word! It is unfortunate for it that they have been 
brought into contact. We might be grateful for the gas- 
lainp at eventide, but it were grievous folly to light it 
up at noon. As in science, literature, art, so it is in 
character. We can wrap up in a word the object of 
“the world’s foster gods ;” to bear witness for Jehovah— 
to extend Christianity—to disinter the truth for Europe— 
to “spread Scriptural holiness’—to humanize prison 
discipline—to abolish slavery—these are soon told; but 
if you unfold each word, you have the life-labor of Elijah, 
Paul, Luther, Wesley, Howard, Wilberforce—the inner 
man of each heart laid open, with its hopes, joys, fears, 
anxieties, ventures, faiths, conflicts, triumphs, in the long 
round of weary and of wasting years. 

Look at this oneness of principle embodied in action. 
See it in Martin Luther. He has a purpose, that miner's 
son. That purpose is the acquisition of knowledge. Ile 
exhausts speedily the resources of Mansfield ; reads hard, 
and devours the lec:ures at Madgeburg; chants in the 
hours of recreation, like the old Minnesingers, in streets, 


for bi 
Hise 
eight 
his ad 
neces 
Schold 
truth, 
Follo 
has fle 
lip an 
parts 
monas 
watch 
friar, 
he hac 
lion— 
to the 
no lig 
eyes 
leaves 
his ce 
Bolog 
upon 
Gospe 
glad E 
alysi, 
the L 
That 
modes 
with t 
do bat 
solve, 
“hold 
and a 
erand 
Seckit 
mail, 
weap 
he sta 


t; whether 
ire deline- 
ngleness of 
and Fes- 
e Coliseum 
1 its kind, 
udvantage, 
| be taken 


ire, as well 
ling Bible, 
riment has 
Pp with the 
ng the rich 
rovk of an 
* Doubt- 
ut how it 
dor of the 
1ave been 
or the gas- 
o light it 
80 it is in 
> object of 
ehovah— 
t Kurope— 
ize prison 
told ; but 
r of Elijah, 
the inner 
oys, fears, 
in the long 


in action, 
Lat maner’s 
dge. He 
eads hard, 
nts in the 
in streets, 


HIS LIFE AND I'S LESSONS. 221 
for bread; sits at the feet of Trebonius in the college # 
Eisenach; enters as a student at Erfurt, and at the age of 
eighteen, has outstripped his fellows, has a University for 
his admirer, and professors predicting for him the most 
uecessful career of the age. LHe has a purpose, that 
Scholar of Erfurt. That purpose is the discovery of 
truth, for in the old library he has stumbled on a Bible. 
Follow him out into the new world which that volume 
has flashed upon his soul. With Pilate’s question on his 
lip and in his heart, he foregoes his brilliant prospect— 
parts without a sigh with academical distinction—takes 
monastic vows in an Augustine convent—becomes the 
watchman and sweeper of the place—goes a mendicant 
friar, with the convent’s begging-bag, to the houses where 
he had been welcomed as a friend, or had starred it as a 
lion—wastes himself with voluntary penances well-nigh 
to the grave—studies the Fathers intensely, but can get 
no light—pores over the Book itself, with scales upon his 
eyes—catches a dim streak of auroral brightne:s, but 
leaves Erfurt before the glorious dawn-—-until at last, in 
his cell at Wittemberg, on his bed of languishing at 
Bologna, and finally at Rome—Pilate’s question answered 


| upon Pilate’s stairs—there comes the thrice-repeated 


Gospel-whisper, “ The just shall live by faith,” and the 
glad Evangel scatters the darkening and shreds off the par- 
alysis, and he rises into moral freedom, a new man unto 
the Lord! He has a purpose, that Augustine monk. 
That purpose is the Reformation! Waiting with the 


| modesty of the hero, until he is forced into the strife, 


with the courage of the hero he steps into the breach to 
do battle for the living truth. Tardy in forming his re- 
solve, he is brave in his adhesion to it. Not like Erasmus, 
“holding the truth in unrighteousness,” with a clear head 
and a craven heart—not like Carlstadt, hanging upon a 
grand principle the tatters of a petty vanity—not like 
Seckingen, a wielder of carnal weapons, clad in growing 
mail, instead of the armour of righteousness and the 
weapon of all prayer,—but bold, disinterested, spiritual— 


he stands before rs Gud-prepared and God-upheld—that 


222 THE PROPHET OF HOREB, 


wiiant Luther, who, in his opening prime, amazed the 
Cardinal de Vio by his fearless avowal, “ Had I five heads 
I would lose them all rather than retract the testimony 
which I have borne for Christ”—that incorruptible Luther, 
whom the Pope’s nuncio tried in vain to bribe, and cf 
whom he wrote in his spleen: ‘This German beast has 
no regard for gold ”—that inflexible Luther, who, when 
told that the fate of John Huss would probably await 
him at Worms, said calmly, “ Were they to make a fire 
that would extend from Worms to Wittemberg, and 
reach even to the sky, I would walk across it in the name 
of the Lord ”—that triumphant Luther, who, in his hon. 
ored age, sat in the cool shadow and ’mid the purple 
vintage of the tree hiniself had planted, and after a 
stormful sojourn, scaped the toils of the hunters, and died 
peacefully in his bed—that undying Luther, “ who, being 
dead, yet speaketh,” the mention of whose name rouses 
the ardor of the manly, and quickens the pulses of the 
free; whose spirit yet stirs, like a clarion, the great heart 
of Christendom ; and whose very bones have so marvel- 
lous a virtue, that, like the bones of Elisha if on them 
were stretchid the corpse of an effete Protestantism, they 
would surely wake it into life to the honor and glory of 
God! 

But we must not forget,.as we are in some danger of 
doing, that we must draw our illustrations ma‘nly from 
the life of Elijah. We have before affirmed that unity 
of purpose and consistency of effort were leading 
features in his character, but look at them in action, 
especially as displayed in the great scene of Carmel. 
Call up that scene before you, with all its adjuncts of 
grandeur and of power. The summit of the fertile 
hill, meet theatre for so glorious a tragedy; the idola- 
trous priests, with alk the pompous ensigns of their idol- 
worship, confronted by that solitary but princely man— 
the gathered and anxious multitude—the deep silence 
tollowing on the prophet’s question—the appeal to fire 
—the protracted invocation of Baal—the useless incan- 


tatio 
noon, 
the ¢ 
the | 
drenc 
gtran¢ 
ing a 
the st 
the p 
atten 
of h 
dept 
and 
testi 
the p 
mou 
grand 
entire 
and o 
puttir 
temp! 
look 
How 
by a 
Pries 
omins 
unmo 
rine 
a nfal 
the ¢ 
“at ¢ 
not | 
gin. 
Ahal 
share 
rese 
+ be 
tune 
ever’ 


azed the 
ive heads 
estimony 
e Luther, 
e, and of 
beast has 
ho, when 
ly await 
ke a fire 
erg, and 
the name 
his hon. 
16 purple 
d her a 
, and died 
ho, being 
ne rouses 
es of the 
eat heart 
») Marvel- 
on them 
ism, they 
glory of 


Hanger of 
nly from 
at unity 

leading 

action, 
Carmel. 
uncts of 
e fertile 
he idola- 
eir idol- 

man— 
D silence 
1 to fire 
is incan- 


223 


HIS LIFE AND ITS LESSONS, 


tations and barbaric rites, “from morning even until 

noon, and from noon until the time of the offering of 
the evening sacrifice; the solemn sarcasm of Elijah; 

the building of the altar of unfurnished stone — the 
drenching and surrounding it with water, strangest of all 

strange preparations for a burnt-sacrifice—the sky redden- 

ing as if it blushed at the folly of the ag of Baal— 

the sun sloping slowly to the west, and falling aslant upon 
the pale faces of that unweary multitude, rapt in fixed 
attention, patient, stern, unhungering—the high accents 
of holy prayer—the solemn pause, agonizing from its 
depth of feeling—the falling flame, “ a fire of intelligence 
and power”—the consuming of all the materials of the 
testimony—and that mighty triumph-shout, rolling along 
the plain of Sharon, waking the echoes of the responsive 
mountains, and thrilling over the sea with an eloquence 
grander than its own; there it stands—that scene in its 
entireness—most wonderful even in a history of wonders, 
and one of the most magnificent and conclusive forth- 
puttings of Jehovah’s power! But abstract your con- 
templations now from the miraculous interposition, and 
iook at the chief actor in the scene. How calm hv is! 
How still amid that swaying multitude! They, agitated 
by a thousand emotions—he, self-reliant, patient, brave ! 
Priests mad with malice—people wild in wonder—an 
ominous frown darkening the royal brow—Elijah alone 
unmoved! Whence this self-possession? What occult 
principle so mightily sustains him? There was, of course, 
unfaltering dependence upon God. But there was also 
the consciousness of integrity of purpose, and of a heart 
“at one.” There was no recreancy in the soul. He had 
not been the passive observer, nor the guilty conniver at 
sin. He had not trodden softly, lest he should shock 
Ahab’s prejudices or disturb his repose. He had not 
shared in the carnivals of Jezebel’s table. He had not 
preserved a dastardly neutrality. Every one knew hin 
to be “on the Lord’s side:” His heart was always in 
tune; like Memnon’s harp, it trembled into melody at 
every breath of heaven. | 


224 THE PROPHET OF HOREB, 


With these examples before us, it behooves us to ask 
ourselves, /Zave we @ purpose? Elijah and Luther ma 
be marks too high for us. Do not let us affect knight. 
errantry, couch the lance at wind-mills to prove our valor, 
or mistake sauciness for sanctity, and impudence for 
inspiration. It is not probable that our mission is to 
beard unfaithful royalties, or to pull down the edifices 
which are festooned with the associations of centuries, 
But in the sphere of each of us—in the marts of com. 
merce, in the looms of labor—while the sun is climbing 
hotly up the sky, and the race of human pursuits and 
competitions is going vigorously on, there is work enough 
for the sincere and honest workman. The sphere for 

ersonal improvement was never so large. To brace the 

ody for service or for suffering—to bring it into subjec- 
tion to the control of the master-faculty—to acquaint the 
mind with all wisdom—to hoard, with miser’s care, every 
fragment of beneficial knowledge—to twine the beautitul 
around the true, as the acanthus leaf around the 
Corinthian pillar—to quell the sinward propensities of 
the nature—to evolve the soul into the completeness of its 
moral manhood—to have the passions in harness, and 
tirmly curb them—* to bear the image of the heavenly” — 
to strive after “that mind which was also in Christ 
Jesus”—here is a field of labor wide enough for the most 
resolute will. The sphere of benefice t activity was 
never so large. To infuse the leaven of purity into the 
disordered masses—to thaw the death-frost from the heart 
of the misanthrope—to make the treacherous one faithful 
to duty—to open the world’s dim eye to the majesty of 
conscience—to gather and instruct the orphans bereft of 
a father’s blessing and of a mother’s prayer—to care for 
the outcast and abandoned, who have drunk in iniquity 
with their mother’s milk, whom the priest and the Levite 
have alike passed by, and who have been forced in the 
hotbed of povert;' into premature luxuriance of evil; 
here is labor, which may employ a man’s whole lifetime, 
and his whole soul. Nome men, are you working? 


Have 
recio 
ing 1n 
somal 
social ¢ 
doing ¢ 
a faith 
to wor 
and 
problet 
yanting 
in the 
emasct 
armed 
vou a 
Let us 
comma 
ness a 
puerile 
us look 
the ch 
otherw 
is gene 
eternit 
purpos 
in disc 
clamol 
Ulysse 
let the 
rity, § 
shall : 
retain 
born, 
highw 
at this 
tions, 
And t 
pose— 


3 to ask 
her ma 
t knight. 
ur valor 
ence for 
mn is to 
edifices 
onturies, 
of com- 
limbing 
hits and 
enough 
here for 
ace the 
subjec- 
aint the 
e, every 
eautitul 
nd the 
ities of 
ss of its 
$8, and 
nly” — 
Christ 
le most 
Ly was 
ito the 
2 heart 
aithful 
sty of 
reft of 
re for 
iquit 
Levit 
in the 
"evil ; 
etime, 


king ? 


HIS LIFE AND ITS LESSONS, 225 


Have you gone forth into the harvesi-field bearing 
recious seed? Alas! perhaps some of you are yet rest- 
ing in the conventional, that painted charnel which has 
tombed many a manhood; grasping eagerly your own 
social advantages; gyved bya Mabanveeh expediency ; not 
doing a good lest it should be evil spoken of, nor daring 
a faith lest the scoffer should frown. With two worlds 
to work in—the world of the heart, with its many-phased 
and wondrous life, and the world around, with its 
problems waiting for solution, and its contradictions 
yanting for the harmonizer—you are, perhaps, enchained 
in the island of Calypso, thralled by its blandishments, 
emasculated by its enervating air. O, for some strong- 
armed Mentor to thrust you over the cliff, and strain with 
you among the buffeting waves! Brothers, let us be men. 
Let us bravely fling off our chains. If we can not be 
commanding, let us at least be sincere. Let our earnest- 
ness amend our incapacity. Let ours not be a life of 
puerile inanities or obsequious Mammon-worship. Let 
us look through the pliant neutral in his hollowness, and 
the churlish miser in his greed, and let us go and do 
otherwise than they. Let us not be ingrates while Heaven 
is generous, idlers while earth is active, slumberers while 
eternity is near. Let us have a purpose, and let that 
urpose be one. Without a central principle all will be 
In deoricr. Ithaca is misgoverned, Penelope beset by 
clamorous suitors, Telemachus in peril, all because 
Ulysses is away. Let the Ulysses of the soul return, 
let the governing principle exert its legitimate autho- 
rity, and the happy suitors of appetite and sense 
shall be slain—the heart, married to the truth, shall 
retain its fidelity to its bridal vow, and the eldest- 
born, a purpose of valor and of wisdom, shall carve its 
highway to renown, and achieve its deeds of glory. Aim 
at this singleness of eye. Abhor a life of self-cortradic- 
tions, as a grievous wrong done to an immortal nature. 
And thus, having a purpose—one enoiers worthy pur-. 
pose—you cannot toil in vain, Work jn the inner—it 


226 THE PROPHET OF HOREB, 


will tell upon the outer world. Purify your own hear; 
—you will have a reformative power on the neighbor. 
hood. Shrine the truth within—it will attract man 

pilgrims. Kindle the vestal fire—it will ray out a life. 
giving light. Have the mastery over your own spirit— 
you will go far to be a world-subduer. Oh, if there be 
one here who would uplift himself or advance his fellows, 
who would do his brother ‘a good which shall live after 
him,” or enroll himself among the benetactors of man. 
kind, to him we say, Cast out of thyself all that loveth 
and maketh a lie—hate every false way—set a worth: 
object before thee—work at it with both hands, an open 
heart, an earnest will, and a firm faith, and then go on— 


‘* Onward while a wrong remains 
To be conquered by the right ; 
While oppression lifts a finger 
To affront us by his might : 
While an error clouds the reason, 
Or a sorrow knaws the heart, 
Or a slave awaits his freedom, 
Action is the wise man’s part !” 


The Prophet’s consistency of purpose, his calmness in 
the time of danger, and his marvellous success, require, 
however, some further explanation, and that explanation 
is to be found in the fact that he was a man of prayer. 
Prayer was the forerunner of his every action—the grace 
of supplication prepared him for his mightiest deeds. 
Whatever was his object—to seal or to open the fountains 
of heaven—to evoke the obedient fire on Carmel—to 
shed joy over the bereft household of the Sareptan 
widow—to bring down “forks of flame” upon the 
captains and their fifties—there was always the solemn 
and the earnest prayer. Tishbe, Zarephath, Carmel, 
Jezreel, Gilgal—he had his oratory in them all. And 
herein lay the secret of his strength. The mountuain- 
closet emboldened him for the mountain-altar. While 
the winged birds were providing for his body, the winged 
prayers were strengthening his soul. In answer to his 


entrée 
servi 
gird] 
from 
in J 
linge 

( 


ence 
ray4 
f th 
only 

had 
then 
livin 
dene 
law, 
beyo 
eter 
worl 
impé 
retri 
be fe 
thro’ 
This 
orda 
bles: 
bind 
Y 
relis 
of ¢ 
cou 
you 
lati: 
er 
ove 
mas 
lab 
@x¢c 


bwn. hea; 
neighbor. 
act man 

out a life. 


& worth, 
, AN open 
n go on— 


mness in 
require, 
planation 
* prayer, 
the grace 
st deeds, 
fountains 
rmel—to 
Sareptan 
pon the 
2 solemn 
Carmel, 
1, And 
ountain- 

While 
) winged 
r to his 


HIS LIFE AND ITS LESSONS. 997 


entreaties in secret, the whole armor of God was at his 
service, and he buckled the breastplate, and braced the 
girdle, and strapped on the sandals and stepped forth 
from his closet a hero, and men knew that he had been 
in Jehovah’s presence-chamber from the glory which 
lingered on his brow. 

Now, as man is to be contemplated, not only in refer- 
ence to time, but in reference to eternity, this habit of 

rayer is necessary to the completeness of his character. 

f the present were his all—if his life were to shape itself 
only amid surrounding complexities of good or evil—if he 
had merely to impress his individuality upon his age, and 
then die and be forgotten, or in the veiled future have no 
living and conscious concern; then, indeed, self-confi- 
dence might be his highest virtue, self-will his absolute 
law, self-aggrandizement his supremest end. But as, 
beyond the present, there lies, in all its solemness, 
eternity; as the world to which we are all hastening is a 
world of result, discovery, fruition, recompense; as an 
impartial register chronicles our lives, that a righteous 
retribution may follow, our dependence upon God must 
be felt and recognized, and there must be some medium 
through which to receive the communications of his will. 
This medium is furnished to us in prayer. I! has been 
ordained by himself as a condition of strength and 
blessing, and all who are under his authority are under 
binding obligations to pray. 

Young men, you have been exhorted to aspire. Self- 
reliance has been commended to you as a grand element 
of character. We would echo these counsels. They are 
counsels of wisdom. But to be sate and to be perfect, 
you must connect with them the spirit of prayer. Emu- 
lation, unchastened by any higher principle, is to our 

erverted nature very often a danger and anevil. The 
ove of distinction, not of truth and right, becomes the 
master-passion of the soul, and instead of high-reaching 
labor after good, there comes Vanity with its parodies of 
excellence, or mad Ambition shrinking from no enormity 


228 THE PROPHET OF HOREB, 


in its cupidity or lust of power. Self-reliance, in a heart 
unsanctified, often gives place to Self-confidence, its base- 
born brother. Under its unfriendly rule there rise wp in 
the soul over-weening estimate of self, inveteracy of evil 
habit, impatience of restraint or control, the disposition 
to lord it over others, and that dogged and repulsive 
obstinacy, which, like the dead fly in the ointment, 
throws an ill savor over the entire character of the man, 
These are smaller manifestations, buf, in congenial soil, 
ana with commensurate opportunities, it blossoms out 
into some of the worst forms of humanity—the ruffian, 
who is the terror of his neighborhood; the tyrant, who 
has an appetite for blood; the atheist, who denies his God. 
Now, the habit of prayer will afford to these principles 
the salutary check which they need. It will sanctify 
emulation, and make it a virtue to aspire. It will curb 
the excesses of ambition, and keep down the vauntings of 
unholy pride. The man will aim at the highest, but in 
the spirit of the lowest, and prompted by the thought of 
immortality—not the loose immortality of the poe.’s 
dream, but the substantial immortality of the Christian’s 
hope—he will travel on to his reward. In like manner 
will the habit of prayer chasten and consecrate the 
principle of self-reliance. It will preserve, intact, all its 
enterprise and bravery. It will bate not a jot of its 
original strength and freedom, but, when it would wanton 
out into insolence and pride, it will restrain it by the 
consciousness of a higher power; it will shed over the 
man the meekness and gentleness of Christ, and it will 
show, existing in the same nature and in completest 
harmony, indomitable courage in the arena of the world, 
and loyal submission to the authority of Heaven. Many 
noble examples have attested how this inner life’ of 
heaven—combining the heroic and the gentle, softening 
without enfeebling the character, preparing either for 
action or endurance—has shed its power over the outer 
life of earth. How commanding is the attitude of Paul 
from the time of his zonversion to the truth! What 


1 a heart 
its base. 
ise up in 
y of evil 
position 
epulsive 
intent, 
he man, 
Hal soil, 
oms out 
ruffian, 
nt, who 
his God. 
inciples 
sanctity 
rill curb 
tings of 
_ but in 
ught of 
 P0Ei’s 
ristian’s 
manner 
ate the 
, all its 
of its 
wanton 


HIS LIFE AND ITS LESSONS. 229 


courage he has, encountering the Epicurean and Stoical 
hilosophers, revealing the unknown God to the multi- 
tude at Athens, making the false-hearted Felix tremble, 
and almost constraining the pliable Agrippa to decision ; 
standing, silver-haired and solitary, before the bar of 
Nero; dying amartyr for the loved name of Jesus !— 
that heroism was born in the solitude where he im- 
portunately “besought the Lord.” ‘In Luther’s closet,” 
says D’Aubigné, “ we have the secret of the Reforma- 
tion.” The Puritans—those ‘men of whom the world 
was not worthy”—to whom we owe immense, but scantily- 
acknowledged, obligations—how kept they their fidelity ? 
Tracked through wood and wild, the baying of the fierce 
sleuth-hound breaking often upon their sequestered 
worship, their prayer was the talisman which “ stopped 
the mouths of lions, and quenched the violence of fire.’’ 
You cannot have forgotten how exquisitely the efficacy 
of prayer is presented in our second book of Proverbs : 


‘¢ Behold that fragile form of delicate, transparent beauty, 

bi A hae pet eye and hectic cheek are lit by the bale-fires of 
eciine ; 

Hath not thy heart said of her, Alas! poor child of weakness ! 

Thou hast erred ; Goliath of Gath stood not in half her strength : 

For the serried ranks of evil are routed by the lightning of her eye ; 

Seraphim rall, xt her side, and the Captain of that host is God, 

For that weak, .luttering heart is strong in faith assured— 

Dependence is her might, and behold—she prayeth,’’* 

Desolate, indeed, is the spirit, like the hills of Gilboa, 
reft of the precious things of heaven, if it never prays. 
Do you pray ? Is the fire burning upon that secret alt ar ? 
Do you go to the closet as a duty? linger in it as a 
privilege? What is that you say? There is a scoffer in 
the same place of business with you, and he tells you it 
is cowardly ta bow the knee, and he jeers about being 
kept in leading-strings, and urges you to avow your 
manliness, and as he is your room-mate, you have been 
ashamed to pray befure him; and, moreover, he seems 


so cheerful, and resolute, and brave, that his words have 


* Tupper’s ‘* Proverbial Philosophy,” of Prayer, p. 109. 


230 THE PROPHET OF HOREB, 


made some impression? What! he brave? He who 
gave up the journey the other day because he lucklessly 
discovered it was Friday ; he who lost his self-possession 
at the party because “the salt was spilt—to him it fell ;” 
he who, whenever friends solicit and the tempter plies, 
is afraid to say no; he who dares not for his life look 
into his own heart, for he fancies it a haunted house, 
with goblins perched on every landing to pale the cheek 
and Weal the courage; ho is a brave man? Oh! to 
your knees, young man ; to your knees, that the cowardice 
may be forgiven and forgotten. There is no bravery in 
blasphemy, there is no dastardliness in godly fear. It is 
prayer which strengthens the weak, and makes the stron 

man stronger. Happy are you, if it is your habit an 

your privilege. ou can offer it anywhere. In the 
crowded mart or busy street ; flying along the gleaming 
line; sailing upon the wide waters; out in the broad 
world; in the strife of sentiment and passion; in the 
whirlwind of battle; at the festival and at the funeral ; 
if the frost braces the spirit or the fog depresses it ; if the 
clouds are heavy on the earth, or the sunshine fills it 
with laughter ; when the dew is damp upon the grass, or 
when the lightning: flashes in the sky; in the matins of 
sunrise or the vespers of nightfall; let but the occasion 
demand it, let the need be felt, let the soul be imper- 
illed, let the enemy threaten, happy are you, for you can 


ray. 
. We learn from the prophet’s history that God’s dis- 
cipline for usefulness is frequently a discipline of trouble. 
His enforced banishment to the brook Cherith; his 
struggles in that solitude, with the unbelief which would 
fear for the daily sustenance, and with the selfishness 
which would fret and pine for the activities of life ; Ahab’s 
bloodthirsty and eager search for him, of which he would 
not fail to hear; Jezebel’s subsequent and bitterer per- 
secution; the apparent failure of his endeavors for the 
reformation of Israel; the forty days’ fasting in the 
wilderness of Horeb—all these were parts of one grand 


disci 
Lord 
on tl 
char 
vide 


weav 
all th 
are § 
and 
used, 
sinew 
pride 
string 
aine 
owet 
broke 
beim 
In sh 
dross 
mute 
would 
of tr 
of Gi 
knew 
Hebr 
serfs 
their 
own | 
out ° 
Wed 
and | 
bonds 
the I 
the P 
bein 
fed hi 
and 1 


They 


He who 
ucklessly 
ossession 
1 it fell “ 
ter plies, 
life look 
d house, 
1e cheek 
Oh! to 
owardice 
avery in 
ir. It ig 
le stron 
abit an 
In the 
‘leaming 
ie broad 
- in the 
funeral ; 
; if the 
> fills it 
TASS, OF 
Latins of 
Decasion 
imper- 
you can 


a’s dis- 
trouble. 
h3; his 
h would 
fishness 
Ahab’s 
b would 
er per- 
‘or ‘iis 
in the 
grand 


HIS LIFE AND ITS LESSONS. 


disciplinary process, by which he was made ready for the 
Lord, fitted for the triumph on Carmel, for the still voice 
on the mountain, and for the ultimate occupancy of the 
chariot of fire. It is a beneficent arrangement of Pro- 
vidence, that “the divinity which shapes our ends” 
weaves our sorrows into elements of character, and that 
all the disappointments and conflicts to which the livin 

are subject—the afflictions, physical and mental, persons 
and relative, which are the common lot—may, rightly 


used, become means of improvement, and create In us - 


sinews of strength. Trouble is a marvellous mortifier of 
pride, and an effectual restrainer of self-will. Difficulties 
string up the energies to loftier effort, and intensity is 
ained from repression. By sorrow the tempter is mel- 
owed, and the feeling is refined. When euffering has 
broken up the soil, and made the furrows soft, there can 
beimplanted the hardy virtues which out-brave the storm. 
In short, trial is God’s glorious alchemistry, by which the 
dross is left in the crucible, the baser metals are trans- 
muted; and the character is riched with the gold. It 
would be easy to multiply examples of the singular efficacy 
of trouble as a course of discipline. Look at the histo 
of God’s chosen people. <A king arose in Egypt “ whic 
knew not Joseph,” and his harsh tyranny drove the 
Hebrews irom their land of Goshen, and made them the 
serfs of an oppressive bondage. The iron entered into 
theirsouls. For years they remained in slavery, until in his 
own good time God arose to their help, and brought them 
out “with a high hand and with a stretched-out arm.” 
We do not mean of all things, tomake apologies for Pharoah 
and his task-masters, but we do mean to say that that 
bondage was, in many of its results, a blessing, and that 
the Israelite, building the treasure-cities, and, peruaps, 
the Pyramids, was a very different and a very superior 
being to the Israelite, inexperienced and ease-loving who 
fed his flocks in Goshen. God overruled that captivity, 
and made it the teacher of many important lessons. 
They had beerr hitherto a host of families; they were to 


¢ 


™~< 


‘an 

ie 

Wie 4 
Ray, M4 

ig. 


232 THE PROPHET OF HOREB, 


be exalted into a nation. There was to be a transition 
effected from the simplicity of the patriarchal government 
and clanship to the superb theocracy of the Levitical 
economy. Egypt was the school in which they were to 
be trained. for Canaan, and in Egypt they were taught, 
although reluctant and indocile learners, the forms of ciyi] 
government, the theory of subordination and order and 
the arts and habits of civilized life. Hence, when God 
gave his laws on Sinai, those laws fell upon the ears of a 
prepared people; even in the desert they could fabricate 
the trappings of a temple service, and engrave the mystic 
characters upon the “ gems oracular” which flashed upon 
the breastplate of the High Priest of God. The long 
exile in the wilderness of Midian was the chastening by 
which Moses was instructed, and the impetuosity of his 
temper mellowed and subdued, so that he who, in his 
youthful hatred of oppression, slew the Egyptain, became 
in his age the meekest man, the much-enduring and 
patient lawgiver. A very notable instance of the influ- 
ence of difficulty and failure in rousing the energies and 
carrying them on to success, has been furnished in our 
own times. Of course we refer to this case in this one aspect 
only, altogether excluding any expression as to the merit 
or demerit of the man. There will probably be two 
opinions about him, and those widely differing, in this 
assembly. We are not presenting him as an example, but 
as an illustration—save in the matter of steady and perse- 
vering purpose—and in this, if he be even an opponent, 
Fas est ab hoste docerc. 

In the year 1837, » young member, oriental alike in 
his lineage and in his fancy, entered Parliament, chival- 
rously panting for distinction in that intellectual arena. 
He was already known as a successful three-volumer, and 
his party were ready to hail him as a promising auxiliary. 
Under these auspices he rose to make his maiden speech. 
But he had made a grand mistake. He had forgotten 
that the figures of St. Stephen’s are generally arithmeti- 
cal, and that superfluity of words, except in certain cases, 


is I 
wit 
to b 
allo 
ea 
er 
this 
was 
the 
befo 
omil 
extré 
sym 
the 
carr 
Joh 
St. 
squil 
reso 
and 
mem 
come 
that 
for 1 
strus 
his ¢ 
The: 
and 
Abo 
fail 
the 
bray 
thro 
can 
the 
his» 
ann 
sty] 
che 


4 transition 
rovern ment 
e Levitica] 
ey were to 
re taught, 
rms of ciyj] 
order and 
when God 
le ears of a 
ld fabricate 
the mystic 
ashed upon 
The long 
stenine 
sity of 
vho, in his 
in, became 
luring and 
the influ. 
ergies and 
ed in our 
one aspect 
the merit 
ly be two 
ig, in this 
umple, but 
and perse- 
Opponent, 


by 
his 


alike in 
t, chival- 
al arena. 
nmer, and 
auxiliary, 
n speech. 
forgotten 
erith meti- 


ain cases, 


233 


HIS LIFE AND ITS LESSONS. 


is regarded as superfluity of naughtiness. He set out 
with the intention to dazzle, but country gentlemen object 
to be dazzled, save on certain conditions. They must be 
allowed to prepare themselves for the shock, they must 
have due notice beforehand, and the operation must be 
performed by an established parliamentary favorite. In 
this case all these conditions were wanting. The speaker 
was a parvenu. He tovk them by surprise, and he pelted 
them with tropes like hail. Hence he had not gone far 
before there were signs of impatience; by and by the 
ominous cry of “ Question,” thén came some parliamentary 
extravagance, met by derisive cheers; cachinnatory 
symptoms began to develop themselves, until, at last, in 
the midst of an imposing sentence, in which he had 
carried his audience to the Vatican, and invested Lord 
John Russell with the temporary custody of the keys of 
St. Peter, the mirth grew fast and furious; somnolent 
squires woke up and joined in sympathy, and the house 
resounded with irrepressible peals of laughter. Mortified 
and indignant, the orator sat down, closing with these 
memorable words: “I sit down now, but the time will 
come when you will hear me!” In the mortification of 
that night, we doubt not, was born a resolute working 


‘for the fulfillment of those words. It was an arduous 


struggle. There were titled claimants for renown among 
his competitors, and he had to break down the exclusivism. 
There was a suspicion of political adventuring at work, 
and broadly circulated, and he had this to overcome. 
Above all, he had to live down the remembrance of his 
failure. But there was the consciousnesss of power, and 
the fall which would have “rushed the coward made the 
brave man braver. Warily walking, and steadily toiling, 
through the chance of years, seizing the opportunity as it 
came, and always biding his time, he climbed upward to 
the distant summit, prejudice melted like snow beneath 
his feet, and in 1852, fifteen short years after his apparent 
annihilation, he was in her Majesty’s Privy Council, 
styling himself Right Honorable, Chancellor of the Ex- 
chequer, and leader of the British Ilouse of Commons. 

HL 


Witty i 


234 THE PROPHET OF HOREB, 


Sirs, are thore difficulties in your path, hindering your 


pursuit of knowledge, restraining your benevolent endea- 


vor, making your spiritual life a contest and a toil? Be 
thankful for them. They will test your capabilities ot 
resistance. You will be impelled to persevere from the 
very energy of the opposition. Ifthere be any might in 
your soul, like the avalanche of snow, it will require 
udditional momentum from the obstacles which threaten 
to impede it. Many aman has thus robed himself in the 
spoils of a vanquished difficulty, and his conquests have 
accumulated at every onward and upward step, until he 
has rested from his labor—the successful athlete who has 
thrown the world. ‘An unfortunate illustration,” you 
are ready to say, “ for all cannot win the Olympic crown, 
nor wear the Isthmian laurel. What of him who fails? 
How is he recompensed? What does he gain?” What? 
Why, Srrenera ror Lirz. His training has insured him 
that. He willnever forget the gymnasium and its lessons. 
He will always be a stalwart man, a man of muscle and 
of sinew. THE REAL MERIT IS NOT IN THE SUCCESS, BUT IN 
THE ENDEAVOR, and, win or lose, he will be honored ‘and 
crowned. 

It may be that the sphere of some of you is that of 
endurance rather than of enterprise. You are not 
called to aggress, but to resist. The power to work has 
reached its limit for a while; the power to wadt must 
be exerted. There are periods in our history when 
Providence shuts us up to the exercise of faith, when 
patience and fortitude are more valuable than valor and 
courage, and when any “further struggle would but 
defeat our prospects and embarrass our aims.” ‘To 
resist the powerful temptation ; to overcome the beset- 
ting sin; to restrain the sudden impulse of anger; to 
keep sentinel over the door of the lips, and turn back the 
biting sarcasm, and the word unkind; to be patient under 
unmerited censure ; amid opposing friends, and a scoffing 
world, to keep the faith high and the purpose firm; to 
watch through murky night and howling storm for the 


ring your 
ont endea- 
toil? Be 
ubilities ot 
. from the 
r might in 
ill require 
h threaten 
aself in the 
uests have 
», until he 
te who has 
tion,” you 
\pic crown, 
who fails! 
”? What? 
nsured him 
its lessons. 
nuscle and 
Ess, BUT IN 
pnored. ‘and 


is that of 
u are not 
0 work has 
wait must 
ory when 
pith, when 
valor and 
vould but 
3? To 
the beset- 
anger ; to 
in. back the 
ient under 
a scoffing 
e firm; to 
m for the 


HIS LIFE AND ITS LESSONS. 


coming day; in these cases, to be still is to be brave ; 
what Burke has called a “ masterly inactivity” is our 
highest prowess, and quietude is the part of heroism. 
There is @ young man in business, battli..» with some 
strong temptation, by which he is vigorously assailed; he 
is solicited to engage in some unlawful undertaking, with 
the prospect of immediate and lucrative returns. Custom 
pleads prescription: “It is done every day.” Partiality 
suggests that so small a deviation will never be regarded-— 
fe it not a little one?’ Interest reminds him that by 
his refusal his ‘* craft will be in danger.” Compromise is 
sure that ‘‘ when he bows himself in the house of Rimmon, 
the Lord will pardon his servantin this thing.” All these 
fearful voices are urging his compliance. But the Abdiel- 
conscience triumphs—help is invoked where it can never 
be invoked in vain, and he spurns the temptation away. 
Is he uot a hero? Earth may despise such a victory, but 
he can afford that scorning when, on account of him, 
“there is joy in heaven.” Oh, there are, day by day, 
vanishing from the world’s presence, those of whom she 
wotteth not; whose heritage has been a heritage of suffer- 
ing; who, in the squalors of poverty, have gleaned a 
hallowed chastening; from whom the fires of sickness 
have scaled their earthliness away, and they have grown 
up into such transcendent and archangel beauty, that 
Death, God’s eagle, sweeps them into heaven, Murmur 
not, then, if, in the inscrutable allotments of Providence, 
you are called to suffer, rather than to do. There is a 
time to labor, and there is a time to refrain. ‘The com- 
pleteness of the Christian character consists in energetic 
working, when working is practicable, and in submissive 


‘waiting, when waiting is necessary. You believe that 


beyond the waste of waters there is a rich land to be dis- 
covered, and, like Columbus, you have manned the vessel 
and hopefully set sail. But your difficulties are increas- 
ing. ‘The men’s hearts are failing them for fear; they 
wept when you got out of sight of land; the distance is 
greater than you thought: there is a weary and unvaried 


936 THE PROPHET OF HOREB, 


prospect of only sky and sea; you have not spoken a ship 
nor exchanged a greeting ; Mage crew are oe 
mutinous, and brand you mad; officers and men crow¢ 
round you, savagely demanding return. Move nota hair's 
breadth. Command the craven spirits to their duty, 
Bow them before the grandeur uf your courage, and the 
triumph of your faith; 
‘‘Hushing every muttered murmur, 
Let your fortitude the firmer 
Gird your soul with strength; 
While, no treason near her lurking, 


Patience in her perfect working, 
Shall be queen at length.” 


Ha! Whatisit? What says the watcher? Layn in 
the distance! No; not yet—but there’s a hopeful fra- 
grance in the breeze; the sounding-line gives shallower 
and yet shallower water; the tiny land-birds flutter round, 
venturing on timid wing to give their joyous welcome, 
Spread the canvas to the wind; by and by there shall be 
the surf-wave on the strand; the summits of the land of 
promise visible; the flag flying at the harbor’s mouth, and 
echoing from grateful hearts and manly voices, the swell- 
ing spirit-hymn, “So he bringeth us to our desired 
haven.” 

We are taught by the Prophet’s history the evil of 
undue disquietude about the aspect of the times. The 
followers of Baal had been stung to madness by their 
defeat on Carmel, and Jezebel, their patroness, mourning 


over her slaughtered priests, swore by her idol-gods that 
she would have the Prophet’s life for theirs. On this 
being reported to Elijah, he seems to be paralyzed with 
fear, all his former confidence in God appears to be 
forgotten, and the remembrance of the mighty deliver- 
ances of the past fails to sustain him under the pressure 
of this new trial. Suchis poor human nature: He before 
whom the tyrant Ahab had quailed—he whose prayer 
had suspended the course of nature, and sealed up the 
fountains of heaven; he who, in the face: of all Israel, 


had contronted and conquered eight hundred and fitty 


n a ship 
ecomin 
n i 
t a hair's 
ir duty, 
and the 


LAND in 
eful fra- 
1allower 
r round, 
releome, 
shall be 
land of 
uth, and 
e swell- 

desired 


evil o 
ne, 
by their 
ourning 
bds that 
On this 
ed with 
5 to be 
deliver- 
pressure 
e before 
prayer 
up the 
Israel, 


id fitty 


HIS LIFE AND ITS LESSONS, 


men—terrified at the threat of an angry woman, flees in 
»recipitation and in terror, and, hopeless for the time of 
his own safety, and of the success of his endeavors for 
the good of Isracl, wanders off into the wilderness, and 
sighs forth his feelings in the peevish and melancholy 
utterance: Let me die. “It is enough—now, O Lord 
God, take away my life, for I am no better than my 
fathers.” This desertion of duty, failure of faith, sudden 
cowardice, unwarranted despendency, petulance, and 
murmuring, are characteristics of modern no less than 
ancient days. There is one class of observers, indeed, 
who are not troubled with any disquietude; to whom all 
wears the tint of the rose-light, and who are dispcsed to 
regard the apprehensions of their soberer neighbors as 
dyspeptic symptoms, or as incipient hypochondriacism. 
A hioniever the age is mentioned, they go off in an ecstasy. 
They are like the Malvern patients, of whom Sir Lytton 
Bulwer tells, who, after having made themselves ex- 
tempore mummies in the “ pack,” and otherwise under- 
gone their matutinal course of hydropathy, are so in- 
tensely exhilarated, and have such an exuberance of 
animal spirits, that they are obliged to run a considerable 
distance for the sake of working themselves off. Their 
volubility of praise is extraordinary, and it is only when 
they are thoroughly out of breath, that you have the 
chance to edge in asyllable. They tell us that the age 
is “golden,” auriferous in all its developments, tran- 
scending all others in immediate advantage and in 
auguries of future good. We are poiuted tothe kindling 
love of freedom, to the quickened onset of inquiry, to 
the stream of legislation broadenine as it flows, to the 
increase of hereditary mind, to the setting further and 
further back of the old landmarks of improvement, and 
to the inclosure of whole acres of intellectual and moral 
waste, thought formerly not worth the tillage. We 
would not for one moment be understood to undervalue 
these and other signs, equally and yet more encouraging. 
On the other hand, though no alarmists, we would not be 


dil < ; 


“jn —_ 


il Ga, 
ak Dives 
Na 


238 THE PROPHET OF HOREB, 


insensible to the fears of those who tell us that we are in 
danger ; that our liberty, of which we boast ourselves, is 
strangely like licentiousness ; that our intellectual emi. 
nence may prove practical folly ; that our liberality verges 
on indifferentism; and that our chiefest dignity is our 
yet-unhumbled pride, that godvnua capkie, which, in all 
its varieties, and in all its conditions, is “ enmity against 
God.” A very cursory glance at the state of thin 
around us will suffice to show that with the dawn of a 
brighter day there are blent some gathering clouds, 

Amid those who have named the Master’s name, there 
is much which calls for caution and for warning. Politi- 
eal strife, fierce and absorbing, leading the mind off from 
the realities of its own condition ; a current of worldl 
conformity setting in strongly upon the churches of the 
land; the ostentation and publicity of religious enter- 
prises prompting to the neglect of meditation and of secret 
prayer; sectarian bitterness in its sad and angry develop- 
ments; the multiform and lamentable exhibitions of 
practical Antinomianism which abound among us—all 
these have, in their measure, prevented the fulfillment of 
the Church’s mission in the world. 

If you look outside the pale of the churches, viewe. 
from a Christian stand-point, the aspect is somewhat 
alarming. Crinie does not diminish. The records of our 
offices of the police and of our courts of justice are perfectly 
appalling. Intemperance, like a mighty gulf-stream, 
drowns its thousands. The Sabbath is systematically 
desecrated, and profligacy yet exerts its power to fascinate 
and to ruin souls, And then, deny it as we will, there is 
the engrossing power of Mammon. Covetousness—the 
sin of the heart, of the Church, of the world—is found 
everywhere; lurking in the guise of frugality, in */e 
poor man’s dwelling; dancing in the shape of gold fields 
and Australia before the flattered eye of youth: shrined 
in the marts of the busy world, receiving the incense and 
worship of the traders in vanity ; arrayed in purple, and 
faring sumptuously every day, in the mansion of Dives; 


Ve are in 
sclves, is 
al emi. 
Y Verges 
Y ig our 
1, in all 
against 
f things 
wn of a 
ds. 
e, there 
Politi. 
off from 
world] 
's of the 
8 enter. 
of secret 
evelop- 
tions of 
us—al] 
ment of 


viewe,} 
mewhat 
Is of our 
ertectly 
stream, 
atically 
Ascinate 
there is 
1ss—the 
s found 
in the 
ld fields 
shrined 
nse and 
ole, and 
Dives ; 


239 


HIS LIFE AND ITS LESSONS, 


twining itself round the piilars of the sanctuary of God ; 
it is the great world-emperor still, swaying an absolute 
authority, with legions of subordinate vices {o waich its 
nod, and to perform its bidding, 

Then, besides this iniquity of practical ungodliness, 
there is also the iniquity of theoretical opinion. ‘here is 
Popery, that antiquated superstition, which ‘s coming 
forth in its decreptitude, roughing over its wrint.les, avd 
flaunting itself, as it used to do in its well-remembered 
youth. There ave the various ramifications of the subile 
spirit of Unbelief: Atheism, discarding its former au- 
dacity of blasphemy, assuming now a modest garb and 
mendicant whine, asking our pity for its idiosyncrasy, 
bewailing its misfortune in not being able to believe that 
there isa God; Raticnalism, whether in the transcen- 
dentalism of Hegel, or in the allegorizing impiety of 
Strauss, or in the panthestic philosophy of Fichté, eating 
out the heart of the Gospel, into which its vampire-fangs 
have fastened; Latitudinariunism on a sentimental 
journey in search of the religious instinct, doling out its 
equal and niggard praisé to it wherever it is found, in 
Fetichism, ‘Thuggism, Mohammedanism, or Christianily ; 
that species of active and high-sounding skepticisin, 
which, for want of a better name, we may call it Credo- 

hobia, which selects the confessions and catechisms as 
the objects of its especial hostility, and which, knowing 
right well that if the banner is down, the courage fails, 
and the army will be routed or slain, “furious as a 
wounded bull, runs tearing at the creeds;” these, with all 
their off-shots and dependencies (for there name is Legion) 
grouped under the generic style of Infidelity, have girt 
themselves for the combat, and are asserting and endeavor- 
ing to establish their empire over the intellects and con- 
sciences of men. And as this spirit of Unbelief has 
many sympathies with the spirit of Superstition, they 
have entered into unholy alliance—* Herod and Pilate 
have been made friends together”—and hand joined in 
hand, they are arrayed against the truth of God. Oh, 


‘jth 


Rie, % 


- 


M4 ta 


1 


240 THE PROPHET OF HOREB, 


rare John Bunyan! Was he not among the prophets? 
Listen to his description of the last army of Diabolug 
before the final triumph of Immanuel: “ Ten thousand 
Devsters, and fifteen thousand Bioopmesn, and old Jn. 
credulity, was again made general of the army.” 

In this aspect of the age its tendencies are not always 
upward, nor its prospects encouraging, and we can under- 
stand the feeling which bids the Elis of our Israel “ sit 
by the wayside, watching for their hearts tremble for the 
ark of God.” We seem to be in the mysterious twilight 
of which the prophet speaks, “ The light shall not be clear 
nor dark, but one day known unto the Lord, not day nor 
night.” Ah! here is our consolation. It is “ known 
unto the Lord ;” then our faith must not be weakened by 
distrust, nor our labor interrupted by fear. “ It is known 
unto the Lord ;” and from the mount ot Horeb he tells 
us that in the secret places of the heritage there are seven 
thousand that have not bowed the knee to Baal. It is 
“known unto the Lord ;” and while we pity the Prophet 
in the wilderness asking for a solitary death, death under 
a cloud, death in judgment, death in sorrow, he draws 
aside the veil, and shows us heaven preparing to do him 
honor, the celestial escort making ready to attend him, 
the horses being harnessed into the chariot of fire. 

Sirs, if there be this opposition, he it ours to “ con- 
tend” the more “earnestly for the faith once delivered 
to the saints.” Many are persuading us to give up and 
abandon our creeds. We ought rather to hold them 
with afirmer grasp, and infuse into thema holier life, 
We can imagine how the infidel would accost an intelli- 
gent and hearty believer. “Be independent; don’t 
continue any longer in leading strings, taking your faith 
from the ipse dixit of another; use your senses, which 
are the only means of knowledge; cast your confessions 
and rituals away; a strong men needs no crutches.” 
And we can imagine the reply. “ Brother, the simile 
is not a happy one—my creed is not a crutch—it is a 
highway thrown up by former travellers to the land that 


is afe 
free \ 
to cle 
ents 
‘peed 
and Vv 
thou 
I am 
toiled 
highw 
can ¢ 
can Cl 
moss-< 
woodl 
eeps 
Ae: 
like t 
unto t 
to be o 
their 1 
truth, 
deem 
James 
Give 
our ¢ 
theolo 
this is 
these 
This ‘ 
the ox 


So 
ig su 


will 1 


orophets } 
Diabolug 
thousand 
L old tn- 


rt always 
in under. 
rael “ sit 
le for the 
twilight 
t be clear 
day nor 
“ known 
kened by 
is known 
he tells 
we seven 
l. It is 
Prophet 
th under 
e draws 
do him 
nd him, 
: 


D * eon- 
elivered 
up and 
d them 
er life, 
intelli- 

don’t 
ir faith 
which 
essions 
tches,”’ 
simile 
it is a 


d that 


HIS LIFE AND ITS LESSONS. 241 


is afar off. ‘Other men have labored,’ and of my own 
free will I ‘enter into their labor.’ If thou art disposed 
to clear the path with thy own hatchet, with lurking ser- 
pents underneath and knotted branches overhead, God 
speed thee, my brother, for thy work is of the roughest, 
and while thou art resting—fatigued and ‘considering’ — 
thou mayest die before thou hast come upon the truth. 
I am grateful to the modern Macadamizers who have 
toiled for the coming time. Commend me to the King’s 
highway. I am not bound in it with fetters of iron. I 
can climb the hill for the sake of a wider landscape. I 
can cross the stile, that I may slake my thirst at the old 
moss-covered well in the field. I can saunter down the 
woodland glade, and gather the wild heart’s-ease that 
peeps from among the tangled fern; but I go back to the 
good old path where the pilgrim’s tracks are visible, and, 
like the shining light, ‘it grows brighter and brighter 
unto the perfect day.’” Sirs, this is not the time for us 
to be done with creeds. They are, in the various churches, 
their individual embodiments of what they believe to be 
truth, and their individual protests against what they 
deem to be error. ‘Give up our theology!” says Mr. 
James of Birmingham; “then farewell to our piety. 
Give up our theology! then dissolve our churches; for 
our churches are founded upon truth. Give up our 
theology! then next vote our Bibles to be myths. And 
this is clearly the aim of many, the destruction of all 
these together; our piety, our churches, our Bibles.” 
This Testimony is true. ‘There cannot be an attack upon 
the one without damage and mischief to the other. 


Just as in old mythology, 
What time the woodman slew 

Each poet-worshipped forest tree-— 

He killed its Dryad too.” 


So as the assault upon these expressions of Christianity 
is successful, the spiritual presence enshrined in them 
will languish and die. ‘“ Hold fast,” then, “the form of 


feet im, 
Wd ps x 
a | isan 


242 THE PROPHET OF HOREB, 


sound words.” Amid the war of sentiment and the jane. 
ling of false philosophy, though the sophist may denounce 
and though the fool may laugh, let your high resolve g0 
forth to the moral universe; ‘‘I am determined to know 
nothing among men save Christ and him crucified.” 
There is another matter to which, if you would suc. 
cessfully join in resistance to the works of evil, you must 
give earnest heed, and that is the desirableness, I had 
almost said the necessity—I will say it, for it ism 
solemn conviction, and why should it not be manfull 
out-spoken?—the necessity of public dedication to the 
service of your Master—Christ. You will readily admit 
that confession is requisit. 10. the completeness of disci- 
gee ; and you cannot have forgotton how the Aposile 
as linked it to faith. ‘Confess with thy mouth, and 


believe with thine heert.” To such confession, in the 


resent day, at all events, church-fellowship is necessary, 

ou cannot adequately make it in social intercourse, nor 
by a consistent’ example, nor even by a decorous attend. 
ance with outer-court worshippers. There must be public 
and solemn union with the Church of Christ. The influ. 
ence of this avowed adhesion ought not to be forgotten. 
A solitary “ witness” of obedience or faith is lost, like an 
invisible atom ‘in the air; it is the union of each particle, 
in itself insignificant, which makes up the “cloud of 
witnesses” which the world can see. Your own admirable 
Society exemplifies the advantage of assocation in be- 
nevolent and Christian enterprise, and the churches of the 
land, maligned as they have been by infidel slanderers, 
aad imperfectly—very imperfectly—as they have borne 
witness for Go:i, have yet been the great breakwater 
against the error and sin, the blest Elims to the desert 
wayfarer, the tower of strength in the days of siege and 
strife. Permit us to urge this matter upon you. Of 
course we do not pretend to specify—that were treason 
penton the noble catholicity of this Society—though each 
of your lecturers has the Church of his intelligent pre- 
ference, and we are none of us ashamed of our own; but 


we do 
that C 
be mog 
yender 
labor. 
and if, 
one Wé 
decisio 
Yet 
piety, 
orthod 
these 
ful lab 
the we 
piety, 
the ex 
Chure 
regené 
Spirit 
John 1 
gelist’ 
aftecti 
knowl 
served 
but th 
heart 
was le 
into if 
union 
the ec 
did : 
of the 
and ¢ 


hero’ 


The 
histo1 
on H 
for ti 


nd the jang. 
y denounce 
resolve go 
ed to know 
ified.” 
would sue. 
I, you must 
ness, I had 
for it is m 
pe manfully 
tion to the 
adily admit 
pss of disci- 
the Aposile 
mouth, and 
sion, in the 
8 necessary, 
rcourse, Nor 
ous attend. 
st be public 
The influ. 
e forgotten, 
lost, like an 
ch particle, 
“cloud of 
n admirable 
tion in be- 
rches of the 
slanderers, 
have borne 
yreak waters 
» the desert 
f siege and 
1 you. Of 
ere treason 
though each 
lligent pre- 
r own; but 


HIS LIFE AND ITS LESSONS. 243 


we do mean to say, that you ought to join yourselves to 
that Church which appears to your prayerful judgment to 
be most in accordance with the New Testament, there to 
yender whatever you possess of talent, and influence, and 


| labor. This ismy testimony, sincerely and faithfully given ; 


and if, in its utterance, it shall, by God’s blessing, recall 
one wanderer to allegience, or constrain one waverer to 
decision, it will not have been spoken in vain. 

Yet once more upon this head. There must be deeper 
piety, more influential and transforming godliness. An 
orthodox creed, valuable Church privileges—what are 
these without personal devotedness ? They must be faith- 
ful laborers—men of consecrated hearts—who are to do 
the work of the Lord. Believe me, the depth of apostolic 
piety, and the fervor of apostolic prayer, are required for 
the exigencies of the present and coming time. That 
Church of the future, which is to absorb into itself the 
regenerated race, must be a living. and a holy Church. 
Spiritual ee must be enunciated by us all, with 
John the Baptist’s fearlessness, and with John the Evan- 
gelist’s love. It is a mistake to suppose that fidelity and 
affection are unfriendly. The highest achievements in 
knowledge, the most splendid cevotiions of God, are re- 
served in his wisdom for the man of perfect love. Who 
but the beloved disciple could worm out of the Master’s 
heart the foul betrayer’s name? Whose heart but his 
was large enough to hold the Apocalypse, which was flung 
into it in the island of Patmos? ‘There must be this 
union of deepest faithfulness and deepest love to fit us for 
the coming age; and to get it, we must just do as John 
did: we must lie upon the Master’s bosom until the smile 
of the Master has burned out of our hearts all earthlier 
and coarser passion, and has chastened the bravery of the 


hero by the meekness of the child. 


The great lesson which is taught us in the Prophet’s 
history, is that which was taught to him by the revelation 
on Horeb, that the Word is God’s chosen instrumentality 
Sor the Church?s progress, and for the world’s recovery. 


244 THE PROPHET OF HOREB, 


There were other !e:sons, doubtless, for his persona] 
benefit. He had deserted its duty and was rcbuked ; he 
had become impatient and exasperated, and was calmed 
down; craven-hearted and unbelieving, he was fortified 
by the display of God’s power; dispirited and wishino 
angrily for death, he was consoled with promise, and pre. 
soe for future usefulness and duty. But the grand 
esson of all was, that Jehovah, when he works, works 
not with the turbulence and passion of a man, but with 
the stillness and grandeur of aGod. “He was not in 
the whirlwind, nor in the earthquake, nor in the fire, but 
in the still, small voice.” And so it is still. “The 
whirlwind” of battle, “the earthquake” of political con. 
vulsion and change, “the fire” of the loftiest intellect, or 
of the most burning eloquence, are valueless to uplift 
and to regenerate the world. They may be, they very 
often are, the forerunners of the moral triumph, but God’s 
is is in his Gospel, God’s presence is in his Word, 
Tere it is that we are at issue, at deep and deadly issue, 
with the pseudo-philosophers and benevolent “considerers” 
who niotest to be toiling in the same cause as ourselves, 
They discrown Christ; they ignore the influence ot the 
Holy Spirit; they proclaim the perfectibility of their 
nature in itself; they have superseded the Word as an 


instrument of progress; and, of their own masonry, are 


ilin~ up a tower, if haply it may reach unto heaven, 

his is the great problem of the age. Do not let us 
deceive ourselves. There are men, earnest, thoughtful, 
working, clever men, intent upon the question. States- 
manship has gathered up its political appliances; civiliz- 
ation has exhibited her humanizing art; philanthropy 
has reared cducational, and mechanics’, and all other 
sorts of institutes; amiable dreamers of the Pantheistic 
school have mapped out in cloud-land man’s progress, 
from the transcendental up to the divine; communism 
has flung over all the mantle of its apparent charity, in 
the folds of which it has darkly hidden the dagger of its 
terrible purpose—nay, every man, now-a-days, stands out 


» ready 
psalm, 
society 
world 1 
yisiona 
pear i 
Christ 
finer tl 
tamed 
Scythie 
Danubs 
artistic 
Greek < 
she sha 
kaowle 
You ha 
you got 
Your 
educatis 
to God 
of Hist 
Dea sac 
training 
ture an 
the loft 
scaled ; 
tions $ 
souls ; 
arm, a 
on the 
all of 
master 
purity 
the we 
disturl 
wande 
the ex 
invete 


8 persona] 
buked ; he 
vas calmed 
us fortified 
id wishing 
e, and pre. 
the grand 
rks, works 
but with 
7as not in 
1e fire, but 
hy The 
itical con. 
itellect, or 
» to uplift 
they very 
but God's 
his Word, 
adly issue, 
siderers” 
ourselves, 
nee ot the 

of their 
ord as an 
BONTY, are 
) heaven, 
ot let us 
oughtful, 
States- 
: oe 
anthropy 
nll olf 
ntheistic 
progress, 
munism 
arity, in 
er of its 
ands out 


HIS LIFE AND ITS LESSONS. 


a ready-made and self-confident artificer, each having a 
psalm, or @ doctrine, or a theoey, which is to recreate 
society and stir the pulses of the world. And yet the 


| world is not regenerated, nor will it ever be, by such 


visionary projects as these. Call up History. She will 
bear impartial witness. She will tell you that, before 
Christ came with his Evangel of purity and freedom, the 
fner the culture, the baser the character; that the un- 
tamed inhabitant of the old Hercynian Forest, and the 
Scythian and Slavonic tribes, who lived north of the 


1 Danube and the Rhine, destitute entirely of literary and 


artistic skill, were, in morals, far superior to the classic 
Greek and all accomplished Roman. Call up Experience; 
she shall speak on the matter. You have increased in 
kaowledge; have you, therefore, increased in piety? 
You have acquired a keener esthetic susceptibility ; have 
you gotten with it a keener relish for the spiritually true? 
your mind has been led out into higher and yet higher 
education ; have you, by its nurture, been brought nearer 
to God? Experience throws emphasis into the testimony 
of History, and both combine.to assure us that there: may 
bea sad divorce between Intellect and Piety, and that the 


| training of the mind is not necessarily inclusive of the cul- 


ture and discipline of the heart. Science may lead us to 
the loftiest heights which her inductive philosophy has 
scaled; art may suspend before us her beautitul crea- 
tions; nature may rouse a “ fine turbulence” in heroic 
souls; the strength of the hills may nerve the patriot’s 
arm, as the Swiss felt the inspiration of their mountains 
on the Mortgarten battle-tield; but they cannot, any or 
all of them, instate a man in sovereignty over his 
mastering corruptions, or invest a race with moral 
purity and power. If the grand old demon, who has 
the world so long in his thrall, is, by these means, ever 
disturbed in his possession, it is only that he may 
wander into desert places, and then return fresher for 
the exercise, and bringing seven of his kindred more 
inveterate and cruel. No! if the world is to be regener- 


(bei iy ate 


me ey 


Re 
wt Gita 
MeN Wena, 


246 THE PROPHET OF HOREB, 


ated at all, it will be vy the “still, small voice;” tha: 
clear and marvellous whisper, which is heard high above 
the din of striving peoples, and the tumult of sentiment 
and passion; which runs along the whole line of being, 
stretching its spiritual telegraph into every heari, 
that it may link them all with God. All human speen- 
lations have alloy about them; that Word is perfect, 
All human speculations fail; that Word abicdeth, 
The Jew hateth it; butit lived on, while the veil 
was torn away from the shrine which Shekinah had 
forsaken, and while Jerusalem itself was destroyed. 
The Greek derided it, but it has seen his philosophy 
effete, and his Acropolis in ruins. The Roman threw it 
to the flames, but it rose from its ashes, and swooped 
down upon the falling eagle. The reasoner cast it into 
the furnace, which his own malignity had heated 
“seven times hotter than its wont” but it came out 
without the smell of fire.” The Papist fastened serpen's 
around it to poison it, but it shook them off and felt no 
harm. The infidel cast it overboard in a temptest of 
sophistry and sarcasm, but it rode gallantly upon the 
crest of the proud waters; and it is livimg still, yet 
heard in the loudest swelling of the storm; it has been 
speaking all the while; it is speaking now. The world 
gets higher at its every tone, and it shall ultimately 
speak in power, until it has spoken this dismantled 
planet up again into the smiling brotherhood of worlds 
which kept their first estate, and God, welcoming the 
prodigal, shall look at it as he did in the beginning, and 
pronounce it to be very good. 

It is as they abide by.his Word, and guard sacredly 
this precious treasure, that nations stand or fall. The 
empires of old, where are they? Their power is dwarfed 
or gone. Their glory is only known by tradition. Their 
deeds are unly chronicledin song. But, amid surrounding 
ruin, the Ark of God blesses the house of Obed-Edom. 
We dwell not now on our national greatness. That is 
the orator’s eulogy and the poet’s theme. We remember 


our Tq 
his na 
upon 
dom, 
unsea 
with 4 
game 
privile 
selves 
blesse 
to he 
It wo 
if the 
if our 
of the 


consel 
the né 
Oh! i 
blood. 
nesses 
There 
and p 
sinew 
our re 
magn 
lence 
ruin ; 
triun 


mout 


oice;” that 

igh above 
' sentiment 
e of being, 
ery heart, 
man specu. 
is perfect, 
d abideth, 
e the Veil 
kinah had 
destroyed, 
philosophy 
n threw it 
1 swooped 
rast it into 
id heated 
came out 
d serpen's 
nd felt no 
mptest of 
upon the 
still, yet 
has been 
he world 
iltimately 
ismantled 
of worlds 
ming the 
ning, ani 


sacredly 
all. The 
s dwarfed 
mn. Their 
rounding 
d-Edom. 
That is 
Pmember 


HIS LIFE AND ITS LESSONS. 


ligious advantages—God recognized in our Senate, 
er stamped aes currency, his blessing ea he 
npon our Queen, our pee ministry, our religious ee- 
dom, our unfettered privilege, our precious Sabbath, nt 
unsealed, entire, wide-open Bible. God hath not eh 
with any nation as he hath dealt with us, and for this 
same purpose our ppuiions are extensive, and our 
privileges secure—that we may maintain among our- 
selves, and diffuse amid the peoples, the Gospel of the 
blessed God. Alas! that our country has not been true 
to her responsibility, nor lavish of her strength for God. 
It would be well for us, and it is a startling alternative, 
if the curse of Meroz were our only heritage of wrath— 
if our only guilt were that we “ came not up to the help 
of the Lord against the mighty.” But we have not 
merely been indifferent—we have been hostile. The 
cupidity of our merchants, the profligacy of our agen 
and sailors, the impiety of our travellers, have hindere 
the work of the Lord. Our Government has patronized 
paganism ; our soldiery have saluted an idol; our cannon 
have roared in homage to a senseless stone—nay, we 
have even pandered to the prostitution of a continent, 
and to the murder of thousands of her sons, debauched 
and slain by the barbarities of their religion—and,. less 
conscientious than the priests of old, we have flung into 
the national treasury the hire of that adultery and blood. 
Oh! if the righteous God were to make inquisition for 
blood, upon the testimony of how many slaughtered wit- 
nesses might he convict pampered and lordly Britain ! 
There is need—strong need—tfor our national humiliation 
and prayer. He who girt us with power can dry up the 
sinews of our strength. Let but his anger be kindled by 
our repeated infidelities, and our country shall fall. More 
magnificent than Babylon in the profusion of her o u- 
lence, she shall be more sudden than Babylon in her 
ruin; more renowned than Carthage for her military 


triumphs, shall be more desolate than Carthage in her | 


ing ; princelier th in her commercial great- 
mourning ; princelier than Tyre in h g 


248 THE PROPHET OF HOREB, 


ness, shall be more signal than Tyre in her fall; wider 
than Rome in her extent of territorial dominion, shall be 
more prostrate than Rome in her enslavement; prouder 
than Greece in her eminence of intellectual culture, shall 
be more degraded than Greece in her darkening; more 
exalted than Capernaum in the fulness of her religious 
privilege, shall be more appalling than Capernaum in the 
deep damnations of her doom. 

Youtg men, it is for you to redeem your country from 
this terrible curse. “The holy seed shall be the sub- 
stance thereof.” As you, and those like you, are impure 
or holy, you may draw down the destruction, or conduct 
it harmlessly away. You cannot live to yourselves, 
Every word you utter makes its impression ; every deed 
you do is fraught with influences—successive, concentric, 
imparted—which may be felt for ages. This is a terrible 
power which you have, and it clings to you ; you cannot 
shake it off. How will you exert it? We place two 
characters before you. Here is one—he is decided in his 
devotedness to God; painstaking in his search for truth ; 
strong in benevolent purpose and holy endeavor; wield. 
ing a blessed influence; tailing oft, but ceasing never; 
ripening with the lapse of years; the spirit mounting 
upon the breath of its parting prayer. The last enemy 
destroyed; his memory green for ages; and grateful 
thousands chiselling on his tomb: “ Hu, BEING DBAD, Yer 
SPEAKETH.” There is another—he resists religious im- 
pressions; outgrows the necessity for prayer; forgets the 
lessons of his youth, and the admonitions of his godly 
home; forsakes the sanctuary; sits in the seat of the 
scorner; laughs at religion as a foolish dream ; influences 
many for evil; runs to excess of wickedness; sends, in 
some instances, his victims down before him; is stricken 
with premature old age; has hopeless prospects, and a 
terrible death-bed; rots from the remembrance of his 
fellows ; and angel-hands burning upon his gloomy 
sepulihre the epitaph of his blasted life: “ Anp ruat 
MAN PERISHED NOT ALONE IN HI INIQUITY,” 


Ml; wider 
n, shall be 
:$ prouder 
ture, shall 
Ing; More 
* religious 
Aum in the 


ntry from 
> the sub- 
we impure 
r conduct 
Ourselves, 
wery deed 
oncentric, 
a terrible 
ou cannot 
place two 
ded in his 
or truth ; 
r; wield. 
ne never; 

ounting 
st enemy 

grateful 
DEAD, YET 
rious im- 
rgets the 
his godly 
t of the 

fluences 
bends, in 

stricken 
s, and a 
e of his 
gloomy 
ND THAT 


HIS LIFE AND ITS LESSONS. 


Young men, which will you choose? I affectionately 
press this question. Oh, choose tor God! “Seek first 
the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all things”’ 
—science, art, poetry, friendship—“ shall be added unto 

ou.” Ido pile, rod rejoice that so goodly a number 
of you have already decided. 

I have only one fitness to address you—but it is one 
which many of your lecturers cannot claim—and that is, 
a fitness of sympathy. Your hopes are mine; with your 
joys, at their keenest, I can sympathize. I have not for- 
gotten the glad hours of opening morning, when the 
zephyr has a balmier breath, and through the richly- 

ainted windows of the fancy, the sunlight streams in 

upon the soul. JI come to you as one of yourselves. 
Take my counsel. ‘ My heart’s desire and prayer for 
you is that you may be saved.” 

There is hope for the future. The world is moving on. 
The great and common mind of Humanity has caught the 
charm of hallowed Labor. Worthy and _toil-worn 
laborers fall ever and anon in the march, and their fellows 
weep their loss, and then, dashing away the tears which 
had blinded them, they struggle and labor on. There 
has been an upward spirit evoked, which men will not 
willingly let die. Young in its love of the beautiful, 

oung in its quenchless thirst after the true, we see that 
Vatvent presence ; 


‘In hand it bears, ’mid snow and ice, 
The banner with the strange device: 
EXCELSIOR !”” 


The one note of high music struck from the great harp 
of the world’s heart-strings is graven on that banner. 
The student breaths it at his midnight lamp—the poet 
groans it forth in those spasms of his soul, when he can- 
not fling his heart’s beauty upon language. Fair fingers 
have wrought in secret at that banner. Many a child of 
poverty has felt its motto in his soul, like the last vestige 
of lingering divinity. The Christian longs it when his 
H2 


250 THE PROPHET OF HOREB. 


faith, piercing the invisible, “desires a better country 
that is, anheavenly.” Excelsior! Excelsior! Brothers, 
let us speed onward the youth who holds that banner, 
Up, up, brave spirit! 


‘Climb the steep and starry road 
To the Infinite’s abode,” 


Up, up, brave spirit! Spite of Digine steep and frowning 
brow, roaring blast and crashing flood, up! Science has 
many a glowing secret to reveal thee! Faith has many 
a Tabor-pleasure to inspire. Ha! does the cloud stop 
thy progress? Pierce through it to the sacred morning, 
Fear not to approach the divinity; it is his own longing 
which impels thee. Thou art speeding to thy coronation, 
brave spirit! Up, up, brave spirit! till, as thou pantest 
on the crest of thy loftiest achievement, God’s glory shal 
burst upon thy face, and God’s voice, blessing thee from 
his throne, in tones of approval and of welcome, shall 
deliver thy guerdon: “I have made thee a little lower 
than the angels, and crowned thee with glory and honor!” 


lige i i S 
‘ i p | { ; 


2 


r country, 
Brothers, 
at banner, 


d frowning 
clience has 
has many 
cloud stop 
1 morning, 
vn longing 
coronation, 
ou pantest 
glory shal. 
thee from 
come, shall 
little lower 
nd honor!” 


— r- 


a eta RY) premaaat ! ide 7 ~ 
y NS Ww & (a A ay 


FAREWELL SERMON. 


PREACHED IN THE METROPOLITAN CuHuRCH, Toronto, oN SUNDAY 
Mornine, May 11, 1873. 


“But it is good to be zealously affected always in a good th: 2, and 
pot only when I am present with you.’’—GaLaTians ly. 18, 


Yes 


HERE isan inner experience in the life of a minis- 
ter of Christ of which the world wotteth not, and 
ou which ordinary Christians can only partially 
share. Not only is he a man of like passions with 
those whom he addresses ; exposed to the same tempta- 
tions ; subject to the ebb and flow of the same tides 
of feeling; but there are trials peculiar to his office, if 
he rightly estimate it, and if its obligations are fgith- 
tully discharged. The church is represented as a 
commonwealth, in which each shares the gladness, or 
is thrilled with the sorrow of the other; and if the 
members of the church feel this interpenetration of 
sympathy, with how much greater intensity will the 
minister feel it, to whom the pastorate of the flock has 
been committed, and who is the minister of God to 
them for good, and who watches for their souls “ as 
one that must give account.” The husbandman has 
his own anxieties during the long months which inter- 
vene between the scattering and the gathering. Soli- 
citous at the seedtime, he is not less solicitous until 
the corn is housed. There is much of ban or of 
blessing to him in the face of the sky. He cannot be 


252 FAREWELL SERMON. 


indifferent whether storms pelt or sunbeams shine. Ho 
is called to mourn sometimes over that which the 
tempest has smitten, or which the sun has sco1vhed; 
he is called sometimes to rejoice with a full heart in 
the joy cf harvest. And surely the spiritual husband. 
man, if he be not a hireling, but one who loves the 
sowing, and who sows for the harvest, should watch 
jealously over the fortunes of the scattered seed. It 
may be that in his congregation there are some whom 
the word has grasped, whom unhallowed associations 
are causing to wither, or who in the engrossments of 
the secular are being weaned from their first love, 
over whom he may look and say, ‘“ I stand in doubt 
of you.” There he may implore pitifully in his 
Master’s name and words, ‘ Will ye also go away ?” 
and yonder he may remonstrate in wounded affection, 
‘Ye did run well ; who hath hindered you, that ye 
should not obey the truth?” Shall he not mourn over 
these, as a father over his wayward child? And if 
there are others in his congregation whose course is 
bright and prosperous, shall not their consistent walk 
and ripening graces fill him with a strange joy? Into 
this ministerial solicitude none entered so deeply as 
the Breat apostle of the gentiles; and it is to his roused 
and startled feelings that we owe the epistle to the 
Galatians. Tidings were brought to him at Corinth, 
whither he had gone with a mind already saddened by 
the defective discipline of the Corinthian church, that 
the Galatians also had gone from their attachment, 
and that they had become entangled in that yoke which 
the Judaizing teachers were ever ready to fasten upon 
the infant churches of the Saviour. He therefore 
writes to them in a style in which rebuke and tender- 
ness are inimitably blended ; vindicates his own apostle- 
ship; claims exclusive truth for the gospel which he 
preaches ; denounces everything that is opposed to it 
as accursed error ; argues for the superiority of evan- 
gelical over legal privilege; and then appeals to them 


hine. He 
hich the 
col vhed ; 
| heart in 
husband. 
loves the 
ld watch 
seed. It 
ne whom 
0ciations 
sments of 
irst love, 
/in doubt 
y in his 
0 away eC 
affection, 
1, that ye 
ourn over 
' And if 
course is 
tent walk 
y? Into 
deeply as 
is roused 
le to the 
Corinth, 
dened by 
rch, that 
achment, 
ke which 
ten upon 
therefore 
tencer- 
h apostle- 
vhich he 
nsec. to it 
of evan- 
sto them 


FAREWELL SERMON, 253 


by the memory of their former affection—an affection 
which seems to have been enthusiastic in its expressions 
of attachment—if haply he may bring back their stra 
desires to the obedience of Christ, and break the spell 
of that accursed witchery under whose fatal glamour 
they had come. The appeal is very touching, and very 
tender; and they must have callous hearts who could 
resist it—** Ye know how through infirmity of the 
flesh I preached the gospel unto you at the first ; and 
my temptation which was in my flesh ye despised not 
nor rejected, but received me as an angel of God, 
even as Christ Jesus. Where is then the blessedness 
ye spake of ? for I bear you record that if it had been 
possible ye would have plucked out your own eyes, 
and have given them to me. Am I, therefore, become 
your enemy because [ tell you the truth? They 
zealously affect you, but not well; yea, they would 
exclude you, that ye might affect them. But it is good 
to be zealously affected always in a good thing, and 
not only when I am present with you.” 

There is a great truth, brethren, embodied ia these 
words, which may profit the churches of all time; 
and there are many among ourselves who, conscious 
that we are imbecile of purpose, and vacillating or 
intermittent in action, may well take to ourselves the 
memory of the apostle’s words—‘“ It is good to be 
zealously affected always’’—there is the point of them, 
“always” —“ in a good thing.” 

Just for a few moments let us dwell upon the nature, 
upon the perpetuity, and upon the profitableness of 
Christian zeal. ‘It is good to be zealously affected 
always in a good thing.” 

1. Zeal may be defined as the heat or fervor of the 
mind, prompting its vehemence of indignation against 
any tbing which it conceives to be evil—prompting its 
vehemence of desire towards anything which it ima- 
gines to begood. In itself it has no moral character at 


ee ad: 


254 FAREWELL SERMON. 


all. It is the simple instinct of energetic nattre, never 
wholly divested of a sort of rude nobility, and never 
destitute of influence upon the lives and upon the char. 
acters of others. The word ‘zeal’ is used indiscrimi- 
nately in scripture in order to denote a strong feeling 
of the mind, whether bent upon evil design or in 
cultivating the things which are of good report and 
lovely. Hence in the 17th verse of the 5th chapter of 
the Acts of the apostles, we read that ‘* The high priest 
and they that were with him were filled with envy,”— 
with zeal, as it is in the original; while in the Book of 
Numbers, Phineas is commended for the zeal with 
which he rose up against those who had violated the 
law of the Lord ; and when once, just once, in the Re- 
deemer’s incarnate life, his disciples saw his holy 
indignation burn as the merchandise was scattered and 
the baffled money-changers driven from the temple 
they had profaned, they remembered the place where it 
is written—“ The zeal of thy house hath eaten me up.” 

Zeal in itself, then, is neither morally excellent nor 
morally blameworthy, and it becomes Christian zeal 
only when it springs from Christian motive—when it is 
displayed in a Christian manner—when it is used for 
Christian ends. The great constraining motive of 
Christian zeal, as of every other grace or energy that is 
halicwed, is “ the love of God shed abroad in the 
heart,” and kindling a pure disinterested brotherly love 
to the fellow man. All true christian zeal bears this 
mark of the mintage. Where this is not, it is mere 
counterfeit coin. hatever may be the special mani- 
festation in which zeal embodies itself—whether it be 
in Christian enterprise, whether it be in indignant 
rebuke against the insolence of error, whether it run 
with willing feet to answer some claim of distress, or to 
respond to some summons which has been passed from 
the chamber of the dying—love must be the source 
from which all its movements spring. If it be not the 
offspring of love it will be a blind distempered emotion 


ire, never 
und never 
. the char- 
idiscrimi- 
1g feeling 
ign or in 
sport and 
hapter of 
igh priest 
envy, ’— 
> Book of 
zeal with 
lated the 
n the Re- 
his holy 
tered and 
e temple 
2 where it 
1 me up.” 
llent nor 
stian zeal 
when it is 
used for 
notive of 
ry that is 
1d in the 
erly love 
ears this 
t is mere 
ial mani- 
her it be 
ndignant 
er it run 
ess, or to 
sed from 
e source 
> not the 
emotion 


FAREWELL SERMON. 


consuming rather than cheerful. serving the altar of 
God with strange and heathen fire. And then, in like 
manner, not Only must the motive of Christian zeal be 
pure, but its expression must be tolerant and merciful 
as it becometh the gospel of Christ. Full often in the 
history of human opinion, zeal has burned with the 
fierce heat of natural passion, rather than with the 
flame, lambent and luminous, of heavenly love, In 
times of ecclesiastical dominance, zeal has grasped the 
persecutor’s sword, and kindled the martyr’s fire ; and 
even in the milder times of toleration it has not spared 
to wield the scoff and fling the sneer. It were alike 
profitless and cruel to enumerate the occasions in all 
ages, and alas, in all churches, in which charity has 
been wounded to the death in her contest with intem- 
perate zeal; but christianity has neither act nor part 
in a spirit that is ruthless and cruel. Christian zeal 
will discriminate as Christ discriminated. Christian zeal 
will know how to rebuke sin, while with clasping ten- 
derness it welcomes and would embrace the sinner. 
Christian zeal will neither be disingenuous to oppo- 
nents, nor willfully blind to the excesses of friends. 
Christian zeal will hasten to acknowledge an involun- 
tary error, and will spurn the unworthy artifice and the 
tortuous policy away. Christian zeal will rejoice not 
in popular iniquity, but in prescribed and unfashionable 
truth. Christian zeal will cling to an opinion only so 
far as it is right, will disclaim it when it has no creden- 
tial but authority, and no argument but the custom of 
the ancestors or the tradition of the school-man. 
Christian zeal, even in the warmth of its enthusiasm, 
will regard the most cherished dogma as of infinitely 
less value than the most indifferent man. Christian 
zeal will care more for souls than for systems, and will 
shrink with the scrupulous haste with which men shrink 
from being accessory to a murder, from anything which 
will erafadia a brother from the truth, or alienate his 


256 FAREWELL SERMON. 


heart from a new and right affection. And then again 
in Christian zeal all the objects on behalf of which its 
energy is exercised must be according to the mind of 
Christ, and must tend to the furtherance of God’s mil. 
lennial purpose of “ peace on earth, and good will 
towards men.” Ience, the chief object of Christian 
zeal will be the spread of the religion of Jesus—that 
which is the great cementing bond of all social rela- 
tions here, and which links them in a higher fellowship 
with the brotherhoods of heaven. Hence in the spread 
of the religion of Jesus there is a worthy sphere for its 
highest energies and intensest cares—here, where calm- 
ness is impiety, and transport temper—here, where 
heaven lavishes its generosity to stimulate the gene. 
rosity of earth—here, where for the sake of those so 
dearly loved and so costily ransomed, to secure their 
salvation from the ruin born for them it was befitting 
that the Son of God should die. And is it not strange, 
brethren, that of all enterprises this should be left so 
often to the undevoutness of luke-warm devotion, 
while in.all other matters enthusiasm is commended— 
at once considered the pledge of sincerity and the 
augury of success? This, the highest and the most 
inspiring principle is pleaded for with a prose of piety 
and a moderation which would not offend a stoic. The 
world applauds the zealous in everything but religion ; 
the world predicts the triumph of the zealous in every- 
thing connected with her province. The warrior 
whose breast shall shine with stars—the scholar who 
makes a hush and pant as he appears, as if men held 
their breath in wonder—they are those who set an ob- 
ject before them and strive for it through the hazards 
of years, and would deem themselves a shame and 
unworthy, if they did aot put heart into their work. 
And shall not the Christian be in earnest with a cause 
that ennobles, with a responsibility which he may not 
transfer, with the destinies of his fellows for ever, 
trembling in the balance and in some sort committed 


Let t 


hen again 
which its 
e mind of 
tod’s mil. 
good will 
Christian 
sus—that 
yeial rela- 
ellowship 
he spread 
re for its 
1ere calm- 
re, where 
the gene- 
' those so 
sure their 
» befitting 
t strange, 
be left so 
devotion, 
nended— 
and the 
the most 
e of piety 
bic. The 
eligion ; 
in every- 

warrior 
blar who 
nen held 
et an ob- 
hazards 
me and 
r work. 
a cause 
nay not 
br ever, 
mmitted 


FAREWELL SERMON. 257 


to his fidelity as a witness for God? With the solemn 
concerns of the soul shall there be trifling ? Whena 
moment’s opportunity welcomed or slighted may 
decide the fortunes of an eternity, shall languid counsels 
prosper or faint desires prevail ? When a real strife is 
waged, fiercer far than the fabled battle between the 
giants and the gods, and heaven and hell are in earn- 
est for the possession of the man, shall those who have 
been won for God be craven or traitorous in the fight ? 
No! Surely if worldly objects fire ambition and claim 
advocacy as earnest as their presumed importance de- 
mands, religion, best among the good things, best in 
intrinsic value, best in the magnificence of the issues 
in which it shall terminate, shall have its zealously 
affected sons shrinking from no sacrifice to promote it, 
contending bravely for it in the very heart of incumb- 
ent peril, and sparing not, in their heroism of devotion, 
the costly offerings of the life and of the blood. 
Brethren ! the summons is to you. Let the tones stir 
you like a clarion! You are called to rise into this ex- 
alted and energetic consecration. There is a climax of 
encouraging circumstances to-day, and there is a vast 
compression of claim. Motives of transcending 
authority crowd upon your memories and are falling 
upon your hearts with power. Oh, respond to them ! 
Let to-day be the last of the indifferent and the first of 
the devoted ones, and in the fervency of a resolve based 
too deeply to be forgotten, let your vow be breathed 
—‘“ For Zion’s sake I will not hold my peace, and for 
Jerusalem’s sake I will not rest, until the righteous- 
ness thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation 
thereof as a lamp that burneth.” 

II. And then, secondly and chiefly—for here, as we 
reminded you, lies the pith of the apostle’s warning— 
“Ttis good to be zealously atfected always,’’—always— 
“in a good thing.”’ 

The Galatians in the presence of the apostle were 
warm and extravagant in their professions of attach- 


a 


958 FAREWELL SERMON. 


ment, both to himself and to the cause to which he had 
given his life, but they needed his presence. The 

needed his presence to prevent the relapse of their af. 
fections into indifference—nay not only into indifference 
but into opposition, inveterate in proportion to their 
former enthusiasm He therefore reminds them that 
zeal, to be valuable, should be permanent—that it should 
not be based upon the shifting sand of favourable cir. 
cumstances, but rooted in a well principled conviction, 
which like a rock, will be granite to the storm as well 
as granite to the sunshine. 

Evidences of the same necessity are occurring in the 
ordinary relations of life. It isso in nature. We do 
not value an intermitting spring so much as the clear 
brooklet which our childhood knew, and which has 
laughed on its course unheeding, and which could never 
be persuaded to dry up though it has had to battle 
against the scorchings of a jubilee of summers’ suns, 
We do not guide ourselves by the glow-worm’s bead of 
light, or with the marsh-lamp’s fitful flame. No, we 
look to the ancient sun, which in our infancy struggled 
through the window and danced upon the wall of the 
nursery, as if he knew how much we delighted to see 
him light up the flower-cup and peep through the 
shivering leaf, And, for ourselves, we do not value 
tne affection of a stranger awakened by some casual 
congeniality, and displayed in kindly greeting or in 
occasional courtesy. Our wealth is in the patient 
bearing, and the unnoticed deed, and the anticipated 
wish, and the ready sympathies, which make a summer 
and a paradise, wherever there is a home. And not 
only in the natural and the social relations, but in the 
enterprise of the world, in the busy activities of men, 
the necessity for uniformity in earnestness is readily ac- 
knowledged. Society very soon brands a man if he 
has got a perseverance as well as an earnestness about 
him. Society soon puts its mark upon the man who 
lodges in a succession of Utopias, the unwearied but 


the 
becs 
bril 


wor 
gen 
spar 
stea 
B 
to h 
God 
you 
vesté 
orn 
of o¢ 
sufte 
in h 
out 
neve 


to a 
with 


_whie 


whic 
gretf 
Kphe 
for e: 
ment 
arran 
lowe: 
and t 
classi 
their 
zeal | 
to-da 
usefu 
seem 
indiv 


nich he had 
ice. They 
of their af. 
indifference 
yn to their 

them that 
at it should 
yurable cir. 
conviction, 
rm as well 


ring in the 
e. Wedo 
3 the clear 
which has 
ould never 
1 to battle 
mers’ suns, 
a’s bead of 
e. No, we 
struggled 
vall of the 
nted to see 
trough the 
not value 
pme casual 
pting or in 
he patient 
anticipated 
a summer 
And not 
but in the 
es of men, 
readily ac- 
man if he 
ness about 
man who 
earied but 


FAREWELL SERMON. 259 


: ¢ 
the objectless builder who never roofs his house, either 
because he was unable to finish, or because some more 
prilliant speculation dazzled the builders’ brain. The 
world has got so matter-of-fact now that it jostles the 
genius off the footpath, while the plodder, whose eyes 
sparkle less brilliantly but more evenly and longer, 
steadily proceeds on his way to success. 

Brethren, I trust you have allowed these illustrations 
to have weight with you. The zeal which you feel for 
God, the zeal which you feel for Christ, the zeal which 
you feel for the cause of the Saviour, must be as the 
vestal fire of old, never suffered to go out either by day 
ornight. The church is ill served by the geyser heat 
of occasional passion which subsides ere its warmth is 
suffered to pervade. It wants a continual energy which, 
in humble imitation of the Great Giver of good, pours 
out its wealth of blessing, never stops its hand, and 
never says, “It is enough.” 

There are temptations to the lack of perseverance in 
religion which do not operate so, forcibly in reference 
to anything besides. ‘There is a perpetual enmity 
without—there is an unsubdued traitorousness within, 


which go far to account for the defective zeal over 


which we have to mourn, and for the tact written re- 
gretfully to the angels of other churches than that of 
Kphesus, that they have left their first love. There is, 
for example, the undue prevalence of individual attach- 
ment, and there is the altered state of the family 
arrangements, and there is the transition from the 
lower to the higher room in the general house of wealth, 
and there are a thousand other causes which defy the 
classification of language, but which are powerful in 
their influence to damp and deaden the once ardent 
zeal for God. How many are there in the churches of 
to-day—how many are there in this church—who were 
useful and earnest when they were poorer men, but 
seem to have invested their energy—to have sunk their 
individuality in their money, asif a dead coin—a coin 


260 FAREWELL SERMON. 


with the image of its Ceesar—were an equivalent for 
living man—a man witha heart and a will! How 
many are there in all churches who are full of enthusj. 
asm when the pet plan is carried out, or when the 
favorite minister preaches, but who are at other times 
inert and listless, as if their hearts were a cabinet of 
which only one man kept the key, or as if they were a 
sort of curiously wrought automaton capable of many 
movements, but one skillful hand alone knew how to 
pull the strings. 

Brethren, if there are such here, I should like to arouse 
you this morning to an acknowledgment of the apostle’s 
word. If religion is a good thing, it is always a good 
thing. It is the portion of the rich man, as well as the 
treasure of the poor. It is good, by whomsoever recom. 
mended ; it is good, by whomsoever disgraced; it is 
good, whether the stammerer’s lips pour out their painful 
advocacy, or whether from eloquent lips the words lea 
in living thunder. It is not to be saluted with the 
traitorous kiss either of time-serving or of treacherous 
lips. It claims the life ; it claims the soul ; it claims the 
all. Its obligations deepen as the shadows gather on 
life’s day, and as the sands drop from life’s hour-glass, 
and as the great hour of retribution comes stealthily on. 
Oh! if ever there were arguments to awaken your 
interest, those arguments are ten times more powerful 
now. The soul is as precious as ever it was, and the 
heritage to which it aspires is yet as attainable, and life 
is as uncertain as the tenure upon which all its opportu- 
nities are held. All the privilege and all the experience 
of the past come to charge the present with interest, and 
are hoarded to freight the future with all the wealth of 
accumulated years. 

Brethren, with all possible earnestness, and with all 
possible affection, I exhort you to be “ zealously affected 
always in a good thing ;” and forgive me if I add, with 
no claim either to apostolic fervor, or to apostolic autho- 
rity, but with a yearning for your spiritual welfare, of 


whit 
wit 

fron 
if th 
tions 
the 

them 


our 
aia 
nece 
word 
and 
is co 
plain 
of mé 
name 
but d 
forge 
this h 
gathe: 
witne 
Jesus 
haltin 
in it, 
yours 
gospel 
baptiz 
manly 
from | 

The 
declar 
withir 
in bla 


| hallow 


ration: 
ig in J 
the sp: 
Be yo 


alent for g 
ill! How 
of enthusi. 
when the 
ther times 
cabinet of 
hey were a 
le of many 
ew how to 


e to arouse 
ne apostle’s 
"ays a good 
well as the 
ver recom- 
ced.; it is 
eir painful 
words leap 

with the 
reacherous 
claims the 
gather on 

our-glass, 
althily on. 
uken your 
B powerful 
5, and the 
>, and life 
3 opportu- 
Xperience 
erest, and 
wealth of 


l with all 
y affected 
add, with 
lic autho- 
relfare, of 


FAREWELL SERMON. 261 


which God is my witness—* Not only when I am present 
with you.” If the ministry to which you have listened 
from this pulpit has been in any measure blessed to you; 
if there are between us those mysterious and tender rela- 
tions which must ever subsist between those who sit at 
the feet of Jesus and those who are privileged to lead 
them there, I pray you do me not this wrong—let not 
your languid or your failing piety make my glorying 
void! The long bond which has united us is now of 
necessity loosened. "rom other lips you will listen to the 
words of eternal li*e, Our interest in each other, fresh, 
and vivid, and hearty now, will become—by a law that 
is common, and of which, therefore, we may not com- 
plain—fainter and fainter, until down the long corridors 
of memory we must gaze, to recall with an effort the 
names and the circumstances which are so familiar to-day; 
but deeply in a heart which does not soon nor readily 
| forget, will be graven, in distinct lettering, the name of 
this house of prayer, and of the congregation which has 
gathered and hearkened within its walls. God is my 
witness how greatly I long for you in the bowels of 
Jesus Christ! ‘There are prophets who predict your 
halting : there are, I fear, malignants who would rejoice 
init, Be it yours to prove the prophets false ones : be it 
yours to have over the malignants the nobility of a 
gospel revenge. As the fathers die, let the children be 
baptized for the dead, and, by a bright succession of 
manly and intelligent piety, prevent the burial-ground 
from becoming richer than the church. 

The same truth will be preached to you: I am bold to 
declare that. No diluted gospel will ever he proclaimed 
within these walls; no trumpet will ever vainly flourish 
in blasts of uncertain sound; no bald morality, no un- 
hallowed speculation, no jargon of daring and mystic 
rationalism will ever be preached here. The truth as it 
is in Jesus, as at once the highest source of holiness, and 
the spring of the grandest morality, will be spoken here. 
Be you eager to espouse, be you manly to maintain it! 


262 FAREWELL SERMON. 


“ Only let your conversation be as becometh the gospel of 
Christ, that whether I come and see you, or else be absent, 
I may hear of your affairs, that ye stand fast in one spirit, 
with one mind—striving together for the faith of the 
gospel, and that others come to you too, imploring the 
shelter of your presence—“ We will go with you, for we 
have heard that God is with you ’—and that your church 
may be rich, not only in ancestral tradition, but in living 
experience, honor to God, and as was the upper room, 
renowned for the rushing wind, and for the cloven tongues 
of flame. “It is .o0d ‘ve zealously affected always in a 
good thing, and noi») ' ~vhen I am present with you.” 
III. My time is go \» enlarge upon the profitableness 
of Christian zeal. “itis go...” No higher praise than 
that can be given to it. “It is good.” The very thing 
that was said of the fairly finished earth, on the morning 
of Jehovah’s rest and pleasure. “It is good”—the very 
thing that is spoken of God himself; “Thou art good, and 
doest good.” “It is good to he zealously affected always, 
in a good thing.” It is good in itself; it is good in its in- 
fluences. Where the heart preserves the ardour of devotion, 
it will preserve the ardour of enterprise. It will be 
always at work for the best interests of men. There 
will be no time for dalliance with temptation ; there 
will be no time for the misgiving of unbelief. The 
active love and the loyal heart will be mutually helpful 
to each other, and the man will grow like a cedar—his 
roots wedging themselves close and firm into the Rock 
of Ages, his branches flinging themselves upward with 
such graceful aim that no tree in the garden of God 
shall be like unto him in his beauty. ‘“ It is good to 
be zealously affected always in a good thing.” And 
who shall estimate the effect upon the progress of the 
Redecmer’s Kingdom, when the Church is filled with 
the spirit of Christian zeal? Oh! a prospect of ineff- 
able spiritual beauty rises up before the prophetic eye, 
informed by the spirit of the Master. ‘tadh member 
of the Church becomes a missionary of the truth, and 


v f : 
ae te 


there 
the co 
thous 
in gro 
of eve 
word 
its int 
reigns 
made 
comet 
the co 
out a 
unive 
cesslO 


Sabb 


he gospel of 
> be absent, 
1 One spirit, 
uith of the 
ploring the 
you, for we 
four church 
ut in living 
pper room, 
ven tongues 
always in a 
rith you.” 
ofitableness 
praise than 
very thing 
he morning 
—the very 
t good, and 
ted always, 
d in its in- 
f devotion, 
It will be 
n. There 
on ; there 
lief. The 
lly helpful 
cedar—his: 
the Rock 

ward with 
en of God 
1s good to 
g.” And 
‘ess of the 
illed with 
; of inefi- 
hetic eye, 
1 member 
ruth, and 


FAREWELL SERMON. 263 


is neither silence nor faltering in the testimony, 
Me cae of love, which are the bands of a man, enclose 
thousands in the gospel fellowship ; the Church itself, 
in growing purity and strength, becomes the a aight 
of ever-ripening authority ; the world, charged by t . 
word as the living epistles speak it, bows it ranks, an 
its intellect, and its pride, before the feet of Jesus; he 
reigns, “‘ whose right it is,” over a regenerate people 
made “ willing in the day of his power ;’’ and “ then 
cometh the end’”—the finished mystery of the cross— 
the consummated glories of redemption—a world with- 
out a rebel—the grand, solemn, waiting hush of the 
universe—the coronation of the triumphant Son—the 
cession of the Sonship in the Godhead—an eternal 
Sabbatic noon—God all in all. 


HENRY WARD BEECHER, D.D. 


«ay 


ites ¢ Hi we OG 


HENRY WARD BEECHER. 


MEMOIR. 


JENRY WARD BEECHER, one of the ablest living 
j| pulpit preachers, and one 01 -he most profoundly 
at H original thinkers of the ay pea day, was born at 
Litchfield, Connecticut, on the 24th day of June, 1813. Ilis 
father, Dr. Lyman ’ Beecher, an earnest and talented 
preacher of the Boa el, officiated at that time, and for many 
years after, over the ‘first Congregational Church of that 
place. Subsequently, Dr. Beecher was called to the charge 
of the Hanover St. Presbyterian Church, in tho city of Bos- 
ton, where he resided about six years. At the expiration of 
that time he accepted the Presi ency of the Lane Theologi- 
cal Seminary, of Cincinnati, Ohio. Some years after wards, 
however, he resigned this charge, and returned to Boston. 
He was a sincere Christian, and one of the earliest and 
blest advocates of the temperance cause. 

Henry Ward received his early education at the Litchfield 
Common Schools, and is said to have been more remarkable 
for wit than for devotion to his studies. At the age of 
seventeen years he entered Amherst College, graduating in 
1834, Having a predilection for Divinity, he entered the 
Lane Seminary, then under his father’s charge, where he 
went through a thorough course of theological studies, 
Emerging thence, a fully qualified preacher, he received « 
tempor ary call, in 1837, to the pastorate ofa ‘small church at 
Lawrenceburg, Indiana, where his maiden efforts were put 
forth with much diffidence and hesitancy. But as his ex- 
perience and self-confidence increased, he began to exhibit 

11 


268 HENRY WARD BEECHER—MEMOIR. 


that fervor and genius which have rendered his name and 
fame so familiar in these latter years. He received a call to 
a larger sphere of usefulness in Indianapolis, in 1839. Here 
he remained for eight years. In 1847 he removed to Brook. 
lyn, N.Y. On the first Sunday in October, of that year, 
this almost unknown young man, from the West, preached 
his first sermon as pastor of Plymouth Church, in Brooklyn, 
Viewed in the light of the subsequent history of the pastor 
and the church, this was a memorable occasion. Henry 
Ward Beecher was then scarcely known beyond the limits 
of his own denomination ; but there was the promise of 
greatness in him. Enthusiastic, eloquent, unconven- 
tional, and independent, he impressed his hearers with the 
feeling that he was born to inaugurate a new era in pulpit 
oratory. ‘There were some who prophesied that he would 
not hold oni. Some, who believed preaching and dull 
decorum to be synonymous, gave him “a yearto run.” His 
style might suit the West, they said, but would never take in 
the polite and elegant congregations of New York and 
Brooklyn. But as the months went by it wav evident that 
the young man had taken a strong hold on the hearts of his 
hearers. His eloquence, his glowing enthusiasm, his broad, 
intense sympathies, his personal magnetism, his manly inde- 
pendence, attracted multitudes about his pulpit, and his 
name soon became familia:: as a household word throughout 
the iength and breadth ofthe land. 

Plymouth Church and its pastor have grown up together, 
working hand in hand for all the good and worthy objects 
for which the Christian Church was instituted If he has 
impressed his strong personalities upon his church and made 
it what it is, it must also be borne in mind that his church 
has never been backward in sustaining him. Entire unity 
and harmony bind them together. The festival, by which 
the twenty-fifth anniversary of his settlement as pastor of 
the church was celebrated in 1872, was not inappropriately 
called a “ silver wedding.” 

Plymouth Church owes its wonderful growth and pros- 

erity to the gigantic ability and indefatigable energies of 
its pastor. Foremost in every good work toward which the 
efforts of the congregation are directed, his zeal and deter- 
mination overcome all obstacles, and admit of no defeat. 


Ss name and 
ved a call to 
1839. Here 
2d to Brook. 
f that year, 
st, preached 
n Brooklyn, 
f the pastor 
on. Henry 
1 the limits 
promise of 

unconven- 
rs with the 
ra in pulpit 
; he would 
y and dull 
run.” His 
ever take in 
~ York and 
vident. that 
earts of his 
» his broad, 
nanly inde- 
it, and his 
hroughout 


» together, 
hy objects 
It he hag 
and made 
is church 
itire unity 
by which 
pastor of 
ropriately 


and pros: 
nergies of 
which the 
ind. deter- 
10 defeat, 


HENRY WARD BEECHER—MEMOIR. 269 


Thoroughly in earnest in his efforts for the intellectual and 
moral elevation of society, sparing no evil, and shunning no 
contest, he fearlessly exposes himself to personal and _poli- 
tical enmities, and to the shafts of scorn, slander, and 
ridicule. To his efforts, to the messin of his ova 
vation, are due the two important home 
sated: and sustained by Plymouth Church—the “ Bethel 
Mission,” in Hicks Street, and the “ Navy Mission,” in 
Jay Street, where thousands of the poor are supplied with 
religious instruction on the Sabbath, and with free reading- 
rooms during the week, to which everyone is welcome. 
The amount of good which these missions have accomplished 
among the poor of the city can be appreciated only by those 
who have seen the reading-rooms crowded night after night 
by young and old, eagerly poring over the books, magazines, 
and newspapers with which they are amply pet 
Many a young man is saved from gin-shop temptations by 
these attractive rooms. It is not saying too much, to aver 
that these missions are the crowning work of Plymouth 
Church and its pastor. Not even his great and brilliant 
services in the cause of freedom ; not even his magnificent 
oratorical triumph in England during the American civil 
war, can be placed higher than these unobtrusive missions, 
in their permanent influence for good. 

The fame of Mr, Beecher rests upon no insecure founda- 
tion, It does not spring, as is too often the case, from a mere 
flimsy flow of language, used as a garb to hide the barren- 
ness of ideas. Entirely and thoroughly original in all he 
utters—a deep-thinking intellect, a profound student in his 
own profession, a judge of human nature by gel, a 
most wonderful analogist,—his audiences hang upon 9 
speech, to discover new ideas and new revelations of truth, 
illustrated with new and striking similitudes, and clothed 
in original and eloquent diction, Preaching for twenty-six 
years in the same church, before almost the same congrega- 
tion, he still rivets their attention, and draws that ~ 
throng together, week aiter week, by the magnetism of his 
genius and the electricity of his nature. isons 

The versatility of his genius, and the almost incredible 
amount of labour which Mr. Beecher performs, are truly 
marvellous, In addition to preaching twice on each Sab, 


270 HENRY WARD BEECHER—MEMOIR. 


bath, addressing the Sabbath-school, his labours at tho 
various meetings for conference and prayer throughout the 
week, and to ‘the customary ministerial duties connected 
with attendance upon the families of his congregation in 
ee astoral calls and in seasons of sickness and trial, this most 
eae rolific author has published several works on various sub. 

ve Moa’ amongst which we may name—“ Lectures to Young 

en,” “ Industry and Idleness,” “ Life Thoughts,” “ Nor. 
wood, ” @ reminiscence of early New England life, and the 
«Life of Jesus, the Christ,” of each of which scores of 
thousands of copies have been sold. Throughout the lectur- 
ing season he 1s ubiquitus, addressing immense audiences 


Ww in “the various cities, the proceeds being devoted to his 
Pome many charities. He likewise fills the chair of editor of one 
| ¢ of the most popular of religious newspapers, “ The Chris. 
r r tian Union,” and his labors, ‘assisted by those of his talented 

sister, Harriet Beecher Stowe, have won for it an unprece- 


dented circulation. Mr. Beecher may justly be considered 


one of the greatest leaders of modern thought. “Tf 
miserg 


It is 
. thin, 
A 6 ohad 
cour 
He | 
the | 
foun 
own 
sutt 
hav 
S whi 
fe how 
tur 
myt 
com 


’ 


urs at the 
ughout the 

connected 
regation in 
» this most 
rarlous sub- 
sto Young 
3,” “N on. 
fe, and the 
1 scores of 
the lectur- 
» audiences 
ted to his 
litor of one 
The Chris- 
lis talented 
an unprece- 
considered 


I. 


IMMORTALITY. * 


“Tf in this life only we have .bope in Christ, we are ot all men most 
miserable.’’—1 Cor. xv. 19, 


aR 


HIS is not the declaration of a universal princi- 
Es ple: it is biographical and personal. And yet, 
icatet) there is in it a principle of prime importance, 
It is true that Paul and his compeers had sacrificed every- 
thing that was dear to man for the sake of Christ. Paul 
had given up the place that he had held among his 
countrymen, and the things which surely awaited him, 
Ne had consented to be an exile. Loving Palestine and 
the memory of his fathers, as only a Jew could love, he 
found himself an outcast, and despised everywhere by his 
own people. And the catalogue that he gives of the 
sufferings which he felt-keenly; which perhaps would not 
have been felt by a man less susceptible than he, but 
which were no less keen in his case—that catalogue shows 
how much he had given up for Christ. And if it should 
turn out that after all he had followed a mere fable, a 
myth; that Christ was but a man; that, dying, he had 
come to an end; that he stayed dead, and that there was 


* Easter-Sunday Morning, April 13, 1868. Lesson: 1 Cor, xv. 1-28, 


ZT2 IMMORTALITY. 


no resurrection, no future, but only that past through 
which he had waded, and that present in which he was 
suffering, then, surely, it would be true that of all men 
he was most miserable. 

This is the biographical view; but it may be said of 
all men, in this respect, that no persons can so ill afford 
to lose faith of immortality as those who have had all 
their affections burnished, deepened and rendered sensi- 
tive by the power of Christianity. When Christianity 
has had the education of generation after generation, and 
has shaped the style of its manhood, and ordained the 
institutions by which its affections have been enlarged 
and purified; when, in short, generations of men have 
been legitimately the children of Christianity, to take 
away from them the faith of immortality would be a 
cruelty which could have no parallel in the amount ot 
suffering which it would entail. 

It is not necessarily true that men without a hope of 
Christianity would have no incitement to virtue—certainly 
not in the ordinary way in which it is put to us. Ab- 
stractly, it is said that virtue is its own reward—and it is, 
If there was enough of it to amount to anything, it would 
be a great, an exceeding great, reward; but where ‘+ isa 
spark, a germ; where itis struggling for its own exist- 
ence; where it bears but a few rip» fruits, the reward is 
hardly worth the culture. If all thai we get is what we 
have in this life, it is but littie. 

Many men are favorably organized and favorably situ- 
ated; they have an unyearning content; things seem 
good enough for them; and they do not understand why 
it is that persons should desire immortality and glory— 
that is, at first. In general, I think there are few persons 
that live long in life who do not, sooner or later, come to 
a point in which they wake up to the consciousness of a 
need of this kind. Jt is not always true in the case of 
persoiis of refined moral and intellectual culture that they 
are conscious of needing a belief in immortality ; but a 
belief in ‘mortality is the unavoidable result ana the 


indi 
you 
larg’ 
con 
com 
or fi 
and 
fron 
tow: 
dire 
T 
stag 
inset 
and 
out 
Anc 
tion 
the 
of 
dire 
M 
littl 
littl 
may 
Op 
dev 
org 
yeti 
ines 
mot 
pur 
tron 
bod 
if y 
mal 
the 
talk 
is § 


st. through 
che he was 
t all men 


be said of 
» ill afford 
ve had all 
ared_ sensgi- 
hristianity 
‘ation, and 
lained the 
1 enlarged 
men have 
y, to take 
ould be a 
amount ot 


a hope of 
—certainly 
us. Ab- 
—and it is, 
r, it would 
lere jh isa 
wn exist- 
reward is 
what we 


ably situ- 
ngs seem 
pene why 

1 glory— 
W persons 
, come to 
ness of a 
e case of 
that they 
y; but a 
ana the 


IMMORTALITY. 273 


indispensable requirement of all true manhood. When 
you look at growth, not in each particular case, but 
largely, as it develops itself in communities; when you 
consider it, not only in a single individual, but in whole 
communities, as they develop from childhood to manhood, 
ot from barbarism through semi-civilization to civilization 
and refinement, the law of development i is always away 
from animal life and its sustaining appetites and passions 
toward the moral and the intellec tual. That is the 
direction in which unfolding takes place. 

The naturalist watches the insect, and studies all the 
stages through which it goes, till it becomes a perfect 
insect. We look at a seed, and see how it develops stem 
and leaf and blossom all the way through, till we find 
out what the plant is in its final and perfect condition. 
And in studying men to know what is the perfect condi- 
tion of manhood, looking at them from the beginning to 
the end, which way does manhood lie, in the direction 
of the ‘bodily appetites and senses, or in the other 
direction ¢ 

Men come into life perfect animals. There is very 
little that culture does in that direction, giving them a 
little more or a little less use of themselves, as the case 
may be. That which we mean when we speak of devel- 
oping manhood in a child, is something more than the 
development of symmetry of form and power of physical 
organization. When we speak of the civilization and 
refinement of the race at large, development does not 
mean bodily power nor bodily skill: it means reason 
inoral sense ; imagination ; profounder affection ; subtler, 
purer, sweeter domestic relations. Manhood grows away 
trom bodily conditions, without ever leaving them. The 
hody becomes a socket, and thesoulisalamp init. ind 
if you look narrowly at what we mean by growth in 
mankind, whether it be applied to the individual or to 
the race, you will tind that we mean an unfolding which 
takes a man away from the material toward that which 
is subtler, more spiritual, existing outside of the ordinary 


274 IMMORTALITY. 


senses, though acting from them, as something better 
than bone and muscle, nerve and tissue. 

All development, then, is from the animal toward the 
spiritual and the invisible. This is the public sentiment 
of mankind even in the lower forms of society. What 
are considered heroic traits, the things which brin 
admiration to men, if narrowly examined will be rh: 
to be not the things which belong to men as brutes— 
though these things may be employed by them as instru. 
ments. Even in “the o 2zases of such men as Samson and 
Hercules, who were'rude, brute men, it was not their 
strength that drew admiration to them: it was their 
heroism ; ; it was their patriotism ; it was that which they 
did by their strength for their kind, and not for them- 
selves. And in lower § societies it is courage, it is self: 
devotion, it is the want of fear, it is the higher form of 
aninal life, that attracts admin: ation, But as we develop 
out of barbarous into civilized conditions, we admire men, 
not because they ean lift so much, or throw such hes avy 
weights, or endure such hardships of body. Admiration 
on these avcounts has its place; but hizher than these is 
the power of thouxht, the power of planning, the power 
of executing, the power of living at one point so as to 
comprehend i in the effects produced all cireuits of time in 
the future. Thought-power; emotion; moral sense; 
justice ; equity in all i's forms; higher manhood, and its 
branches, which stretch up into the atmosphere and reach 
nearest to the sun—these are something other than those 
qualities which develop earliest, and are lowest—nearest 
to the ground. 

True manhood, ee has its ripeness in the higher 
faculties. With: vit disdaining the companionship of the 
body, the manhood of man grows away from it—in 
another direction. 
the physical that is *» man: but there is,by means of the 
physical, the ripenin,’ of the intellevtual, the emotional, 
the moral, ths asthet. > life, as well as the whole ; spiritual 
nature. 


“here is not simply the ripening of 


\ 
will 
val 


con 
seek 
this 
per 
thei 
to t 
sure 
we 
buil 
buil 
heat 
Ant 
may 
men 
wort 
rend 
thou 
Incw 
pern 
the ¢ 
Tl 
Men 
evan 
thing 
out 
peri 
allel 
conn 
W 
ASsOK 
stoo 
so m 
ever 
caus 
inex 


ing better 


oward the 
sentiment 
ty. What 
ich brin 
| be found 
s brutes— 
. as instru- 
mson and 
not their 
was their 
vhich they 
, for them. 
, it is self. 
a¢ form of 
ve develop 
mire men, 
uch heavy 
dmiration 
n these is 
the power 
tL so as to 
of time in 
al sense; 
d, and its 
and reach 
han those 
—nearest 


1e higher 
ip of the 
m it—in 
ening of 
ns of the 
motional, 
spiritual 


IMMORTALITY. 275 


When reason and the moral sense are developed, there 
will inevitably spring up within a man an element the 

value of which consists in perpetuating things—in their 
continuance. It is spontaneous and universal for one to 
seek to perpetuate, to extend, life. I do not mean by 
this that one wants to live a erent while; but men are 

yerpetually under the unconscious influence of this in 
fhatp nature: the attempt to give form and permanence 
to that which is best in tneir manhood. We build, to be 
sure, primarily, to cover ourselves from the elements : ; but 
we very soon cease to build for that only: we not merely 
build tor protection from cold and from wet, but we 
build for gratification, We build to gratify the sense of 
heauty, the sense of convenience, and the sense of love. 
And we go on beyond that: we build in order that we 
may send down’ to those who are to come after us a 
memorial of our embodied, ine: nated thoughts. In other 
words, when men build, they seek, by incarnation, to 
render things permanent. which have existed only as 
thoughts or transient emotions. There is a tendency to 
incarnate the fugitive elements in men, and give them 
permanence. And the element of continuing is one of 
the elements which belong to the higher manhood. 

This throws ltght upon ‘the material growths of society. 
Men strive to perpetuate thoughts and ‘feelings which are 
evanescent unless they are born into matter. Men build 
things for duration, There is this unconscious following 
out of things to make them last; to give them long 
periods. And it opens up to men the sense of their 
augmented being. Largeness of being is indissolubly 
connected with extended time of being. 

We admire the pyramids, not because they have been 
associated with so many histories, but because they have 
stood so many ages. We admire old trees, not because 
so many tribes have sat under them, nor because so many 
events have taken place beneath them, but simply be- 

cause they have age with them. For there are mute, 
inexplicable feelings covnected with the mere extension 


276 IMMORTALITY. 


of time which belong to the higher development of man. 
hood in ws. Frangible things are of less value than 
things that are infrangible. Things that last are of more 
value, on the same plane, than their ¢ congeners are that 
do not last. 

Who ~ equal the pictures which are painted on the 
panes of glass in our winter rooms? Where can you find 
a Lambineau, or any painter who can give mountain 
scenery such as we have for nothing, every morning, 
when we wake up, and such as the sun outside, or the 
stove inside, destroys before ten o’clock ? These pictures 
are noi valued as are those which are painted on canvas, 
and which are not half so good; but the element of 
enduring is with the latter, while the element of evan- 
escence is with the former. Though the pictures on the 
Lei are finer than those on the canvas, they lack the 

.ement of time, on which value so largely depends. The 
pre craves, hunygers for, this quality of continuance as an 
element for measuring the value of things. This element 
of time’ is somewhat felt in the earlier conditions of 
humanity; but it grows with the development of men, 
and attaches itself to every part of human life. 

I never saw a diamond that was so beautiful as are the 
dew-drops which [ see on my lawn in surhmer. What is 
the difference vetween a dew-drop and a diamond? One 
goes in a moment; it flashes and dies; but the other 
endures ; and its value consists in its endurance. There 
are hundreds of things which are as beautiful as a diamond 
in their moment ; but the endurance of the diamond is 
measured by ¢ ages, and not by moments, and so earries on 
the value. 

[ do not draw these reasonings very close as yet—I do 
not desire to put too much emphasis upon them; but | 
think you will see that there is a drift in them, and tinat 
they will bear, at last, an important relation to this ques- 
tion of immortality. The element of manhood carries 
with it a very »vowerful sense of the value of existence. 
The desire to live is a blind instinct. A happy ex 


in t 
intr’ 
kno 
is de 
ing 
tho 
cdeey 
that 
A 
it to 
it, h 
a cr 
perl 
evel 
indi 
piec 


nt of man. 
alue than 
re of more 
‘3 are that 


ed on the 
i you find 
mountain 
| morning, 
ide, or the 
$e pictures 
on. canvas, 
‘lement of 
t of evan- 
res on the 
y lack the 
nds. The 
ANGE as an 
is element 
ditions of 
it of men, 


a 
ve 


as are the 

What is 
ma? One 
the other 
ce. There 
1 diamond 
liamond is 
earries on 


yet—I do 
m; but | 
, and that 
this ques- 
od carries 
existence, 


happy ex- 


IMMORTALITY. Ore 


perience brings to this instinct many auxiliaries—the 
expectation of pleasure; the wish to complete unfinished 
things; the clinging of affection to those that have excited 
love; and habits ot enterprise. 

Besides all these, is a development of the sense of value 
insimply being. We have said that in external matters 
the continuity of being is an element of value in the 
judgment which mankind at large have put upon things. 
‘We say that the same is true in respect to the inward ex- 
istence—-to manhood itself. The savage cares very little 
for life. He lives for to-day ; and in every to-day he lives 
forthe hour. Time is of the least importance to him. 
The barbarian differs from the savage in this; that he 
lives to-day for to-morrow, perhaps, but not for next year. 
The semi-civilized man lives for next year; but only for 
the year, or for years. The civilized man begins to live 
in the present for the future. And the Christian civilized 
man begins to live with a sense of the forever. 

The extension of the sense of time goes with the de- 
velopment of manhood in men. The sweet, the tender, 
the loving, the thoughtful, the intellectnal, live not simply 
with a sense of life as a pleasure-bringer: there grows up 
in them, with their development toward manhood, an 
intrinsic sense of the value of being itself. The «vul 
knows the cargo that it carries. It knows that that cargo 
is destined to immortality. As men are conscious of see- 
ing more, or thinking more, and of feeling more; as 
thought becomes more precious; as emotion becomes 
deeper and more valuable; so men more and more feel 
that they cannot afford to have such things go to waste. 

A man who takes in his hand alump of mud and molds 
it to some pleasing form, cares but little when, dropping 
it, he sees it flatten on the ground. The man that grinds 
a crystal, and sees it broken, thinks of it for a moment, 
perhaps, with regret, but soon forgets it. No one, how- 
ever, can see an organized thing, having its uses, and 
indicating exquisite skill and long experience, dashed to 
pieces without pain. But what is anything that is organ- 


My 


4 


278 IMMORTALITY. 


ized in life worth in comparison with the soul of a man? 
And if that soul be pure, and sweet, and deep, and noble, 
and active, and fruitful, who can, without a pang, look 
at it, and think that it must in an instant go to nothing, 
dissolving again as an icicle from a roof in “the spring ? 

This feeling is not the fruit of mere reflection. It i is 
instinctive. tt i is universal. Men do not cultivate it on 
purpose. They cannot help having it. No man of moral 
culture can regard human life as without immortality 

except with profound melancholy. No man that is sus- 
ceptible to reflectiveness can bear to think of man’s 
existence here without the bright background of another 
life. 

TLis sense of the continuity of existence is grounded in 
men, and grows with their refinement and development 
and strength, and gives color to their life, and change to 
their opinions, it may be. 

To men who have developed moral sense and intel- 
lectual culture, every element of value in life is made 
precious by some conscious or some unconscious element 
of time and continuance. It is the nature of our better 
faculties; in their better states, to place a man in such re- 
lations to everything that is most precious to him, that it 
gives him pleasure in the proportion in which it seems 
to be continuous and permanent, and gives him pain in 
the proportion in which it seems to be evanescent and 
perishing. 

We are building a crystal character with much _ pain 
and self-denial ; and is it to be built as bubbles are blown? 
What is finer in line than the bubble? What is more 
airy? Where are pictures more exquisite, where are 
colors more tender and rich and beautiful—and where is 
there anything that is born so near to its end as a bubble? 
Is the character which we are building with so much 
pain and suffering and patience, with so much burden of 
conscience, and with so much aspiration ; is the character 
which we are forming in the invisible realm of the soul 
—is that but a bubble? Is that only a thin film which 


refle 


ness 
no fi 
rolle 
flect 
what 
year 
wor 
0es 
: bu; 
large 
what 
fining 
susce 
to pa 
pain 
exq ui 
they 


spina 
sonal 
auxil 
dema 
lite, t 


f a man? 
nd noble, 
sang, look 
) nothing, 
spring ? 

on, Tt is 
vate it on 
n of moral 
mortality 
1at is sus- 
of man’s 
»f another 


‘ounded in 
velopment 
change to 


and intel- 

is made 
is element 
our better 
n such re- 
im, that it 

it seems 
m pain in 
scent and 


uch pain 
re blown? 
t is more 
here are 
where is 
a bubble? 
so much 
burden of 
character 
f the soul 
ilm which 


IMMORTALITY. 


reflects the transient experiences of a life of joy or sad- 
ness, and goes out? Then, what is life worth? If I had 
no function but that of a pismire ; if I were a beetle that 
rolled in the dirt, and yet were clothed with « power of re- 
flection, and knew what the depths of feeling were, 
what intense emotions were, and what struggling and 
yearning were ; if, being a mere insect, I had all that 
works in the intellect of man, and all the aspiration that 
goes with spiritual elements ; if I were but a leaf-entter, 
a bug in the soil, or about the same thing on a little 
larger pattern, and were to be blotted out at death, 
what would be the use of my trying to grow? If by re- 
fining and whetting our faculties they become more 
susceptible to pleasure, they become equally susceptible 
to pain. And in this great, grinding, groaning, world, 
pain is altogether out of proportion to pleasure, in an 
exquisite temperament. The finer men are the better 
they are, if they are forever; but the finer men are the 
worse they are, if they are only for a day; for they have 
a disproportion of sensibility to suffering over and above 
present remuneration and conscious enjoyment. 

Men feel an intrinsic sense of personality and personal 
worth. They have self-esteem, which is the only central, 
spinal, manly faculty which gives them a sense of per- 
sonal identity and personal value, and which is an 
auxiliary counsellor ot conscience itself. This sense of 
demands something more than a short round of physical 
life, to be followed by extinction. I am too valuable to 
perish so; and every step in life has been training me in 
the direction of greater value. As men grow broader, 
and stronger, and finer, and deeper, and sweeter, they 
become more and more conscious of the intrinsic value 
of their being, and demand for themselves a harbor in 
order that they may not be wrecked or foundered. 

Nor do I think that there can be found, to any con- 
siderable extent, or developed, friendships which shall 
not, with all their strength and with all their depth, resist 
the conception of dissolution of fading. For friendships 


ads 
7 hig Vv 
Vy 
ZG on : 
62 SPEER | 2 . 
= i345, = 
5 — patel =| o a6 
ze olf =I 2 Ee 
w <= oll =|] Sl Sse. 
ar ites =O 
=u = 
N 
y 
%, “I~ 
exAN & 4" 
AF 4 “ WW 
$7, LAN &, gu © 
LCS og A G hes y xy ROS 
*\ @G 4 , 


SPR SR PTH Ai ENE MTSE AMR EL SEN TIES BSE SR ASL SARI AIT TRS et SER eH ATCA SH A FE my 


a Se Sees ee eas 
= ‘ Saher: 


tality. There are, therefore, in the growth of the mind 


280 IMMORTALITY. 


are not casual likings. Friendships are not merely the 
interchange of good nature, and the ordinary friendly 
offices of good neighborhood. These things are friendly, 
but they do not comprise friendship. Two trees may 
grow contageous, and throw their shade one over upon 
the other ; but they never tonch or help each other ; and 
their roots quarrel for the tcod that is in the ground, 
But two vines, growing over a porch, meet each other, 
and twine together, and twist fiber into fiber and stem 
into stem, and take shape from each other, and are gub. 
stantially one. And such aie friendships. Now, one 
cannot have his life divided as two trees are. He cannot 
enter into partnership with others, and be conscious that 
that partnership shall be but for an hour or for a moment, 
The sanctity, the honor, the exaltation, the exhilaration 
of a true and manly friendship lies in the thought of its 
continuance. There can be no deep friendship which does 
not sigh for endlessness. 

Still more is this true of love: not that rudimentary 
form which seeks lower fruitions, and which is often but 
little more than passion done up in friendship; but that 
higher love which manifests itself chiefly in the spiritual 
realm ; that love which is not forever asking, but forever 
giving ; that love which is not centripetal, but centrifugal ; 
that love which, like a mother’s, gives for the pleasure of 
giving; that love which reveres; that love which looks 
up; that love which seeks to exalt its object by doing 
whiat is pleasant and noble; that love which demands 
continuance, elevation, yea, grandeur, it may be, in the 
thing beloved. How little will such a love tolerate the 
idea of evanescence, the dread of discontinuing! Can 
such a love do other than yearn for immortality ? 

So then, if you take the thought, it is this: that if men 
develop, they come under the dominion of higher faculties ; 
and that it is then their nature to stamp on all their occupa- 
tions on their self-consciousness, on the whole development 
of their affections, the need of continuance, of immort- 


merely the 
Wry friendly 
re friendly, 
) trees may 
» over Upon 
_ Other ; and 
the ground, 
each other, 
r and stem 
nd are sub- 

Now, one 

He cannot 
nscious that 
r amoment, 
exhilaration 
ought of its 
which does 


udimentary 
is often but 
p; but that 
he spiritual 
but forever 
entrifugal ; 


pleasure of . 


which looks 
bt by doing 
h demands 
be, in the 
olerate the 


that if men 
r faculties ; 
eir occupa- 
evelopment 
of immort- 
the mind 


IMMORTALITY. 281 


itself, as a department of nature, these elements of con- 
viction. The mind cannot do other than develop in itself 
a faith in immortality. 

It may be said, and it sometimes is said, that the origin 
of the belief of existence out of the body—of spiritual 
existence—may be traced directly back to the dreams of 
the barbarous ages—to a period when men were so low 
that they did not recognize the difference between a dream 
and a waking reality—to a time when persons dreamed 
that their friends came back to them, and waked up and 
believed that they had been back. Thus, it is said, began 
the thought of continuity of life after death. For my 
part, I do not care how it began. The question is not 
how it started: the question is, What becomes of it now 
that it has begun? No matter how it was born, what 
purpose is it to serve? Whatisit adapted todo? How 
is it calculated to influence our manhood? In what way 
shall it be employed to lead man God-ward? How shall 
it be used to work most effectually in the direction of 
civilization and refinement? It so fitsevery human soul, 
that men will not let it go. They cling to it with their 
inward and best nature. 

All the experiences of human life fall in with this 
tendency of the mind. When men look out upon the 
incoherent and unmannerly course of things in time, I 
can understand how, believing in the future, they may 
live with patience ; but in every age of the world where 
the clear light of immortality has not shone, men have 
mostly been discouraged, have been generally indifferent 
to public superiority, and have taken no interest in things 
done for the sake of humanity. Such is the worthless- 
ness of time, to. the thought of those that have no faith 
in the future, that they have cared for little except present 
physical enjoyment. And on the whole, when such men 
crowd together, and tribes take the place of individuals, 
or kingdoms take the place of tribes, with all their com- 
plications in the working out of their clashing results, 
they look upon human lite, and feel that the world is not 


Nin al 
in 
on ‘Nie, 


Whit tp 


282 IMMORTALITY. 


worth living for. Things are so uncertain, products are 
in such disproportion to their causes, or to the expecta. 
tions of men, that if there is to be nothing but this life, 
then, “ Eat, drink and be merry, for to-morrow we die,” 
is not only the philosophy of the epicurean, but the 
temptation of the most wise and frugal and self-restrain- 
ing. The nature of life to a man whois highly educated, 
requires that he should believe in the continuity and 
existence of the myriads that he sees in such a state of 
quarreling infelicity and wretchedness in this mortal 
condition. The utter futility of the best part of a man’s 
life here, the total bankruptcy of his best endeavors, the 
worthlessness of his career from the material standpoint, 
makes it imperative on him to believe that he shall have 
another chance in another sphere of being. 

Is it enough to have been born, to have lived till one is 
of age, and then to be launched out to founder in mid 
ocean? Is it enough that one should devote the best 
part of his life to the building of a character, only to sec 
the fabric which he has constructed tumbling about his 
ears? Is this enough in the day of distress and bank- 
ruptey? Is it enough, in the time when a man’s 
ambitions are crossed, and the sky is dark, and he can do 
nothing but stand amid the ruins of his hopes and ex. 
pectations? Is not the thought revolting to every instinct 
of manhood ? 

But if there is another life; if all our labor has this 
value in it, that while a man is building up his outward 
estate he is more powerfully building up his inward 
estate; if it is certain that the man himself will live, no 
matter what becomes of his property and his reputation, 
then, all his endeavors have endless scope, and his life 


becomes redeemable and radiant. 


Nowhere else so much as in the realm of grief, I think, 
is the question of immortality interpreted. It is true that 
the first shock of overwhelming grief sometimes drives 
faith out of the mind; that it sometimes staggers the 
reason ; that it sometimes dispossesses the moral sense of 


wroducts are 
the expecta- 
out this life, 
ow we die,” 
an, but the 
self-restrain- 
ily educated, 
otinuity and 
ch a state of 
this mortal 
t of a man’s 
deavors, the 
standpoint, 
e shall have 


ed till one is 
nder in mid 
ote the best 
', only to see 
1g about his 
ss and bank- 
Pn a man’s 
d he ean do 
pes and ex- 

ery instinct 


bor has this 
his outward 
his inward 
will live, no 
reputation, 
and his life 


ief, I think, 
is true that 
mes drives 
aggers the 
al sense of 


‘ IMMORTALITY. 288 


its accustomed health, and leaves the mind in weakness. 
As in a fever, the natural eye can see nothing aright, and 
things seem to dance in the air, and take on grotesque 
forms, 80 persons who are bewildered with first sorrow 
oftentimes see things amiss. And there is no skepticism 
which is so deep and pulseless as that which often takes 
possession of people in the first great overmastering sur- 

rise and shock of grief. But after one has recovered a 
little, and the nerve has come to its wonted sensibility, 
the faith of immortality returns. There is that in every 
soul which knows what is the strength of life and noble 
deeds and aspirations; and therefore there is that in every 
soul which calls out for immortality. 

I cannot believe, I will not believe, when I walk upon 
the clod, that it is my mother that I tread under foot. 
She that bore me, she that every year more than gave 
birth to me out of her own soul’s aspiration—I will not 
believe that she is dust. Everything within me revolts 
at the idea. 

Do two pera walk together in an inseparable union, 
mingling their brightest and noblest thoughts, striving 
for the highest ideal, like flowers that grow by the side 
of each other, eons fragrance each on the other, and 
shining in beauty each for the other; are two persons 
thus twined together and bound together for life, until in 
some dark hour one is called and the other is left; and 
does the bleeding heart go down togthe grave and say, 
“T return dust to dust?’ Was that dust, then? That 
trustworthiness ; that fidelity; that frankness of truth; 
that transparent honesty; that heroism of love; that 
disinterestedness ; that fitness and exquisiteness of taste ; 
that fervor of love; that aspiration ; that power of con- 
viction; that piety; that great hope in God—were all 
these elements in the soul of the companion that has dis- 
appeared but just so many phenomena of matter? And 
have they already collapsed and gone, like last year’s 
flowers struck with frost, back again to the mold? In 
the grief of such an hour one will not let go the hope of 


resurrection. 
12 


284 IMMORTALITY. 


Can a parent go back from the grave where he has laid 
his children, and say, “I shall never see them more?” 
Even as far back as the dim twilight in which David 
lived, he said, ‘ Thou shalt not come to me, but I shall 
go to thee;” and is it possible for the parental heart to 
stand in our day by the side of the grave where children 
have been put out of sight, and say, “ They neither shall 
come to me, nor shall I go to them; they are blossoms 
that have fallen; they never shall bring forth fruit”? 
It is unnatural. It is hideous. Everything that is in 
man, every instinct that is best in human nature repels it, 

Is not the human soul, then, itself a witness of the truth 
of immmortality ? 

Men say, “ You cannot prove it. There is no argument 
that can establish it. No man has seen it, and it cannot 
be substantiated. Itis not a ponderable thing.” Men 
demand that we should prove things by straight lines; by 
the alembic; by scales; by analysis; but I say that there 
is much in nature which is so high that scales and rules 
and alembics cannot touch it. And is not man’s soul a 
part of nature—the highest part? 

I hold that even the materialist may believe in immor- 
tality. For, although there is a gross kind of materialism, 
there may be a materialism which is consistent with a 
belief in immortality. Because, on the supposition that 
mind is matter, it must be admitted that it is incompar- 
ably superior to aff other matter that we are familiar 
with. Is there any matter outside of mind that produces 
thought and feeling such as we see evolved among men? 
If it be the theory that mind is matter, and if the matter 
of which the mind is composed be so far above all other 
kinds of matter in its fruit and product, is it not on so high 
a plane as presumably not to be subject to the lower and 
coarser forms of examination and test? I know no reason 
why cerebral matter may not beeternal. I do not belong 
to those who take the material view of the mind; but T 


‘do not know that immortality is inconsistent even with 


materialism ; and how much more easily may it be recon- 


2 he has laid 
em more ?” 
hich David 
but I shall 
tal heart to 
re children 
either shall 
re blossoms 
rth fruit” 3 
x that is in 
ire repels it, 
of the truth 


oO argument 
id it cannot 
ing.” Men 
ht lines; by 
y that there 
3 and rules 
an’s soul a 


p in immor- 
aterialism, 
ent with a 
sition that 
incompar- 
e familiar 
at produces 
long men? 
the matter 
b all other 
on so high 
lower and 
r No reason 
hot belon 

nd; but 

even with 
be recon- 


IMMORTALITY. 285 


ciled to the view of those who believe in the ineffable 
ane eater the imponderable, spfritual condition, of the 
sou 

In addition to these arguments, when we come to the 
Word of God, we hear the voices of those who sang and 
chanted in the past. We hear the disciple crying out, 
“Christ is risen!” and we hear the apostle preaching this 
new truth to mankind. So that now the heavens have 
been broken open. The secrets of the other life have 
been revealed. Andis there not a presumption, following 
the line of a man’s best manhood, that immortality is 
true? Does one need to go into a rigorous logical exam- 
ination of thig subject? Should one stand jealously at 
the side of the sepulchre of Christ, and examine this mat- 
ter, as a policeman examines the certificate of a saspected 
man, or as one takes money from the hand of a cheating 
usurer, and goes out to see if it is gold? Shall one stand 
at the door from which issue all the hopes that belong to 
the best part of man; shall one look upon that which is 
demanded by the very nature of his better manhood, and 
question it coldly, and tread it under foot? 

What do we gain by obliterating this fair vision? 
Why should not Heaven continue to shine on? Why 
should we not look into it, and believe that it is, and that 
it waits for us?) Have we not the foretokens of it? Is 
not the analogy of the faculties one that leads us to 
believe that there is some such thing? Does not the 
nature of every man that is high and noble revolt at flesh 
and matter? Are they not rising toward the ineffable? 
Are not all the intuitions and affections of men such that, 
the better they are, the more they have of things that are 
manly, the more indispensable it is that they should have 
endurance, etheralization, perpetuation ? 

The heart and flesh cry out for God. They cry out for 
immortality. Not only does the Spirit from the heavenly 
land say to every toiling, yearning, anxious soul, ‘ Come 
up hither,” but every soul that is striving upward has in 


Ht | {ida ‘hd 
hy 

yy, 
‘AND 


My 


286 IMMORTALITY. 


it, if not a vocalized aspiration, yet a mute yearning—, 
voice of the soul—that eries out for heaven. 


‘¢ As the heart panteth after the waterbrooks, so panteth my soul af 
Thee, O God !” ; 


On such a day as this, then, in a community of moral 
feeling, how blessed is the. truth which comes to us, that 
we are not as the beasts that die; that we areas the gods 
that live! That for which we were made is immortality 
and our journey is rough, straight, sharp, burdensome, 
with many tears. Our journey is not to the grave, / 
am not growing into old age to be blind, and to be deaf, 
and to be rheumatic, and to shrink a miserable cripple 
into the corner, shaking and tottering and forgetting all 
that I ever knew. The best part of meis untouched. / 
sit enshrined within the me. The soul; the reason; the 
moral sense; the power to think; the power to will; the 
power to love; the power to admire purity, and to reach 
out after it—that is not touched by time, though its 
instrument and means of outer demonstration be corroded 
and failing. No physical weakness touches the soul. 
Only the body is touched by sickness. And shake that 
down! shake it down! Let it go! For, as the chrysalis 
bursts open, and the covering which confines the perfected 
insect is dropped, that he may come out into brightness 
of form and largeness of life; so this body is but a chrys- 
alis; and when we break through it, we rise on wings by 
the attraction of God, and by the propulsion of our own 
inevitable desire and need, and are forever with the Lord, 


yearning—s 
th my soul after 


ity of moral 
s to us, that 
‘eas the gods 
immorta ity; 
burdensome, 
he grave, / 
d to be deaf, 
rable cripple 
orgetting all 
itouched, J 
reason ; the 
‘to will; the 
and to reach 
2, though its 
be corroded 
es the soul. 
1 shake that 
the chrysalis 
he pertected 
o brightness 
but a chrys- 
on wings by 

of our own 
ith the Lord. 


IMMORTALITY. 


PRAYER BEFORE THE SERMON. 


LiFrt upon us, this morning, the light of thy countenance, brighter 
to our souls than the light of the sun travelling in the greatness of 
his strength—a light where our dark thoughts wander; a light 
where our footsteps of hope stumble; a light to those doubts and 
to those enshrouding fears which so often take possession of 
our souls and would lead them captive, yet wandering upon 
earth in their darkness. When we are nearest to that which is 
best within us, we have most faith of thee and of immortality. 
When we rebound to that which is lowest and which brings us to 
the scil and to the beast again, we are most beclouded and most in 
doubt. 

Evermore, then, draw us near to our better selves, that out of 
these gracious affections we may discern clearly the truths of our 
salvation, that we may know more of thee, and be more sure that 
thou art, and thou art near to every one who needs and seeks thee. 
Bring to us the assurance of that other life the glory of which tran- 
scends all thought or knowledge. For how are we perpetually at 
odds with this life! How we, when walking most firmly, perpet- 
ually stumble; and when most vigilant, lose our way; and when 
strongest, are overcome with sudden and unexpected weakness ! 
We are children of darkness; and all marks of our rudeness and 
imperfection cling to us; and yet we are filled with half-sights. 
We have expectations and yearnings. We are strangely drawn 
away from our lower selves. We hear sounds inarticulate which 
we cannot put together, but which seem to syllable joy to us afar 
off. In some hours we do understand voices which speak tous, It 
is the Spirit and the Bride that say from off the heavenly battle- 
ments to our souls that are wondering, Come home! We do 
understood the yearnings when we seek again that which we have 
once loved with all our souls’ immortality. Can it be gone forever 
from us? Do we not seek our children in such a way that we must 
find them? Do we not seek our companions, and all to whom we 
have given that which is best in our souls? And shall we not find 
them? Can it be that they have gone out, or that they have been 
extinguished, because they are no longer visible to these mortal 
senses, and because we cannot with these earthly bodies touch them ? 
Are they gone from that which is purest, and highes’, and serenest 
inus? Hast thou not given us a nature that speaks of heaven as 
well as a nature which touches the earth? Do we not discern by 
the higher life of our souls not only the things which to the senses 
are invisible, but the things which the intellect cannot reason 
about? O Lord our God, give strength to that which is God-like 


in us to-day, that we may mount up through all the realm of doubt, 


Ws ath 
iy 

hy. 
' Wy 


288 IMMORTALITY. 


and through all the drudgery of the senses, and stand in the midst 
of the substantial blessings of those who are freed from the body 
and have risen into spiritual life, and spiritual promise, and are 
forever with the Lord. Blessed company! How large! Swelling 
through the ages, more and more blessed in immortal experience, 
Into that great ocean flood we send rills from our hearts. There 
are our children, There are our parents, There are our brothers 
and sisters. There are those, called by earthly names, that have 
been dearest and nearest to us. And though, going, they left us 
in tears and in darkness, now how do they rain down joys upon us 
and help us! With invisible hands of sweet affection, how are we 
lifted by them! How through memory are we brought very near 
to the throne by those whose going seemed our greatest loss and 
disaster! How are thcy fulfilling-in us, through our yearnings and 
upward reaching, all the promises which thou didst make, in the 
sanctification of our sorrow, and our enfranchisement through it! 
Verily, by wounding us thou hast made us better. By pruning we 
have been made to bring forth more fruit. That part which bore 
fruit of the flesh, thou art chastising. That part which would not 
bear fruit to hope, and faith, and love, thou art causing to be full 
of blossom and full of cluster, 

We thank thee for all that invisible way and all that mystery of 


' conduct by which our life has been blessed, and by which we have 


been exalted from our low and sordid conditions, into the realms of 
hope and expectation, which shall be unchanged, except that they 
shall be over-mastered and excelled by realization. We bless thee 
for all that we hope and expect of the heavenly land. We thank 
thee in behalf of those who have toiled through all the ages, and 
who have been comforted by the sweet dew which has fallen on 
them from above. How many have been outcast that could not 
have lived but for the hope of heaven! How many have walked 
through darkness, and persecution, and suffering, even unto blood, 
strengthened by the hope of heaven! How many are now in fast- 
nesses, how many are bowed down, how many are mourning, 
bereaved, whose strength is in the expectancy of heaven! How 
many are there to-day who need thee, O Lord Jesus, risen, a token 
and pledge that they shall rise! If we, too, may break through all 
the encumbrances of life and cerements of death; if we, too, may 
rise because thou hast risen, and with irresistible power may cell 
up to thee with the consciousness that we are thine, then what 1s 
there in life that we need to fear? What burden can be too heavy 
for the hand of God that is under us? What experience can be too 
quick for souls that are comforted by the Holy Ghost? What 
consolations can be witheld from those that are but a step from 
heaven? What sorrows can be unrelieved which are known to 
Christ, and which are felt by him in our behalf? 

We beseeeh of thee that thou wilt grant to every one in thy 


1d in the midst 
from the body, 
‘omise, and are 
rge | Swelling 
ttal experience, 
hearts. There 
are our brothers 
mes, that have 
ig, they left us 
m joys upor us 
ion, how are we 
ught very near 
‘eatest loss and 
r yearnings and 
st make, in the 
ent through it! 
By pruning we 
yart which bore 
hich would not 
ising to be full 


hat mystery of 
which we have 
nto the realms of 
xcept that they 
We bless thee 
d. We thank 
l the ages, and 
h has fallen on 
that could not 
hy have walked 
ven unto blood, 
re now in fast- 
are mourning, 
heaven! How 
, risen, & token 
eak through all 
f we, too, may 
bower may cell 
, then what 1s 
n be too heavy 
ence can be too 
host? What 
ut a step from 
are known to 


ery:one in thy 


IMMORTALITY. 


presence suc.. & nearness, to-day, of the heavenly influence, such a 
sense of the power of Christ’s resurrection, such vehemence of hope, 
such gladness of faith, such love in our immortal part—in our 
goul-life—that all that is within us shall bless thy name, We take 
hold of thee, unknown, invisible, all-beloved Saviour. We do not 
understand what God is, We cannot throw the circuit of our 
thought around about the majesty of the universe, We cannot fill up 
the vast reach of infinite being. But out from the great unknown and 
invisible realm there comes to us the warmth, and the light, and the 
cheer of love. And we come back to see what it means in thy life 
and in thy words. We lift up those words and that life again, 
and enshrine them in our thought, in the heavenly realm, And 
thou dost interpret God to us. Thou art to us as the spring, with 
sllits sweet sounds and budding promises to those who are 
weary of the winter. Thou art to us what the summer is to those 
that long for the summer. 

O thou blessed, ever-rejoicing Christ! draw near to each one, this 
morning, in thy presence. Draw near to us, thy dear children. 
Cause the cup of our joy to overflow. Draw near to those who are 
afar from thee—who have forgotten their first love. Bring them 
pack again with renewed “onsecration. Draw near to those who 
are pained and oppressed with burdens and sorrows. Let them 
know that there is emancipation, that there is yet glorious light 
and liberty for them, Draw near to those who have had doubts 
and distressing fears, that their prison doors may be opened, and 
that they may be brought out by the Emancipator. Draw near to 
those who have been in the midst of sin, and under transgression, that 
they may know that there is a Heart that feels for them even in the 
seat of justice. O Lord Jesus, withhold not thy mercies from any 
this day. Be with those who are rathered in thine house, or who 
are confined in their own dwellings, or who wander at large with- 
out thought of God or thought of the sanctuary. Be with all thy 
children everywhere. Shine upon them, to-day, with thy Spirit. 
As the sun not only comes forth to those who are good and just, 
but pours abroad everywhere his fulness of light and warmth so 
shine thou with infinite fulness of mercy and of love upon the good 
gnd the bad ; upon the just and the unjust ; upon the righteous and 
the unrighteous; upon all who need thy saving power. 

We beseech of thee that thou wilt accept our thanks for all the 
mercies which we have had as a church and people; for all the 
mercies of our households; for all the mercies of our personal lives. 

We pray that thou wilt extend the same blessings which are ours 
to those who are without them. Spread abroad the new salvation 
of Jesus Christ to every part of this land, and of all lands, Gather 
in all nations. And at last may the whole earth see thy salvation. 

And to the Father, the Son, and the Spirit shall be praise 
evermore, Amen. ; 


' | tots 


~~ 


ORs 


EXTERIOR AND INTERIOR DIVINE 
PROVIDENCE. 


*¢ For it is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of his good 
pleasure.’’—Pui1, ii, 13. 


a By HIS may be called a distinct declaration of the 
M3 yanl doctrine of an interior spiritual providence, 
eek} Our Lord comforted his disciples with the as. 
surance of an external divine providence. He assured 
them that their lives, their whole career, their safety, 
their defense, was a matter of Divine oversight and 
care. He did not tell them how. He never philoso. 

hized. He merely stated thig grand fact, addressing 
it, not to their reason as a thing to be understood, but 
to their heart, to their hope, to their courage, as a thing 
to be accepted and used for their comfort in life. 

This providence was one which took charge of them 
even in their minutest physical wants. Zuake no thought 
for your food nor for your raiment is the command—that 
is, take no grinding anxiety. To take thought, in old 
English, was to take anxious thought,—to be troubled 
about. And the declaration of the Master was this: 
‘Give yourself no undue anxiety about what you shall 
eat, or what you shall drink, or wherewithall you shall 
be clothed. God knows that you have need of these 
things.” 

He calls attention to that work of divine providence 
by which the mfnutest things—little birds, the flowers 


‘VINE 


do of his good 


ation of the 
providence, 
rith the as. 
He assured 
heir safety, 
ersight and 
er philoso- 
addressing 
brstood, but 
, a8 a thing 
life. 

ge of them 
ke no thought 
mand—that 
rht, in old 
be troubled 
was this: 
t you shall 
ll you shall 
d of these 


providence 
he flowers 


DIVINE PROVIDENCE. 291 


of the field, and the grass—are all provided for. In 
God’s great arrangement, in the organism of nature, 
there was provision made for the things that are most 
delicate and helpless. Everything in fs vast sphere of 
divine providence was cared for. ‘ And are you not, 
he says, “ better than birds and flowers? God will 
take care of you.” 

Still he did not say how. He did not teach them 
potany. He did not instruct them in the physiology 
of vegetable growth. He said, “you will be taken care 
of,” but he did not teach the processes by which they 
should be taken care of. 

Further than that, he told them that as reformers, as 
builders of society on a better pattern, they would have 
troubles, and would be brought before the rulers of the 
synagogue, and would be put to death, many of them; 
“but let it not trouble you,” he says, “be prepared, 
and I will take you through the emergency.” 

That was a providence which not merely touched the 
body, but went within. And later, he gave them a 
most unequivocal assurance that there was a providence 
which went through. ‘I will come and abide with 
you, and in you,” he declared. Such was the impres- 
sion which was made on the apostles that they brought 


this out in the most bold manner, and declared, asin | 


our text, that God works in men to will and todo; He 
works in nature simply to do—for nature does not will; 
but in man he works both ¢o will and to do. He works 
in the germination and in the whole conduct of thought 
and feeling. He works in the relations of thought and 
feeling to practical life. And he teaches men that 
he has a providence on the inside which takes care of 
thinkings and plannings, as divine providence outside 
takes care of all acts and issues of physical life. 

He assures them, then, that in the inward, the silent, 
the invisible world of the soul, there is a providence 
which is the equivalent of, and still more glorious than, 
that providence which takes cognizance of the visible, 


*% 


292 EXTERIOR AND INTERIOR 


the tangible and the physical. It is to this last, which 
is so little regarded, and whose comfort is so little ex. 
tracted, that we shall call your attention; and it is that 
part of the divine providence over men and the world 
which is transcendently the most important. 

Consider, for instance, the prodigious fruitfulness of 
the individual life in any human being—-at any rate, in 
any degree of civilization. Consider what lives we 
are living daily. Is there anything else 80 active 
as burning souls, carrying so many parts, and every 
part continually producing so many effects, visible 
or invisible? Consider how many trains of thought 
are set agoing by the senses from. day to day. Con. 
sider how much of the action of the mind there is that 
is conscious and recognized, and how much there is § 
that is unconscious and unrecognized, from the time 
that we rise in the morning to the time that we lie 
down and are lost in sleep at night. Who can measure 
tne amount of thought that passes through an ordinary 
active mind from first to last? if it were written ina 
book what voluminous lives we si:ould be found to live, 
whose thoughts through one single twelve hours woul( 
fill a volume! It would not, perhaps, be a volums 
filled with the most useful matter; but the bulk would 
be there. The amount, if it were written out and re. 
duced to physical conditions, of the inward life of one §& 
single part of our nature—the thinking and observing 
part—is beyond computation ; and it is not the less im. 
pertant because we have not been accustomed to 
measure it, estimate it, and conform it to any definite 
measurement. 

Add to this genius. Add the images which it is all 
the time forming. Add the effects which it produces 
on the reasoning and observing powers. Add all the 
judgments which men are incessantly forming. Add 
the reasoning processes which they go through, and 
the observations which they make to arrive at they 
conclusions. 


+o =o & 


Boe s 


ete et ct to tt os desc = as 


em ie 


3 last, which 
so little ex. 
and it is that 
id the world 
t 


uitfulness of 
any rate, in 
1at lives we 
3€ 80 active 
. and every 
cts, visible 
of thought 
day. Con- 
there is that 
ich there is 
ym. the time 
that we lie 
can Measure 
an ordinary 
written ina 
und to live, 
hours would 
e a volum: 
bulk would 
out and re. 
od life of one 
1 observing 
he less im- 
ustomed to 
any definite 


hich it is all 
it produces 
Add all the 
ning. Add 
rough, and 
e at they 


DIVINE PROVIDENCE. 293 


Add to these the emotions which come up in the 
mind, of hope and despondency, of courage and despair, 
of like and dislike, of love and hate. Add the subtle 
interplay of the ten thousand feelings which are going 
on alithe time. What a vast activity there is stored up 
in the invisible chamber of every man’s life? This is 
the case even in tranquil moments; but consider how 
much increased this is by conflicts, by rivalries, by all 
those things which give rapidity and fruitfulness to the 
faculties of the mind. What a loom we carry in us! 
We stand by the side of a Jacquard loom, and wonder 
how wit could invent a machine that should act so like 
life. We wonder how any apparatus can be constructed 
to produce a fabric, which shall come out with figures 
on it of birds, and men, and ail manner of figures 
wrought apparently by the intelligent intent of the 
machine itself. But, strange as that may seem, it is 
not to be thought of in comparison with that loom 
which, without crank or shuttle, is perpetually pro- 
ducing fabrics with every sort of figure in the form of 
reason, and moral sentiments, and social affections, and 
passions and appetites. What a vast activity there is 
going on in the human mind, so silently that there is 
ro clanking heard! We go by men every day in each 
of whom are these fiery, flashing elements of power. 
Here are companies of them, here is an army of them, 
here is a city full of them, «nd there is the vastest ac- 
tivity in the mind ofeach; and who can conceive what is 
going on in the multitude of beating, throbbing lives 
which are flaming forth and reaching cut to the ut- 
termost in every direction, all as silent as the dew 
which is distilled on the myriad flowers in the meadow ? 
Really vast, infinite, is this activity, when you think of 
it; and yet it goes on in perfect silence. 

Consider, too, that large as is the outward achieve- 
ment of human wit and wisdom, the inward history of 
itis far larger than the thing itself. In other words, 
the spiritual element, which works itself out into some 


294 EXTERIOR AND INTERIOR 


hysical exponent, is, in the sight of God, without a 
oubt, and is in vur own sight when we think upon it, 
larger and more transcendent than that physical ex. 
ponent. | 
When a man builds a curious house, men look it 
over, and speak of it as he edn re ; as being well 
arranged; as being finished beautifully in this respect 
or in that; as being admirable in such and such points, 
We praise it. And we pay the architect in a better 
coin than the landlord pays him, when, with a height. 
ened conception of him and his work, we say, We 
will build, one of these days (for that is the day-dream 
which every man has I suppose); and we will have a 
plan from him.” There stands that little home cottage, 
which we sc much admire, and which we mean with 
some modifications to reproduce; but the house which 
the architect builds inside is a great deal more curious 
than the house that he builds outside. All the thoughts 
that he had; all the processes that he devised; all the 
plans that he concoted—these are more wondrous a 
thousand times than that which he finally produced, 
The invisible building is more than the visible building. 
When the artist puts his pencil to the canvas, and 
brings out a picture which lives a thousand years, men 
can scarcely find terms in which to express admiration 
for that picture; but the picture itself is not so wonder- 
ful as was that inside painter that first conceived of it; 
and all the strokes which were put upon it, all the 
colors and tints which were given to it, are not to be 
compared with those myriad thoughts »f which these are 
but feeble representations. 11 those visions out of 
which he selected ; all those thoughts which came down 
around about him ; which he arranged and re-arranged, 
which he rejected and called back again; which he 
finally chose ep Bae he tells you, infinitely 
transcend anything that he has suceeded in producing. 
The peinter is more than the painting, a thousand 
times over. 


, without a 
ink upon it, 
physical ex. 


men look it 
| being wel] 
this respect 
‘uch points, 
" epee 
Nn a height. 
8ay, “We 
day-dream 
will have ag 
me cottage, 
mean with 
ouse which 
ore curious 
ie thoughts 
ed; all the 
rondrous a 
produced, 
e building, 
anvas, and 
years, men 
admiration 
50 wonder- 
ved of it; 
it, all the 
not co be 
h tliese are 
bns out of 
ame down 
arranged, 
which he 
infinitely 
oducing. 
thousand 


DIVINE PROVIDENCE. 295 


When a musician has written his tune, when he has 
written a monody, he has written but a slender stream 
of that or spring of genius which is welling up in his 
soul. He will tell you that that tune which sounded 
in his inward ear was never sung afterwards as it was 
first sung to him. The silent songs that genius hears, the 
invisible pictures that genius sees, the hidden buildings 
which men of genius construct, being castles in the air 
(literally castles in the air)—these are a thousand times 
more beautiful than those which get out into the visible 
world. , 
We see a household brought up well. A mother 
who took alone the burden of life when her hushand 
laid it down, without much property, out ofher penury, 
by her planning and industry, night and day, by her 
willfulness of love, by her fidelity, brings up her 
children; and life has six men, all of whom are like 
pillars in the temple of God. And oh! do not read to 
me of the campaigns of Cesar; tell me nothing about 
Napoleon’s wonderful exploits; I tell you that, as God 
and the angels look down upon the silent history of 
that woman’s administration, and upon those men- 
building-processes which went on in her heart and 
mind through a score of years, nothing exterior, no 
outward development of kingdoms, no empire-building 
can compare with what she has done, Nothing can 
compare in beauty, and wonder, and admirableness, 
and divinity itself, to the silent work in obscure dwell- 
ings of faithful women bringing up their children to 
honor and virtue and piety. I tell you, the inside is 
larger than the outside. The loom is more than the 
fabric. The thinker is more than the thought. The 
builder-is more than the building. + 

Consider, too, that this silent, invisible life within 
us is.not only all the time working, and immensely 
fruitful, multitudinous in results, and greater than any 
or all of its exponents; but that itis all the time, while 
itis working outwardly, working on itself. It is not 


296 EXTERIOR AND INTERIOR 


so much a life that is working out results independent 
of itself, as it is a self-building process. All the 
thoughts that flow from us are working channels of 
thought in us. 

As in the dark caves of Kentucky the lime that ig 
held in solution forms, as the stream trickles from the 
roof, stalactites, or, as the water drops to the ground, 
stalagmites, so the process of thought leaves incrusta- 
tions on the soul within, as well as outside of the soul, 
It is producing a result. It is perpetually building 
walls, if you liken it to architecture. It 1s working 
channels, if you liken it to a stream. It is addiug 
stroke after stroke to the portrait, if you liken it to art. 
Nothing moves in this world that it does not exert an 
influence on the universe in some degree. The flight 
of a bird, the falling of a leaf to the earth, the scuffling 
of two birds, or their chasing each other through the 
air, the vibration of a note, anything which causes the 
least impact, changes the whole universe, as streams 
that run to the sea and empty themselves into it change 
the sea, and change the channel from the top to the 
bottom. The sea roars and murmurs, and then wipes 
its brow, and is calm again ; but it is never the same 
sea ; it is nevar the same shore ; it is never the same 
waves. The waves striking the shore, and retreating, 
never leave it as it was. 

Now, if it is so in hard matter, if it is so in visible 
and physical things, how much more is it so in such 
mobile and subtle elements as those which constitutes 
the soul’s life ? How much more is it so with the soul 
which changes at a giance or a thought. which is more 
mobile than a thermometer, and which is more sensi- 
tive'than any barometer! And men are not conscious 
of it. Nor are they conscious of other changes which 
we know are going on. 

I have lately kept an account of invisible things to a 
certain extent. t have made myself a companion of 
things not seen. For my barometer is all the time 


independent 
. <All the 
channels of 


lime that ig 
es from the 
the ground, 
es incrusta- 
of the soul, 
ly building 
is working 
t is addiug 
en it to art, 
lot exert an 
The flight 
he scufflin 
hrough the 
causes the 
as streams 
oit change 
top to the 
hen wipes 
br the same 
r the same 
retreating, 


) in visible 
80 in such 
onstitutes 
h the soul 
h is more 
hore sensi- 
conscious 
ges which 


hing's to a 
panion of 
the time 


DIVINE PROVIDENCE. 


telling me of the changes of the mystic fluid in which 
[live. They are registered night and day, andI see 
what is going on where I cannot see. My barometer 
is likewise telling me of the increase or decrease of heat 
which is going on. And my differential thermometer 
is telling me, all the time, of the moisture that is in the 
atmosphere. So I know the hydrometric conditions of 
the world in which I live’. And I have come to feel 
that the things which are going forward on the vastest 
scale I do not know anything about, or that they do not 
report themselves to the eye. ; 

Professor Tyndall tells us that what we see of light 
is not all of light, and that rays which are operative, 
aad which can be demonstrated to exist, have no means 
of reporting themselves to the eye. There is a vast 
amount going on which is palpable in this physical 
globe ; but how much more there is that is subtle and 
impalpable! Light, heat, and electricity are a motive 
power and formative power which is playing through 
every single soul that lives, and thinks, and is acting, 
and is acted upon. The activity of that self which we 
carry is going forward every day, and changing, modify- 
ing, building, unbuilding, piling up and pulling down 
the elements of our being. There is a perpetual forma- 
tive process going on in the silent world about us: but 
the outward world is not so big as the inside world 
within us. 

Men know about how they stand in some respects. 
Men know how they stand in regard to their bank 
account—sometimes. Men know how they stand in 
regard to their property—some men do. We have 
certain rough, coarse estimates which we make of our- 
selves, A man can usually tell about how tall he is; 
about how much he weighs; about how much he is 
worth—though he usually makes it twice as much at it 
really is. A man may beable to tell you that he stands 
reasonably well with his fellow men, that he is success- 
ful in business, and ail that. But what coarse measures 


yt 
“Ny, 
\ Mga 


298 EXTERIOR AND INTERIOR 


those are which take cognizance of such things! The 
do not touch a man’s real manhood. What man gap 
tell you to-day what is about the condition of his reason, 
of his observing power, of his power to philosophize? 
What man understands the workings of his reasonin 
intellect? What man has any guage or mode of 
estimating, or can give any intelligent conception of, 
the actual moral state in which he is existing? - What 
man can tell, not simply whether he has lied or sworn, 
but what is the condition of his moral sensibility? What 
man can tell what is its fiber, its power, its growth, its 
richness or poverty, its admirableness or ignobleness? 
What man can give any true measurement of himself 
in these respects ? 

We are going on, and going up, and building; but we 
are like men who are building in the night, and do not 
see what they are building. Did you ever have a thought 
come to you in the night, and try to write it down with- 
out a light, and see in the morning what queer writing 
you had done? Queerer yet would be the writing which 
you would do if you were to attempt to write down what 
you are inside. And yet, the unknown, the unseen facts 
which are going on in the great invisible world are a 
thousand times more significant than those which are 
going on outside. 

I look at what summer is doing and has done. What 
do I see when I go to my little hillside? I perceive that 
my evergreens are three feet higher than they were last 
summer. and are proportionally finer and better ; but what 
do I know of all that the little roots have been doing? of 
the ramifications that they are making? of the supplies 
which they are gathering from the earth? of the various 
processes by which they are supporting the life of the 
shrubs? What do I know in regard to their condition as 
regards health or unhealth? What do I know of the 
bark? What do I know of the leaves ? 

We look at nature with a coarse eye, and see a few 
gross things; but the silent processes by which sap is fur- 


ings! They 
1at man can 
f his reason, 
1ilosophize ? 
IS reasonin 

or mode of 
nception of, 
ng? - What 
ed or sworn, 
lity? What 
growth, its 
enobleness? 
t of himself 


ing; but we 
and do not 
ve a thought 
down with- 
eer writing 
riting which 
» down what 
unseen facts 
world are a 

which are 


one. What 
erceive that 
were last 
r; but what 
n doing? of 
he supplies 
the various 
life of the 
ondition as 
now of the 


l see a few 
sap is fur- 


DIVINE PROVIDENCE. 299 


pished to the plant, and by which root, and fiber, and 
park, and leaf, and blossom, and fruit are nourished and 
maintained, we are comparatively ignorant of. We look 
upon the various parts of a tree, but we look upon them 
inthe most superficial manner, not suspecting that their 
interior nature is measurable and analyzable. 

Who knows what the summer has done to the tree of 
lifeinside of us ? Who knows where its roots have gone? 
Who knows what has been the secret history of the ele- 


ments that have entered into the growth of this tree ? 


Who knows what sap has gone through it and organ- 
ized new growths in its branches? Who knows the 
methods by which its fruit is produced 2? Who can stand 
before man in imagination and picture the workings of 
his mind for any given period ? We cannot write down 
the products of human life in a single year, and not even 
ina single month. How profoundly ignorant we are of 
ourselves ; and yet it is in ourselves that we live, if any- 
where. The man inside is the real man. The outside 
man is the mere shell or crust. That which goes to make 
manhood is not that which addresses itself to the outward 
senses ; it is love, anc. truth, and fidelity, and aspiration, 
and spirituality ; and what do you know about these ? 
What have you by which 1) trace and measure them ? 
How can you estimate them? Yet you are sailing 
through the air, you are voyaging across the sea, you are 
carrying this great invisible realm of yourself upward and 
onward, to be reported by and by, when death shall come ; 
and yet, how little do you know about it! 

Notwithstanding all these sublime forces which exist in 
a man, how helpless he is to take care of himseli! Nota 
babe of months, left to cook its own food, would be more 
helpless to supply his wants than the wisest man, left 
alone, is to fashion his own spiritual ailment, and take 
care of his inside life. 

Thank God, science is now more and more, by analog- 
les, pointing in the same direction, and teaching that all 

Kl 


\heaag |! 
NY, 
May 


i 


‘ 


300 EXTERIOR AND INTERIOR 


growths in this life are along a line which proniseg 
higher spiritual development. 

If then, we know so little of men, and of things below, how 
much less do we know of the other life? How much less do 
we know of things which are indispensible to the shaping of 
that immortality in which we believe, or seek to believe? 

Upon the basis of these representations, the doctrine of 
a providence exterior and interior is one which every man 
ought to believe, and which I think every man of a 
higher reason does believe. I most fully believe in the ex- 
terior providence of God, and I more fully and earnestly 
believe in his interior work. “ Work out your own sal- 
vation with fear and trembling,” says the apostle, “ for it 
is God that worketh in you to will and to do.” I want 
the divine providence, the providence of clouds, and 
storms, and rains; I want the providence of summer and 
winter ; I want the general providence of God, to make 
physical industry successful, and to guide me in all my 
ways. As a business man, as a merchant, as a lawyer, as 
a physician, I need to act in a sphere of external provi- 
dence; but living there is comparatively easy. It is not 
to be compared with living in that other sphere, which is 
so vast, and which involves such momentous interests, 
That is where we especially need God’s providence, 
And when God says, “I work in you to will and 
to do,” the heart says : “ Blessed be God, that there is a 
providence in the inside as well as on the outside.” 


Brethren, I know there are a great many who doubt 


whether there is a divine providence; yet, I know that if 
you take it as it is laid down in the New Testament, it is 
not only easily comprehendible, but employable, and that 
it is full of bounty and fruit. But if you attempt to 
frame and fashion the method of it, and cast yourself on 
science for a solution of it, you come to grief, and are 
like a man who should cast himself on a hedge of thorns. 
Our Master never told us how he managed his providence. 
What did he say ?. He simply said: “Confide in me. I 
am the Guide ; 1 am the Father ; and I take care of all 


aS TH 


Se Oe ae ey a ee ee ee ee ee oe i oe 


pTO.nNises g 


below, how 
uch less do 
» Shaping of 
to believe ? 
doctrine of 
every man 
man of a 
e in the ex- 
d earnestly 
ur OWN sal- 
stle, “ for it 
. TI want 
slouds, and 
ummer and 
1, to make 
in all my 
. lawyer, as 
nal provi- 

It is not 
e, which ig 
3 interests, 
rovidence, 
will and 
there is a 
de.” 


how that if 
ment, it is 
e, and that 
attempt to 
ourself on 
f, and are 
of thorns. 
rovidencs. 
inme. I 


are of all 


ho doubt. 


DIVINE PROVIDENCE. 301 
men. I take care of the beasts, of the grass of the field, 
aud of the flowers ; and certainly I take care of you. 
Therefore trust in me. Lean back your weary head, and 
believe that you are not the only one there is that con- 
cerns himself with your fate. Believe that there is God 
the Father, who looks after your welfare.” “ How, Lord?” 
“That is my business.” 

It is our philosophical curiosity or impertinence that 
runs forward and undertakes to say that God’s providence 
works in this way, or that way, or the other way. It is 
the attempting +o arrive at an explanation of the provi- 
dence of God that brings us to grief in our reasonings. 

“Why, does not God govern by natural law ?’ say men. 
“Do you suppose men can change natural laws ? Do you 
suppose men’s thoughts and wishes are going to change 
the organism which from eternity was laid down?” I 
say, I do not know anything about it. But then, I know 
that the God who makes natural laws, can use them to do 
what he wishes to have them do. .I do not know how 
God ordains and administers his providence, but I know 
he has declared that he has a providence ; and I know 
that I am a thousand times happier in believing it than I 
should be in disbelieving it. Iam a thousand times more 
active when I am working under the influence of hope 
than when I am working under the influence of despair. 
When I put my trust in myself, or in any human power, I 
fall back discouraged and sick at heart ; but when I say to 
myself, “ Fool, why give yourself anxious thought ? Does 
not God think enough for all his creatures ? Do not dis- 
trust him,” I am cheerful, and buoyant, and full of courage. 
I have seen skepticism on the subject of the providence of 
God, and I have seen anxiety about the future, in men. I 
have seen itin women. I have seen itin thisman. And 
I have asked myself, after the manner of the sublime sar- 
casm of Christ : ‘ Which of you, by taking thought, can 
add a cubit to his stature?” Suppose you are four feet 
high, and suppose you worry yourself almost to death 
about it, do you grow by worrying? Does it make any 


Wit une § 


r 
ii 


7 
iM) 


302 EXTERIOR AND INTERIOR 


difference? Do fretting and anxiety do you any good? 
Do they not consume your happiness, use up your strength 
and make you less fit for life and its enjoyments ? 

Do not you know some round, healthy-blooded woman 
who, while other people are crying, and all the time com- 


ing to grief, does not trouble herself, and comes out as well ' 


as they do, and has comfort all the time, too ? 

Do not you find men that are driven from pillar to post, 
that are racked with anxiety, that cannot sleep at nights, 
and that do not know what they shall do to get along bet- 
ter? And are they not like a water-logged ship? And 
do they not use up their strength by mere fretting and 
worrying ? And therefore is it not better to trust God 
and do what you can? Is it not better, after you have 
acted according to your highest wisdom, to leave the re- 
sults to Providence? “ But,” says aman, “I shall be bank- 
rupt.” Very well, when you get to bankruptcy you 
cannot go any further : make up your mind to that and 
be at ease. “ But suppose sickness comes ?” Well, what 
can sickness do ? It can kill you—that is all; and if you 
had just as lief’ die as live, that endsit. Your book-keep- 
ing is too operose. You do not keep your accounts on the 
right plan. Living or dying you are the Lord’s. 

{should like to have these men who doubt providence 
in external things, (for I am now speaking to such) over- 
hear their children in the nursery talking in this wise : 
Here are little Robert and little Mary. The elder is only 


ten years of age, and the other eight; and below them - 


oO 
are brothers and sisters, six, five, four years of age, and 


so on all the way down. They are talking to themselves 
as to where ’pa and ’ma are going to get their clothes and 
food. They cannot see. They do not understand ’pa’s 
business. And they are fretting and worrying about 
where they are going to get what they need to eat, and 
drink, and wear. And the mother stands and_ listens, 
and thinks, “ Would not that make a capital story for a 
Sunday-school paper ? The idea of those young children 
feeling anxious about how they are going to get along! 


nD =~ _e 


os —_ 


+] ee ee ee eee 


nn 


my good? 
ir strength 
3? 

ed Woman 
time com- 


ut as well ° 


ar to post, 
at nights, 
along bet- 
ip? And 
stting and 
trust God 
you have 
ve the re- 
1 be bank- 
ptcy you 
that and 
Vell, what 
und if you 
o0k-keep- 
nts on the 


rovidence 
ch) over- 
his wise : 
er is only 


low them - 


age, and 
emselves 
thes and 
and ’pa’s 
ig about 
eat, and 
listens, 
ry for a 
children 
t along! 


DIVINE PROVIDENCE. 303 


Just as though we were not going to take care of them !” 

And yet, does not that mother herself, when sickness 
comes, and little Robert is lying sick of one disease in 
one room, and little Mary is lying sick of another disease 
in another room, play the child, and a abe at that, and 
do just the same thing that she saw these children doing? 
And do not we do the same thing? And does not God 
laugh at us, and chide us? “ Your heavenly Father 
knoweth that ye have.need of these things,” is the con- 
solation which God breathes into our ears ; and if you 
say, “How?” the reply is, “ None of your business.” 
If you find out before God tells you, you will do more 
than others have been able to do. But will you not 
believe until you do know how ? 

Suppose you are in danger of bankruptcy, and it is 
sharp 2.30, and the bank closes at 3.00, and you have 
got to pay five thousand dollars or fail, and you come to 
me, and I let you have the money ; before taking it, will 
you ask me, “ Where did you get it?” “TI got it, and got 
it for you; and that is all you want to know about it.” 

Some men seem more foolish than those Indians or 
heathens who scarify their bodies and torment them- 
selves. It would seem as though men tried to make 
their troubles and sorrows that are minatorial worse than 
they are. 

Now, if this is so in regard to the outside providence, 
which takes care of our physical comforts and material 
wants, how is it respecting that inside providence which 
takes care of our thoughts, and feelings, and imagina- 
tions, and lays the foundation of immortality in us, 
building up that something which is by and by to stand 
before God? We have no chart nor compass on the sea 
of inward life over which we are voyaging, except God. 
He is our Hope and Help in this great inner realm 
through which we are passing, not by the senses, but by 
faith. And if we live by faith and not by sight, how 
sweet and comforting it is to hear our Master say to us, 
“Work out your own salvation, and go forward with 


{LAI 
"My ” 
Mw 


804 EXTERIOR AND INTERIOR 


hope and courage, for it is God that is working in you to 
will and to do of his good pleasure.” 

Listen to those other words which are contained in the 
Epistle to the Colossians : 


* Set your affections on things above, and not on things on the eart) : 
for ye are dead; and your life is hid,” 


This great inward life is hid. Where is it hid? 
** Your life is hid with Christ in God.” 
You are living, as it were, in the bosom of the Eternal, 


“When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear 
with him in glory.” 


Lift your drooping head, O soul, much desponding, but 
easily conscious of little that is good and much that is 
evil! O soul, much tempted, much tried, sorrowful, 
waiting, sometimes compelled to patience! lift up your 


head. Your life is more than appears. What is going — 


on in your life you have no registry of, but God has kept 
an account of it all, He has been molding you by a mil- 
lion touches ; by thovghts and feelings he has been 
building a structure within you; and when he takes 
away the scaffold, as he will ere long, then you will 
appear givrious to him, to angels, to men, and to yourself. 
And then you will be satisfied, first with yourself, when 
you see that you are wrought in the image of the Lord 
Jesus Christ. 

“Commit yourselves to the providence of God in out- 
ward things ; commit yourselves to the dear providence 
of God in inward things; and believe that neither your 
father, nor your mother, nor the wife of your bosom, nor 
your own self even, loves you half so much as the God 
who made you, the God who keeps you, and the God who 
manifested his love for you by the gift of his Son Jesus 
Christ, our Saviour, who is God in you the hope of glory. 

Let us draw near to God, dear Christian brethren, this 
morning, with renewed confidence and trust. Let us, as 
we partake of these emblems of the broken body of 
Christ, and of his blood shed for the remission of our 
sins, renew our hope, and become, even in these dark 


y 
y 
y 
t 


a ee 8 cn oe el Ue | cee OR 


y in you to 
ined in the 


on the earth : 
id ? 


he Eternal, 
e also appear 


nding, but 
ch that is 
sorrowful, 
t up your 
ut is going 
d has kept 
l by & mil- 
has been 
he takes 
you will 
0 yourself. 
elf, when 
the Lord 


od in out- 
providence 
ther your 
bosom, nor 
8 the God 
» God who 
Son Jesus 
p of glory. 
hren, this 

et us, as 

body of 
Dn of our 


hese dark 


DIVINE PROVIDENCE. 805 


days, children of light. Let the promises of God be like 
so many chaplets round about our head. Let us stand 
strong, not in our own wisdom, and not in cur own good- 
dese, but in this: He loves us; and having loved us, he 
will love us unto the end. 

I now affectionately invite all who need divine help, all 
who are conscious of their own sinfulness, all who are ear- 
nestly and honestly desiring to live a Christian life, and all 
who are willing to take the bounty which God proffers to 
them—I now affectionately invite all such to partake 
with us of these emblems, which are not alone for church 
folks, nor for eminently Christian people. I present to 
you your dear Jesus, who, when he walked upon the 
earth, was a friend of publicans and sinners. And if there 
be here any who, being sinful, long for regeneration, for 
uplifting, and for nobility in God, he is your Jesus, your 
Saviour; and you have a right to these humble memo- 
rials, if you accept them sincerely, as a help to a better 
and a higher life. Whether you belong to one church 
or another, or to no church, if you covenant to give 
yourself to the Lord Jesus Christ, and to live, as far as in 
you lies, by the help of God, a high and holy life, I invite 
you to tarry with us. I invite sinners to partake of the 
bounty and blessing of their promised Saviour. 


° PRAYER BEFORE THE SERMON. 


Our heavenly Father, we thank thee that thou art, though theu 
art so much above our reach, and that thou art everywhere. To our 
homes we come by weary journeyings ; but it is home for the soul 
anywhere throughout the vast domain of God. Where there is want 
or sorrow or need, thou art close at hand. Though thou dost not 
now manifest thyself to these our bodily eyes; though men may no 
longer reach out their hand to thee, yet thou knowest how to make 
known thy presence and power to our inward lite, and our souls 
greet thee, and take hold upon thee. We rejoice when we have 
spiritual fruition of our God, that this higher communion is granted 


1 yet 
ij ys 
Vw 


806 EXTERIOR AND INTERIOR 


to us, and that we are not left to the earth to be earthy by a mere 
physical communion. We rejoice that we are drawn to a higher 
life ; that we are drawn into the better part of ourselves ; that we 
are growing ; and that by faith we come to that manhood which ig 
appointed to those who follow thee. 

e rejoice, O Lord, that thy testimonies are sure, and that the 
‘witnesses which have now swelled through the ages of the faith of 
God toward his people are not vain witnesses. We ourselves also 
testify to thy divine goodness. Ever since we can remember, thy 
mercies have been round about us. Thou hast done exceeding 
abundantly more for us than we could ask or think. Thou hast 
shed the light of thy countenance upon us; and it has been daylight 
indeed to our souls. Thou hast been with usin the storm and in 
the calm ; in sickness and in health ; in perplexity and in times 
when all things were clear and tranquil. Thou hast been a God 
for the soul. Thou hast met its wants and exigenci.s. Thou hast 
blessed us in the innermost recesses of our life. Thou hast made it 
profitable for us to call upon thee in prayer. Thou hast granted 
unto us that communion which has cast its light out in all the times 
of strife and struggle in the world. We rejoice to belive that thou 
wilt not leave us nor forsake us ; and that having loved thine own 
thou wilt love them unto the end, 

We thank thee that more and more are finding their way to the 
unknown God. We thank thee that more and more are coming 
through their nobler part to that kingdom which is the realm of 
the spirit, and not of the body. Especially may thy blessing rest 
upon thy servants who have been gathered to-day into this visible 
church, and who are joined to the company of those who live by 
faith. Be with them in all their relations of life. Grant that they 
may live more and more godly, with their éye upon the world that 
is to come ; that their hopes may be more and more radiant ; that 
their hearts may be stirred within them, both to obey thee in the 
silence of their thoughts and to work out before thee with their 
hands the things which are becoming. We pray that thou wilt 
comfort them in their household relations. Sanctify their affiietions, 
Bless to them their prosperity. Take from it all its dangers. May 
they find every single day that their strength isin God. May they 
walk more happily than ever before. May they be more cheer- 
ful, more hopeful, more courageous. May they bear such a teati- 
mony by their life that men shall be led to draw near to their 
Saviour, and find the same bounty and blessing which they enjoy. 

We pray that thy blessing may rest upon the families of this 
church. We thank thee for all thy great goodness to it in times gone 
by ; for the unity of feeling which exists in it; for the absence 
which there has been of division, and hardness, and coldness, one 
toward another. Thou hast united this church in thee, and so in 


thy by a mere 
n to a higher 
Ives ; that we 
hood which ig 


and that the 
of the faith of 
nurselves algo 
smember, th 
he exceeding 
- Thou hast 
been daylight 
storm and in 
and in times 
been a God 
.» Thou hast 
hast made it 
hast granted 
. all the times 
ive that thou 
ed thine own 


r way to the 
€ are coming 
he realm of 
blessing rest 
0 this visible 
who live by 
hnt that they 
e world that 
pdiant ; that 
iV thee in the 
with their 
t thou wilt 
r afflietions, 
ngers. May 
May they 
more cheer- 
ch a testi- 
par to their 
they enjoy. 
lies of this 
times gone 
he absence 
Idness, one 
», and so in 


DIVINE PROVIDENCE. 307 


iwelf, And we pray that still thou wilt go on in ways of mercy 
with it. 

May thy truth evermore be clear. May it search the innermost 
thoughts of men. May it lead to nobler lives, and to higher con- 
ceptions of character, and to more blessed fruitfulness. 

We pray that thou wilt grant thy blessing to rest upon parents 
who are attempting to rear their children unto manhood. May 
they never be weary in well-doing. May they not be discouraged 
nor give up so long as life shall last. 

We pray that thou wilt bless the labors of thy servants who are 
devoting themselves to the welfare of those who are Jess favored 
than themselves. May those that cerry light into dark places, 
those who go to houses of distress bearing comfort, those who carry 
instruction among the ignorant, and those who endeavor to help 
such as need help around them-——may they be themselves guided 
and sanctified and abundantly blessed of God. 

We pray, O Lord er God, that thou wilt put it into the hearts 
of more not to live for self, not to live for things transient, but to 
live in the spirit of Him who went about doing good, and whosaid 
It is more blessed to give than to receive. More and more may this 
spirit be diffused throughout the land. 

May churches no longer be divided one over against another. 
May they learn those things which make for peace and union. May 
love prevail. May the power of the malign passions be more and 
more banish2d from the earth, until at last the beast shall be up- 
rooted, an the man shall emerge and come forth in all the purity 
and beauty that is in Christ Jesus, 

Now, may the services of this sanctuary be acceptable in thy 
sight. We would please thee. Thy pleasure is our joy. 

e pray that thou wilt grant to every one who is present with 
us a portion of thy blessing. Remember those who are strangers 
in our midst. Grant that the blessing of God may rest upon them, 
and that they may find fellowship in thy sanctuary with thee and 
with us. Remember those dear ones who are far away in their 
households. Follow their derires and prayers this morning. 

Spread the word of truth throughout all the world. May the 
number of those who lebor to carry the Gospel to their fellow men 
be increased. May those who bear the name of Christ be precious 
everywhere. May nations no longer bruise and wound each other. 
May they no longer throw themselves with desolatiogs one upon 
another. May the time of peace and gladness come when Christ 
shall reign over all the earth. 

And to thy name shall be the praise, Father, Son, and Spirit, 
evermore. Amen, 


Hi fants 


il Wy 


tid 


TTT. 


REASON IN RELIGION. 


‘For when for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that one 
teach you again which be the first principles of the oracles of God; and are 
become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat. For every one 
that useth milk is unskilful in the word cf righteousness; for he is a babe, 
But strong meat belongeth to them that are of full ave, even those who bh 
reason of use have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil,” — 
Hes. v. 12-14, 


province of duty. The sacred Scripture stands almost 
alone as a book of religious directions in exhorting toa 
full, tree and constant use of the reason. From _begin- 
ning to end, it takes for granted that man is a reasonable 
creature, to be dealt with by motives intelligently pre- 
sented. Men are best dealt with by an appeal to tueir 
reasoning faculties; and, in consequence, the Word of 
God is constructed substantially upon that plan. It 
addresses the reason primarily. It challenges men to 
‘examine the different commands by the light of reason. 
Some have thought that the question of the apostle, 
“Who art thou that repliest against God?’ was a 
dissuasion from meddling with the human understand- 
ing in things divine. If it be, it stands solitary in 
the word of God. “Come now, and let us reason 
together, sa'th the Lord.” Throughout the. Old and 
New Testaments there are inducements and persuasions 
of every kind to the examination of God’s commands; 


7e need that one 
of God; and are 
For every one 
for he is a babe, 
n those who b 
od and evil,” 


for want of 
an indolent 
ason in the 
ands almost 
orting toa 
rom_begin- 
| reasonable 
gently pre- 
eal to tueir 
e Word of 

plan. It 
res men to 
of reason. 
he apostle, 

?” was a 
inderstand- 
solitary in 
us reason 
B.Old and 
persuasions 
ommands ; 


REASON IN RELIGION. ’ 309 

® 
and it is declared that they are reasonable; that they are 
right, just, true, good. Everywhere throughout the Word 
0 God are provocatives to the fullest and largest us: of 
our understanding in judging of things fit or unfit, right 
or wrong, true or false. So that it may be said that the 
Word of God is constructed upon the very principle of 
exciting men to the use of their reasoning faculties. _ 

On the other hand, dullness, and stupidity, and indif- 
ference, and that simplicity which indicates want of 
culture and igncrance, are made criminal. Men are re- 
proached, blamed for them. And one of the effects 
which may be expected from the soul’s being touched by 
the Divine Spirit is that it will mount up into a higher 
realm of intelligence. In no instance that I remember 
is there a command which should lead men to lean on 
others for their knowledge. Certainly, there is nothing 
like a servile acceptance of imposed conclusions recom- 
mended in the Word of God. 

Nor is it anywhere authoritatively hinted at, or clearly 
stated, that God has reposed his truths in the keeping of 
any body of men from whom their fellow-men are to 
receive them implicitly and unthinkingly. Not even 
from himself are we to take, unchallenged and unex- 
amined, the truths which are fundamental to our char- 
acter and our lives; and still less are we commanded to 
take ‘hem at the hands of the Church, or of any priestly 

dy whatever. 
Pony so far as reason is concerned, the Word of God is a 
grand encourager of the supreme use of the understanding 
of men, both in things secular’and in things spiritual and 
divine. So far from our reason being limited by autho- 
rity in any arbitrary body, it is made to be the duty of 
each individual to think, to judge, to choose, to be vital. 
Not that men shou!d do it without help; not that men 
who. are combined for the pursuit of truth are to be 
treated with disrespect; not that there are not many 

resumptions that men who betake themselves to any 
fine of thought will be more likely to be right than those 


ee 


ips 


It 


310 REASON IN RELIGION. 


who do not; but whatever help we may gain from pre. 
cedent, from authority, from men of any profession, it js 
the wha | of every individual man to weigh, to judge, “to 
prove all things, and to hold fast that which is good.” 
The Word of God is an enlightener; and wherever jj 
has been a free Bible, wherever it has been generally 
read, and wherever its influence has really entered into 
the lives and hearts of men, there intelligence has pre. 
vailed, and there the human understanding has unfolded 
its best works, and developed its best efforts. So that 
the Word of God is not a tyrant book. It imposes. no 
manacles and no restraints, except those which belong to 
the nature of the human mind, and the nature of the 
subjects which the human mind is called to investigate, 
hen, therefore, the hierarchical churches cast dis. 
esteem upon the human reason, and reproach thor who 
lean to their own understanding, as if the declarations of 
the Old ‘Testament were to have literal application, they 
depart from the genius and the spirit of the Word of God, 
And yet, the Protestant spirit is liable to go to the other 
extreme. The reason is not infallible any more than the 
Pope or the Church. Men have cast down the hier. 
archies, and refused to accept them, questioning their 
edicts. Men have denied the right of any class to think 
for them. They have gone almost to the extent of idol- 
izing the reason. There are a great many kinds of idols 
in the world: there are those thet are made of sticks, and 
stones, and clay, and precious metals; and then there are 
churches that are idols; and there are creeds that are 
made to be idols; and there is such a thing as idolizing 
the Bible itself--which zs the idol of many and many a 
Protestant; and the reason is the idol of still others. In 
many instances, the Roman tendency, and the modern 
free-thinking tendency, stand at the opposite extremes— 
both of them alike in error; for the human reason is 
neither so acute, nor so comprehensive, nor so sure in its 
deductions as men think. It is not any safer in many 
instances, and in some not so safe, as an authority, as 


ous 
lige 
for 
lead 
whd 
lie 
fe 
the 
astY 
han 
to ¢ 
facts 
han 
trut 
tom 
tacts 
for 1 
whit 
bee 
to ti 
arti 
bees 
to tl 
to 1 
cone 
mer 
his | 
tion 
for. 
spot 
hea 
and 
per) 


The 


fain from pre. 
rofession, it js 
to judge, “to 
h is vood,.” 
d wherever it 
een generally 
y entered into 
ence has pre. 
> has unfolded 
rts. So that 
t imposes. no 
‘ich belong to 
ature of the 
O investigate, 
shes cast dis. 
th those who 
eclarations of 
lication, they 
W ord of God. 
> to the other 
ore than the 
wn the hier. 
ioning their 
lass to think 
tent of idol- 
inds of idols 
of sticks, and 
Len there are 
pds that are 
as idolizing 
pnd many a 
others. In 
the modern 
extremes— 
NM reason is 
O sure in its 
er in many 
thority, as 


REASON IN RELIGION. 311 


custom or experience. In ten thousand ways men are ob- 
liged to do that which they scoff at and scorn the hierarchy 
for doing or enjoining. DoTI do all the thinking which 
leads to the things that I believe in? I believe in the 
whole system of mathematics, whether abstract or ap- 
plied; but have I thought it all out? I never have, and 


S thank God I never shall! It is not for me to think out 


the great system of astronomy in order to believe the 
astronomical truths of my time. I accept them at the 
hands of the Church of Astronomers. It is not for me 
to go through all the earth and explore geographical 
facts, in order to believe them. I accept them at the 
hands of the professional explorers. I trust them for the 
truth of these things. It is not for me to unbed the cus- 
toms which stud society all over, and run back to its real 
facts, in order to believe in its philosophy. .It is enough 
for me to know the averiuge experience of society, upon 


’ which these customs are based. I take them as they have 


been handed down to me. It is not for me to undertake 
to traverse or analyze the reasons of art. I take from 
artists the great canons of truth in that department, 
because I believe that they have found them out. I trust 
to their authority in such matters. And when you come 
to look into affairs in general, there is no man who is not 
constantly pinning his faith on the sleeve of some other 
men for knowledge—and that in the very sphere to which 
his avocation confines him. Everybody, in some direc- 
tions, is doing that which we abuse the Roman Catholic 
for doing in religion; he is not so far wrong after all, in 
spots. ‘The grocer in many parts of his business acts on 
hearsay. He goes according to other men’s judgments 
j and thinkings. The Surgeon and the Physician are 
perpetually doing it. The Lawyer lives upon precedents. 
The Astronomer is always receiving truths from others. 
Ile gives them more or less examination; and yet, in the 
main, he takes them on trust. There is no sphere of 
human life in which a man stands where he is not the 
centre of innumerable rays of light which come in ypon 


312 REASON IN RELIGION. 


him; and he takes them without analysis. It is not jp 
the power of a man to give independent and persona] 
investigation to them all, so as to know them of himselt 

If, therefore, to follow out every line of truth with one’s 
own individual reasonings and deductions were a neces. 
sity of intelligent conviction, inen could believe but a few 
things. It is not in our power in this life to master man 
subjects. There is only time enough for one to think 
about a limited number. It transcen''s the power of men 
to cover much ground by invest:gation in this world. 

So, then, there are both of these principles at work, 
It is indispensably necessary that men should think, and 
that they should think for themselves. It is necessary, 
in repeated ins‘ances, that they should make their own 
deductions and conclusions, and follow in the lines of 
conduct which flow from them. But on the other hand, 
men cannot, in all things, think for themselves, It is 
right, it is wise, it is reasonable, to accept the thoughts of 
others. We give and take. In one place a man thinks 
for you, and in another place you think for him. There 
is this interchange of knowledge on the great p~inciple of 
the faith of maninman. We trust each others thinkings, 
And yet there is, over all this faith and trust, an investi- 
gating tendency; a thoughtfulness; a right to stop every 
conclusion, and question it, and oblige it to show its pass- 
port and prove its origin. 

Both of these tendencies are at work. We teach men, 
but they are left independent and free to think. Ovher 
men teach us; but we are independent and free to think. 
In certain lines, we take the results of each other’s think- 
ings; but not without the right of questioning them. 

‘When, therefore, men insist upon it that to be in the 
full exercise of reason, one must throw off the past, and 
lift up his head into an independent sphere, where no 
man before has been, and think out all things, to him may 
be applied the words of the proverb : : 


‘“*Segst thou a man wise in his own conceit? There is more hope of a 
fool than of him.” 


It is not in 
and personal 
n of himself 
ith with one’s 
were a neces. 
eve but afew 
master man 
one to thin 
power of men 
is world. 
sles at work, 
id think, and 
13 necessary, 
‘ke their own 
| the lines of 
e other hand, 
selves, It is 
e thoughts of 
4a man thinks 
him. There 
t principle of 
prs thinkings, 
st, an investi- 
to stop every 
show its pass- 


e teach men, 
rink. Ocher 
ree to think, 
pther’s think- 
¢ them. 

to be in the 
he past, and 
e, where no 
| to him may 


more hope of 4 


REASON IN RELIGION. 813 

Not ;ilosophy, but folly inheres there. 

Let us lock a little then at the elements and the proofs 
of that reason which men talk so much about, and know 
so little of. 

First and lowest, is that which we possess with the 

whole range of the lower animals—perceptive reason— 
that part otf the human understanding which takes cog- 
nizance of physical tacts and events that are exterior to 
ourselves; which perceives the existence of things, and 
their various qualities: which recognizes whatever 
belongs to the framework or physical structure of the 
globe. 
° Ther# is evidence that we possess this phase of reason 
in connection with the lower creation. In many respects 
they have sharper senses than we have. ‘The eagle and 
the vulture can see a thonsand-fold more accurately and 
distinctly than we can. The hound has a sense of smell 
which interprets things to him as no sense of smell 
ever interprets things ta men. There is a sense of touch 
possessed by many animals which is finer and more 
authoritative than any sense of touch which is committed 
tous. But no animal has an average so high and of so 
many senses, extending over such a large radius of the 
physical world as man. 

Where the results of observation are brought together 
in certain affiliations, we have what we call the realm of 
sensuous, physical science, which is dependent mainly on 
the quality of perceiving. 

Now, if any man ‘supposes that there is certainty in 
this realm, he has given very little consideration to it. 
Men say, “Do you not believe the sight of your own 
eyes?” , I have nothing better, I admit, by which to see 
things. A man’s hearing is the best thing he has for 
that side of truth which is taken in through the ear. His 
sense of smell, his sense of taste, aud his sense of touch— 
they are the best instruments which he hasfor perceiving 
particular phases ‘of truth. But are,these instruments so 
perfect that men may rely upon them implicitly? No. 


\\ 
it 


anit § 


ity 


‘ 


314 REASON IN RELIGION. 


Every court of justice shows that the same event, being 
looked at by two, by four, by six different men, is nof, 
although they are honest, and mean to state the truth, 
seen by any two of them alike. The sense of seeing in 
each one acts imperfectly, and each sees differently from 
the others, and makes a different reportfrom theirs. Mer 
think that they see things with absolute accuracy; but 
experience has taught the scientist that one observation ig 
not enough—that a score of observations are necessary 
in order to correct the fallibility of the sense of seeing. 

The same is true of the sense of hearing. Men do not 
hear half that there is going on to begin witb. Let the 
leader of a choir or a band hear a semi-tone of discord, 
and his ear will detect it instantly. Mine does not. The 
great rush of sound I hear; I take in certain great effects 
that are produced; but all that fine analysis by which 
the ear, under suitable training, detects the slightest shade 
or element—that I am deficient in. That belongs only to 
the musician, and comes only by education. 

Hearing is not very accurate as between one man and 
another. In some it is far bettter than in others. It is 
not very accurate as between one period of a man’s life 
and another. Different statements are given where men 
listen carefully and report truly what they have heard. 

The same is true in respect to the sense of touch. The 
five senses, with the perceptive intellect back of them are 
alike in this respect. The sense of color, the sense of 
shape, the sense of quality, all the senses, when you 
apply the test to them, and measure their accuracy, are 
found to be very unreliable. Nothing is more inaccurate 
than the reports of a man’s perceptive intellect. And 
yet, with what arrogance do men speak of it! It answers 
the common purposes of society; but not without falling 
into innumerable errors which need to be corrected. 

When a young physiologist came with great zeal to 
Cuvier, and said that he had discovered a new muscle in 
the frog, the old naturalist waived him off kindly, and 
said, “Come to me again in ten years.” He never came. 


vent, being 
nen, is not, 
> the truth, 
f seeing in 
rently from 
heirs. Mer 
suracy ; but 
servation is 
e necessary 
of seeing, 

Men do not 
b. Let the 
of discord, 
2s not. The 
yreat effects 
3 by which 
yhtest shade 
ongs only to 


ne man and 
hers. It is 
a man’s life 
where men 
ve heard. 
ouch. The 
of them are 
he sense of 
when you 
curacy, are 
inaccurate 
lect. And 
It answers 
hout falling 
ected. 
eat zeal to 
vy muscle in 
kindly, and 
never came. 


REASON IN RELIGION. 315 
Farther investigation proved to him that he had not 
found a new muscle. 

Every school of natural history, every school of physics, 
in the broadest domain, knows perfectly well that the 
senses need to be trained, and tht there are very few 
men whose knowledge of the senses can be relied upon. 
The genius of knowing even the lowest form of truth is 
a rare genius; and in ripest to the great mass of men 
the senses are. fallible. Though they answer a certain 
rough use of life, and afford a basis for general confidence, 
yet, after all, when the question is one of exactitude, 
there is nothing less to be trusted than the senses, until 
they have been trained. And there are not many men 
who are capable of being trained so that their senses 
shall be irreproachable. 

This is one of the grounds and signs of the skepticism 
of science. Men who are scientific investigators apply 
to truth the tests of physical investigation. They per- 
ceive the mistakes which are made by others and them- 
selves, and they come to have a realizing sense, as the 
old ministers used to say, of the fallibility of man’s per- 
ceptive reason. When they hear a man reasoning from 
the Bible, and forming judyments and drawing deductions 
therefrom, they hold these judgments and deductions in 
suspicion and say, ‘¢ That man is not using his understand- 
ing accurately.” If you go still higher to the reflective 
reason, it is that which recognizes the relations of things 
to the relations of truths. All truths are in their abstract 
forms subjective. They belong to you. They spring 
out of your inner consciousness. All things are mainly 
external to you; but the reflective reason recognizes the 
results of matter in its own sphere, and also the results 
of states of mind, and of all that belongs to human con- 
sciousness and human faculty and human power. Ordi- 
narily we call the use of this reason philosophy. Where 
it exists in certain forms, and considers everything in the 
most abstract way, we call it metaphysves. 

_ Now, when we look at the reliableness of thissuperior 


K2 


\ 
\ 
\ 


Mall # 


Wi 
i 


316 REASON IN RELIGION. 


reason, has it proved to be a safe ground for trust? Foy 
I know not how many hundreds and thousands of years 
men have been heaping up system after system ; and the 
chief object of each succeeding philosophy or theory ha 
been to show that the one which prece ed it was false in 
the higher realm of the philosophical intellect. Men haye 
been for ages reasoning, drilling, training, accumulating. 
and after all, the consciousness of mankind is that the re. 
flective reason, while it has vast advantages, while it sup. 

lies a human want and a human necessity, is as fay 
from being infallible as anything can be. No man can 
afford to lean his whole weight upon it without suspicion, 
without test, without trial. It partakes of the fallibility 
of human nature. 

Nor does it follow, because a great many different 
minds, in different directions, come together on a truth, 
that it is more true than it would otherwise be, 
Whole generations have believed together, and a new 

eneration has, by new methods of investigation, upset 
their belief. There have been times when the whole drift 
of the world was in certain directions; and they were 
always followed by new developments; and speedily the 
current turned right round and flowed the other way— 
showing that asthe men individually have been fallible in 
their reflective reason, they have likewise been s0 collec. 
tively. The thinking of masses of men ina given direc. 
tion does not necessarily authenticate any truth. The 
fact that things have been accepted trom the days of the 
patriarchs may create a presumption or probability that 
they are true, but it is not absolute evidence of their 
truth ; for many things have been believed from the days 
of the patriarchs that have proved not to be true, and 
been taken out of the category of truths. 

When, then, you come to judge of the action of the 
understandings of men—their perceptive reason and their 
reflective reason—you will find that though they have 
practical serviceableness, they are so crude, so untrained, 
and so disturbed by the emotions of the mind, that they 


r trust? For 
ands of years 
fem ; and the 
or theory ha 
t was false ip 
ct. Men have 
ccumulating ; 
is that the re. 
, While it sup. 
ity, is as far 

o man can 
out suspicion, 


the fallibility 


any different 
or on a truth, 
otherwise be, 
r, and a new 
igation, upset 
he whole drift 
nd they were 
t speedily the 
> other way— 
een fallible in 
been 80 collec. 
a given direc- 
y truth. The 
he days of the 
obability that 
lence of their 
from the days 

be true, and 


action of the 
ason and their 
gh they have 
so untrained, 


ind, that they 


REASON IN RELIGION, 317 


are not infallible, nor absolute, nor to be depended 
upon. 

There is another sphere of the reason—tha t one in which 
truths are apprehended in their social and moral rela- 
tions. We coine into the knowledge of truths of fact and 
matter by the mediation of our senses; but there is a 
higher realm than that of fact and matter. There is an 
invisible realm where emotion, where senti:ment, where 
spirituality reside. We come into communion with that 
realm by the understanding, through the mediation of our 
personal emotions and feelings. T will illustrate it. 

I do not suppose that toa butterfly there is any thought 
of beauty; but it is itself beautiful. I think that there 
is not in the animal creation—except possibly in a few of 
the more highly organized animals—any considerable 
sense of beauty. But the heaven is beautiful, and the 
earth is beautiful. 

There are a great many men who, in this respect, are 
like the animal kingdom—men of strong reasoning power ; 
men of sharp observing power; men of great power of 
creativeness ; men who know how to turn ideas into things, 
and yet apparently have no sense of that subtle element 
which pervades the atmosphere, which influences human 
conduct, and which is, as it would seem, a letting down 
of one of the greatest attributes of God on earth—the 
sense of things beautiful. Man does not perceive this. 
What is the matter? 

Take a little air, or strain. which an organist may give 
you. Itshall besome familiar tune, like Dundee, or some 
old carol. Let him, by-and-by, after playing it on one or 
# two small stops, introduce another stop—a hautbois, or a 
wood-flute, for instance: and you will see that while the 
air remains, there is a new quality in it. Let him intro- 
duce another stop, and another; and you will see that it 


® is still the same melody and harmony, but that something 


additional has gone into it; that it is richer, sweeter, 
stronger. We have not language to follow these subtle 
things very far. 


318 REASON IN RELIGION. 


Now, it is so with the human mind. The intellect jg 
looking at things; and if all the emotions were shut off 
and were not allowed to color them, how barren, how 
unrich they would be! But re draw one emotion, and 
instantly the things perceived through the intellect are 
affected by that emotion. As in playing a tune, every 
additional stop that is introduced adds a new quality to 
the sound, so the understanding is modified, changed, en. 
riched, by this or that emotion which is let on. 

When the intellect is thus electrified, magnetized, polar. 
ized, it comes to a recognition of the greater truths of 
affection and sentiment. For instance, a man who is ab- 
solutely without love for children or pets will sit in a 
nursery where children are laying, without any sort of 
feeling; but put me where those children are and I am 
asparkle all over, because I love children. The moment 
my perceptive reason and my reflective reason are shot 
through with the magnetism of this emotion of love for 
children, I become competent to perceive thoughts and 
feelings and relations which I never could have perceived 
by any ordinary process of thinking. It is the thinking 
power, waked up and acting through the color of an 
emotion, that brings one into relation to the truths which 
belong to that emotion. 

Take a man who has no conscience naturally (it would 
not be difficult to find sich men !), and let him stand in 
the midst of actions and presentations, whatever they are, 
and he will perceive no sense of equity ; he will have no 
fine appreciation of honor, no intense feeling of what is 
right or wrong; he will be entirely without any such 
emotion; but others, standing right by him, and highly 
constituted in their moral nature, will be sensible to what 
is right, and true, and noble, and just. In other words, 
where emotion is absent from a man, his understanding 
cannot know or comprehend certain feelings which belong 
to emotion; but where emotion is present in a man, it 
unites with his understanding, and enables him to takein 
these feelings. The feeling of conscience joining itself 


e intellect js 
vere shut off, 
barren, how 
emotion, and 
intellect are 
1 tune, every 
W quality to 
changed, en. 
on. 
etized, polar. 
ter truths of 
n who is ab- 
will sit in a 
it any sort of 
re and I am 
The moment 
ason are shot 
n of love for 
thoughts and 
ave perceived 
the thinking 
color of an 
truths which 


lly (it would 


im stand in ° 


ver they are, 
will have no 
lr of what is 
put any such 
, and highly 
sible to what 
other words, 

derstanding 
which belong 
in a man, it 
im to takein 
oining itself 


319 


REASON IN RELIGION. 


to the reason, to the undersianding, enables it to perceive 
those things which belong to the realm of conscience. 
The understanding is always the knowing part; but what 
it knows depends on what it has before it, or behind it, 
or within it. 

Take the emotion of ideality, which we call imagina- 
tion, fancy, aspiration, yearning, and what not. Where 
that joins itself to the understanding, it makes the orator, 
the poet, the mystic, the dreamer. It makes men see 
erat in regions where they do not outwardly appear. 
In all such cases the understanding is magnetized by that 
feeling which brings them in relation to things invisible— 
tosuperior truths, Throughout the world, the sentiment 
of benevolence, the sentiment of hope, the sentiment of 
faith, the sentiment of conscience, the sentiment of love, 
bring us into relation to spheres of truth which are infinite, 
divine, transcendent. . 

When, then, you come to look at what are called moral 
intuitions in men, what are they but results of such a 
highly organized, sensitive state of mind, that feeling, 
flashing upon the understanding, brings into the form of 
knowledge or perception all the truths that belong to the 
emotion which has colored, or magnetized, or polarized 
the understanding ? 

Now, in this realm, what style and degree of certainty 
is there? I think, generally speaking, it may be said 
that those intuitions which are aguinst nature—using 
nature in a qualified sense—are more apt to be true than 
those which are with nature. In other words, the spon- 
taneous feelings which a man has in the direction of the 
animal sphere—anger, pride, cruelty, and the like—are, 
generally speaking, more erroneous than those intuitions 
which go out toward the generous, the noble, the pure, 
the self-denying. It is more natural for aman to act with 
those immense swells of feeling which work toward the 
animal, than to act with those emotions which work to- 
ward the spiritual, and yet in that direction he most often 
acts wrongly. It is only by long practice with reason and 


$20 REASON IN RELIGION. 


feeling that we have learned to discern the right from the 
wrong—the good from the bad. It requires education— 
that 1s to say, the introduction of the element of habit 
upon this joint action of the reason and the emotions— 
to enable us to make just moral distinctions. Men re. 
quire the sharpening of drill before they can discern 
what is high; what is right; what is symmetrical; what 
is beautiful—before they can discern any of those noble 
qualities which belong to them, and which are implied in 
the terms cwelization and spirituality. These are all 
reached through an imperfect medium. Emotion and 
reason, working together on a highe. plane, are tran- 
scondently valuable ; but they are tar from being infalli- 
ble. They are full of faults and mistakes. 

So far, then, as to the fallibility of men’s reason. 

it would seem, at first thought, in looking over this 
subject, as though there was a strong argument in favor 
of having the Church think for men, and tell them what 
is right and what is wrong; but there is always this 
fallacy: that where the Church thinks out a truth, and 
tells it to me, % have to think of it before I can under. 
stand it. I meet the same liabilities to error in accepting 
from the Church what it says as infallible, that I do in 
the exercise, of my own thought independent of the 
Church. “he very act of receiving truths from other 
persons or from hodies of persons, is attended with as 
many riskis as the act of searching for truths unaided by 
others. I am liable in accepting what comes to me from 
others, to no less limitations and mistakes than I would 
beif I went forth and gathered my own materials and 
made my own deductions. 

Moreover, we have had the experience of ages, which 
shows us that the truths which are handed down to us by 
corporate bodies are not any more true than those which 
are developed by our own individual experiences. 

Take the household. The father and the mother can 
think for the children until they are fifteen, or eighteen, 
or twenty years of age; but then they must think for 


ht from the 
education 
nt of habit 
emotions— 
Ss. Men re- 
can discern 
rical; what 
those noble 
e Implied in 
hese are all 
motion and 
e, are tran- 
eing infalli- 


ason. 

” over this 
ent in favor 
them what 
always this 
, truth, and 
ean. under- 
nN acceptin 
hat I do 
ent of the 
from other 
ed with as 
unaided by 
to me from 
an I would 
uterials and 


wes, Which 
wn to us by 
hose which 
Ces, 

nother can 
' eighteen, 
; think for 


REASON IN RELIGION. 32] 


themselves. Why? Because no child is like its father 
and mother. All truth is relative to the person by whom 
it is applied. Every inan has his specialty which renders 
it impossible for him to take the shape, the color, the 

roportions, the exact elements of discrimination, which 
belong to the mind of any other person. No two persons 
ever agree. No two persons ever see alike, or hear alike, 
or feel alike, or think alike. 

I have a kaleidoscope at home (just now that is the 
plaything), and in turning it round probably five hun- 
dred times, and causing thousands of combinations, I 
have never seen two combinations in it that were alike. 
There are just so many (twenty or thirty) pieces of glass 
in it; and the sphere is very small in which they work ; 
and yet, the combinations are never repeated, are never 
reproduced. I do not know as they would be if I were 
to turn the kaleidoscope five hundred years. Although 
there are only twenty or thirty of these bits of glass, there 
is always some little difference in the combinations which 
they form, and which report themselves to the eye. 

If that be so in respect to twenty or thirty little bits 
of glass, which maintain their own individual forms, and 
can only change in their relative positions, what a kal- 
eidoscope the human mind must be, that has thirty or 
forty feelings, which are never the same, which are always 
changing in quality and intensity, and each of which 
forms endless combinations with the others! A vast, 
voluminous, intricate, changing thing, in its outworking, 
would the human mind seem to us to be if we had an eye 
of divinity by which we could give form to all the thoughts 
and feelings of men as they flow out. No two men think 
like each other; and no man thinks like himself in any 
two consecutive moments. 

When, therefore, bodies of men attempt to impose their 
views on their fellow-men, they act contrary to the 
nature of the mind, and contrary to the experience of 
mankind. Views so imposed cannot be helpful or 
profitable. No wise man will ever reject or neglect the 


322 REASON IN RELIGION. 


results which have been arrived at by any other wise 
man, or any body of wise men; he will always look with 
great respect, and with a recognition of the presumption 
of their truth, on things which have come down through 
long periods, and which have approved themselves to 
renerations of men; but no certainty attaches to them. ’ 
Ve cannot afford to take them as absolute. There is 
nothing infallible but God ; and he is hid. 

‘When, therefore, it is proposed that this limitation, 
this fallibility, of the human mind shall be remedied by 
some authoritative tribunal, that tribunal itself is subject 
to all the liabilities to error which the indiviaual is who 
accepts its dictum. 

Then next, let me speak of the arrogance of those who 
are throwing aside, or attempting to disesteem, or to 
disown, all the deductions of the spiritual sense; all the 
results of the action of the upper understanding. Look 
at the scientific tendency by which men would bring 
everything down to the sphere of tiie perceptive reason. 
There are many honorable exceptions. I do not say that 
it is the tendency of the professors themselves to overvalue 
the accuracy of scientific investigation. The fallibility of 
the lower forms of physical reason, or of that which tends 
to physics, should teach men the fallibility, also, of the 
higher faculties of mankind. 

When, therefore, men disown morality, or its founda- 
tion, sociology, or its great elemental foundation ; spiritu- 
ality, with all its experiences, on the ground that they 
do not come within the purview and investigatory power 
of the lower reason, it seems to me that they act in the 
most incomprehensibly unphilosophic manner. Shall I 
disown the sounds that fill the air, becanse, applying my 
eye to them, I cannot see them? Shall I disown all 
odors, because, putting my ear to the flower, I cannot 
smell them? Shall men disown truths, because they 
cannot taste them, when they are discoverable only 
through the joint action of passion or affection or spiritual 
emotion, and the higher understanding? Shall men 


y other wise 
1y8 look with 
presumption 
own through 
hemselves to 


hes to them, : 


ie. There js 


is limitation, 
remedied by 
elf is subject 
aual is who 


of those who 
steem, or to 
nse; all the 
ding. Look 
would bring 
tive reason, 
not say that 
0 overvalue 
fallibility of 

hich tends 
lso, of the 


its founda- 
Nn; spiritu- 
that they 
tory power 
act in the 
Shall I 
plying my 
isown all 
I cannot 
ause the 
ble only 
spiritual 
all men 
if 


REASON IN RELIGION. 323 


apply the crucible, or the mathematical rule, or any out- 
ward measure, to things that, if perceived at all, must be 
perceived through the channel of higher thoughts and 
feelings, and disown them because they cannot stand the 
test of the lower reason? The lower reason has its tests, 
the superior unspiritualized reason has its tests, and the 
spiritualized reason has its tests; and each must rest on 
its own ground. 

It is arrogance, then, even if it be maintained in silence, 
to suppose that all the great truths of spiritual Christianity 
are to be rejected, or held in doubt, because they refuse 
to submit themselves to the test of scientific reason. There 
is a higher realm than that in. which the senses bear 
sway; and the lower court cannot control the higher. 
The justice of the peace may appeal up to the judge, but. 
the judge never appeals down to the justice. And the 
higher reason is unjudged by the lower, though it judges 
the lower. 

One other point. In view of the carefulness required 
in the investigation of truth; in view of the time and 
training and discipline that are required; in view of the 
nature of the mind, and the skill required to judge of its 
actions rightly, I say to all those who are speaking lightly 
of the faith of their tathers, and of the manners and cus- 
toms of their childhood; I say to all those who, without 
any special knowledge, are talking of progress and 
emancipation, and of the glorious era of reason; I say to 
all those who are curveting in physical philosophy, as 
against the higher modes of arriving at the truth, “ You 
are going toc fast and too far. No man is wise who 
leaves his head behind him; and you are travelling faster 
than your brain can go.” . 

To bring new thought to the balancing of truth; to put 
thoughts to thoughts, and to make them march in ranks 
and train together to form systematic facts and co-opera- 
ting truths—this is a slow, a cautious and difficult process. 
Not one in a hundred can reach the higher forms of truth 
without having been schooled. You would not think of 


o24 REASON IN RELIGION. 


judging of painting without having studied the art. You 
would not think o1 judging of the operations in an astrono- 
mical observatory without having thoroughly investigated 
those operations, And yet, men take the old Bible, and 
sling it behind them, and say, “ ‘This may have been good 
enough for my father and mother, but it will not answer 
my purpose. Iam going to read scientific facts. I am 
going to find out what is true in other directions. I am not 
going to be held down by.those superstitions, those cid 
women’s fables, those fantastic notions. Iam going to be 
emancipated from everything of that sort” If you come 
to that result by the action of your nobler nature in its 
best condition, 1 admit that it is legitimate; but if, when 
you have scarcely been born into the light; if, while you 
are raw, and untrained; if, with no more thought on the 
subject than you can give to it in walking from your 
house to the ferry ; if, without seeking for knowledge as 
a hid treasure; if, without scales, or measures, or alem- 
bics, inside, or outside, or anywhere, you rush into those 
themes which embrace infinity and eternity, which cover 
the whole destiny of man, which relates to the condition 
ot States, the foundations of households, and the economy 
of industrial life—everything that concerns us here and 
hereatter—and undertake to settle all these matters by 
scientific generalizations, you are a fool—with my compli: 
ments. And how many persons you will find who do 
these very things! How many there are who refuse to go 
to church, as their fathers did! How many say, Let those 
who will take their grandmother’s spectacles and read that 
old Book; but as for me, I have been born the forerunner 
of a new sphere, and of new times!” : 
Youwmust equilibrate in this matter; you must tak 
things that men believed in the past; you must trust the 
conclusions of men who have gone bobbie you; but you 
may carefully think, and conscientiously reason to test 
the ultimate truth of those convictions. You cannot rise 
to a high and honorable place in business life, or civil life, 
or political life, except by those stepping-stones which 


eart. You 
1 an astrono- 
investigated 
. Bible, and 
e been good 
not answer 
acts. Iam 
s. [am not 
, those cid 
going to be 
f you come 
ature in its 
ut if, when 
, while you 
1¢ht on the 

rom your 
owledge as 
3, or alem- 
into those 
which cover 
e condition 
he economy 
s here and 
matters by 
my compli. 
nd who do 
efuse to go 
r, Let those 
d read that 
forerunner 


must take 
Bt trust the 
> but you 
n to test 
annot rise 
r civil life, 
nes which 


REASON IN RELIGION. 325 


were squared and laid down by the industry of those who 
have preceded you. Knowledze, virtue, morality, spirit- 
uality, manhood can only be acquired by long effort and 
practice. 

Men gradually find new elements of truth, or larger 
proportions of old truths. Be willing to receive new 
fight but until you have something substantial and clear 
es crystal to take the place of the old, hold on to what 
you already have. Nothing is so bad as for a man to be 
afloat. Nothing is so bad as for a man to lose faith in 
everything. 

Put in a skiff, in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean, a 
babe that knows neither the stars, nor the sea, nor storms, 
nor sail, nor compass, nor rudder, and what such a child 
is, that is the young man who drifts through life, con- 
temning all faith, all knowledge of the past, yet with- 
out having acquired any knowledge of the present, or 
gained any intuitions of the future. 


“Seest thou a man wise in his own conceit? There is more hope of a 
fool than of him.” 


Prove all things; but as a condition of doing it, and 
after you have done it, hold fast to that which is good. 


PRAYER BEFORE THE SERMON. 


WE are not afraid to draw near to Thee, O thou Holy;One, We 
are not afraid of thy justice, nor of thy wrath. For, though we 
know that thine hand is against evil, we know that thy heart is 
toward the children of men, even in their degraded condition. It 
is thy wiil that they shall be drawn up by the power of*thine in- 
telligence, and of thy holiness, and of thy goodness, until they 
shali see thee as thou art, and feel thy presence, and be trans- 
formed into thine image. We are far from thee, but thou hast 
pushed us away, that our journey may be toward thee. Though 
we are ‘unlike thee; though thou art not of a form like ours; 
though thou art not bound to the clay as we are, yet, inwardly, 
we believe that thou hast given us the beginnings of divine thought 


326 REASON IN RELIGION. 


and feeling’, and that thou wilt shape us into the image of thyself, 
We draw near to thee this morning, knowing our weakness, our 
want, our ignorance, and our transgression, in that limited sphere 
where we know what is right and what is wrong. We draw near 
to obtain thy help; to experience thy compassion; to be warmed 
by thy love; to be formed by thy power, which works perpetually 
in the hearts of those who will. 

Enter, O Divine Spirit, into our souls, with light, and warmth, 

_ and life, and love, and joy; and may we be able, this morning, 
in entertaining thee, to cast out all rivals; to lay aside everything 
which offends thee. Speak to us as thou didst of old to thy 
disciples, Peace he with you; and may all turbulent passions, and 
all sensuous appetites, and all unsatisfied and wearisome longings, 
and all burdensome doubts, and all trying memories, and all 
blinding clouds, and all things which disturb the calm of our 
settled peace, depart from thy presence ; and may we dwell with 
thee, this morning, in that restfulness and in that childlike confidence 
which shall make us supremely happy in the Lord. 

We desire, O Lord, to confess thy great goodness, and our 
unworthiness of it. We look back to the way in which we have 
been led to admire thee, and upon the rod and the chastisement 
which have been laid upon us; and we see that they have been 
blessings; and we commit ourselves again unknowing, but con- 
fiding, to that hand which hath guided us thus far. All that we 
have we commit to thee Thou art sovereign. Thy thoughts 
never forsake the earth, but are always abroad. Evermore the 
Watchman, thou art, of Israel, that slumberest not nor sleepest. 
Thou hast all power, and thou hast all goodness. We commit 
ourselves to thy thought, and thy purpose, and thy power; and 
desire to find peace in the perfect submission of ourselves to thee. 

We pray that thou wilt deliver us, in the various spheres in which 
our life is cast, from untruthfulness; from unfaith; from tempta- 
tions which are stronger than our resisting power. Deliver us from 
all evil, and give to us, day by day, such intimations of thy pre- 
sence and of thy complace-icy as shall fill our horizon with light, 
that we may cal! ourselves the children of light—the sons of God. 

We pray that thou wilt bless all who are in thy presence accord- 
ing as thou seest that they need in their special wants and in their 
personal necessities, Be to every one a present help. Grant 
abundantly outward blessings to those who have inward strength ; 
and grent inward strength to those who are surrounded by outward 
tokens of thy goodness. Be to all that which they need ; not that 
which they plead for in their ignorance, but that which thou, in 
thy wisdom, seest to be best for them. 

We pray that thou wilt grant thy blessing to rest upon all those 
who are laboring in their respective spheres to build up the king- 


ge of thyself. 
weakness, our 
imited sphere 
Ve draw near 
0 be warmed 
‘$ perpetually 


and warmth, 
this morning, 
le everythin 

f old to thy 
passions, and 
me longings, 
ries, and all 
calm of our 
e dwell with 
ke confidence 


$8, and our 
ich we have 
shastisement 
y have been 
1g, but con- 
All that we 
y thoughts 
yermore the 
or sleepest, 
We commit 
ower; and 
es to thee, 
es in which 
bm tempta- 
ver us from 
f thy pre- 
with light, 
ns of God. 
bce accord- 
d in their 
Dp. Grant 
strength ; 
ly outward 
; not that 
thou, in 


all those 
the king- 


REASON IN RELIGION. 327 


od in this world and in the great world beyond. Oh, 
ee eB be wise! May they themselves be enlightened. May 
they not be weary in well-doing, for in due season they shall reap 
j int not. 
: Le gia Sabbath-schools, and all that teach and all that are 
taught in them. We pray that the army of children that are 
growing up in our midst may grow up better men than we have 
been; with a larger thought of the work of God in this world; 
and with a better and earlier consecration thereto. 

We pray that thou wilt grant thy blessing to all those who go 
forth to-day on missions of mercy to the imprisoned, to the sic s, 
and to the wandering. May they go in the spirit of the Master ; 
and may they find that it is not in vain that they carry out the 
merciful dispensations of the Gospel among their fellow-men. . 

We pray for the reformation of those who are given to vice an : 
to crime. We pray for more virtue and wisdom in our laws anc 
in our institutions. Wilt thou increase, we pray thee, the restor- 
ing power of thy truth in the midst of men. We pray that a 
wilt bless all who teach, in every sphere of learning. Remember 
all those who are teaching in our common schools ; all those 
who are te:ching in obscure and destitute places; and al! those 
who, with pains and self-denial, devote themselves to the good of 
sie whee for schools for those who but lately were in bondage 
and darkness; for schools in far distant settlements, where 
i > prevails. ; 
eMay all fainapios of ere via up in remembrance before 

e greatly blessed of God. ; 
eee tts ‘bs kingdom may come, and that thy will may be 
done throughout the whole world. Unite the nations together in 
a common desire for peace. May that love of blood and of segre- 
gation, and may that spirit of avarice and of com bativeness, 
which have desolated the world so long, at last be restrained; and 
may the spirit of intelligence, and of humanity, and of love anne 
in the place of these disastrous evils. We pray that thy Church 
may everywhere spread, and purify the nations of the earth. May 
the day speedily come when, from the rising of the sun to the going 
down of the same, men shall know and love the Lord. aes 

And tu thy name shall be the praise, Father, Son, and Spirit. 
Amen, 


LOA AA EAMES EAL LM ALAA A — REN SD 


Ra 


| (C 3 
| ae 


THE USE OF IDEALS. 


‘And base things of the world, and things which are despised, hath God 
chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are; 
that no flesh should glory in His presence. But of Him are ye in Christ 
Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sancti- 
fication, and redemption : That, according as it is written, He that glorieth, 
lef him glory in the Lord,”—1 Cor. i, 28-81. 


HE apostle believed a good deal more than hz 
taught. He saw a great many things which were 
Bee true, but which it was not possible for him to in- 
part, because men were not ready to receive them. No 
one can read the close of the thirteenth chapter of 1st 
Corinthians without receiving Paul’s idea of the great 
truth of the relative and of the absolute far beyond any 
expression which he ever gave to it meatenso; and there 
shines up through the passage which I have read a 
philosophy of: the apostle which we may develop, but 
which would not have fitted the times or circumstances 
in which he lived. It lay in his own mind an under- 
truth, out of which came direction and instruction which 
was adapted to the wants of the disciples of his time. 
What did he mean when he spoke of “ things that are” 
as being subdued by “things which are not”? Did he 
mean to say that nothing is stronger than something? 
Did he mean to affrm that a nonentity has an actual 
power over a reality? No; he meant simply that as 
compared with physical realities, as compared with 
sensuous life and organization, there is a power in the 
thought-realm, invisible, intangible, unorganized, which 


ised, hath God 
hings that are; 
re ye in Christ 
468, and sancti- 
@ that glorieth, 


wre than hz 
which were 
him to im- 
them. No 
upter of 1st 
f the great 
eyond any 
; and there 
ave read a 
velop, but 
sumstances 
‘an under- 
tion which 
f his time. 
s that are” 
¢ Did he 
omething ? 
5 an actual 
y that as 
ared with 
er in the 
ed, which 


THE USE OF IDEALS. $29 


is stronger than any development in the form -f 1atter. 
Kingdoms are not so strong as are the impulses and the 
invisible tendencies of men which go to make kingdoms. 

But in this connection it wes not the invisible in general 
that he was’speaking of: it was that which we call in our 
time the ideal. He was describing the conflict of the 
truth of the Gospel with the great realities of philosophy 
and of worship which existed in the world. The better 
thought of God, and the better thought of manhood, and 
the better thought of character and of life, which is the 
ideal thought—this was in conflict with the tangible and 
the visible. The unseen, as men regarded it at that time, 
was simply an imagination—a thing without an existence. 
At the best it was but poetry, they said. It was mostly 
fantasy, moonshine, mere supposition. There was no 
reality init. But Paulsaid: 


“6 Thin # which are despised hath God chosen, yea and things which are 
not [ideal things], to bring to nought things that are” [real thinge). 


In other words, he declared that things which are not 
in any philosophy, and which are not in any outward 
form of organization, are mightier than the things which 
are recognized by philosophy, and which are organized 
in some outward form. 


“That no flesh should giory in his presence. But of Him are ye in Christ 
Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness and sanctifi- 
cation, and redemption. That, according as it is written, He that gloricth, 
let him glory in the Lord.” 


The appositeness of this passage—the connecting us 
with Christ Jesus in this remarkable way—I shall call 
your attention to in the closing of this discourse, only 
saying now, in respect to this, that the doctriue of the 
imputation of Christ’s righteousness which the theologians 
of former times attempted to teach has been rejected by 
sound thinkers, and is scarcely taught at all. But they - 
were feeling after an illustrious truth. Their mistake 
eonsisted, not in the fact that there was no truth in that 
direction, but that they took an imperfect view of it, and 


830 THE USE OF IDEALS. 


did not give an expression which was worthy of the thing 
that Mi sought by them. But that will come up in the 
sequel, 
ropose to speak of Zhe Useand Abuse of Ideals, 

There is a power in the human mind, which all recog: 
nize, to see things as they are—that is to say, as they 
embody themselves to our senses; but there is equally a 
power to see things as they might be. There is a con. 
structive power as well as an interpretative power. And 
it is not the result of education, although education 
develops it. It antecedes development. 1t is found in 
children even more than in men grown. It is found in 
the most savage nations, just as much as in the most 
civilized. There is in the human mind a power to receive 
the truths which are exterior to the mind, and which 
embody themselves and come in through the ear-gate and 
the eye-gate to the senses. There is also a power in the 
human mind, as clear and distinct, to see things that are 
not—that is, things which the senses would say do not 
exist. It is the power to see things in their imagined 
condition. A child that sees an apple as large as it can 
hold in its hand, has no trouble in seeing an apple as 
large as it can hold in both hands, or twenty times as 
large and as beautiful. He has the power to create it. 
And it may be more powerful in its influence upon the 
child’s mind than the thing that is. 


Among the ignorant, in all nations, this power of 
fashioning pictures, visions, ideals, has existed; and it is 
where it has depended upon ignorance that it has led to 
fantastic visions, and even to impossible things. But, 
however impertectly it has worked among the nations in 
times gone by, this power of fashioning an imaginary 
thing, and then having that imaginary thing come back 
and act upon the soul that fashioned it, has been working 
out one of the most energizing and divine elements that 
is in the human composition. For although there is 
great use and great glory in the management of things 


that are, and are apparent to the senses, yet there is even 


of the thing 
e up in the 


P Ideals, 
h all recog. 
ay, as they 
8 equally a 
re 1s & Con- 
wer. And 
- education 
is found in 
is found in 
n the most 
r to receive 
and which 
ar-gate and 
ywer in the 
gs that are 
say do not 
r imagined 
e as it can 
n apple as 
y times as 
create it, 
P upon the 


power of 
; and it: is 
has led to 
igs. But, 
nations in 
imaginary 
some back 

working 
nents that 
) there is 
of things 
re is even 


THE USE OF IDEALS. 381 


infinitely more glory in the fashioning of things that the 
hand cannot handle, nor the eye see, nor the ear hear, 
nor the tongue taste. Rightly used, the power of raising 
up an ideal—that is to say, anything more perfect in the 
imagination than its prototype—before the senses; the 
power to put a better thing in the place of the thin 
that is before you, or that you have, is a power BP 
lies at the root of all growth in the individual, and of 
civilization in the community. 

A man dwells first in a cave; and by and by there 
comes to him the thought, “If instead of tie in a cave, 
or wurse, in a hollowed-out tree, I were to put upfour 

osts, and cover them in, would not that be better?’ 

he theught of a hut to a man who has been brought u 
in a cave or a hollow tree is a thought of genius. It is 
an ideal. 

But when children brought up in huts begin to say, 
“Why should we forever live in this one room, where all 
things go on together? Why should we not have two 
rooms, and put the dirt in one and the clean in the other? 
Why should we not have a house?” they also give 
expression to an ideal. He who from a hut goes to a 
house, has an ideal in his mind before he does it. No- 
body ever stumbled upon a thing like that. 

And when men had lived in houses, the thoughts of 
multiplied apartments, and of more convenient ones, and 
of passages, and of decorations, and of ten thousand 
machineries of use dawned one by one upon their minds; 
and they were ideals hefore they were reals. They never 
would have been reals if they had not first been ideals. 
It is the things that you think of that leads to the things 
that you do. 

A man, himself a savage, found a crab-apple tree in 
the woods, and ate of the crab-apples, and scarcely thought 
he would eat again, till hunger drove him to it; and yet 
he thought, ‘‘ May be there are better, or these may be 
made better.” Ah! may be made better—that is genius 
tohim. The apple that he thinks of is the ideal apple. 

ul 


332 THE USE OF IDEALS. 


Tis acerb crab-apple, puckery, unsatisfying, is the real 
apple. Looking at it he says, “Out of this may come 
something better ;” and he plants the seed in a fairer soil, 
under better circumstances, and the products do prove 
better. And some other man says, “If they are made 
better by transplanting once, why may they not be twice?” 
And 80, step by step, is developed the orchard. 

It was by these processes, long delayed, and continued 
through ages, through a thousand years, that the ideal 
led on, step by step, to a higher ground. 

Men saw that the acorn, which the squirrel, or some 
othér animal, scratched leaves or soil over, sprouted or 
grew; and they said, ‘‘ Why would they not grow if | 
should cover them with earth?’ So they began to open 
the soil, and put in the seed. At first they opened the 
soil with a sharp stick, pulling it themselves, and scratch- 
ing a furrow. And then they said, ‘Why should I pull 
the stick? Why should not animals do it?” And they 
‘made the animals do it—and did not take out a pateni- 
right for it either! And then the thought occurred to 
them, “ Why not have something better than a stick! 
Why not shoe the stick with irun?” And by and by 
‘came the plow. But the real wii the sharp-pointed 
stick; and the tdeal led on, from step to step, till we 
have the plow; and not only a plow pulled by animals 
but a steam-plow, which is the final form of a rude stick 
propelled by hand. : 

So we go from the real to something better. There is 
something in us that says, “ This is not as good as it may 
be. There may come cut of it something better.” And 
where a man, in looking on a thing which exists, has 
power to conceive of a better form or quality or use for 
that thing, or a larger sphere in which it may be em- 
ployed, he has an ideal of that thing. 

n ideal, then, is the conception of higher forms, or 
qualities, in things, in conduct, in character. Every man 
who is at all civilized has ten thousand ideas. vel 
man who is aman with any vitality, if he has been civil: 
ized or Christianized, has come into that condition in 


1g, is the real 
is may come 
n a fairer soil, 
ucts do prove 
ley are made 
not be twice?” 
urd. 

nd continued 
hat the ideal 


irrel, or some 
r, sprouted or 
not grow if | 
began to open 
2y opened the 
3, and scratch- 
should I pull 
62” ~And they 
> out a patent: 
ht occurred to 
than a stick! 
d by and by 
sharp-pointed 

step, till we 
d by animals 
f a rude stick 


er. There is 
ood as it may 
etter.” And 
h exists, has 
ity or use for 
may be em- 


er forms, or 
Every man 
leas. aha 
as been civil- 
condition in 


THE USE OF IDEALS. 3338 


which his whole head sparkles and swarms with concep- 
tions of things. He is not content with things as they 
aro, but is incessantly suggesting to himself hoe they 
might be. And the might be is the ideal. How good or 
how poor this is depends upon the nature of the man that 
thinks it. To some it is meager. To others it is better. 
To yet others it is very fine. T'o still others it is trans- 
cendent. ‘These last are geniuses—the highest forms of 
men. 

There can be no doubt, then, that this is a part of the 
nature of the mind which God gave to it, and which is 
necessary to it in the conditions in which it exists, and 
through which it is to be developed; namely, not to be 
content with things as they are—neither with nature out- 
side, nor with manhood inside; but to have the power of 
conceiving betterment, and then to have the power of 
following that conception. And men in lifte—comprehen- 
sively speaking, society—are rich, not in proportion to 
what they have realized, but in proportion to their power 
of idealizing. 

Sometimes we use the term ¢deal, referring to things 
as they are, and looking at them in an abstract light; but 
I am using it in the sense of holding up a rare pattern or 
conception by which we may strive for improvement. 
And it is the use and abuse of this faculty that I wish to 
speak to you about this morning. 

First, this capacity of having ideals; of seeing things 
which are not; of perceiving what the things which are 
may become—this capacity inspires life. It is this which 
is perpetually waking up in men a desire to better them- 
selves, and to better their circumstances. 

Man is an unfolding animal. Whatever may be the 
whole truth in respect to modern philosophy, there can 
be no more question that man is a seed, and that in his 
generation he unfolds, than that man exists at all. That 
the race has been through a series of unfoldings is a thing 
established, I think, beyond any peradventure. Now, it 
necessary that such acreature, with such a peculiar or- 


? 


304 THE USE OF IDEALS. 


anization, by which he is to rise through unfoldings ste 
a step to a higher development, should have something 
to stimulate him to this higher development. Content, 
in one sense, is animalism. Ideals makes blessed discon- 
tent; not murmuring, not repining, but aspiration—ag 
sense of the unfitness of things. And a love for that 
which is better is divine in a man. 

The horse knows nothing about that, and the dog knows 
nothing about it, so far as we know. The dogs and 
horses never told me their secrets; but. there is no eyvi- 
dence that any animal, except the rational animal, man, 
has any sense of the value of the superior over the inferior; 
of the ideal over the real; of things as they might be 
over thingsas they are. This quality belongs distinctively 
toman. It is that very quality which sets him on the 
way of development and improvement. 

hat which makes a man all the whiie fruitful of sug. 
gestion ; that in a man which leads him to say : “ What 
is a matter of fact to-day may be better to-morrow ; and 
what is a matter of fact to-morrow may be better the 
next day”; that which keeps alive in a man the sense of 
bettering and bettering, unfolding and unfolding is 
divine. Ideas are the forces by which God brings society 
up. Pains and penalties, in one sense, force men away 
from gross animalism. Their attempts to live a large life 
in the lower sphere are all the time met and thwaried. 
God does not mean that men should live as animals do. 
When they attempt to live so he brings upon them per- 
petual stripes. Itisasif God were saying to men in their 
universal experience ; “not down there, not down there; 
up, out! up, out!” to drive them from a lower sphere to 
the higher life. 

There are these glowing suggestions, these golden 
thoughts, these star-light ideals, that hangin the air above 

men, and ei¢ winning them upward. These two things 
' —the pressure from below, and the drawing from above 

—both together are continually leading men to untold, 
to develop, to grow, and rise to the nobler and higher 
spheres of manhood. 


foldings step 
ve somethin 

it. Content, 
lessed discon- 
aspiration—a 
love for that 


he dog knows 
he dogs and 
are is NO evi- 
animal, man, 
r the inferior; 
ath might be 
3 distinctively 
s him on the 


uitful of sug- 
say: “ What 
morrow ; and 
be better the 
n the sense of 
unfolding is 
brings society 
e men away 

ea large life 
snd thwarted. 
s animals do. 
on them per- 
> men in their 

down there; 
wer sphere to 


hese golden 
the air above 
e two things 
» from above 
bn to untold, 
and higher 


THE USE OF IDEALS, 30) 


A man may be contented with his fare. He may be con- 
tented if he has brown bread, hard brown bread, Prussian 
brown bread, and none other. If a man is in prison, he 
may say: “I will be content with that; I am too much 
of a man to grumble because my food is not milled in 
that way or in this.” But a people, as a people, ought 
to have higher food. A nation of men ought not to sit 
down and say, “ Poor, hard, innutritious, soggy bread is 
good enou h for us.” Fora race to do that is to make 
swine of themselves. For special reasons an individual 
man may rise above his circumstances. For a man who 
is a martyr, and who has been accustomed to higher 
things, and who is disdainful of lower things, it is noble 
to have this content, and to scorn repining ; but for aman 
regarded as a member of the great growing race or 
species to have such contentment is beggarly. It isbeastly. 
tt is being willing to stay in the egg when he ought to 
want to be hatched. It is being willing to remain in the 
nest when he ought to want to fly with the eagle. It is 
being willing to be.an animal when he ought to feel the 

ulsations of manhood far above the animal. Many seem 
to think that to be content is a Christian virtue. Under 
some circumstances it is; but under other circumstances 
it is base. 

There lived on the Miami Bottom the richest man in 
all the county. He owned more hogs than any three 
farmers in thatregion; and he had more acres of corn to 
feed his swine on than any of his neighbors. He hada 
double log cabin with a second story to it. He lived up- 
stairs, and the other hogs lived down stairs. The floor 
was 80 loose and clattery that when the horses and hogs 
got to sea and squealing below, he could shove a 
board one side and halloo at them to keep order. His 
knife was a corn-cob with an old razor in it. There was 
not a man in the county who had as much money, and as 
much ground, and as many swine as he had. I will not 
mention his name, for he may have some relations alive! 
Now tell me, my friends, is the coarse, coru-eating, 


336 THE USE OF IDEALS. 


pig-swilling man who is master of a thousand hogs, him. 
self the chief, and who is content with his condition, and 
does not want anything better, an example of Christian 
contentment? Js such contentment as his manly ? 

When the Prodigal Son champed his pod by the side 
of the swine, should he have said, “This is good enough 
for me; I will stay here and eat with these swine?” 
When he said, “I will arise,” was it not the manhood 
that spoke in him? Everywhere it is the divine in man 
that says, “ Arise; look higher; think more nobly: 
endeavor better!” To be content under certain circum. 
stances is degrading; it is devilish. But aspiration, the 
having * ideal and reaching toward it—that is divine, 
That belongs to the higher manhood. 

Ideals, then, rightly used, inspire life, and the truest 
life, in men. 

Ideals also redeem men from a life which is purely 
sensuous, from a life that is unspiritual, and opens up to 
him a future and invisible life. And this istrue in regard 
to every part of life that we touch. Faith means the 
sense of things not seen. And the sphere of faith is a 
most important sphere. It relates to character, and it 
relates also to the future. There is no man that works 
and carries his work in his head, who has not the lower 
form of faith. The man is thinking of things unseen who 
lies awake at night and thinks of a new invention or of 
the development of some machine. And it is a noble 
. thing for a man to work in physics in such a way that the 
chamber where he works is invisible, though the work 
itself when it comes out is to be visible. It is opening 
up a higher realm when the workman is discontented 
with the thing he does, and the manner of executing that 
thing. 

itis said that a Yankee is restless, and is never con- 
tented until he has changed anything that he has received. 
Although this may be carried to excess ; although asl 
is not always improvement and advancement; yet the 
attempt to see if something cannot be made better at 


band hogs, him. 
8 condition, and 
le of Christian 
s manly ? 
od by the side 
8 good enough 
these swine? 
the manhood 
divine in man 
more nobly; 
ertain circum. 
aspiration, the 
that is divine 


ind the truest 


hich is purely 
d opens up to 
true in regard 
th means the 
of faith is a 
racter, and it 
in that works 
not the lower 
Ss Unseen who 
vention or of 
it is a noble 
way that the 
igh the work 

It is opening 

discontented 

ecuting that 


8 never con- 
1a8 received, 
ugh i 
nt; yet the 
de better at 


y THE USE OF IDEALS. $37 
w 


every step in our daily work is noble, and is pointing to- 
‘d the spiritual and invisible, | 
weal net is it so when it is gt over anaes i . 
a man to endeavor to do the bes 
ey rd The young man has any ae of edt 
' hi rho ¢ 
before him, and he can se ect those wh 
be hie ae He can select per Laci ape ch a 
: an §€ those whic : 
of conduct, or he can select nich | 
a ond unmannerly, patterning after those wore 
an thelr muscle, and “ strike out from the shoulder. 
aye can follow those who are gaa, pode, tt oe 
, i iri But when aman has made 
who are refined and aspiring. ote Mga eee 
i taken to follow his model, a hig 
his selection, and under ; ghes 
dto him. He may have awak 
ideal may be suggeste He. de aes 
in hi sire to develop his true man ; 
. Heh thie be set at work in his thoughts to do better 
ee the average of those with whom he ee rCe 
id ‘a man’s conduct should be nobler than that o 
ee men. One who is content is get yee a Oey. 
] better, is dead, to all intents anc 
body eise acts, and no 4 Ha peed stants vail 
. JItis only the man who asp 8, ‘a 
wake ke conduct ss and truer, and purer, and nobler, 
that is really alive. Sa 
mre An eee in epee to conduct, still ee yi if 
i nduc € 
ie i ect to character, or the interior co 
Coe ona of thought hy sage yeh Rie or 
hich comes to it. No man shou - 
Sak wills te th ki ower, nor any part of it. No 
tent with his thinking p : eee 
med to be so skillful that he é 
man has ever yet learne | nat 
“Ido not want to be any mor 
ann ank ‘train his power of observation so that he can 


afford to say, “Ido not desire to have any better power 


of observation.” No man can be so ney ip nese oF 
generalizing that he can afford to ye pop nase 
reason or generalize any better. Me me ne ny 
of his disciplined parts so as to be able to say, 


. ) 
my purposes I have reached the asap ait’ ry 0 pen 
i disposition is naturally generous, and who has 


338 THE USE Ob I ®ALS, 


educated by his parents to high-mindedness, can afford to 
say, in respect to any part of his inward character, “| 
am yood enough. I am better than men require me to 
be.” True nobility never should be satisfied with any. 
thing in any direction so long as there is anything better, 
It is to go on from grace to grace, from fineness to fine. 
ness, from good to better, from lower to higher. As long 
as life lasts growth is to go on. : 

That is a good tree of which I say, every spring when 
I go up to the country, “ Ah ! It is broader than it was last 
summer. I noticed, a year ago, that I could see light be. 
tween that and yonder evergreen ; but there is no space 
there now. And I see that it has sprouts shooting three 
feet into the air this summer.” I pronounce this to be a 
wholesome tree. But not far from it there is another tree, 
When I look upon that I see it has not grown, Leaves 
cover it; but:there are no new shoots on the top, on the 
side, or anywhere. And I say, “ There is something at 
the root or something is the matter with the bark ; or the 
circulating system is out of order.” A. tree that does not 
grow is not a sound or wholesome tree. And when I find 
the next summer that half of it is dead, I do not change 
my mind. And if I find the next summer that it is two- 
thirds dead, I do not change my mind then. And when 
at last the old tree stands and waves one branch, like a 
sunk swimmer with one hand above the water, saying, 
“So much of me is alive yet, but all the rest is dead,” J 
say to the axeman, ‘ Cut it down: why cumbereth it the 
ground?” 

When I see men who are all the time growing taller 
and broader in their character; and who, by the devel- 
opment of their mind are fulfilling the divine intent, I 
say that they are useful members of society; but when I 
see men stand still, growing neither taller nor broader, | 
say, “Something ails them.” When I see men whose 
outward form remains, but in whom no sap is left, from 
whom part after part has been taken away, in whom there 
is no vitality, who are shrunk and shrunk, so that: there 


can afford to 
haracter, “T 
equire me to 
dl with any. 
thing better. 
eness to fine. 
er. Ag long 


spring when 
an it was last 
see light be. 
18 NO space 
ootiug three 
this to be a 
nother tree, 
mm. Leaves 
top, on the 
mething at 
ark; or the 
nat does not 
when I find 
not change 
ut it is two- 
And when 
ch, like a 
er, Saying, 
is dead,” J 
reth it the 


ing taller 
he devel- 
intent, I 
it when I 
roader, | 
Pn whose 
eft, from 
om there 
at: there 


THE USE OF IDEALS. 339° 


are only one or two faculties which are not extinguished, 
I say, “It is time that they were taken away. They are 
useless.” 

It is life; it is pressing forward ; it is the influence of 
ideals which lift you up, and never will let you have any 
peace where you are—it is these things which go to make 
q true and essential manhood. 

Therefore, ideals prevent stagnation; as where they 
lead men to aspire who, if it were not for them, would be 
content with things as they are in society. And this 
leads to that everlasting question—in our land at any 
rate—of the conservative and the progressive. Who shall 
decide between them? One man says, “1 am conserva- 
tive.” Another man says, “I am progressive.” I say 
that if you are a wise man, you are both conservative and 
progressive. If a man is wise, his back is conservative, 
and his front progressive ; and to cut him in two is to kill 
him! Ifa man isall progressive, he is not sound and right, 
and if a man is all conservative he is not sound and right. 
I never saw a man that I cared anything about who had 
not both the conservative and the progressive elements, 
If a man is to be of much use he must have them both. 

Some men, you know, when the team is at the top of 
the hill, say, ‘‘ Now, be free! Do not use the breeching. 
Use the traces. Loosen the reins. Go as fast as you 
can.” I say that that is unwise progression. 

Other men, you know, are just the reverse. They will 
not let you use the traces at the bottom of the hill, but 
they will stop the team, and buckle the breeching as 
tight as they can, and block the wheels for fear the horses 
will run up hill too fast ! 

Now, both of these elements are indispensable to 
society and to the individual. Every man should be 
HA onl and every man should be conservative. 
Kvery man should shake, and every man should gather. 
Kvery man should sow, and every man should reap. 
Every man should take seed, and throw it away; and 
when it comes back he should put it in the garner, that 


ips 


340 THE USE OF IDEALS. 


he may have seed to plant again. One of these elements 
is the gleaning power, and the otheris the keeping power, 
One cuts, and the other binds the sheaf. They ought to 
be friends, and not enemies. 

When men made the tread-wheel they imitated God’s 
globe; for when people are on tread-wheels, however 
much they may like to sit down, they do not do it, 
They are not allowed to. They travel on; or, as the 
wheel turns, stand still and walk. The globe turns ovey 
every day, and says tomen, “ Keep step!” It gives them 
no time to rest. Whi they are in the world they must 
work. Their business is to develop, trom the lower 
sphere into a higher. So long as men live in this world, 
life means activity—activity in thought, activity in plan, 
activity in desire. It means effort. It means out-reach. 
ing aspiration. 

No man should think that he is good enough. Noman 
should think that his household is good enough. No 
man should think that his house is good enough. I do 
not believe in a peasant who is content with his dwelling. 
I do not believe in aman who is so well satisfied with his 
house that he does net want the chimney, the walls, the 
floors, the windows, the appointments, something or other, 
better. IJ do not believe in a man who cannot think of 
some sort of improvement, though he may not be able to 
make it with his own hand. It is not necessary that you 
should run to extravagance ; but you arenot to look upon 
your household arrangements as being sufficient. You 
ought to regard them as things to be refined, to be im- 
proved, to be made better. 

There are elements in every-day life which vex it, tor- 
ment it, hamper it, anger it; and these should be watched 
for and overcome. Every man should study to have 
better thoughts, and to have a better speech. Men 
shovld study to elevate the tone of their imtercourse with 
those among whom they move. There isnot a man who 
always speaks across his table as he ought to. There 
is not a woman who alway replies as she ought to. We 


hese elements 
eeping’ power, 
‘hey ought to 


nitated God's 
els, however 
lo not do it, 
n; or, as the 
be turns ovey 
It gives them 
1d they must 
m the lower 
in this world, 
‘ivity in plan, 
ins out-reach. 


gh. Noman 
enough. No 
nough. I do 
his dwelling, 
isfied with his 
e walls, the 
hing or other, 
not think of 
ot be able to 
sary that you 
to look upon 
cient. You 
1, to be im- 


h vex it, tor- 
l be watched 
dy to have 
eech. Men 
recourse with 
a man who 
t to. There 
rht to. We 


341 


THE USE OF IDEALS. 


know what the music of life is; but what jangling there. 
is in the air, like the sound of discordant bells trom dif: 
ferent steeples? How that which God meant to be 
wonderful in its balm and blessing is made to prodace 
ain and sorrow! For youand me there is a better way 
of intercourse ; there is a better way of business; there 
is a better way in the store; there is a better way in the 
shop; there is a better way on the farm; there isa better 
way on the sea; there is a better way in the street; and 
it becomes us to hunt for better ways in those spheres 
where we are providentially placed. It is by trying little 
by little to discover and put in, practice hetter ways that 
we are to elevate our lives. Nothing else will do it. 
This is the foundation of all heroism; for only by 
dwelling upon things better than the level of life can a 
man prepare himself to be a hero. Brethren, there are 
not many heroes inthe world ; lut there is a vast amount 
of heroism. Whoever does a thing that is above the or- 
dinary line of doing, so far rises toward heroism; and if 
it is a thing which can not be done without self-sacrifice, 
itis heroic. There is many a woman who is heroic be- 
causé she can hold her tongue. Ah! do not laugh. You 
tie a man to the stake, and let Indians dance about him, 
and stick slivers into him, and with torches light them, 
and if he bears his suffering patiently, do not you see 
that he is heroic? And let a woman stand where every 
inch of her nature, which is exquisitively sensitive, is 
subjected to the extremest torture, and let her in spite of 
it all manifest a disposition which is inexpressibly lovely, 
and stands patiently, and “having done al), stand,”—is 
not she heroic? There is many and many a hero by 
reason of the virtue of silence. And I tell you that 
God’s histories will reveal moze names than men’s do of 
heroism. There is scarcely a neighborhood in which 
there are not heroic things done. Every day and every 
hour there are heroic things done in our kitchens. I as 
the men who are acquainted with the lives of hard-work- 
ing servant girls, ‘“‘ Do they spend their money tor them- 


342 THE USE OF IDEALS. 


selves or for others?” And the report on every hand is 
that they toil night and day, year after year, to earn 
enough to enable them to send money to their kindred. 
And do you tell methat there is no heroism in the kitchen ? 
You think heroism must be on Mount Athos. It is on 
the plain below! 
herever a heart beats for others, and goes out to 
succor others, and acts disinterestedly, at its own cost and 
sacrifice, for something else or somebody else, there is 
heroism. Alas! that we cannot join heroism to heroism ; 
but it is expensive food. Men cannot afford to be heroic 
except in spots. Yet, if a manis never heroic, why is he 
on earth? Why is he not dead? Hezs dead; why ishe 
not buried ? Men break out here and there with patience 
in places where it requires a vast amount of grace to be 
patient. Men A giulidag deeds, run risks, go through perils, 
for the sake of doing good. And such men manifest a 
spirit of heroism. But I am sorry to say that a sort of 
average conventional goodness seems to deaden heroism. 
I tell you, I love my kindso much that I am always glad 
to know that even bad men have something good in them. 
I hardly dare repeat to you a fact that came to my know- 
ledge; but I will. 
he San Francisco was carrying a cargo of women of 
the street, and she was overtaken by a storm, and it was 
evident that but few of those on board could be saved; and 
one who was there told me that not one on that ship in 
their distress was more calm and disinterested and help- 
ful of others than these low creatures. And from the 
bottom of my soul I thanked God. Do you want to see 
every spark of virtue trod out of those that are degraded? 
Are you not glad when you find that there is a glimmer 
of it left'in them? I was. 

There are many bad men here and there in whom you 
will see heroisms, And whenever you see an act of dis- 
interestedness above the level of ordinary endeavor and 
conduct, be sure that an ideal of heroism has been there. 
For heroism is born of forethought. You cannot sow 


very hand is 
ear, to ear 
eir kindred. 
the kitchen ? 
os. It is on 


foes out to 
wn cost and 
Ise, there ig 
to heroism ’ 
to be heroic 
c, why is he 
1; why is he 
rith patience 
grace to be 
ough perils, 
manifest a 
at a sort of 
ns heroism, 
always clad 
bod in diem: 
> my know- 


women of 
and it was 
saved ; and 
at ship in 
and help- 
from the 
vant to see 
degraded ? 


a glimmer 


whom you 
act of: dis- 
Pavor and 
Ben there. 
nnot sow 


THE USE OF IDEALS, 


cockle-seed and thistle-seed and find an oak tree growing 
from them. Wherever you see an oak tree growing, you 
may rest assured that an acorn has been there. Heroism 
does not spring out of that which is all vulgar; and yet 
heroism comes from those in whom there is much vul- 
arity. There are many peesane who are living not far 
rom the firey gate of hell, but who have thoughts that 
are heroic. And oh, that they had the power of resurs 
rection in them by which they might lift themselves up 
out of the slough and make these occasional thoughts 
frequent and these frequent thoughts habitual, and so 
save themselves ? 

Ideals also prevent conceit. How men become vain 
when their standard is low! How natural it is for men, 
having a low standard, and never raising it, to think, not 
only that they have come up to it, but that they really 
have overgrown it! I have seen the Glycene Chinensis 
grow eighty feet high; and everything ought to grow to 
the extent of the capacity which it has in fe ont T have seen 
it come far short of that. I had one myself. Although 
it was planted in the best of soil it would not grow a bit 
the first year. The second year it grew about an inch. 
The third year.it grew about a foot. In the course of 
five or six years it got up some six feet high—about on a 
level with the balustrade of my veranda. I have no 
doubt that that Glycene felt proud and conceited, and 
looked down, and said, “ Well fan up above this balcony, 
ain't I? Why, I have done splendidly well.” If you 
will only make your ideal mean enough, you can every 
one of you feel that you are heroic. I pulled up the old 
thing, and threw it away. And it did itgood; for when 
Mr. Turner found it, and carried it to another place and 
planted it, it took the hint, and commenced to grow, and 
became quite large ! 

What. men want, is something to give them a better 
ideal of growing. No man who looks down for his 
measure will rise. It ig a shame for a man to excuse 
himself for the undeveloped condition which he is in -by 


344 THE USE OF IDEALS. 


saying, “ The law lets me do so and so.” Whom was the 
law made for? For those who could not go higher than 
the average strength of the wholecommunity. And are 
you not stronger than the average of the community? 
No man lives who should not be honester than the law 
requires him to be. There is no man that should not be 
more generous than he'is required to be by public senti- 
ment. There is no man who ought not to be a better 
man than his circumstances require. Every man should 
be more highly developed in manhood and truth and 
wisdom than the majority of men in society. Youshould 
set your standard high, and then strive to reach it. 

A man who looks up all the time is never a great man 
to himself. Are youa poet? Then do not get poetasters 
to read, and say, “I write better poems than they do, 
and therefore | am a better poet.” itead Milton; read 
Shakespeare; read Homer; go to the old Englishmen of 
immortal thought, ‘whose drums and trumpets have 


sounded clear down through the ages to this day; go to 


the grandest and noblest of our thinkers and writers ; sit 
in council with them; and then see if you are nota 
dwarf—a pigmy. It will make you humble to have high 
ideals, But a man who forever measures himself by 
pigmies and dwarfs, and thinks he is better than they— 
what is he but a mountebank among pigmies and)dwarfs ? 
A true ideal tends to cure the conceit of men, and to rank 
them. Says the apostle, “ Let every man think of him- 
self as he ought to think, soberly, according as God hath 
dealt to every man the measure of faith.” The measure 
of faith? What is faith? It is the sight of invisible 
excellence. It is the sight of noble qualities unseen. It 
is the sight of ideal grandeur. Let every man measure 
himself by that conception, and then think of himself as 
he ought to think; let him think of himself as lowly and 
poorand neeedy; and he may well call out for help and 
for grace. 
I will add one more head to this side of the subject. 

The ideal is peculiarly Christian ; because Christ came 


Vhom was the 
» higher than 
ty. And are 
community } 
than the law 
hould not be 
public senti- 
0 be a better 
-man should 
ad truth and 
You should 
ach it. 
a great man 
‘et poetasters 
ian they do, 
filton’; read 
glishmen of 
npets have 
day; go to 
writers ; sit 
u are nota 
o have high 
himself by 
han they— 
nd. dwarfs ? 
and to rank 
nk of him- 
s God hath 
e@ measure 
bf invisible 
nseen. It 
n measure 
himself as 
lowly and 
r help and 


subject. 
1rist Game 


845 


THE USE OF IDEALS. 


to give us a new life; he came to give renovation to 
character. Christianity is simply the theory and the 
philosophy which teaches how to deal with that character 
which is superinduced upon the animal] conditions of man. 
It may be that man sprang from the animal. I have no 
objections to that. It may be that he came to his higher 
nature by development. However that may be, this 
higher nature which has been developed on and above 
the animal nature is the part of man which Christianity 
comes to instruct you how to develop still higher—how 
to make salvable and immortal. And every man must 
of necessity, if he is going to bea Christian, have an 
ideal character. God must be an ideal to him—that is, 
something conceived, rather than something seen. And 
heaven must be an ideal to him—that is, something that 
is before him in his though‘, and not before him by his 
senses. And so, all that throng of angelic influences— 
the communion of the Saints with the world; the con- 
ditions of the upper sphere; that ministration of angels 
which has been recognized in the old dispensation and in 
the new, but which has almost died out of men’s faith— 
all these come through the medium of the ideal. 

When, therefore, the Apostle says that God has chosen 
the things that are not to bring to nought the things that 
are, in the light of this discussion does it not become a 
very plain thing? Does not the declaration, that God 
brings to nought the things that are, become very plain 
when he treads down vulgarism by the ideal of a higher 
inanhood ; when he treads down vice and violence, and 
puts under all things that are, and makes them subject to 
the higher and nobler nature? When this element of 
faith; when this conception of an ampler life, and of a 
nobler self; when these invisible, intangible things— 
things that are not—when all these things shall take the 
place of things external, and fill the whole world with 
their light and glory, and men shall develop anJ aspire, 
do not you see that a new mzaning will be given to the 
Gospel, and that Gow hath chosen the foolish things of 


346 THE USE OF IDEALS. 


the world to confound the wise, and the weak things of the 
world to confound the things which are mighty, and the 
base things of the world, and thiags which are despised, 
and snes which are not, to bring to nought things that 
are 

Brethren, take home this subject to yourselves. There 
is a plentiful application which you can, every one of you, 
by your thoughts, minister to your own cases. Have you 
an ideal in every part of your life? Do you hold the 
light of better things over every one of your passions and 
appetities, over every institution and relation, over all 
social economies, over all business, over all civic and 
political relations? Do you live by the bright picture of 
something better than that which you have attained} 
Do you chasten the vulgarity of daily life? Do you 
refine the cares and necessities of daily life? Are you 
growing larger, sweeter, finer, and better? If so, then 
you are children of God, and heaven is already begun in 
you. 


PRAYER BEFORE THE SERMON. 


How fair is the world which thou hast made, O Lord our God! 
How wonderful art thou in thy glory, and in all thy thoughts of 
beauty, and in all the excellence which the earth doth show forth! 
And yet, where hast thou made anything so beautiful or so full 
of sweetness as little children are? They are of thee, and they 
bear something of thy nature, and shall go back to thee, to report 
what history has befallen them upon earth. They are thine, and 
are lent to us. And what joy do they bring! Though they come 
crying, how do they come to bear smiles and laughter, and full- 
handed joy, in years and years that flowon? How light is the 
house with them! and how dark it is without them! How full of 
strength dost thou make their little weakness to those who are 
called td take care of chem! How in nourishing them, do we 
nourish ourselves! How in teaching them, do we ourselves learn! 
How are we taught what God is by that which he makes us to be 
by tiose little ones that are so dear to us ! 


2 
y 
t 
] 
] 
I 
{ 
| 


things of the 
ghty, and the 
are despised, 
’t things tha; 


slves, Phere 
ty one of you 
, Have'yee 
you hold the 
passions and 
10ON, Over all 
ull civic and 
ht picture of 
ve attained 
e? Do you 
>? Are von 

If so, then 
dy begun in 


ord our God! 
y thoughts of 
h show forth! 
iful or so fuil 
ee, and they 
hee, to report 
e thine, and 
h they come 
er, and full- 
light is the 
ow full of 
ose who are 
nem, do we 
selves learn! 
kes us to be 


THE USE OF IDEALS. $47 


When we look back and think of our childhood ; of our pleasure 
in our father’s house ; of all the golden hours and rich experiences 
which we passed through: when we think of what our own 
children have been to us, and how much there has been of joy 
even in our care of them, and how much of sweetness in our 
sorrow in connection with them, and of rest in our labor for them, 
oh, what reward do we see that thou hast brought to us! and how 


much over and above what we have suffered ! ow can we enough 
thank thee that life begins thus at the smallest—at the seed? How 
can we thank thee enough for the helplessness of the infant, and 
for allits growing days, and for its waxing knowledge ? 

We thank thee that society is so organized, that the strong must 
care for the weak ; that though men in their strength are arrogant, 
yct little children can lead them ; that they are cor.pelled to bow 
down to the cradle; that they must necus humble themselves 
before the helpless and needy. 

We rejoice in all that thou hast done for the household, and in 
the househoid. We thank thee for its purity, for its sweetness, 
for its light, for its joy, for'all the tokens of heaven that ure in it. 

And we beseech of thee, Lord Jesus, again do what thou didst 
upon earth: take these little children into thine arms. None 
forbid the parents, now, to bring them; and none think that little 
children are too small for thy care; for thine example, and thy 
beneficent love, have wrought more and more through the ages, 
till we know that God thinks of the least things. Look after these 
little ones, May their lives and their health be precious in thy 
ha and wilt thou go before them, and prepare the way for 
them. 

Prepare the way, also, for the blessing that comes with sorrow 
in the parents’ hearts. We beseech of thee that thou wilt be 
gracious to these parents Quench not the light of that hope 
which they have. May they hold up these children, and bebold 
them as angels in the sun. Holding them before the face of their 
Father, may they seem to them as God’s little ones. May they 
look upon them with thee for a background. With their loving, 
may they think of thy loving. And so may human hearts answer 
to the divine throb: so may there be deepened in them a sense 
of what it is to be parents, and of what it is to rear children for 
life .nd immortality. 

We pray that thou wilt grant, this morning, as hundreds look 
upon this scene, and call to mind their own children, that those 
whose hearts are sore and heavy yet with grief and unspent tears, 
may have a blessing. Baptize, even with the dews of divine 
grace, those who monrn for their little children; and we pray that 
thou wilt comfort their hearts if they are heavy, and enlighten 
them if they are dark. 


L2 


348 THE USE OF IDEALS. 


We beseech of thee that thou wilt grant thy blessing to reg 
upon all those who find the burden of their life very heavy for 
them. Bless all parents who mourn because they cannot do {or 
their children what they would. Console those who see others 
bringing up their children in prosperity, and opening for them the 
doors of knowledge and skill, while they in their poverty anq 
weakness and obscurity cannot do anything for those that they 
love so much. Lord God, may they have such a sense of thy 
providence, and such a trust in thee, that they shall feel sure that 
their Father in heaven can do for their little ones what they on 
earth cannot do for them. 

And we beseech of thee that thou wilt be with those who moun 
over children that have come to them sick or deformed, and that 
have no prospect in life, and look with sad eyes upon the ways of 
men, We pray that thou wilt have mercy upon them, and give 
them a power of faith by which they shall see their children, not 
as they are in the infirmities of this mortal life, but as they shall 
be in the perfection of the life which is to come. 

Have compassion, we beseech of thee, upon all those who have 
reared thcir children sadly, and drank deep the cup of affliction 
for them, Grant, O Lord, that they may have such a sense of the 
other life, that they may have such a sense of the great mercy of 
God, and of the power of the Spirit, that they shall not feel that 
all is lost, and that all hope is gone. We pray that thou wilt 
strengthen those} who still combat with evil in their offspring, 
and lead them to a greater patience, to a conquering faith, and 
to a sense of God ever present—Immanuel—that shall enable them 
to go on from day to day, and bear as long as thou dost think it 
best that they shall bear. 

We pray that thou wilt join us together by affection more and 
more. Furify our hearts; and add to our love, wisdom. Bring 
forth faith in us; and may it be a faith that evermore works by 
love. May we in faith, and ‘simplicity, and innocence be little 
children ourselves. We pray that thou wilt grant that more and 
more we may grow up into a manhood of true Christian expe. 
rience. May the day come, when from childhood our children 
shall be brought up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. 
We pray for the cradle. We pray that the paths which lead 
oi ig may lead upward, all over our land, and throughout the 
world, 

We pray that thou will grant a blessing to those who give their 
time and strength to the teaching of the poor and ignorant. 
Instruct them. Strengthen them. Grant that they may reap their 
joy as thev go along from day to day, and have no need of 
sympathy from others, or of any other blessing than that which 
they receive in doing good. May they know, from their own 


blessing to rest 
very heavy for 
y cannot do for 
who see others 
ng for them the 
eir poverty and 
those that they 
a sense of thy 
ull feel sure that 
es what they on 


hose who mourn 
rmed, and that 
pon the ways of 
them, and give 
ir children, not 
jut as they shall 


e. 

those who have 
cup of affliction 
h a sense of the 
2 great mercy of 
all not feel that 
that thou wilt 
their offspring, 
ring faith, and 
hall enable them 
bu dost think it 


ction more and 
wisdom, Bring 
more works by 
cence be little 
that more and 
hristian expe- 
l our children 
bn of the Lord, 
1s which lead 
roughout the 


who give their 
and ignorant. 
may reap their 
e no need of 
an that which 
om their own 


THE USE OF IDEALS. 349 


experience, that it is more blessed to give than to receive. And 
while they water, may they themselves be watered. While they 
pour out, O Lord God, do thou pour in, that their hearts may be 
ever-flowing fountains, undiminished. 

Grant thy blessing to rest upon this church; upon all the 
families in it; and upon those members of it who are scattered 
abroad throughout the world. 

Look in compassion upon those who are present with us to-day. 
All that are in trouble ; all that are heavily laden ; all that need 
help of any kind, may they find thee here to-day. Look with 
compassion upon all who are home-sick ; upon strangers jn a 
strange land ; and upon all who think of their dear children left 
behind them. Grant to them the blessing of the presence of God, 
and the sanctifying influence of the Spirit. May they put all their 
trust in God, and feel that everything shall be well with them. 

Now, Lord, we pray for thy blessing upon the further services 
of the sanctuary to-day; upon all our duties; and upon our labor 
through the week ; and grant that we may go on from Sabbath 
to Sabbath, from Sunday to Sunday, until at last we reach that 
great joy-day above, whence we shall go out no more, and where 
we shall be forever with the Lord. 

And to thy name shall be the praise, Father, Son, and Spirit.— 


Amen. 


Ey 


ae cs ey) 
Zz ( xt Se, LZ ) 


V. 


THE HARMONY OF JUSTICE AND LOVE. 


‘6 Now the end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and 
of 8 good conscience, and of faith unfeigned. ’’—1 Tim. i., 5. 


“AS HE object that the Apostle hai in uttering these 
4 words is shown in the verse preceeding: 


** Neither give heed to fables and Godless genealogies which 
minister questions [that is discussions], rather than godly edifying which js 
in faith.” 


He is giving an exhortation to Timothy. He is instruct- 
ing him how he shall carry himself, and how he shall teach 
others to carry themselves. His exhortation is this, sub- 
stantialiy: “The little, petty qnestions that spring up 
among the Jews, and among the Jewish Christians, about 
descent, and about ordinances, and about days, and about 
observances, and about genealogies—there is no end to 
them. They only make men dispute one with another; 
and you never can settle them in the world. They do 
not make men better. They do not improve their temper; 
they almost always make them more irritable. They do 
not make them more lovely; they almost always make 
them more unlovely. They do not instruct them: they 
almost always blind them. They make them think that 
they know, when they do not know. They do not minis- 
ter to edification.” Thus he speaks of those questions 
which they were so likely to discuss. 
Then he declares what the great end and object of 
preaching is, The end of the commandment—that is, 


) LOVE. 


L pee heart, and 


ttering these 
ing: 

snealogies which 
difying which is 


e is instruct- 
e shall teach 
is this, sub- 
spring up 
Btians, about 
s, and about 
5 no end to 
th another: 
They do 
1eir temper ; 
They do 
ways make 
them: they 
think that 

) not minis- 
e questions 


L object of 
t—that is, 


THE ‘HARMONY OF JUSTICE AND LOVE. 351 
the foundation on which we and everybody must stand ; 
the foundation of all public and private instruction; the 
thing which the commandment undertakes to bring about 
in this world; the result which it is to produce—this, the 
apostle says, is charity, by which we mean love—the 
largest kind of love—love formed “out of a pure heart, 
and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned.” This 
is the obiect of all teaching, of all organization, of all re- 
ligious institutions. 

Now, any system of theology that, being legitimately 
preached, does not produce “charity out of a pure heart, 
and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned,” is false, 
no matter what the materials are that are put into it. 
Ayd every church organization that does not produce 
“charity out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, 
and. of' faith unfeigned,” is not a Christian organization. 
And any administration of the truth, in the hands of any 
church or sect, no matter whether it was apostolic or not, 
no matter if Paul, and Peter, and a dozen like them, 
living to be as old as Methuselah, had come down to 
that church or sect, and to that administration, if it 
did not produce in its members “ charity out of a pure 
and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned,”’ 
would not be a Christian administration. For the end 
of the commandment is that. That is the thing to be 
produced by the administration of truth, and by orga- 
nization, and by preaching. That is the thing which 
every man is to aim at. That is to be the fruit by 
which we shall know that men are Christians. 

This exposition is remarkable. There are many 
things in it which I shall not trouble you with to-day 
—for [shall resume it. But the exposition of the text 
itself is full of philosophy. 

Following Christ’s declaration that on love hung all 
the Old Testament dispensation, Paul says, yet more com- 
prehensively, that the whole end and aim of the com- 
mand—that is, the old dispensation and the new one— 
is Love. He declares on that they center. He says 


352 THE HARMONY OF 


that this is the one great supreme end. But that which 
is peculiar here, is this: that he unfolds that love as 
complex, either in its nature, or else in its mode of de- 
veloping the mind. It is nota mere complacency. It 
is not good-nature and general kindness without any 
other moral consideration. True Christianity—that 
which the term Christianity means in its highest in- 
spiration—when it speaks of divine love, requires that 
it shall not be an effection proceeding out of moral in- 
difference, or out of a low, flabby state of half-animal, 
half-spiritual kindness; but that it shall be a love “ out 
of a pure heart.’”’ It is that benevolence which springs 
from a nature in which the highest moral sentiment 
predominates. No man is capable of issuing divine 
love, who is living under the control of his animal ap- 
petites—of his pride and selfishness. For the love that 
the Bible means, and that the apostle here expounds, is 
that love which is capable of being generated and issued 
out of pure thoughts; out of the highest spiritual sen- 
timents ; out of the noblest moral instincts. Itis the 
fruit and voice and spirit of the highest part of a man’s 
nature, and not of the lower parts of his nature. It is 
therefore a love that belongs first to God, and next to 
us by so much as we are divine, or are able to approach 
in sympathy to the divine elements. 

But this is not all. It isa love which must have 
other attributes ; or rather, it is a love which must car- 
ry with it those elements which we erect into attributes 
as if they were separate from it, and different from it. 
It is a love which carries with it, as a part of itself, “a 
good conscience.”’ 

Now, conscience is but the generic term for moral 
sense. It is the tountain of truth; and so it carries the 
intellect with it. Itis the fountain of recitude; and 
so it carries righteousness with it. It is the fountain 
of honor; and so it carries all that glow and sensi- 
bility which surrounds the highest experience of recti- 
tude. <A true Christian love is one which must spring 


t that which 
that love as 
mode of de- 
lacency. It 
vithout any 
ianity—that 
highest. in. 
quires that 
f moral in. 
1alf-animal, 
a love “ out 
ich springs 
sentiment 
ling divine 
animal ap- 
ie love that 
xpounds, is 
and issued 
iritual sen- 
It is the 
of a man’s 
ure. It is 
nd next to 
D approach 


must have 
must car- 
attributes 
from it. 
itself, “a 


for moral 
arries the 
de; and 
fountain 
nd sensi- 
of recti- 
st spring 


JUSTICE AND LOVE. 353 


out of the highest moral sentiment, and which must 
also carry with it “a good conscience.” “ A good 
conscience”’ is a part of it. ‘A good conscience” 
ribs it up, and gives it backbone, and makes it clear to 
the core, solid, strong, efficacious. Love without any 
conscience is namby-pamby. It is mush. True love 
has in it the noblest sense of charater, “out of a pure 
heart.’ True love has in it an all-embracing sense 
of truth—the beauty of it, and the reality of it. True 
love is made up of elements which render it necessary 
that it shall have a discriminating regard for that which 
is right. It carries beauty and philosophy and moral 
excellence in it. It is a comprehensive affection of the 
soul. 
Even all that does not exhaust the wonder of this di- 
vine experience ot true charity, or love; for its full 
scope’ and quality can not be known until we see it 
with its own atmosphere about it. If it be simply an 
affection of time and change, limiting itself by the tran- 
sient elements of this world, then it can in no respect 
resemble that affection of love which God experiences. 
Therefore it must have elevation above all physical con- 
ditions. A true, divine and Christian love must take 
hold on the invisible, on the future, on the infinite, on 
the eternal. And that is the scope of the term “ faith ” 
here used as the last-named source of that ‘ charity ”’ 
which is the end of the commandment—which is that 
for which God put the commandment into this life. 
What, now, 1s charity? Itis that sublime likeness 
to God which carries with it purity of heart, conscience, 
and faith. It is the generic term for the truths which 
lie outside of this life—for supersensuous truths—for 
truth that are invisible—for truths which belong to 
places and realms that are beyond the reach of the 
body, or of scientific truths ; for science limits itsel* 
to that which the body can take hold of. And this is 
that which the apostle says the commandment was put 
into the world for. And his business was so to preach 


304 THE HARMONY OF 


and to hold up that commandment as to produce this 
kind of love, or charity. 

From this consideration of the nature of true divine 
love, or charity, light may be thrown upon the ad. 
ministration of justice and benevolence in the divine 
government. : 

It has been the habit of men, on the one side, to feel, 
and sometimes to teach, that justice has a field all to 
itself, and that mercy has a field all to itself; as if they 
were two very different things, not only, but as if when 
one acted the other did not. In other words, as in hu- 
man experience men are angry, thoroughly angry, so 
that they feel nothing else but anger, and then, when 
that has passed away they are thoroughly good-natured 
so as not to be at all angry,—their minds being like a 
handle with two blades, one of which being open ; the 
other must be shut, or one of which being shut, the other 
must be opened; so men have transferred this purely 
human affection, according to its wealxness, to the divine 
administration ; and there has been an impression that 
God was a God of benevolence, to be sure, but that he was 
also a God of justice. It has been supposed that some- 
times he isaGod of justice, and sometimes a God of love; 
and that when he is the one, he can not be the other. 
And when he is a God of justice it behooves sinners to 
look out for his sword, that goes flashing through the uni- 
verse—that and nothing else; but when he has vindi- 
cated his will, then his sword is put up, and then comes 
the scepter of mercy—that, and nothing else. As if 
mercy ever could exist, and be a divine quality, unless 
it had justice in it allthe time! As if any justice could 
exist. that had not. mercy in it to the very grain and 
core! Asif you could separate the two! As if, be- 
cause we, in our whole animal conditions, do separate 
them, and because we are unable to rise to the highest 
forms of moral development, we were to carry the 
analogue up, and separate love and mercy in the divine 


nL 


ee a ee ee ee eee 


Cmte er TH 


CO a ee ee ee ee 


roduce this 


true divine 
yon the ad- 
. the divine 


side, to feel, 
_ field all to 
r; as if they 
tas if when 
1s, as in hu- 
y angry, so 
then, when 
ood-natured 
eing like a 
r open ; the 
it, the other 
this purely 
o the divine 
ession that 
that he was 
that some- 
tod of love; 
the other. 
s sinners to 
gh the uni- 
has vindi- 
hen comes 
se. As if 
ity, unless 
stice could 
grain and 
As if, be- 
D separate 
1e highest 
carry the 
he divine 


JUSTICE AND LOVE. 395 


administration, and make God as poor and meagre as 
men are! But such has been the habit. 

This has tended to raise up reacting views. There 
has come up on the two sides of this disposition, two 
general schools or theology, one of which revolves 
around the conception of God as a benevolent gover- 
nor. And his benevolence, to their thought, is largely 
a benevolence of moral indifference,-or of fatalism—or 
fatal good nature. They usually are a rebound from 
the other school—from those men who have constitu- 
tionally a large conscience, and large reflective facul- 
ties. 

These latter form to themselves an idea of govern- 
ment among men. ‘They believe that law is indispen- 
sable to good government, to nationai life, and to indi- 
vidual happiness. And by their constitution they are 
on the side of justice, as the administration of law. 
“Put down,” they say, “put down whatever will dis- 
turb society. Ifit will get out of the way, let it; but 
if it will not, put it down. And as much pain as is 
necessary to do it, must be inflicted.’ They transfer 
that which is human to the divine nature, and say, “In 
the infinite realm God is just, and he must govern by 
truth, and law and justice; and all that will be true 
and just and upright shall be happy; and all that will 
not must take the consequences, and be overwhelmed 
—or, if they are not, it will be because there is some 
special interposition of divine mercy. They hold up 
the mechanical character of a God governing, first, by 
justice. “For,” say they, “he must be true.” “ First 
pure,” they say, ‘and then peaceable.”’ But has not 
a man aright to be peaceable until he is pure? Do 
you suppose it is the absolute, philosophical, arithme 
tical order, that a men shall be first pure and then 
peaceable? Must we quarrel until we are pure? And 
yet, this question is discussed, and arguments are plied 
to show that God must be just before there is room for 
anything besides justice. It is said, not only that he 


356 THE HARMONY OF 


must be just, but that in order to save by his Son he 
must exact justice before he can grant happiness, 
Mercy, according to their view, must stand back, as if 
it were something separable from justice, and different 
from it. They believe that in the Government of God, 
first is justice, with all its infinite modes of administra. 
tion; with all its infinite penalties, with all its 
infinite outlying consequences. Their idea of God 
is that of a Being who stands in a justice that is 
something other and different from the spirit of 
‘o, And this idea has been lifted up before men, 
‘1. T do not hesitate to say that where the most “ Gos. 
jo. vas been preached (strange inconsistency !), there 
the predu:ninent idea, to this day, of Christians is, that 
God is a Being to be feared, that he is a “ consuming 
fire,” as he is represented to be in the Old Testament. 
That nas been the one thought which has cast a lurid 
ligat over communities. Religion has been made un- 
attractive, and sometimes even repulsive, because men 
have held that God was a God of justice, and of a jus- 
tice which was separate and different from love. As if 
there could be any justice but that which love inspires 
and directs! And yet that idea has crept into men’s 
beliefs, and the result has been that there have risen up 
two systems of theology, in oné of which the predomi- 
nent idea has been, justice administered by divine power. 
And this idea has gone on augmenting and intensify- 
ng, until the hell made by justice has been a caldron 
only smaller than the heaven into which myriad ages 
have been pouring contributions. And God, because 
he was just, has all this time been sitting in the top- 
most heaven, carrying on this gigantic slaughter of 
creation! He has gone on creating the eight hundred 
million creatures of the globe, and pouring them end- 
lessly down, untaught, unhelped, without good neigh- 
borhood, without Christ, without the Bible, without 
revelation from any source, under the pressure of the 
circumstances around about them, swept by a resistless 


-his Son he 
| happiness, 
d back, as if 
and different 
nent of God, 
f administra- 
with all its 
idea of God 
stice that is 
he spirit of 
before men, 
most ‘ Gos. 
ency !), there 
tians is, that 
‘* consuming 
_ Testament. 
cast a lurid 
en made un- 
because men 
nnd of a jus- 
love. Asif 
Ove inspires 
t into men’s 
ave risen up 
he predomi- 
divine power, 
d intensity- 
n a caldron 
nyriad ages 
od, because 
in the top- 
laughter of 
rht hundred 
> them end- 
rood neigh- 
le, without 
sure of the 
a registless 


JUSTICE AND LOVE. 357 


fate to their pitiful end, all because God could not 
spare, or did not spare, or would not spare! That has 
been preached and held up before men. 

I do not wonder, therefore, that there has been a *::r- 
rific rebound; and that there has risen up on the voter 
side a school of men that said, ‘“ Away with suc. a 
bloody tyranny! Away with such a notion of God! 
God is good—too good to make suffering.’’ And yet, 
the wail of poverty in the street ; the winter wind that 
brings dismay to thousands and thousands of our fel- 
low creatures ; the myriad forms of distress which exist 
throughout the world—these all teach us that there is a 
God that will allow suffering. 

The whole creation has “ grow.e: and travailed in 
pain until now.’ And can it b: sai: that there is no 
purpose in it, no motive tor it*® Can it be said that 
there is to be no disciplinary su“ering in this world, 
and in the world to come? And yet there have been 
men who have made God on: i» bea Being so good 
and kind that he cannot bear to cause a sigh, or see a 
tear, that he cannot bear to produce suffering; who 
have made him out to be a pellucid, smiling, 
easy-going, good-natured God, that excused every- 
body; that said, ‘‘ You had better not do so and so,” 
but still, if they will, lets them, and does not punish 
them for it; whose indulgence is like that of a foolish 
parent, who, seeing a child going headlong to destruc- 
tion, is too kind to subject the child to that discipline 
which is necessary to arrest it in its downward course. 

And so there has sprung up that swollen, obese and 
miserable conception of a Governor in heaven, who in 
his administration, made no difference between right 
and wrong; no difference between sin and righteous- 
ness; no difference between guilt and merit; no dif- 
ference between obedience and disobedience to law. 

If there is anything taught by nature and providence, 
itis that God is a God of justice as well as of love; that 
when love rules in heaven, and puts its soft arms 


358 THE HARMONY OF 


around men and lays its soft hands on men, there are 
bones in those arms and in those hands; that love 
means truth; that love means justice; that love means 
government; that love tends to produce the one and 
the other, all the way through; and that twere is no 
difference between them. Love working by enforce. 
ments is justice, and justice working by kindness ig 
love. They are not to be separated. That love which 
includes justice, is the one identic dvelopment of the 
divine disposition by which, not the means, but the 
ends are to be looked at. 

What is God administering for? What is the pur. 
pose of the problem of life but to develop men, and 
bring out their powers, and carry them forward to a 
better state of existence? And in working out this 
problem, God punishes those that are disobedient. He 
stimulates those who are prone to self-indulgence or dis- 
couragement. Tears are lessons. Groans are modes of 
instruction. Sufferings are ways of discipline. But they 
are sufferings inflicted, not for the sake of giving pain ; 
not for the sake of avenging any wrong committed ; but 
for the sake of refashioning, reforming. And the love- 
work of God throughout the universe is the production 
of love. In other words, “ The end of the command- 
ment is love out ofa pure heart, and of a good con- 
science, and of faith unfeigned.” 

This whole error springs from the habit of regarding 
divine attributes purely in the light of human infirmi- 
ties. It is true that man must reason from his own self 
to the divine. This is & difficult process of reasoning. 
It is one that is beset with liabilities toerror. Neverthe- 
less, it is the only ladder by which we can ascend from 
our Own moral consciousness to the divine consciousness. 
You have just as much knowledge of God as you have 
in yourselves the moral susceptibility to interpret from. 
If you have no feeling of conscience, you have no means 
of understanding what conscience is in God. If you 
have no love, if you have no patience, if you have no 


1, there are 
; that love 
love means 
he one and 
tLuere is no 
by enforce. 
kindness is 
love which 
nent of the 
ns, but the 


is the pur- 
p men, and 
orward to a 
ng out this 
edient. He 
rence or dis- 
we modes of 
But they 
riving pain ; 
itted ; but 
hd the love- 
> production 
b command- 
a good con- 


f regarding 
an infirmi- 
is own self 
reasoning, 
Neverthe- 
scend from 
sciousness. 
hs you have 
rpret from. 
e no means 
bd. If you 
ou have no 


a JUSTICE AND LOVE, 359 


long-suffering, then you have no elements by which you 
can gain a true conception of the divine nature. Andso 
we must fashion our own idea of God from some mora! 
consciousness in ourselves. 

But scrupulous care is required that we shall not se- 
lect our lower nature, and transfer the conception which 
comes from that to the divine nature. Nor should we 
take the imperfections of our higher moral nature—those 
strains of experience which we have by reason of our 
limitation and our lowness—and raise them up as thie 
ideals and models after which to fashion our conceptions 
and ideals in reference to God. We are to seize the 
luminous hours in our experience which reveal the 
higher manhood of the soul; and from these we are to 
get an ideal from which we can reason toward God. 
And even then we shal] see [lim as through a glass 
darkly. Our best conceptions, our truest ideals, our 
highest moods—even these interpret but very imper- 
fectly the divine nature to us. And yet, it is this, if 
anything, that must interpret him to us. 

ow, in interpreting God from ourselves, why should 
we disjoin these moral emotions, as if there were not in 
us the hints and beginnings of that which is in God in 
its perfect form! As men are uncultivated, their facul- 
ties work separately and individually. As men are cul- 
tivated, their faculties more and more work together. 
What we mean by civilization and education is not simply 
the development of force in each faculty, but subordina- 
tion in groups of faculties, and, above all, selection and 
harmonization between faculties, so that the mind 
comes out of many different tendencies to a certain sort 
of moral unity. By education and civilization we mean 
especially this: the so using of any faculty, or any set 
of faculties, that all the rest shall be in harmony 
with it. Men, when they are yet uncultivated, separate 
feeling and intellect. Intellect goes one way, and feel- 
ing another. ‘As men grow truly cultivated, the feelings 
carry with them intellect, and the intellect carries with 


360 THE HARMONY OF 
it feeling; and they are not separated. That is 
spurious refinement which makes men so fastidious that 
they must have a power that will not let feeling come 
up and mix with it. All true culture and development 
carries feeling in reason, and reason in feeling; for true 
culture tends toward harmonization and unity. When 
men are low, there is no such thing as taste, there js 
nothing but sense, to them. They want fact. They 
want exactitude. They want literality. They want 
bestiality, almost. But as men carry up their develop. 
ments, not simply in the realm or sense, or that which 
is accurate, or that which is effectual, but in the realm of 
imagination, of taste, of the higher emotions, these two 
realms do not interfere with each other, but harmonize, 
They come together easily in a high state of develop. 
ment. 

In the lower forms of life personal liberty leaves men 
unbound. They throw off law and throw off all res. 
traint. But in the higher forms of development, men 
find that the way to be perfectly free is to be perfectly 
faithful to duty. That is, obligation, obedience to the 
highest conception of duty, carries the highest personal 
liberty to man. Duty and unity belong to the higher 
conditions of life. 

I have already illustrated that love in its lower 
forms, tends to act toward justice or anger, at one 
time, and toward mercy at another time; but as men 

row wiser and come into better relations, we see how 
it is that love carries a perpetual justice, and justice a 
perpetual love. We see then the noblest representa- 
tion of the unity of these feelings and their inseparable- 
ness, not alone in the household, not alone in the 
parental relation, but in the relations of friendship. 

There is nothing that you are more sensitive to than 
the excellence of those whom you love most. You 
cannot bear that those whom you love should not be 
pure and true. You can tolerate imperfection in any 


rd 


gD ee hes Soe ao 


That is a 
stidious that 
eeling come 
Jevelopment 
ng}; for true 
rity. When 
iste, there js 
fact. They 

They want 
1eir develop. 
r that which 
| the realm of 
is, these two 
t harmonize, 

of develop- 


y leaves men 
v Off all res- 
ppment, men 

be perfectly 
Hience to the 

est personal 
o the higher 


n its lower 
er, at one 
ut as men 

we see how 

nd justice a 
representa- 

inseparable- 

one in the 
endship. 
tive to than 
ost. You 
puld not be 
tion in any 


JUSTICE AND LOVE. 361 


others better than in those whom you love. You 
want them to represent your highest ideal. 

Take the familiar instance of a mother. I think 
that a great-minded woman, who is all but a Christian 
by nature, and who is then enriched by grace, and 
prought into the conscious sympathy and affinity of 
the Lord Jesus Christ—I think that such a woman, 
administering in the household, presents the best con- 
ception of moral government, and the best conception 
of mediatorial work, and the best conception of aton- 


. jing love, which it is possible to present on earth. Men 


have gone to kings to get it: I go to my queen. Men 
go to states: I goto my household. Men go to generic 
sources: I gu to specific. You shall nowhere find a 
pattern so near to the Lord Jesus Christ, and to the 
grounds and reasons of moral government, in the 
atoning grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, as in a great, 
rich, ripe, sweet-minded woman, who is bringing up her 
household of perhaps six, seven, eight, nine children. 
And the illustration is all the more striking where, as 
is sometimes the case, a woman does this with poverty 
in her own family, and yet is sweet-minded, and is 
always working, though never for herself, and is never 
weary, and is willing to be interrupted by this, that, or 
the other one, and is always living for others, in 
others, under others, spending or being spent to lift 
up those that are weaker than she—those that first 
drew nutriment from her breast, and who ail the rest 
of their days have been drawing life from her heart of 
wre she continually pouring out the spirit of love for 
them. 

And yet does she not bring tears from them? Is 
there anybody else so rigorous against meanness as 
she? Oh! how she hates it in her children! But does 
she gnash her teeth at them, because she hates it? 
Does she smite them? Yes, sometimes; and she ought 
to; for she cannot always get along without it. ifthe 
infliction of physical pain can be avoided, it is betier to 


pia ali aces Sa 


MAT aN aie: 


862 THE HARMONY OF 


avoid it; but there are times when it must be resorted 
to. It is a matter of temperament and constitution, 
whether you shall bring in physical as well as moral or 
other motives. But this is the thought: that in the 
administration of love in the family, D oy and pleasure 
are instruments, alternatives. And for the sake of 
what? for the sake of making suffering? for the sake 
of satisfying a broken law of the household? for the 
sake of vindicating the dignity and personality of the 
mother? No. The end of her administration is to 
work those children up to a disposition “ of love out of 
a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith 
unfeigned ;” and she administers to that end, mingling 
all the time with her administration, truth, purity, duty, 
and integrity. And her sternest moments of integrity 
are wrapped about with the atmosphere of love and 
goodness. And you cannot take the two elements 
apart. There she stands in the household, and is God 
to those children till they have grown up; and her 
example there is one of beneficence, and furnishes the 
best conception that we can have upon earth of a gov- 
ernment which consists of self-sacrifice ; of living for 
others ; of pouring out one’s life for others, and of ad- 
ministering so as to bring them up from their low estate 
to a life of excellence. And in her treatment of them, 
punishing or rewarding them according to the dictates 
of her best judgment as to what will promote their high- 
est welfare, you get a better ideal of the government of 
God than in the whole realm of human life besides. No 
king, no schedule of kingly government, ever came 
half so near to representing the divine government as 
this mother’s administration in the household. 

Now, is it necessary, even in reasoning of the divine 
nature from our experience, that we should separate 
love and justice, and make two Gods—one a God of 
mercy, and another a God of justice? or that we should 
make God a God of love at one time, and a God of jus- 
tice at another? that we shouid make him now a God 


be resorted 
constitution, 
1 as moral or 
- that in the 
and pleasure 
the sake of 
for the sake 
old? for the 
nality of the 
stration is to 
of love out of 
and of faith 
1d, mingling 
purity, duty, 
3 of integrity 
of love and 
wo elements 
a and is God 
up; and her 
furnishes the 
arth of a gov- 
of living for 
s, and of ad- 
eir low estate 
nent of them, 
b the dictates 
pte their high- 
overnment of 
besides. No 
, ever came 
vernment as 
old. 
of the divine 
uld separate 
one a God of 
hat we should 
a God of jus- 
n now a God 


JUSTICE AND LOVE. 363 


of sternness, and then a God of mercy ? Notat all. God 
is always just, or he is never just; he is always merciful, 
or he is never merciful. He is the same yesterday, 
to-day, and forever. He always mingles love and jus- 
tice together ; and both of them are instruments for 
building men up from the lowest forms to a glorious 
perfected state of manhood in the future. 

All such representations, then, of the divine moral 
government, as naturally and necessarily leave the 
impression that because God is good he is careless of 
moral distinctions; all such representations as leave the 
impression that God is good-natured, rather than good ; 
that he will not permit suffering; that he will not pun- 
ish the wrong-doer; that he leaves nature, a vast 
machine, to turn out results without praise or blame- 
worthiness—all such representations proceed upon a 
theory of benevolence which is neither Scriptural, 
experimental, rational nor philosophical. The general 
effect of such views, if left alone, is to lower the tone of 
conscience, to diminish the inspiration of spiritual life, 
and to deteriorate, ultimately, the morals of the 
community. 

On the other hand, any representations ot divine jus- 
tice in the moral government of God which leave it 
before men as doing or permitting things which fairly 
shock an intelligent benevolence, does so upon a false 
philosophy both of government and of the attributes of 
justice, 

The quality of justice is indispensable to the highest 
form of love. Love thinks, reasons, discriminates, pre- 
fers, chooses, condemns, punishes, and yet is never 
cruel, but is alwayslove. Love/sjust. Itis the nature 
of love to be just, to be true. It does not take two 
natures to make the two things. It is the oflice of love, 
when it shall have risen up out of its lower condition, 
and out of its training-ground, to bring forth fruit of 
justice as well as of love. That is the way it acts, and - 
pursues its end. 
ml 


364 THE HARMONY OF 


It is perfectly fair, then, judging ot the truth by 
various representations of the divine government and 
of the divine nature, to say that any view which shockg 
that feeling educated under Christian teaching, in 
Christian families, and by legitimate Christian truth, 
is false. In other words, that moral susceptibility, that 
moral sense of rectitude, and that moral sense of 
obligation which are the legitimate fruits of Christianity 
‘n us, become a tribunal before which we have a right 
to judge, not God, but men’s representations of God; 
not everlasting truth, but the systems of truth which 
men propose for our adjudication and for our acceptance, 
And the moral sense of Christendom is obliged to 
review, in every few centuries, the systems of theology 
which exist, and to take out the naturalism and heathen- 
ism which there is in them, and substitute for them the 
truth as it is in Christ Jesus. 

There is but one other poiut that I shall make. As 
yet, I thiak no man can frame a system for the actual 
history and the actual events of the world which unites 
both sides—divine justice and divine love. They are 
separable among men, but united in God. We have 
never risen high enough tolay an explanatory conception 
on the course of history. I do not despair of its being 
done in this world, but I do not expect that it will be 
doneinmy day. The mystery of history is an unsoluble 
problem. Take the highest idea of moral government 
over the world, and attempt to apply it to the events 
that have chequered the flow of human life in this 
world, and you are met at every step by questions un- 
answerable. In Job you will find precisely the same 
reasonings that are advanced tu-day ; you will find there 
the a of argument which may be found in Byron’s 
works, in Goethe’s Faust, and in the philosophy of each 
succeeding intelligent uge, You find as magnificently 
set forth in Job as in any subsequent literature of the 
world, the question of how to reconcile the facts in life 
with the conception of the nature of a divine Governor 


» truth by 
iment and 
‘ich shocks 
ching, in 
hian truth, 
bility, that 
sense of 
hristianity 
ave a right 
s of God; 
uth which 
vcceptance, 
obliged to 
yf theolog 
a haath 
yr them the 


make. As 
the actual 
1ich unites 
They are 
We have 
onception 
rf its being 
it will be 
unsoluble 
bvernment 
he events 
fe in this 
stions un- 
the same 
find there 
n Byron's 
iy of each 
nificently 
re of the 
cts in life 
Governor 


JUSTICE AND LOVE. 


who discriminates between right and wrong. That is 
a question that is not solved ; and we have not risen 
high enough, as yet, to solve it. Ages may do it; but 
we are not in a state to do it now. 

And as we cannot go backward, and lay an explan- 
atory philosophy on all the events of history, still less 
are we able to go forward with it. That is to say, it is 
impossible for a man to lay down a schedule of what 
God must do and will do in the future. I am shocked 
to see how little I know, sometimes ; and oftener to see 
how much other people know. I hear people discussing 
theology and showing a familiarity with the divine na- 
ture and the divine government which is perfectly 
wonderful. I hear men say that God cannot do this, 
and that He can do that, as though they had been in 
His counsels, and found out everything that he knows. 
“Who by searching can find out God?” why, a theo- 
logian—a theological professor! Everything in the 
alphabet not only, but everything that the alphabet can 
be made to spell out, he knows. Men make their 
wicker-work systemsof theology the basis of a familiarity 
with divine thought and divine action and divine being, 
which is truly astounding. One would think that a 
man’s soul would feel itself abashed, as the revelator 
did, before angels, and much more before God, whose 
immensity of experience so far transcends our highest 
moods of experience; and yet, men look up and say, 
“God goes just so far in that direction, and just so far 
in that ; he is just so long, and just so broad.” They 
have the doctrine of the divine nature and the divine 
government all studied out. They can tell you exactly 
how it opens and shuts. It is like a Chinese puzzle; 
and if you do not know how you cannot, and if you do 
know you ean, put in every piece just right. If you 
believe just so, you are “ orthodox,” but if you do not, 
you are a “heretic.” Ifyou believe so and so, you are 
a “Pelagian;” or, if you are not that, you are a 
“semi-Pelagian.”’ And what an awful thing it is to be 


366 THE HARMONY OF 


a ‘“ Pelagian” or a “semi-Pelagian”’ all one’s life, and 
not know it! ‘You are no better than an Arminian,” 
says the Professor. Yo do not know what that is; but 
whatever it is, you wish you were not that. And you 
are afraid of being an ‘Arian,’ a ‘“Socinian,” a 
‘“‘Pelagian,”’ and pretty much everything else. We 
have ever so many mad-dog names on points that are 
mystical, or on points which human knowledge is inad- 
equate to grasp. These blind theories of government 
are the ones on which there has been more persecution 
than on any others; and they are to-day the test ques- 
tions, the shibboleths, that separate between church and 
church. Is there on earth a body of men that God has 
more blessed than He has the Methodist ehurch and 
ministry? And why do they stand separated from the 
great Presbyterian body? The “ Five Points of Calvin- 
ism,” “ Foreordination,’”’ the ‘ Decrees,” the ‘ Decree 
of Reprobation” and the “Decree of Election,” an 
‘¢ Kfficacious Calling,” so that a mar shall not fall from 
grace, and a score of other doctrines (I have forgotten 
them; my education is incomplete in this regard)— 
what are they but so many metaphysical views of the 
divine government, and the divine character, which 
separate these two great bodies of Christians? And so 
the Arminian stands firing at the Calvinist, and the 
Calvinist stands fring back at the Arminian. They 
are at agreement in respect to the great essentials 
of religion, and yet these non-essentials are a wall of 
separation between them—though, thank God, the wall 
is getting lower and lower, and the spirit of love is 
growing stronger and stronger. 

Only see how those that are alike in theologies, and 
in church polities and sympathies—the great Baptist 
brotherhood and the Pedo-Baptists—are separated by 
their difference of belief on one or two minor points of 
doctrine? One says, “ You may baptize children.” 
The other says, “ You may not.’ One says, ‘ You 
must put them all under.” The other says, “ Itis only 


s life, and 
rminian,” 
at is; but 
And you 

‘inian,” a 
else. We 
s that are 
ge is inad- 
»yvernment 
ersecution 
test ques- 
hhurch and 
it God has 
1urch and 
1 from the 
of Calvin- 
> * Decree 
ection,” an 
t fall from 
forgotten 

regard)— 

bws of the 
er, which 
And so 

, and the 
wn. They 
essentials 

a wall of 

, the wall 

of love is 


pories, and 
t Baptist 
arated by 
points of 
hildren.”’ 
vs, ** You 
It is only 


JUSTICE AND LOVE. 367 


necessary to sprinkle them,”’ That is all that separates 
them. There is not a turnpike so hard, there is 
not a way so broad, that these brethren can travel on it 
together with this little bit of difference between them. 
They hold the same general doctrines, and employ the 
same symbols; but this slight variation in the mode ot 
administering a rite keeps them apart. | 

And so it is all the way through Christendom. You 
shall find churches split up, here on doctrine, there on 
polity; here on organization, there on robes; here on 
days. There are the ‘Seventh-day Baptists,’ and 
there the ‘Sixth-day Baptists’—no, not Sixth-day 
Baptists—yes; at any rate there are those that say you 
must keep Saturday, and there are others that say you 
must keep Sunday. And if I laugh at them and say 
“What difference does it make,” they say, ‘“‘ None, so 
far as the day is concerned; but is not obedience some- 
thing? Thatisthe question,” ‘ Eh,” says the Seventh- 
day Baptists, “Did not God command us to observe 
the seventh day? And is disobedience nothing?” And 
so they entrench themselves behind this technicality of 
obedience or disobedience. 

If I go to those who believe in immersion, and say, 
“Do you really think that it makes any diftereuce, \ynen 
one is baptized, whether he goes under the wacer, or is 
5 Sena ”* they say ‘“‘ It makes no differeice so far as 
the mere effect on the individual is concernei; but if 
Christ said, ‘Go under the water,’ the obedience ov dis- 
obedience makes a great deal: difference.” Well, I 
cannot get away from that. ‘They have got me tuere. 

If I go to an Episcopalian, and say, “ Now, do you 
think it makes any difference about my salvation 
whether I am in the ‘true church’ or not’ Do you 
not suppose that I can get to Heaven out of my own 
church as well as out of yours? he says, ‘“ Well, the 
mere church is nothing, but if Christ said that this was 
the true church, then obedience is something.” 

And so they all have their little catch-word obedience, 


868 THM WARMONY OF 


as if that were the marrow ot Christianity; as if God 
thought of these little screws, and nail-heads, and tacks! 
They may have some value in the machinery ; but they 
are only parts, and minor parts of it. ‘The end of the 
commandment,’’ says the apostle, the whole thing which 
the commandment aims at and is designed to produce, 
‘is charity out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience 
and of faith unfeigned.”’ 

Now go home and quarrel over your dories. Go 
home and quarrel over your churches. But remember 
that he who loves God, and is accepted of him, he whose 
love is outpouring an inteijligent beneficence from a 
pure heart, from a sound conscience, and from a true, 
unfeigned faith in th future, is the sweet product, the 
golden fruit of the tree of life. And pray, whatever 
may become of baptisms, and days, and ordinances, and 
rituals, which are permissable, but not authoritative— 
pray that the end which the commandment seeks, may 
be wrought out in you. 


9 


PRAYER BEFORE THF SERMON, 


Our Father, teach us to pray. As thy disciples gathered about 
thee, blessed Saviour, and asked knowledge of the way of thought 
ani faith and love, sodowe. We do not need to ask thee for daily 
bread, as though we were hungry; for our wants are abundantly 
supplied. It is rather for us to give thanks than to solicit. Nor 
do we come to thee to ask thy help by which we shall be able to 
live in all this outward estate. Already thou hast so inspired us, 
and hast surrounded us by so many influences, that we are guided 
and taught and sustained. But how shall we come to thee as chil- 
dren come? How shall we understand thee when only out of our- 
aclves can we find and fashion those elements of thought by which 
to (iscorn thee ¢ Oh! how poor are we in goodness! and how is 
love itself but a struggling taper in us! Often plunged in selfish- 
novi, oltca worldly and calculating ; seldom shining far above the 
h.izon, wad beyond the reach of mist and vapor; poor as the stars, 
he v shall we understand thy nature of love and infinite beneficence 


as if God 
ind tacks ! 
; but they 
end of the 
‘ing which 
») produce, 
onscience, 


yxies. Go 
remember 
, he whose 
ce from a 
m a true, 
oduct, the 
whatever 
ances, and 
oritative— 
eeks, may 


ered about 
of thought 
ee for daily 
abundantly 
plicit. Nor 
be able to 
nspired us, 
are guided 
hee as chil- 
out of our- 
t by which 
ind how is 
1 in selfish- 

above the 
bs the stars, 
beneficence 


JUSTICE AND LOVE. 369 


that wearies not; that never forsakes truth; that never forsakes 
justice; that never forsakes goodness; that bears in itself eternal 
truth and justice and goodness, and yet forever loves, beneficent on 
every side, in act, in thought, in plan, in administration, in attri- 
bute, and in fruit and outcome; that in all things is full of the 
desire to create happiness in men, and to continue them in enjoy- 
ment? How shall we form anything in ourselves that shall raise us 
to the conception of the goodness of thy nature? What do we 
know of long-suffering, who are tired in a day? If thou that sittest 
on the circle of the earth art not tired ; if thou that art ever on the 
battle-field of life art unwearied; if thou art the same yesterday 
to-day and forever, what is there in us that can interpret thee ? 
Who, by searching, can find out God? And if we draw near to thee 
to pray; if we would commune with thee, exchanging our thoughts 
for thine, speaking with thee as children may speak with a parent, 
then we need to say to thee, Lord, teach us how to pray. Teach 
us better things in life. Teach us nobler feelings. Teach us those 
aspirations that shall break upward toward thee. Teach us that 
renunciation that shall cure pride, and selfishness, and envy, and 
jealousy, and every hateful and malign passion. Teach us to live 
above the power of the senses, and in the realm and under the do- 
minion of faith, more and more, from day to day, so that every day 
we may be better fitted for communion with thee. 

And now, Lord, we desire to thank thee, this morning, for the 
help of days past. For our sky is not altogether clouded. Bright 
is it in places, though there are storms in the heavens which our 
passions bring. We discern thee afar off, though we see but thy 
retreating glory. Thy face wecannot see while we are in the flesh. 
We rejoice in our past experience, and in the hope which it begets 
in us for the future. And we desire to give ourselves to the 
ministration of thy good Spirit opening our hearts wide, and not 
grieving thee by our coldness or want of the disposition to welcome 
thee. Enter, O Spirit of light and comfort and purity ! and cleanse 
onr hearts. Tllumine them, and fill them with the divine life. 
And we pray that we may walk with a holy hope and faith of that 
life which is not far beyond us, and to which we aspire. We shall 
not carry thither all our joys. Many of them are earthly joys, 
which dry up upon the stalk, and which the wind rattles ; 
and these shall be left behind. We shall not always be 
seeking those things which perish in the using. We shall not 
say to the eye, thou art my God; nor to the ear thou art my 
king. We shall yet live and be as the sons of God, and dwell 
in an immortality of nobler pleasures, and brighter joys, and purer 
aspirations, forever fulfilling themselves. We shall be as the cbil- 
dren of the living God. 

Grant that that life beyond may never quite fade out, and that 


870 THE HARMONY OF 


there may come more frequent hours when it shall shine out like 
the very gateof heaven. Speak to us,O thou blessed God! by thy 
inaudible voice, ‘hat the soul only knows. Grant us the witness of 
the Spirit that we are sons of God And if we do not know what 
that means, may it rise up in us as music heard afar off, whose toneg 
cannot be distinguished. And may it centre in us. And so may 
we hear the sounds and feel the influences from the heavenly land, 
And may we long, if it be the will of God, to lay down our burden, 
and our duty, and our life, that we may find our nobler life and out 
better joys with thee. 

Accept the thanks of all those who come up this morning to thank 
thee that thou hast heard their prayers; of those that thank thee 
for strength given them to accomplish the purposes about which 
they were sent in thy providence; of those that thank thee for great 
escapes from circumstances of fear; of those that thank thee for re. 
stored health; of those that thank thee that in the midst of deep 
bereavements and afflictions and distress, thou hast held their head 
up above the wave. Accept the thanksgiving of those that would 
thank thee if they dared, but think that they must not. Break through 
all such fears, and show {hyself not only to those that are near, but 
to those that are afar of all the more. Be with those who think 
themselves to be thy children, and give thanks to-day. And those 
that are wandering from the fold, away from their Father’s house, 
Grant that they may have a better mood to-day, and lift them up 
to a plane where they shall have some thoughts of thanksgiving to 
their God. 

And we beseech of thee that thou wilt bless all that are in trouble, 
And if they have come up here to have their troubles lightened, 
give them not release unless it be best for them; but say to them 
(and may they feel thine arm about them), “‘ My grace shall be suf- 
ficient for thee.” And we pray that there may be this release, that 
we shall beable to bear trouble by the grace of God, and to become 
stronger by it, and clearer in the faith ‘of the Lord Jesus Christ, by 
darkness and by light. 

And we beseech of thee that thou will be near to those that can- 
not come unto us, nor mingle their voices here; who are shut up it 
may be, by sickness, Be gracious to them, and send thine angels 
to minister sweet thoughts to them of that rest which remaineth 
for the people of God. May there open up befere them light from 
the other world, and may all their gloom and sadness be cheered 
away by the communications of thy dear Spirit. 

And we beseech of thee that thou wilt be near to those that 
watch with the sick; to those that carry great burdens; to those 
who, in beholding the play of life, recall their own lives, and ail the 
multitude of the mercies of it. Shed the influence of thy Spirit 
upon them, we beseech of thee. 


on on oat ot CA £2 ob. tt tt 


ee a ae ee 


ee SS ee ee” ee 


shine out like 
.God! by thy 
the witness of 
t know what 
ff, whose toneg 

And so may 
1eavenly land, 
mn our burden, 
er life and our 


ning to thank 
at thank thee 

about which 
thee for great 
ik thee for re- 
midst of deep 
eld their hea 
se that would 
Break through 
t are near, but 
se Who think 
y. And those 
‘ather’s house, 

lift them up 
anksgiving to 


re in trouble, 
es lightened, 
say to them 
shall be suf- 
release, that 
hd to become 
us Christ, by 


ose that can- 
e shut up it 
thine angels 
h remaineth 
i light from 
s be cheered 


» those that 
hs; to those 
, and ail the 
thy Spirit 


' 


JUSTICE AND LOVE. 871 


And we pray for those who are disconsolate, and who sit in dark- 
ness of mind. May a great light arise upon them. Go to them, 
thou comforting Saviour. 

And if there be those who mourn over their sins to-day; if there 
be those who are heart-broken in view of their own wickedness; 
if there be those whose consciences bear witness against them, end 
all of whose better nature stands up and accuses them, stand thou, 
dear Saviour, on their side. Justify them; speak peace to them, 
though they be sinful. And grant that they may hear thy voice 
saying to them, Love and justice are united. Thy sins are forgiven 
thee. Rise, go, and sin no more, 

We beseech of thee, O Lord our God, that thou wilt grant thy 
blessing to rest upon all, according to their own circumstances—in 
the unmentionable circumstances of their life; in their hidden 
thoughts, or hidden joys, or hidden griefs ; in those troubles that 
they cannot themselves understand, or that, if they could under- 
stand them, they could not mention. 

Be with those that are far from us to-day on errands of thy 
providence, wherever they are. May thy Spirit go with them. 
May they find a home; may they enjoy the Sabbath ; and may they 
find a sanctuary of worship, though it be in the wilderness. 

Be with those that have gone down upon the great deep. Espe- 
cially be with thy servant, our brother, who for so many years has 
ministered near unto us, and here frequently. Be with him, and 
with his; and keep him yet in the hollow of thy hand. And during 
the months of his separation from his people, and in distant lands, 
Lord bless him in body and in soul. And spare him to come back 
again, and to shine brighter, and be stronger and mare fruitful in 
the work of the Master than ever he has been before. And keep 
the people of his charge, and a‘: their households, May death 
spare them, and light abound with them. And may the sanctuary 
still be strong, and thy servants labor together for the things that 
are lacking now in their midst. 

And so we beseech of thee that thou wilt bless all the churches 
near unto us. May we think more and more of them, and not 
altogether of ourselves. May we seek to take hold of hands with 
all that love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. And carry 
forward thy great work in this city, and throughout all our cities, 
and throughout this whole land. 

We pray for schools and colleges, and seminaries of training. 

We pray for all that are in authority in thisnation, We pray 
that thou wilt give us magistrates that shallfear God. May our 
laws become purer; and may the administration of them become 
more and more righteous. We beseech of thee that thou wilt 
remember all governors and counsellors in this Union. Be pleased 
to remember the President of these United States, and his cabinet 


872 THE HARMONY OF JUSTICE AND LOVE. 


in counsel with him. Give them wisdom, and give them tho 
Spirit of the living God, that they may do their duty as in the 
fear of the Lord. 

Bless all that are in authority throughout the world. May they 
rule diligently, and in mercy, and without selfishness, and without 
oppression. 

e beseech of thee that wars may speedily come to an end, 
May men learn a better way. May they learn to lift up the light 
of knowledge upon the whole earth. May darkness and supersti- 
tion flee away, and the bright day of knowledge and of piety come, 
and all the earth see thy salvation. j 

Which mercies we ask in the name of the Father, of the Son, 
and of the Holy Spirit, Amen, 


VE. 


give them tho 
duty as in tho 


rid, May they 
$8, and without 


me to an end, 
lift up the light 
ss and supersti- 
1 of piety come, 


her, of the Son, 


sly. > aK 


VI. 


LOVE, 
THE COMMON LAW OF THE UNIVERSE. 


‘‘ Now the end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and 
of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned.’’—1 Tim. i, 5, ” 


HAVE already spoken from this passage, defining 
what “the end of the commandment” means— 
namely, the results at which it aims; the fruits 
which it seeks to produce; the reason which it has for 
et, for exercising authority, and for its activity in the 
world. . 

It aims to secure the great, the universal spirit of 
benevolence, charity, love—by whichever term your phil- 
osophy styles it. But that it may not be supposed that 
charity, as here employed, is a mere mild sentiment, a 
mere well-wishing, kind, but weak, or at least feeble, the 
apostle gives his conception of Christian charity. It is a 
feeling that arises, not from any casual impulse of nature. 
No experience can rise to the height that justifies you in 
calling it charity or love, which springs merely from 
interest, or momentary generosity. It is that charity or 
that state of love which can spring, and does spring, only 
from a pure heart—or, in other words, a heart which has 
been divinely developed; which has been opened up into 
a state of symmetry and purity. That is a heart in which 
the moral and spiritual elements predominate over all 
casual impulses, and over all the lower nature of man. 


Nn he a a I cra a Sr ea een 


NS 


vv 


7 


IMAGE EVALUATION 
TEST TARGET (MT-3) 


— 
2.0 
= 
Lg 


las 
2.2 


28 


x | 
~ 
aE 


: Ae 


pay 
te 


45 | 
wy 
us 
i 


LO *& 
| EE 
ia 


& 
a tas 
——a 
—— 
——— 
ed 


16 


14 


1.25 


.~ 


ae 


Eg 
4 “Cp 


23 WEST MAIN STREET 


WEBSTER, N.Y. 14580 
(716) 872-4503 


a 


FS 
" — 
a ae ask 
RSA Sot 3S as 
eS RATER D AIEEE 


374 LOVE, THE COMMON 


That is, out of the very highest moral and spiritual ele. 
ments of man’s being must this leve spring which it is 
the nature of the law to produce. Nor cua we to think 
that this love, or good-will, which springs from men’s 
noblest faculties, always works by the conferring of 
happiness, or that it seeks only present good. It seeks 
men’s enjoyment by men’s perfection. Therefore it i; 
always an element that goes with the spirit of justice, 
equity, righteousness. Love out of a pure heart—out of 
the noblest instincts of nature, love that goes with a 
sound conscience—that is, with that whole mood of our 
moral being which discriminates between right and wrong, 

cod and ad, high and low in character—this is the 


ove which always carries with it moral purity, and 
which carries with it, also, discriminating equity. 

But then, it might still be thought that it was a senti- 
ment which was exerted upon men for the sake of their 
lower life, for their present convenience; and therefore 
it is added, “ By faith unfeigned.” 


Now, “Faith is the evidence of things not seen.” 
Faith is the soul’s realization of those truths which are 
invisible. In other words, the action of that part of our 
mind is supersensuous. It does not work by the senses. 
It is higher than the scientific side of the mind, therefore, 
if by science you mean the art of knowledge that comes 
tarough the senses. 

So, then, we conclude that benevolence, or the love 
which Christianity develops and makes the supreme end 
of its existence, is not a monochord ; that it is a composite 
thing; that it carries with it the great sterling elements 
of truth, of righteousness, of justice; that it carries with 
it, not the present existence alone, but the life that is to 
come—-the great realm of faith. It is the largest and 
supremest action of the mind which is conceivable. 

Certain inferences were made during our former con- 
sideration of this passage which we shall not recapitulate. 
Certain questions were argued which it is not necessary 
now to argue again. There is further matter to be derived 
from the words of the Apostle. And I remark: 


| spiritual ele- 
iw which it is 
yht we to think 
ys from men’s 

conferring of 
‘ood. It seeks 
Therefore it i; 
irit of justice, 
 heart—out of 
rt goes with a 
e mood of our 
ight and wrong, 
er—this is the 
ral purity, and 
equity. 

it was a senti- 
e sake of their 
; and therefore 


ngs not seen.” 
ths which are 
hat part of our 
by the senses. 
mind, therefore, 
ge that comes 


e, or the love 
e supreme end 
t is a composite 
ling elements 
it carries with 
life that is to 
he largest and 
ceivable. 

r former con- 
pt recapitulate. 
not necessary 
r to be derived 
mark; 


LAW OF THE UNIVERSE. 375 


1. The commandment given to men may be assumed 
to be, as it is taught in the word of God to be, a com- 
mandment which represents God’s life and disposition. 
Not only is it a transcript of the divine will, but it is 
also a transcript, to a certain extent, of the divine life. 
That there are many things that man is commanded to 
do, either by words addressed directly to him, or by the 
organized laws of nature, which do not belong to the 
divine Being, is not to be denied; but of the fact that the 
great ends of human existence are the same as those ends 
which God himself pursues, we are not left in doubt. 
And when that, on which all the law and the prophets 
hang, when the law of the New Testament—the new 
commandment—is declared to be love, and love in that 
large way in which it is expounded by the apostle, it is 
fair to say that this is the universal law—a law not for 
man alone, relative to his lower condition, but for all 
beings in the universe, in their various conditions, from 
the highest to the lowest. It is because man is a member 
of the universe, and because God is training the whole 
universe to final unity, and because all his intelligent 
creatures are to come into unity with eaeh other by 
coming into likeness and unity with him, that this great 
law of love is instituted. And this law is the law of 
heaven as really as it is the law of earth; and of God as 
really as of any of his children. It is a law which in- 
cludes all beings alike—the highest and the lowest; the 
least developed and the most nearly perfected. 

Always, then, and everywhere, now and hereafter, we 
are under a law which is turning us toward this one great 
element that the apostle declares to be the end and object 
of the world’s existence—the production in us of this 
superlative and overruling feeling of true benevolence ; 
not an indifference to goodness; not an indifference to 
truth ; not an indifference to right and wrong. It isa be- 
nevulence which includes in it all these things; which 
makes them a part of itself: which wraps them up, and 
strengthens them, and gives them vigor. 


376 LOVE, THE COMMON 


2. The genius of creation and the genius of the universe 
may therefore be inferred, properly, to be benevolence, 
this does not exclude the use of stern or of forceful ele- 
ments, by any means; but it does determine the purpose 
for which they are used; and it does determine the 
average direction which it may be supposed is taken by an 
economy in which all things are used under the super- 
vision and inspiration of a central and divine benevolence. 
Which way time is traveling, which way the universe is 
traveling, and under what power of inspiration, is a matter 
of profound importance. Nature has the power of teacli- 
ing much. It has taught but little. It is susceptible of 
teaching far more than men have ever yet found out by it. 
Men have found in nature, comparatively speaking, but 
little in respect to God; and that little has been, if I may 
so say, on the side of the natural or physical attributes of 
God. We have found out from nature how God treats 
matter; we have found out from nature how he treats the 
lower forms of animated existence; we have found out 
from nature how he treats the lower forms of humanity: 
but hitherto nature has been studied by men who were 
undeveloped themselves, and only parts of what it is 
capable of teaching has been found out. The higher 
reaches of knowledge nature has not disclosed as it has 
the power of disclosing them. Even the apostle, reason- 
ing in Romans, declares that men might have found out 
God’s “ Eternal power and God-head” “by the things 
that are made”; but the apostle does not say that we can 
learn God’s benevolence from nature. I do not believe 
that the terms and arguments of divine benevolence can 
be sustained by that argument. Nature is full of apparent 
contradictions. Force, in the history of the worid, has 
been stronger than right. Cruelty has had more scope | 
than kindness among men. There is that mystery of or- 
ganization by which, from the lower to the higher, each 
thing is more or less made to depend upon the destruc- 
tion of something beneath it. We see on every hand the 
working of that Taw by which being feeds on being, clear 


of the universe 
e benevolence, 
of forceful ele. 
ne the purpose 
determine the 
dis taken by an 
ider the super- 
ne benevolence, 
the universe i; 
tion, is a matter 
power of teach- 
; susceptible of 
found out by it. 
y speaking, but 
s been, if I may 
sal attributes of 
1ow God treats 
ow he treats the 
have found out 
s of humanity: 
men who were 
of what it is 
The higher 
losed as it: has 
Apostle, reason- 
ave found out 
‘by the things 
ay that we can 
do not believe 
evolence can 
all of apparent 
he worid, has 
ad more scope 


mystery of or- | 


e higher, each 
n. the destruc- 
very hand the 
bn being, clear 


LAW OF THE UNIVERSE. 377 


up to man. . 
Gospel comes in, teaching us rather to suffer for another 
than to make another suffer for our good. At that point 


And there it is only reversed when the 


is introduced the law of benevolence. But looking 
through nature comprehensively, in its lower ranges, it 
would be difficult to discern the evidence of a law of 
benevolence administered by a divine providence. In the 
material world there is much that is beautiful, and there 
is much that is fit, and there is much that can be made to 
serve benevolent uses ; but the question whether the world 
itself, in its construction, indicates a benevolent Artificer, 
will be settled very much according to the circumstances 
and education of the person that reasons. If he is himself 
evenly balanced in constitution ; if he has been brought 
up charmingly ; ifhe has been very happy: if those around 
about him have been very happy ; and if he has looked 
upon every thing from the churchly point of view, and 
seen every thing under the most favorable circumstances, 
he will be likely to think that nature says that God is a 
God of love. Nature evidently makes him wise and 
powerful; but when you look at the outlying race; when 
you look, not at the few that are fortunately circumstanced, 
not at the few that are housed and husbanded in the 
family, but at the masses of mankind ; when you look at 
the vast. volume of animal life, and attempt to find in 
their history evidence of the divine benevolence, you fail. 
To me it is impossible to see in the lower history of the 
universe proof that God is benevolent. That part of 
nature does not determine it. 

But then, we find this: thatthe lowest part of creation, 
inorganic elements, and the lowest forms of organic 
material existence, are governed by absolute force. Rising 
higher, we find, in the lowest forms of human existence, 
that fear and intense terror begin to be introduced as a 
motive-force. Rising still higher, we find that as the 
lower forms of social life come into the sphere of 
voluntariness, motives grow milder. That is, men are 
susceptible to higher influences, and they have new points 


378 LOVE, THE COMMON 


of susceptibility developed in them, as they rise in the 
scale of being. And as new ranges of faculties come in, 
you will find coming in with -bhem higher principles of 
government, that tend to control men by the higher and 
better elements, and not by the lower ones; until, when 
you come to the higher forms ot human life by being 
educated and developed, then you will find that the 
governing force is implied, rather than used. That is the 
undertone, the sub-base. It may be that the melody rung 
far above it in the direction of piety and moral life. 

In other words, you will find that there is an ascendin 
scale, and that the divine government which is indicate 
in nature is this: when things are low they are governed 
by forces which are appropriate to them; and from the 
lowest point all the way up, in every stage of existence, 
the governing motives are exactly adapted to the condi- 
tion of the things governed, and all that is low is governed 
by force, and force that has in it coercion, yea, bruising 
cruelty, simply because it is the only thing that is adapted 
to the lower stage of developement ; because it is the only 
influence that can at that point be brought to bear upon 
existing things. 

Taking in the whole of nature, then, there is an anal- 
ogy which points toward a central benevolence, in this: 
that while at the lowest state of existence we see nothing 
but fate, nothing but force, there is amelioration from 
that point, in an ascending scale. It goes higher and 
higher, from force to lenity, and from lenity to mercy and 
love. And the analogy points still farther. It points to 
a realm beyond this lite, where all government is benev- 
olence, and where, having emerged from lower and 
disciplinary conditions, the race and: universal existence 
will be governed supremely, not any longer by the law of 
force (fur their state shall have been ameliorated): not any 
longer by the motives of fear and terror (for they shall 
have escaped from the bondage of these things); not any 
longer by considerations of interest (for they shall have 
risen higher than these); but by the principle of love. 


i can fh, a a a ee ee ee ee ee eee eee 


eset of Ke 


y rise in the 
ties come in, 
principles of 
> higher and 
until, when 
ife by being 
ind that the 
That is the 
2 melody runs 
ral life. 
an ascending 
1 is indicated 
are governed 
ind from the 
of existence, 
to the condi- 
w is governed 
yea, bruising 
hat is adapted 
2 it is the only 
o bear upon 


e is an anal- 
bnee, in this: 
e see nothing 
oration from 
s higher and 
to mercy and 
It points to 
pnt is benev- 
lower and 
sal existence 
by the law of 
ed): not any 
br they shall 
gs); mot any 
shall have 
iple of love. 


LAW OF THE UNIVERSE. 379 


At last there are hints and indications of nature that the 
race is governed by disciplinary and recuperative forces. 
Rut, in order to this conclusion, the Christian idea of 
ain and suffering must supplant the old Roman, the 
uscan, that is, the heathen, idea. Our notions of justice, 
to an extent that is hardly dreamed of by ourselves, have 
been vitiated by the infection of heathenism. There 
existed nations that loved the infliction of pain, as the 
old Romans did. And the Spanish bull-fights to-day are 
a coarse exhibition of that which pervaded ancient Roman 
jurisprudence and afterwards the Romish Church, and 
which we did not shred off at the Reformation. For many 
things then stuck to us which we might well have got 
rid of. This most repulsive idea of pain and suffering 
was derived from the Tuscans, who are said to have had, 
as shown in their art and literature, the most horrible con- 
ception of fate and of the future existence of all nations that 
ever lived on the face of the globe. And this conception 
ot the infliction of basilar, fundamental pain and cruelty, 
as the right of the gods, has been handed down from age 
to age; and men have framed into their theology the idea 
that, for reasons of his own glory, God foreordained, from 
all eternity, portions of the human race to be vessels of 
wrath, to be cursed and made miserable forever and 
forever. And we find that infernal, heathen conception 
of God coming on down to us through the various modi- 


. fications and channels of theology. So that yet, in the 


minds of many men, this pain and this suffering are a 
part of the divine sovereignty and the divine right, 
indicating in God a love of pain and suffering as such. 

Now, you cannot, in calling a being by another name, 
make him enjoy suffering without making him malignant ; 
and any being that loves suffering for its own sake, any 
being on whose heart the sight of suffering produces a 
pleasurable response is infernal. And there has been 
many and many a man who said his prayers to the devil 
thinking that he sat on the throne of Jehovah. 

What is the Christian idea of pain and suffering? That 


M2 


380 LOVE, THE COMMON 


it is a means to an end; and that the end is so blessed and 
glorious in the fruition of joy as to justify the intermediate 
stage of suffering and pain. Thus justice is not ignored, 
Christianity recognizes a government of justice, and g 
overnment of pains and penalties, now and hereafter, 
ut they are not pains and penalties for the sake of 
indulging any being in an unnatural and hideous ecstacy, 
Every throb of the great heart of Christianity is a blow 
to the infernal conception that God sits and enjoys the 
sufferings of the damned. It is enough to make me 
renounce their faith even to think of such a: conception 
as this, as taught with authority, and as kept alive in 
some of the most excellent Christian sects of this day, 
It is a hideous, outrageous slander upon the grandeur of 
the love and the purity of the adminstration, and the 
beneficence of the wisdom, of the Ruler of the universe, 
“But,” it is asked, “is there not Scripture for it?” 
There is Scripture for anything that a man wants Scrip. 
ture for. Yes, there ¢s Scripture for it, just as there are 
knives in the ore of the mountain. You can get the ore, 
and you can make assassins’ knives of it, or you can 
make plowshares of it. Scripture is a great forest, and 
you can go into it and cut timber and make it up into a 
_ great variety of utensils. You can make a flail out of 
this text; or you can make a plow-handle out of it; or 
you can build it into a cradle; or you can make out of it 
@ watrior’s spear-handle. Scripture is the most usable 
and adaptable thing in the world. It is with that as it 
is with nature. God has spread good and bad through 
the world. There are poisons here, and fruits there, and 
grains yonder; precipices lift themselves up on one side, 
and meadows and gardens stretch themselves out on the 
other; dangers and benefits, sorrows and joys, lie before 
men ; and they can take the one or the other. And the 
necessity of choosing is a part of their discipline. It isa 
part of the education of their intelligence. And it is 
their interest to take the right things. 
The spirit of Christianity, as I have already intimated, 


‘go blessed and 
\e intermediate 
is not ignored, 
justice, and a 
and hereafter, 
or the sake of 
Lideous ecstacy, 
nity is a blow 
and enjoys the 
. to make men 
h a conception 
s kept alive in 
ts of this day. 
he grandeur of 
ration, and the 
f the universe, 
ripture for it?” 
wn wants Scrip- 
ust as there are 
can get the ore, 
it, or you can 
reat forest, and 
nke it up into a 
e a flail out o 
le out of it; o 
n make out ofit 
he most usable 
with that as it 
hd bad through 
ruits there, and 
up on one side, 
ves out on the 
joys, lie before 
her, And the 
cipline. It isa 
hee. And it 3 


pady intimated, 


LAW OF THE UNIVERSE. 381 


is that of remedial suffering, which is consonant with the 
spirit of true benevolence. 


“Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom 
he receiveth. If ye endure chastening, God dealeth with you as with sons; 
for what son is he whom the Father chasteneth not? But if ye be without 
chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards. and not sons, 
Furthermore, we have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we 

ave them reverence; shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the 
Father ot spirits, and live? For they verily for afew days chastened us after 
their own pleasure ; but he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his 
holiness. 


This is the charter of administration. Itis the marrow 
of history. It is revealed by the spirit of Christianity 
that there are in the divine love all these operative forces. 
God, although he is full of beneficence, governs matter 
as matter must be governed. And as the existences 
which he governs rise in the scale, he changes the form of 

overnment from that of brute force to that of moral 
orce. Even in the lower forms of human existence, 
hysical power is of neve ty employed, and government 
is painful ; but as men rise higher under this education, 
there come in social motives and interests. And as in 
this school of discipline men rise still higher, they come 
into an academy where the government is more gentle, 
where there is less pain and more pleasure; and when 
they have come to this stage in the development of their 
mcral sense, they have reached such a degree of spiritual 
susceptibility and refinement that God can deal with them 
as with sons, and they become partakers of the divine 
nature, and are no more strangers and foreigners, but are 
friends of God, and enter into his confidence, and come 
under his immediate inspiration, and live by the power 
of his Spirit which is in tl] em. 

Now, to me, the comiort of all this is in this thought 
that the genius of the universe, that that which has its 
hand on the helm, is not fate, is not cruelty, and is not 
indifference ; that all the vast work that is going on is a 
work which is under the inspiration of this central spirit 
of benevolence. It is a benevolence that is determined 


382 LOVE, THE COMMON 


to have purity, because that is the most beneficent thing, 
It is a benevolence that is determined to use all the instru. 
ments that are necessary to secure purity now and here. 
after. Therefore it is love “ out of a pure heart, and of 
a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned.” It is a love 
which takes in the present and the future, the now and 
the hereafter. It is a love which takes in the whol 
being of man. This it is that presides. 

Time is a school, and God is the universal Schoolmaster, 
and men are learners, and are graded from step to ste 
as they are to take the education that belongs to the 
successive stages of their being. 

Such a providence as this is a joy. It inspires one wit) 
some hope for the world. If 1 thought that this wor 
was a huge bag, and that nations, like cats, were swung 
round by some giant hand, they, meantime, fierce) 
scratching and fighting with infernal noise, what would! 
preach for? I would say to men, with the profoundes 
sorrow, ‘Get all the pleasure you can, give yourselve: 
up to hilarity, eat, drink, and be merry, for to-morroy 
you die.” 

But such is not the world, and such are not the squabble 
of life and time. There are the fitful spasms of force; 
there are the gigantic processions of woe and cruelty; 
there are groanings and travailings in pain until nov; 
but there is a divine purpose under them all, whichi 
working out results from that issue the very soul ani 
heart of love. There is a good time coming. It wil 
take it a great while to come; the road is long and the 
work is large; but it ¢* coming; and éven if I donot se 
it for a thousand ages yet, it is a joy and a comfort fa 
me to know that it iscoming. Some will see it here. The 
time will come when the world will cease to grope ; wha fi 
no man shall be obliged to say to his neighbor, “ Known 
the Lord.” The time will come when men shall beat ther 
swords into pruning-hooks. The time will come wha 
all the earth shall rest, and there shall be one more not! 


veneficent thing, 
ise all the instru. 
y now and here. 
ire heart, and of 
4? It is a love 
ve, the now and 
-es in the whole 


sal Schoolmaster, 
rom step to ste 
t belongs to the 


; inspires one witl 
ht that this worll 
cats, were SWulk 
reantime, fiercely 
cise, what would! 
h the profounder 
n, give yourselve 
ry, for to-morror 


o not the squabble 


spasms of force; 


voe and cruelty; 
n pain until now; 
hem all, which i 
he very soul ani 

coming. It wil 
hd is long and the 
ven if I donot sé 
and a corsfort {a 
1see it here. Th 
se to grope ; whet 
ighbor, “ Knowtt 

en shall beat ther 
9 will come whi 

be one more nol! 


§ tural, false and pernicious. 


lwhich the sun shone. 


LAW OF THE UNIVERSE, 383 
joined to that universal choir that chants the praise of God, 
and of supreme and victorious Love. 

8. Any system of theology, any style of preaching, 
which leaves upon the mind any other impression than 
that of divine benevolence as the regent disposition of 
God, and the animating spirit of providence, is unscrip- 
It cannot be doubted that 
systems of theology have left other impressions, and that 
preaching does leave, and that continuously, other im- 
pressions on men’s minds. 

[ distinctly remember that as a child my predominant 
thought of God was one of fear and dread, because I sup- 
posed that the side of God which was turned towards me 
was vengeance. I was taught that I was sinful long be- 
fore I knew anything but that I was so. Isupposed that 
I was a sinner becausgs I did not feel sinful. I was taught 


i that the not feeling that which unquestionably was the 


underlying element of my being, was one of the tokens 
of sin. And I strove to feel; because through the gate 
of feeling I hoped to pass that wall on the other side of 
I was on the north side, where all 
was snow; and they told me that if I could get on the 
other side, I should find that there the sun had shone so 
long that the violets were already blooming. I made the 
ffort; but the snow was too deep for me. And until 
fter I had reached my majority, my thought of God was 
one of dread and tear, because the side of the divine mind 
hat was turned toward me was the side of “justice.” 
My thought of God was that he was the Just Judge ; that 
henever men repented of their sin he would become the 
orgiving Friend and the universal Father, but that until 
men did repent, and just so long as they stood unrepent- 
nt, God was toward them a consuming fire. And that 


B consider to be a heresy that strikes the whole Gospel of 


hrist flat in the face. ‘‘ God so loved the world that he 
rave his only begotton Son” to die for it. God did not 
ove the world because Christ coaxed him to. Out of love, 
ut of infinite depths of desire and kindness, he gave forth 


384 LOVE, THE COMMON 


from himself this expression of his nature. Oh! if I had 
only known that God loved me, and felt toward me ag 
the mother feels toward the child; if some one had said 
to me, “ Even as your mother takes you up in her arms to 
expostulate with you, to expose to you your fault that she 
inay lead you out of it, letting no others know it till it is 
cured and passed away; as she helps your infirmity, use 
so God does. It is the divine nature to be medicinal to 
infinite weakness and want. God does not wait till you 
are worth loving (for you will not be, this side of veep 
but he takes you up just as you are that he may guide 
and mould you into lovableness. And now, while you are 
asinner, while your heart is far from God and sympathy 
and love; while yet there is the whirl of passions in you, 
God does sympathize with you and love you; and you 
are balavai. tobe up, and see that all is bright and win- 


' ning and inviting.” Oh! if these things had been told 
me when I first needed to know them, I might have 
walked in peace when I was eight years old—for I was 


subject to profound religious feelings at that early age, 
But they were hidden from my eyes then; and till I was 
twenty-tive years old [had no thought that it was the na. 
ture of God to be sorry for sinners. The impression left on 
my mind was, that God was first pure and true and just; 
and that then, if men conformed to certain conditions, he 
would be loving. Whereas, I preach that God is lovin 

all the time, that he was loving from the beginning, an 

that he will be loving to the end. I preach that love is 
the Alpha and Omega of the divine nature. And when 
I speak of God’s love, I mean no puerile thing; no 
maudlin sentiment: I mean a love that is ermed with 
force, and fear, and pain, and all things that are necessary 
to work the universe up from its low, earthly conditions, 
through all the changing phases of animalism, and through 
all the planes of humanity, and bring it at last into per- 
fect unity and accord with the divine nature and the 
divine government. This is a love that does not scruple 
to give pain; but it is pain for medicine. It is a love 


@ 


oO 


Od —— 


| ~~) 


SsHeq_a”"o 


Oh! if I had 
toward me as 
e one had said 
yin her arms to 
r fault that she 
now it till it is 
infirmity, ts 
» medicinal to 
yt wait till you 
de of eternity), 
he may guide 
, while you are 
and sympathy 
passions in you, 
you; and you 
bright. and win- 
had been told 
I might have 
old—tor I was 
hat early age. 
and till I was 
it was the na 
pression left on 
true and just; 
conditions, he 
God is lovin 
beginning, an 
ch that love is 
e, And when 
ile thing; no 
s ermed with 
are necessary 
ly conditions, 
a, and through 
last into per- 
ature and the 
ps not scruple 
It is a love 


LAW OF THE UNIVERSE. 


that does not scruple to smite and to punish—long and 
terribly to punish; but it is punishment which is inflicted 
as the bitterest and most loathsome cup is put to the li 
of the babe by the mother, because she loves the child, 
and believes that in that cup is the hope of its life. d 
subjects individuals and nations to pains and sufferings 
that they may be brought out of their low estate, 
and not because he wants to see them sizzle and fry. 
Never does God punish because there is malignity in the 
divine mind—never ! never / 

We are, theretore, not only bound in our preaching to 
preach right doctrine, but we are bound to preach it with 
the right emphasis, I think there has been more error in 
emphasis than in statement. There has been enough, in 
all conscience, in statement; but there are many who 
hold technically right views of theology, while they so 
emphasize one or the other side of the divine nature that 
the impression left upon the minds of those that hear 
and read is unfavorable. Take a familiar example. 

A man tells you, some day, “ You have hurt the feelings 
of all those people over yonder.” “I? yousay. “ Yes, 
you.” “ Why, bless your heart, what have Isaid or done ¢ 
I did not want to hurt the feelings of any of them.” No, 
you did not voluntarily hurt their feelings; but you 
carried your being in such a way that it rode over them, 
and crushed them here, and hit them there. You did 
not take any consideration for them ; so that every one 
of them has felt bruised or wounded, one way or another, 

yyou. “ Well,” you say, “I did not intend to.” No, 
you did not intend to; but it was the way that you carried 
yourself that hurt their feelings. 

Now, there are men who are afraid that if they give 
up God’s justice, if they remit on that side, if they loose 
the bands, and do not keep the spear-point to men’s 
consciénces all the time, if they do not preach the law 
continually, men will fly off from the truth, and go to 
destruction. And so they emphasize justice to such a 
degree, in their preaching, as to produce fear, and not 


386 LOVE, THE COMMON 


love—dread, and not trust. Whereas, God should be 
preached as the most glorious and the most attractive 
and the most winning Being in the universe. Heshould 
be so preached as to leave the impression on the minds of 
men that he sums up in his nature all things that are 
good, or he could not be the almighty Good—for God is 
but a contraction for good. 

4, In church-life there must be a practical recognition 
and an emphatic honoring of this principle that love or 
benevclence is the nature of all law, organization, institu- 
tion, custom, or observance. And although the instru- 
ments by which we educate men are not to be lightly 
esteemed, or loosely set aside, or carelessly drawn away, 
or recklessly changed, yet, when it is necessary to give 
up either the spirit of true benevolence or dogmas, and 
forms, and ceremonies, by which we seek to produce that 
benevolence, we are to cling to the benevolence, and lei 
these other things go. This principle was clearly enuncia- 
ted by Christ, when he said, ‘‘ The Sabbath was made for 
man, and not man for the Sabbath. And I say, The 
church was made for man, and not man for the church. 
Dogmas and doctrines were made for man, and not man 
for them. Theology was made to help men, and men 
were not made to be sacrificed to 1t. All ordinances and 
institutions and commandments are designed to subserve 
men’s uses and interests; and it should be so held and 
taught in our churches. The end sought, which throws 
back its value on all instruments and processes, is the 
spirit of true beneficence, kindness, love, self-sacrifice, 
helpfulness. The maintenance of powerful benevoience 
is more vital to the Christian Church than dogmatic 
systems. 

Suppose a church do all believe right things, and all of 
them feel wrong ones, what is the use? Suppose a church 
do all subseribs to one confession of faith, and all of them 
quarrel with each other, and are full of jealousies, and 
envyings, and debates, and strifes, what does it amount 
to, that they are theologically united? Suppose a church 


od should be 
Lost attractive 
e. Heshould 
1 the minds of 
1ings that are 


I—for God is 


al recognition 
e that love or 
ation, institu- 
yh the instru- 
to be lightly 
drawn away, 
essary to give 
dogmas, and 
» produce that 
lence, and lei 
early enuncia- 
was made for 
1 I say, The 
* the church. 
and not man 
en, and men 
dinances and 
Ht +o subserve 
so held and 
vhich throws 

esses, is the 
self-sacrifice, 
benevoience 
an dogmatic 


rs, and all of 
ose a church 

all of them 
ousies, and 
5 it amount 
se a church 


LAW OF THE UNIVERSE. 387 


is united in polity, and they all have the same govern- 
ment, and the same method of worship, from A to Z, and 
all of them are devoid of charity, what does it signify ? 
Paul tells us, that though a man speak with the tongue 
of men and of angels and have not charity, he is as sound- 
ing brass, or a tinkling cymbal. : The apostle teaches us 
that all generosity is unworthy of the name which is not 
prompted by the spirit of benevolence. He says: 


“Though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my 
body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing.” 


Charity—-the divine holiness-producing, happiness- 
making spirit of love—this is the end of the law. It is 
the reason for the church. It is the reason for doctrines. 

It is the reason for polity and for worship. And yet, 
men sacrifice the feeling for the sake of keeping the 
instruments bv which the feeling is produced. Men will 
agitate and embroi! a whole generation in disputing about 
doctrines of charity, engendering all manner of. rancorous 
feelings. Princeton will not speak to New Haven, and 
New Haven will not speak to Andover; and all theologi- 
cal seminaries are thrown into paroxysms. “And they 
fiercely assail each other, and attempt to drive each other 
into Orthodoxy. And the churches, one after another, 
take it up; and all candidates for the ministry are rigidly 
examined on doctrinal points ; and heresy-hunters, like a 
pack of hounds, are at their heels, to see thatethey are 
sound in truth and Orthodoxy. 

But where is that benevolence which trutia and Ortho- 
doxy were meant to servo? Where is that benevolence 
for the sake of which truth and Orthodoxy were ordained ¢ 
Where is that benevolence by which men are to be 
brought into true sympathetic relations one to another ¢ 
It is sacrificed for the sake of theology. And to-day our 
churches are set apart one from another, and sects are 
arrayed one against another, because the cohesion of 
benevolence is wanting. 

All denominations are insisting upon it that we must 


388 LOVE, THE COMMON 


obey. But what is obedience? Are we to be obedient to 
the outside, or to the inside? Is it to the shuck or to the 
kernel that wé are to be obedient? Which is greater 
obedience, that of obeying the law, ‘Thou shalt love the 
Lord thy God,” “and thy neighbor,” or that of yieldin 
allegiance to a doctrine which prescribes some outwar 
observance? Which is the greater obedience, that which 
is demanded by the divine law of love, or that which is 
demanded by a dogma as to whether you will go under 
the water or not, or as to whether you will keep Sunday 
or not? These dogmas are mere outside leaves. They 
do not touch the root of the thing. 

The law of benevolence says, ‘Do youlove?” There 
is the rub; and men are saying, “ No, we do not love ; 
but the reason why we do not love, and fellowship, and 
co-operate, is that we must obey.” Obey how? By 
putting on black during one part’ of tneservice, and white 
during another? By standing with the back to the audi- 
ence during one part of the reading, and with the face to 
the audience during another part? “This,” they say, 
“is ordered, and we cannot countenance any deviation 
from it.” And so people sacrifice benevolence to exter- 
nals—to the external of externals. And so have such 
fribbles deluded men—and wise men. Is there any place 
where Satan has spun more webs, and caught more 
victims, than in the Church of Christ? The church has 
been the siaughter-house of Christianity. 

The heart of Christendom has never been corcentrated 
as it ought to be upon that wh‘ch the apostle declares to 
be the end of the law. The whole economy of grace is 
but the means or instrument by which men are to seek to 
develop this larger nature. Never have the church come 
up to a conception of this large Christian charge; and I 
think they have never had a univorsal enthusiasm for it, 
which would not let it go out from theirsympathy. We 
have had revivals in which there has becn enthusiasm for 
the propagation of the faith. We have had awakenings 
in thigh the power of the church was brought to bear for 


obedient to 
ick or to the 
h is greater 
1alt love the 
of ae 
ne outwar 

, that which 
at which is 
ill go under 
ep Sunday 
ves. They 


e?? There 
» not love; 
wship, and 
how? By 
2, and white 
to the audi- 

the face to 
” they say, 
y deviation 
nce to exter- 
) have such 
re any place 
nught more 
church has 


oncentrated 
declares to 
of grace is 
e to seek to 
hurch come 
arge; and I 
siasm for it, 
pathy. We 
husiasm for 
awakenings 
t to bear for 


LAW OF THE UNIVERSE. 389 


the spread of its views and doctrines. The church has 
had its periods of revival for dogmatic settlements. 
Again and again truths have been rounded out, as men 
have supposed, by councils. Successive ages. have gone 
down in which churches have been stirred up with scho- 
Jastic fervor. The church has had its celestial rage for 
organization, if I may so call it; and has arranged how 
it should exist, and in what shape, and with what mem- 
bers, and with what distribution of authority. And the 
whole world has stood in suspense while these things 
were going on “for the sake of charity ”—which charity, 
meanwhile, was destroyed. The church has had its fer- 
vor and revivals over ordinances, and over the reforma- 
tions of ordinances. It has dispossessed them of idolatry, 
and reared them into new forms. It has killed some, 
ana given added life to others. It has had its fervors of 
philanthropism and humanity. And now it is more in 
that condition, perhaps, than it has been at any other 
period. Probably there wes never a time when there 
was so much that was in accordance with the second 
member of the great law, as at the present day. There 
have been tiraes when “ Thou shalt love thy God” has 
been fulfilled and kept almost to the forgetting of *‘ Thou 
shalt love thy neighbor.” ‘ Thou sha!t love thy neighbor,” 
in the form of humanitarianism and the relieving of the 
ills of the race, has been the inspiration of our day 
almost to the forgetting of ‘“‘Thou shalt love thy God.” 
But when, in any age, has the whole church been seized, 
as by a divine inspiration, with the thought and the 
impulse of unfeigned and cheerful love one to another ? 
When has there been the feeling in the church, ‘ Bene- 
volence, after all, in its largest, purest, truest Christian 
type, is the most precious thing we have, and that must 
be guarded, whatever becomes of doctrine. We must 
keep this spirit whatever becomes vf ordinances. We 
must preserve beneficence, whatever becomes of ortho- 
doxy. We must not lose this heart-love or heart-summer?” 
‘When has the church ever had that feeling or ir=piration ? 


390 LOVE, THE COMMON 


When has it swept through any nation, or from nation 
to nation? This highest type of Christian experience the 
church is yet without. 

5. We are to expect, in each individual, benevolence 
of character, and real charity of life, as the true fulfilling 
of the law. In instituting a series of educating influences, 
we are to take into account what truths will be more 
likely to restrain evil and purge the soul to purity than 
others. It makes a great deal of difference, in instituting 
educational influences, whether a man believes one thing 
or another. Truth is better than error, in just this, that 
it has more power to produce the final state of beneficence 
in its complex form. There is such a thing as the work 
of the truth; and therefore we are not to say that if a 
man is sincere, that is enough. That: would be absurd 
on the ship. Ifa man takes his reckoning by his chro- 
nometer, and it is all wrong, will his sincerity bring him 
into New York, or cast him away on the beach? Ifa 
man says, “ Not plowing is wiser than plowing; sow 
your seed upon the hard ground, and let it be—that is 
the best way,” will his sincerity make it the best way ? 
If a man says, ‘‘ Chaff is just as good as wheat, and if the 
farmer only thought so, and sowed it in faith and sincerity 
he would get a good crop,” would he? Ifa man says, 
“Thistles are as good as wheat: only sow them sincerely 
and you will find them to be so,” will you? The more 
sincere a man is who sows cuckles and thistles and bur- 
docks, the worse it is for him. Sincerity does not change 
natural law. Andso I say that in instituting an economy 
of education, in instituting means by which to propagate 
religion, it is very important that men should be true; 
and sincerity is no substitute for the truth. 

I do not say that the ordinances of the church are of 
no importance ; I say that they are important, and that 
they require great thought and wisdom; but they are 
never to be so much thought of as to dispossess that for 
which they were themselves created—the great central 
spirit of true beneficence. 


om. nation 
rience the 


mevolence 
) fulfilling 
influences, 
be more 
arity than 
nstituting 
one thing 
this, that 
aneficence 
the work 
that if a 
be absurd 
his chro- 
ring him 
wh? Ifa 
Ing; Sow 
—that is 
est way ? 
und if the 
sincerity 
han says, 
sincerely 
he more 
and bur- 
change 
Pconomy 
opagate 
be true; 


h are of 
nd that 
hey are 
hat for 
central 


LAW OF THE UNIVERSE. 391 


More than that, if I find that a man’s heart is supremely 
possessed of this divine spirit, Iam no longer at liberty 
to ask him how he came by it. If it is there; if he loves 
God, and gives evidence of it; if he loves his fellowmen, 
and gives evidence of it, it does not make any difference, 
it must not make any difference to me, where he got it. 

I think it better to have common schools by which to 
teach the population how to read ; but if a man has never 
gone to the common school, and yet can read—is not 
reading the thing? I think that going to school is the 
best way of getting education; but then, suppose a man 
gets an education without going to school, is that not to 
be taken as sufficient? I think that if a man goes through 
a school course, a college course, a university course, he 
is better educated than if he does not; but here and there 
aman comes up, and acquires an education, and makes 
himself felt, without going through any such course; and 
are you to question whether he is educated or not because 
he acquired his education outside of institutions? Because 
institutions, on the whole, are best for the community, 
are you to deny that any man is educated who. does not 
go oe them ? 

Now, I hoid that there are great fundamental doctrines 
of the divine government and the divine nature, that are 
blessed of God for men’s amelioration, for their good ; 
but suppose I find a man who has all the effects which 
these doctrines are designed to work, wrought in him by 
other influences, without being technically connected 
with the doctrines, am I to say that I will not recognize 
him as a Christian! I say that the spirit of God in the 
heart of a man is all that we have aright to look for. It 
may be interesting to know by what process he arrived 
at the result; but we are to judge of him by his fruit ? 
If a Universalist gives evidence of possessing the Spirit 
of God, his life is his voucher for his faith. And it he 
applies for admission into our Church, he is to come in, 
not because he is ‘a Universalist, but because he is God’s; 
beeause he is Christ’s, ° 


392 LOVE, THE COMMON 


“ Yes,” it is said, “but what are you going to do about 
the doctrine?” Nothing. “ But suppose a man wants 
to come in as a Unitarian?” He sont not come in as a 
Unitarian—not if I had my way. I would stand in the 
door, and would not Jet him in. But if he should say, 
‘Sir, I am ten times as much a Christian as I am a Uni- 
tarian, “Ah! asa Christian,” I would say, “ you can 
come in, but not as anything else.” Noman can come in 
as a Swedenborgian; but hecanas a Christian, no matter 
if he has the Swedenborgianism beside. A man may be 
a Christian, and yet be a Unitarian; and a man may be 
an orthodox man and not be a Christian. It is as long as 
it is broad. Some men are a great deal worse than their 
creed, and do not live half way up to it; and some men 
are a great deal better than their creed, and live far be- 
yond it Why is that? Because God employs more 
Instruments in bringing up men than your church and 
Catechism. God has a church in father and mother; 
God has instrumentalities for saving men, not in ordinan- 
ces and doctrines alone, but in the examples of holy men. 
Thousands of men in adversity and peril are helped by 
the illustrious lives of others, as no dogmas or ceremonies 
could help them. And the moment we see that a man 
has imbibed the true spirit of benevolence, we are to re- 
ceive him, though we may reject his outward belief. We 
are to accept a man, not because he is one thing or 
another, so tar as creeds are concerned, but because his 
life and disposition are right. A man whose heart is 
filled with love for God and his fellow-men has a right to 
stand in sweet fellowship with us. 

But how can a man be a Christian who does not believe 
in Christ ? 

There is the puzzler. He cannot. But then, a man 
may believe in Christ who does not believe in Christ’s 
name, using that name simply in its superficial meaning. 
Do we mean by Christ ety the letters that spell out 
that name ? 1s not Christ merely a name for certain 
qualities—for love, for purity, for truth, for a holy faith 


ig to do about 
4 man wants 
come in as a 
stand in the 
e should say, 
,I am a Uni- 
y, “you can 
n can come in 
an, no matter 
man may be 
man may be 
t is as long as 
‘se than their 
nd some men 
d live far be- 
mploys more 
r church and 
and mother; 
t in ordinan- 
sof holy men. 
re helped by 
by ceremonies 
e that a man 
we are to re- 
belief. We 
one thing or 

because his 
hose heart is 
as a right to 


s not believe 


then, a man 
e in Christ’s 
al meaning. 
at spell out 

for certain 
a holy faith 


LAW OF THE UNIVERSE. 393 


in and obedience to the Saviour and God? Is it not a 
name that signifies not simply beliefs, but succor of love, 
and self-denial of love? Is it not aname filled full of the 
sweetest and richest fruit of divine being? A man may 
believe in the thing which that name covers, who yet, 
from the force of prejudice and education, is unwilling 
to take the name itself. There is many a man who be- 
lieves in Christ, only he will not call him by that name. 
Ke believes in God as he was manifested in Christ. He 
does not know much about the historical part of Christi- 
anity. He believes in that part in which the heart is con- 
cerned. He may not believe in theology; he may not 
accept all the dogmas in regard to days, and incarnation, 
and meditation, and passion, as they are framed into 
theology; but he has taken the spirit of Christ. And 
having taken that, he has taken Christ. If a man takes 
the spirit of Christ, it does not matter so much about the 
name. He takes Christ who takes his spirit. 
Now, if you have not the spirit of Ghrist, go away. 
Do you say that vou believe in the Trinity? Go away; 
our spirit is bad. Do you say that you believe in the 
Vather, the Son, and the Holy Ghost—three Persons and 
one Godhead? Go away; you are filled with envyings 
and jealousies toward your neighbor. Do you say that 
you are sound on all the points of doctrine? Go away ; 
you are, with all your theology, fierce and truculent and 
arrogant, and devoid of love toward Godandman. You 
believe in the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost ? 
Yes, you believe in the outside of them, but you do not 
believe in the inside of them. You do not believe in that 
which makes them. It is not the alphabet that makes 
God. It is not the spelling certain letters that makes 
God. It is the eternal purity, the eternal sweetness, the 
eternal remedialness in the divine power and wisdom and 
justice, employed for the purposes of love—it is these 
that make God. 
A man comes in and says, “I do not know much 
about these doctrines. I know very little about Christ. 


394 LOVE THE COMMON 


I do not believe that he is divine. But I believe that his 
spirit is to bemine.” He believes that the spirit of Christ 
is gentleness, is sweetness, is forgiveness, is self-denial, ig 
laboring for others, is the feeling which the tenderest 
mother experiences toward her ald, He does not see 
his way to believe in the ordinary view of his divinity ; 
but in the higher view of it he does believe. He thinks 
he does not, but he does. He deceives himself. He is 
misled by a juggle of words. For that which is Christ 
is the inner life of Christ; and that. is what he does be. 
lieve in. As to the power of registering it, and putting 
it in its place in a system of theology, it would be better 
if he had it; but that is not vitally important. If any 
man has the spirit of Christ, he is his, He does believe , 
in him. 

And so, what of your Unitarianism? It becomes a 
mere word,asimple name. I do not myself regard that 
doctrine as being a part of Christianity, or as being tha 
in which it is desirable to educate people. If 1 did I 
should not be preaching as I do here. If I thought that 
to be the best doctrine, I should take it. But if'a man 
has the spirit of Christ, I will not reject him because he 
holds that doctrine. 

Therefore, if a person comes to me (and it would be all 
the better if there were twenty of them), and gives me his 
individual experience in his daily life, and gives evidence 
that he is walking in the spirit of Christ and in the enjoy- 
ment of the divine presence, I take him, because he does 
believe in the interior of God. He may not believe in 
the systematic and exterior views of the divine Being as 
you and I have classified them; but he takes the spirit 
which they are designed to set forth. And Isay that the 
love of God in the soul should rise higher than ordinan- 
ces, than dogmatic systems, than sects, than the products 
of human reason. I believe that Christianity should begin 
on the inside, and work outside, and not that it should 
stand outside and wait till it can go inside. 

And so, all that are called of God, and respond to the 


slieve that his 
pirit of Christ 
self-denial, is 
the tenderest 
does not see 
his divinity ; 
» He thinks 
imself. He is 
rhich is Christ 
at he does be- 
t, and putting 
ould be better 
tant. If any 


e does believe , 


It becomes a 
lf regard that 
as being that 
. If I did l 
[ thought that 
But if a man 
m because he 


t would be all 
d gives me his 
vives evidence 
4 in the enjoy- 
bcause he does 
mot believe in 
vine Being as 
hkes the spirit 
1 Tsay that the 
than. ordinan- 
the products 
y should begin 
hat it should 


espond to the 


e 


LAW OF THE UNIVERSE. 305 


call, and give token ot true obedience to the Father; all 
that by sweet sympathy and self-denial and service give 
evidence that they love their fellow-men ; all that hope in 
the mercy of God, and not in their own vain righteous- 
ness; all that show by their lives that they are in the 
fellowship of the whole invisible church of Christ in 
heaven and upon earth—all such are known in heaven, 
are named there, and are longed for there, and will 
certainly be found there. 

May God gi.:nt us all to enter largely into the apostle’s 
generous and noble utterance : 


‘Now, the end of the commandment is charity, out of a pure heart, and 
of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned.” 


PRAYER BEFORE THE SERMON. 


We thank thee, O God, that thou dost not accepf us according to 
ourmerit. It is not the purity of our being, nor its greatness, that 
commends us to thee. Thou dost not measure us upon thine own 
self. It isour feebleness which excites thy pity. Itisour unripeness 
which leads thee to shine upon us. It is our sin which makes thee 
a Saviour in heart, a Saviour in providence, and a Saviour in grace, 
For thy nature is to be generous—to be gracious, Thou art not in- 
different to righteousness. That is dear to thee; for us it isdearto 
thee. Thou art not willing that we should be taken away from pain 
and suffering, only to abide ascripplesin deformity. It is thy desire 
that we should be shaped by love, by goodness, by compassion, and, 
if need be, by fear and by force. T210u art sovereign, and thou dost 
mold the great universe which thou hast uncer thee, according to its 
necessities, working mightily in all thfhgs, and working in all things 
according to their special need, that thou mayest direct universal 
progressand growth toward perfection, toward righteousness, toward 
all godlikeness. 

We rejoice that thou art supreme; that none can hinder thee; that 
only thyself art counsel to thyself; that only thine own strength is 
equal to thy strength. Thou, O God, the Father, Son, and Spirit, 
dwellest in unalloyed companionship of blessedness; and in thee 
are the roots of universal being; and in thee is the destiny of all. 
From thee comes all history ; and back to thee report all the events 
of history. Thou art the beginning and the end—the Alpha and 


nl 


396 LOVE, THE COMMON 


the Omega. In thee we live, and move, and have our being. And 
what such being as thine must be, who of us, from our diminished 
sphere, can rise to understand? Glimpses we have, whicl. we inter- 
pret by the things that are good in ourselves; but the height, and 
the depth, and the length, and the breadth, of infinity—above all, 
the scope and continuity of thy being—who of us can fathom it? It 
is toward thyself that we are living, and for thyself that we are 
longing. Allother knowledge fails and seems worthless, if we may 
but stand in Zion and before God, and see thee as thou art, and feel 
the blessedness of thy life. This is the sum of all desire and 
aspiration. 

And now, O Lord! as thou hast been patient in days gone by, 
still be patient with us. Command all thy angels of mercy, that 
they bear an expression of the fullness of thy love to us. Speak to 
all that isin nature, that it may serve us as from the God of love, 
And we pray that we may thus, by thine instruments and by thy 
servants, be lifted up from stage to stage, from sphere to sphere, 
from glory to glory, until we stand in Zion and before God. 

Listen to the inaudible sigh to-day. To-day listen to the unspoken 
messages of the heart. Behold the things which we do not see 
ourselves. Behold even the things which we do not voluntarily 
show thee for fear or.for shame. Naked and open must we be be- 
fore Him with Whom we have to do. 

And grant unto every heart that is here, that succor, that assur- 
ance, that sympathy, that forgiving message of mercy, that 
inspiration of hope and of courage, which it needs. For some are 
sitting under the shadow. Thou art breaking over them great 
trouble. And yet, art not thou hid within the cloud that is round 
about them? We pray thee that they may not fear so much their 
outward trouble. Grant that they may have sensibility to the near 
approach of divine providence, and that they may have faith min- 
istered to them to know that the hand that smites them is the hand 
that was pierced for them. 

We pray that thou wiit be near to those that are in bereavements, 
and that are suffering acute anguish of heart. And when thy work 
hath had its way ; when thou hast caused them to suffer enough, 
establish them through suffering in faith and in joy. We ask not 
so much that the thorns may be removed, as that thy grace 
may be sufficient for every sufferer. 

Be with those that are full of trouble for others, Hast thou not 
known this burden, Lord Jesus? Hast thou not long enough carried 
the world in thy sympathy to understand and succor all those that 
by sympathy for others are burdened? And may they learn this 
lesson evermore. As thou didst carry the sorrows of men; as thou 
didst bear their sins; as their sicknesses were laid upon thee; as 
thou hast been the great Substitute and Nurse, bearing the world 


ur being. And 
our diminished 
whicl. we inter- 
he height, and 
lity—above all, 
n fathom it? It 
lf that we are 
hless, if we may 
ou art, and feel 
all desire and 


days gone by, 
of mercy, that 
ous. Speak to 
ie God of love, 
nts and by thy 
here to sphere, 
ore God. 

to the unspoken 
we do not see 
not voluntarily 
must we be be- 


cor, that assur- 
bf mercy, that 

For some are 
ver them great 
d that is round 
so much their 
ility to the near 
ave faith min- 
hem is the hand 


hb bereavements, 
when thy work 
suffer enough, 

We ask not 
hat thy grace 


ast thou not 
enough carried 

all those that 
hey learn this 
men; as thou 
pon thee; as 
ng the world 


LAW OF THE UNIVERSE. 397 


and all its creatures, even as the nurse bears the little child, so, O 
Lord! we beseech of thee that in our measure, and afar off, and ina 
diminished sphere, and with exceeding imperfection, we may in 
kind be like thee, and carry one anothers burdens, and bear one 
another's infirmities, and carry one another’s faults, and he patient 
with each other unto the end. May we long more for others than 
for ourselves ; looking not every man on his own things, but every 
man also on the things of another. 

And we pray that thou wilt grant thy blessing to rest upon all - 
those that have come up hither this mo:ning, to speak of thy mer- 
cies and of thy past kindnesses to them, May they not forget to 
give thanks who are blessed every da; May we not have a sense 
of need more than of thy bounty. May we seek more to see what 
God hath done for us, than to see that which we yet lack. 

And we pray that thou wilt bless all families that are accustomed 
to meet with us in this congregation. If any are withheld from the 
place where they would be, may that place where they are be a 
sanctuary. And may the Spirit of God’s love minister to every one 
of them. And we pray that the heavenly light may not be withheld 
from, but may abide upon every Christian family. 

And we pray that thou wilt this morning remember those that 
are sick, and those that wait with the sick, and those that are ab- 
sent from among us because they are bearing messages to the 
unsought and to the untaught. And remember those that are sent 
afar off on errands of thy providence. Grant that everywhere those 
whose hearts look wistfully this way to day, may be satisfied from 
the sanctuary of the Spirit of God. Bear messages of mercy and of 
peace and of blessing to them. ‘ 

We pray that thou wilt be with all, to-day, that shall preach the 
Gospel. May they be strong in body, and inspired of heart. to do 
the will of God, and their duty toward men. We pray, O Lord, that 
thou wilt unite thy people more with the Spirit of love, and that 
charity may pervade the Church of Christ upon earth. And let not 
malign power have any more its abiding place in thy temple and 
sanctuary. May the Spirit of the Lord come, and pure love be 
developed out of the Church, that the world may begin to see the 
dawn of its summer. Let thy kingdom come, we pray thee, in all 
intelligence, in all knowledge, in all justice, in wise laws, in pure 
and upright magistrates, in national peace, in national kindvesses 
of good neighborhood. Bring to an end, by the power of the 
truth, and by the uprising nature of the whole human family, all 
superstition, and all misruie, and all oppression, an‘ all wars,.and 


all cruelties, and all those great disasters that so long have ravaged 


the world. Let thy kingdom, in which dwelleth righteousness, 
come, and thy will be done upon earth 2s it is in heaven. 
We ask it for Christ Jesus’ sake. Amen. 


‘ 


a 1 WA 


Hy 
WE 
Hi} 


Hf 
Mil 


i 


CHAS. HADDON SPURGEON, AT 23 YEARS OF AGE. 


CHARLES HADDON SPURGEON. 


sce emememneet 


MEMOTR. 


g = born at Kelvedon, in Essex, England, on 10th June, 

iaateml} 1834, His father, whose calling as a layrnan is not 
generally known, occupies, on Sunday, the position of pas- 
tor of » small Independent Church in Essex; and his grand- 
father, the Reverend James Spurgeon, still officiates as_pas- 
tor of the Stambourne Independents, near Halsted, in the 
same county. This grandfather has come before the public 
as the author ofa biography of his grandson—a singular re- 
versal of the usual practice, by which the office of biography 
is performed by the children for the fathers. 

Shortly after his birth, young Spurgeon was removed to 
the house of this grandfather for his education. As a boy he 
was remarkable for truthfulness, seriousness, and piety. He 
was often found in the hayrack, or the manger, reading aloud, 
talking, or sometimes preaching, to his brothers and sisters.” 
‘He enjoyed the benefit of a good school education at Col- 
chester, and subsequently attended some classes at an agri- 
cultural college at Maidstone ; but his friends could not per- 
suade him to go to Oxford or Cambridge. He was satisfied, 
he said, that ke onght to be doing something more useful at 
his time of life than reading J.atin and Greek. In his six- 
teenth year he entered upon independent life by becoming 
usher.in a school. 

Within a few months afterward he took a very bold step. 


HE REV, CHARLES HADDON SPURGEON was 


402 CHARLES HADDON SPURGEON—MEMOIR. 


Doubts having arisen in his mind on the subject of baptismal 
regeneration, he resolved to quit the Independent Church; 
and neither his father nor his grandfather being able to con- 
trovert his arguments, he made a public profession of faith as 
a member of the Baptist denomination on May 3,1850. His 
emotion at going through the ceremony was increased by 
the reflection that it was his mother’s birth-day. 

His first sermon was preached a few months afterward, 
under the auspices of the “ Lay Preachers’ Association,” at a 
village near Cambridge. For some months afterward he 
hei alternately at some one of the villages round Cam- 

ridge, and at length received a call as pastor to the village 
of Waterbeach. Asthe number of church members was only 
forty, his salary was nominal, and he was still obliged to 
continue his duties as usher of a school to support himself: 
He walked. every day from Cambridge to Waterbeach, and 
back again; and under his ministrations the number of 
church members doubled, and people began to hear of the 
minister. 

In 1853, his reputation as a preacher having spread, he re- 
ceived a call to go to London, and commenced to preach at 
the New Park Street Church. After a few Sabbath minis- 
trations, the London congregation liked him so well that they 
invited him to become their regular preacher; and he ac- 
cordingly remaved to London in January, 1854. ; 

From this time Mr. Spurgeon’s fame was estabiished. 
The New Park Street Chapel being soon too small for the 
crowds who assembied to hear him, he preached in Exeter 
Hall, and filled the immense room in that building to over- 
flowing. In 1855 he went to Scotland and created a furore 
there. At Aberfeldy the bellman was sent round to cry, 
“Your auld playmate and auld acquaintance, Shony Carstair 
(the parson of the parish), wants to see you all at the Inde- 

endent Chapel, to hear my dear friend, the Rev. C. H. 

purgeon.” During the fall and winter of 1855 Mr. Spur- 
geon’s fame was ever on the increase, and his popularity ad- 
vanced steadily. His hearers were ccunted by the thousand, 
and his Sunday School scholars in equa! proportion. _Mean- 
time, he was not neglectful of himself. In January, 1856, he 
married Miss Susannah Thomson, of London, in the presence 
of thousands of his friends. ay. 


rR. 


of baptismal 
ent Church; 
able to con- 
on of faith as 
31850. His 
mcreased by 


s afterward, 
‘iation,” at a 
ifterward he 
round Cam- 
‘0 the village 
ders Was only 
ll obliged to 
port himself: 
erbeach, and 
» number of 
y hear of the 


pread, he re- 
to preach at 
bbath minis- 
ell that they 
; and he ac- 


estabiished, 
small for the 
bd in Exeter 
ing to over- 
ed a furore 
bund to cry, 
ony Carstair 
t the Inde- 
Rev. C. H. 
5 Mr. Spur- 
pularity ad- 
he thousand, 
on. Mean- 
'y, 1856, he 
he presence 


CHARLES HADDON SPURGEON—MEMOIR 403 


It was soon determined to erect an edifice, capable of ac- 
commodating the immense audiences who flocked to hear the 
vigorous and powerfu! preacher. A hundred thousand dol- 
lars were speedily collected, and the erection of the present 
edifice known as “ The Tabernacle,” was at once commenced, 
Meanwhile Mr. Spurgeon preached in any and every build- 
ing or inclosure where he could be heard and could be of 
service. Many of his most effective discourses were deliver- 
ed in the fields ; some in Exeter Hall, and some in the Sur- 
rey Musical Hall. One great discourse was uttered in the 
Crystal Palace to an immense audience of 30,000 people. 
On its completion the “Tabernacle” was consecrated with 
suitable services, and since that time Mr. Spurgeon has for 
the most part occupied the pulpit in this edifice, the building 
generally being well filled and the audiences numbering four 
or five thousand people. 

Of Mr. Spurgeon’s style the most striking peculiarity is 
his earnestness and homeliness. He is never afraid of saying 
anything, or of hurting any one’s feelings. He tells the truth 
straight out, no matter whom it inay offend; and he tells it 
in the plainest and most emphatic Saxon. He is at times 
humorous amd sarcastic. Some time since, when preaching 
before 10,000 people in the Surrey Hall, he announced the 
second lesson, and then paused, observing, “If I make a 
short pause between the lessons, it will give an opportunity 
to those persons who have their hats on to take them off in 
the house of God.” 

On another occasion he was preaching on the contrast be 
tween the sufferings of the damned in hell and the delights ot 
the blessed in heaven. When he came to that part of the 
discourse in which he draws a picture of the place of punish- 
ments, the orator’s voice was raised to the highest pitch, his 
tone was sonorous and awful, his manner so vivid that 
many of his hearers actually quivered with horror. In the 
midst of one of his most terrible periods he suddenly paused, 
and, without the least change of manner or tone, observed : 
“Tf those persons near the door continue their conduct I 
shall send for a policeman.” He then resumed his discourse 
on hell. 

Mr. Spurgeon divides popular favor among church goers 
in England with Dr. Punshon, the famous Wesleyan, Mr, 


/ 


a 


404 CHARLES HADDON SP” RGEON—MEMOIR. 


Spurgeon has never visited this continent, but his fame has 
crossed the ocean. Dr. Punshon has long been amongst us, 
and is now as well known here as at home. The three 
names of Punshon, Beecher and Spurgeon, are as familar in 
our mouths as household words. Our readers have, in this 
valume, an opportunity afforded them of comparing their re- 


spective styles and merits 


[OIR. 


t his fame has 
en amongst us, 
1e. The three 
eas familar in 
s have, in this 
aring their re- 


SPURGEHON’S SERMONS. 


I. 
TRAVAILING FOR SOULS. 


Of this sermon, a copy was sent to every Baptist and Congregational 
minister in Great Britain, and several letters have been received. acknow- 
ledging the quickening thereby received. May the like result be far more 
abundant in the New World. } 


‘AS SOON AS ZION TRAVAILED, SHE BROUGHT FORTH HER CHILDREN,”’— 
Isaiah 44 8, 


AISRAEL had fallen into the lowest condition, but 
wa) an inward yearning of heart was felt in the mic.t 
of God’s people for the return of the divine biecs- 
ing ; and nogooner had this anxious desire become intense, 
than God heard the voice of its cry, and the blessing 
came. It was so at the time of the restoration of the 
captives from Babylon, and it was most evidently so in 
the days of our Lord. A faithful company had continued 
still to expect the coming of the Lord’s anointed messenger; 
they waited till he should suddenly come in his temple; 
the twelve tribes, represented by an elect remnant, cried 
day and night unto the Most High, and when at last 
their prayers reached the fulness of vehemence, and their 
anxiety wrought in them the deepest agony of spirit, 
then the Messiah came; the light of the Gentiles, and 
the glory of Israel. Then began the age of blessedness 
in which the barren woman did keep house and become 


406 TRAVAILING FOR SOULS. 


the joyful mother of children. The Holy Ghost was 
given, and multitudes were born to the church of God, 
yea, we may say, a nation was born in a day. The wil- 
derness and the solitary place were glad for them, and the 
desert rejoiced and blossomed as the rose. We are not, 
however, about to enter into the particular application of 
our text as Isaiah uttered it: the great declarations of 
revelation are applicable to all cases, and, once true, they 
stand fast for ever and ever. Earnestly desiring that God 
may give a large spiritual blessing to his church this 
morning, through the subject to which my mind has been 
directed, I shall first ask you to note that in order to the 
obtaining of an increase to the church, there must be 
travail, and that, secondly, this travail is frequently fol- 
lowed by surprising results. I shall then have to show 
why both the travail and the result are desirable, and 
pronounce woe on those who stand back and hinder it, 
and a blessing on such as shall be moved by God’s own 
Spirit to travait for souls. 

J. It is clear from the text, ‘As soon as Zion travailed, 
she brought forth her children,” that THERE MUST BE THE 
TRAVAIL before there will be the spiritual birth. 

Let me first establish this fact from history. Before 
there has fallen a great benediction upon God’s people, 
it has been preceded by great searchings of heart. Israel 
was so oppressed in Egypt, that it. would have been very 
easy, and almost a natural thing, for the people to become 
so utterly crushed in spirit as to submit to-be hereditary 
bond-slaves, making the best they could of their miserable 
lot; but God would not have it so; he meant to brin 
them out “with a high hand and an outstretched arm.” 
Before, however, he began to work, he made them begin 
tocry. Their sighs and cries came up into the ears of 
God, and he stretched out his hand to deliver them. 
Doubtless, many a heart-rending appeal was made to 
heaven by mothers when their babes were torn from their 
breasts to bercast into the river. With what bitterness 
did they ask God to look upon his poor people Israel, 


a ee ee oe ee ee a a a a a ee ae 


ee ee 


y Ghost was 
rch of God, 
yy. The wil- 
hem, and the 
We are not, 
apvlication of 
sclarations of 
ace true, they 
ing that God 
; church this 
nind has been 
. order to the 
‘here must be 
requently fol- 
1ave to show 
fesirable, and 
nd hinder it, 
y Gods own 


ion travailed, 
MUST BE THE 
th. 
ory. Before 
xod’s people, 
eart. Israel 
e been very 
ble to become 
e hereditary 
eir miserable 
ant to bring 
tched arm.” 
them begin 
the ears of 
sliver them. 
as made to 
from their 
t bitterness 
ople Israel, 


TRAVAILING FOR SOULS. 407 


and avenge them of their oppressors. The young men 
bowed under the cruel yoke and groaned, while hoary 
sires, smarting under ignominious lashes from the task- 
master, sighed and wept before the God of Israel. The 
whole nation cried, “O God visit us; God of Abraham, 
of Isaac, and of Jacob, remember thy covenant, and 
deliver us.” This travail brought its resu't; for the Lord 
smote the field of Zoan with mighty plagues, and forth 
from under the bondage of the sons of Misriam, the 
children of Israel marched with joy. 

As we shall not have time to narrate many instances, 
let us take a long leap in history to the days of David. 
The era of theson of Jesse was evidently a time of relig- 
ious revival. God was honored and his service maintained 
in the midst of Judea’s land in the days of the royal bard; 
but it is clear to readers of the Scriptures that David was 
the subject of spiritual throes and pangs of the most in- 
tense kind. His bosom throbbed and heaved like that of a 
man made fit: be the leader of a great revival. What 
yearnings he had! He thirsted after God, atter the living 
God! hat petitions he poured forth that God would 
visit Zion, and make the vine which he had planted to 
flourish onceagain. Even when his ownsins pressed heavily 
upon him, he could not end his personal confession without 
entreating the Lord to build the walls of Jerusalem, and 
to do good in his good pleasure unto Zion. Now, David 
was only the mouth of hundreds of others, who with equal 
fervency cried unto God that the blessing might rest upon 
his people. There was much soul-travail in Israel and 
Judah, and the result was that the Lord was glorified, and 
true religion flourished. 

Remember also the days of Josiah, the king. You 
know well how the book of the law was found neglected 
in the temple, and when it was brought before the king, he 
rent his clothes, for he saw that the nation had revolted, 
and that wrath must come upon it to the uttermost. The 
young king’s heart, which was tender, for he teared God, 
Was ready to break with anguish to think of the misery 


TRAVAILING FOR SOULS. 


that would come upon his people on account of their sins, 
Then there came a glorious reformation which purged the 
land of idols, and caused the passover to be observed as 
never before. Travails of heart among the godly pro. 
duced the delightful change. 

It was the same with the work of Nehemiah. His book 
begins with a description of the travail of his heart. He 
was a patriot, a man of nervous, excitable temperament, 
and keen sensibility of God’s honor, and when his soul 
had felt great bitterness and longing, then he arose to 
build, and a blessing rested on his eflorts, 

In theearly dawn of Christian history, there was a pre. 
paration of the church before it received an increase. Look 
at the obedient disciples sitting in the upper room, waiting 
with anxious hope; every heart there had been ploughed 
with anguish by the death of the Lord, each one was intent 
to receive the promised boon of the Spirit. There, with 
one heart and one mind, they tarried, but not without 
wrestling prayer, and so the Comforter was given, and 
three thousand souls were given also. 

The like living zeal and vehement desire have always 
been poe in the Church of God before any season 
of refreshing. Think not that Luther was the only ma 
that wrought the Reformation. There were hundreds who 
sighed and cried in secret in the cottages of the Black For. 
est, in the homes of Germany, and on the hills of Switwer 
land. There were hearts bieaking for the Lord’s appearing 
in strange places; they might have been found in the pal. 
laces of Spain, in the dungeons of the Inquisition, among 
the canals of Holland, and the green lanes of England. 
Women, as they hid their Bibles, lest their lives should be 
forfeited, cried out in spirit, “O God, how long?” Ther 
were pains as of a woman in travail, in secret places ther 
were tears and bitter lamentations, on the high places o 
the field there were mighty striving of spirit, and so af 
length there came that grand revulsion which made the 
Vatican to rock and reel from itsfoundation to its pinnacle 


There has been evermore in the history of the church, th: jf 


travail before there has been the result, 


Yap es eee ee 


hee 


nt of their sins, 
1ich purged the 
be observed as 
the godly pro- 


niah. His book 
his heart. He 
e temperament, 
when his soul 
1en he arose to 


there was a pre- 
a increase. Look 
er room, waiting 
d been ploughed 
sh one was intent 
it. There, with 
but not without 
- was given, and 


sire have always 
efore any season 
as the only man 
bre hundreds who 
of the Black For: 
e hills of Swituer 
Lord’s appearing 
found in the pal: 
hquisition, among 
nes of England. 
sir lives should be 
w long?” Ther 


he high places 0 
spirit, and 80 al 
which made the 
on to its pinnacle 


ecret places ther 


bf the church, th: & 


TRAVAILING FOR SOULS, 409 
And this, dear friends, while it is true on the large 
scale, is true also in every individual case. A man with 
no sensibility or compassion for other men’s souls, may 
accidentally be the means of conversion; the good word 
which he utters will not cease to be good because the 
speaker had no right to declare God’s statutes. The bread 
and meat which were brought to Elijah were not less nour- 
ishing because the ravens brought them, but the ravens re- 
mained ravens still. A hard-hearted man may say a good 
thing which (tod will bless, but, as arule, those who bring 
souls to Christ are those who first of all have felt an agony 
of desire that souls should be saved. This is imaged to us 
in our Master’s character. He is the great Saviour of men; 
but before he could save others, he learned in their flesh to 
sympathize with them. He wept over Jerusalem, he sweat 
il drops of blood in Gethsemane; he was, and is, a 

igh priest who is touched with the feeling of. our infirmi- 
ties. As the Captain of our salvation, in bringing many 
sons unto glory he was made perfect by sufferings. Even 
Christ went not forth to preach until he had spent nights 
inintercessory prayer, and uttered strong cryings and tears 
for the salvation of his hearers. His ministering servants 
who have been most useful, have always been eagerly 
desirous to be so. If any minister can be satisfied wihods 
conversions, he shall have no conversions. God will not 
force usefulness on any man. It is only when our heart 
breaks to see men saved, that we shall be likely to see 
sinners’ hearts broken. The secret of success lies in all- 
consuming zeal, all subduing travail forsouls. Read the 
sermons of Wesley and of Whitfield, and what is there in 
them? Itis nosevere criticism to say that they are scarcely 
worthy to have survived, and yet those sermons wrought 
marvels, and well they might, for both preachers could 
y truly say— 


’ The love of Christ doth me constrain 
To seek the wandering souls of men; 
With cries, entreaties, tears, to save, 

To snatch them from the fiery wave.” 


410 TRAVAILING FOR SOULS. 


In order to understand such preaching, you need to see 
and hear the man, you want his tearful eye, his glowing 
countenance, his pleading tone, his debs, Manes Thave 
heard of a great preacher who objected to having his ser. 
mons printed, “ Because,” said he, “ you cannot print me,” 
That observationis very much to the point. A soul-winner 
throws himself into what he says. As I have sometimes 
said, we must ram ourselves into our cannons, we must fire 
ourselves at our hesvers, and when we do this, then, by 
God’s grace, their hearts are often carried by storm. Do 
any of you desire your children’s conversions? You shall 
have them saved when you agonize for them. Many a 
parent who has been privileged to see his son walking in 
the truth, wil) tell you that ‘before the blessing came he 
had spent many how in prayer and in earnest pleadin 
with God, and then it was that the Lord visited his chil 
and renewed hissoul. I have heard of a young man who 
had grown up and left the parental roof, and through evil 
influences, had been enticed into holding sceptical views. 
His father and mother were both earnest Christiaus, and 
it almost broke their hearts to see their son so opposed to 
the Redeemer. On one occasion they induced him to go 
with them to hear a celebrated minister. He accompanied 
them simply to please them, and for no hi¢her motive. 
The sermon happened to be upon the glories of heaven. 
Tt was a very extraordinary sermon, and was calculated 
to make every Christian in the audience to leap for joy. 
The young man was much gratified with the eloquence of 
the preacher, but nothing more; he gave him credit for 
superior oratorical ability, and was interested in the ser- 
mon, but felt none of its power. He chanced to look at 
his father and mother, during the discourse, and was sur- 
prised to see them weeping. He could not imagine why 
they, being Christian people, should sit and weep under a 
sermon which was most jubilant in its strain. W hen he 
reached home, he said, “ H'ather, we have had a capital 
sermon, but I could not understand what could make you 
sit there and cry, and my mother too?” His father said, 


ha 


PPS ares gy pat oy Pag gee te nacre ntl a a RO RE eo Eines emi ae 


u need to see 
, his glowing 
ieart. Ihave 
aving his ser- 
10t print me.” 
\ soul-winner 
ve sometimes 
, we must fire 
this, then, by 
storm. Do 
32 Youshall 
em. Manya 
on walking in 
sing came he 
nest, ghee 
sited his chil 
yung man who 
d through evil 
eptical views. 
hristiaus, and 
so opposed to 
ced him to go 
b accompanied 
inher motive. 
es of heaven. 
yas calculated 
p leap for Joy. 
e eloquence of 
him credit for 
d in the ser- 
red to look at 
and was sur: 
imag ine why 
weep under 4 
n. When he 
ad a capital 
ld make you 
is father said, 


TRAVAILING FOR SOULS. 411 


“My dear son, I certainly had no reason to weep concern- 
ing beset nor your mother, but I could not help think- 
ing all through the sermon about you, for alas, I have no 
hope that you will be a partaker in the bright joys which 
await the righteous. It breaks my heart to think that 
you will be shut out of heaven.” His mother said, “The 
very same thoughts crossed my mind, and the more the 
preacher spoke of the joys of the saved, the more I sor- 
rowed for my dear boy that he should never know what 
they were.” That touched the young man’s heart, led him 
toseek his father’s God, and before long he was at the same 
communion table, rejoicing in the God and Saviour whom 
his parents worshipped. The travail comes before the 
bringing forth; the earnest anxiety, the deep emotion 
within, precede our being made the instruments of the 
salvation of others. 

I think I have established the fact; now for a minute 
or two let me show you the reason forit. Why is it that 
there must be this anxiéty before desirable results are 
arte For answer, it might suffice us to say that God 

as so appointed it. It is theorderof nature. Thechild 
is not born into the world without the sorrows of the 
mother, nor is the bread, which sustains life procured from 
the earth without toil: “In the sweat of thy tace shalt 
thou eat bread,” was a part ofthe primeval curse. Now 
as it is in the natural, so is it in the spiritual; there shall 
not come the blessing we seek, without first of all the 
earnest yearning for it. Why, it is so even in ordinary 
business. We say, ‘ No swea: no sweet,” ‘ No pains no 
gains,” ‘No mill no meal.” If there be no labor there 
shall be no profit. He that would be rich must toil for 
it; he that would acquire fame must spend and be spent 
to win it. It is everso. There must ever be the travail 
and then the desire cometh. God has 80 appointed it: 
let us accept the decree. 

But better still, he has ordained this for our good. If 
souls were given us without any effort, anxiety or prayer, 
it would be our loss to have it so, because the anxieties 


412 TRAVAILING FOR SOULS, 


which throb within a compassionate spirit exercise his 
hgh they produce grateful love to God; they try his 
aith in the power of God to save others ; they drive him 
to the mercy-seat; they strengthen his patience and 
perseverance, and every grace within tae man is educated 
and increased by his travail for souls, As labor is nowa 
blessing, so also is soul-travail; men are fashioned more 
fully into the likeness of Christ thereby, and the whole 
church is by the same emotion quickened into energy. 
The fire of our own spiritual life is fanned by that same 
breath which our prayers invite to come from the four 
winds to breathe upon the slain. Besides, dear friends, 
the zeal that God excites within us is often the means of 
effecting the purpose which we desire. After all, God 
does not give conversions to eloquence, but to Acart. The 
power in the hand of God’s Spirit for conversions is heart 
someng contact with heart. Truth from the heart goes 
to the heart. This is God’s battle-axe and weapons of war 


in his crusade. He is pleased to use the yearnings, long- 


ings, and sympathies of Christian men, as the means of 
compelling the careless to think, constraining the hardened 
to feel, and driving the unbelieving to consider. I have 
little confidence in elaborate speech and polished sentences, 
as the means of reaching men’s hearts; but I have great 
faith in that simp.. minded Christian woman, who must 
have souls converted or she will weep her eyes out over 
them; and in that humble Christian who prays day and 
night in secret, and then avails himself of every opportu- 
nity to address a loving word to sinners. The emotion 
we feel, and the affection we bear, are the most powerful 
implements of soul-winning. God the Holy Ghost usually 
breaks hard hearts by tender hearts. 

Besides, the travail qualifies for the proper taking care 
of the offspring. God does not commit his new-born 
children to people who do not care to see conversions. 
If he ever allows them to fall into such hands, they 
suffer very serious loss thereby. Who isso fit to encourage 
a new-born believer as the man who first anguished before 


exercise his 
they try his 
ey drive him 
atience and 
1 is educated 
bor is now a 
hioned more 
d the whole 
into energy. 
yy that same 
yom the four 
dear friends, 
the means of 
fter all, God 
> heart. The 
rsions is heart 
the heart goes 
eapons of war 
arnings, long- 
the means of 
the hardened 
sider. I have 
hed sentences, 
I have great 
an, who must 
eyes out over 
rays day and 
very opportu- 
The emotion 
ost powerful 
Ghost usually 


er taking care 
his new-born 
b conversions. 

hands, they 
tto encourage 
ruished before 


TRAVAILING FOR SOULS. 418 


the Lord for his conversion? Those you have wept over 
and prayed for you will be sure to encourage and assist. 
The church that never travailed, should God send her a 
hundred converts, would be unfit to train them; she 
would not know what to do with little children, and 
would leave them to much suffering, Let us thank God, 
brethren, if he has given us any de ree of the earnest 
anxiety and sympathy, which i soul-winning men 
and women, and let us ask to have more; for, in propor- 
tion as we have it, we shall be qualified to be the instru- 
ments in the hand of the Spirit, of nursing and cherishing 
God’s sons and daughters. 

Once more, there is a great benefit in the law which 
makes travail necessary to spiritual birth, because it 
secures all the glory to God. If you want to be lowered 
in your own esteem, try to convert achild. I would like 
those brethren who believe so much in free will, and the 
natural goodness of the human heart, to try some children 
that I could bring to them, and see whether they could 
break their hearts and make them love the Saviour. 
Why, sir, you never think yourself so great a fool as after 
trying in your own strength to bring a sinner to the 
Saviour. Oh! how often have I come back deteated from 
arguing with an awakened person whom I have sought 
to comfort: I did think I had some measure of skill in 
handling sorrowful cases, but I have been compelled to 
say to myself, “ What a simpleton I am! God the Holy 
Ghost must take this case in hand, for I am foiled.” 
When one has tried in a sermon to reach a certain person 
who is living in sin, you learn afterwards that he enjoyed 
the sermon which he ought to have smarted under; then, 

ou say, “Ah, now I see what a weak worm I am, and 
if good be done, God shall have the glory.” Your longing, 
then, that others should be saved, and your vehemence 
of spirit, shall secure to God all the glory of his own 
work; and this is what the Lord is aiming at, for his 
gory a will not give to another, nor his praise to an arm 
of flesh. 


NQ 


414 TRAVAILING FOR SOULS. 


And now, having established the fact, and shown the 
reasons for it, let us notice how this travail shows atself. 

Usually when God intends greatly to bless a church, 
it will begin in this way :—Two or three persons in it are 
distressed at the low state of affairs, and become troubled 
even to anguish. Perhaps they do not speak to one 
another, or know of their common grief, but they begin 
to pray with flaming desire and untiring importunity. 
The passion to see the church revived rules them. They 
think of it when they go to rest, they dream of it on their 
bed, they muse on it in the streets. This one thing eats 
them up. They suffer great heaviness and continual 
sorrow in heart for perishing sinners; they travail in 
birth for souls. I have happened to become the centre 
of certain brethren in this church; one of them said to 
me the other day, ‘‘O sir, I pray day and night for God 
to prosper our church; I long to see greater things ; God 
is blessing us, but we want much more.” I saw the deep 
earnestness of the man’s soul, and I thanked him and 
thanked God heartily, thinking it to be a sure sign of a 
coming blessing. Sometime after, another friend, who 
probably now hears me speak, but who did not know any 
thing about the other, felt the same yearning, and must 
needs let me know it; he too is anxious, longing, begging, 
crying, for a revival ; and thus from three or four quarters 
I have had the same message, and I feel hopeful because 
of these tokens for good. When the sun rises the moun- 
tain tops first catch the light, and those who constantly 
live near to God will be the first to feel the influence of 
the coming ee The Lord give me a dozen impor- 
tunate pleaders and lovers of souls, and by his grace we 
will shake all London from end to end yet. The work 
would go on without the mass of you, Christians; many 
of you only hinder the march of the army; but give us 
a dozen lion-like, lamb-like men, burning with intense 
love to Christ and souls, and nothing will be impossible 
to their faith. The most of us are not worthy to unloose 
the shoe-latches of ardent saints, I often-feel I am not 


1 shown the 
hows itself. 
3s a church, 
ons in it are 
me troubled 
peak to one 
; they begin 
importunity. 
hem. They 
of it on their 
e thing eats 
nd continual 
ay travail in 
e the centre 
them said to 
ght for God 
things ; God 
saw the deep 
ced him and 
re sign of a 
friend, who 
hot know any 
o, and must 
ng, begging, 
four quarters 
eful because 
s the moun- 
0 constantly 
influence of 
lozen impor- 
is grace we 
Fhe work 
ians; many 
but give us 
vith intense 
impossible 
ly to unloose 
1 I am not 


TRAVAILING FOR SOULS. 


so myself, but I aspire and long to be reckoned among 
them. Oh, may God give us this first sigh of the travail 
in the earnest ones and twos. 

By degrees the individuals are drawn together by 
sacred affinity, and the prayer-meetings become very 
different. The brother who talked twenty minutes of 
what he called prayer, and yet never asked for a single 
thing, gives up his oration and falls to pleading with 
many tears and broken sentences: while the friend who 
used to relate his experience and go through the doctrines 
of grace, and call that a prayer, forgets that rigmarole and 
begins agonizing before the throne. And not only this, 
but little knots here and there come together in their 
cottages, aud in their little rooms cry mightily to God. 
The result will be that the minister, even if he does not 
know of the feeling in the hearts of his people, will grow 
fervent himself. He will preach more evangelically, 
more tenderly, more earnestly. He will be no longer 
formal, or cold, or stereotyped ; he will be all alive. 
Meanwhile, not with the preacher only will be the bless- 
ing, but with his hearers who love the Lord. One will 
be trying a plan for getting in the young people ; another 
will be looking after the strangers in the aisles, who come 
only now and then. One brother will make a vehement 
attempt to preach the gospel at the corner of the street ; 
another will open a room down a dark court; another 
will visit lodging-houses and hospitals; all sorts of holy 
plans will be invented, and zeal will break out in many 
directions. All this will be spontaneous, nothing will be 
forced. If you want to get up a revival, as. the term is, 
you can do it, just as you can grow tasteless strawberries 
in winter, by artifical heat. There are ways and means 
of doing that kind of thing, but the genuine work of God 
needs no such planning and scheming; it is altogether 
spontaneous. Ifyou see a snow-drop next February in 
your garden, you will feel persuaded that s;ring is on the 
way ; the artificial-flower maker could put as many snow- 
drops there as you please, but that would be no index of 


416 TRAVAILING FOR SOULS. 


coming spring. So you may get up an apparent zeal 
which will be no proof of God’s blessing; but when 
fervor comes of itself, without human direction or control, 
then is it of the Lord. When men’s hearts heave and 
break, like the mould of the garden under the influence 
of the reviving life which lay buried there, then in very 
deed a benediction is on the way. Travailisno mockery, 
but a real agony of the whole nature. May such be seen 
a this our church, and throughout the whole Israel of 
od. 

II. Now, with great brevity, let us consider that Tur 
RESULT IS OFTEN VERY sURPRISING. It is frequently sur- 
prising for rapidity. “As soon as Zion travailed, she 
brought forth her children.” God’s works are not tie 
by time. The more spiritual a force is the less it lies 
within the chains of time. The electric current, which 
has a greater nearness to the spiritual than the grosser 
forms of materialism, is inconceivably rapid from that 
very reason, and by it time is all but annihilated. The 
influences of the Spirit of God are a force most spiritual, 
and more quick than any thing beneath the sun. As 
soon as we agonize in soul the Holy Spirit can, if he 

leases, convert the person for whom we have pleaded. 
hile we are yet speaking he hears, and before we call 
he answers. Some calculate the expected progress of a 
church by arithmetic; and I think I have heard of 
arithmetical sermons in which there have been ingenious 
calculations as to how many missionaries it would take to 
convert the world, and how much cash would be de- 
manded. Now, there is no room here for the application 
of mathematics; spiritual forces are not calculable by an 
arithmetic which is most at home in the material uni- 
verse. A truth which is calculated to strike the mind of 
one man to-day may readily enough produce a like effect 
upon a million minds to-morrow. The preaching which 
moves one heart needs not be altered to tell upon ten 
taousand. With God’s Spirit our present instrumentali- 
ties will suffice to win the world to Jesus; without him, 


parent zeal 
; but when 
n or control, 
s heave and 
he influence 
hen in very 
no mockery, 
such be seen 
ole Israel of 


ler that THE 
quently sur- 
availed, she 
are not tie 
> less it lies 
rrent, which 
n the grosser 
id trom that 
ilated. The 
ost spiritual, 
he sun. As 
‘it can, if he 
ave pleaded. 
pfore we call 
progress of a 
ve heard of 
en ingenious 
vould take to 
ould be de- 
e application 
rulable by an 
material uni- 
> the mind ot 
a like effect 
ching which 
ell upon ten 
strumentali- 
without him, 


TRAVAILING FOR SOULS. 417 


ten thousand times as much apparent force would be only 
somuch weakness. The spread of truth, moreover, is 
not reckonable by time. During the ten years which 
ended in 1870, such wondrous changes were wrought 
throughout the world that no prophet would have been 
believed had he foretold them. Reforms have been ac- 
complished in England, in the United States, in Germany, 
in Spain, in Italy, which according to ordinary reckon- 
ing, would have occupicd at least one hundred years. 
Things which concern the mind cannot be sabjected to 
those regulations of time which govern steamboats and 
railways; in such matters God’s messengers are flames of 
fire. The Spirit of God is able to operate upon the minds 
of men instantaneously: witness the case of Paul. Be- 
tween now and to-morrow morning he could excite holy 
thought in all the minds of all the thousand millions ot 
the sons of Adam; and if prayer were mighty enough, 
and strong enough, why should it not be done on some 
bright day ? We are not straitened in him, we are 
straitened in our own bowels. All the fault lies there. 
Oh for the travail that would produce immediate results. 
» But theresult is surprising, not only for its rapidity, but 

for the greatness of it. It is said, ‘ Shall a nation be 
born at once?” As soon as ever Zion. was in distress con- 
cerning her children, tens of thousands came and built up 
J ramets: and re-established her fallen state. So, in 
answer to prayer, God not only bestows speedy blessings, 
but great blessings. There were fervent prayers in that 
upper room “ before the day of Pentecost had fully come,” 
and what a great answer it was when, after Peter’s sermon, 
some three thousand were ready to confess their faith in 
Christ, and to be baptifed. Shall we never see such things 
again? Is the Spirit straitened? Has his arm waxed 
short? Nay, verily, but we clog and hinder him. He 
cannot do any mighty work here because of our unbelief ; 

and, if our unbelief were cast out, and if prayer went up 

to God with eagerness, and vehemence, and importunity, 

then would a blessing descend so copious as to amaze us 


418 TRAVAILING FOR SOULS. 


But enough of this, for I must ngeds pass on to the next 
point. 

III. Tuts TRAVAIL AND ITS RESULT ARE ABUNDANTLY DE- 
SIRABLE; pre-eminently desirable at this hour. The world 
is perishing for lack of knowledge. Did any one among 
us ever lay Chinaon his heart? Your imagination cannot 
grapple with the population of that mighty empire, with- 
out Ged, without Christ, strangers to the commonwealth 
of Israel. But it is not China alone; there are other vast 
nations lying in darkness; the great serpent hath coiled 
himself around the globe, and who shall set the world 
free from him ? Reflect upon this one city with its three 
millions. What sin the moon sees! What sin the Sab- 
bath sees! Alas for the transgressions of this wicked 
city. Baby‘on of old could not have been worse than 
London is, nor so guilty, for she had not the light that 
London has received. Brethern, there is no hope for 
China, no hope for the world, no hope for our own city, 
while the church is sluggish and lethargic. Through the 
church the blessing is usually bestowed. Christ multiplies 
the bread, and gives it to the disciples; the multitudes 
can only get it through the disciples. Oh, it is time, it is 
high time that the churches were awakened to seek the 
good of dying myriads. Moreover, brethren, the powers 
of evil are ever active. We may sleep, but Satan sleepeth 
never. The church’s plough hes yonder, rusting in the 
furrow ; do you notsee it to your shame? But the plough 
of Satan goes from end to end of his great field, he leaves 
no headland, but he ploughs deep while sluggish churches 
sleep. May we be stirred as we see the awful activity of 
evil spirits and persons who are under their sway. How 
industriously pernicious literature is spread abroad, and 
with what a zeal do men seek for fresh ways of sinning. 
He is eminent among men who can invent fresh songs to 
gratify the lascivious tongue, or find new spectacles to de- 
light unclean eyes. O God, are thine enemies awake, and 
only thy friends asleep? O Sufferer, once bathed in bloody 
sweat in Gethsemane, is there not one of the twelve awake 


to the next 


DANTLY DE- 
The world 
one among 
ition cannot 
mpire, with- 
1monwealth 
‘e other vast 
hath coiled 
t the world 
ith its three 
sin the Sab- 
this wicked 
worse than 
e light that 
no hope for 
ar own city, 
hrough the 
st multiplies 
multitudes 
is time, it is 
to seek the 
, the powers 
tan sleepeth 
sting in the 
the plough 
d, he leaves 
sh churches 
l activity of 
way. How 
abroad, and 
of sinning. 
psh songs to 
acles to de- 
awake, and 
rd in bloody 
velve awake 


TRAVAILING FOR SOULS. 419 


but Judas? Are they all asleep except the traitor? May 
God arouse us for his infinite mercy’s sake. 

‘_ Besides this, my brethren, when a church is not serving 
God, mischief is brewing within herself. While she is 
not bringing others in, her own heart is becoming weak 
in its pulsations, and her entire constitution is a prey to 
decline. The church must either bring forth auldeen 
unto God, or else die of consumption : she has no alterna- 
tive but that. A church must either be fruitful or rot, 
and of all things, a rotting church is the most offensive. 
Wouid God we could bury our dead churches out of our 
sight, as Abraham buried Sarah, for above ground they 
breed a pestilence of scepticism; for men say, “ Is this 
religion ?” and taking it to beso, they forego true religion 
altogether. 

And then, worst of all is, God is not glorified. Ifthere 
be no yearning of heart in the church, and no conver- 
sions, where is the travail of the Redeemer’s soul? Where, 
Immanuel, where are the trophies of thy terrible conflict ? 
Where are the jewels for thy crown? Thou shalt have 
thine own, thy Father’s will shall not be frustrated; thou 
shalt be adored; but as yet we see it not. Hard are 
men’s hearts, and they will not love thee ; unyielding are 
their wills, and they will not own thy sovereignty. Oh! 
weep because Jesus is not honored. The foul oath still 
eurdles our blood as we hear it, and blasphemy usurps 
the place of grateful song. Oh! by the wounds and 
bloody sweat, by the cross and nails, and spear, I beseech 
you followers of Christ, be in earnest, that Jesus Christ’s 
name may be known and loved through the earnest 
agonizing endeavors of the Christian church. 

IV. And now I must cone near to a close, by, in the 
fourth place, noticing THE WOE WHICH WILL SURELY COME 
TO THOSE WHO HINDER THE TRAVAIL OF THE CHURCH, and so 
prevent the bringing forth of her children. An earnest 
spirit cannot complete its exhortations to zeal without 
pronouncing a denunciation upon the indifferent. What 
said the heroine of old who had gone forth against the 


20 TRAVAILING FOR SOULS. 
enemies of Israel, when she remembered coward spirits ? 
“Curse ye Meroz, saith the angel of the Lord, curse ye 
bitterly the inhabitants theréof; because they came not 
to the help of the Lord against the mighty.” Somesuch 
curse will assuredly come upon every professing Christian 
who is backward in helping the church in the day of her 
soul’s travail. And who are they that hinder her? [ 
answer, every worldly Christian hinders the progress of 
the gospel. Every member of a church who js living in 
secret sin, who is tolerating in his heart any thing that he 
knows to be wrong, who is not seeking eagerly his own 
personal sanctification, is to that extent hindering the 
work of the Spirit of God. ‘“ Be ye clean that bear the 
vessels of the Lord,” for to the extent that we maintain 
known unholiness, we restrain the Spirit. He cannot 
work by us as long as any conscious sin is tolerated. It 
is not overt breaking of commandments that I am now 
speaking of, brethren, but I include worldliness also—a 
care for carnal things, and a carelessness about spiritual 
things, having enough grace just to make us hope that 
you are a Christian, but not enough to prove you are; 
bearing a shrivelled apple here and there on the topmost 
bough, but not much fruit; this I mean, this partial bar- 
renness, not complete enough to condemn, yet complete 
enough to restrain the blessing, this robs the treasury of 
the church, and hinders her progress. O brethren, if any 
of youare thus described, repent and do your first works ; 
and God help you to be foremost in proportion as you 
have been behind. 

They are also guilty who distract the mind of the 
church from the subject in hand. Anybody who calls 
off the thoughts of the church from soul-saving is a mis- 
chief-maker. I have heard it said of a minister, “He 
greatly influences the politics of the town.” Well, it is 
a very doubtful good in my mind, a very doubtful good 
indeed. Ifthe man, keeping to his own calling of preach- 
ing the gospel, happens to influence these meaner things, 
it is-well, but any Christian minister who thinks that he 


—ZJ AG Mea itll 


oF et on Bl oo eo -- ee ee ee 


he 
Port 


rd spirits ? 
d, curse ye 
y came not 
Some such 
g Christian 
day of her 
ler her? I 
progress of 
is living in 
ning that he 
rly his own 
ndering the 
at bear the 
ve maintain 
He cannot 
lerated. It 
t I am now 
ness also—a 
ut spiritual 
is hope that 
pve you are; 
the topmost 
partial bar- 
ret complete 
treasury of 
hren, if any 
first works ; 
tion as you 


iind of the 
y who calls 

is @ mis- 
ister, “ He 
Well, it is 
nbtful good 
p of preach- 
ner things, 
iks that he 


TRAVAILING FOR SOULS. 421 


can do two things well, is mistaken. Let him mind soul- 
bat and not turn a Christian church into a ae er 
club. Let us fight out our politics somewhere else, but 
not inside the church of God. There our one business is 
soul-winning, our one banner is the cross, our one leader 
is the crucified King. Inside the church there may be 
minor things that take off the thoughts of men from 
seeking souls,—little things that can be made beneath 
the eye that is microscopical, to swell into great offences. 
Oh, my brethren, let us, while souls are perishing, waive 
personal diiferences. “It must need be, ‘that offences 
come, but woe unto him by whom the offence cometh;” 
but, after all, what can there*be that is worth takin 
notice of, compared with glorifying Christ. It our Lor 
and Master would be honored by your being a door-mat 
for his saints to wipe their feet on, you would be honored 
to be in the position; and if there shall come glory to 
God by your patient endurance, even of insult. and con- 
tumely,.be glad in your heart that you are permitted to 
be nothing that Christ may be all in all. e must by 
no means turn aside to this or that; not even golden 
apples must tempt us in this race! There lies the mark, 
and until it is reached, we must never pause, but onward 
press, for Ohrist’s cause and crown. 

Above all, my brethren, we shall be hindering the 
travail of the church if we do not share in it. Many 
church members think that if they do nothing wrong, 
and make no trouble, then they are all right. Not at 
all, sir; not at all. Here is a chariot, and we are all 
engaged to drag it. Some of you do not put out your 
hands to pull; well, then, the rest of us have to labor so 
much the more; and the worst of it is we have to draw 
you also. While you do not add to the strength which 
draws, you increase the weight that is to be drawn. It 
is all very well for you to say, “ But I do not hinder ” ; 
you do hinder, you cannot help hindering. If a man’s 
leg does not help him in walking, it certainly hinders 


him; Oh, I cannot bear to think of it. That I should 


429 TRAVAILING FOR SOULS. 


be a hindrance to my own soul’s growth is bad indeed; 
but that I should stand in the way of the people of God 
and cool their courage, and damp their ardor—my Mas. 
ter, let it never be! Svoner let me sleep among the clods 
of the valley, than be a hindrance to the meanest work 
that is done for thy name. 

V. And now I shall close, not with this note of woe, 
but with A worp oF BLEssINe. Depend upon it there 
shall come a great blessing to any of you who feel the 
soul travail that brings souls to God. Your own heart 
will be watered. You know the old illustration, so often 
used that it is now almost hackneyed, of the two travel- 
lers, who passed a man ffozen in the snow, and thought 
to be dead ; and the one said, “I have enough to do to 
keep myself alive, I will hasten on ;” but the other said, 
“J cannot pass a fellow-creature while there is the least 
breath in him.” He stooped down and began to warm 
the frozen man by rubbing him with great vigor ; and at 
last the poor fellow opened his eyes, came back to life and 
animation, and walked along with the man who had 
restored him to life; and what think you was one of the 
first sights they saw? it was the man whoso selfishly took 
care of himself frozen to death. The good Samaritan had 

reserved his own life by rubbing the other man; the 
riction he had given had caused the action of his own 
blood, and kept him in vigor. You will bless yourselves 
if you bless others. 
oreover, will it not be a joy to feel that you have 
done what you could? It is always well ona pha 
evening for a preacher to feel when he gets home, “ Well, 
I may not have preached as I could wish, but I have 
preached the Lord Jesus and dati forth all my heart 
and I could do no more.” He sleeps soundly on that. 
After a day spent in doing all the good you, can, even if 
you have met with no success, you can lean your head on 
Christ’s bosom and fall asleep, feeling that if souls be not 
gathered, yet you have your reward. If men are lost, it 
1s some satisfaction to us that they were not lost because 


bad indeed ; 
ple of God 
or—my Mas- 
ong the clods 
neanest work 


note of woe, 
upon it there 
who feel the 
yur own heart 
ation, 80 often 
1e two travel- 
, and thought 
ugh to do to 
the other said, 
re is the least 
evan to warm 
vigor ; and at 
ack to life and 
nan who had 
vas one of the 
o selfishly took 
amaritan had 
her man; the 
on of his own 
less yourselves 


that you have 
on a Sunda 
home, “ Well, 


h all my heart 
undly: on that. 
bu, can, even if 
your head on 
if souls be not 
hen are lost, it 
rt lost because 


ish, but I have - 


TRAVAILING FOR SOULS. 423 


we failed to tell them the way of salvation. But what a 
comfort it will be to yor -upposing you should be success- 
ful in bringing some to Uhrist. Why it will set all the 
bells of your soul ringing. There isno rreater joy except 
the joy of our own communion with Christ, than this of 
bringing others to trust the Saviour. Oh seek this joy 
and pant after it. And what if you should see your own 
children converted? You have long hoped for it, but 
your hopes have been disappointed ; God means to give 
you that choice blessing when you live more nearly to 
him yourself. Yes, wife, the husband’s heart wiil be won 
when your heart is perfectly consecrated. Yes, mother, 
the girl shall love the Saviour when you love him better. 
Yes, teacher, God means to bless your class, but not until 
first of all he has made you fit to receive the blessing. 
Why, now, if your childre. were to be converted through 
your teaching, you would be mightily proud of it: 
God knows you could not bear such success, and does not 
mean to give it until he has laid you low at his feet, and 
emptied you of yourself, and. filled you with himself. 
And now J ask the prayers of all this church, that God 
would send us atime ef revival. I have not tocomplain 
that U have labored in vain, and spent my strength for 
nought; far from it. I have not even to think that the 
blessing is withdrawn from the preaching of the word, 
even in a measure, for I never had so many cases of con- 
version in my life as I have known since I have been 
restored from sickness; I have never before received so 
many letters in so short a time, telling me that the ser- 
mons printed have been blest, or the sermons preached 
here; yet I do not think we ever had so few conversions 
from the regular congregation. I partly account for it 
from the fact, that you cannot fish in one pond always 
and catch as many fish as at first. Perhaps the Lord has 
saved all of you he means to save; sometimes, I am 
afraid he has; and then it will be of little use for me to 
keep.on preaching to you, and I had better shift quarters 
and try somewhere else. It would be a melancholy 


424 TRAVAILING FOR SOULS. 


thought if I believed it :—I do not believe it, I only fear 
it. Surely it is not always to be true that strangers, who 
drop in here only once, are converted, and you who are 
always hearing the gospel remain unaffected. Strange, 
but may it not be strangely, lamentably true of you? 
This very day may the anxiety of your Christian friends 
be excited for you, and then may you be led to be anxious 
for yourselves, and give your eyes no slumber till you 
find the Savionr. You know the way of salvation; it is 
simply to come with your sins and rest them on the 
Saviour ; it is to rely upon or trust in the atoning blood. 
Oh that you may be made to trust this morning, to the 
praise of the glory of his grace. The elders mean to meet 
together to-morrow evening to have a special hour of 
prayer ; I hope, also, the mothers will meet and have a 
time of wrestling, and that every member of the church 
will try to set apart a time for supplication this week, 
that the Lord may visit again his church, and cause us to 
rejoice in his name. We cannot go back; we dare not 
go back. We have put our hand to the plough, and the 
curse will be upon us if we turn back. Remember Lot’s 
wife. It must be onward with us; backward it cannot 
be. In the name of God the Eternal, let us gird up our 
loins by the power of his Spirit, and aoa conquer- 
ing through the blood of the Lamb. e ask it for Jesus’ 
sake. Amen. 


I only fear 
rangers, who 
you who are 
d. Strange, 
rue of you? 
stian friends 
to be anxious 
ber till you 
vation; it is 
them on the 
oning blood. 
ning, to the 
mean to meet 
ecial hour of 
t and have a 
f the church 
on this week, 
id cause us to 
we dare not 
ugh, and the 

ember Lot’s 
rd it cannot 
s gird up our 
vard conquer- 
Ik it for Jesus’ 


: 


“ YOUR OWN SALVATION.” 


(This sermon has been very largely blessed in conversions. 


It has been 
very widely scattered in its separate form. } 


YOUR OWN sALVATION.’’—Phillipians ii, 12, 


E select the words, “ your own salvation,” as our 
text this morning, not out of any singularity, or 
from the slightest wish that the brevity of the text 
should surprise you ; but because our subject will be the 
more clearly before you if only these three words are 

ronounced. If I had nominally taken the whole verse 
i could not have attempted to expound it without dis- 
tracting your attention from the topic which now weighs 
upor my heart. Oh that the divine Spirit may bring 
home to each one of your minds the unspeakable impor- 
tance of “ your own salvation !” 

We have heard it said by hearers that they come to 
listen tous, and we talk to them upon subjects in which 
they have no interest. You will not be able to make 
this complaint to-day, for we shall speak only of “your 
own salvation ;” and nothing can more concern you. It 
has sometimes been said that preachers frequently select 
very unpractical themes. Nosuch objection can be raised 
to-day, for nothing can be more practical than this; 
nothing more needful than to urge you to see to “ your 
own salvation.”” We have even heard it said that minis- 
ters delight in abstruse subjects, paradoxical ¢>gmas, and 
mysteries surpassing comprehension ; but, assuredly, we 


426 “YOUR OWN SALVATION.” 


will keep to plain sailing this morning. No sublime 
doctrines, no profound questions shall perplex you; you 
shall only be called on to consider ‘ your own salvation ;” 
a very homely theme, and a very simple one, but for all 
that, the most weighty that can be brought before you, 
I shall seek after simple words also, and plain senter.ces, 
to suit the simplicity and plainness of the subject, that 
there may be no thought whatever about the speaker's 
language, but only concerning this one, sole, on ?, topic, 
" your own salvation.” Iask you all, as reasonable men 
who would not injure or neglect yourselves, to lend me 
your most serious attention. Chase away the swarming 
vanities which buzz around you, and let each man think 
for himself upon “his own salvation.” Oh may the 
Spirit of God set each one of you apart in a mental soli- 
tude, and constrain you each one, singly, to face the 
truth concerning his own state! Each man apart, each 
woman apart; the father apart, and the child apart: may 
you now come before the Lord in solemn thought, and 
may nothing occupy your attention but this: “ your own 
salvation.” 
I. We will begin this morning’s meditation by noting 
THE MATTER UNDER CONSIDERATION—Salvation / 
Salvation! a great word, not always understood, often 
narrowed down, and its very marrow overlooked. Salva- 
tion! This concerns every one here present. Weall fell 
in our first parent; we have all sinned personally; we 
shall all perish unless we find salvation. The word salva- 
tion contains within it delwerance from the guilt of our 
past sims. We have broken God’s law each one of us, 
more or less flagrantly, we have all wandered the down- 
ward road though each has chosen a different way. Sal- 
vation brings to us the blotting out of the transgressions 
of the past, acquittal from criminality, purging from all 
ge that we may stand accepted before the great 
udge. What man in his sober senses will deny that 
forgiveness is an uuspeakably desirable blessing ! 
ut salvation means more than that: it includes deliver- 


“YOUR OWN SALVATION,” 


No sublime ance from the power of sin. Naturally we are all fond 
lex you; you of evil, and we run after it greedily; we are the bond- 
n salvation :” slaves of iniquity,'and we love the Sendags. This l» st is 


e, but for all 
nt before you. 
ain senter.ces, 
subject, that 
, the speaker's 
le, only topic, 
easonable men 
8, to lend me 
the swarming 
ach man think 
Oh may the 
a mental soli- 
y, to face the 
an apart, each 
ild apart: may 
n thought, and § 
is: “yourown ff 


the worst feature of the case. But when salvation comes 
it delivers the man from the power of sin. He learns 
that it is evil, and he regards it as such, loathes it, re- 
pents that he has ever been in love with it, turns his back 
upon it, becomes, through God’s Spirit, the master of his 
lusts, puts the flesh beneath his feet, and rises into the 
liberty of the children of God. Alas! there are many 
who do not care for this: if this be salvation they would 
not give a farthing for it. They love their sins; they re- 
joice to follow the devices and imaginations of their own 
corrupt hearts. Yet be assured, this emancipation from 
bad habits, unclean desires, and carnal passions, is the 
maip point in salvation, and if it be not ours, salvation in 
its other branches is not and cannot be enjoyed by us. 
Dear hearer, dost thou possess salvation from sin? hast 
thou escaped the corruption which is in the world through 
lust? If not, what hast thou to do with salvation? To 
any right-minded man deliverance from age! rinciples 
is Sasa as the greatest of all blessings. at think- 
est thou of it? 

Salvation includes delwerance from the present wrath 
of God which abides upon the unsaved man every moment 
of his life. Every person who is unforgiven is the object 
of divine wrath. ‘“ God is angry with the wicked every 
day. Ifhe turn not, he will whet hissword.” “ Hethat 
believeth not is condemned already, because he hath not 
believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God.” 
I frequently hear the statement that this is a state of 
noes This is a great mistake, for our probation 

as long since passed. Sinners have been proved, and 
found to be unworthy; they have been “ weighed in the 
balances,” and “found wanting.” If you have not be- 
lieved in Jesus, condemnation already rests upon you: 
you are reprieved a while, but your condemnation is re- 
5 corded, Salvation takes a man from under the cloud of 


tion by noting 


ton | 

derstood, often 
cooked. Salva- 
nt. Weall fell 
ersonally ; we 
he word salva- 
he guilt of our 
each one of us, 
ered the down: 
rent way. * al- 
e transgressions 
urging from 4 
hefore the great 
will deny that 
lessing! 
neludes deliver 


428 “YOUR OWN SALVATION.” 


divine wrath, and reveals to him the divine love. Hecan 
then say, ‘‘O God, I will praise thee: though thou wast 
angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou 
comfortest me.” Oh, it is not hell hereafter which is the 
only thing a sinner has to fear, it is the wrath of God 
which rests upon him now. To be unreconciled to God 
now is an awful thing: to have God’s arrow pointed at 
you as itis at this moment, even though it fly not from 
the string as ye is aterriblething. Itis enough to make 
you tremble from head to foot when you learn that you 
are the target of Jehovah’s wrath: “he hath bent his 
bow, and made it ready.” Every soul that is unrecon- 
ciled to God by the blood of his Son is in the gall of 
bitterness. Salvation at once sets us free from this state 
of danger and alienation. We re no longer the 
‘children of wrath, even as others,”’ but are made children 
of God and joint heirs with Christ Jesus. What can be 
conceived more precious than this ? 

And then, we lastly receive that part of salvation which 
ignorant persons put first, and make to be the whole of 
salvation. In consequence of our being delivered from 
the guilt of sin, and from the power of sin, and from the 
present wrath of God, we are delivered from the future 
wrath of God. Unto the uttermost will that wrath des- 
cend upon the souls of men when they leave the body 
and stand before their Maker’s bar, if they depart this 
life unsaved. To die without salvation is to enter into 
damnation. Where death leaves us, there judgment 
finds us; and where judgment finds us, eternity will hold 
us for ever and ever. “He which is filthy, let him be 
filthy still,” and he that is wretched as a punishment for 
being filthy, shall be hopelessly wretched still. Salvation 
delivers the soul from going down into the pit of hell. 
We being justified, are no longer liable to punishment, 
because we are no longer chargeable with guilt. Christ 
Jesus bore the wrath of God that we might never bear 
it. He has made a full atonement to the justice of God 
for the sins of all believers. Against him that believeth 


ove. Hecan 

igh thou wast 

vay, and thou 

r which is the 

wrath of God 

neiled to God 
ow pointed at 
it fly not from 

nough to make 
earn that you 
hath bent his 
hat is unrecon- 
is in the gall of 
from this state 
10 longer the 
e made children 
What can be 


salvation which 
be the whole ot 
delivered from 
n, and from the 
rom the future 
hat wrath des- 
leave the body 
ey depart this 
is to enter a 
here judgmen 
nat will hold 
hy, let him be 
unishment for 
still. Salvation 
he pit of hell. 
to punishment, 
n guilt, Christ 
ight never bear 
justice of Go 
that believeth 


“YOUR OWN SALVATION,” 429 


there remaineth no record of guilt; his transgressions are 
blotted out, for Christ Jesus hath finished transgression, 
made an end of sin, and brought in everlasting righteous- 
ness. What a comprehensive word then is this—“ salva- 
tion!” It is a triumphant deliverance from the guilt of 
sin, from the dominion of it, from the curse of it, from 
the punishment of it, and ultimately from the very exis- 
tence of it, Salvation is the death of sin, its burial, its 
annihilation, yea, and the very obliteration of its memory; 
for thus saith the Lord: “their sins and their iniquities 
will I remember no more.” 

Beloved hearers, I am sure that this is the weightiest 
theme I can bring before you, and therefore I cannot be 
content unless‘[ see that it grasps you and holds you fast. 
I pray you give earnest heed to this most pressing of all 
subjects. Ifmy voice and words cannot command your 
fullest attention, I could wish to be dumb, that some 
other pleader might with wiser speech draw you to a 
close consideration of this matter. Salvation appears to 
me to be of the first importance, when I think of what it 
is in itself, and for this reason I have at the outset set it 
forth before your eye: ; but you may be helped to remem- 
ber its value if you consider that God the Father thinks 
highly of salvation. It was on his mind or ever the earth 
was. He thinks salvation a lofty business, for he gave 
his Son that he might save rebellious sinners. Jesus 
Christ, the only Begotten, thinks salvation most import- 
ant, for he bled, he died to accomplish it. Shall I trifle 
with that which cost him his life? If he came from 
heaven to earth, shall I be slow to look from earth to 
heaven? Shall that which cost the Saviour a life of ° 
zeal, and a death of agony, be of small account with me? 
By the bloody sweat of Gethsemane, by the wounds of 
Calvary, I beseech you, be assured that salvation must be - 
worthy of your highest and most anxious thoughts. It 
could not be that God the Father, and God the Son, 
should thus make a common sacrifice; the one giving his 
Son and the other giving himself for salvation, and yet 

ol 


430 “YOUR OWN SALVATION.” 


salvation should be a light and trivial thing. The Holy 
(host thinks it no trifle, for he condescends to work con- 
tinually in the new creation that he may bring about sal- 
vation, He is often vexed and grieved, yet he continues 
still his abiding labors that he may bring many sons unto 
glory. Despise not what the Holy Ghost esteems, lest 
thou despise the Holy Ghost himself. The sacred Trinit 
think much of salvation ; let us not neglect it. I beseec 
you who have gone on trifling with cabin, to remem- 
ber that we who have to preach to you dare not trifle 
with .. The longer I live the more I feel that if God 
do not make me faithful as a minister, it had been. better 
for me never to have been born. What a thought that I 
am set. as a watchman to warn your souls, ‘and if I warn 
you not aright, your blood will be laid at my door! My 
own damnation will be terrible enough, but to have your 
blood upon my skirts as well!—God save any one of his 
ministers from being found guilty of the souls of men. 
Every preacher of the gospel may cry with David, 
“ Deliver me from bloodguiltiness, O God, thou God of 
my salvation.” 

Bethink you, O careless hearers, that God’s church 
does not consider salvation to be a little matter? Earnest 
men and women, by thousands, are praying day and night 
for the salvation of others, and are laboring too, and 
making great sacrifices, and are willing to make many 
more, if they may by any means bring some to Jesus and 
his salvation. Surely, if gracious men, and wise men, 
think salvation to be so important, you who have hitherto 
neglected it ought to change your minds upon the matter, 
and act with greater care for your own interests. 

The angels think it a weighty business. Bowiug from 
their thrones, they watch for repenting sinners ; and when 
they hear that a sinner has returned to his God, the 
waken anew their golden harps and. pour forth fres 
music before the throne, for “ there is joy in the presence 
of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth.” It 
is certain also that devils think salvation to .be a great 


The Holy 
to work con- 
ing about sal- 
he continues 
any sons unto 

esteems, lest 
sacred Trinit 
it. I beseec 
yn, to remem- 
lare not trifle 
1 that if God 
ad been. better 
thought that I 
and if I warn 
ny door ! My 
t to have your 
ny one of his 
souls of men. 

with David, 
, thou God of 


God’s church 
atter? Earnest 
r day and night 
oring too, and 
> make many 
e to Jesus and 
hnd wise men, 
b have hitherto 
bon the matter, 
erests. 

Bowiug from 
hers; and when 
his God, they 


n the presence 


y forth fresh 


epenteth.” It 
to be a great 


“YOUR OWN SALVATION.” 431 
sabi os their arch-leader goeth about seeking whom 
emi oe They never tire in seeking men’s des- 
a ey know how much salvation Foiiies God, 
sitet erri ° the ruin of souls is; and therefore they 
oer sags land, if they may destroy the sons of 
shea bene: pray you careless hearer, be wise enough to 
aan ie more your cruel enemy, the devil, would 
Sa stoi or you! Remember, too, that lost souls 
A zh ius ea eae The rich man, when he was 
poi ‘a , thought highly of nothing but his barns, 
pte ousing of his produce; but when he came into 
e p sae ‘of torment, then he said: “ Father Abraham 
send Lazarus to my father’s house ; for I have five breth- 
ren; that he may testify unto them, lest they also come 
into this place of torment.” Lost souls see things in 
aoe light than that which dazzled them here below; 
ey pn things at a different rate from what we do 
abe where sinful pleasures and earthly treasures dim 
hai ain eye. I pray you then, by the blessed Trinity 
y | e tears and prayers of holy men, by the joy of an els 
uae Me dalle by the malice of devils and the des- 
ost, arouse 4 
ene a oreat eee Pon eee 
shall not depreciate anything that con : - 
fare, but I shall abeadtastly sasork that er wk 
oe any one gf you as salvation. Your health by 
all means. Let the physician be fetched if you be sick ; 
Ka well for diet and exercise, and all sanitary laws. 
hie wisely to your constitution and its peculiarities ; 
ut what matters it after all, to have possessed a healthy 
body, if you have a perishing soul ! ealth, yes, if veh 
must have it, though you shall find it an empty thing if 


you set your heart upon it. Prosperity in this world, 


earn it if you can do so fairly, but “ what shall it pr 

man if he shall gain the whole world, and lose ee 
soul?” A golden coffin will be a poor compensation for 
a damned soul. To be cast away from God’s presence 
can that misery be assuaged by mountains of treasure é 


“ 


9 “YOUR OWN SALVATION.” 


Oan the bitterness of the second death be sweetened by 
the thought that the wretch was once a millionaire, and 
that his wealth could affect the policies of nations? No, 
there is nothing in health or wealth, comparable to sal- 
vation. Nor can honor and reputation bear a comparison 
therewith. Truly they are }ut baubles, and yet for all 
that they have a strange fascination for the sons of men. 
Oh, sirs, if every harp-string in the world should resound 
your glories, and every trumpet should ‘proclaim your 
tame, what would it matter if a louder voice should say, 
‘“‘ Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, pre- 
pared for the devil and his angels?” Salvation! salva- 
tion-/ satvation! Nothing on earth can match it, for 
the merchandise of it is better than silver, and the gain 
thereof than fine gold. The possession of the whole uni- 
verse would be no equivalent to 4 lost soul for the awful 
damage it has sustained, and must sustain for ever. Pile 
“up the worlds, and let them fill the balance ; ay, bring as 
many worlds as there are stars, and heap up the scale on 
the one side; then in this other scale, place a single soul 
endowed with immortality, and it outweighs the whole. 
Salvation! nothing can be likened unto it. May we feel 
its unutterable value, and therefore seek it till we possess 
it in its fulness ! 

II. But now we must advance to a second point of 
consideration, and I pray God the Holy Spirit to press it 
upon us, and that is, whose MaTreRiIs ir? We haveseen 
what the matter is—salvation; now, consider whose it 
is? “ Your own salvation.” At this hour nothing else 
is to occupy your thoughts, but this intensely personal 
matter, and I beseech the Holy Spirit to hold your minds 

‘fast to this one point. 

If you are saved it will be “‘ your own salvation,” and 
you yourself will enjoy it. Ifyou are not saved, the sin 
you now commit is your own sin, the guilt your own 
guilt. The condemnation under which you live, with all 
its disquietude and fear, or with all its callousness and 
neglect, is your own—all your own. You may share in 


tened by 
aire, and 
ns ? No, 
le to sal- 
ym parison 
et for all 
s of men. 
d resound 
laim your 
hould say, 
fire, pre- 
on! salva- 
tech it, for 
d the gain 
whole uni- 
- the awful 
ever. Pile 
uy, bring as 
he scale on 
single soul 
the whole. 
ay we feel 
l we possess 


nd. point of 
to press 1t 
e have seen 
or whose it 
hothing else 
ly personal 
your minds 


ation,” and 
ed, the sin 
t your own 
ve, with all 
ousness an 

ay share 10 


i ahs dian atin 
ee cal OS ere ne a ope 


“YOUR OWN SALVATION.” 433 


other men’s sins, and other men may become participa- 
tors in yours, but a burden lies on your own back which 
no one besides can touch with one of his fingers. There 
is a page in God’s Book where your sins are recorded un- 
mingled with the transgressions of your fellows. Now, 
beloved, you must obtain for all this sin a personal par- 
don, or you are undone forever. No other can be washed 
in Christ’s blood for you; no one can believe and let his 
faith stand instead of your faith. The very supposition 
of human sponsorship in religion is monstrous. You 
must yourself repent, yourself believe, yourself be washed 
in the blood, or else for you there is no forgiveness, no 
acceptance, no adoption, no regeneration. It is all a 
personal matter through and through: “ your own salva- 
tion ” it must be, or it will be your own eternal ruin. 
Reflect anxiously that you must personally die. No 
one imagines that another can die for him. No mancan 
redeem his brother, or give to God a ransom. Through 
that iron gate I must pass alone, and so must you. 
Dying will have to be our own personal business; and in 
that dying we shall have either personal comfort or per- 
sonal dismay. When death is past, salvation is still our 
“own salvation ;” for if I am saved, mzne “ eyes shall seek 
the king in his beauty: they shall behold the land that 
is very far off.” Mine eyes shall see him, and not another 
on my behalf. No brother’s head is to wear your crown ; 
no stranger’s hand to wave your palm ; no sister’s eye to 
gaze for you upon the beatific vision, and no sponsor’s 
heart to ‘be filled as your proxy with the ecstatic bliss. 
There is a -personal heaven for the personal believer ins 
the Lord Jesus Christ. It must be, if you possess it, 
“your own salvation.” But if you have it not, reflect 
again, that it will be your own damnation. But no one 
will be condemned for you; no other can bear the hot 
thunderbolts of Jehovah’s wrath on your behalf. When 
you shall say, “Hide me, ye rocks! Conceal me, O 
mountains!” no one wil! spring forward, and say, “ You 
can cease to be accursed, and I will become a curse for 


4 “YOUR OWN SALVATION.” 


you.” <A substitute there is to-day for every one that 
believeth—God’s appointed substitute, the Christ of God ; 
but if that substitution’ be not accepted by you, there can 
never he another; but there remains only for you a 
personal casting away to suffer personal pangs in your 
own soul and in your own body forever. This, then, 
makes it a most solemn business. Oh, be wise, and look 
well to “ your own salvation.” 

You may be tempued to-day, and very likely you are, 
to forget your own salvation by thoughts of other 
people. We are all so apt to look abroad in this mat- 
ter, and not to look at home. Let me pray you to re- 
verse the process, and let every thing which has made 
you neglect your own vineyard be turned to the op- 
posite account, and lead you to begat home, and see 
to “your own salvation.” Perhaps you dwell among 
the saints of God, and you have been:rather apt to find 
fault with them, thowgh for my part, I can say these 
are the people I desire to live with, and desire to die 
with: “thy people shall be my people, and thy God 
my God.” Butoh, if you live among the saints, ought 
it not to be your business to see to “your own salva- 
tion?” See that you are truly one of them, not writ- 
ten in their church-book merely, but really graven 
upon the palms of Christ’s hands; not a false profes- 
sor, but a real possessor; not a mere wearer of the 
name of Christ, but a bearer of the nature of Christ. 
If you live in a gracious family, be afraid lest you should 
be divided from them forever. How could you endure 
to go from a Christian household to a place of tor- 
ment? Let the anxieties of saints lead you to be 
anxious. Jet their prayers drive you to prayer. Let 
their example rebuke your sin, and their joys entice 
you to their Saviour. Oh, see to this! But perhaps 
you live most among ungodly men, and the tendency 
of your converse with the ungodly is to make you 
think as they do of the trifles and vanities and wicked- 
nesses of this life. Do not let it be so; but on the con- 


y one that 
st of God ; 
, there can 
for you a 
1s in your 
This, then, 
2, and look 


ly you are, 
sar other 
1 this mat- 
you to re- 
1 has made 
to the op- 
me, and see 
vell among 
apt to find 
n say these 
esire to die 
d thy God 
saints, ought 
own salva- 
mn, not writ- 
ally graven 
alse protfes- 
arer of the 
e of Christ. 
you should 
you endure 
place of tor- 
you to be 
prayer. Let 
joys entice 
But perhaps 
e tendency 
») make you 
and wicked- 
on the con- 


ee a 


pier en 


_ ra. Meepenentiowe ee 
SME AN TOO : =m 


“YOUR OWN SALVATION.” 435 
trary, say, “O God, though I am placed among these 

eople, yet gather not my soul with sinners, nor my 
life with bloody men. Let me avoid the sins iuto which 
they fall, and the impenitence of which they are guilty. 
Save me, I pray thee, O my God, save me from the 
transgressions which they commit.” 

Perhaps to-day some of your minds are occupied with 
thoughts of the dead who have lately fallen asleep. 
There is a little one unburied at home, or there is a 
father not yet laid in the grave. Oh, when you weep 
for those who have gone to heaven, think of ‘“ your 
own salvation,” and weep for yourselves, for you have 
Late with them forever unless you are saved. You 

ave said, “Farewell’’ to those beloved ones, eter- 
nally farewell, unless you yourselves believe in Jesus. 
And if any of you have heard of persons who have 
lived in sin and died in blasphemy, and are lost, I pray 
you think not of them carelessly lest you also suffer the 
same doom: for what saith the Saviour: “Suppose ye 
that these were sinners above all the sinners?’”’ I tell 
you, Nay: but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise 
perish.” It seems to me as if everything on earth and 
every thing in heaven, and every thing in hell, yea, and 
God himself, call upon you to seek “ your own salva- 
tion,” first and foremost, and above all other things. 

It may be profitable to mention some persons upon 
whom this theme needs much pressing. I will begin 
at home. There is great need to urge this matter upon 
official Christians, such as I am, such as my brethren, 
the deacons and elders are. If there are any persons 
who are likely to be deceived, it is those who are called 
by their office to act as shepherds to the souls of others. 
Oh, my brethren! it is so easy for me to imagine be- 
cause I am a minister, and have to deal with holy 
things, that therefore I am safe. I prayI my never fall 
into that delusion, but may always cling to the cross, as 
& poor, needy sinner resting in the blood of Jesus. 
Brother ministers, co-workers, and officials of the church, 


436 “YOUR OWN SALVATION.” 


do not imagine that office can save you. The son of 
perdition was an apostle, greater than we are in office, 
and yet at this hour he is greater in destruction. Sce 
to it, ye that are numbered among the leaders of Israel, 
‘that you yourselves be saved. 

Unpractical doctrinalists are another class of persons 
who need to be warned to see to their own salvation, 
When they hear a sermon, they sit with their moutls 
open, ready to snap at halfa mistake. They make a 
man an offender for a word, for they conclude then- 
selves to be the standards of orthodoxy, and they weizh 
up the preacher as he speaks, with as much coolnessas 
if they had been appointed deputy judges for the Great 
King himself. Oh, sir, weigh yourself! It may be a 
great thing to be sound in the head, in the faith, but 
it is a greater thing to be sound in the heart. I may 
be able to split a hair between orthodoxy and _ hetero- 
doxy, and yet may have no part nor lot in the matter. 
‘You may be a very sound Calvinist, or you may hap- 
pen to think soundness lies in another direction ; but, 
oh, it is nought, it is less than nought, except your 
souls feel the power of the truth, and ye yourselves are 
born again. See to “ your own salvation,” O ye wise 
men in the letter, who have not the Spirit. 

So, too, certain persons who are always given to 
curious speculations need warning. When they read 
the Bible it is not to find whether they are saved or no, 
but to know whether we are under the third or fourth 
vial, when the millenium is going to be, or what is the 
battle of Armageddon. Ah, sir, seaach out all these 
things if thou hast time and skill, but look to thine 
own salvation first. The book of Revelation, blessed 
is he that understands it, but not unless, first of all, he 
understands this, “he that believeth and is baptized 
shall be saved.” The greatest doctor in the symbols 
and mysteries of the Apocalypse shall be as certainly 
cast away as the most ignorant, unless he has come to 


be SD ee Re a Sg Pa eee ee nee Se 


The son of 
‘e in Office, 
ction. See 
‘3 of Israel, 


3 of persons 
1 salvation. 
1eir moutls 
ey make a 
ude them- 
they weizh 
coolness as 
r the Great 
t may be a 
e faith, but 
art. I may 
and hetero- 
the matter. 
u may hap- 
action ; but, 
except your 
urselves are 
’ O ye wise 


ys given to 
nh they read 
saved or no, 
rd or fourth 
what is the 
ut all these 
bk to thine 
ion, blessed 
st of all, he 
is baptized 
he symbols 
hs certainly 
has come to 


See iN 


me ‘orn 5 3 
Sn Ee ips at aire A cits RAI 


“YOUR OWN SALVATION.” 


437 


Christ, and rested his soul in the atoning wok of our 
great substitute. 

I know some who greatly need to look to their own 
salvation. I refer to those who are always criticising 
others. They can hardly go to a place of worship but 
what they are observing their neighbor’s dress or con- 
duct. Nobody is safe from their remarks, they are 
such keen judges, and make such shrewd observations. 
Ye faultfinders and talebearers, look to “your own 
salvation.” You condemned a minister the other day 
for a supposed fault, and yet he is a dear servant of 
God, who lives near his Master; who are you, sir, to 
use your tongue against such a one ashe? The other 
day a poor humble Christian was the objet of your 

ossip and your.slander, to the wounding of her heart. 

h, see to yourselves, see to yourselves. If those eyes 
which look outward so piercingly would sometimes 
look inward they might see a sight which would blind 
them with horror. Blessed horror if it led them to 
turn to the Saviour who would open those eyes afresh, 
and grant them to see his salvation, 

I might also say that in this matter of looking to 
personal salvation, it is necessary to speak to some who 
have espoused certain great public designs, I trust I am 
as ardent a Protestant as any man living, but I know too 
many red-hot Protestants who are but little better than 
Romanists, for though the Romanists of old might have 
burnt them, they would certainly withhold toleration 
from Romanists to-day, if they could; and therein I see 
not a pin to choose between the two bigots. Zealous | 
Protestants, I agree with you, but yet I warn you that 
your zeal in this matter will not save you, or stand in the 
stead of personal godliness. Many an orthodox Protes- 
tant will be found at the left hand of the Great Judge. 
And you, too, who are forever agitating this and that 
Public question, I would say to you, “ Let politics alone 
till your own inward politics are settled on a good foun- 
dation.” You are a Radical Reformer, you could show us 


438 “YOUR OWN SALVATION.” 


a system of political economy which would right all our 
wrongs and give to every man his due; then I pray you 
right your own wrongs, reform yourself, yield yourself to 
the love of Jesus Christ, or what will it signify to you, 
though you knew how to balance the affairs of nations, 
and to regulate the arrangement of all classes of society, 
if you yourself shall be blown away like chaff before the 
winnowing fan of the Lord. God grant us grace, then, 
whatever else we take up with, to keep it in its proper 
place, and make our calling and election sure. 

III. And now, thirdly, and oh for grace to speak aright, 
I shall try to ANSWER CERTAIN OBJECTIONS. I think I 
hear somebody say, “ Well, but don’t you believe in pre- 
destination? What have we so do with looking to our own 
salvation? Is it not all fixed?’ Thou fool, for I can 
scarce answer thee till I have given thee thy right title; 
was it not fixed whether thou shouldst get wet or not in 
coming to this place? Why then did you bring your 
umbrella ?. Is it not fixed whether you shall be nourished 
-with food to-day or shall go hungry ?, Why then will you 
go home and eat your dinner? Is it not fixed whether 
you shall live or not to-morrow; will you, therefore, 
cut your throat? No, you do not reason so wickedly, so 
foolishly from destiny in reference to anything but “your 


own salvat‘on,” and you know it is not reasoning, it is 


just mere talk. Here is all the answer I will give you, 
and all you deserve. 

Another says, “I have a difficulty about this looking to 
our own salvation. Do you not believe in full assurance? 
Are there not some who know that they are saved beyond 
all doubt!” Yes, blessed be God, I hope there are many 
svch now present. But let me tell you who these are not. 
These are not persons who areafraid to examine themselves. 
If I meet with any man who says, “I have no need to 
examine myself any more, I know I am saved, and there- 
fore have no need to take any further care,” I would veb- 
ture to say to him, “Sir, you are lost already. . This strong 
delusion of yours has led you to believe a lie.” There are 


oe oT te, EU ai yl Sat ce ER i a 


™Z2 


right all our 
n I pray you 
\d yourself to 
onify to you, 
rs of nations, 
ses of society, 
aff before the 
s grace, then, 
,in its proper 
@, 
» speak aright, 
s. I think [ 
elieve in pre- 
ing to our own 
ool, for I can 
ay right title; 
wet or not in 
yu bring your 
ll be nourished 
y then will you 
fixed whether 
rou, therefore, 
» wickedly, so 
ning but “your 


will give you, 


this looking to 
full assurance ! 
p saved beyond 
here are may 
o these are not. 
ne themselves. 
e no need to 
red, and there- 
 T would veh- 
r . This strong 
e.” There are 


pasoning, it is 


“YOUR OWN SALVATION.” 439 
none so cautious as those who possess full assurance, and 
there are none who have so much holy fear of sinning 
against God, nor who walk so tenderly and carefully as 
those who possess the full assurance of faith. Presumption 
is not assurance, though, alas! many think so. No fully 
assured believer will ever object to being reminded of the 
importance of his own salvation. 

ui a third objection arises, “ This is very selfish,” says 
one. “ You have been exhorting us to look to ourselves, 
and that is sheer selfishness.” Yes, so you say: but let 
me tell you it is a kind of selfishness that is absolutely 
needful before you can be unselfish. A part of salvation 
is to be delivered from selfishness, and I am selfish enough 
to desire to be delivered from selfishness. How can you 
be of any service to cthers if you are not saved yourself ? 
A man isdrowning. Iam onLondon Bridge. If I spring 
from the parapet and can swim, I can save him; but sup- 
pose I cannot swim, can I render any service by leaping 
into sudden and certain death with the sinking man? I 
am disqualified from helping him till I have the ability to 
do so, There is a school over yonder. Well, the first 
inquiry of him who is to be the master must be, “Do I 
know myself that which I profess to teach?” Do you call 
that inquiry selfish? Surely it is a most unselfish self- 
ishness, grounded upon common sense. Indeed, the man 
who is not so selfish as to ask himself, “Am I qualified to 
act as a teacher ?” would be guilty of gross’ selfishness in 
putting himself into an office which he was not qualified 
to fill. I will suppose an illiterate person going into the 
school, and saying, “I will be master here and take the 
pay,” and yet he cannot teach the children to read or 
write. Would he not be very selfish in not seeing to his 
own fitness? But surely it is not selfishness that would 
make a man stand back and say, “ No, I must first go to 
school myself, otherwise it is but a mockery of the children 
for me'to attempt to teach them anything.” This is no 
selfishness, then, when looked at aright, which makes us 


440) “YOUR OWN SALVATION.” 


see to our own salvation, for it is the basis from which we 
operate for the good of others. 

IV. Having answered these objections, I shall for 
minute attempt to RENDER SOME ASSISTANCE to those who 
would fain be right in the best thing. 

Has the Holy Spirit been pleased to make anyone here 
earnest about his own salvation? Friend, I will help you 
toanswer two questions. Ask yourself, first, “Am I saved?” 
I would help thee to reply to that very quickly. If you are 
saved this morning, you are the subject of a work within 

ou, as saith the text, “ Work out your own salvation ; for 
it is God which worketh in you.” You cannot work it in, 
‘but when God works it in, you work itoul. Have you a 
work of the Holy Ghost in your soul? Do you feel some- 
thing more than unaided human nature can attain unto ? 
Have you a change wrought in you from above? If so, 
you are saved. Again, does your salvation rest wholly 
upon Christ ? He who hangs anywhere but upon the cross, 
hangs upon that which will deceive him. If thou standest 
upon Christ, thou art on a rock ; but if thou trustest in the 
merits of Christ in part, and thy own merits in part, then 
thou hast one foot on a rock but another on the quicksand ; 
and thou mightest as well have both feet on the quicksand, 
for the result will be the same. 


‘None but Jesus, none but Jesus 
Can do helpless sinners good.” 


Thou art not saved unless Christ be all in all in thy soul, 
Alpha and Omega, beginning and ending, first and last. 
Judge by this, again: if you are saved, you have turned 
your back on sin. You have not left off sinning—would to 
God we could do so—but you have left off loving sin; you 
sin not wilfully, but from infirmity ; and you are earnestly 
seeking after God and holiness. You have respect to God, 
you desire to be like him, you are longing to be with him. 
Your face is towards heaven. Youare as a man who jour- 
neys to the Equator. You are feeling more and more the 
warminfluence of the heavenly heat and light. Now, ifsuch 


ee ee rr a 


~~ 


= e- FS 


‘om which we 


I shall for a 
to those who 


» anyone here 
will help you 
‘Am I saved?” 
ly. If you are 
, work within 
salvation ; for 
not work it i, 

Have you a 
you feel some- 
attain unto ? 
bove ? If so, 
n rest wholly 
upon the cross. 
thou standest 
trustest in the 
5 in part, then 
he quicksand ; 
he quicksand, 


lin thy soul, 
rst and last. 
have turned 
ng—would to 
ing sin; you 
are earnestly 
espect to God, 
>» be with him. 
nan who jour- 
and more the 
Now, ifsuch 


“YOUR OWN SALVATION,” 441 
be your course of life, that you walk not after the flesh, but 
after the Spirit, and bring forth the fruits of holiness, then 
ou are saved. May your answer to that.question be given 
in great honesty and candor to your own soul. Be not too 
partial a judge. Conclude not that all is right because out- 
ward appearances are fair. Deliberate before you return a 
favorable verdict. Judge yourselves that ye be not judged. 
lt were better to condemn yourself and be accepted of God, 
than to acquit yourself pa find your mistake at the last. 
But suppose that question shold have to be answered 
by any here in the negative (and I am afraid it must be), 
then let those who confess that they are not saved, hear the 
answer to another inquiry; “How can I be saved?” Ah, 
dear hearer, I have not to bring a huge volume nor a whole 
armful of folios to you, and to say, “It will take you months 
and years to understand the plan of salvation.” No, the 
way is plain, the method simple. Thou shalt be saved 
within the next moment if thou believest. God's work of 
salvation is, as far as its commencement and essence is con- 
cerned, instantaneous. If thou believest that Jesus is the 
Christ thou art born of God now. If thou dost now stand 
in ot at the foot of the cross, and view the incarnate God 
suffering, bleeding, and dying there, and if as ti:ou dost look. 
at him, thy soul consents to have him for her Saviour, and 
casts herself wholly on him, thou art saved. How vividly 
there comes before my memory this morning the moment 


_ when I first believed in Jesus! It was the simplest act my 


mind ever performed, and yet the most wonderful, for the 
Holy Spirit wrought it in me. Simply to have done with 
reliance upon myself, and have done with confidence in all 
but Jesus, and to rest alone my undivided confidence in him, 
and in what he had done. My sin was in that moment for- 
given me, and I was saved, and it may all be so with you, 
my friend, even with you if you also trust the Lord Jesus. 
“Your own salvation” shall be secured by that one simple 
act of faith ; and henceforward, kept by the power of God 
through faith unto salvation, you shall tread the: way of ho- 
liness, till you come to be where Jesus is in everlasting bliss, 


442, “YOUR OWN SALVATION.” 


God grant that not a soul may go out of this place unsaved, 
Even you, little children, who are here, you youngsters, you 
young boys and girls, I pray that you may in early life at- 
tend to “your own salvation.” Faith is not a grace for old 
people only, nor for your fathers and mothers only ; if your 
little hearts shall look to him who was the holy child Jesus, 
if you know but little yet, if you trust him, salvation shall 
be yours. I pray that to you who are young, “ your own 
salvation” may become, while you are yet in your youth, 
a matter of joy, because you have trusted it in the hands of 
your Redeemer, 

Now I must close; but one or two thoughts press me. 
I must utter them ere I sit down. I would anxiously 
urge each person here to see to this matter of his own sal- 
vation. Do it, I pray you, and in earnest, for no one can 
do it for you. I have asked God for your soul, my hearer, 
ana I pray [ may have au answer of peace concerning 
you. But unless you also pray, vain are my prayers. 
You remember your mother’s tears. Ah! you have cros- 
sed the ocean since those days, and you have gone into 
the deeps of sin, but you recollect when you used to say 
your prayers at her knee, and when she would lovingly 
say “Amen,” and kiss her boy and bless him, and pray 
that he might know his mother’s God. Those prayers are 
ringing in the ears of God for you, but it is impossible 
that you can ever be saved unless it is said of you, “ Be- 
hold, he prayeth.” Your mother’s holiness can only rise 
up in judgment to condemn your wilful wickedness un- 
less you imitate it. Your father’s earnest exhortations 
shall but confirm the just sentence of the Judge unless you 
hearken to them, and yourselves consider and put your 
trust in Jesus. Oh! bethink you each one of you, there 
is but one hope, and that one hope lost, it is gone forever. 
Defeated in one battle, a commander attempts another, 
and hopes that he may yet win the campaign. Your life 
is your one fight, and if it be lost it is lost for aye. The 
man who was bankrupt yesterday commences again in 
business with good heart, and hopes that he may yet suc- 


place unsaved. 
pungsters, you 
n early life at- 
a grace for old 
gs only ; if your 
ly child Jesus, 
salvation shall 
ng, “ your own 
nm your youth, 
in the hands of 


ights press me. 
ould anxiously 
of his own sal- 
for no one can 
soul, my hearer, 
ace concerning 
re my prayers. 
you have cros- 
have gone into 
ou used to say 
would lovingly 
him, and pray 
hose prayers are 
it is impossible 
d of you, Be- 
bs can only rise 
wickedness un- 
st exhortations 
dge unless you 
and put your 
e of you, there 
s gone foreveY. 
empts another, 
ign. Your life 
for aye. The 
ences again in 
e may yet suc- 


serie weeeke 


se ain Aba 


“YOUR OWN SALVATION.” 


443 


ceed; but in the business of this mortal life, if you are 
found bankrupt you are bankrupt forever and forever. I 
do therefore charge you by the living God, before whom 
I stand, and before whom I may have to give an account 
of this day’s preaching ere another day’s sun shall shine, 
I charge you to see to your own salvation. God help 
you, that you may never cease to seek unto God till you 
know by the witness of the Spirit that you hav2 indeed 
passed from death unto life. See to it now, now, Now, 
now. This very day the voice of warning comes to cer- 
tain of you from God, with special emphasis, because you 
greatly need it, for your time is short. How many have 
passed into eternity during this week! You may your- 
self be gone from the land of the living before next Sab- 
bath-day. I suppose, according to the calculation of pro- 
babilities, out of this audience there are several who will 
die within a month. I am not conjecturing now, but ac- 
cording to all probabilities, these thousands cannot all 
meet again, if all have a mind to do so. Who then among 
us will be summoned to the unknown land? Will it be 
you, young woman, who have been laughing at the things 
of God? Shall it be yonder merchant, who has not time 
enough for religion? Shall it be you, my foreign friend, 
who have crossed the ocean to take a holiday? Will you 
be carried back a corpse? I do conjure you bethink 
yourselves, all of you. You who dwell in London will 
remember years ago when the cholera swept through our 
streets, Some of us were in the midst of it, and saw many 
drop around us, as though smitted with an invisible but 
deadly arrow. That disease is said to be on its way 
hither again: it is said to be rapidly sweeping from Po- 


1 land across the Continent, and if it come and seize some 


of you, are you ready to depart? Even if that form of 
death do not afflict our city, as I pray it may not, yet is 
death ever within our gates, and the pestilence walketh 
in darkness every night, therefore consider your ways. 
Thus saith the Lord, and with his word I conclude this 


| discourse: “ Prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.” 


a y) ~~ ay : t LRN TIES — (a TS a seers 
_- > poe SAV ML am CC a 
TN eS HE “6 | 


Ii. 


THE SIN OF GADDING ABOUT. 


‘Why gaddest thou about so much to change thy way ?””—JEREMIAH ii, 36, 


S4/0D’S ancient people were very prone to forget 
yay| him, and to worship the false deities of the 
44i\ neighboring heathen. Other nations were 
faithful to their blocks of wood and of stone, and 
adhered as closely to their graven images as though 
they really had helped them, or could in future deliver 
them. Only the nation which avowed the true God 
forsook its God, and left the fountain of living waters 
to hew out for itself broken cisterns which could hold 
no water. There seems to have been, speaking after 
the manner of men, astonishment in the divine mind 
concerning this, for the Lord says, ‘“ Pass over the 
isles of Chittim, and see; and send untv Kedar, and 
consider diligently, and see if there be such a-thing. 
Hath a nation changed their gods, which are yet no gods? 
but my people have changed their glory for that which 
doth not profit. Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this, 
and be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate.” In this 
same chapter the Lord addresses his people with the 
question, “Can a maid forget her ornaments? or a 
bride her attire? Yet my people have forgotten me 
days without number.’ And here, in this text, the 
same astonishment appears, ‘‘ Why gaddest thou about 
so much to change thy way?” It most certainly was 


ica i un il piel Whi td al 


UT. 


~JEREMIAH ii, 36. 


one to forget 
eities of the 
ations were 
f stone, and 
es as though 
uture deliver 
he true God 
living waters 
h could hold 
eaking after 
divine mind 
ass over the 

Kedar, and 
uch av thing. 
yet no gods? 
r that which 
rens, at this, 
e.” In this 
nle with the 
ments ? or @ 
orgotten me 
his text, the 
thou about 
ertainly was 


ety tae “ eg STs 


= ae ARR 


sgn aes SO ie : 


THE SIN OF GADDING ABOUT. 445 


a most unreasonable thing that a people with such a 
God, who had dealt out to them so graciously the riches 
of his love, and had wrought such wonders on their 
behalf, should turn from him to the worship of Baal or 
Ashtaroth, mimic gods which had ears but heard not, 
eyes but saw not, and did but mock the worshippers 
who were deluded by them. 

J desire to put this question to believers, and then to 
ie unconverted. May the Holy Spirit bless it to each 
class. 

If you read this question, taking it in its connection, 
you wil! see in the first place, that there is a relationship 
mentioned. The question is asked, “Why gaddest thou 
about so much?” The inquiry is not made of a traveller, 
nor of one whose business it is to journey from pole to 
pole, and to investigate distant lands. It is not asked of.- 
a wayfarer lodging for a night, nor of a homeless vagrant 
who finds a poor shelter beneath every bush; but it is 
asked by God of his people Israel, describing them under 
the character of a married wife. He represents the nation 
of Israel as being married unto himself, himself the hus- 
band of Israel, and Israel his bride. -To persons bearing 
that character the question comes with great force, 
“Why gaddest thow about somuch?” Let others wander 
who have no central object of attraction, who have no 
house, and no “ house-band,” to bind them to the spot; 
but thou, a married wife, how canst thou wander? What 
hast thou to do in traversing strange ways? How canst 
thou excuse thyself? If thou wert not false to thy rela- 
tionship thou couldst not do so? No, beloved, we strain 
no metaphor when we say that there exists between the 
soul of every believer and Jesus Christ, a relationship 
admirably imaged in the conjugal tie. We are married 
unto Christ. He has betrothed our souls unto himself. 
He paid our dowry on the cross. He espoused himself 
unto us in righteousness, in the covenant of grace. We 
have accepted him as our Lord and husband. We have 
given ourselves up to him, and under the sweet law of 


02 


446 THE SIN OF GADDING ABOUT. 


his love we ought to dwell evermore in his house. Heis 
the bridegroom of our souls, and he has arrayed us in 
the wedding dres# of his own righteousness. Now it is to 
us who own this marriage union, and who are allied to the 
Lord Jesus by ties so tender, that the Well Beloved says, 
Why gaddest thou about so much?” 

Observe, that the wife’s place may be described as a 
three-fold one. In the first place, she should abide in de- 
pendence upon her husband’s care. It would be looked 
upon as a very strange thing if a wife should be overheard 
to speak to another man, and say, “Come and assist in 

roviding for me.” If she shall cross the street to another’s 

ouse and say to a stranger, “I have a difficulty and a 
trouble; will you relieve me from it? I feel myself in 
great need, but I shall not ask my husband to help me, 
though he is rich enough to give me anything I require, 
and wise enough to direct me, but [come to you a stranger, 
in whom I have no right to look for love, and I trust 
myself with you, and confide in you rather than in my 
husband.” This would be a very wicked violation of the 
chastity of the wife’s heart: her dependence as a married 
woman with a worthy husbaad, must be solely fixed on 
him to whom she is bound in wedlock. Transfer the 
figure, for it is even so with us and the Lord Jesus. It 
is a tender topic; let it tenderly touch your heart and 
mine. What right have I, when I am in trouble, to seek 
an arm of flesh to lean upon, or to pour my grief into an 
earth-born ear in preference to casting my care on God, 
and telling Jesus ail my sorrows? Ifa human friend had 
the best intentions, yet he is not like my Lord, he never 
died for me, he never shed his blood for me, and if he 
loves me he cannot love me as the husband of my soul 
can love! My Lord’s love is ancient as eternity, deeper 
than the sea, firmer than the hills, changeless as his own 
Deity; how can I seek another friend in preference to 
him? What a slight I put upon the affection of my 
Saviour! What a slur upon his condescending sympathy 
towards me! How I impugn his generosity and mistrust 


Heis 
ued us in 


ouse. 


‘Ya 

N ow it is to 
» allied to the 
Beloved says, 


ascribed as a 
1 abide m de- 
ald be looked 
be overheard 
and assist in 
st to another’s 
fficulty and a 
feel myself in 
1 to help me, 
ing I require, 
rou a stranger, 
>, and I trust 
r than in my 
riolation of the 
e as a married 
olely fixed on 
Transfer the 
brd Jesus. It 
our heart and 
rouble, to seek 
y grief into an 
care on God, 
an friend had 
ord, he never 
me, and if he 
d of my soul 
prnity, deeper 
bss as his own 
preference to 
ection of my 
ing sympathy 
y and mistrust 


THE SIN OF GADDING ABOUT. 447 
his power if, in my hour of need, I cry out, “Alas! I have 
no friend.” No friend while Jesus lives! Dare I say 
I have no helper? No helper while the Mighty One upon 
whom God has laid help still exists with arm unparalyzed 
and heart unchanged? Can I murmur and lament that 
there is no escape for me from my tribulations? No escape 
while my Almighty Saviour las and feels my every 

rief? Do you see my point? Put it in that shape, and 
the question, “ Why gaddest thou about so much to look 
after creatures as grounds of dependence!” becomes a very 
deep and searching one. Why, O believer, dost thou 
look after things which are seen, and heard, and handled, 
and recognized by the sense, instead of trusting in thine 
unseen but not unknown Redeemer? Oh! why, why, 
thou spouse of the Lord Jesus, why gaddest thou about 
somuch? Have we not even fallen into this evil with 
regard to our own salvation? After a time of enjoyment 
it sometimes happens that our graces decline, and we lose 
our spiritual enjoyment, and as we are very apt to depend 
upon our own experience, our faith also droops. Is not 
this untaithfulness to the finished work and perfect merit 
of our great Substitute? We knew at the first, when we 
were under conviction of sin, that we could not rest on 
anything within ourselves, and yet that truth is always 
slipping away from our memories, and we try to build 
upon past experiences, or to rely upon present enjoyments, 
or some form or other of personal attainment. Do we 
really wish to exchange the sure rock of our salvation for 
the unstable sand of our own feelings? Can it be that 
having once walked by faith we now choose to walk by 
sight? Are graces, and frames, and enjoyments, to be 
preferred to the tried foundation of the Redeemer’s atone- 
ment? Be it remembcred that even the work of the 

Holy Spirit, if it be depended upon as a ground of accept- 
ance with God, becomes as much an antichrist as though 

it were not the work of the Holy Spirit at all. Dare we 

80 blaspheme the Holy Ghost as to make his work .in us 
9 rival to the Saviour’s work for us? Shame on us that 


448 THE SIN OF GADDING ABOUT. 


we should thus doubly sin! The best things are mis- 
chievous when put in the wrong place. Good works have 
“necessary uses,” but they must not be joined to the 
work o: Christ as the groundwork of our hope. Even 
precious gold may be made into an idol-calt, and that 
which the Lord himself bestows may be made to be a 
polluted thing, like that brazen serpent which once 
availed to heal, but when it was idolized came to be 
styled by no better name than “a piece of brass,” “0d 
. was broken and putaway. Donot continually harp upon 
what thou art, and what thou art not; thy salvation does 
not rest in these things, but in thy Lord. Go thou and 
stand at the foot of the cross, still an empty-handed 
sinner to be filled with the riches of Christ; a sinner 
black as the tents of Kedar in thyself, and comely only 
through thy Lord. 

Again, the wife’s position is not only one of sole de- 
pendence upon her husband’s care, but it should be, and 
is, a position of sole delight in her husband’s love. 'To 
be suspected of desiring aught of man’s affection beyond 
that, would be the most serious imputation that could be 
cast upon a wife’s character. We are again upon very 
tender ground, and I beseech each of you who are now 
thinking of your Lord, consider yourself to be on very 
tender ground too, for you know what our God has said— 
“The Lord thy God is a jealous God.” ‘That is a very 
wonderful and suggestive expression—“ a jealous God.” 
See that it be engraven on your hearts Jesus will not 
endure it that those of us who love him should divide 
our hearts between him and something else. The love 
which is strong as death is linked with a jealousy cruel 
as the grave, ‘‘the coals thereof are coals ot fire, which 
hath a most vehement flame.” The royal word to the 
spouse is, “ Forget also thine own kindred, and thy 
fa'her’s house; so shall the King greatly desire thy 
beauty: for he is thy Lord; and worshipthou him.” Of 
course, beloved, the Master never condemns that proper 

natural affection which we are bound to give, and which 


ngs are mis- 
d works have 
coined to the 
hope. Even 
alt, and that 
nade to be a 
which once 
1 came to be 
f brass,” “ad 
lly harp apon 
calvation does 
Go thou and 
empty-handed 
Yist; a sinner 
_ comely only 


ne of sole de- 
hould be, and 
nds love. To 
ection ha 
that could be 
ain upon very 
who are now 
o be on very 
30d has said— 
hat is a very 
‘ealous God.” 
1 pe will not 
should divide 
lise. The love 
jealousy cruel 
ot fire, which 
al word to the 
dred, and thy 


ly desire thy 


youhim.” Of 
ms that proper 
ive, and which 


| 
. 


THE SIN OF GADDING ABOUT. 448 
it isa part of our sanctification to give in its due and 
proper proportion to those who are related tous. Besides, 
we are bound to love all the saints, and all mankind in 
their proper place and measure. But there is a love 
which is for the Master alone. Inside the heart there 
must be a sanctum sanctorum, within the veil, where he 
himself alone must shine like the Shechinah, and reign on 
the merey-seat. There must be a glorious high throne 
wivhin our spirits, where the true Solomon alone must sit ; 
the lions of watchful zeil must guard each step of it. 
There must he, the King in his beauty, sit enthroned, sole 
monarch of the heart’s affections. But alas! alas! how 
often have we gone far to provoke his anger! We have 
set up the altars of strange gods hard by the holy place. 
Sometimes a favorite child has been idolized; another 
time, perhaps our own persons have been admired and 
pampered. We have been unwilling to suffer though we 
knew it to be the Lord’s will: we were determined to 
inake provision for the flesh. We have not been willing 
to hazard our substance for Christ, thus making our 
worldly comfort our chief delight, instead of feeling that 
wealth to ba well lost which is lost as the result of 
Jehovah’s will. Oh, how soon we make idols! Idol- 
making was not only the trade of Ephesus, but it is a 
trade all the world over. Making shrines for Diana, nay, 
shrines for self, we are all master craftsmen at this in some 
form or another. Images of jealousy, which become 
abominations of desolation, we have set up. We may 
even exalt some good pursuit into an idol, even work for 
the Master may sometimes take Ais place; as was the case 
with Martha, we are cumbered with much serving, and 
often think more about the serving than of Aim who is to 
be served; the secret being, that weare too mindful of 
how we may lvok in the serving, and not enough consider- 
ate of Aim, and of how he may be honored by our service. 
It is so very easy for our busy spirits to ga labout, and so 
very difficult to sit at the Master’sfeet. Now, Christian, 
if thou hast been looking atter this and after that 


450 THE SIN OF GADDING ABOUT. 


secondary matter; if thy mind has been set too much 
upon worldly business, or upon any form of earthly love, 
the Master says to thee, “ My spouse, my beloved, why 
gaddest thou about so much?” Let us confess our fault, 
and return unto our rest. 

But a third position, which I think will be recognized 
by every wife as being correct, is not simply dependence 
upon her husband’s care and delight in her husband’s 
‘ove, but also daligence in her husband’s house. Thegood 
house-wife, as Solomon tells us, “ looketh well to the ways 
of her household, and eateth not the bread of idleness.” 
Sne is not a servant, her position is very different from 
that, out for that very reason she uses the more diligence. 
A servant’s work may sometimes be finished, but a wife’s 
never. ‘She riseth also while it is yet night, and giveth 
ineat to her household, and a portion to her maidens.” 
She rejoices willingly to labor as no servant could be 
expected to do. ‘She seeketh wool, and flax, and 
worketh willingly with her hands.” “She girdeth her 
‘loins with strength, and strengtheneth her arms. She 
perceiveth that her merchandise is good: her candle 
goeth not out by night. She layeth her hands to the 
spindle, and her hands hold the distaff.” All through the 
live-long night she watches her sick child, and then 
through the weary day as well the child is still tended, 
and the household cares are stil! heavy upon her. She 
relaxes never. She counts chat her house is her kingdom, 
and she cares for it with incessant care. The making of 
her husband happy, and the training up of her children 
in the fear of God, that is her business. The good house- 
wife is like Sarah, of whom it is written, that when the 
angels asked Abraham, “ Where is Sarah thy wife?” he 
answered, ‘ Behold she is in the tent.” It would have 
been well for some of her descendants had they been “in 
the tent,” too, for Dinah’s going forth to see the daugh- 
ters of the land cost her dear. Now, this is the position, 
the exact position of the chaste lover of Jesus, he dwells 
at home with Jesus, among his owm people. The 


seerenieisdsainnendsiindineneneeiienenmeeniniemmetiioataenmendieenimestonpaimemne nanan re ee ee 


— 


et too much 
earthly love, 
aloved, why 
83 our fault, 


e recognized 
dependence 
er husband’s 
2, Thegood 
ll to the ways 
of idleness.” 
ifferent from 
re diligence. 
|, but a wife’s 
t, and giveth 
er maidens.” 
ant could be 
nd flax, and 
, girdeth her 

arms. She 

her candle 
hands to the 
through the 
d, and then 
still tended, 
on her. She 
er kingdom, 
e making of 
her children 
> good house- 
at when the 
y wife ?” he 
would have 
ey been “in 
p the daugh- 
he position, 
s, he dwells 
ople. The 


THE SIN OF GADDING ABOUT. 451 


Christian’s place with regard to Christ is to be diligently 
engaged in Christ’s house. Some of us can say, I trust, 
that we do naturally care for the souls of men. We were 
born by God’s grace, to care for them, and ¢*ild not be 
happy, any more than some nurses can be happy without 
the care of children, unless we have converts to look after, 
and weaklings to cherish. Itis well for the church when 
there are many of her members, beside her pastors and 
deacons, who care for the souls of those who are born in 
the church. The church is Christ’s family mansion. It 
should be the home of new-born souls, where they are 
fed with food convenient fr them, nourished, comforted, 
and educated for the bette 1: id. You have all some- 
thing to do; you who **e :..:rried to Christ have all a 
part assigned you in te household of God. He has 
given you each a happy tisk. It may be that you have 
to suffer in secret for hima, or you have to talk to two or 
three, or perhaps in . ‘iile village station, or at the 


corner of a street you have to preach, or possibly it is the 


distribution of a handful of tracts, or it 1s looking after 
the souls of a few women in your district, or teaching a 
class of children. Whatever it is, if we have been grow- 
ing at all negligent, if we have not thrown our full 
strength into his work, and have been expending our 
vigor somewhere else, may not the question come very 
pertinently home to us, ‘“ Why gaddest thou about so 
much?” Why that party of pleasure, that political meet- 
ing, that late rising, that waste of time? Hast thou noth- 
ing better to do? Thdu hast enough to do for thy hus- 
band and his church, if thou doest it well. Thou hast 
not a minute to spare, the King’s business requireth haste. 
Our charge is too weighty and too dear to our hearts to 
admit of sloth. The Lord has given us as much to do as 
we shall have strength and time to accomplish by his 
grace, and we have no energies to spare, no talents to 
wrap up in napkins, no hours to idle in the market-place. 
One thing we do: that one thing should absorb all our 
powers. To neglect our holy life-work is to wrong our 


452 THE SIN OF GADDING ABOUT. 


heavenly Bridegroom. Put this matter in a clear light, 
my brethren, and do not shut your eyes to it. Have you 
any right to mind earthly things? Can you serve two 
masters? What, think you, would an, kind husband 
here think, if when he came home the children had been 
neglected all day, if there was no meal for him after his 
day’s work, and no care taken of his house whatever } 
Might he not well give a gentle rebuke, or turn awa 
with a tear in his eye? And if it were long continued, 
might he not almost be justified if he should say— My 
house yields me no comfort! This woman acts not as a 
wife tome!” And yet, bethink thee, soul, is not this 
what thou hast done with thy Lord? ‘When he hascome 
into his house has he not found it in sad disorder, the 
morning prayer neglected, the evening supplication but 
poorly offered, those little children but badly taught, 
and many other works of love forgotten. It is thy busi- 
ness as well as his, for thou art one with him, and yet 
thou hast failed in it. Might he not justly say to thee, 
“IT have little comfort in thy fellowship? I will get me 
gone until thou treatest me better, and when thou longest 
for me, and art willing to treat me as I should be treated, 
then I will return to thee, but thou shalt see my face no 
more till thou hast a truer heart towards me?” Thus in 
personal sadness have I put this question; the Lord give 
us tender hearts while answering it. 

I will ask thee a few questions, not so much by way of 
answering the inquiry, as to show how difficult it is to 
answer it. “ Why gaddest thou about so much?” Has 
thy Lord given thee any offence? Has he been unkind 
to thee? Has the Lord Jesus spoken to thee like a 
tyrant, and played the despot over thee? Must thou not 
confess that in all his dealings with thee in the past, love, 
unmingled love, has been his rule? He has borne 
patiently with thine ill-manners; when thou hast been 
fuolish he has given thee wisdom, and he has not up- 
braided thee, though he might have availed himself of 
the opportunity of that gift, as men so often do, to give 


clear light, 

Have you 
u serve two 
nd husband 
en had been 
im after his 
> whatever ? 
r turn awa 
y continued, 

say—* My 
cts not as a 
|, is not this 
he has come 
lisorder, the 
lication but 
udly taught, 
,is thy busi- 
him, and yet 
say to thee, 
will get me 
thou longest 
ld be treated, 
my face no 
” Thus in 
1e Lord give 


h by way of 
ult it is to 
uch?” Has 
een unkind 
thee like a 
ust thou not 
he past, love, 
has borne 
hast been 
has not up- 
himself of 
do, to give 


Ee ge Fe EE EOIN 


RE SP ES ee arya Bt ee Rae 


THE SIN OF GADDING ABOUT. 458 


He has not 
turned against thee or been thine enemy, why then be 
so cold to him? Is this the way to deal with one so 


a word of upbraiaing at the same time. 


tender and so good? Let me ask thee, has thy Saviour 
changed? Wilt thou dare to think he is untrue to thee 
Is he not “the same yesterday, to-day, and forever?” 
That cannot, then, be an apology for thine unfaithful- 
ness. Has he been unmindful of his promise? He has 
told thee to call upon him in the day of trouble, and he 
will deliver thee; has he failed to do so? It is written, 
“ No good thing will he withhold from them that walk 
uprightly.” Has he withheld a really good thing from 
thee when thou hast walked uprightly? If, indeed, he 
had played thee false, thine excuse for deserting him 
might claim a hearing, but thou darest not say this, 
Thou knowest that he is faithful and true. 

I wish I liad the power to handle a topic like this as 
Rutherford, or Herbert, or Hawker would have done, so 
as to touch all your hearts, if you are at this hour without 
enjoyment of fellowship with Jesus. But, indeed, 1 am 
so much one of yourselves, so much one who has to seek 
the Master’s face myself, that I can scarcely press the 
question upon you, but must rather press it upon myself. 
“Why gaddest thou about so much to change thy way?” 
Blessed shall be the time when our wanderings shall 
cease, when we shall see him face to face, and rest in his 
bosom! Till then, if we are to know anything of heaven 
here below, it must be by living close to Jesus, abiding at 
the foot of his cross, depending on his atonement, looking 
for his coming—that glorious hope, preparing to meet 
him with lamps well trimmed, watching for the midnight 
ery, ‘ Behold, the Bridegroom cometh;” standing even 
in his presence ; looking up to him as we see him pleading 
before the throne, and believing that he is ever with us, 
even unto the end of the world. Oh, may we be in future 
so fixed in heart that the question need not again be 
asked of us, “ Why gaddest thou about so much ¢” 


C GER Yaak 
RR 


IV. 


NUMBER ONE THOUSAND; OR, “BREAD 
ENOUGH AND TO SPARE.” 


‘¢ And when he came to himself, he said, how many hired servants of m 
pers nay bread enough and to spare, and I perish with hunger?” 
UKE xv. 17, 


awaken the dead aroused him; the visions of his 
sinful trance all disappeared; his foul but fascinatin 

dreams were gone; he came to himself. Or the wor 

may be applied to one recovering from insanity. The 
prodigal son had played the madman, for sin is mad- 
ness Of the worst kind. He had been demented, he 
had put bitter for sweet and sweet for bitter, darkness 
for light and light for darkness ; he bad injured himself, 
and had done for his soul what those possessed of devils 
in our Saviour’s time did for their bodies, when they 
wounded themselves with stones, and cut themselves 
with knives. The insane man does not know himself 
to be insane, but as soon as he comes to himself he pain- 
fully perceives the state from which he is escaping. Re- 


« BREAD 
Pd 


ed servants of m 
ah with hunger?” 


d may be ap- 
p, deep swoon. 
is true condi- 
vy himself from 
ain, returnin 
be which shal 
visions of his 
but fascinatin 
Or the wor 
insanity. The 
for sin is mad- 
demented, he 
pitter, darkness 
njured himself, 
sessed of devils 
ies, when they 
cut themselves 
know himself 
h imself he pain- 
sescaping. Re- 


“BREAD ENOUGH AND TO SPARE.” 


455 


turning then to true reason and sound judgment, the 
prodigal came to himself. Another illustration of the 
word may be found in the old world fables of enchant- 
ment: when a man was disenthralled from the magician’s 
spell he “ came to himself.” Classic story has its legend 
of Circe, the enchantress, who transformed men into 
swine. Surely this young man in our parable had been 
degraded in the same manner. He had lowered his 
manhood to the level of the brutes. It should be the 
property of man to have love to his kindred, to have 
respect for right, to have some care for his own interest ; 
this young man had lost all these proper attributes of 
humanity, and so had become as the beast that perish- 
eth. But as the poet sings of Ulysses, that he compelled 
the enchantress td restore his companions to their 
original form, so here we see the prodigal returning to 
manhood, looking away from his sensual pleasures, and 
commencing a course of conduct more consistent with 
his birth and parentage. There are men here to-day 
perhaps who are still in this swoon; O God of heaven, 
arouse them! Some here who are morally insane ; the 
Lord recover them, the divine Physician put his ag 
hand upon their fevered brow, and say to them: “ 
will; be thou made whole.” - Perhaps there are others 
here who have allowed their animal nature to reign 
supreme; may he who destroys the works of the devil , 
deliver them from the power of Satan, and give them 
power to become the sons of God. He shall have all 
the glory ! . 

It appears that when the prodigal came to himself he 
was shut up to two thourhts. Two facts were clear to 
him, that there was plenty in his father’s house, anc that 
he himself wasfamishing. May the two kindred spiritual 
facts have absolute power over all your hearts, if you are 
yet unsaved ; for they were most certain!v all-important 
and pressing truths. These «re no fancics of one in a 
dream ; no ravings of a maniac ; no imagizations of one 
under fascination: it is most true that there is plenty 


456 NUMBER ONE THOUSAND; OR 


of all good things in the Father’s house, and that the 
sinner needs them. Nowhere else ‘can grace be found 
or pardon gained; but with God there is plenitude of 
mercy; let none venture to dispute this glorious truth. 
Equally true is it that the sinner without God is per- 
ishing. He is perishing now; he will perish everlast- 
ingly. All that is worth having in his existence will 
be utterly destroyed, and he himself shall only remain 
as a desolation; the owl and the bittern of misery and 
anguish shall haunt the ruins of his nature forever and 
forever. If we could shut up unconverted men to those 
two thoughts, what hopeful congregations we should 
have. Alas! they forget that there is mercy only with 
God, and fancy that it is to be found somewhere else; 
and they try to slip away from the humbling fact ot 
their own lost estate, and imagine that perhaps there 
may be some back door of escape; that, after all, they 
are not so bad as the Scripture declares, or that perchance 
it shall be right with them at the last, however wrong 
it may be with them now. Alas! my brethren, what 
shall we do with those who wilfully shut their eyes to 
truths of which the evidence is overwhelming, and the 
importance overpowering? I earnestly entreat those 
of you who know how to approach the throne of God 
in faith, to breathe the prayer that he would now bring 
into captivity the unconverted heart, and put these two 
strong fetters upon every unregenerate soul; there is 
abundant grace with God, there is utter destitution with 
themselves. Bound with such fetters, and led into the 
presence of Jesus, the captive would soon receive the 
liberty of the children of God. 

I intend only to dwell this morning, or mainly, upon 
the first thought, the master thought, as it seems to me, 
which was in the prodigal’s mind—that which really 
constrained him to say, “! will arise and go. to my 
father.” It was not, I think, the home-bringing thought 
that he was perishing with hunger, but the impulse to- 
wards his fatherfoundits mainspring in the consideration, 


nd that the 
ce be found 
plenitude of 
orious truth. 
God is per- 
‘ish everlast- 
xistence will 
onl: remain 
f misery and 
» forever and 
| men to those 
13 we should 
rey only with 
ewhere else; 
bling fact ot 
verhaps there 
ifter all, they 
hat perchance 
wever wrong 
‘ethren, what 
their eyes to 
ning, and the 
entreat those 
hrone of God 
iid now bring 
put these two 
oul; there is 
stitution with 

led into the 
n receive the 


mainly, upon 
seems to me, 
which really 
nd go, to my 
ging thought 
p impulse to- 
onsideration, 


‘BREAD ENOUGH AND TO SPARE.” 457 
‘¢ How many hired servants of my father’s have bread 
enough and to spare!” The plenty, the abundance, 
the superabundance of the father’s house, was that 
which attracted him to return home; and many, many 
a soul has been led to seek God when it has fully ke- 
lieved that there was abundant mercy with him. My 
desire this morning shall be to put plainly before every 
sinner here the exceeding abundance of the grace of God 
in Christ Jesus, hoping that the Lord will find out those 
who are his sons, and that they may catch at these 
words, and as they hear of the abundance of the bread 
in the Father’s house, may say, “I will arise and go to 
my Father.” 

I. First, then, let us consider for a short time THE MORE 
THAN ABUNDANCE OF ALL GOOD THINGS IN THE FATHER’S 
House. What dost thou need this morning, awakened 
sinner? Of all that thou needest, there is with God an 
all-sufficient, a superabounding supply; “bread enough 
and to spare.” Let us prove this to thes First, consider 
the Father himslf, and whesoever shall rightly consider 
the Father, will at once perceive that there can be no 
stint to mercy, no bound to the possibilities of grace. 
What is the nature and character of the Supreme? “Is 
he harsh or loving?” saith one. The Scripture answers 
the question, not by telling us that God is loving, but by 
assuring us that God is love. God himself is love ; it is his 
very essence. It is not that love is in God, but that God 
himself is love. Can there be a more concise and more 
positive way of saying that the love of God is infinite ? 

ou cannot measure God himself; your conceptions can- 
not grasp the grandeur of his attributes, neither can you 
tell the dimensions of his love, nor conceive the fulness 
of it. Only this know, that high as the heavens are 
above the earth, so are his ways higher than your ways, 
and his thoughts than your thoughts. His mercy en- 
dureth forever. He pardoneth iniquity, and passeth b 
the transgression of the remnant of his heritage. He 
Yetaineth not his anger forever, because he delighteth in 


458 NUMBER ONE THOUSAND; OR 


mercy. “Thou, Lord, art good, and ready to forgive: 
and plenteous in mercy unto all them that call upon 
thee.” “Thy mercy is great above the heavens.” “ The 
Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy.” 

If divine love alone should not seem sufficient for your 
salvation, remember that with the Father to whom the 
sinner returns, there is as much of wisdom as there is of 

race. Is thy case « very difficult one? He that made 
thee can heal thee. Are thy diseases strange and com- 
plex? He that fashioned the ear, can he not remove its 
deafness? He that made the eye, can he not enlighten it 
if it be blind? No mischief can have happened to thee, 
but what he who is thy God can recover thee from it. 
Matchless wisdom cannot fail to meet the intricacies of 
thy case. 

Neither can there e any failure of power with the 
Father. Dost thou not-know that he who made the 
earth, and stretched out the heavens like a tent to dwell 
in, hath no bound to his strength, nor limit to his might? 
If thou needest omnipotence to lift thee up from the 
slough into which thou hast fallen, omnipotence is ready 
to deliver thee, if thou cry to the strong for strength. 
Though thou shouldest need all the force with which the 
Creator made the worlds, and all the strength with which 
he bears up the pillars of the universe, all that strength 
and force should be laid out for thy good, if thou wouldst 
believingly seek mercy at the hand of God in Christ 
Jesus. None of his power shall be against thee, none of 
his wisdom shall plan thy overthrow ; but love shall reign 
in all, and every attrib. +e of God shall become subser- 
vient to thy salvation. Oh, when I think of sin I cannot 
understand how a sinner can be saved; but when I think 
of God, and look into his heart, I understand how readily 
he can forgive. ‘ Look into his heart,” saith one; “* how 
can we do that?” Hath he not laid bare his heart to 
you? Doyou inquire where he has done this? I answer, 
yonder, upon Calvary’s cross. What was in the very 
centre of the divine heart? What, but the person of the 


to forgive: 
at call upon 
ens.” ‘* The 


jient for your 
to whom the 
as there is of 
e that made 
nge and com- 
ot remove its 
ot enlighten it 
ened to thee, 
» thee from it. 
intricacies of 


ower with the 
vho made the 

. tent to dwell 
+ to his might? 
e up from the 
tence is ready 
o for strength. 
vith which the 
oth with which 
1 that strength 
‘f thou wouldst 
tod in Christ 
+ thee, none of 
love shall reign 
ecome subser- 
of sin I cannot 
t when I think 
nd how readily 
th one; “* how 
e his heart to 
is? Lanswer, 
gs in the very 
p person of the 


ee — 
pits 


‘‘BREAD ENOUGH AND TO SPARE.” 459 
Well-beloved, his only begotten Son? And he hath 
taken his only begotten and nailed him to the cross, be- 
cause, if I may venture so to speak, he loved sinners 
better than hisSon. He spared not his Son, but he spares 
the sinner; he poured out his wrath upon his Son and 
made him the substitute for sinners, that he might lavish 
love upon the guilty who deserved his anger. O soul, if 
thou art lost, it is not from any want of grace, or wisdom, 
or power in the Father ; if thou perish, it is not because 
God is hard to move or unable to save. If thou be a 
castaway, it is not because the Eternal refused to hear thy 
cries for pardon or rejected thy faith in him. On thine 
own head be thy blood, if thy soul be lost. If thou 
starve, thou starvest because thou wilt starve ; ‘for in the 
Father’s house there is “bread enough and to spare.” 
But, now, consider a second matter which may set this 
more clearly before us. Think of the son of God, who is 
indeed the true bread of life for sinners. Sinner, I re- 
turn to my personal address. Thou needest a Saviour ; 
and thou mayst well be encouraged when thou seest that 
a Saviour is provided—provided by God, since it is cer- 
tain he would not make a mistake in the provision. But 
consider who the Saviour is. He ishimself God. Jesus 
who came from heaven for our redemption was not an 
angel, else might we tremble to trust the weight of our 
sin upon him. He was not ‘mere man, or he could but 
have suffered as a substitute for many, if indeed for one; 
but he was very God of very God, in the beginning with 
the Father. And does such a one come to redeem? Is 
there room to doubt as to his ability, if that be the fact ? 
I do confess this day, that if my sins were ten thousand 
times heavier than they are, yea, and if I had all the sins 
of this crowd in addition piled upon me, I could trust 
Jesus with them all at this moment now that I know him 
to be the Christ of God. He is the mighty God, and by 


| his pierced hand the burden of our sins 1s easily removed ; 


he blotteth out our sins, he casts chem into the depths of 
the sea. 


460 NUMBER ONE THOUSAND $ OR 


But think of what Jesus the Son of God has done. He 
who was God, and thus blessed forever, left the throne 
and royalties of heaven, and stooped to yonder manger, 
There he lies ; his mother wraps him in swaddling clothes, 
he hangs upon her breast; the Infinite is clothed as an 
infant, the Invisible is made manifest in flesh, the Al- 
mighty is linked with weakness, for our sakes. Oh, 
matchless stoop of condescension! Ifthe Redeemer God 
does this in order to save us, shall it be thought a thing 
impossible for him to save the vilest of the vile? Can 
any thing be too hard for him who comes from heaven to 
earth to redeem ? 

Pause not because of astonishment, but press onward. 
Do you see him who was God over all, blessed forever, 
living more than thirty years in the midst of the sons of 
men, bearing the infirmities of manhood, taking upon 
himself our sickness, and sharing our sorrows; his feet 
weary with treading the acres of Palestine; his body 
: faint oftentimes with hunger and thirst, and labor; his 
ae knees knit to the earth with midnight prayer; his eyes 

| red with weeping (for ofttimes Jesus wept), tempted in all 
points like as we are? Matchless spectacle! An incar- 
nate God dwells amoxy sinners, and endures their contra- 
diction! What glory flashed forth ever and anon from 
the mi¢s+ of his lowliness! a glory which should render 
faith ‘1 lira inevitable. Thou who didst walk the sea: 
thou wio didst raise the dead, it is not rational to doubt 
thy power to forgive sins! Didst thou not thyself put it 
so when thou badest the man take up his bed and walk! 
“ Whether is easier, to say, Thy sins be forgiven thee ; or 
| to say, Rise up and walk?” Assuredly he is able to save 
to the uttermost them that come unto God by him: he | 
was able even here on earth in weakness to forgive sins, 
much more now that he is seated in his glory. He is 
exalted on high to be a Prince and a Saviour, to give 
gush | repentance ant remission of sins. ; 
PA ee. ut, ah! the master proof that in Christ Jesus there is 
ty ay “bread enough and to épare,” is the cross. Will you 


LY 


has done. He 
oft the throne 
onder manger. 
ddling clothes, 
clothed as an 
1 flesh, the Al- 
ur sakes. Oh, 
Redeemer God 
hought a thing 
the vile? Can 
from heaven to 


t press onward. 
blessed forever, 
+t of the sons of 
d, taking upon 
orrows; his feet 
stine; his body 
, and labor ; his 
prayer; his eyes 
t), tempted in all 
cle! An incar- 
ures their contra- 

and anon from 
ch should render 


st walk the sea: “@ 


rational to doubt 
ot thyself put it 
is bed and walk! 
forgiven thee ; of 
he is able to save 
God by him : he 
3 to forgive sins, 
his glory. He is 
Saviour, to give 


“ist Jesus there is 
cross. Will you 


“BREAD ENOUGH AND TO SPARE.”’ 461 
follow m . : 
eda anes gh will you follow him, rather, to 
you see the blood t f 
upon the ground in’ hi y sweat as it falls 
genset tutor ‘a his agony? Can you think of his 
along the Via D 1 io od and Pilate? Can you trace him 
aces sealed olor of J erusalem? Will your tender 
tn Mileed end’ at see him nailed to the tree, and lifted 
and die? This is but tl 2 oo UP 
ward kernel of his sufferi the shell; as for the in- 
Bike Gan’ cone a erings no language can describe it 
God laid sin on ai gi into it. The everlasting 
fell the wrath, ‘Tt hoe where the sin was laid there 
hath put him om duh ae the Lord to bruise him; he 
dum @d’s ont ‘a ue .’ Now he that died upon the cross 
+n the wiantt y : ‘ otten Son. _ Can you conceive a limit 
sieee wis think . la Savionr’s death ? Iknow there are 
to limit the merit f ie blew to their system of theology 
igriogs nealael cai 1e blood of Jesus: if my system of 
emia’ i plone 1a limitation, I would cast it to the 
lodging in my oa 8 e not, allow the thought to find a 
In Ohiist’s nich ih se seems so near akin to blasphemy 
iocmmeet:- fale ed work I see an ocean of merit; m 
There must be pes ema my eye discovers no +h 
1) God badi-ao- valle oa efficacy in the blood of Christ, 
world, but ten th * it, to have saved not only all this 
ha Maker's Pfr worlds, had they transgressed 
and limit is out of he. a ee 
a ib ee = os le question. Hay ing a divine per- 
limited value; b + is not consistent to conceive of 
t ‘Wendie i emitie : ane ese one inapplicable 
ixes i ime (Re of the divine purpose 
p neaart | cegy of the infinite offering, but | ei 
Teena lenin age some x vk. In the atonement of Christ 
Ht watchs Meo oe and to spare ;” even as 
be nrg) of those that haiey ” aia 5 pi 
_ but now let me lead you to an int of 
joyful consideration, and that is the Holy Spintt eee 
is tale af lle Vthar’ we quot dis hen: | theology. 
“i ather, we spoke of the Son; let us now 


462 NUMBER ONE THOUSAND; OR 


‘speak of the Holy Spirit. Wedo him all too little honor, 
for the Holy Spirit condescends to come to earth and 
dwell in our hearts; and notwithstanding all our provo- 
cations he still abides within his people. Now sinner, 
thou needest a new life and thou needest holiness, for 
both of these are necessary to make thee fit for heaven. 
Is there a provision for this? The Holy Spirit is provided 
and given in the covenant of grace; and surely in him 
there is “enough and to spave.” What cannot the Holy 
Spirit do? Being divine, nothing can be beyond his 
power. Look at what he has already done. He moved 
upon the face of chaos, and brought it into order ; all the 
beauty of creation arose beneath his moulding breath. 
We ourselves must confess with Elihu, “The Spirit of 
God hath made me, and the breath of the Almighty hath 
given me life.” Think of the great deeds of the Holy 
Spirit at Pentecost, when men unlearned spake with 
tongues of which they knew not a syllable aforetime, and 
the flames of fire upon them were also within them, so 
that their hearts burned with zeal and courage to which 
they hitherto had been strangers. Think of the Holy 
Spirit’s work on such a one as Saul of Tarsus. That 
persecutor foams blood, he is a very wolf, he would devour 
the saints of God at Da nascus, and yet, within a few 
moments, you hear him say, “ Who art thou, Lord?” 
and yet again, “ Lord, what wilt thou have me to do ¢” 
His heart is changed; the Spirit of God has new created 
it; the adamant is melted in a moment into wax. Many 
of us stand before you as the living monuments of what 
the Holy Ghost can do, and we can assure you from our 
own experience, that there is no inward evil which he’ 
cannot overcome, no lustful desire of the flesh which he 
cannot subdue, no obduracy of the affections which he 
cannot melt. Is anything too hard for the Lord? Is the 
Spirit of the Lord straitened? Surely no sinner can be 
beyond the possibilities of mercy when the Holy Spirit 
condescends to be the agent cf human conversion. O 
sinner, if thou perish, it is not beeause the Holy Spirit 


ittle honor, 
earth and 
our provo- 
Jow sinner, 
1oliness, for 
for heaven. 
t is provided 
rely in_him 
ot the Holy 
beyond his 
He moved 
rder ; all the 
ding breath. 
‘he Spirit of 
Imighty hath 
of the Holy 
spake with 
foretime, and 
Hhin them, so 
age to which 
of the Holy 
Tarsus. That 
would devour 
within a few 
thou, Lord?” 
me to do” 
s new created 
b wax, Many 
ents of what 
you from our 


svil which he 


esh which he 
ons which he 
Lord? Is the 
inner can be 
Holy Spirit 
nversion. 


Holy Spirit 


‘“‘BREAD ENOUGH AND TO SPARE.” 463 
wants 
Father fails gn 1 me blood of Jesus lacks efficacy, or the 
Christ, but do nig 3, it is because thou believest not ir 
alvaniant hea abide in wilful rebellion refusing the 
A few rapid fate ife which is placed before lg ' 
vo to show still fi ences upon other things, which will 
Fi teerierd thes the oe of the ‘provision of 
God has hee, : ie at well that throughout all the ages 
prophets have be ng one prophet after another, and these 
martyrs and pra succeeded by apostles, and these b 
Re aa essors, and pastors and evangelists ae 
renga lead 10se have been commissioned by the Lord 
roti pe : pea 7 and what has been the messag 
Ghuiet. the oe deliver 2 They have all pointed i 
pe bee grent areeer Moses and the prophets all 
ost thou think so have all truly God-sent ambassadors 
osiieied aa: -Aeit fle 2 : oo that God has made all this fuss 
Sat tes, aaa (Has he sent all these servants to call 
plied his i insufficiently furnished ? Has he multi 
aoe ee _— through so long a time to bid “yi 
sufficient for th Ae provision which is not, after all 
siaiiecdcaetth oo Oh, it cannot be! God is not 
of his mere = oes he mock poor needy souls. The stores 
Rasclleci, oe for the utmost emergencies 
eres ani ; EO that God has been pleased to stake his 
prea col a P en Men desire a name, and God 
a to select font ees - Ts it - ae ~_ patts 
and s U » . Sl not t 1e CG *3] 
pon thet esa When instead of the Daler alee 
commas ma e-tree, and instead of the thorn shall 
Serineca ir-tree, it shall be to the Lord for a name 
en a ta ee i 
gi : ‘ roe Wi a name by savi : 
som melons ont Saviour? Ah! his great reine 
el out — as black as hell, and pardoning 
pi gh — oulest of the foul, Is there one mon- 
scoped 1ere who —— to glority God great 
3 is salvation will be the wonder of “A mek 


O thou most 


the amazement of devils? I hope there is 


‘upon the greatest of offenders. 


464 NUMBER ONE THOUSAND; OR 


degraded, black, loathsome sinner, nearest to being a 
damned sinner! if this voice can reach thee, I challenge 
thee to come and prove whether God’s mercy is not a 
match for thy sin. Thou Goliath sinner, come thou 
hither; thou shalt find that God can slay thine enmity, 
and make thee yet his friend, and the more his loving 
and adoring servant, because great forgiveness shall 
secure great love. Such is the greatness of divine mercy, 
that “where sin abounded, grace doth much more 
abound,” 

Dost thou think, again, O sinner, that Jesus Christ 
came out of heaven to do a little deed, and to provide a 
slender store of merey? Dost thou think he went up to 
Calvary, and down to the grave, and all, that he might 
do a common-place thing, and provide a stinted, narrow, 
limited salvation, such as thine unbelief would imagine 
his redemption to be? No. 
Hercules, but these were child’s play compared with the 
labors of Christ who slew the lion of hell, turned a puri- 
fying stream through the Augean stables of man’s sin, 
and cleansed them, and performed ten thousand miracles 
besides: and will you so depreciate Christ as to imagine 
that what he has accomplished is, after all, little, so little 
that it is not enough tosave you? Ifit were in my power 
to single out the man who has been the most dishonest, 
most licentious, most drunken, most profane—in three 
words, most earthly, gensual, devilish—I would repeat 
the challenge which i gave just now, and bid him draw 
near to Jesus, and see whether the fountain filled with 
Christ’s atoning blood cannot wash him white. I chal- 
lenge him at this instant to come and cast himself at the 
dear Redeemer’s feet, and see if he will say, “I cannot 
save thee, thou hast sinned beyond my power.” It shall 
never, never, never be, for he is able to the uttermost to 
eave. He is a Saviour, and a great one. Christ will be 
honored by the grandeur of the grace which he bestows 
There is in him pardon 
“enough and to spare.” 


We speak of the labors of 


"PM mo 


t to being 4 
, L challenge 
ercy is not a 
+, come thou 
thine enmity, 
ore his lovin 
giveness sha 

divine mercy, 
. much more 


4 Jesus Christ 
d to provide ® 
he went up to 
that he might 
tinted, narrow, 
would imagine 
f the labors ot 
pared with the 
, turned a purl: 
es of man’s SiN, 
ousand miracles 
st as to Imagine 
il, little, so little 
ere in my power 
most dishonest, 
rofane—in three 
I would repeat 
1 bid him draw 
htain filled with 
white. I chal- 
st himself at the 
say, “1 cannot 
ower.” It shall 
he uttermost to 
Qhrist will be 
hich he bestows 
. in him pardon 


‘BREAD ENOUGH AND TO SPARE.” 


I must leave this point, but I cannot do so without 
adding that Ithink “BrEeap ENOUGH AND To sPARE” might 
be taken for the motto of the gospel. I believe in par- 
ticular redemption, and that Christ laid down his life for 
his sheep; but, as I have already said, I do not believe 
in the limited value of that redemption; how else could 
I dare to read the words of John, * He is the propitiation 
for our sins: and not for ours only, but also for the sins 
of the whole world.” There is a sure portion for his own 
elect, but there is also over and above “to spare.” I 
believe in the electing love which will save all its objects 
— bread enough ;” but I believe in boundless benevolence, 
“Bread enough and to spare.’ We, when we have a 
purpose to accomplish, put forth the requisite quantity of 
strength and no more, for we must be economical, we 
must not waste our limited store; even charity gives the 
poor man no more than he absolutely needs; but when 
God feeds the multitude, he spreads the board with im- 
perial bounty. Our water-cart runs up and down the 
favored road, but when heaven’s clouds would favor the 
good man’s fields, they deluge whole nations, and even 
pour themselves upon the sea. There is no real waste 
with God; but at the same time there is no stint. 

‘BREAD ENOUGH AND TO sPARE;” write that inscription 

over the house of mercy, and let every hungry passer-by 

be encouraged thereby to enter in and eat. 

II. We must now pass on to a second consideration, 
and dwell very briefly on it. According to the text, there 
was not only bread enough in the house, but rug LowsEst 
IN THE FaviveEr’s HOUSE ENJOYED ENOUGH AND To SPARE. 

We can never make a parable run on all-fours, there- 
fore we cannot find the exact counterpart of the “ hired 
servants.” I understand the prodigal to have meant this, 
that the very lowest menial servant employed by his 
father had bread to eat, and had “bread enough and to 
spare.” Now, how should we translate this? Why, 
sinner, the very lowest creature that God has made, that 
has not sinned against him, is well supplied and has 


466 NUMBER ONE THOUSAND; OR 


abounding happiness. There are adaptions for pleasure 
in the organizations of the lowest animals, See how the 
gnats dance in the summer’s sunbeam ; hear the swallows 
as they scream with delight when on the wing. He who 
cares for birds and insects will surely care for men. 
God who hears the ravens when they cry, will he not 
hear the returning penitent? He gives these insects 
happiness; did he mean me to be wretched? Surely he 
who opens his hand and supplies the lack of every living 
thing, will not refuse to open his hand and supply my 
needs if I seek his face. 

Yet I must not make these lowest creatures to be the 
hired servants. Whom shall I then select among men? 
I will put it thus. The very worst of sinners that have 
come to Christ have found grace “ enough and to spare,” 
and the very least of saints who dwell in the house of the 
Lord find love “enough and to spare.” Take then the 
most quilty of sinners, and see how bountifully the Lord 
treats them when they turn unto him. Did not some of 
you, who are yourselves unconverted, once know persons 
who were at least as bad, perhaps more outwardly 
immoral than yourselves? ell, they have been con- 
verted, though you have not been; and when they were 
converted, what was their testimony? Did the blood of 
Christ avail to cleanse them? Oh, yes; and more than 
cleanse them, for it added to beauty not their own. 
They were naked once; was Jesus able to clothe them % 
Was there a sufficient covering in his righteousness ¢ 
Ah, yes! and adornment was superadded ; they received 
not a bd¥e apparel, but a royal raiment. You have seen 
others thus liberally treated, does not this induce you 
also to come? Some of us need not confine our remarks 
to others, for we can speak personally of ourselves. We 
came to Jesus as full of sin as ever you can be, and felt 
ourselves beyond measure lost and ruined; but, oh, his 
tender love! I could sooner stand here and weep than 
speak to you of it. My soul melts in gratitude when I 
think of the infinite mercy of God to me in that hour 


for pleasure 
See how the 
the swallows 
ng. He who 
are for men. 
will he not 
these insects 
2 Surely he 
‘every living 


d supply my 


res to be the 
among men ¢ 
ers that have 
and to spare,” 
.e house of the 
[ake then the 
‘ully the Lord 
d not some of 
know persons 
re outwardly 
ave been con- 
en they were 
1 the blood of 
nd more than 
ot their own. 
clothe them 4 
‘ighteousness 4 
they received 
vou have seen 
is induce you 
our remarks 
rselves. We 
be, and felt 
> but, oh, his 
d weep than 
itude when 
in that hour 


‘BREAD ENOUGH AND TO SPARE.” 467 


when I came seeking mercy at his hands, Oh! why will 
not you also come? May his Holy Spirit sweetly draw 
you! I proved that there was bread enough, merey 
enough, forgiveness enough, and to spare. Come along, 
come along, poor guilty one; come che, there is room 
enough for thee. 

Now, if the chief of sinners bear this witness, so do the 
most obscure of saints. If we could call forth from his 
seat a werk believer in God, who is almost unknown in 
the church, one who sometimes questions whether he is 
indeed a child of God, and would be willing to be a hired 
servant so long as he might belong to God, and if I were 
to ask him, ‘“‘ Now after all how has the Lord dealt with 
you?” what would be his reply? You have many 
afflictions, doubts, and fears, but have you any complaints 
against your Lord? When you have waited upon him 
for daily grace, has he denied yon? When you have been 
full of troubles, has he refused you comfort? When you 
have been plunged in distress, has he declined to deliver 
you? The Lord himself asks, ‘“ Have [ been a wilderness 
unto Israel?” Testify against the Lord, ye his people, 
if ye have aught against him, Lear, O heavens, and 
give ear, O earth, whosoever there be in God’s service 
who has found him a hard task-master, let him speak. 
Among the angels before Jehovah’s throne, and among 
men redeemed on earth, if there be any one that can say 
he hath been dealt with unjustly or treated with ungener- 
ous churlishness, let him lift up his voice! But there is 
not one. Even the devil himself, when he spoke of God 
and of his servant Job, said ‘ Doth Job serve God for 
nought?” Of course he did not: God will not let his 
servants serve him for nought; he will pay them super- 
abundant wages, and they shall all bear witness that at 
his table there is ‘bread enough and to spare.” Now, 
if these still enjoy the bread of the I’ather’s house, these 
who were once great sinners, these who are now-.only 
very commonplace saints, surely, sinner, it should en- 
courage you to say, “I will arise and go to my Father,” 
for his hired servants “have bread enough and to spare.” 


se NX x 
V4 WV &. YY St 
id ee 
¥,, <a 
y os 
- © 
2 iM es. 
rik if 
So Slt " <i 53° 
© = Oo =——5 | @ 
ep ol =I) 2 2.5 
=F S= = = Sos 
Bas 
'D 5. 
> SH S 
dy =o 
N G IN 
Baro “AM & 
we NF we he 


] - MEER ter een: eT NODA SRE RA 1 ay cs se ia aa on! tats le ae Tao oe Se ie AEE Wt 


468 NUMBER ONE THOUSAND; OR 


III. Notice in the third place, that the text dwells 
UpON THE MULTITUDE OF THOSE WHO HAVE “BREAD ENOUGH 
AND TO sPARE.” The prodigal lays an emphasis upon 
that word, “ How many hired servants of my father’s !” 
He was thinking of their great number, and counting 
them over. He thought of those that tended the cattle, 
of those that went out with the camels, of those that 
watched - the sheep, and those that minded the corn, and 
those that waited in the house; he ran them over in his 
mind:, his father was great in the land, and had many 
servants; yet.he knew that they all had of the best food 
“enough and to spare.” ‘Why should I perish with 
hunger? Iam only one at any rate; though my hunger 
seem insatiable, it is but one belly that has to be filled, 
and, lo, my father fills hundreds, thousands every day ; 
why should I perish with hunger?” Now, O thou 
awakened sinner, thou who dost feel this morning thy sin 
and misery, think of the numbers upon whom God has 
bestowed his grace xlready. Think of the countless hosts 
in heaven: if thou wert introduced there to-day, thou 
wouldst find it as easy to tell the stars, or the sands of 
the sea, as to count the multitudes that are bef6re the 
throne even now. 

Let us add a few words to close with, close grap- 
pling words to some of you to whom God has sent his 
message this. morning, and whom he intends to save. 
Oh you who have been long hearers of the gospel, and 
who know it well in theory, but have felt none of the 
power of it in your hearts, let me now remind you 
where and what you are! Youare perishing. As the 
Lord liveth, there is but a step between you and death ; 
but a step, nay, but a breath between you and hell. 
Sinner, if at this moment thy heart should cease its 
beating, and there are a thousand causes that might 
produce that result ere the clock ticks again, thou 
wouldst be in the flames of divine wrath. Canst thou 
bear to be in such peril? If you were hanging over a 
rock by a slender thread which must soon break, and i 


e text dwells 
BREAD qponenlen 
jasis upo 
aa father’s Y” 
_ and counting 
ed the cattle, 
;. of those that 
j the corn, an” 
xem over in his 
and had many 
of the best food 
perish with 


has to be ae 
ex ery day ; 
Now, ©. thot 


with, close graP- 
God has sent 118 

intends to save. 
of the gospel and 
e felt none 0 


mind you 
now re ‘Ag the 


rath. ¥V 
ere hangin 


4 s00n preak, and 


‘oBREAD ENOUGH AND TO SPARE.” 


469 


you would then fall headlong down a terrible precipice, 
ou would not sleep, but be full of alarm. May you 

have sense enough, wit enough, grace enough, to be 

alarmed until you escape from the wrath to come. 

Recollect, however, that while you are perishing, you 
are perishing in sight of plenty; you are famishing 
where a table is abundantly spread; what is more, 
there are those whom you know now sitting at that 
table and feasting. What sad perversity for a man to 
persist in being starved in the midst of a banquet, 
where others are being satisfied with good things. 

But I think I hear you say, “I fear I have no right 
to come to Jesus.”’ I will ask you this: have you any 
right to say that till you have been denied? Did you 
ever try to go to Christ? Has he ever rejected you? 
If then you have never received a repulse, why do you 
wickedly imagine that he would repel you? Wickedly, 
I say, for it is an offence against the Christ who opened 
his heart-upon the cross, to imagine that he could re- 
pel a penitent. Have you any right to say, “ But I 
am ndt one of those for whom mercy is provided ? ”’ 
Who told you so? Have you climbed to heaven and 
read the secret records of God’s election? Has the 
Lord revealed a strange decree to you, and said, “Go 
and despair, I will have no pity on you?” If you say 
that God has so spoken, I do not believe vou. In this 
sacred book is recorded what God has said, here is the 
sure word of testimony, and in it I find it said of no 
humble seeker, that God hath shut him out from his 
grace. Why hast thou a right to invent such a fiction 
in order to secure thine own damnation? Instead 
thereof, there is much in the word of God and else- 
where to encourage thee in coming to Christ. He has 
not repelled one sinner yet; that is good to begin 
with; it is not likely that he would, for since he died 


‘to save sinners, why should he reject them when they 


seek to be saved:? 


You say, “I am afraid to come to 
Christ.” 


Is that wise? I have heard of a poor navi- 


P2 


470 ‘NUMBER ONE THOUSAND; OR 


gator who had been converted, who had ‘but little edu- 
cation, but who knew the grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, and when dying, very cheerfully and joyfully 
longed to depart. His wife said to him, “ But, mon, 
ain’t ye afeared to stand before the judge?” ‘ Wo- 
man,” said he, “‘why should I be afeared of a man as 
died for me?’ Oh, why should you be afraid of 
Christ who died for sinners? The idea of being afraid 
of him should be banished by the fact that he shed his 
blood for the guilty. You have much reason to be- 
lieve from the very fact that he died, that he will re- 
ceive you. Besides, you have his word for it, for he 
saith, ‘“‘ Him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast 
out ’’--for no reason, and no way, and on no occasion, 
and under no pretence, and for no motive. “I will 
not east him out,” says the original. ‘ Him that 
cometh to me I will in no wise cast out.”” You say it 
is too good to be true that there can be pardon; for 
you: this isa foolish measuring of God’s corn with 
your bushel, and because it seems too et a thing for 
you to receive, you fancy it is too good for God to be- 
stow. Let the greatness of the good news be one rea- 
~~ believing that the news is true, for it is so like 
God. 

Because the gospel assures us that he forgives great 
sins through a great Saviour, it looks as if it were true, 
since he is so great a God, : ; 

What should be the result of all this with every sin- 
ner here at this time? I think this good news: should 
arouse those who have almost gone to sleep through 
despair. The sailors have been pumping the vessel, 
the leaks are gaining, she is going down, the captain is 
persuaded she must be a wreck. Depressed by such | 
evil tidings, the men refuse to work; and since the 
boats are all stove in and they cannot make a raft, they 
sit down in despair. Presently the captain has better 
news for them. ‘She will float,” he says; ‘‘ the wind 
is abating too, the pumps tell upon the water, the leak 


OR 


1 ‘but little edu- 
yur Lord Jesus 
Hy and joyfully 
im, “ But, mon, 
udge?”? ‘ Wo- 
ved of a man as 
yu be afraid of 
a of being afraid 
that he shed his 
ch reason to be- 
that he will re- 
ord for it, for he 
1 in no wise cast 
1 on no occasion, 
motive. ‘I will 
al. “Him that 
ut.’ You say it 
in be pardon for 
God’s corn with 
ood a thing for 
e for God to be- 
news be one rea- 
o, for it is so like 


he forgives great 
as if it were true, 


g with every sin- 
rood news: should 
to sleep through 
nping the vessel, 


wn, the captain 1s | 


epressed by such 


x; and since the f 


make a raft, they 
aptain has better 
says; ‘the wind 
he water, the leak 


his sins and come to Christ. 


‘(BREAD ENOUGH AND TO SPARE.” 471 


can be reached yet.’’ See how they work; with what 
cheery courage they toil on, because there is hope! 
Soul, there is hope! There is hope! TuHere 1s Hore! 
To the harlot, to the thief, to the drunkard. 
‘¢ There is no hope,”’ says Satan. Liar that thou art, 
et thee back to thy den; for thee there is no hope; 
Feb for fallen man, though he be in the mire of sin up 


. to his very neck, though he be at the gates of death, 
_ while he lives there is h 


ope. There is hope for hopeless 
souls in the Saviour. 

In addition to arousing us, this ought to elevate the 
sinner’s thoughts. Some years ago, there was a crossin 
sweeper in Dublin, with his broom, at the corner, an 
in all probability his highest thoughts were to keep the 
crossing clean, and look for the pence. One day, a law- 
yer put his hand upon his shoulder, and said to him, 
“My good fellow, do you know that you are heir to a 
fortune of ten thousand pounds a year?” “Do you 
mean it?’ said he. ‘Ido,’ hesaid. “I have just re- 
ceived the information ; Iam sure you are the man.’” 
He walked away, and he forgot his broom. Are you aston- 
ished? Why, who would not have forgotten a broom 
when suddenly made possessor of ten thousand a year ? 
So, I pray that some poor sinners, who have been think- 
ing of the pleasures of the world, when.they hear that 
there is hope, and that there is heaven to be had, will 
forget the deceitful pleasures of sin, and follow after 
iho and better things, 

Should it not also purify the mind? The prodigal, 
when hesaid, ‘I will arise and go to my father,” became 
in a measure reformed from that very moment. How? 
say you. Why, he left the swine-trough: more, he left 
the wine cup, and he left the harlots. He did not go 


with the harlot on his arm, and the wine cup in his hand, 
and say, “I will take these with me, and go to my fa- 
ther.” It could not be. These were all left, and though 
-he had no goodness to bring, yet he did not try to keep 

I shall close with 


this re- 


AZ 
at* 


NUMBER ONE THOUSAND. 


mark, because it will act as a sort of caveat, and be a fit 
word to season the wide invitations of the free gospel. 
Some of you, I fear, will make mischief even out of the 
gospel, and will dare to take the cross and use it for a 
gibbet for your souls. If God is so merciful, you will 

o therefore and sin the more: and because grace is 

reely given, thérefore you will continue in sin that 
grace may abound. If you do this, I: would solemnly 
remind you I have no grace to preach to such as you. 
‘Your damnation is just ;” itis the word of inspiration, 
and the only one I know that is applicable to such as 
you are; but every needy, guilty soul that*desires a 
Saviour is told to-day to believe in Jesus, that is, trust 
in the substitution and sacrifice of Christ, trust him to 
take your sin and blot it out; trust him to take your 
soul and save it. Trust Christ entirely, and you are 
forgiven this very moment; you are saved this very in- 
stant, and you may rejoice now in the fact that being 
justified by faith you have peace with God through Jesus 
Christ our Lord. O come ye, come ye, come ye; come 
and welcome; come ye now to the Redeemer’s blood. 
Holy Spirit, compel them to come in, that the house of 
mercy may be filled. Amen, and Amen. 


). 


aveat, and be a fit 

f the free gospel. 
ef even out of the 
}and use it for a 
nerciful, you will 
because grace is 
tinue in sin that 
would solemnly 
1 to such as you. 
ord of inspiration, 
icable to such as 
yul that‘ desires a 
esus, that is, trust 
rist, trust him to 
him to take your 
rely, and you ar? 
saved this very in- 
1e fact that being 
God through Jesus 
ye, come ye; come 
Redeemer’s blood. 
1, that the house of 
men. 


