“THM 





Mrs.Wm.McKinley Walker | 
2332 Chestnut Avenue 
Long Beach 6 | 
California 





Theology Library 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 
California 


rom the library of 


WM. MCKINLEY WALKER 





Donated from the Library 
of 
Wm. McKinley Walker 


Ta | LED 


Waole Wallttr< /9b0, 





THE HOLY SPIRIT 





The Holy Spirit 


Who He Is and What He Does 


and 


How to Know Him in All the Fulness 
of His Gracious and Glorious Ministry 


ke “ OL) / } FE AtyBy sey Aw O 
R. A. TORREY, D.D. /896~/ #20. 


Luthor of “<Soul-Winning Sermons ;”’ “The Persow 
and Work of the Holy Spirit,” ete. 


Bie 


NEW YORK 


Fleming H. Revell Company 


LONDON AND EDINBURGH 


Copyright, Mcmxxvu, by 
FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY 


New York: 158 Fifth Avenue 
London: 99 Anerley Road 


PREFACE 


the Holy Spirit that I have given in the various 

cities in which I have held meetings during the 
last twenty-five years. Of course, the addresses have 
grown and been modified as I have gone from city to city. 
They have been greatly blessed of God in bringing multi- 
tudes of believers into a larger Christian experience and 
life, in stirring up and equipping many for intelligent 
service and directly or indirectly, in the conversion, I 
presume, of a very goodly company in Japan, China, 
Australia, India, England, Scotland, Ireland, Germany, 
and in various states of the Union. After Mr. Moody 
had heard the addresses in the earlier form in which they 
were given, he insisted that I should give them in every 
place I visited, and the demand for their publication has 
increased as the years have gone by. 

Nearly two years ago, I brought out a volume entitled 
Soul-Winning Sermons, containing all the sermons that I 
ordinarily preached in the night meetings wherever I con- 
ducted a series of meetings covering four weeks, I in- 
tended to bring out also a companion volume, containing 
the morning or afternoon addresses that I give to Chris- 
tians in a four-weeks series, but these addresses are for 
the most part devoted to two lines of teaching—teaching 
concerning prayer and teaching concerning the Holy 
Spirit and His Work. When this latter book was well 
under way, it seemed wise to divide it into two volumes: 


5 


4 he chapters in this book are really addresses on 


6 PREFACE 


one devoted entirely to the subject of Prayer, and the other 
devoted entirely to the related subject of the Holy Spirit 
and His Work. The volume on Prayer, entitled The Power 
of Prayer and the Prayer of Power, came out almost 
simultaneously with the volume, Soul-Winning Sermons. 
Since then I have been so almost incessantly engaged, both 
winter and summer, in conducting evangelistic meetings 
and Bible conferences, and in writing other books for 
which the publishers could not wait, that I have been un- 
able to bring out the volume on the Holy Spirit until now. 

The substance of these addresses may be found in 
books of mine already published, and when people have 
asked me if they could not get the addresses in printed 
form I have replied: “You can find the substance of | 
them in my book, The Person and Work of the Holy 
Spirit, or in my other book, What the Bible Teaches.” 
But many who have secured those books have said: “ We 
want the addresses in the form that you give them in your 
meetings, with the illustrations that you use and the ap- 
plications and personal appeals that you make.” So here 
they are, and it is hoped that God may use them in the 
printed form even as He has so wonderfully used them 
when spoken from the platform. 

In the present book there is no attempt to treat this 
great subject in a thorough and comprehensive way and 
in all its manifold bearings. If one desires to find such 
treatment of the subject he is referred to my book, The 
Person and Work of the Holy Spirit, in which it is at- 
tempted to give an exhaustive treatment of this important 
subject. The aim of this book is altogether practical; 
viz., to produce immediate results of definite personal 
blessing in the heart and life and service of every one 
who reads it. 


PREFACE 7 


Anyone who has this volume and the books, Soul-Win- 
ning Sermons and The Power of Prayer and the Prayer 
of Power, and my smaller book, Getting the Gold Out of 
the Word of God, has practically all the sermons and ad- 
dresses that I give in any evangelistic campaign of ordi- 
nary length. However, not all the sermons that I preach 


_ in my longer series of meetings—covering, for example, 


three continuous months each (as in Liverpool and in 
Philadelphia), or covering five continuous months (as in 
London) ,—are in print, nor even in manuscript form. 

R. A. T. 





CONTENTS 


ft THE PERSONALITY OF THE Hoty Spirit. . Il 
II. THe Horny Spirit Convincinc MEN oF Sin. 41 


III]. Tue RecENERATING WorK oF THE HoLy 
SPiRD Dee ee. ky™.- Gara ee GOD IO 


IV. How vo BE Fully AND FoREVER SATISFIED . 88 


Vv. THE BAPTISM WITH THE Hoty Spirit: WHAT 
igic-Anp, Waar 1? Dorms . > 6 Seo 2.107 


VI. Tue Baptism with THE Hoty Spirit: WHO 
NEEps It AND WHo Can Havelr. .. . 136 


VII. Tue Baptism witH THE Hoty Spirit: How 
OCOD DAGN SUT eh) > J cest & ¢ cheered - a 4 


Vill. Tux Baptism WITH THE Hoty Spirit: How 
nO Ontain Irt- Rica? Now . «2 «- .. 175 


22 Aad We 


ay 
aves 





I 
THE PERSONALITY OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 


E, begin herewith a series of studies of the person 
and work of the Holy Spirit. We shall begin this 


series s by considering what the Bible has to say 


about the oly — as a Soe It is en 2 to 





know_His Blessed wor souls Patiout first 
coming to know the Holy Spirit as a persom,! One of the 
most fruitful sources of error and misconception, of un- 
wholesome enthusiasm and false fire and fanaticism, in the 
treatment of this whole subject, is from trying to know 
,the work of the Holy ee before we first come t 










subject today is, “The 


Oo many of 3 you doubtless that will seem like a rather 
abstract, abstruse, and impractical subject to take up with 
a popular audience. I do not blame you if you think so, 
for I can remember very distinctly the time when I so 
thought. I recall the first popular address that I ever 
heard upon the subject of the personality of the Holy 
Spirit. It was given by the late Dr. James H. Brooks, of 
St. Louis, that giant of Bible teaching. It was given in 
St. Paul, Minnesota. As I say, it was the first popular 
address that I had ever heard on that subject. Of course 
I had heard lectures upon the subject in the theological 
+S 


12 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


setninary, but this was an address before a popular au- 
dience. When Dr. Brooks had finished his address I said 
to myself, “ Well, Dr. Brooks has proved his point, the) 
Holy Spirit certainly i “Nbut what difference does 
it make anyhow whether the Holy Spirit is a Divine Per- 
son, or whether the Holy Spirit is a Divine Influence 
whith God the Father, Who doubtless is a person, sends ~ 
into our hearts? It is divine anyhow.” 

But I afterward came to find out that it made all the 
difference in the world. I discovered from the study of 
the Word of God, and from my own experience and the 

, experience of others, that_the doctrine of the personali 
Lof the Holy Spirit i is not_on funda ental, but vital and 
Jimmeasurably practical.} Any one ‘who does not know 
| Holy Spirit_as_a prea has not attained_untg 
complete and well rounded Christian _experience.} Any 


one who knows_God the Father, and God the Son, and 





5 — : 3 a ed 
does not know God the Haly Spirit, has not attained unto 
[the Christian conception of God, nor to a fully Christian |/ 
|,experience. 


Tur IMPORTANCE OF THE DOCTRINE OF THE 


R\ : PERSONALITY OF THE Hoty Spirit 
wt J) In the first place, e doctrine of the personality of | 


the Holy Spirit is 9 the highestimportance frou.the. 





flim as such, if we think of the Holy Spirit merely as an 
impersonal influence or power, as so many do, then wé are 


robbing a Divine Person of the worship which is His due 
of the love which is His due, and of the faith and confi 
dence and surrender and obedience and j ; 
May I stop just here to ask each one of you, 





THE PERSONALITY OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 13 


“Do you worship the Holy Spirit?” Theoretically we all — 
do every time we sing the long metre Doxology : 


“Praise God from whom all blessings flow, 
Praise Him all creatures here below, 
Praise Him above, ye heavenly host, 


Praise Father, Son, and H oly Ghost.” 
‘Theoretically we all do every time we sing the Gloria Patri: 


“Glory be to the Father, 
And to the Son, 


And to the aol Ghost. 
As it was in t e beginning, 
Is now, 


And ever shall be, 
World without end. Amen.” 


But it is one thing to do a thing theoretically, and it is 
quite another thing to,actually do it. It is one thing to sing 
words, it is quite another thing to realize the meaning and 
the force of the words that you sing. 

I had a very striking illustration of this some years ago. 
I was going to a Bible Conference in New York State. I 
had to pass a city four miles from the grounds where the 
Conference was held. I had a relative living in that city 
and on the way to the Conference I stopped to call upon 
my relative, who went with me to the Conference. This 
relative was a Christian, she was much older than I, and 
had been a Christian much longer than I, and a member of 
the Presbyterian Church at that, brought up on the Shorter 
Catechism, and thoroughly Orthodox. I spoke that morn- 
ing at the Conference on the Personality of the Holy 
Spirit. When the address was over and we were waiting 
on the veranda of the hotel for the trolley to take us back 
to the city, my relative turned to me and said, “ Archie, 


14 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


I never thought of Jt before as a person.” Well, I had 
never thought of “Tt” as a person, but thank God I had 






ets 


In the second place, Jt is of the highest importance 
from a practical standpoint that w ekpom the fal birth 
as a Person. If you think of the Holy Spirit, as so ) many” 
even among Christian people do today, as a mere in- 
fluence or power, then your thought will constantly be, 


“ How can I get hold of the scare Spirit and use it?” 





here no difference between the thought of man, the 
“worm, using God to thresh.the mountain, or God using 
man, the werm, to thresh the mountain? ‘The former 
conception, the conception of man using God to thresh 
the mountain, is heathenish; it does not differ essentially 
from the African fetish worshipper who uses his god. 
e latter conception, - 

hold of us and_usi 














Spirit getting 





Furthermore, if you think of the Holy Spirit Be as 
an influence or power that you are to get hold of and use, - 
your thought will necessarily be, “ How can I get more 
of spirit? ’’} But if you think of Him in the 

Biblical way, jas L Person gon thought will be, “How 







The former conception, the conception of the Holy 
Spirit as a mere influence or power that you and I are 
to get hold of and use, leads inevitably to self-confidence, 
and self-exaltation, and a parade of self. If you think 
of the Holy Spirit as an influence or power that you are 
to get hold of and use, and then fancy that you have 


THE PERSONALITY OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 15 


received the Holy Spirit, the inevitable result will be that 
you will strut around as if you belonged to a superior 
order of Christians. How much we see of that sort of 
thing. I remember a woman who once came to me at 
the Northfield Bible Conference at the close of an ad- 
dress and she said to me, “ Brother Torrey, I want to 
ask you a question, but before I do, I want you to under- 
stand that J am a Holy Ghost woman.” My, it made me 
shudder, it sent a chill over me. It did not sound like it. 


: But, on the other hand, if yon Mie of the Holy Be 
e Biblica as a Di 





of no th ought that is more > calculated to put ¢ one in the 


dust and keep one in the dust, than this-great Biblical” 


bruth of the Holy Spirit as a Divine Person coming r_to 


Teed 


fake up. His, dwelling in our hearts,.and to take posses- 
i; sion of our lives and _ to use us _as “He in His infin 
isdom sees fit. 


"Gin the third place, Vedoctrine of the Phesoule ; 
jof. the Holy Spirit is of the Jighest importance from the; 





Person This address upon Dee Peron ity of the. fol 
Hpirit which, for substance, I have given in almost ever 
\ ity in which I have ever held a series of meetings, is in 
some respects seemingly upon the most abstruse and 
technical subject that I ever attempt to handle before a 
popular audience, and yet, notwithstanding that fact, 
more men and women have come to me at the close of 


16 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


this address, and more have written to me afterwards 
concerning it, testifying of personal blessing received, 
than of any other address which God has ever permitted 
me to give. 





There are four separate and distinct lines of proof of 
he Personality of the Holy Spirit. 
ai.) The first line pot proof of the Personality of the 
oly Spirit is that, g distinctive marks or cha: “acheroak 


50 EE bed tothe Fa b. 


‘Biblg.] What are the distinctive marks or characteristics s 
“of personality ? Suowledss, fgeling and will. Any being 
who knows and‘feels and wills is a person. Oftentimes 
when you say that the Holy Spirit is a Person, people 
understand you to mean that the Holy Spirit has hands, 
and feet, and fingers, and toes, and eyes, and ears, and 


nose, and mouth, and so on. No, not at all. These are 
iy; these are the marks of cor-. 





Hata the Lord’s return, will cease to have bodies for an 


time being ; we will be “\absent_from the body, and_at 


Q d” (2 Cor. 5:8), but we shall not 


cease to be persons; we will be persons still, even though 


we have no body. I ht it, the marks of personality 


are_knowledge, feeling will and an being suse 





opirit in the Bible,\ 


THE PERSONALITY OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 17 


urn in your Bibles to_1 Cor. 2:11, “ For what 
maf! knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man 
which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no. 





words, is not a mere illumination that ene to your 
mind and mine, whereby our minds are enlightened and 
strengthened to see truth that they would not otherwise 
discover. No, the Ho Di a—Person who Himsel fi 
knows..the.things of GC and reveals to u wha ia le} 
Himself knows. ms 
| 42 yNow turn to LCor, 12:11 (RV): “ But all cnet i 
fworketh the one and the Sgine Spirit, dividing to each one 
everally he thought is that the Holy 
Spirit is not merely a Divine Power that we get hold ) 
yand use according to our will, but that the Holy Spirit i 
i ets hold of us and_uses us acc} 


















“Jess earnest-minded Christians are going astray at this 
_point. They are trying to get hold of some 
which they can use according to their will, I thank God 
from the depth of my heart that there is no divine power 
that I can get hold of to use according to my will. What 
could I do in my foolishness and ignorance with a divine 
power? What evil I might work! But while I thank 
God that there is no divine power that I can get hold of 
and use in my foolishness and ignorance according to my 


swill, I am still more are that were is a “IE: Person 









18 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


3} Now turn to.Romans 8:27, “ And He that se: arch- 


éth the hearts knoweth what is the mind =f Ethe Spirit 
because He mak ion for th i according 
to the will of God”) What I wish you to note here is the 


expression, “the mind of the Spirit,” The Greek word 
“ ‘cc ‘4 ” ¥) ‘e pr ‘ 9 . . 


here translated “mind” is “ phronema,” and it is a com- 
prehensive word that has in it all three ideas of knowl- © 
edge, feeling and il.} It is the same word which is used 
jin n the seventh verse of this chapter, where we read, “ The 
mind of the flesh is enmity against God,” where the 
thought is that not merely the thought of the flesh is’ 
enmity against God, but the whole moral and intellectual 
lifeof the flesh is enmity against God. 
(4) We now turn to a most remarkable passage 
fRomans 15:30, “ ae beseech you, brethren, for the} 






What I wish aon to notice particularly 1 in aS 
verse are these five words, ft the It 
is a wonderful thought. It teaches that the Holy rh is 
not a mere blind influence or power, no matter~how 

“ombaaai that comes into our hearts and lives, but that. 





many of us ministers who are” here today have ever 


preached a sermon on ‘The Love of the Spirit.” I won- 


der how many of you have ever heard a sermon on “ The 
Move-of the Spirit.” “T wonder how many_of you have 
Every day 


of your life you kneel down ore God the Father, at 
‘east I hope you do, and say, \ Heavenly Father, I thank 


Thee for Thy great love that led Thee to give Thy Son > 






a 


THE PERSONALITY OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 19 


esus Christ_to come down into this sinful world and to 
ie upon the cross of Calvary in my place. >) Every day 
O 


e you kneel down and look up into the face of 





me in my lost estate, yes, ate my fall and ruin pera 


and_sending His own Son down to this w ie upon | 
the cross in my place, I would have been a lost man today. , LL 
IIf it had not been for \the love Of Jesus. pi t the Son. / 7 


‘coming down to this world in obedience. cH ather 





4 intil at iat He succeeded in brin nging 1 me to my senses 


and bri inging me_to_realize my utterly lost_con condition, © and 


ealing | the | Lord |, jesus to me AS just the Saviour Whom 


20 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


peededwand..induced me and enabled me to receive the 


f Tord esus as my Sa 10 cand. Lor che - it had not = q 
for this _patie ot, long- 









ering never-wea ing ove QO 


This passage "does not add corer to me — that 
we have already had; I have brought it in merely because 
it is from the Old Testament. There are those who say 
that the doctrine of the Personali the H 
is in the New Testament but not in the Old ‘Testament ; 
but here we find it as clearly in the Old Testament as in 
the New. Of course, we do not find it as frequently in 
the Old peste as. in the New, for this arate’ dis pen- 








h, many who say that the doctrine of,the Trin- 
ity is not in the Old Testament, that while it is in the New 
Testament is not in the Old Testament. But thedoc- 

tring of the Trini in_the estament in the 
first_chapter of the Bible. |-In Genesis 1:26 we re 
“ And God said, ieémaps make man in Our image wns 

ere “the plurality of the persons in the 

Godhead rEere out clearly. God did not ar be WA 

“Let me” “make man in my own image.” No, He 

Let us make man in Our image, after Our like. 


ersons in the Trinity are found in the 












_..T HE PERSONALITY OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 21 


“first three verses in the Bible, {In the 

é ed the heaven and the earth;” here we have God the 
ather. “And the earth was mation form, and void, 
and darkness was upon the face of the deep. And_th 


= = = = ALLA 
by O OG, TT10 C DON TD DCC O>—$~nC—Vi-3- here. 


thaye the Word, “Le here be ight: and the owas. ight.” 
Here we have the three persons of the Trinity in the first 
three verses of the Bible. 

In actual fact the doctrine inity.is found many 
hundreds of times in the Old Testament. In the Hebrew 
Bible it occurs in most of the places where you find the. 
word “God” in your English Bible, for the Hebrew 
word ordinarily used for God in the Old Testament is a 
plural noun; literally translated it would be “ Gods,” and 
not “God.” In the very passage to which the Unitarians 
and Jews, who reject the Deity of Christ, refer so often 
as proving conclusively that the Deity of Christ cannot 
be true, namely, Deut. 6:4, the very doctrine that they 
are seeking to disprove is found; for Deut. 6:4, literally 
“translated, would read, “ Hear, O Israel: Jehovah our 
Gods is one Jehovah.” 

_Why did the Hebrews, with their unquestionable and 
intense monotheism, use a plural name for God? ‘This 
was the question that puzzled the Hebrew grammarians 
and lexicographers of the past, and the best explanation 
that they could arrive at was that the plural for God here 
used was “the pluralis majestatis,” that is, the plural of 
majesty. But this explanation is entirely inadequate. To 
say nothing of the fact that the pluralis majestatis in the 
Old Testament is a figure of very doubtful occurrence— 
I have not been able to find any place in the Old Testa- 
ment where it is clear that the pluralis majestatis is used— 








22 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


but in addition to that, even if it were true that the 
pluralis majestatis does occur in the Old Testament, there 
is another explanation for the use of a plural name for 
God that is far nearer at hand and far more adequate and 
satisfactory, and that is, that the Hebrew inspired writers 
used a plural name for God, in spite of their intens€} 
monotheism, | becg Use 2 there 1s a pluralit _of.. persons in \ 
hoes one Godhe si 






Tn other "words, the Holy. Spirit is not a mere blind, im-.. 
Sa onl influence or power that. comes to dwell in your 
art and mine. No, He is a Person, a.Person. Who.love 

7, His la Person. Who. is holy and intensel sensitive against/) 


every act and word and thoug ht. 

How many a young man is kept back from doing 
things that He would otherwise do, by the thought that 
if he did do that his mother might hear of it and she 
would be grieved beyond expression. How many a young 
man who went over to France in the late war, and was 





THE PERSONALITY OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 23 


surrounded by the awful temptations that encompassed 
our young men on every hand at that time and at that 
place, in some hour of fierce temptation stood at the door 
of a house that no self-respecting man ought ever to enter, 
and just as his hand was on the door-knob and he was 
about to open the door, the thought came to him, “If I 
should enter there mother might hear of it, and if she did 
it would nearly kill her,” and he has turned away without 
entering. But listen, there is One holier than the holiest 
mother that you or I ever knew, One Who loves us witt 





ome into my mind some “tl aa or imagination, from 
what source I do not know, but it is a thought I ought 
not to*entertain, and just as as about to give it lods 
ent the ore has come, 





Be ing ne thought of the Holy pirit in our mind’ 
will help us to solve all the questions that perplex the 
young believer’ in our day. For example, the question, 
“Ought I as a Christian to go to the theatre or the 
movies?” Well, if you go the Holy Spirit will go, too, 
for He dwells in the heart of every believer and goes 
wherever the believer goes. Were you ever in a theatre 
or moving picture show in your life where you honestly 






24 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


















If not, do not go. Ought I asa 
Christian go to dances? Well, here again, if you go the 
Holy Spirit will surely go. Were you ever at a dance in 
all your life where you really believed the atmosphere of 
the place would be congenial to the Holy Spirit?) Shall 
I as a Christian play cards? Were you ever at a card 
party in your life, even the most select little neighbour- 
hood gathering, or even at a home gathering to play cards, 
where bye ou the atmosphere of the place would be 

: it?) If not, do not play. So 
and that some of us| 


illus TIT of this in the Bible, but I will limit our con- 


_ sidezation today to three instances, 
urn to the secon chapter of 1 Corinthians. ingt 


. the tenth verse we read§“ But unto us aie eel the a 














represented as searching the deep things of God. In 
other words, as we have already said under our previous 
heading, the Holy Spirit is not a mere illumination 
whereby our minds are illumined and made strong to 
_ apprehend truth that they would not otherwise discover, 
| but the Holy Spirit is a mena Who_ Hi 


into the deep to_us ee SEE } 













THE PERSONALITY OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 2¢ 


which He discovers. | Such words, of course, could only 


be spoken of a person. 
SQ) ow turn to Romans 8: 26, “ And in like manner 
hhe—o6irit also_helpeth_o infirmity: for we know not}, 
: I to pray as we ought; but the Spirit Himself maketh} 
iniereegion Lars tS. with groanings which cannot be ut- i; 


Hore the Ho 


‘The Holy Spirit i is not merely 2 an influence — : 
comes pos us and impels us to pray, nor is He 
guidance to us in offering our prayers... 
imself a Person Who Himself pra 
wei Ever believer ! 

























0, no HL 


e [os 2: Dani Heb "7:25) 4 
Vho prays through us down here on earth) 


When I started around the world in 1901, I sent out 
five thousand letters to people whom I had learned knew 
how to pray, asking them if they would pray for Mr. 
Alexander and me every day as we went around the 
world. One of the hardest tasks I ever had in my life 
was signing those letters, signing my name five thousand 
times, but it paid, for soon letters came back by the thou- 
sands from these persons saying that they would pray for 
us every day. When Mr, Alexander and I reached Mel- 
bourne, Australia, ten thousand. people had taken it up 
and were praying for us every day, and when we reached 






26 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


England no less than forty thousand people were prayiny 
for us every day. Who could not preach under such 
circumstances, and is it any wonder that the marvellous 
results followed that did follow? I wish they were all 
praying for me still; but, while I would be glad to have 
those forty thousand people praying for me every day, if 
I-had to choose between having forty thousand of the 
godliest men and women on earth praying for me ever 
day, or errr ani two—Persons Christ the Son, our }} 





4 ee ‘Now turn to two aaa related passages. \_ ohn}, 
14: 26, “ But the Comforter, even the-Ho: Di whom 


Rann SRC Sa Eee quae 


jthe aber anomie in M name ‘He shall teach ou all 





Thave the same thought. in John on (214, Ct ier yet 
}Jmany things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them 
now. Howbeit when_He, the Spirit of ‘Truth, is come,}\ 
He Shall po you _into_ all the truth ; a Fle_ shall no ; 





THE PERSONALITY OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 27 


have often thought when we heard some great human 
teacher whom God has especially blessed to us, “Oh, if 
I could only hear that man every day, then I might make 
some progress in my Christian life.” But listen, we can 
have a teacher more competent by far than the greatest fe 

human teacher that ever spoke on earth for our teacher pos Til 


~~ I. 





every day, and ak De cricss—-cacnelr 1S —He—Fto7 LYS pitti t.. 
Vt 3. The third line of proof of the_ -ersonality a hel 
B Proeenaceminueunwisnmonwennntil. te 
als y_Spirit An off cis predi cated wi le Haly) °C ahs: 
| au = “edica att ‘ ais med correo ae. a ier, 
te for example, at John 14: 16, oe Bh we eos ie And 
wt the Father and H give you another. 


Ween Up to this time our Lord Jesus had beck the 
riend always at hand to ais them in every emergency 
that arose. But now He was going, and their hearts were 
filled with consternation, and He tells them that while He 
is goin Q take His Can you 
for a moment imagine our Lord Jesus saying this if the 
other who is coming to take His place were a mere im- 
personal influence or power? 
Can you imagine our Lord Jesus saying what He says 
in John 16:7, “ Nevertheless I ‘ you the truth J/t 1s) 


ere 


Wf that on es coming’ to 
take His place were not another Person but a mere in- 
fluence or power? In that case, is it for a moment con- 





28 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


ceivable that our Lord could say that it was expedient 
for Him, a Divine Person, to go and a mere influence or 
‘power, no matter how divine, come to_ take His ple 





wel ‘take it for granted that you know that the Greet 
word translated “ Comforter ” in these verses means far 
more than Comforter. It means Comforter plus.a great 
deal beside. The Greek word so translated is “ Para- 
kletos.” ‘This word is a compound word, compounded 
of the word “ Para,” which means “alongside,” and 
** Kletos,” which means “ one called ”: so the whole word 
means, “One called to stand alongside another,” one 
called to take his part and help him in every emergency 
that arises. 

It is the same word that is translated “ Advocate” in 
1 John 2:1, “If any man sin, we have an Advocate 
(Parakleton) with the Father, Jesus Christ the right- 
eous.” But the word “ Advocate” does not begin to give 
the full force of the word. Etymologically the word 
“Advocate” means about the same as the word “ Para- 
kletos.” Advocate is really a Latin word transliterated 
into the English; the word is compounded of two words, 


THE PERSONALITY OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 29 


‘ad,” meaning “to,” and “ vocatus,” which means “ one 


called ;” that is to say, Advocate means one called to_ 
another to take his part, or to help him. But in our 
English usage this word Advocate has obtained a nar- 

rower and more restricted, sense. The Greek word, as. 
have already said, means 
and the thought is of g 









Whenever 
they got into any trouble they simply turned to Him. For 
éxample, on one occasion. they.were..perplexed .on..the 
subject of prayer and they said to the Lord, “ Lord, teach 
us to pray,” and He taught them to pray. On another 
ocasion when Jesus was coming to them walking on the 
water, when their first fear was over and He had said, 
“Tt is I, be not afraid,” then Peter said unto Him, “ Lord, 
if it be Thou, bid me come unto Thee upon the water.” 
And the Lord said, “ Come.” ‘Then Peter clambered over 
the side of the fishing-smack and commenced to go to 
Jesus, walking on the water. He got along fine for a few 
moments, and then seemingly he turned around to see if 
his companions saw how well he was doing, thus he took 
his eyes off the Lord and saw the wind and the waves, 
and yo sooner had he gotten his eyes off the Lord than, 
he began to sink, and he cried out, “ Lord, save me,” and 
Jesus reached out His hand and held him up. Just so, 


when they got into any other emergency the disciples 
turned to the Lord and He delivered them 9 But now He 


was going and consternation filled their hearts, and the 
Lord said to comfort them, “ Yes, I am going, byt another 


dust as Divine as L, just as loving and tender as I, just as. 


30 THE HOLY SPIRIT 





ey N How can we fear under any Srcmianeee if 
we really believe that He is by our side? You may be 
surrounded by a howling mob; I have been, an Irish mob 
and a.Chinese mob, but what of it, if He walks between 
you and the mob? That thought will banish all fear. I 
had some years ago a Striking illustration of this in my 
own experience that I shall never forget. I was speaking 
at a Bible Conference on a lake in New York State. I 
had a cousin who had a cottage four miles up the lake 
and I went up there and spent my rest day with him. 
The next day he brought me down in his steam launch to 
the pier where the Conference was held. As I stepped 
off the launch onto the pier he said to me, “ Come back 
again tonight, Archie, and spend the night with us,” and I 
promised him I would. But I did not realize what I was 
promising. That night, when my address was over, as I 
went out of the hotel and started on my walk, I found that 
I had taken a large contract. The cottage was four miles 
away, but a four-mile walk or an eight-mile walk was 
nothing to me under ordinary circumstances, but a storm 
was coming up and the whole heaven was overcast. Fur- 
thermore, the path led along a bluff bordering the lake, 
and the path was near the edge of the bluff. Sometimes 
the lake was perhaps not more than ten or twelve feet 
below, at other times some thirty or forty feet below. I 
had never gone over the path before and found that it led 
right along the edge of the bluff; besides that, there was 


THE PERSONALITY OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 31 


no starlight and I could not see the path at all. There | 
had already been a storm that had gulleyed out deep 
ditches across the path into which one might fall and 
break his leg. I could not see these ditches except when 
there would be a sudden flash of lightning, when I would 
see one, and then it would be darker and I blinder 
than ever, 

As I walked along this path, so near the edge of the 
bluff with all the furrows cut through it, I felt it was 
perilous to take the walk and thought of going back; but 
the thought came to me, “ You promised that you would 
come tonight and they may be sitting up waiting for you,” 
so I felt that I must go on. But it seemed creepy and 
uncanny to walk along the edge of the bluff on such an 
uncertain path which I could not see, and could only hear 
rising from the foot of the bluff the sobbing and wailing 
and the moaning of the lake as it was moved by the fast 
approaching storm. Just then the thought came to me, 
“ What was it you told the people there at the Conference 
about the Holy Spirit being a Person always by our side? 
Does He not walk by your side now?” Then I at once 
realized that the Holy Spirit walked between me and the 
edge of the bluff, and that four miles through the dark 
was four miles without fear, a gladsome instead of a 
fearsome walk. 

I once threw this thought out in the Royal Albert Hall 
in London, one dark dismal afternoon. There was a 
young lady in the audience who had an abnormal fear of 
the dark. It simply seemed impossible for her to go into 
a dark room alone. After the meeting was over she hur- 
ried home and rushed into the room where her mother 
was sitting and cried, “ Oh, mother, I have heard the most 
wonderful address this afternoon I ever heard in my life, 


eee THE HOLY SPIRIT 


about the Holy Spirit always being by our side as our 
ever-present helper and protector. Mother, I shall never 
be afraid of the dark again.” But her mother was a 
practical English woman, and said to her, “ Well, let us 
see how real that is. Now, go up-stairs to the top floor, 
into the dark room, and shut the door and stay in there 
alone in the dark.” The daughter wrote me the next 
day, “I went bounding up the stairs, went into the dark 
room, closed the door and it was pitch dark, and Oh, it 
was dark, utterly dark, but that room was bright and 
glorious with the presence of the Holy Spirit.” 





you ever have insomnia? I did. For owe ae awful 
years. Night after night I would go to bed almost dead, 
it seemed to me, for sleep, and I thought I would cer- 
tainly sleep as I could scarcely keep awake; but scarcely 
had my head touched the pillow when I knew I would not 
sleep, and I would hear the clock strike twelve, one, two, 
three, four, five, six, and then it was time to get up. It 
seemed as though I had not slept at all, though I have no 
doubt I did; for I believe that people who suffer from 
insomnia sleep far more than they think they do, else we 
would go insane or die, but it seemed as if I did not sleep 
at all. This went on for two long years, until I thought 
that if I could not get sleep I would lose my mind. And 
then I got deliverance. For years I would retire and fall 
asleep about as soon as my head touched the pillow. But 
one night I went to bed in the Bible Institute in Chicago, 
where I was then stopping. I expected to fall asleep 
almost immediately, as had become my custom, but 
scarcely had my head touched the pillow when I knew I 
was not going to sleep. Insomnia was back. If you have 


THE PERSONALITY OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 33 


ever had him you will always recognize him. It seemed 
as if Insomnia was sitting on the footboard of my bed 
looking like an imp, grinning at me and saying, “I am 
back for two more years.” 

“Oh,” I thought, “two more years of this awful in- 
somnia.” But that very morning I had been teaching to 
our students, in the lecture-room on the floor below, the 
Personality of the Holy Spirit, and the thought came to 
me almost immediately, “ What was that you were telling 
the students down-stairs this morning about the Holy 
Spirit being a Person always with us?” And I said to 
myself, “Why don’t you practice what you preach? “4 







And He opened to me some of the sweet 
and precious things about Jesus Christ that are found in 


the Word of God , filling my soul with calm and peace and 
joy, and the next thing I knew I was asleep, and the next — 
thing I knew it was tomorrow morning, 4 And whenever 


Insomnia has come around since and sat on my foot- 
board, I have done the same thing and it has never failed. 
In this thought of the Hol Spirit being a Personalf 







the thought of the Holy Spirit as an Ever-present Friend, 
Always at hand, once enters your heart and stays there 
ou will never rare another (Gack moment_as long as 
to live = 
My life for the larger part of the last twenty-five yea rsd Ld 
: : have often been separated frond Ss 
my any for months at a time, sometimes I have not? 
seen my wife for two or three months at a time, and for 
eighteen months I did not even once see any member of 


my family except my wife. One night I was walking 












34 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


the deck of a steamer in the South Seas between New 
Zealand and Tasmania. It was a stormy night. Most 
of the other passengers were below, seasick, and none of 
the officers or sailors could walk with me, for they had 
their hands full looking after the boat. Four of the five 
members of my family were on the other side of the 
globe, seventeen thousand miles away by the nearest route 
that I could get to them, and the one member of my fam- 
ily who was nearer was not with me that night. As I 
walked the deck all alone I got to thinking of my four 
children seventeen thousand miles away and was about 
to get lonesome, when the thought came to me of the 
Holy Spirit by my side, and that as I walked up and 
down the deck in the night and in the storm He took 
every step with me, and all my loneliness was gone. 

I gave expression to this thought some years ago in the 
City of St. Paul, and at the close of the address a physi- 
cian said to me, “I wish to thank you for that thought. 
I am often called at night to go out alone through dark- 
ness and storm far into the country, and I have been very 
lonely, but I will never be lonely again, for I will know 





are in the world ida. Many of us have lost loved ones, 
but we_need not have a moment’s heartache if we only 
know ihe communion of the Hol Ghost. “1 There is 





perhaps ere e today some woman who a year ago, or it 
may be only a few months or a few weeks ago, or pos- 
sibly a few days ago, had by her side a man whom she 


dearly loved, a man so strong and wise that she was freed 


THE PERSONALITY OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 35 


from all sense of responsibility and care, for all the bur- 
dens were upon him. How bright and happy were the 
days of his companionship! But the dark day came 


-'when that loved one was taken away, and how lonely 


and empty and barren and full of burden and care life 


jis today. Listen, woman, there is One Who walks righ® 
| by your side today, Who is far wiser and stronger and 


i 


Y 


more_lovi ng and more able to 2 tide and help than the 
wisest and strongest and most loving husband that ever 


2 lived: ready to bear_all the burdens and responsibility of 


ife for you, yes, ready to do far more, read come in 
and dwell in your heart and fill ook and corner of 
our empty and_ aching hea and suis halal the loneli 


IE ess and all the fearuche forever, 


‘T said this one afternoon in St. Andrew’s Hall in Glas- 
gow. At the close of the address, when I went out into 
the reception-room, a lady who had hurried out to meet 


' me, approached. She wore a widow’s bonnet, her face 


bore the marks of deep sorrow, but now there was a happy 
look in her face. She hurried to me and said, “ Dr. Tor- 
rey, this is the first anniversary of my dear husband’s 
death (her husband was one of the most highly esteemed 
Christians in Glasgow), and I came to St. Andrew’s Hall 
today saying to myself, ‘Dr. Torrey will have something 
to say that will help me.’ Oh,” she continued, “you have 
said just the right word. I will never be lonesome agai 
never have a heartache again. will let the Hol 
irit come in and fill ever ing cor 
Eighteen months passed, I was back in Scotland again, 
taking a short vacation on the Lochs of the Clyde, on the 
private yacht of a friend. One day we stopped off a 
point, a little boat put off the point and came alongside 
the steam yacht. The first one who clambered up the 


9 


36 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


side of the yacht and over the rail and onto the deck was 
this widow. Seeing me standing on the deck she hurried 
across and took my hand in both of hers and with a radi- 
ant smile on her face she said, “Oh, Dr. Torrey, the 
thought you gave me in St. Andrew’s Hall that afternoon 
stays with me still, and I have not had a lonely or sad 
hour from that day to this.” 

But it is in our Christian work that the thought comes 
to us with greatest power and helpfulness. Take my own 
experience: I became a minister of the gospel simply be- 
cause I had to, or be forever lost. .I do not mean that I 





as. my Saviour turned upon my preaching the gospel. 
For several years I refused to come out as a Christian 
because I was unwilling to preach, and I felt that if I 
became a Christian I must preach. The night that I sur- 
rendered to God I did not say, “I will accept Christ,” or 
“T will give up my sins;” I said, “I will preach.” 

But if there was ever a man who by natural tempera- 
ment was utterly unfitted to preach, it was I. I was an 
abnormally bashful boy, and a stranger could scarcely 
speak to me without my blushing to the roots of my hair. 
When I went away from home visiting with other mem- 
bers of my family, I could not eat enough at the table, I 
was so frightened to be among strangers. Of all the 
tortures I endured at school there was none so great as 
that of reciting a piece. To stand on the platform and 
have the scholars looking at me, I could scarcely endure 
it; and even when my own father and mother at home 
asked me to recite the piece to them before I went to 
school, I simply could not recite it before my own father 


THE PERSONALITY OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 37 


and mother. Think of a man like that going into the 
ministry. Even after I was a student in Yale College, 
when I would go home on a vacation and my mother 
would have callers and send for me to come in and meet 
them, I could not say a word. After they were gone my 
mother would say to me, “ Archie, why didn’t you say 
something to Mrs. § or Mrs. D ?” and I would 
say, “ Why, mother, I did.” And she would reply, “ You 
did not utter a sound.” I thought I did, but it would get 
no further than my throat and stick there. I was so 
‘bashful that I never even spoke in a church prayer- 
meeting until after I entered the theological seminary. 
Then I thought that if I were to be a preacher I must at 
least be able to speak in my own church prayer-meeting. 
I made up my mind that I would. I learned a piece by 
heart, I remember some of it to this day, but I think I 
forgot some of it when I got up to speak that night. As 
soon as the meeting was open I grasped the back of the 
settee in front of me and pulled myself up to my feet and. 
held on to it lest I should fall. One Niagara went rush- 
ing up one side and another down the other, and I 
tremblingly repeated as much of my little piece as I could 
remember, and then dropped back into the seat. At the 
close of the meeting a dear old maiden lady, a lovely 
Christian woman, came to me and said, “ Oh, Mr, Torrey, 
I want to thank you for what you said tonight. It did me 
so much good, you spoke with so much feeling.” Feel- 
ing? ‘The only feeling I had was that I was scared nearly , 
to death. Think of a man like that going into the 
ministry. 
My first years in the ministry were torture. I preached 

three times a day. I committed my sermons to memory, 
and then J stood up and twisted the top button of my 








38 i, THE HOLY SPIRIT 


coat until I had twisted the sermon out, and then when 
the third sermon was preached and finished I dropped 
back into the haircloth settee back of the pulpit with a 
great sense of relief that that was over for another week. 
But then the dreadful thought would at once take posses- 
sion of me, “ Well, you have got to begin tomorrow 
morning to get ready for next Sunday.” Oh, what a 
torment life was. But a glad day came, a day when the 
thought which I am trying to teach you now took posses- 
sion of me, namely, that when I stood up to preach, that, 
though we saw me, that there was Another whom they 





4 From that day to this, preaching has 
been the joy of my life; I’d rather preach than eat. 
Sometimes when [ rise to preach, before I have uttered 


ia word, the thought of Him standing beside a able and_ 







oy that I can scarcely refrain from shouting. 
“Just so in your Sunday School teaching. Some of you 
worry about your Sunday School class for fear you will 
say something you ought not to say, or leave unsaid some- 
thing you ought to say, and the thought of the burden and 
responsibility almost crushes you. Listen! Always re 
member this, as S you sit there teaching your class: 








ing the res ponsibilit ree ae class let E Him do it det Him |} 


Ao. the teaching. } 


One Monday morning I met one of the most faithful: 
laymen I ever knew, and a very gifted Bible teacher. ‘This 






THE PERSONALITY OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 39 


Monday morning as I called upon him at his store he was 
greatly cast down over the failure in his class, or what he 
regarded as failure. He unburdened his heart to me, and 
I listened. ‘Then when he had finished I said to him, 
“Mr, Dyer, did you not ask God to give you wisdom as 
you went before that class?” He said, “I did.” ‘Then 
I said, “ Did you not expect Him to give it?” He re- 
plied, “I did.” Then I said, “ What right have you to 
doubt that He did?” He answered, “I never thought of 
that before. I will never worry about my class again.” 
Just so in your personal work. When I or someone 
else urges you at the close of the meeting to go and speak 
to someone else, Oh, how often you want to go, but you 
do not stir. You think to yourself, “I might say the 
wrong thing. I might do more harm than good.” Well, 
you will say the wrong thing if you say it. Yes, if you 
say it you certainly will say the wrong thing, but .trust_ 










et Him have 
speak through.} It may not appear to be the right thing 
at the time, but sometime you will find that it was just | 
the right 

One night in Launceston, Tasmania, as Mrs, Torrey 
and I went away from the meeting my wife said to me, 
* Archie, I wasted the whole evening. I have been talk- 
ing to the most frivolous girl you ever saw. I don’t think 
she had a serious thought in her head, and I spent the 
whole evening with her.” I replied, “Clara, how do you 
know that you wasted the evening? Did you not ask God 
to guide your” “Yes.” “Did you not expect Him 
tor” “Yes,” “Well, leave it with Him.” The very 
next night at the close of the meeting the same seemingly 
utterly frivolous young woman came up to Mrs, Torrey, 







40 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


feading her mother by the hand, and said, “ Mrs. Torrey, 
won’t you speak to my mother? You led me to Christ 
last night, now please lead my mother to Christ.” 

But I must close. There is another line of proof of 


the Personality. one H oly. Spirit, but we have no time 
e per its z 


 befo ore, but do you 





retically we Featene all believed that 


(in your real thought of Him, in your practical attitude 
toward Him, \treat Him as _a Person? Do you realy 
regard the Hol; Dt as just as _real.a, person 





think of Mim as_a_Divi ine Per on-always at your side?) 

The Holy Spirit y was sent by the peeiet into this world 
to be to the disciples of our Lord in this present dispen- 
sation, after our Lord’s departure and until His return, 
to be to you and me, just what Jesus Christ had been to 
His disciples during the days of His personal companion- 
ship with them on earth. Is He that to you? Do you 

ion of the Holy Spiri 





word, iF say it rever rently, the whole object of this address 


is to introduce you to my Friend, the Holy Spirit} 


IT 
THE HOLY SPIRIT CONVINCING MEN OF SIN 


ESTERDAY afternoon we studied together about 
| the ave Spirit as _a Person, the Holy Spirit 
Himsel oday we begin a study of the work 


of the "Holy Spirit, and we shall begin our study of His 
work just where He begins His work in most of us, 
Will you please turn in your Bibles to John, the sixteenth 
chapter, the seventh to the eleventh verses: 

“ Nevertheless I tell you the truth: It is expedient for 


you that I go away: for if I go not away, omforter,|, 
will not come unto you; but if I go, L.will.send.Him.unto.} 
ou.| And He, when He is come, will convict the world 


in respect of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment: 
of sin, because they believe not on Me; of righteousness, 
because. I.go.to.the Father, and ye behold Me no more; 
of judgment, because the prince of this world hath been 
judged.” 

In these verses we are told that, [t is the work of the 


Holy Spirit to “ Convict the world in respect of sin, and 
of righteousness, and of judgment.” 


I. THe Hoty Spirit ConvicrINc THE WorLD oF SIN 
First of all, [¢ is the work of the Holy Spirit to convict 
men of sin. That is to say, it is the work of the Holy 
Spirit to show men their error concerning sin in such a 


41 


42 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


way as to produce a deep sense of personal sinfulness. 
This is where the work of salvation begins in most men, 
they are brought to realize that they are sinners and that, 
therefore, they need a Saviour, and then they are ready 
without much urging to accept Jesus Christ as their Sav- 
iour, when He is presented to them as just the all- 
sufficient Saviour they so sorely need. 

One of the great needs of the present day is conviction 
of sin. The average man has no realization of the awful- 
ness of sin, nor of the fact that he himself is a great sin- 
ner before God. If men and women can be brought to 
a realization of what great sinners they are before God, 
‘most of their doctrinal. difficulties about the 
‘Christ.and about the doctrine of the aton ement,, through 


} he.shed blood, of ,Jesus,.Christ,,.will take care of them- 
‘selves ; for ae but a Divine 























their si wi ongings.ef th coe own ia feace: 8 
‘This i is one of the 5 lacks in much of our so-called 

“revival work ” today, the lack of a deep sense of sin on 
the part of those who come, or profess to come, to Jesus 
Christ. 

Now it is the work of the Holy Spirit to thus convict 
men of sin, to bring them to a realization of their sinful- 
ness, and of their lost condition, and of their great guilt 
before God. Neither you nor I can convince any man of 
sin. As we shall see later, the Holy Spirit uses us to do 
the work, that is, He does the work through us, but we of 
ourselves cannot do it. He must do it. The human heart 
is “deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked ” 
(Jer. 17:9), and there is nothing in which the deceit- 
fulness of the human heart comes out more clearly than 
in the blindness of every one of us to our own sinfulness. 


HOLY SPIRIT CONVINCING MEN OF SIN 43 


We are very sharp-sighted as regards the sins and short- 
comings of others, but very blind to our own. And the 
oe is so blind to its sinfulness that no_one_but_the 


oly Spirit can ever convince the world of sin, that is, 
can ever bring men to see how sinful they are are. No mat- 


ter how great our natural powers of reasoning and per- 
suasion may be, we cannot produce real conviction of sin 
by all our arguments and all our pathetic stories. We can 
get men to cry by telling pathetic stories (and by singing 
songs about “Tell Mother I’ll Be There”), but mere 
shedding of tears over pathetic stories and touching songs 
is not conviction of sin, 

ONLY. BE PRODUCED. BY. THE yy THE Holy SPIRIT. | 

Here is where many of us make our greatest mistake 
both in our preaching and in our personal work; we try to 
convince men of sin, we try to do the Holy Spirit’s work, 
we try to do what He alone can do, and of course we fail. 

I had a very striking illustration of this some years ago 
in our own church in Chicago. One night one of our 
very best workers came to me in the after-meeting and 
said, “I have a man over here, an engineer on the Pan- 
handle .Railroad. I want you to talk with him. I have 
been talking with him for two straight hours and have 
made no impression upon him. Won’t you come and 
speak with him?” JI went over and she introduced me 
to the man, and I sat down beside him and began to use 
the Word of God to produce conviction of sin, but all the 
time looking to the Holy Spirit to carry His own Word 
home. I had not talked with him ten minutes when the 
man was under deep conviction of sin and down on his 
knees crying to God for mercy. While I had talked with 
him this lady who had been talking with him for two 
hours had listened. As a rule that is a very unwise thing 











44 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


to do, for one worker to listen while another talks with 
an inquirer; for men will not open their hearts, nor will 
they _get the real help they need _ while a third party is 
listening. But this woman had a purpose in e in doing it, and 
it was all right in this instance. When the man had gone 
out the worker turned to me and said, “ Mr. Torrey, that 
is very strange.” I said, “ What is strange?” She re- 
plied, “Do you know that you used exactly the same 
passages of Scripture in dealing with that man that I 
used, and I talked with him two hours and made no im- 
pression, and you talked with him not more than ten 
minutes and he was under conviction of sin and crying 
to God for mercy?” 

Now, really, there was no mystery about it, nothing 
strange about it. What was the explanation? I believe it 
was this, that that worker for once had made a mistake 
that she seldom made, that of trying to do the Holy 
Spirit’s work, trying to convince of sin the man with 
whom she was dealing. And when she came to me and 
said, “I have talked with this man two hours and made 
no impression upon him,” the thought came to me at 
once, “If Miss W. , one of my best workers, has 
talked with this man for two hours and made no impres- 


sion, what is the use of m tryin to. “talk Ik with him”; a 


and in a sense of utter helplessness I had_cast_myself}. 





Oh, let us never forget that it is impossible for us to 
convince any man or woman of sin, and in all our preach- 
ing and in all c our personal work let : 






also be sure that are in such relations to ead | that the 
oly Spirit can do Hi work th rough us. 


HOLY SPIRIT CONVINCING MEN OF SIN 45 


But while we cannot convince men of sin, while it is 
utterly impossible for us to do it, thank God, the Holy 
poe can do it. And, if we would Put ourselves at the 


| and if we would fe toe se Oe eae) 


of sin through us, and if we would be more careful to be. 
i relations od that the Holy Spirit can work 

us, we would see far more conviction of sin 
‘than we do. 

When I was pastor of the Moody Church in Chicago, 
we had a committee of the church, composed of some- 
thing like twenty-five members, consisting of the elders 
and deacons and other officers of the church, who met 
together for supper every Friday night, and after supper 
went over the roll of the church, keeping a constant 
watch-care of the members of the church, and discussed 
the various business matters of the Church. At one of 
these Friday night meetings, after we had been discussing 
various important matters, one of our elders said, “ Breth- 
ren, I am not at all satisfied with the way things are going 
in our church, We are having many professed conver- 
sions, and we are having many accessions to the Church, 
but I do not see the conviction of sin that I would like to 

see, and I propose that, instead of discussing business mat- 


ters any further tonight, we spend the time in.prayer,and 


that we meet on other nights also, to cry to God we send 
His Holy..Spirit among us in convicting power.” The 
whole committee saw the wisdom of the suggestion, and it 
was immediately adopted ; and the remainder of that meet- 
ing was spent in prayer, and for a number of nights we 
met together for prayer, to pray definitely for the convict- 
ing power of the Holy Spirit in the work of the church. 
Not long after that, one Sunday night, when I arose to 





















46 | THE HOLY SPIRIT 


preach I looked around to my left and saw sitting in the 
front seat underneath the gallery, right beside one of my 
deacons, a large, well-dressed man, rather over-dressed, 
with a great big diamond shining from his shirt front. 
Something about the man’s appearance led me to say to 
myself, “I believe that man is a sporting man.” It turned 
out later that he was. His mother kept a sporting-house 
in Omaha and he himself was in Chicago at that time, 
gambling. I said to myself as I saw him sitting there 
beside the deacon, “ Deacon Young has been fishing to- 
day.”—It is a great thing to. have deacons in your church 
and then as I preached I would ‘look radeal at that man. 
His eyes were riveted upon me, he was evidently deeply 
interested. When I went down-stairs to. the after- 
meeting, I noticed that Deacon Young had brought him 
down to the after-meeting, and when I went into an inner 
room for a little closer dealing with individuals, I saw 
that Deacon Young brought him in there. We were a 
long time dealing with souls that night, and about eleven 
o’clock I had just finished dealing with the last one I ex- 
pected to speak to, when Deacon Young came over to me 
and said, “I’ve got a man over here I want you to talk 
with.” JI went over; it was this big sporting man. He 
was greatly agitated, ‘“ Oh,” he groaned as Deacon Young 
introduced me to him, “I don’t know what’s the matter 
with me. I feel awful.” 

Then he went on to tell me this story. He said, “ My 
mother keeps a sporting-house in Omaha, and I am here 
gambling in Chicago, This is the first time that I was 
ever in a Protestant service in my life. I started out this 
afternoon to go down to Cottage Grove Avenue to meet 
some friends down there, and to spend the afternoon 


HOLY SPIRIT CONVINCING MEN OF SIN 47 


gambling. But I was passing by Washington Square over 
yonder and some of the young men of your church were 
holding a meeting in the open air. Among them I saw a 
man named Forbes whom I had known in a life of sin, 
and I said to myself, ‘I wonder what Forbes is doing in 
a meeting like this,’ and I stopped to listen to what he 
might have to say. I was not much impressed and started 
down the street to go to Cottage Grove Avenue. I had 
gone about two blocks when some mysterious power took 
hold of me and brought me back to that meeting. When 
the meeting was over this gentleman (pointing to Deacon 
Young) got hold of me and took me to your Yoke Fel- 
lows’ meeting for supper, and to the meeting that fol- 
lowed the supper, and then took me to the meeting 
up-stairs, and then brought me down here.” And then he 
uttered a groan, “Oh, I don’t know what’s the matter 
with me. I never felt like this before. I feel awful,” 
and he trembled like a leaf and groaned. I said, “I'll tell 
you what’s the matter with you. The Holy Spirit is con- 
victing you of sin.” And that powerful man, shaking and 
trembling with deep emotion, that man who had never 
been in a Protestant service before in all his life, got 
down on his knees and cried to God for mercy, and went 
out with the joyous realization that his sins were all 
forgiven. . 

Oh, that is what we want to see in our meetings. That 
is what we can see if we we only realize our own utter in- 
ability to convince men en of sin, and believe in ‘in the : power of 
(aa do it, and look to Him to do it, and 

depend aupon Tim todo it, and count upon Him to do it, 
and be sure that we ourselves are in such r¢ relations to to “God 
us, 

Let me give you another illustration of the convicting 










48 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


power of the Holy Spirit. Another Sunday night, when 
I arose to preach in the Moody Church, as I looked up 
into the gallery to my left, I saw, almost directly over 
where the other man had sat, another very loudly-dressed 
man. He, too, had a great diamond shining from his 
shirt front, and I said to myself, “ Ah, there is another 
sporting man.” It turned out that he was a travelling 
man, but he was also a sporting man. As I preached, he 
listened with the closest attention and kept moving 
farther and farther to the front edge of his seat, his eyes 
fastened on me. In the midst of my sermon, with no in- 
tention whatever of drawing the net at that time, but 
merely to drive a point home, I said, “ Who will take 
Jesus Christ right now?” The words had scarcely left 
my lips when he sprang to his feet and his voice rang out 
through the church like a pistol shot, “I will.” I stopped 
preaching right then and there—I was not there to save 
sermons, but to save souls—and I gave the invitation to 
all who would accept Jesus Christ as their Saviour right 
then and there to rise to their feet, and all over the house 
men and women and young people sprang to their feet. 

I remember one man especially, an old colonel from 
New York City, belonging to one of the richest families 
in New York City, but whose family had sent him out 
to Chicago to drink himself to death, and that was exactly 
what he was doing in one of the Chicago hotels. He was 
present at our service that night, a man over seventy 
years of age. He was one of the first men on his feet, 
with the tears running down his rugged cheeks, and he 
too accepted Christ that night. 

Shimon and wane wes bas SNe ee tod 
of sin men and women who have wandered far from God, 


such as I have just described ; He has power to produce 





HOLY SPIRIT CONVINCING MEN OF SIN 49 


the deepest conviction of sin in the hearts of people of 
culture and refinement, “eit and_women living uprigh pright 
lives, men and women of most attractive and winsome 
personality. 

I was sitting one day in my office in the Bible Institute 
in Chicago, waiting for the dinner-bell to ring, when 
there came a rap at my door. “Come in,” I said, and 
there entered an old Scotch gentleman of the finest type. 
He was a man over eighty years of age. I showed him 
to a chair and almost immediately he burst into tears. 
Then he said to me: “ You do not know me but I know 
you. I come constantly to hear you preach, and I have 
come around today to ask you if you think there is any 
hope for a sinner who has sinned so greatly, and contin- 
ued so long in sin, as I have.” Seldom have I seen a man 
under deeper conviction of sin than this elderly gentle- 
mati who had always lived an upright life; but who had 
néver accepted Christ. I took my Bible and showed him, 
on the one hand, what the Bible had to say about him and 
his exceeding sinfulness, and what it had to say, on the 
other side, about the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, 
Who came down into this world to save him, and upon 
Whom all his sins had been laid, and in Whose atoning 
death he might then and there find pardon, and Who had 
risen again and was now a living Saviour “able to save 
to the uttermost ” anyone who came to God through Him. 
And this fine old Scotch gentleman knelt with me in 
prayer and accepted the Lord Jesus as his own Saviour 
and went out of my office rejoicing in the knowledge that 
his sins were all forgiven, 

Some years ago I was attending a Bible Conference in 


Atlanta in the Baptist Tabernacle. At the close of one 
of my addresses, a prominent Baptist preacher, a scholarly 











50 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


man, asked for a private interview with me. This min- 
ister was a graduate of a leading Southern university. 
After graduating from the university he had taken a 
course at the Louisville Theological Seminary, and after 
that had gone to Chicago University for post-graduate 
study and had made so fine a record there that he had 
been sent to Germany to represent the University there. 
He was now pastor of a leading Baptist church in Geor- 
gia. He said to me: “I have a difficult problem on hand 
and I wish your advice. I am the pastor of a church in 
a university town. My congregation is largely made up 
of university professors and their families and university 
students. They are charming people. Some of them put 
me to shame by the beauty of their lives.” “ Now,” he 
continued, “if I had a congregation such as they have in 
_ the Pacific Garden Mission in Chicago of down-and-outs 
and bums and men like that, it would be easy to convict 
them of sin (that is where he was mistaken), but my 
problem is how to convict of sin people of the beautiful 
character and conduct that constitute my audiences.” 
“You cannot do it,” I replied, “ but the Holy Spirit can.” 

Oh, is not that what we need to see in our meetings 
here? Is that not what we need to see in our regular 
services in our churches? Is that not what we most need 
to see over all our land today in all our efforts to lead 
men to a better life,—deep conviction of sin wrought by 
the power of the Holy Ghost? Well, He can do it; He 
alone can do it. He can do it just as well today as He 
ever_could; and He will if we only look to Him to do it. 
If was He that did it on the Day of Pentecost, when three 
thousand men and women were pricked in their heart and 
cried aloud to the apostles, “Men and brethren, what 
shall we do?” If Peter had preached that same sermon 


HOLY SPIRIT CONVINCING MEN OF SIN 51 


the day before Pentecost, the day before the Holy Spirit 
came, there would have been no such results; but now he 
and the hundred twenty “were all filled with the Holy 
Spirit” (Acts 2: :4), and he anensey and the others did 





y “will 5 its a 


will you notice just what sin it is of which the 
Holy Spirit convicts men. Let me read it to you again. 
“And He, when He is 








of drunkenness, not the sin of stealing not the sin of 


adultery, not the sin of murder, nor of any other i immor- { 


ality or crime, but. just .the..sin..of, not. 





three thousand on the Day of Pentecost. The Apostle 
Peter had just said in Acts 2:36, “Therefore let all the 
house of Israel know assuredly, that God hath made that 
same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, 

Christ hen we read in the thirty-seventh verse, “ Now 
when they heard this (that is, had heard that the One 
whom they had rejected was both Lord and Christ), they 
were pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter and to 
the rest of the apostles, Men and brethren, What shall we 
do?” Yes, this is the sin of which the Holy Spirit con- 
vinces men and women today, the sin, the awful sin, of 






Pes wa a in. | 







( Christ tr “not the sin 7 


on of God, not believin on a J eSUS Crises erates an 
This was the sin of which 1 the Holy Spirit convicted the 


52 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


rejecting Him, of not believing in Him, Whom God hath 
made our Divine “ Lord and Christ.” 

Now that is the very sin of which it is most difficult to 
convince men. ‘The average unbeliever does not look 
upon his unbelief in Jesus Christ as sin at all. Often- 
times he is proud of his unbelief, instead of being 
ashamed of it; and he looks upon it as a mark of intel- 
lectual_ superiority. He struts around and says, “Oh, I 
am an agnostic,” or, “ Oh, I am a Unitarian,” or, “Oh, I 
am a sceptic,” or, “Oh, I am an infidel.” Oftentimes 
they are all the more proud of it because it is about the 
only mark of intellectual superiority that they possess. 

( If it is not quite as bad as that, and people are not proud 
of their unbelief, at the very worst they regard it as a 
mere misfortune and they will say, “Oh, I can’t believe. 
I do wish I could believe, but I can’t. Won’t you please 
pity me because I can’t believe?” But when the Spirit 
of God comes to a man, he does not look upon unbelief 
in Jesus Christ as a mark of intellectual superiority, 
neither does he look upon it as a mere misfortune: he 
sees clearly that it is the worst, the most decisive, the 
most daring, and the most damning of all sins, and while 
he may bitterly regret his dishonesty or his impurity, or 
whatever other sins of which he may have been guilty, he 
sees and feels that the most awful of his sins is the sin 
of rejecting the glorious Son of God. He sees that no 

sin he can possibly commit against a fellow man can 
match in enormity the sin of rejecting Him Whom ioe. 










has clearly shown, by raising Him from the dead, to be 
His own ‘eternal Son; and Him “Who gave up heaven and 
all its glory to come down to earth with all its shame to 
bear our sins in His own body on the cross. But you and 
I cannot make men see that ; but the Holy Ghost’can, and 


HOLY SPIRIT CONVINCING MEN OF SIN _ 53 
this is the sin of which the Holy Spirit convicts men, the 


sin of unbelief in Jesus Christ. 


II. Tue Horny Sprrert Convictinc THE WorLp oF 


RIGHTEOUSNESS 
But the Holy Spirit not only convicts men of sin, He 
also “ Convicts the world . . . of righteousness ;” not of 


our righteousness, for we have none, but of Jesus Christ’ 





which God has zien to the = in Jesus Christ. 
There are two things, and two things only, that anyone 
needs to see in order to be saved: First, he needs to see 








One of the most pit to he revivals in the ese tne of 
the Church, one in which the work of the Holy Spirit 
was most clearly and wonderfully manifested, was the 
Ulster Revival in the North of Ireland in the years 1859 
and 1860. Rev. William Gibson, the Moderator of the 
General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of Ireland, 
in the year 1860, has written a very full history of that 
revival, and in it he relates many instances of conversion. 
They were all typical: men and women were brought 
under overwhelming conviction of sin; sometimes this 
conviction of sin lasted for days (that, of course, was 
unnecessary if Christ had been properly presented at 
once) ; then after days of deep and awful conviction the 
light would break in upon men and they would get a 
wonderful view of Jesus Christ and just believe on Him, 
and enter into a clear experience of forgiveness of sin. 


/ 


54 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


-and of wonderful joy in the Lord. It was simply the 
Spirit convincing men of sin, and also convincing 
jthem of | righteousness. ee 
“Some years ago I was at the meeting of the Men’s 
Brotherhoods of the United Presbyterian Church of 
America, held at Pittsburgh. I spoke upon the subject 
of prayer, and in my adcress used as an illustration the 
Ulster Revival. A gentleman, a member of the church 
where the meetings were held, had sent his limousine to 
my hotel to take me to the meeting, but he had not come 
himself ; but«just sent his chauffeur. When I went out 
of the meeting that afternoon to hurry to another meet- 
ing, the gentleman himself was at the door and said, “I 
am going to ride back with you.” We had scarcely gotten 
into the automobile when he turned to me and said, “I 
was converted in that Ulster Revival of which you were 
speaking. I was a mere lad. I was out in the field and 
I was ridiculing the revival, and suddenly I was struck to 
the ground and fairly wallowed in the furrow, over- - 
whelmed with the sense of my sinfulness. And then, as 
I eae there in the furrow, as given nderfu 
of Jesus Christ.dying for my sins, and I believed on 





GS SADE 


im and was saved before IJ arose out of the furrow.” 
Oh, that is what we need here in these meetings, men 
and women brought under overwhelming conviction of 
sin by the fae mae: then t Holy Spirit revealing 













cae SSIs inh A 


fri ighteousness o of chris t and the righteousness whee God 
SRA AAD Ba NEN ROIE AS 
as rovided f for ‘for us i 2suS irist.. ee ee 


The story is “is told of a ‘faithful ce minister who 
was travelling through Scotland and stopped one night at 
an inn. The innkeeper came to him and asked him if he 
vould conduct family worship. He replied that he would 


HOLY SPIRIT CONVINCING MEN OF SIN 55 


if the innkeeper on his part would bring to the worshig 
-all the guests in the house, and all the servants. This 
the innkeeper agreed to do. When they were gathered in 
the big room for the service the minister turned to the 
innkeeper and said, “ Are all the servants here?” “ Yes,” 
replied the innkeeper. “All?” persisted the minister. 
“Well, not all. All but one. There is one girl who 
works down in the kitchen washing the pots and kettles, 
who is so dirty that she is not fit to come to the meeting.” 
The minister replied, ‘ We will not go on with the service 
until she comes,” and he insisted and the innkeeper went 
for this servant and brought her in. This faithful man 
of God became greatly interested in this poor, neglected 
creature ; and when the others were passing out of the 
room he asked her if she would not stay for a few min- 
utes. And when everyone had gone he said to her, “I 
want to teach you a prayer for you to offer: ‘ Lord, show 
me myself.’ Will you offer it every day?” She replied 
that she would. The next day the minister left, but a 
short time afterward came back again and asked the inn- 
keeper about this girl, The innkeeper replied, “ She is 
spoiled, she is no good at all. She is weeping all the 
time, weeping day and night, and can hardly attend to her 
work.” The minister asked to see her again, and when 
she came in the minister said, “ Now I want to teach you 
another prayer. ‘Lord, show me thyself.’ Now pray 
that prayer every day.” 

The minister left and a few years afterward was 
preaching one Lord’s Day morning in a church in Glas- 
gow. At the close of the service a neat, trim looking 
young woman came up to him and said, “ Do you recog- 
nize me?” He replied, “ No, I do not.” She said, “ Do 
you. recall holding a service in an inn and speaking to one 


56 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


of the servants afterward, and teaching her to pray the 
prayer, ‘Lord, show me myself,’ and afterward teaching 
her the other prayer, ‘ Lord, show me Thyself’ ?” “Oh, 
yes,” he said, “I remember that.” “ Well,” she said, “I 
am that girl, And when you taught me that first prayer 
and went away, and I asked God to show me myself, He 
gave me such a view of my vileness and my sin that I 
was overwhelmed with grief and could scarcely sleep at 
night or work by day for thinking of my sins. Then,” 
she said, ‘‘ when you came back and taught me the second 
prayer, ‘Lord, show me Thyself,’ God gave me such a 
view of Himself, of His love and. of, Jesus Christ. dyi 
on the. cross for me, ae that all the burden. of my. sin_rolle 
way a and am became a happy Ct Christian. 3 Yes, those are 
he two . thins s es that each one of us needs to see—our own | 
in, and ita is the work ‘of the Hol y Spirit to show us that, 
Coll ‘the rig righteousness of. Christ and the. righteousness that!) 






















iawn 


x0d_ has provided, for you and 1 me in Jesus | Christ, and it 
s the work of the Holy. Spirit tc to show. us. that. also, ee 


SRL ELEE RS) SGN rire RO SL MGM CRE IN 


III. Tue Hoty Spirrr Convincinc THE WorLpD oF 
JUDGMENT 


But there is still a third thing of which the H Holy S' pirit 


convicts men, and that is of judgment, attested by the 
judgment of the prince of this world, the Devil. ‘There 


has perhaps never been a day in the whole history of the 
Church of Jesus Christ on earth when the world needed 
more to be convinced of “ judgment,” than today. The 
average man has but little faith that there is to be a future 
judgment. Indeed, a large number of our church mem- 
bers, and even of our preachers, have lost all realization 
of future judgment and of a future awful hell. A great 
many of our churches, and not a few of our superficially 


HOLY SPIRIT CONVINCING MEN OF SIN 57 


orthodox preachers, have really given up all belief in such 
a hell as Jesus Christ and the Bible taught, and even those 
preachers who do still believe in it theoretically seldom, if 
ever, preach it. 

When the question was being discussed of inviting me 
to the city of D——, the Y. M. C. A. Secretary of that 
city said, “ We do not want Dr. Torrey to hold evangel- 
istic services in D , for he will preach hell, and we do 
not wish to have hell preached here in D .” Now he 
had sized me up exactly right. I certainly would preach 


hell, for Jesus Christ preached it, and God, in_our day 


as_well as in all other days, greatly blesses the preaching 
of His truth. It is only fair to say that when I actually 


did go to that city, that same secretary was about the 
most faithful supporter that I had in the city. But his 
remark at that time shows the attitude that many take 
today on this subject. Many think that while the doctrine 


of eternal punishment is true, that it at it ought not to | not to be 
taught because it is not what men like to hear today ; ju today ; just 


as though what men liked to hear is what they ought to 
hear. Very frequently the truth that men_least like to 


hear is the truth that they most need to hear, 

_ When I was holding meetings in the city of Philadel- 
phia, in the North Armory, I preached two sermons on 
hell. A few nights afterward, as I was going out of the 
armory to get into the carriage to take me to my home 
about three miles away, I saw a Presbyterian minister 
who had a church near my home going out of the armory, 
and I invited him to get into the carriage with my daugh- 
ter and myself and we would take him home. After we 
had ridden some distance, this minister turned to me and 
said, “Dr. Torrey, one of my elders asked me a question 
the other day. He asked me if I believed in hell the way 











58 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


you preached it. I replied, ‘Have you any reason for 
suspecting that I don’t?’ ‘No,’ he said, ‘I have no 
reason for suspecting that you don’t, but do you?’ Then 
I replied, ‘Yes, I do. I believe every word that Dr. 
Torrey preached on the subject.’ Then my elder said, 
‘Then why don’t you preach it?’” Yes, why don’t we 
preach it? We certainly need to preach it. ‘The pend 
needs to hear it, and God blesses the preaching of Pa op 
wooed when the Spirit of God cot comes to men they believe 
“ judgment.” I doubt if any minister ever had more 
difficulties with the doctrine of future punishment as 
taught in the Bible than I did. I would come up to this 
doctrine time and time again, and would back off every 
time I came up to it. In my early ministry I succeeded 
in convincing myself that the Bible did not teach ever- 
lasting punishment, that while it taught that there would 
be a hell, and an awful hell, and a hell that might last 
through centuries or even thousands of years, that at last 
“somehow, somewhere, somewhen,” all men, and even 
the Devil himself, would be brought to repentance and 
hell would therefore cease to be. So I believed and so I 
taught. But the time came when I could no longer recon- 
cile the teachings of the Bible with this position, and so 
I gave it up, and theoretically I believed in an everlasting 
hell; but even after that, every time I came up to the 
doctrine, as I say, I would back off, it seemed as if I 
could not possibly have it that way. But one night, after 
I had gone to Chicago Tr was lai 
might know the Hol 





thorough-going. way. than I 
é : ‘And that night God heard my 
prayer, and stich a fi ling with the Holy Spirit, such a 


HOLY SPIRIT CONVINCING MEN OF SIN 59 


being taken possession of by the Holy Spirit, as I had 
never known before, came to me, and with that new in- 
filling of the Holy Spirit there came such a revelation of 
the infinite majesty and glory of Jesus Christ, the wor- 
drous Son of God, and such a revelation of the awfulness 
of the sin of rejecting such a glorious Saviour as that, 
that I saw at once that if men would not accept this 
glorious Saviour, then all the most terrible statements to 
be found in the Word of God as to the future eternal 
destiny of those who would not accept Jesus Christ, were 
demanded by the very necessities of the case, and from 
that day to this I have never had the slightest difficulty 
with the doctrine of future punishment taught in ‘oid 


Bible. The. Holy...Spirit..Himself.,.had., convinced..me,, 
* God oa that He may you also. 






IV. Tue Hoty Spirrr Convinces THE WorLD ONLY 
THrouGH BELIEVERS IN JESUS CHRIST 
To sum it all up then; it is the work of the Holy Spirit 
to convict men of sin, and of righteousness, and of judg- 
ment. It is not our work, but His. But sans notice 
very carefully that, w ere} THE 


BRAT 











THROUGH 
SUS Cee ae ‘ 
thought comes out in the seventh and eighth verses: 
“Nevertheless I tell you the truth: It is expedient for 
you that I go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter 
will not come unto you; but if I go, I will send Him unto 
you (that is, to believers), And He, when He is come 
(that is, come unto you, come unto believers), wil! con- 
vict the world in respect of sin, and of righteousness, 
and of judgment,” that is to say, the Holy Spirit comes 






60 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


to the believer, and through the believer to whom He: 
comes convinces the unsaved. As far as we are told in 
ithe Bible, the Holy Spirit has no way of getting at the : 
‘unsaved except through the channel of those who arg... 
already saved; He comes to the believer and through the 
believer convinces the unsaved of sin. What a solemn 
thought that is. If we realized that the Holy Spirit could: 
only reach the unbeliever through us, us who are already 
saved, would we not be more careful to present to the 
Holy Spirit an unchoked channel for the Holy Spirit to 
work through? 

Every conversion recorded in the Acts of the Apostles 
was through human instrumentality, not one single con- 
version is recorded there that was not by human in- 
strumentality. Take, for example, the conversion of 
Cornelius. If there was ever a miraculous conversion it 
was that! Why, we are told in the tenth chapter of the 
Acts of the Apostles that an angel appeared to Cornelius 
and spoke to him, but the angel did not tell Cornelius 
what to do to be saved. On the contrary, the angel said 
to him, “Send men to Joppa, and call for one Simon, 
whose surname is Peter; who shall tell thee _words _ 
whereby thou and all thy | “house. shall. be. saved” ~ (Acts 
Wd3; 14). In other words, ‘not even an angel could 
show him the way of life, it must be a saved fellow-man, 
and_a Spirit-filled { fellow-man,, who did it) ea 

Take the conversion of Saul of Tarsus. If ever there 
was a miraculous conversion it was certainly that, when 
the risen and ascended Lord _Jesus Himself _appeared | to 
him, e actually saw Jesus in the glory, but the Lord 
Jesus did not tell him what to do to be saved. Paul 
cried, “ What shall I do, Lord?” (Acts 22:10). And 
the Lord said unto him, “ Arise and go into Damascus, 






HOLY SPIRIT CONVINCING MEN OF SIN 61 


thee.of all things which are sai 
The Lord did not te im 


[2s do to be paved ‘a certain” man “named Ananias ” 
had to be oe upon the scene, and Ananias told him 
what to do, saying, “Arise, and be baptized, and wash 
away thy sins, callin on the name of ear 

9510223116). <a 
As far as God tells us in His Word, tur Hoty Guost 

HAS NO WAY OF GETTING AT THE Word, nue Hoa Gun 

THROUGH US WHO ARE ALREADY SAVED, This is exceed- 

ingly solemn. Oh, if we only realized it, would we not 
be more careful to present to the Holy Spirit an unob- 
structed channel for Him to work through! Do you 
take that in? Does it mean you? 

You wives who have unconverted husbands. You are 
| Praying for their conversion, you are praying that ‘God} 
wil o convict them of sin and show | 
»OL,.Chri; ‘ist; but the Holy Spirit can get at. 
them only Mieughice some saved person, and most likely 
only through you, for you are the nearest to them. And 
many and many a man is lost because his wife is such an 
obstructed channel that the Holy Spirit cannot work 
through her, and so her husband is lost forever. 

One time when Mr. Moody was holding meetings in 
Philadelphia a lady came to him and asked him to pray 
for her husband. He replied, “ No, Pll not pray for your 
husband.” ‘“ What!” she exclaimed, “not pray for my 
husband? Do you not pray for the unsaved?” “Yes, 
I do, but I will not pray for your husband.” “ Why 
not?” she asked. “ Because,” Mr. Moody replied, “I 
believe you yourself are the greatest obstacle there is in 
the way of the conversion of your husband.” The woman 
was greatly provoked and went to her husband after she 





















62 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


got home and said, “ Mr. Moody insulted me this after- 

noon.” “ What,” replied her husband, “ Mr. Moody in- 

sulted you? I thought Mr. Moody was a gentleman, I 

did not suppose he would insult any lady.” “ Yes,” 

she replied, “ Mr. Moody insulted me this afternoon.” 

\, “ What did Mr. Moody say to you?” her husband asked. 
he “He said I was the greatest obstacle there was in the 
is _. way of your conversion.” “ Well, ain’t you?” said her 
vn a "husband, And some of you wives here today who are 
Ny trying to get people to pray for the conversion of your 
«» \we husband, you who are deeply concerned for the conver- 
il ia oft of your husband, you yourself are the greatest ob- 


q Ne oe acle there is in the way of the conversion of your hus- 
r ‘band. The Holy Spirit has no way of getting at your 
pve fh 

_»/.. husband except through you, and unless you get  thor-_ 





ra oughly right with God yourself and become an ‘unob-| 
tructed channel through which the ‘Holy Spirit can ‘work, 
is husband will be lost forever. 
uv” When I was holding meetings in Omaha, the pastor of 
ane the leading Methodist Church in the city became deeply 
; concerned about the salvation of one of the most promi- 
nent members of his congregation, a leading business 
man, and he called upon him at his store. The gentleman 
invited Dr. S up to his private office, and Dr. S 
commenced to talk to him about his soul. The man 
listened and then said, “ Dr. S——, what do you want 
me to be like? Do you want me to be like my wife, she 
is a member of your church? Do you want me to be like 
her? I have seen her greatly excited over a whist drive. 
I have never seen her nearly so excited over a prayer- 
meeting in all her life as I have seen her over a whist 
drive. Do you want me to be like her?” 
But then again there are many of us who will not even 











HOLY SPIRIT CONVINCING MEN OF SIN 63 


offer ourselves at all to the Holy Spirit as an instrument 
for Him to work through. Oh, how many there are here 
in this audience today whose lips the Holy Spirit is trying 
to get the use of, but you will not give Him the use of 
your lips. He is trying to reach someone through you, 
but you will not allow Him to. 

I once read of a young lady who died in New York 
City. A Presbyterian minister was invited to conduct the 
funeral services; he was not her own pastor; I do not 
know why her own pastor was not invited. This minister 
who was to conduct the services went first to her own 
pastor and asked him, “Was Mary a Christian?” Her 
pastor replied, “I do not know. Three weeks ago IJ had 
a very solemn impression that I ought to speak to Mary 
about her soul, but I put it off. I said, ‘ Mary is in my 
congregation every Sunday and I can speak to her when 
I will, and I put it off and now Mary is dead and I do 
not know whether Mary was a Christian or not.” He 
next went to her Sunday School teacher and asked her 
Sunday School teacher, ‘“‘ Was Mary a Christian?” The 
Sunday School teacher replied, “I do not know. Two 
weeks ago I had a profound impression that I ought to 
speak to Mary about her soul, but I put it off. I said, 
‘Mary is in my class every Sunday and I can speak to 
her when I will,’ and I put it off. And now Mary is 
dead and I don’t know whether Mary was a Christian or 
not.” He next went to her own mother and said to her, 
“Was Mary a Christian?” “I do not know. A week 
ago I had a deep impression that I ought to speak to 
Mary about her soul, but I put it off. I said, ‘ Here is 
Mary in the house with me all the time. I meet her three 
times a day at the table. I can speak to her when I will,’ 
and I put it off, and now Mary is dead and I do not know 


64 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


whether Mary was a Christian or not.” Three pairs of 
lips that the Holy Spirit was trying to get the use of, the 
three pairs of lips that one would naturally think would 
be most easily at His disposal, her minister’s, her Sunday 
School teacher’s and her mother’s, and not one of the 
three would let the Holy Spirit have the use of their lips, 
and so Mary died unsaved. When I got back from going 
around the world and spent a month with my church in 
Chicago, I related this incident one Sunday morning. 
There was in my audience a young woman who had a 
class of girls from about fourteen years of age up. What 
I said made a deep impression upon her, and when she 
went before her class that Sunday afternoon she spoke 
to every member of her class about accepting Christ. 
Among those who did accept Christ was a girl fourteen 
years of age, if I remember correctly, apparently per- 
fectly well and strong. Before the next Sunday came 
round that girl’s body was lying out in the cemetery. 
Oh, how fortunate that that young woman that morning 
gave her lips to Jesus Christ to use. Have you given 
yours? And are you listening for the Holy Spirit to 
show you to whom to go? And are you depending upon 
the Holy Spirit to work through you? And are you an 
unobstructed channel ? 

Let me beseech you, every one of you that professes 
to be a Christian, to put your lips today at the Holy 
Spirit’s disposal for ‘wie throtgt von fo-convich whom- 


_soever “He. will of sin, , and. of _righteousness, and.of 









. ve thoroughly put out of. your, 
d ife ‘everything that would, hinder the Holy Spirit work- | 
ling through, _you, and. that. you.are_an_ unobstructed 

channel for the Holy Spirit to work through; and b be 







HOLY SPIRIT CONVINCING MEN OF SIN _ 65 


listening listening sharply, for the Holy Spirit’s direc- 
on whom to speak. 


When Mr. Alexander and I were holding meetings in 
Brighton, England, in the great Dome, one afternoon one 
of our workers went away from the afternoon meeting 
and went imo a restaurant for tea before coming back 
to the night meeting. While he was sitting at the table 
he had a deep impression that he ought to speak to the 
waiter about his soul, but he put it off. It seemed to him 
as if it would be a strange thing to speak to a man who 
was waiting upon him about accepting Christ. He 
finished his meal and went outside, but his impression 
that he should have spoken to that waiter was so deep 
that he waited outside for the waiter to come out, intend- 
ing to talk to him then. When he had waited there for 
some time, the proprietor of the restaurant came out and 
began to put up the shutters, and asked him what he was 
waiting for. He replied, “I am waiting to speak to that 
man that waited upon me at the table.” The proprietor 
said, “ You will never speak to that man again. Immedi- 
ately after serving you he went up to his room and blew 
his brains out.” Oh, men and women, we live in a solemn 
world, and we need to be very careful how we walk. We 


need to_be re: be goad _for.God, to use us any moment, and to. i 
3 5 OLY SPIRIT ALONE CON-. ' 


PORE OR ie te NR ARAL 


VINCES MEN OF SIN, AND “OF "RIGHTEOUSNESS, "AND ‘OF 


EST ECR ANS. matt RNS 


Getemreeevemensmnnentorcieleens OREN, 
JUDGMENT ; But He 1 DOES. ji “THROUGH | us—never _ for- 


cara an ee 


Pepe 


THE RECENERATING WORK OF THE HOLY 





Holy Spirit in convicting men of sin. We saw 

that it was the work of the Holy Spirit to convict 
men of sin and of righteousness and of judgment. Today 
we shall study further the work of the Holy Spirit. 


YY itay spit we were studying the work of the 


Li tes Hoty, Spirit BEARtNG WITNEss TO THE 


EGARDING JESUS “Curist 
Turn first of all to Jno. 15:26, 27: “ But when the 
Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the 
Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from 
the Father,.He. shall..bear. witness,.of -Me:. and ye also 
bear witness because ye have been with Me from the 
beginning.” Here we see that it is the work of the Holy 
Spirit to bear witness concerning Jesus Christ. All the 
work of the Holy Spirit centres in Jesus Christ. It is 
His work to magnify Christ to us, to glorify Christ by 
taking of the things of Christ and declaring them unto 
us (cf. ch. 16:14). 
ae is. only through. the direct..testimony of the Holy 
pirit. in the individual heart the t any man ever comes ie 
o a true and living and saving knowledge of Jesus, Christ 
.! No amount of listening to the testi- 
mony of men regarding Jesus Christ, and no amount even 


66 


REGENERATING WORK OF HOLY SPIRIT 67 


ef studying what the Scriptures have to say about Christ } 
Jesus, will ever lead anyone to a true and eh and 


My OF 





It is true that He Holy Spirit’s testimony regarding 
Jesus Christ is found in the Bible. In fact, that is exactly 
what the whole Bible is, the Holy Spirit’s testimony to 
Jesus Christ. The whole testimony of the Book centres 
in Jesus Christ. As we read in Rev. 19:10, “ The testi- 
mony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.” But while that 
is true, unless the living Spirit, Who lives and works 
today, takes His Own testimony as it is found in the 
written Word, the Bible, and interprets it Ayeies to the 
heart of the individual and makes, it.a.living thing 

heart of the individual, he will not come rm a real, ae 
saving knowledge of Jesus Christ. 

If, therefore, you wish men to get a true view of Jesus 
Christ, such a view of Him that they will believe on Him 
and be saved, you must seek.for.them the, testimony,of the. 

Holy, Spirit, and you must put yourself in such relations 
to God that the Holy Spirit can bear His testimony 
through you. No amount of mere argument and persua- 
sion on your part will ever bring anyone to a living knowl- 
edge of Jesus Christ. 

And if you wish to have a true knowledge of Jesus 
Christ yourself, it is not enough that you study the Word 
and what the Spirit of God has said about Jesus Christ in 
the Word: 
‘the Spirit of God..direc ly to your Own,neart through. J i 

ord, and_ put, yourself, in, such,relations, to,.God that. the)... 
Holy Spirit can bear His testimony. directly.toyour, heart, 











68 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


The attitude that you must take toward God in order that 
the Holy Spirit may bear His testimony to Jesus Christ 
directly to your heart is the attitude ofabsolute surrender | _ 
to the will of God; for Peter is recorded as saying in} 


{Acts 5: 32, “ ve are wittiese ce of these pe and so is 


And we read these words of ‘our Lord Je 


Himself in Jno. 7:17, “If any man wille th todo. His 


will, he shall know of the teaching, whether it is of | 
: : Desi RAR dR i 















This explains why it is t rau one may read the Gospel 
of John time and time again and not come to a saving 
knowledge of Jesus Christ, even though that Gospel was 
written for the specific purpose of bringing men to a 
saving knowledge of Jesus Christ. The writer himself 
tells us in the twentieth chapter and the thirty-first verse, 
These are written that ye may believe that Jesus is the 
Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye may have 
But if the same man will 


his will to God before beginning to, read the, Gospel. 
will ¢ ask God. each time he reads ; to send, His Holy. 


to interpret to his heart SpE ted thins ngs. the that. he _teads, he can- 
not read the Gospel » through ey even once, without coming 
to believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and 
through believin : 
I have seen this illustrated many a time. One Sunday 
night as I was going out of the inquiry meeting in the 
Moody Church a young man was waiting for me in the 
vestibule, I think he had already been a Church member. 
He said to me, “ Mr, Torrey, I don’t believe anything. 
Can you tell me how to believe?” “Don’t you believe 
anything at all? Don’t you believe there is a God?” 
“Yes,” he said, “I believe there is a God, but I am in 


















REGENERATING WORK OF HOLY SPIRIT 69 


doubt about everything else.” “ All right,” I said, “if 
you believe there is a God you ought to surrender your 
will to God, then begin at the first chapter of John, first 
verse, read a few verses at a time, not too many, and pay 
close attention to what you read and each time before you 
read pray this prayer, ‘Oh God, show me what of truth 
there is in these verses I am about to read, and what Thou 
showest me to be true I promise to take my stand upon.’ 
And read on, day after day consecutively until you get 
through the Gospel. Will you de it?” “ Yes,” he re- 
plied, “I will.” “One thing more, when you get through 
the Gospel, come and report to me.” About two weeks 
after when I went out of prayer-meeting one night I met 
him in the vestibule again. He said, “I have come to 
report.” I said, “ What is your report?” He said, 
“Don’t you know?” “ Yes,” I replied, “I think I do.” 
“Well,” he said, “my doubts are all gone. I do believe 
that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and I do believe 
in the Bible as the Word ot God.” Why did he now 
believe when he did not believe before, although he had 
read the same book through time and time again? He 
believed now because he had put himself in such a relation 
to God that the Holy Spirit could bear His testimony 
through His Own written Word. 

This also explains why it is that one who has been long 
in the darkness concerning Jesus Christ so quickly comes 
to see the truth, when he surrenders his will to God.) It 
explains an experience that pretty ; much e every - thoughtful 
worker has had: You sit down beside an inquirer who 
really desires to know the truth and be saved, and you 
take your Bible and show him from some of the plainest 
statements of the Word just what one must do to be 
saved, namely, to believe on Jesus Christ; and you take 


70 THE HOLY SPIRIT 







the _ truth about Jesus Christ’s atoning death and about, 
resurrection,.and about His being a Deliverer from 
he power of sin today, and you show it to him from some 
f the plainest statements of the Bible along those lines ; 
and you make the way of life as plain as day and you go 
‘over it, and over it, and over it; but still the inquirer does 
‘not see it at all but sits there dumb, puzzled, perplexed, 
bewildered, and he very likely tells you, “ I cannot see it.” 
Yet you have made it as plain as day. That is, to you it 
is as plain as day. But it is not plain to him and some- 
times you are tempted to think that the inquirer is in- 
tellectually stupid. Not at all. He is perfectly clear 
about other things. And then you go on and on, and you 
go over it again and again, and suddenly a new light comes 
into the inquirer’s face and he exclaims, “I see it—I see 
it,’ and he believes on Jesus Christ and is saved right 
then and there. Now what has happened? Simply this, 
jg that the Holy. sapitit. has DOrns ddan Shimon 
_ that inquirer’s heart. 

o in all our dealing with inquirers we must not only 
make sure that we give them the right Scripture to show 
them their need of a Saviour and that Jesus Christ. is. 
just the e Saviour ur, they need, we must..see.to. it..also..that 
we are lookin to the Spirit. TE God,,£o bear Tis. ‘witness 
to Jesus Christ through us and that we are in such a rela- 
tion to God that the Holy Spirit can bear His witness t 
esus Christ through us, 

Take what occurred on the day of Pentecost. ‘The 
Apostle Peter bore his testimony to Jesus Christ, and 
\gave the testimony of the Old Testament Scriptures, and 
the Holy Spirit, through. Peter's. testimony.and that. of. 
Testament, _ Scripture: ‘2nbore His. testimony _ to 


Jesus Christ, and so men saw and believed, and i in that 
ra SCN 
































REGENERATING WORK OF HOLY SPIRIT. 71 


day . there were added unto them about three thousand 
souls.” Now, if the Apostle Peter had given just the 
same testimony the day before and had given just the 
same Scriptures the day before (that is, the day before 
Pentecost, the day on which the Holy Spirit was given), 
there would have been no such results; but the time had 
come for the Holy Spirit to do His work and Peter had 
been “ filled with the Holy Spirit,” “when Pentecost was 
fully come,” and now not only did Peter give his testi- 
mony, but™ God, Who had taken pos- 
session of Pe ave His testimony, and men saw and 
believed. 

Mr. Moody used to put it in this graphic way. He 
aid: “ Peter said, ‘ Therefore let all the house of Israel 







= At one time when I was superintendent of the Bible © 
Institute in Chicago I lived in the Bible Institute, and 
every night I would try to get home from my own meet- 
ings before the students got home from the various places 
they had gone to help in the work, and I would meet 
them on the stairway and we would talk over the experi- 
ences of the night together. One night a large company 
of them came back from the Pacific Garden Mission full 
of enthusiasm and joy. “Oh,” they said, “ Mr. Torrey, 
we had a wonderful time at the Pacific Garden Mission 
tonight. Crowds of men came to the altar, all kinds of 
drunkards and outcasts, and were saved.” ‘The next day 
I met Harry Monroe, who was at that time in charge of 
the Pacific Garden Mission. I said, “ Harry, the boys 
‘ell me you had a wonderful time at the Pacific Garden 


72 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


Mission last night.” He replied, “ Mr. Torrey, do you 
want to know the secret of it? I just held up Jesus 
Christ and it pleased the Holy Spirit to illumine the face 
of Jesus as I held Him up and men saw and believed.” 
I thought that was a beautiful way of putting it. 
And so when you and I preach, or when we do per- 
sonal work or teach, we should hold up Jesus sti ; 
He is presented in the Scriptures and t then. look..to, 
Holy Spirit to illumine His face, and to be very sure we 
are in such a relation to God an and to the Holy _ Spirit, a and 
so dependent upon the the ‘Holy. ‘Spirit, and ; sO. sunbed b 
he Holy Spirit to, do, His. work,.that. He, can. do it, and | 
‘then men will. see. and. believe.! 
» Let me repeat it in order that we may be sure that you 
get it, if you wish men to see the truth about Jesus Christ 
do not depend upon your own powers of expression or 
persuasion, or upon your own eye of pa 
and At how to use it, but ca : 
; pirit ina realization of your ee helplessness, sness ae look 
to Him to bear The is testimony to Jesus Christ, a and see to 
git also that those you are dealing | with put it themselves i in 
suck h an | attitude _toward_ “God _that the Holy Spirit 
in ea to ‘o them, and see to it also t hat you are i are in eae a 
telation to God, so ful surrendered to Him, so “so separated | 
from all ‘that | hinders H His work, 1 that ~ He can bear | His} 
‘ testimon through you. In nthe Tio! Hol; irit’s testimony O 
a esus Chri Christ lies the ct cure for all | ignorance concerning . 
Christ, and Fall's ‘scepticism c ‘concerning Christ, 


a oe oe 





























[ \PIRIT. ENERATING MEN. 

Now jets me cal your attention to another wonderful, 
gracious and glorious work of the Holy Spirit. Turn in 
your Bibles to Jno. 3:3-5: “Jesus answered and said 


REGENERATING WORK OF HOLY SPIRIT 73 _ 


unto him (that is, unto Nicodemus), Verily, peal T = 


; ee ae Except one be born again (or, “anew,” or, 
PS fro he cannot. see.the. kingdom _ “of ro 
N en. saith unto Him, How can a man be born 
when he is old? can he enter a second time into his 
mother’s womb and be born? Jesus answered, Verily, 
verily, I say unto thee, Except one be.born of water and 
ixit,, he cannot venter into the kingdom of God.” © 
Here we are told that men are born of the Spirit, or born | 
Bi ihe Amie s a aN f 
xactly the same truth is set forth in a way that may en- 
able some of you to grasp it more readily, in Titus 3:5:\) 


iF 
“ Not by works done in righteousness, which we did | our- F 
Vselves, but according to to 














dis mercy He saved us, ‘through e 
the washing of regeneration anc and ren newing 0 of. ‘the Holy. 


PER: 


pirit.” Here we are taught that i that it is ist the work.of the Holy. 
| Spirit to renew men or to make me men anew, or "(to use the > 


common theological | expression ) ) to. ‘reg jenerate men. ‘\ 
Wat Is RECENERATION? We have two de apa ‘ 
* Regeneration, ’ “iN irth,” in the Bible. You 
will find the first of these definitions i in Eph, 2:1; “ And 
you..did He make alive, when eW. ere Asad. through your. 


















MParta-. 
tion o i ee men, who..are morally... ritually dead 
Because of their trespasses and ies en man and 
“woman and child of us, no matter how excellent in char- 
acter or how religious our parents may have been, was 
born into this world spiritually dead. We are: ee nature | 
oral and spiritual corpses. : : 


mparts. to. us this life.. 


miparts t es aa aaa 


) Of Course they sist. =. God is the instrument that the 1e | 


“14 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


Ioly Spirit uses in imparting life. That we are eee in | 


Bey | 
il Pet, 1: 23: zi Having been egotten aga again, not. of .c =|) 
_ruptible seed, but of incorruptible throu ugh tl the word orl 
(God, which _ liveth and abidet ante "And we are told the 
same thing in Jas. 1:18: ‘ His o n_ will begat He. us! 
with the word of truth, that we should be a kind of first- | 
fruits. of. His creatures.” We see plainly i in both of these | 
passages that the Word of truth, the Word of God, the | 
Word contained in the Bible, is the instrument which the), 

Holy Spirit uses in regeneration, BUT IT Is ONLY AS THE 
Hoty Spirit uses THE Word THAT REGENERATION. .RE= 
SEN e mere written Word will not produce the New 

“Birth, no matter how faithfully preached or faithfully 
given in personal work, unless the living Spirit of God 
makes it a living thing in the hearts of those to whom we 
preach or with whom we are dealing. This comes out 
very plainly in another statement of the Apostle Paul’s 
found in 2 Cor. 3:6: “ The letter killeth, but the Spirit 

giveth, life.” What does this mean? It is often taken in 
these days of superficial and careless thinking, and care- 
less Bible study, to mean that the literal interpretation of 

Scripture (which these men call “the letter”), that is, 
taking the Scripture to mean just what it says by apply- 
ing the usual laws of grammar and diction, kills, but that 
some spiritualizing interpretation, some interpretation that 
makes the Word mean something it evidently was not. 
intended to say, that gives life. This is one of the fa- 
vourite tricks in misinterpreting the Scriptures employed 
by those who are determined not to take the Bible as 
meaning what it says; and they call all those of us who 
insist on interpreting the Bible to mean what it says, 
“deadly literalists.”. There never was a more unwar- 
ranted misconstruction of Paul’s words, or the words of 





REGENERATING WORK OF HOLY SPIRIT 75 


anyone else, than that. Paul did not have the remotest 
thought of teaching anything of that kind. If there ever 
was a “ deadly literalist’ (if literalism is really deadly), 
it was the very man who wrote these words. Paul was 
always insisting upon the exact force of every word used. 
Paul would build a whole argument on a word, or on a 
part of a word, on the number of a noun, or on the case 
of a noun, or on the tense of a verb. No, Paul did not 
mean anything of that kind. 

What did he mean? Well, the way to discover what 
any man really means by what he says or writes is to 
read what he says or writes in the connection in which it 
is said. In this case the connection shows beyond the 
possibility of honest doubt exactly what Paul meant. In 
the third verse of this same chapter Paul draws a con- 
trast between the Word of God written on parchment or 
on paper with pen and ink, or graven on tables of stone 
as in the case of the Ten Commandments, and the Word 
of God written as he puts it by “ it..Of, the livin 
- not in tables of stone, but gm ta>les that are hear, 
esh,” and what Paul therefore says is, that the mere 
“letter” of the Word, the Word written or printed in a 
book, kills, 7. e., brings condemnation and death; but that 
ithe Word of God written by the S‘pirit of the a God i: 
in_our hearts (“on tables that are hearts of flesh Py ‘that 
e..| This, of course, is only to say in other words ; 
Vv What 1 we have already said above, that st ts only as the ¥ 

ing, oly Sp akes today.to..the.heart of .the.indix. 
wid the Word_o ad. and..quites. it.on,.the heart, are. i 
men,made. alive, o born. again. | No amount of giving the 
y Bible, he: written Word, in sermon, or personal work, or 


teaching, will ever lead to.a.man being. born agaif.) If we 


‘wish to see men born again through our preaching, or 











76 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


through our personal work, or through our teaching, we, 
must realizeour..dependence upon the Holy Spirit.and!) 
look. to. Him, and count upon. Him, to carry, the truth that | 
we preach ot or give out in personal work or in teaching 
‘home fo.the. bear and sos_to it. that we. ourselis are in| 
| such a relation to God that_ the. Hol oly Spirit ¢ can do His 
regenerating work through us. | 
We have a second God-given definition of Regener- 
ation in 2 Pet. 1:3, 4: Seeing that His divine power, 
hath granted unto us all things that pertain unto life and 
sone throug h _the 1¢_ knowledge of Him that cated us 
by His Own glory and | virtue ; whereby He ath_granted 
unto us His precious ane exceeding great promises ; that 














g secaped ae the SST AOT TS is in the 


\world_by_lust.”] 
is, the ii haHenon of a new nature, “ the divine ature, 
be baborttian of # met 
e are all born into this world with a corrupt nature, 
corrupt in its thoughts, corrupt in its affections, corrupt 
in its will. 

1. First of all, Every one of us, no matter how fine our 
ancestry, or how pious our parents, are born into this 
world with a mind that is blind to the truth of God. As 

aul puts it in 1 Cor. 2:14, “ The natural man receiveth 
not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolish- 
ness unto him: neither can he know them, because they ar 







2. In the Pena place, We are all of us born into this 
world with affections that are corrupt, that is, with affec- 
tions set upon things that displease God. We love the 


things we ought to hate, and we hate the things we ought 
to love. 


REGENERATING WORK OF HOLY SPIRIT 77 


3. And, in the third place, We are all of us born into 
this world with a will that is perverse. As Paul puts it 
in Rom. 8:7, “ The mind of the flesh (that is, “ the mind 
of ” the natural and unregenerate man) is enmity against 
God; for it is not subject to the law of God, neither in- 
deed can it be.” We are all of us born into this world 
with a will that is perverse, a will that is set upon pleas- 
ing self, and not set upon pleasing God. Now, what 
pleases self may not be something corrupt or criminal or 
vile or immoral. What pleases us may be something re- 
fined, something of a high character; it may not be get- 
ting drunk or stealing or lying or committing adultery or 
doing any evil or vile or base thing; it may be culture or 
music or art or some other high and refined thing; but 
pleasing self is the very essence of sin, whether the thing 
that pleases self is something very high or something very 
low. And any will that is set upon pleasing self is a will 
in rebellion against God: it is “enmity against God.” 
There is only one right attitude for the human will, and 





So then we are all ten into the world with this nature 
that is Pee ys acy and meonally corrupt. 





a fied which instead of cae blind to tie truth of God 
is open-eyed to the truth of God. How often I have seen 
that. I have seen a man come into a meeting like this, an 
utter infidel. I have a man in mind at this moment, a 
man who had not been inside a church for fourteen years, 
and who was a rank and very bitter infidel. But this 


185): THE HOLY SPIRIT 


man was induced to come and hear me preach. The 
Spirit of God wrought through me that night and through 
a personal worker who dealt with him in the after- 
meeting, and that man was born again then and there, 
and that thoroughly darkened mind became,illuminated at 
' once, and, instead of the things “of the Spirit of God” 
being any longer “ foolishness unto him” they became as 
clear as day, and within a week he was bringing others 
into a knowledge of the truth. He brought his own wife 
to meeting the following Sunday night and led her into 
the light ; and within a year he was preaching the Gospel,, 
2. But we are not only given a new intellectual nature, 









old loves.) Instead of loving ene longer the things tha 
isplease God we now love the things that please God. 
The things we once hated we now love, and the t ings 
we once loved we now hate. How clearly that was illus- 
trated in my own experience. As I look back upon my 
life before I was born again I can hardly believe what I 
know to be true about my own affections and about my 
likes and my dislikes, before I was born again. In those 
days I hated the Bible. I read it every day, but it was to 
me about the most stupid Book I read, I would rather 
have read last year’s almanac any day than to have read 
the Bible. But when I was born again my heart was 
filled with love for the Bible and today I would rather 
read the Bible than any other book or all books put to- 
gether. I so love it that sometimes I think I will not read 
any other book but the Bible. In those former days, 
before I was born again, I loved the card-table, the the- 
atre, the dance, the horse-race, the champagne supper, and 
I hated the prayer-meeting and the Sunday services. 













REGENERATING WORK OF HOLY SPIRIT 79 


Today I hate the dance and the card-table and the theatre 
and the horse-race, and I love the gathering together of 
God’s people and the services of God’s house on the 
Lord’s Day. It is just as Paul puts it in 2 Cor. 5:17, 
“Tf any man be in Christ, he is a new creation: the ol 
ings are passed away; behold, they are become new.” 
3. But in_ the New Birth we are not only ae 
intellectual nature and_a ne are 
given a new.volitional, nature,..that4s, we are given a 
new will, When one is born again his will is no longer 
set upon pleasing self: his will is set upon pleasing 
x0 There is nothing else in which. he. so. deli hts as. 
What he himself de- 
sires is See to him: what pleases God is everythin 
to him 
e see, then, that the New Birth is the impartation.o 
“a new nature, God’s Own nature, to men who are dead | 
a od and sins, | J t is the Holy S piri t Who i im~ 
| As we have already said, the Word of | 


od is the ins arcat the Holy Spirit uses in imparting’ 
» this new nature. ‘This comes out in the very verse we 
ye already quoted as containing God’s definition of the 
: “ee Birth, 2 Pet. 1:4, “ Whereby He hath granted | unte 
us His precious and exceeding...great prot mises; that 
through these. (that,dS. ils fc satde 
ling great promises, t EE t ord). 
‘ye may become pei kers of, the wit ie! natu ure.” Yes: 
always the written Word i is the instrument through which 
the new nature is imparted to men, BUT_IT Is ONLY A 
THE Holy SPIRIT USES THE INSTRUMENT, THE WRITTEN 


SL NAD EA 


Norp, tHat THE New Birtu, ce IMPARTATION OF | 



















O we see again ‘tt rat if we wis to rhe born again our- 


80 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


selves, it is not enough to read the Bible, sie that is 
the instrument the Fol; _Spirit uses, in _Tegene ae eaiGe 





We s see aaas that t if we 1 we ae others t to 
be born again. i oT TEE TE k, 
or teaching, or whatever it may be, we must see to it we 
not only give them the written Ore and | give them the 
right passages trom the” Word, butt that we are rein such. a\ 





right relation toward. God, and that we.so, realize our de-} 

pendence upon the ‘Holy Spirit for Him ‘to a the work i 
‘and. that we so count upon Him t to do tl 1 e work, that ‘He 
can do His regenerating work thr ough us. a 

he mere letter of the C Sospe “will ‘merely bring con- 

demnation and. kill, unless accompanied by the Holy 
Spirit’s power. | The ministry of many a perfectly ortho- 
dox preacher or teacher is a ministry of death; indeed 
one of the deadest things on earth is dead orthodoxy. 
His ministry is a ministry of death because while he gives 
the Word, he gives it “ with enticing words of man’s) 
wisdom and not in dome stratioy .theSpirit..and_of 


be WShrrerdise OF. 2 ete No anor ney ee TT no 















It is He, and He alone that makes a man a new 
creature. But thank God He is ever ready to do this, 
when the conditions are supplied which are necessary if 
He is to do His work. We are all dependent upon Him, 
if there are to be real results, real regeneration. 

Just as we are utterly dependent upon the work of 
Christ for us in justification so we are utterly dependent 


REGENERATING WORK OF HOLY SPIRIT 81 


upon the work of the Holy Spirit in us for regeneration. 
The whole work of regeneration can be described in this 
way: the human heart is the soil, the Word of God is the 
seed, we preachers and teachers and personal workers are 
the sowers. We go to the granary of the Bible and take 
from it that portion of seed we wish to sow; we preach 
it or teach it or use it in personal work; but if it all 
stopped there there would be no real result, there would 
be no New Birth. But, if as we preach or teach or do 
personal work, we look to the Holy Spirit to do His 
work, He will quicken the seed as we sow it, and it will 
take root in the hearts of those to whom we speak, and 
the human heart will close around it by faith, and a new 
creation will be the result. ’ 

I am often asked if I believe in sudden conversion, I 
believe in something far more wonderful than sudden 
conversion. I believe in gudden regeneration, Conver- 
sion is an outward thing; it means merely turning 
around: One is faced one way, faced away from God; 
he turns around and faces the other way—he faces toward 
God. That is conversion. But regeneration goes down 
to the very depths of the human heart and spirit. It is a 
radical transformation of the innermost man, an imparta- 
tion of life, and the impartation of a new nature. An 
outward conversion, if it is to be real and lasting, must be 
the result of an inward regeneration. A man may be 
converted a hundred times, but he cannot be born again 
but once; for, when one is born again, when God imparts 
His Own nature to a man, he stays born again; as John 
puts it in 1 Jno. 3:9, “Whosoever is begotten.of.God.is 
not doing sin (that is, not making a practice of sin), but 

; 5 bak : 


od-s..seed OC-S..CM 















82 THE HOLY eae 











es, I ee PURINES OT oroug 
ion..of..the..inmost_man.*) 

Why do I believe in it? Because this Book teaches it 
and because I have seen it over and over again. How 
could I doubt it when I had sitting beside me week after 
week and year after year on the platform of the Moody 
Church in Chicago, as my assistant pastor, a man who, up 
to the time he was forty-two years of age was one of the 
most desperate and notorious sinners that ever lived, a 
man who at the age of nine was a drunkard, and utterly 
incorrigible all through his school days, a man who en- 
tered the United States Navy at the age of fifteen and 
went through the Civil War and learned all the vices of 
the navy, and who at the close of the war went into the 
regular army and learned all the vices of the army, and 
spent a good deal of that time while with the army at 
Fort Leavenworth in the guard-house, and was there 
elected the leader of a gang of desperados that were con- — 
fined in the army guard-house at that time, a man who 
was ordered out of the city of Omaha by the mayor and 
chief of police for almost killing the bully of Omaha in 
a fight, a man who rode down the streets of Omaha in a 
cab with a revolver in each hand firing the revolvers out 
of both windows as he sped down the street, a man who, 
in spite of the money he inherited from his father, was 
outlawed from the town where he lived in Iowa, but who 
came back to that same town one night, went into a Gos- 
pel meeting and knelt at the altar and accepted Jesus 
Christ and was transformed into the best friend I ever 
had in my life, a man I loved as I never loved any other 
man, a man of whom if anybody should ask me who was 
the most Christlike man I ever met in my life, I would 


REGENERATING WORK OF HOLY SPIRIT 82 


teply without hesitation, “Rev. William S. Jacoby ”— 
the dearest man I ever knew ; he is now with Christ in 
the glory. Yes, I beli 

If I did not believe in sudden “regeneration, I would 
quit preaching, for what would be the use of it all? 
What use, for example, of my preaching to such a con- 
gregation as I used to preach to every Sunday night in 
the Moody Church in Chicago, when that building was 
packed of a Sunday night with the motley crowds who 
gathered there. There were some of the finest Christians 
in Chicago there, there were university students, medical 
students, law students, lawyers, doctors, and prominent 
business men and earnest Christian men anc women were 
there, but there were also “ jail birds” there, criminals 
just out of Joliet State Prison, infidels, ‘outlaws, de- 
praved men of pretty much every nation on earth. What 
would be the use of preaching to a crowd like that, if it 
were not for the regenerating work of the Holy Spirit? 
But, believing as I did in the regenerating work of the 
Holy Spirit, I always arose to preach with a heart full 
of hope and _ expectation ; Be I never knew any night 

the Sp ' 1 ve, would light. 

“Take, for example, ¢ one aT Sundae night. There 
had come into the audience that night, long before the 
meeting began, a man so intoxicated that the moment he 
was given a seat he went to sleep. He was not turned 
out, for we had given our ushers instructions never to 
turn out any man no matter how drunk, unless he insisted 
on making a disturbance, and, if they were compelled to 
turn him out, to follow him out and deal with him and, 
if possible, lead him to Christ. This man did not make 
a disturbance, except possibly he snored a little. As I 
rose to preach that night, I offered a prayer before I 








84 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


preached, as I usually do; but I offered that night a differ- 
ent prayer from any I ever offered before, and I have 
never offered the same prayer but once since (and that 
was when this man asked me to offer it again). JI am 
sure God put-it on my lips that night; for I knew nothing 
about this man. ‘The prayer I offered was this, “Oh 
God, if there is any man here in Chicago Avenue Church 
tonight who has run away from New York or from any 
other Eastern city, and has left his wife and children 
there to starve, and is drinking himself to death here in 
Chicago, save that man tonight.” Though I had never 
heard of this man before, when I offered the prayer I had 
described that man’s case exactly. He had not only run 
away from an Eastern city, but from New York, and he 
had left his wife and children there to starve, and he was 
drinking himself to death in Chicago. Just as I offered 
that prayer he awakened from his slumber, and he heard 
my words and they sank into his heart. When he left 
that building he could think of nothing else. As he 
afterwards described it to me and others, that night he 
wet his pillow with his tears and God saved him. He 
got up. wWLSCnerated MMe am 

member him! I can see his face yet. 

That very same night there was a man sitting up in the 
gallery to my left who was a competent railroad engineer, 
but who had been blacklisted by every railroad running 
into Chicago because of his intemperate habits. As I 
preached that night the Holy Spirit carried my words 
home to that man’s heart and he believed on Jesus Christ 
and was saved, and born again. As I finished preaching 
one of my elders stepped up to him and said to him, 
“ Are you saved ?,” The man replied," loam. ttle said, 
“When were you saved?” He said, “ About five min- 





REGENERATING WORK OF HOLY SPIRIT 85 


utes ago as that man was preaching.” The next day that 
man went down to the office of the vice-president of the 
Chicago and Eastern Illinois Railroad. How an engineer 
that was blacklisted by every railroad running into Chi- 
cago ever got into the office of the vice-president of the 
Chicago and Eastern Illinois Railroad, I do not know; 
but he certainly did. He said to the vice-president, “ I am 
a competent railroad engineer, but I have been blacklisted 
by every railroad running into Chicago for getting drunk, 
but last night I was converted up in the Moody Church.” 
The vice-president sprang from the table, went to the 
door and locked it and said, “I believe in that sort of 
thing, let us pray.”’ And so the vice-president of the 
railway and the engineer that was blacklisted by every 
railroad running into Chicago, knelt and prayed together. 
When they got up from the floor the vice-president said 
to him, “ Everything I say on this road goes. I will give 
you a letter to the foreman of the round-house at Dan- 
ville. He will give you an engine.” 


Oh, yes, I believe in sudden regeneration, and believing 


tin the regenerating power of the Holy Spirit through the 





vomen,all over, I never despair of any man or woman on) 
‘earth, and I expect to keep on preaching and teaching the 
mighty Word o od in the..power..of..the, Floly ost as 
long as I have strength enough to stand on my feet and 
preach. Yes, if God sees fit to put me on a sick bed 
‘before I pass into eternity or before the Lord comes, I 
expect to preach Jesus Christ to men there on the sick 


be nd I expect to see 
men and women and children}. } Is it any 
wonder that I would not give up preaching the Gospel 






36 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


to be President of the United States or to occupy any 
throne on earth? 

his doctrine of the New Birth isa glorious doctrine, ] 

‘It is true it sweeps away false hopes.| It comes to the 

oy man who is trusting in his morality and ie “ Morality 

| 4s not enough. You Mus? BE BORN AGAIN.” It comes 

to the man who is trusting in reform, in turning over a 


i new leaf, and says, “ Reform is not enough, no matter 
bho thorough it may be. ost abs | 

It comes to the man or woman who is trusting in educa- 
tion and culture and says, “Education and culture are — 
not enough— ». It comes to the 
man or woman who is trusting in his or her amiability of 
character, in his kindness of heart and generosity in giv- 
ing, and says, “ Amiability of character, kindness of heart 
and generosity in giving are not enough. You Mus? BF 
BORN AGAIN.’ > It comes to the one who is trusting in the 
externalities of religion, in the fact that he goes to church 
_regularly and has been baptized and united with the 
- Church, and partakes of the Lord’s Supper, and regularly 
reads his Bible and says his prayers; and * All the 
externalities of religion are not enough. 


Id aie 





Or 


a 

















BORN. ACATIN 
Yes, the doctrine of the New Birth sweeps away all th 
false hopes such as a multitude of you here this morning, 
are building upon, and tells you a better way, the o 
ay.. But while it sweeps awa false hopes, it brings in a 

















Vone of us and says, “ You MAY BE BORN AGAIN.” 

comes to the one who hae no nee for the things of God 
jgand therefore thinks there_is no hope for him, and says. 
i It comes to the one who is 


down in sin of one kind or another, the one who is strug- 


REGENERATING WORK OF HOLY SPIRIT 87 


og hard but futilely to break away from sin and says, 
ae may be born again nian all your love for, si 
1¢ erly 7 ‘) It comes 
si and com- 
mitted so many sins that he thinks there is no hope for 
him, that there is nothing to look forward to but an 
eternal hell, an eternal continuance of the hell he is 
already in, and that is getting worse ever 







Oh, men and women, have ats been Henn again? I 
do not ask you whether you are church members; I do 
not ask whether you have been baptized; I do not ask 
whether you go regularly to the Lord’s Supper; I do not 
ask you whether you are giving as much of your income 
to the church and to the poor as you should give; I do not 
ask you whether you go to prayer-meeting regularly, and 
say your own prayers regularly every day and study your 
Bible ecient I ask you, 
A ake 








He IS READY TO MAKE YOU ALL OVER; ee IMPART TO YOU | 
Gov’s Own Nature THROUGH His WorD IF YOU WILL | 
ONLY LET Him Do Ir. 







IV 


HOW TO BE FULLY AND FOREVER 
SATISFIED 


UR subject this afternoon is lowes eee 
: Wing Forever Satisfied | 
ur Lord Jesus Christ Himself tells us how 


each one of us can be fully satisfied and satisfied for ever. 
, Turn in roe Bibles to John 4: 14: “ But , eve 








There is a matchless music in "these words, I ‘remember 
how, as a boy, before I had any thought of becoming a 
Christian myself, I would come back to this verse again 
and again, and read it over and over. There was to me 
a fascination in those words that almost no other utter- 
ance of our Lord possessed. I did not understand their 
meaning at all, but they seemed to me like a marvellous 
strain of music from some far away, heavenly world. 
But when I came to understand their meaning and to 
experience for myself the great truth they set forth, there 
was in them a preciousness that I cannot put into words. 
You will recall the circumstances under which the words 
were spoken. Our Lord Jesus had been taking a long and 
tiresome journey afoot, covering the entire day. He had 
started out in the early morning with His disciples, and 


88 


HOW TO BE FULLY SATISFIED 89 


they had trudged along the whole day through, appar- 
ently without anything to eat, and about sunset had reached 
the outskirts of the village of Sychar. It was formerly 
thought that the “ sixth hour ” was noon-time, but it was 
later discovered that in Ephesus, where John wrote this 
Gospel, time was reckoned as it is with us today,—fror 
midnight till noon, and from noon till midnight,—and the 
sixth hour was therefore six o’clock in the afternoon. So 
“about the sixth hour” was six o Gea: in the evening. 






-curb. The dictiples went into the town near-by 
to get something to eat, but apparently He was too tired 
to accompany them. Ina little while, as He sat thus upon 
the well-curb, looking up the road, He saw a woman of 
evil character coming toward the well to draw water. Im- 
mediately a new thirst took possession of Him—not a 
thirst for water for His body, but a thirst for the salvation 


of that outcast woman’s soul} As soon as she aprecicheaey 
within speaking distance Jesus, seeking an approach to her 
oul, said: “ Give. Me to drink;” not so much that He 


\ wished water for His thirsty body (though He sorely 
needed that), as that He wished to win that woman from 
‘her sins into the possession of eternal life which He alone 
‘could gives} Instead of letting ‘down the jug she carried 
into the well to draw water, she meanly and contemptu- 
ously said: “ How is it that Thou, being a Jew, askest 
drink of me, which am a Samaritan woman?” Our Lord 
does not notice the insult, but replies: “ If thou knewest 
the gift of God, and who it is that saith to thee, Give Me 
to drink; thou wouldest have asked_of Him, and He 
would have given edieriaioe eel Immediately the 


woman said to Him: “ Sir, Thou hast nothing to draw 


90 “THE HOLY SPIRIT 


with, and the well is deep: from whence then hast Thou 
that living water?” Pointing down into that well, at 
which so many generations of men and cattle had slaked 
their thirst, Jesus replied: “ Every one that drinketh of 
this water shall thirst again.” 

How true that is of every earthly fountain of satis- 
faction or joy; no matter how deeply one drinks, he soon 
thirsts again. For example, drink as deeply as you will 
of the fountain of wealth, you are not satisfied for long: 
you soon thirst again. Drink of the fountain of worldly 
fame or honour or power, how long will you be satis- 
fied? You soon thirst again. Drink as deeply as you will 
of the fountain of worldly pleasure, you will not be satis- 
fied for long: you soon thrist again. Drink as deeply as you 
| will of the fountain of human knowledge, of the fountain } 
of science, or philosophy, or literature, or at the fountain | 














Sof that most nearly divine of all human fountains, the foun- 
tain of human love, you soon thirst again. Not one of 
these things fully satisfies, neither do they.satisfy for long. 
Then_our added the wonderful words of our 
| text : Cf W yet,.shall drink of the water that I shal 
give him shall never thirst; or to translate more liter- 
ally: “shall not thirst forever ;” “ But the water tha 




















i Le santegey: if z 
one of us could sit and ponder those words in silence by 
ourselves till their full meaning and full force took entire 
possession of our minds and hearts. | Drinx 





But what is the water that our Lord Jesus gives? If 
you look at the commentaries on John 4:14, you will find 


HOW TO BE FULLY SATISFIED 91 


a great many different answers to this question. But the 
Bible itself answers the question and tells us plainly just 
what this water is that the Lord Jesus gives. You will 
find this answer in John 7: 37-39: “Now on the last | 
day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, 
saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto Me and 
drink. [He that believeth on Me, as the Scripture hath 
said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. 
















on Him were to receiye.| Fi 


HRIST [VE EL CLO 
those who believe 
ift. cI 0 








. . . 
Vy... 11O oe ce) ToTMentc 


es, NO _ in. your. p essessons, hus Ic 









our joy is in our eerie or in our possessions we 
cannot by any possibility be always happy ; for sometimes 
| our environment is just what we would have it to be, 
and sometimes it is just what we would not have it to 
be. When our environment is pleasant, then we are 
happy, but when it is unpleasant we are miserable. If 
our joy is in our possessions,—that is, in our possessions 
outside of ourselves—we cannot by any possibility be 
always happy, for sometimes we have them, and some- 
times we lose them. When we have them we are happy, 
but when they are gone we are utterly miserable. We 






92 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


are happy when we are rich, but we are miserable when 
we are poor. We are happy when we are well, but we 
are miserable when we are sick. We are happy when 
men speak well of us, but we are miserable when they 
speak evil of us. We are happy when we have our 
friends with us, but plunged into the depths of sorrow 
and _ despair when they are taken from us by death. 
But. if our source of. joy a 
ountain sptinging up within us,..then. we are enti 
independent of our surroundings, our circumstances our 
| possessions or Jack o possessions, We are joyful when 
'we are rich and equally joyful when we are poor; we © 
‘are joyful when things go just right, and equally joyful a 
‘when they go “dead wrong ;” we are joyful when we are — 
well, but equally joyful when we are sick; we are joyful — 
»when men speak well of us, but equally jovitl when they 
i speak all manner of evil against us; we are joyful when 










the dearest friend we have on earth is taken from us; 


indeed, the as of the indwelling Spirit, of God seems 


voftentimes...to,.wel D...With even greater power.in the | 






‘comes, § sooner or - later, to. every one of us, when for the ) 
last time we look into the face of some dearly loved one 
lying cold and still in death, what possible comfort is — 
| there in anything that this world can give? Is there any | 
-surcease for our sorrow in such an hour to be gained by 
going to the theatre, the opera, the card-party, the dance? 
No, those things would only add to our sorrow. We do 
not think of going to them at such an hour. But from 
this fountain within us, which the indwelling Spirit has 
become, gushes up at at such 1a | time as that “ joy unspeak- 


‘able aad full of glory.” 









HOW TO BE FULLY SATISFIED 93 


How well I remember such an experience in a time of 
apparently overwhelming sorrow that came to my wife 
and to me years ago. We had a lovely daughter, about 
nine years of age, a most winsome child. One Saturday 
afternoon Mr. Jacoby, the redeemed man of whom I 
spoke to you yesterday, came to our house, as he did 
every Saturday afternoon, to take the children with him 
out to Lincoln Park. When they returned that evening 
about six o’clock, our little Elizabeth said: “I don’t think 
Til eat any supper tonight; I don’t feel real well.” We 
thought little of it, considering it simply a bilious attack. 
But the next morning when she came down to breakfast 
she said: “TI don’t think I’ll go to church this morning ; 
my head aches.” We still thought it was simply a bilious 
attack. But Monday morning, when she came to the 
breakfast-table, she said: “I don’t feel real well yet; I 
don’t think I’d better go to school today.” It seemed 
rather long for a bilious attack to stay with a child, and 
yet it seemed nothing serious. She was around the house 
all day, not feeling really well, but apparently not very 
sick. Tuesday morning, when she arose, she said: “I am 
well today and I’m going to school.” But she added: “I 
have a strange feeling in my throat!” Her mother 
looked into her throat and saw the tell-tale white patch, 
and, of course, we sent for a physician at once. When 
he came and had carefully examined the child he said: 
“There is nothing to be anxious about. It is not diph- 
theria; it is only tonsilitis. But I will keep a close 
watch.” The next morning he came again and gave her 
another examination, and then said: “ Well, it is diph- 
iheria, but not a serious case at all. There is nothing to 
be alarmed about.” 

The other children were sent away from home, so that 


94 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


they might not be exposed. Our Elizabeth seemed to be 
better all that day. That night I slept down-stairs to 
avoid exposing others whom I might have to meet during 
the following day, and her mother stayed up-stairs with 
the little child. The next morning, long before daylight, 
her mother ran to the top of the stairs, calling: “ Archie, 
come up, quick!” I rushed up-stairs and saw Elizabeth 
choking. I ran at once for the physician. He came back 
with me; but Elizabeth was apparently very much better. 
The choking had all passed away; indeed, she seemed 
well on the road to recovery. The doctor said: “ For 
some reason or other I don’t feel like administering anti- 
{oxin ; but keep a close watch on her, and if she gets any 
worse telephone me at the Medical College and I will 
leave my classes and come at once.” But she seemed to 
rapidly grow better rather than worse; indeed, she said 
to her mother: “ Mother, I am well; I want to get up 
and dress.” In the meantime, a trained nurse had come, 
and her mother came down-stairs to talk with me. We 
were very happy in the thought that our little girl had 
been spared to us, and I had written letters to Mr. 
Moody and other friends saying how the crisis was past 
and Elizabeth was well on the road to recovery. 
Suddenly, right in the midst of our talk with one 
another, the nurse ran to the top of the stairs and called: 
“Come up, quick!” We rushed up-stairs, Elizabeth’s 
eyes were closed. She was breathing rapidly, not chok- 
ing, but the little heart was giving out. There was no 
time to send for the doctor. JI dropped on my knees to 
pray. I had hardly time to begin when the spirit of our 
little one had taken its flight from the mortal body. It 
was so sudden, so unexpected, it was almost crushing. 
The health officers came in and ordered that we should 


HOW TO BE FULLY SATISFIED 95 


bury the body at once. Of course, no one was allowed to 
come to the funeral. We had to have the service all 
alone, with the exception of the presence of Mr. Jacoby, 
who insisted on coming and accompanying us to the 
grave. Even her brother and little sisters could only 
stand across the street and look at the house where lay 
the body of their sister, whom they would never see 
again until the resurrection. We carried the little body 
to the cemetery. It was raining pitilessly, and as the little 
body was lowered into the grave and the rain poured upon 
the box that contained the casket, my wife turned to me 
and said: “ Archie, I am so glad that Elizabeth is not in 
that box!” 

When we returned home the health officers demanded, 
very wisely, that after being fumigated we should leave 
the house to them and go to a strange hotel for the night. 
All that night there was the most prolonged thunder- 
storm, except one, that I ever passed through. It seemed 
to be one unceasing flash of lightning and crash of thun- 
der, and we could not sleep. 

The next morning, as I went, thoroughly worn out, to 
the Bible Institute to meet my classes, as I passed around 
the corner of Chestnut Street and La Salle Avenue, I 
could contain my grief no longer. There was no one on 
the street, and I cried aloud : e Oh, Elizabeth! Eliza- 
beth!” And just_then 

eart broke forth with such power as I think I had never } 
possess before, and it was the most joyful moment 
that I had ever known in my life! 

Oh, how wonderful is 5 the joy. 0: of the 1e Holy G Chost ! | Tt 
is an unspeakably glorious t thing to have your joy, not in 
things without you, not even in your most oe loved 
friends, but to have within you a foun ; inging 










96 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


up, springing up, springing up, always springing up, three 
hundred and sixty-five days in every year, E pringing Up 
under all circumstances into everlasting life. 


__It_is_also.a_great thing that you can haye.a.fountain_. 
hat. you. can, take with vou wherever. you.g0..) A good 
many years ago I was walking along the Winchester Road 
in Northfield with George Needham, the celebrated evan- 
gelist. We went over the state line into New Hampshire. 
On our return, when we had reached a place about five 
minutes north of where the Auditorium now stands, we 
passed by a hill. Mr. Needham said to me: “ Torrey, I 
believe that if we go up to the top of that hill we will 
get a fine view.” So up to the top of the hill we went, 
and it was a wonderful view! At our feet lay the North- 
field Seminary grounds in all their beauty. Then across 
the road, the meadows leading down to the Connecticut 
River, that ran like a broad silver band between the 
gentle slopes of green on both sides of the river. Then 
one tier of hills and then another a little higher, then 
another, then another—five, six, seven tiers, ending in 
the Green Mountains in the distance, and all bathed in 
the golden light of the setting sun! It was a scene of 
marvellous beauty. J turned to Mr. Needham and said: 
“T am going to buy this hill and build a house right 
where we are standing!” So the next day I went to the 
farmer who owned the land; he named his price, and I 
paid it. The following spring I began to build my house. 
My friends who drove along the foot of the hill would 
call to me, and when I would go down would say: “ What 
are you building ’way up there for?” I would reply: 
“Because I wish to see out.” “But,” they said, “ you 
will have no water up there!” 

That is where they were mistaken; for before a spade 








HOW TO BE FULLY SATISFIED 97 


was put into the ground to dig the foundations, in walk- 
ing over the place with the farmer from whom I had 
purchased it, I noticed a little depression in the ground, 
perhaps fifty or seventy-five feet from where I had in- 
tended to build the house. I said to the farmer: “I think 
if we should dig there we would strike water.” He re- 
plied: “I don’t know; it looks as if you might.” I sent 
for a well-digger. He dug a hole four or five feet across 
and eight feet deep—and the water came bubbling in. 
There were soon five feet of water in that eight-foot-deep 
well, and such water! Clear as crystal—so clear that 
when you looked into the well, even when there were 
five feet of water in it, it looked sometimes as if there 
were none, the water was so clear and transparent. And 
water soft and cold and pure and never-failing We had 
many dry seasons after that and many another well ran 
dry; but not our well, up on the hillside. There was 
always plenty of water in that spring and many would 
come there to drink. 

But there was one grave trouble with that well—a 
fatal fault—I could not take it with me when the call 
came for me to go elsewhere. During the Spanish- 
American War I was with the soldiers at Chickamauga 
Park, and we had a prolonged drought; for weeks and 
weeks no rain; and with sixty thousand troops marching 
and counter-marching, and artillery wagons running 
across the field, the dust filled the air day and night—dust 
thirty feet high! We ate dust, we drank dust we slept 
dust, and we drempt dust! And no water anywhere fit 
to drink. There was a well to which the officers of 
Major-General Brooks’ command had access, and it 
looked good and tasted good, but drink it and in a short 
time you would be flat on your back. And oh, how 


98 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


thirsty I got, and how often I would think of that well 
of mine up on the hill at Northfield! But it did me no 
good, for it was many hundreds of miles away. 

Then the call came for me to go to China, and while 
in China we decided to visit Canton. Cholera was raging 
in Canton at the time. People were fleeing from the 
city in fright. When we boarded the boat at Hong-Kong 
to go up to Canton, they said to us: “ Be sure and drink 
no water on the boat. A member of the French Legation 
went up last week and drank water on that boat. He was 
at breakfast with his family, but died with cholera before 
lunch.” I remembered the warning on the way up, but 
after a few days in Canton, when we were going back 
on the steamer, as I sat down to dinner I read on the 
menu card: ‘Corned beef and cabbage.” That looked 
good to an American who had been eating all kinds of 
foreign concoctions. Without thinking of what it would 
do for me, I ordered corned beef and cabbage. But I 
soon found what it would do for me! In the evening I 
began to get very thirsty. I was about to start for the 
water-tank when I remembered the warning: “Be sure 
and drink no water on the boat. A member of the French 
Legation went up last week and drank some water on 
the boat. He was with his family at breakfast and died 
with cholera before lunch!” So i drank some of the 
various soft-drink concoctions as long as [I dared, and 
then lay all night suffering from thirst and thinking of 
the well on the hillside at Northfield, so many thousands 
of miles away. But I had another Well that I had 
brought with me, and while my body thirsted, my soul 
was satisfied: the Holy Spirit within was springing up, 
springing up, springing up, into everlasting life and joy! 


Please note another thing: when cne has this fountain 


HOW TO BE FULLY SATISFIED 99 







is_entir - 
' ie ‘S: joy."} What does he 
Feare for the dance, or th e card-party, or the theatre, or 
any other kind of learitily satisfaction? Who would go 
to an old green, slimy pool to drink when he had right 
at hand a clear crystal spring? Oh, the world with its 
allurements has no power over the one who has this 
fountain within! 

I often think there is little use in telling young Chris- 
tians: You must not dance; you must not play cards; 
you must not go to the theatre; you must not do this, 
that and the other thing. There is a far better ahs ( 





he 9 receive the Holy Spirit, and let. Him ha full | 
right of way within, and the will have no. aegee: or. 





h_things—they will stay away from the theatre and 
the dance, and the rest, not merely because they ought, 
but because they will not desire to go. Who that knows 
of a clear, crystal spring will sneak off to some green, 
slimy pool to drink? 

When Mr. Moody was holding meetings in Philadel- 
phia, a lady came to him one day at the close of one of 
his meetings and said: “ Mr. Moody, I don’t like youl i 
“ Why?” he asked. “Because you are so narrow.” “TIT 
didn’t think I was narrow,” Mr. Moody replied; “ why 
do you think Iam narrow?” “ Because you don’t believe 
in the dance, you don’t believe in cards, you don’t believe 
in the theatre, you don’t believe in anything nice!” “Let 
me tell you something,” he said, “I go to the theatre 
whenever I want.to.” ‘ What!” she exclaimed, “ you 
go to the theatre whenever you want to? Oh, I do like 
you, Mr. Moody! You are much broader than I thought.” 
“Yes,” he replied, “I go to the theatre whenever I want 
to, I Don’t WANT To!” 


100 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


Some days later another lady came to him and said: 
“Mr. Moody, I did not understand what you meant when 
you said you went to the theatre whenever you wanted to, 
but I understand now. I was converted in your meetings 
and a few days ago, after my conversion, my husband 
asked me to go to the theatre with him. I did not care 
to go, but went to please him. We had hardly taken our 
seats when the curtain rose and just a little while after 
the curtain rose something was said on the stage that 
grated on this new life that I had in my heart. I turned 
to my husband and whispered: ‘ Husband, I can’t stand 
this!’ He whispered back: ‘ Stay through this play and 
I will never ask you to come again.’ I straightened up 
and the play went on for a little while longer, and again 
something was said or done on the stage that grated on 
this new life in my heart. Again I turned to my hus- 
band and whispered: ‘ Husband, I really can’t stand this; 
I must go!’ My husband whispered back: ‘ Don’t make 
a scene. Stay through this play and I'll never ask you 
to come again.’ Again I straightened up and tried to 
endure it. But soon something else was said or done 
that jarred upon this new life that I had in my heart, and 
I turned to my husband and said: ‘ Husband, I really 
can’t stand it any longer!’ He whispered back: ‘ Don’t 
make a fool of yourself!’ I replied: ‘ Husband, I have 
been making a fool of myself for thirty years, and I am 
not going to make a fool of myself any longer!’ And I 
got up and left.” 

Oh, if you have this fountain within, you will not want 
these things. The pure crystal spring of the Holy Spirit 
in the heart will make it impossible for you to ‘seek to 
slake your thirst at the green, slimy pools of this world’s 
pleasures, 


HOW TO BE FULLY SATISFIED 101)» 


But someone will ask: Why is it, then, that so many 
Christians do run after these things? The answer is 
very simple: It is either because they never have really 
received the Holy Spirit as an indwelling fountain of life 
and joy and satisfaction, which is doubtless true of many, » 
professing Christians; or else the fountain has become ( 
choked. You know it is quite possible to choke a 
fountain. 

I was born in the city and brought up in the city. 
Occasionally, in the summer, our family would take a |» 
vacation in the country. But in the heart of the great 
city was where we lived. When I became ten years of 
age I was thoroughly tired of the city, as any healthy 
boy would be. My two brothers, who were both older 
than I, were also tired of the city, and we went to our 
father and said: “ Father, buy a home in the country.” 
He was born in the country and was, I suspect, more 
tired of the city than we were, and, though he was only 
forty-three, he made up his mind that he would retire 
from business and would buy a home in the country. 
He went to Geneva, N. Y., about twenty miles from 
where he was born. Oftentimes, as a young man, he 
had noticed a beautiful place on Seneca Lake where he 
thought he would like to live when he had money enough 
to make it possible. It was just outside Geneva, across 
the lake, the grounds running down to the lake. But, on 
reaching Geneva, he found that the owner did not wish 
to sell the place. He went to an old friend, an elder in 
the Presbyterian Church, Captain Joe Lewis, and said: 
“Joe, I came out here to buy the Swan place but they 
don’t wish to sell it. I am greatly disappointed!” 
“Reuben,” he replied, “I think I know a place that 
would suit you—the Colonel Sherrill place. The colonel 





102 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


was killed in the war, and his widow wishes to sell the 
place.” He took my father out, and they soon agreed 
upon the terms and my father bought the place. 

Geneva is a beautiful city lying at the foot of Seneca 
Lake, one of the most beautiful sheets of water in the 
world, forty-two miles long and from two to five miles 
wide. The man who had originally built the place had 
spent a great deal of money upon it. It was half a mile 
from the lake and part of the city lay between the place 
and the lake. But the man wished to see up the lake. So 
he had three hundred teams to work for many weeks 
building an artificial hill, so that they could see over the 
lake and up the lake twenty miles, Then he laid out his 
lawns and gardens and sent to different parts of this 
country and, I think, also to England, to get large trees to 
set out. But when the trees were set out and the house 
and barns and stables built, and the orchards planted, 
though he could see twenty miles up the lake the man was 
not satisfied, because of the water supply. There was a 
good well, but it was a long ways from the house, and he 
wished to have a well near at hand where he could pump 
water through the house. He sent for well diggers and 
set them to digging a well not very far from the house. 
They dug and dug and dug; it seemed as if they never 
would strike water. But one day they struck water and 
struck altogether too much, They struck a “ gusher ” and 
the water came pouring in until they were afraid it would 
undermine the foundations of the house. He sent for the 
fire department ; they pumped the well out, and while still 
pumping they lowered a man in a basket down into the 
well with a rag carpet in his hand. He found the great 
orifice where the water was pouring in and shoving the 
rag carpet in stopped the flow of water. Then they piled 


HOW TO BE FULLY SATISFIED 103 


in rocks on top of it, and the well was perfectly safe. 
But it was also perfectly useless, 

One day, standing by that expensive hole, the man said 
to himself: “I put a lot of money into that hole and I am 
going to have that water!” They took out the rocks that 
had been piled in, then curbed the well up with stone from 
the bottom to the top; and then he sent for the fire depart- 
ment again. Again they lowered the man into the well. 
In one hand he held a cord with which to pull a bell to 
signal them when he got hold of the carpet. He took hold 
of the carpet with one hand and with the other rang the 
signal, and they pulled him up, dragging the carpet with 
him. And the water poured in again, but now it was 
perfectly safe., 

For years we drank of that well, and wonderful water 
it was. But in the course of time my father and mother 
died, and the place passed into other hands. I never re- 
visited the place after my father’s funeral for twenty-two 
years ; I did not want to see it. But one time I had to pass . 
through Geneva to go to Cornell University to speak at a 
meeting there. On returning through the place I thought 
I would get off and visit the old place. The station of the 
Lehigh Valley railroad was right on our old place, about 
a quarter of a mile back from where the house had stood. © 
A street-car line passed right over the spot where the 
house had been located. I got off and looked to see if I 
could find anything that reminded me of the old home. 
The house had been taken down, brick by brick and stone 
by stone. Many of the finest trees had been cut down. 
The lawns and gardens and orchards were now laid out 
in city lots. I thought at first I was to find nothing that 
belonged to the old home. But passing by a house I 
noticed a well right in front of the front porch. I 


104 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


thought to myself: ‘‘ What a strange place to have a well, 
right in the front yard and in front of the porch;” and 
then it occurred to me that it was the old well! Leaving 
the old home place, I went down town. The Presby- 
terian minister met me on the street. ‘‘ Oh,” he said, 
“have you been up to the old place?” I replied: “I 
have.” He said: “ You didn’t find anything of the old 
place left, did you?” “ Yes,” I said, “just one thing— 
the old well. But what a strange place for a well—right 
in front of your front porch! I should think they would 
fill it up.” He replied: “ They will never fill that well 
up—it’s the best water in Geneva!” Do you see the 
point ?—the best water in Geneva! and yet it had been 
plugged up for a long time with an old rag! If you 
have ever received the Holy Spirit as an indwelling 
source of joy, you have had in your heart, not “the best 
water there is in Geneva,” but the best water there is in 
the universe. And in many of you the well is plugged 
up by some old rag of sin or worldly conformity. Let’s 
pull out the old rags today! What do you say? 

When I was holding meetings in Melbourne, Australia, 
I used this illustration one day at a meeting for business 
and professional men in the town hall. There was a 
Church of England clergyman in my audience who had 
Known the joy of the Holy Spirit in his earlier life in 
England, but in coming out to Australia the fountain had 
become choked. As he heard me that day a great unrest 
came into his heart; he longed for the old joy. He spent 
the whole afternoon at the Cathedral in prayer (the 
Cathedral was kept open all day for prayer). But when 
night came on he had not got the old rag out yet. He 
called upon Father Kent, a godly Anglican clergyman, 
and told him of his trouble, and Father Kent helped him 


HOW TO BE FULLY SATISFIED 105 


to get the old rag out, and he was filled with even greater 
joy than he had known before. He came to me the next 
day and told me of the experience. When we went to 
Geelong to hold meetings there, this man, whose parish 
was fifteen miles from Geelong, brought a wagon-load 
of people down every night to the meeting and took them 
back again after the meeting was over. He was the most 
useful worker we had in Geelong. 

Oh, if you have ever known this joy and have lost it, 
find out today what it is that stops the well and have it 
out, and you will know not only as great but very likely 
a greater joy than you knew before. 

When I was holding meetings in Bristol, England, in 
the Coulston Hall, I spoke one afternoon on this same 
subject. At the close, as I stepped into my carriage to 
go to my hotel, another Anglican clergyman came up and 
said: “I am going to ride to the hotel with you,” and 
stepped into the carriage with me. We had not gone far 
when he said: “I once knew this joy of which you have 
been speaking today, but the fountain is now plugged, and 
I know what plugs it—it is a plug of tobacco! I am 
zoing to give it up today.” 

What is it that stops the fountain in your heart? Do 
you know? If so, put it away today. But perhaps you 
do not know what it is. You know you once had that 
joy and you know you have lost it. Well, you can know, 
Ask God to show you what it is that stops the foun ain’ 
and promise Him that if will show you what it is 

ou_will give it up.§& He will show you if you are really 
bINCeTe 

But perhaps some of you never knew the joy of the 
Holy Spirit. You can know that wondrous joy today. 
The Lord Jesus stands here today, all unseen, but never- 


106 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


ttheless here, holding out the golden goblet that contains 
he living water, and saying: “ Whosoever drinketh of 
the water that I shall give him shall never aa but th 


wate hat ha I give him sha. become inhi 


water, pringing up..into_¢ erla isting lite 7s Wil 


THB) 







1 you 






sirssde ita > 


see back in the chapter the Lord tsi says (in 
fvs. 10): “If thou knowest the gift of God and who it is 
ithat saith to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have 
asked of Him, and he would have given thee living 
water.” Just ask of the Lord Jesus, but be sure, when | 

you ask, that you really mean. it, and that you reall long G 
: irit,. ‘at. any price ‘and that your, wi ist 


full TERME LT to mest Pe ves...the... . Pl 
to them that obe (Acts 5: 32), 






v 


THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT: 
WHAT IT IS AND IT: “DOE 
HE address of this afternoon, and the addresses of 
the days immediately to follow, are the outcome 
of an experience, and that experience was the 
eof a study of the Word of God. .j After I had 
been a Christian for some years, and after I had been in 
the ministry for some years, my attention was strongly 
attracted to certain phrases found in the Gospels and in 
the Acts of the Apostles, and in the Epistles, such as 
i baptized with the Holy Spirit,” “ filled with the Spirit,” 





. Spirit: > endued wit “power from on. ‘high, *"and other 
closely allied phrases. As I studied these various phrases 
in their context, it became clear to me that they all stood 
for essentially the same experience; and it also became 


clear to me that God had® provided for each_ ach _child of 
His in this _ present. dispensation. t that they should should be 
this _ e baptized with ¢ the Spirit,” or, “filled” with he 


’ 
Di 


hes I studied the subject still further, I became con- 
vinced that they described an experience which I did not 
myself possess, and I went to work to secure for myself 


the experience thus described. {sought earnestly, that, I 
ight.“ irit,”, I went at it 
very ignorantly. I have often wondered if anyone ever 


107 


108 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


‘went at it any more ignorantly than I did. \But-whi 
was_ignoran was, thorough cere and in earnest. 





NOON hen I began to tell others A Ww at I had found in the 
ry Word of God, first in very small circles, then in larger 
’ circles, then in much wider circles, and at last it was my 

privilege to tell it literally around the globe. I have often 


ht, in connection. with my own experience, of our. 











both in Jerusalem aoa in all Facies, ana in . Samaria, and 

h..; for it has been 
my privilege to declare the truth in the very remotest 
inhabited spot there is on this globe from the place where 
I myself was “ baptized with the Holy Spirit.” _ 

You will find the substance of all I have to say this 
afternoon, in three verses in the Bible, Acts 1:4, 5, 8: 
“And being assembled together with them (He) com- 
manded them that they should not depart from Jerusa- 
lem, but wait for the promise of the Father, which, saith 
He, ye have heard of Me. For John truly baptized with 





water ; but_ye_shall be baptized with the Ho host not 
many days hence. . . . But ye shall receive power, afte 
HQ VE bh QU. HLO , OWLE...UPON OX) Pram. W0X@ GANT ARAYA De 


vitnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, 
and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the 


earth.” What I wish you to noticeparticularly just now, 
in these verses, is these words A BAPTIZED WITH THE 


THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 109 


«Hoty Guost. f What a peculiar expression it is! What 


does it mean? We all know what it means to be baptized 
with water: we have seen poeple thus baptized. But 
“baptized with the Holy Ghost,” what does it mean? 
What I have to say on the general subject of the 
ae with the Holy Spirit, will come under five heads: 
First: What the Baptism with the Holy Spirit Is. 
Second: What the Results of the Baptism with the 
Holy Spirit Are. 
am The Necessity of the Baptism with the Holy 
2 ae or, Who Needs the Baptism with the Holy Spirit. 
Fourth: The Possibility of the Baptism with the Holy 
Spirit, or Who Can Be Baptized with the Holy Spirit. 
| “Fifth: How the Baptism with the Holy Spirit Is to 
Be Obtained. 





I. Wuat ts THE BAPTISM wiTH THE Hoty Spirit? 

The first question, then, that we should consider is, 
“What is the Baptism with the Holy Spirit?” The 
Bible makes this very plain, if we study the various pas- 
sages that speak of the subject, and study them in their 
context. 

1. In the first place, the Baptism with the Holy Spirit 
ts a definite experience of which one may know wh 
he has received it or not. ‘This is clear from Acts 1:4, 5: 
“And being assembled together with them (He) com- 
manded them that they should not depart from Jerusa- 
lem, but which, saith 
He, ye have heard from Me. For John indeed baptized 
with water; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost 











verses that the Baptism | with the Holy Ghost is a definite 
experience of which a man may know whether he has 


110 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


received it or not, for if not, how could the disciples 
possibly know when the days of waiting were over and 
the days to begin their ministry had begun? 

The same thing is clear from Acts 19:2 also: “He 
said unto them, |Have ye received the Hol Ghost sia) 

e believed?” or, as it is in the Revised Version, “ Did ye 

. receive the Holy Ghost when ye believed? “| “ And they 

said unto him, No, we did not so much as hear whether 

the Holy Ghost was given.” Paul had come down to 

the City of Ephesus, and had found there a small group 

of disciples, twelve in number. There was something 
about these twelve disciples that did not altogether sat-_ 
isfy Paul. We are not told just what it was, 
have been that there was not tha Iness_ 
about them that one expects to find in Spirit- filled Chris- 
tiansl It may be that Paul was troubled by the fact that 
there were only twelve of them, thinking that if they 
were Spirit-filled, there would certainly have been more 
than twelve of them by this time. Whatever it was that 
disturbed Paul, he went right to the root of the difficulty 
at once by putting to them the question that we have just 
read, “Did ye receive the Holy Ghost when ye be- 
lieved?” Evidently Paul expected a definite “ Yes,” or 
a definite “ No” in answer to that question. In point of 
fact he got a definite “ No.” They said “ No, we did not 
so much as hear whether the Holy Ghost was given.” 
They did not say what our Authorized Version makes 
them say: “ We have not so much as heard whether there 
be any Holy Ghost.” I suppose there are Christians 
today who are as ignorant as that, they do not even know 
that there is such a person init, but these 
disciples knew that there was a Holy Spirit. They knew, 
furthermore, that there was a definite promise of the 













THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 111 


baptism with the Holy Ghost, but they did not know that 
that promise had as yet been fulfilled. Paul assured 
them that it had, and saw to it at once, even before that 
meeting broke up, that they all took the steps whereby 
they were all definitely and immediately baptized with 
the Holy Ghost right then and there without any “ tarry- 
ing meetings” or anything of that sort. 

There is much talk in these days about the Baptism 
with the Holy Spirit, and much prayer for the Baptism 
with the Holy Spirit that is altogether vague and indefi- 
nite. You will go to a meeting and men will stand up 
and pray that they may be baptized with the Holy Ghost, 
but oftentimes, if after the meeting is over you should 
go to them and ask, “Did you get what you asked? 
Were you baptized with the Holy Ghost?” there is quite 
a strong probability that they would hesitate, and even 
stammer, and say, “ Well, well, J hope so.’ But there 
is none of that indefiniteness in the Bible. The Bible is 
the most definite book that was ever written. That is 
one of the reasons why I love it. ‘The Bible is definite 
about salvation; so definite that if a man is saved, and 
knows his Bible, and you put to him the question, “ Are 
you saved,” he will reply, in all humility and yet with 
equal confidence, “ Yes, God in Eis infinite. mercy..and} 
ondescension has sayed even me.”} The Bible is just as } 
efinite about the Baptism with the Holy Spirit ; so defi- 
nite that if_a man hasbeen.“ baptized, with the Holy! 
Spirit,” and knows his Bible, and you put to him the! 
question, “ Have you aptized with the Holy} 
Spirit?” he will reply, in all humility and yet with equal | 
' confidence and positiveness, “ Yes, God in His infinite), 
ercy and condescension has seen fit to baptize even me 













112 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


Of course, it is quite possible that a man may be a_ 
saved man and yet, by reason of his ignorance of the 
Bible, not have assurance of salvation, 7. e., he may not 
know that he is saved. We have all met many such men | 
and women. But it is his privilege to know (1 Jno. 
5:13). And so it is also quite possible that a man may 
have been “baptized with the Holy Ghost” and yet, 
through ignorance of the Bible, not know the name of 
the experience which he has received. JI have met such 
men and women as that. I remember a man who came 
to me once at an “ International Christian Workers’ Con- 
vention” at Washington, D. C. He was a well-known 
man—a man known all over the country; a man that I 
presume every one of you would know at least by name 
if I should mention it. At the close of an address that 
I gave on “The Baptism with the Holy Spirit,” this 
man came to me and said, “Is that what you call it, the 
Baptism with the Holy Spirit? I never heard the name 
before, but I have received what you have been talking 
about, and I can tell you just where I received it.” But, 

hile this is all true, it is possible for us to know whether 






ENCE OF WHICH ONE MAY KNOW. WHETHER, HE. JLAS) 
| RECEIVED IT OR NOT, | 
f) ) 2 In the second place, th 
MOY fe O ne 
ing..work, | In other words: it is one thing 
to nar cn again urs th 1¢ Holy Spirit, and quite another 
thing to be bapti i 
evident from Acts 1:5: e aptized with the 
Holy Ghost, not many days hence.” It is evident from 
these words that the apostles had not as yet been baptized 


THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 113 
saeeetaeaeneemeeeta me imeneninua ace cl : 
with the Holy Spirit, they were to be “not many days 


hence.” But 3 ment to sam our Lot ord ae" 
h Oo 





Now, what does ‘ clean becatse of the word: bi ene 
Turn to 1 Peter 1:23, and you will get your answer: 
“Having been begotten again, not of corruptible seed, 
_ but of incorruptible, through the word of God, which 
liveth and abideth.” It is evident from these words that 
“clean through the Word” (or “ because of the Word,” 


3 


as the Revised Version reads) means “ begotten again, 
or born again, “through the Word.” So these men were 
already born again, but they were not as yet baptized with 
the Holy Spirit. They were to be “baptized with the 
wi ce 

The same thing is evident from Acts 8:12-16. In 
verse 12 we are told that “when they believed Philip 
preaching the good tidings concerning the kingdom of 
God, and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, 
both men and women.” Now certainly, in that large com- 
pany of baptized believers, who had “believed Philip 
preaching good tidings concerning the kingdom of God, 
and the name of Jesus Christ,’ and who “ had been bap- 
tized into the name of the Lord Jesus” (v. 16), there 
were at least some who were regenerate men and women. 
Whatever may be the correct mode of baptism, by 
sprinkling, immersion, or pouring, these disciples had, 
beyond question, been baptized in the right way, for 
Philip, an officially appointed officer in the church, had 


not baptized with the Holy S S‘pirit. {! 
| So it Is As CLEAR AS LANGUAGE CAN POSSIBLY MAKE | 
| IT, THAT IT IS ONE THING TO BE BORN AGAIN AND SOME- 
L HING FURTHER, SOM TELL VG. ADDITIONA O BE. BAP D 
_wits tue Hoty Spier. | | 
| therefore, that one may be a regenerate man and yet not § 
as yet have received the baptism with the Holy Spirit. 
‘| Let us bow to the clear teaching of the Word of God} 
_ even if it does not agree with our preconceived theories. | 
Now, if.a man.is, regenerate,..he is saved} This is not) 
| a question of salvation at all. If he should die he would 
| go to heaven. ) Buf though, MG bS SAVE VullbrkS Md Wednfutdeds 


‘yet all. 1 that he might , 





| have, and ought to have.} 


114 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


administered the baptism, and as I have said, it is clear 
that some, at least, of this company of properly baptized 
believers were regenerate men. But when we come down 
to verses 15 and 16, we read, “ Peter and John, when 


they were come down, .pravea hem..that...they.adagls 
CONC bur kd ron HO Skerrveh.Q os et. He. sas fallen. upon 
none..of.them.. ere baptized into the name of) 


PSom we see clearly that these regenerate) 


men had not feee baptized with the Holy Ghost, thoug i 


they had been properly “ baptized into the name of the 
Lord Jesus.” They were regenerate men but they were 





finer 


rit is clear and denalle: 






or God’s. service. He has not as 


PS RAI RR 


i 





Let me make it clear, still further, that every believer 


| has the Holy Spirit in some sense; that the Holy Spirit 


dwells in every one that is born again, ‘This appears 
clearly from Romans 8:9, as well as from many other 
passages of Scripture. Let me read Romans 8:9 to 
you: “ But if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he 


is none of His.” Now the words “the Spirit of Christ” 


in this verse do not mean a Christlike spirit. The words 


THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 115 


are a name for the Holy Spirit; that is clear from the 
context. And what we are told here is that if any man 
hath not the Holy Spirit (Whg,is here called the Spirit 
of Christ), he is none of His. it,.1s,.clear,.that every } 

pirit,.\) But in many a 
believer the Holy Spirit dwells away back in some hidden 
sanctuary of his person, away back of conscious experi- 
ence. So, just as it is one thing to have a guest in your 
house living in some remote corner of the house where 
you scarcely know that he is there, and quite another 
thing to have that guest taking entire possession of the 
house, just so it is one thing to have the Holy Spirit 
dwelling away back of consciousness in some hidden 
sanctuary of our being, and quite another thing to have 
that Holy Spirit taking entire possession of the house. 
In other words, it is one thing to have the Holy Spirit 
merely dwelling in us but we not conscious of His 
dwelling, and quite another thing to be filled, or baptized, 
with the Holy Spirit. we may put it with perfect 
accuracy in this way: 


ee the gift of the wie btn 


aly iS pirit,” = thie Jiro 


et me e say, still further, that, one ma. be ba tized with 





is exactly what occurred in the case of the houeonold of. 
Cornelius. Cornelius and his household and friends were 
listening to the first gospel sermon they had ever heard 
in their lives, and Peter had come to the climax of his 
sermon, in Acts 10:43, where he says: “To Him (1. e., 
to the Lord Jesus) bear all the prophets witness, that 
through His name everyone that believeth on Him shall 


116 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


receive remission of sins,” and no sooner had Peter said 
it than they all believed on the Lord Jesus and were born 
again, and right then and there, before Peter could finish 
his sermon, we read, “While Peter yet spake these 
all them. that t heard the the 


, aS many as came with Peter, because that on the 
Gentiles also ut the gift th ly Spirit. 
' For they heard them speak with tongues and magnif 


God.” So we see that they were baptized with the Holy 
Spirit the very moment that they believed and were born 
again. Now in a normal order of the Church, I believe 
that this would be the common experience; but alas! the 
Church is not in a normal order today. A very large 
portion of the Church of Jesus Christ today is exactly 
where the believers in, Samaria were before Peter andg 
John came down and bia) Cd £ OL obieuiélat,.iey,.1aigl 
receive the Holy pivit” because “as yet He was falle 
pon not one of them.” ‘They are just where the twelve) 
disciples in Ephesus were before Paul visited Ephesus 
baptized.with..the baptism..of. repentance, .forgiven,.and 
Asaved, but not yet baptized with. the Hoaly_S pirit i 
The Baptism with the Holy Spirit is every believer’ 
privilege and_birthright, through the crucified, risen and) 
ascended Saviour.| Jesus Christ, when He ascended up 
on high, prayed for His Church (Jno, 14: 15-17), that 
is, for the whole body of believers, and received for 
them, as we are told in Acts 2: 33, “the promise of the 
Holy Spirit” and poured forth the Holy Spirit upon 
His Church as a body, but many members of the true 
Church, that is, many saved men and women, have not 
claimed for themselves their birthright ; and so, while the 
baptism with the Holy Spirit is theirs, 7. e., it belongs ta 








THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 117 






are told in 1 Cor, 12:13, is “baptized into the Body’ 
£ Jesus Christ as a living, active, efficient member o 
that Body; but many believers have not claimed this 
“Baptism with the Holy Spirit,” and therefore are not 
possessors of those gifts (see 1 Cor. 12:4-11) that 
qualify them to be members of the Body in the sense in 
which Paul is describing the Body in the twelfth chapter 
of First Corinthians. They are potentially baptized with, ~~ 
the Holy Spirit but not experimentally so baptized, but 
they may be at once. 

In any event the passages that we have read, and many 
others that we might read, make it clear to any one whose 
mind is subject to the Word of God, and who therefore 
simply desires to know what the Word of God teaches 
and is not the slave of a theory, that one may be born 
again and yet not be baptized with the Holy Spirit. 
Furthermore, from our own observation and experience 
today, we must_all know tha the baptism with,.the 
Holy Spirit means anything definite, as it certainly. did 
in Bible days, as set forth im both the Acts.and_ inthe). | 
Epistles, then there are many people in the Church today 
who we have a right to believe are born again and thus 
saved, who are not as yet baptized with the Holy Spirit. 

_ 3. In the third place,. 





ee 






is evident from the passage where our Lord Jesus made 
the original promise of the baptism with the Holy Spirit, 


Acts 1:8: “ But_ye shall receive power,..when.,the. Holy. 


118 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


y 


-Spirit_is come upon yous.and ye. shall. be..my. witnesses. 


both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and 
unto the uttermost part of the earth.” ‘The same thing 
is evident from the twelfth chapter of First Corinthians, 
where the whole subject of the Baptism with the Holy 
Spirit is treated at length and in detail. We will not take 
time to read the passage now, although we shall have oc- 
casion to read much of it later. There is not one single 
passage in the Bible, either in the Old Testament or the 
New Testament, where the Baptism with the Holy Spirit 
is spoken of, where tt is not connected with testimony or 
service. I made this statement some years ago in speak- 
ing to a large class of theological students. At the close 
of the lecture two students came up to me and said, “ Did 
we understand you to say, Mr. Torrey, that there was not 
a single passage in the Bible, where the Baptism with the 
Holy Spirit is mentioned, where it is not connected with 
testimony or service?” “Yes,” I replied, “that is ex- 
actly what I said.” “ Well,” they said, “we doubt it.” 
I replied, “ You have a perfect right to doubt it, but now 
go and search your Bible and bring me, if you can, one 
single passage in the Bible where the Baptism with the 
Holy Spirit is definitely mentioned or referred to, where 
it is not connected with testimony or service.” They 
went to work to search for the passage. I think they — 
must be searching for it yet, for they have never brought 
it to me; and they never will, for it is not to be found 
anywhere in the Bible. I have gone through my Bible on 
this subject, time and time again since I made that remark 
to those students, and without the slightest fear of suc- 
cessful contradiction I repeat the statement already made, 
that there is not a single passage in the Old Testament or 
New Testament where the Baptism with the Holy Spirit 


THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 119 


is spoken of or referred to where it is not connected with | 
testimony or service. 


The Baptism with the Holy Spirit is not primarily for 
the purpose of making us individually holy. Please note 
carefully my words and grasp exactly what I say. I do 
not say that it is not the work of the Holy Spirit to make 


us holy, for it is His work to make us.bolypand it is only 


through His work that any one of us can become holy. 





“come still clearer when we come to study the next part 
‘ of our subject: the Results of the Baptism with the 
Holy Spirit. 

Neither is it the primary purpose of the Baptism with 
the Holy Spirit to make us personally happy. Note again 
carefully what I say. I do not say that the Baptism with 
the Holy Spirit will not make us happy, if we receive it. 
I have never known anyone yet who was “ baptized with 
the Holy Spirit ” into whose heart a new and more won- 
derful joy did not come, but I am saying that this is not 





I am glad that this is so, for while ecstacies are all Heh 
in their place, and while I know something about them in 
my own experience, yet in a world such as you and I live 
in, where there is this awful tide of men, women and 
children sweeping on unsaved to a hopeless eternity, I 
would rather go my entire life through without one single 
touch of ecstasy or rapture, and have power to do my 
part to stem this awful tide and save at least some, than 









own Word. So I repeat it again, THE BAPTISM WITH TH 


‘MARILY FOR THE PURPOSE OF , EQUIPMENT Ton Te TESTIMONY 
“ ic ARE RNR N53 ‘ 
\JAND SERVICE: IT Is TO MAKE US USEFUL FoR Gop IN TH 
Gace a ata eS Na NR aA NAR LPAR IEA eh 
SALVATION OF SOULS AND NOT MERELY TO MAKE US HAPPY 


120 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


to have indescribable raptures every day of my life and 
have n 

I wish to be very clear and very emphatic at this point, 
for here is where a multitude of people in our day are 
going astray. Men and women go off to “ Bible Con- 
ferences,” to “meetings for the deepening of the spiri- 
tual life,” and to “tarrying meetings,” and all that sort 
of thing, and they come back and tell you what a won- 
derful experience they have had, what raptures they have 
passed through, and how they have been “ baptized with 
the Holy Spirit,’ and I have watched carefully a good 
many of these people; and many of them are of no more 
use to their pastors or their churches than they were 
before. And some of them are of far less use than they 
were before and are sometimes a positive nuisance. They 
have no more love for souls than they had before, make no 
more effort for the salvation of the lost than they did be- 
fore, and win no more souls to Christ than they did before; 
and I am therefore sure that whatever experience they 
may have received they have not had the Baptism with the 
Holy Spirit along the lines so plainly laid down in God’s 










OLY SPIRIT Is ALWAYS CONNECTED _WITH, “AND. ‘TS PRI 


REDE I 


SAN aR prs ST SORES ela agg 3S {om 


II. THe REsuLts oF THE Baris WITH THE HoLy 
This leads us to He ‘gdonind questions “What ate the 
Results of the Baptism with the Holy Spirit? The re- 
sults of the Baptism with the Holy Spirit as set forth in 
the Word of God are many-fold, but they can all be 





THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 121 


summed up in one word, and that word is power. This 
comes out in the passage to which I have already re- 
ferred, Acts 1: 8: “ YE SHALL, RECEIVE POWER 






oth in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Sa- 
maria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth. i 














ernoon meets the conditions of the Baptism, abl 
Spirit and is therefore “ baptized with the Hol 
there will come a new power into his life and service, 
There needs, however, a word of caution to be said 
at this point, and not only to be said, but to be made clear 
and to be emphasized, and that word of caution is, this 
power will not manifest itself in the same way in every 
individual. ‘That thought is developed at considerable 
length in 1 Cor. 12, the classical passage on the whole 
subject of the Baptism with the Holy Spirit. Let me 
read you verses 4 to 13: “ Now there are diversities of 
gifts, but the same Spirit. And there are diversities of 
administrations, but the same Lord. And there are di- 
versities of workings, but the same God, Who worketh 
all things in all. But to each one is given the manifesta- 
tion of the Spirit, to profit withal, for to one is given 
through the Spirit the word of wisdom; and to another 
the word of knowledge, according to the same Spirit; to 
another, faith, in the same Spirit; and to another, gifts 
of healings, in the one Spirit; and to another, workings 
of miracles; and to another prophecy; and to another dis-\ 
cernings of spirits; and to another diverse kinds of 
tongues; and to another, interpretation of tongues; but all 
these worketh the one and the same Spirit, dividing to each 












122 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


one severally as He will, For as the body is one, and hath 
any members, and all the members of the body, being 
any, are one body; so also is Christ. For in one Spin 








one Spirit.” 
ow what strikes one, or what ought to strike one, 
most forcibly in this passage, is the word “ diversities” 
so often repeated, and also the words “to another” so 
often repeated. And the thought is as clear as language — 
can make it, and very much emphasized, that while there 
is “one Baptism with the Holy Spirit” there is a wide 
variety of manifestations of that one Baptism with that 
one and same Spirit; that the Baptism with the Holy 


/Spirit results in one gift in one person according to the 
/ line of service to which he is called, and quite another 


gift to another person, according to the line of service to 
which he is called. 

Now that is the point at which a multitude of people 
go astray. They hear of some person who was baptized 
with the Holy Spirit, and the Holy Spirit for His own 
wise reasons imparted to that person some special gift 
for the special service to which he was called, and they 
think that if they are baptized with the Holy Spirit they 
must have precisely the same gift that this other person 
had. But that is, as we see, entirely unscriptural ; indeed, 
it is clearly anti-scriptural. 

It was at this point that I was tempted to go astray 
when I first began the study of this subject, a great many 
years ago. I noticed that in the second chapter of the 
Acts of the Apostles, and in the tenth chapter of the Acts 
of the Apostles, and in the nineteenth chapter of the 
Acts of the Apostles, those who were baptized with the 


THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 123 


Holy Spirit “spake with tongues,” and I wondered if 
everyone who was baptized with the Holy Spirit would 
not speak with tongues. And as I did not see anyone 
speaking with tongues today, I wondered if this gift was 
not confined to the Apostolic Age. But one day my at- 
tention was called to First Corinthians the twelfth chap- 
ter, and I read the verses which I have just read to you, 
and discovered that while there was “one Baptism with 
the Holy Spirit,” there was a vast variety of manifesta- 
tions of that one baptism, and that it was distinctly said 
that to one was given “divers kinds of tongues,” but to 
others an entirely different gift; and I also discovered 
that speaking with tongues was way down at the bottom 
of the list. And then my attention was fixed upon the 
closing verses of the chapter, verses 28 to 31, where I 
read: “ And God hath set some in the church, first apos- 
tles, secondly prophets, thirdly teachers, then miracles, 
then gifts of healing, helps, governments, divers kinds 
of tongues.’ Here again “tongues” was at the very 
bottom of the list. Then I went on and read: “ Are all 
apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? are all work- 
ers of miracles? Have all the gifts of healing? do all 
speak with tongues?” And therefore I saw that Paul 
clearly taught that there were among the believers in this 
wonderfully gifted church, of which he had plainly de- 
clared in the thirteenth verse that every one of them was 
baptized with the Holy Spirit, some at least who did not 
speak with tongues. So I saw that the teaching that 
speaking with tongues was the inevitable and invariable 
result of being baptized with the Holy Spirit, and that 
any one who had not spoken with tongues had not been 
baptized with the Holy Spirit, was utterly unscriptural 
and anti-scriptural. 


xX 


124 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


But then I was tempted to fall into another error, of a 
somewhat similar character. I had read the testimony of 
John Wesley, and of Charles G. Finney, and D. L. 
Moody, and others, and I noted how all these men, when 
they were baptized with the Holy Spirit, obtained the 
gift of an evangelist, and I was tempted to say to myself, 
anyone who is baptized with the Holy Spirit will have the 
gift of an evangelist. Now that is just as unscriptural 
as to say that every one who is baptized with the Holy 
Spirit will speak with tongues. If God has called a man 
into the work of an evangelist, and he is baptized with 
the Holy Spirit, then doubtless he will have the gift of 
an evangelist, but if God has called him to some other 
work he will have some other power or gift, which wiil 
fit him for the work to which God has called him, 

This mistake, that every one who is baptized with the 
Holy Spirit will have power as an evangelist, leads to 
three great evils. The first great evil to which it leads 
is the evil of disappointment, and sometimes even of 
despair. Many a man has heard an address upon the 
Baptism with the Holy Spirit which is not carefully 
guarded at this point, and he gets the impression that 
the inevitable and invariable result of the Baptism with 
the Holy Spirit is the gift of an evangelist, and then this 
man seeks for himself the Baptism with the Holy Spirit, 
and meets the conditions of that baptism, and conse- 
quently really is baptized with the Holy Spirit, but God 
has not called him to the work of an evangelist, and 
therefore, of course, God does not empower him with 
the gift of an evangelist, and the man is perplexed and 
bewildered and sometimes is in despair, wondering if he 
really has been baptized with the Holy Spirit. 

I recall a very striking illustration of this. A Scotch- 


THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 125 


man, a ship-plater, receiving large wages over in Scot- 
land, heard an address on the Baptism with the Holy 
Spirit. He got the impression that the result of the 
Baptism with the Holy Spirit was in every instance power 
as an evangelist, and he sought for himself the Baptism 
with the Holy Spirit and obtained it. Then he heard 
that there were spiritually destitute fields in America, up 
in the Northwest, and he made up his mind to go there 
and preach the gospel; and at a great financial sacrifice 
he sold out everything and came out to Minnesota. But 
God had not at that time called him to be.an evangelist, 
and he found no openings, and he was nearly in despair. 
He not only wondered whether he had been baptized with 
the Holy Spirit, he even got to doubting his salvation. 
While in this distressed state of mind, one Sunday morn- 
ing, he dropped into the church in Minneapolis of which 
I was at that time pastor, and that very morning I spoke 
on the Baptism with the Holy Spirit, and made clear 
what I am trying to make clear to you today, that while 
“there is one Baptism” with the Holy Spirit, there is a 
wide diversity of manifestations of that one baptism; and 
chat the gift of an evangelist is not by any means the 
invariable result of that baptism. He saw the truth and 
put himself in God’s hands for God to choose the field 
of service and to qualify him for the service to which 
God had called him. 

Very soon there came to him an opening to go down 
into some destitute parts of Wisconsin, doing Sunday 
School missionary work. He went, and there the great 
thing happened. When he had thus given up dictating 
to the Holy Spirit what gift should be bestowed upon 
him, and left_it entirely with the Hi rit in His. 
sovereign will to decide, and_went out to do the work) 





126 THE HOLY SPIRIT 







od opened to him, the very gift that he had sought 
ame upon him, He did receive the gift of an evangelist, 


and town after town was quite overturned by the power 
of the gospel as presented by him, 

The second mischief that results from this error that 
the Baptism with the Holy Spirit will always result in 
power as an evangelist, is the error of presumption. 
Many a man has heard an address upon the Baptism with 
the Holy Spirit that is not carefully guarded at this point, 
and has gotten the impression that the one invariable 
result of the Baptism with the Holy Spirit is power as 
an evangelist, and so he says to himself, “ All I need to 
become an evangelist is to receive the Baptism with the 
Holy Spirit. Now that is not true. It is very far from 
the truth. In order to be an evangelist the first thing a 
man needs is a call from God to that specific work. If 
God in His infinite wisdom has not called a man into that 
work, but into some other work, he certainly will not get 
power as an evangelist, even though he is baptized with 
the Holy Spirit. The second thing a man needs in order 
to be an evangelist is such a knowledge of the Word of 
God that he has something to preach that is worth listen- 
ing to. If a man has a call of God to the work of an 
evangelist, and has obtained such a knowledge of the Word 
of God that he has something to preach that is worth 
listening to, and then is baptized with the Holy Spirit, he 
will have power as an evangelist, but otherwise he will 
not have power as an evangelist. One of the most un- 
fortunate things in evangelistic work today is that so 
many men have rushed into the work whom God never 
called into it, who have no message that is worth while. 

The third mischief that results from this error is the 
worst of all, and that is the mischief of indifference. 


THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 127 


Many a person comes to a meeting like this and hears an 
address on the Baptism with the Holy Spirit and gets 
the impression that the one result of the Baptism with 
the Holy Spirit is the gift of an evangelist, and this 
person knows that God has not called him to the work of 
an evangelist. For instance, here is a woman, with a 
family of five or six or even more children. Now that 
woman knows, or at least it is to be hoped that she has 
sense enough to know, though some don’t, that God has 
not called her to be an evangelist, that her work is at 
home with her children; and when she hears this address 
she says to herself, “ My minister may need the Baptism 
with the Holy Spirit, the evangelist may need the Bap- 
tism with the Holy Spirit, the Y. M. C. A. Secretary 
may need the Baptism with the Holy Spirit, but I don’t; 
for God has not called me to be an evangelist. My work 
is here at home with my own children.” But if a mother 
gets the right conception of the Baptism with the Holy 
Spirit, the Bible conception, namely, that it is to fit be- 
lievers in Jesus Christ not only for the work of an evan- 
gelist, but for any other function to which God may call 
us in His Church, and that there is no other function in 
the Church that God has more honoured than the func- 
tion of sanctified motherhood, then this woman will say, 
“ Evangelists may need the Baptism with the Holy Spirit, 
my pastor may need the Baptism with the Holy Spirit, 
but I must have it in order that I may have power to 
bring my own children up in the nurture and admonition 
of the Lord.” 

Before leaving this part of my subject, I wish to call 
your attention to the fact, and to emphasize the fact, that , 
it 1g THE Horny Spirrt HimseLF Wuo DECIDES WHAT | 
THE PARTICULAR GIFT OR MANIFESTATION SHALL BE IN 






128 THE HOLY SPIRIT 






This is very plain from 1 Cor. 
12:11: “For all these worketh the one and the same 
Spirit, dividing to each one severally even as He will.” 
Here we are distinctly taught that it is not for us to 
choose some gift and look to the Holy Spirit to impart 

‘to us that self-chosen gift. It is not for us to choose for 

ourselves some field of service and look to the Holy Spirit 

‘to qualify us for the field of service which we have 


Site 


eee 


chosen. No, emphatically no! wilbedSufOtoMSuokQpUt ou 
selves entirely at the disposal of the. Holy Sp 
Hin 0 choose the gift and. for.f1im.£ogualify us with... 


the gift which He has chosen; for Him to choose the 
| field of service, and for Him to qualify us for the field, 

: thich He Himself has chosen) Oh, how man 
: go astray at this point! ‘They have chosen for them- 
' selves some particular gift, it may be speaking with 
_ tongues, it may be the gift of an evangelist, or some 
other gift, and then they meet the conditions of the Bap- 
tism with the Holy Spirit, and then, though they may 
not be definitely conscious of it, they try to dictate to the 
Holy Spirit what gift he shall impart to them. I have 
| known people who have waited for weeks or months, or 
even years, for their self-chosen gift of speaking with 
_ tongues. 

I recall a man whom I knew intimately in Chicago, a 
man who was very useful in his church and very gifted 
in prayer. While I was away, going around the world 
preaching the gospel, this man got under the influence 
of those people who over-emphasize “speaking with 
tongues.” He gave up all his work and gave all his 
time, when he was not engaged in his business, to “ wait- 
ing for his Pentecost,’ by which he meant waiting until 
he should be enabled by the Spirit to speak with tongues. 





THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 129 


After two long years of waiting, the last I knew of him 
he was still absolutely useless, “ waiting for his Pente- 
cost.” No, No, No, ne FLO D sovereign in the 
whole matter (1 Cor, 12:11), and it is not for you nor 
for me to dictate to Him what gift He shall impart to us 
when we are baptized with the Holy Spirit. It is for us 
ito leave that entirely with Him, and just put ourselves 
unreservedly at His disposal for Him to choose the field) 
of service, and for Him to. qualify. us for the work. to 
which He has called us, and to impart to us the cift that! 
‘fits us for that work, whether it be s speaking with tongues} 
or something entirely. different...which, according to the 
repeated teaching of the Scriptures, is far more impor- 
tant than the least desirable of all gifts, that of “ speaking 
with tongues.” 
But having given and emphasized this word of caution, 
let me repeat what I said some time ago, that 










Spirit, they will oe a power in Wie Service that the 


‘which God has called them, | I could stand here by the 
— and repeat instances which have come under my 
own personal observation, of men and women and young 
people who have been baptized with the Holy Spirit, and 
who did “receive power.” Let me give you three illus- 
trations from life that I think will prove helpful. 

The first is of a minister who was the first one, as 
far as I know definitely, that it was my privilege to lead 
into a like experience to my own. I had gone from 
Chicago to New Britain, Conn., more than a thousand 
miles, to deliver just one address. A thousand miles and 
back is a long ways to go to deliver one address, and yet 
I shall never cease to rejoice that I travelled that two 





130 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


thousand miles to deliver that address. It was at a State 
Convention of the Young People’s Society of Christian 
Endeavour, held in an armory. Perhaps three thousand 
young people were present, and some older ones. ia 
spoke upon the subject of Pers nal Work, and as I drew 
my address to a close I said, |‘ In_order_ to, do_efficien 


TE ay REFN 


ersonal e must be baptized with the Hol 

irit,” and re a few words of explanation of what L 
“meant by being “baptized with the Holy Spirit.” When 
the convention closed a minister came to me on the plat- 
form and said, “I haven’t this power that you have been 
talking about tonight, but I want it. Will you pray for 

me?” I replied, “ Why not kneel down and pray a 
here now? ” 

It is a good deal to ask of a Congregational minister in 
staid old New England, where the Congregationalists 
boast that they are the University denomination, and they 
are (for almost all the leading universities in New Eng- 
land were founded originally by the Congregationalists) 
—I say, it is a good deal to ask of a Congregational min- 
ister in staid old New England, to kneel down on a plat- 
form while three thousand young people are breaking up 
and leaving the armory in disorder, to seek a blessing 
from God like an old-fashioned Methodist inquirer at 
the mourners’ bench; but this minister was in earnest, and 
he said, “I will.’ We placed two chairs together in a 
corner of the platform where we were not likely to be 
much observed, and knelt down to pray. I prayed and 
then he prayed that he might be baptized with the Holy 
Spirit. Then we arose and after a few words we had to. 
separate, he to hurry to his train and I to hurry to ‘mine. 

Some time passed by and I was in Washington, D. C., 
at a Christian Workers’ Convention. The night I reached 






THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 131 


there I was standing in the rotunda of the hotel where 
I was stopping, and an assistant pastor of the Fourth 
Congregational Church in Hartford, Conn.” saw me and 
hurried to me and said, “Do you remember that min- 
ister that you prayed for at New Britain, Conn.?” I 
said, “ Yes, I do.” He said, “ Have you heard from him 
since?” “No,” I said. “Let me tell you about him,” 
he said. “ He has gone back to his church a transformed 
man. | He is pastor of a large country church in Con- 
necticut, and since that night you prayed for him his 
evening congregations fill his church, which,” this man 
added, “is a very unusual thing in a country church in 
Connecticut. But that is not the best of it, there are 
conversions at every service, and a very large proportion 
of the conversions are the young men of the community.” 
Now is not that what we want? Not the sending off for 
some evangelist to come at rare intervals and have some 
ae stirring of the community, but the power of God 
u astors of our churches reaching in 
the power of the Holy Spiri every Sunday night, and 
conversions right along ¢ Well, that i is what we can have, 
and t irit 
Some years passed by and one hot summer afternoon 
I was speaking at Mr. Moody’s peeks cn in Northfield, 











4 once % Ca. LL POU [Za 
eth_unto God? i As Ti came awa epee the piactorn a 
number of Methodist ministers from Alabama gathered 
around me. ‘They said, “ Did. we understand you to say 
that if any minister did not have power and results in his 
work it was his own fault?” “ Well,” I replied, “ breth- 
ren, I am not sure that that is just what I said, but that 
is about what I believe.” “ But,” one of them urged, 


132 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


“ suppose your whole official board is against you. What 
can you do then?” Mr. G , the Assistant Pastor of 
the church in Hartford, was there again, and he broke 
in, “ Mr. Torrey, may I say something?” “ Certainly,” 
I replied. 

He said, “ Do you remember that Congregational min- 
ister that you prayed with at New Britain, Connecticut?” 
“Yes,” I said, “I remember him well.” He continued, 
“Did you know that he had changed his church?” “ No, 
I did not.” “ Well,” he said, “he did, last February.” 
(This was August.) ‘“ He had a call from a church in 
the suburbs of Boston. All his spiritually minded friends 
advised him not to accept the call, for all the ruling mem- 
bers of the church were against aggressive evangelistic 
effort. But in spite of all the advice of his spiritually 
minded friends, he somehow felt led to accept the call, 
and he went there last February. There have already 
been fifty-nine conversions, and thirty-eight of them are 
business men of the community.” Oh, brethren, is not 
that what we want? Well, that is the sort of thing we 
can have. The secret of it is in our being “ baptized 
with the Holy Spirit.” 

Let me give you a second illustration. I had been at 
Montreal, Canada, attending an Inter-provincial Conven- 
tion of the Young Men’s Christian Association. In my 
last address I had spoken on the Baptism with the Holy 
Spirit. Sometime after I got back to Chicago, I received 
a letter from a young man, a member of one of the 
churches in Montreal. He wrote, saying: 





“ DEAR Mr. Torrey: ‘ 

“T was at your last meeting at the Y. M. C. A. convention 
in Montreal, and heard you speak on the baptism with the 
Holy Spirit. I went away to my home and ht that oe 


THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 133 


J tained it} I am Chairman of the 
Lookout Committee of the Young People’s Society of Chris- 
tian Endeavour of our church. I got together the other 
members of our committee, and found that two of them 
had been at the same meeting, and had already obtained the 
baptism with the Holy Spirit. Then we prayed for the other 
members of the committee and they were baptized with the 
Holy Spirit; and now we are going out into the church 
among the young people, and the young people are coming 
to Christ right along.” 


Brethren, is not that what we want? Is not that what 
we want in our young people’s societies? Not this ever- 
lasting getting up and quoting, parrot-like, some passage 
of Scripture; not this everlasting getting up at the 
monthly “Consecration Meeting” and professing to be 

wholly surrendered to God when you know you are not; 
but the young people of our churches baptized with the 
Holy Spirit, and going out among the other young people 
of the churches and communities, and leading them to 
Christ. Well, this is what we can have. The whole 
secret of it is having our young people “baptized with 
the Holy Spirit.” 

Now, just one more illustration, and to me in some 
respects the best of all. I was in Syracuse, N. Y., at- 
tending a Young Men’s Christian Association State Con- 
vention. I was over speaking at the meeting of “the 
Women’s Auxiliary.” As I came down from the plat- 
form and passed out the door, a gentleman and his wife 
were waiting for me. They said, “Are you going over 
to the main meeting?” I said, “Yes.” They said, 
“Are you going to walk?” I said, “Yes.” “Can we 
walk with you?” “ Yes,” I said, “if you will walk fast.” 
As we went down the stairs they began at once to tell me 
how they had never heard me before, but that they had 


134 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


read the report of an address that I had delivered at 
Boston, on the Baptism with the Holy Spirit, and they 
said, “ We have been baptized with the Holy Spirit.” 
Then the man did the talking. He was Superintendent 
of one of the prominent Sunday Schools of the city, and 
since he had been baptized with the Holy Spirit God had 
revolutionized the Sunday School. I heard from other 
sources that even the pastor of the church was trans- 
formed. When he had finished telling what the Baptism 
with the Holy Spirit had meant to him (and had also 
meant a transformed church), then his wife broke in 
and she said, “And, Mr. Torrey, the best part of it is 
that T_have been able to get into the hearts of my own | 
children, which I was never able to do before.” ml 
Oh, brethren, is not that what we want? Is not that 
what we must have? the power to get into the hearts of 
our own children, and to lead them to Christ? I think 
one of the saddest things in the Church of Jesus Christ 
today is to see the sons and daughters of the Christian 
fathers and mothers, fathers and mothers who have been 
pillars in the church, growing up not to follow in the 
footsteps of their fathers and mothers; growing up some- 
times quite godless, not in the church on the Lord’s Day, 
not in the Sunday School, but off joy-riding, or golfing, 
or on hiking parties, or playing tennis, or, God only 
knows what. Oh, the condition today of the children of 
earnest and godly and active Christian fathers and 
mothers, is appalling! What all of us fathers and 
mothers need, first of all, is power to get into the hearts 
of our own children. And we can have that power. 
how: “Ye shall receive power, when 
the Holy Ghost is come upon you.” 
Oh, men and women and young people who belong te 


THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 135 


Christ! Are we having in our service for Christ the 
power that we might have and ought to have? We are 
living in a world where we are surrounded by perishing 
men, women and children on every hand. And there is 
a solemn responsibility upon every one of us, to do 
everything that is in our power, at any cost, to see that 
these men and women and children are saved. And 
there is a way in which any one of us can have power 
for that work. It is by being definitely baptized tes the 
Holy Spirit. Shall we not decide today that 

tice of that ba aE and 









. We saw, i th the fourth pees that the one great _resul 
of the Baptism with the Holy Spirit is powER in the ey 


VI 


THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT:.WHO 
NEEDS IT AND WHO CAN HAVE IT. 


W E saw yesterday that the Baptism with the Holy 


Spirit is. finite experience of which one may 
know whether he has received it or not, 
We saw, in the second place, that 











We saw, in | the third place, that 
always. connected with and is prit 











marily f 


TS ieamann 


at, while this power 
might manifest itself in a great variety of ways according 
to the different lines of service to which God has called 
us, there would always be power in the service of anyone 
who had been baptized with the Holy Spirit. - 
We come today to the very important question of the 
Possibility of the Baptism with the Holy 
irit, or to put it in another way, Who Needs the Bap- 
tism with the Holy Spirit and Who Can Have It? 







I. Wuo NEEps THE Baptism witH THE Hoty 
Sprrit ? 
We take up, first, the question of Who Needs the Bap- 


136 


ere BB 








THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 137 


tism with the Holy Spirit? The Bible answers this ques- 
tion very plainly. 

Turn first of all to Luke 24:49. We will begin back 
at the forty-fifth verse to get the connection: ‘“ Then 
opened He their minds, that they might understand the 
Scriptures ; and He said unto them, Thus it is written that 
Christ should suffer, and rise again from the dead the 
third day; and that repentance and remission of sins 
should be preached in His name unto all the nations, be- 
ginning from Jerusalem. Ye are witnesses of these 
things. And, behold, I send forth the promise of my 
Father upon you: but tarry ye in the city, until ye be 
clothed with power from on high.” 

Here our Lord gives a very definite, distinct and posi- 
tive commandment to those to whom He was speaking, 
that they should not undertake the work to which He 
had called them until they had received the all-necessary 
ae for that work of which He speaks here as 

> and further on, 


as ‘a being * 2 “clothed” with power from on high,” and by - 
comparison of Scripture with ig fon a. we find that this 






“ promise of the Father,” this being “ clothed with Lvower 
from on hi igh,” : is the Baptism with - with the Holy Spirit. 


Now, to whom were these words spoken? ‘To the 
eleven apostles. And.who were those apostles? It is 
oftentimes said that they were uneducated men, and from 
that supposed fact an argument is adduced for an unedu- 
cated ministry. But no argument by any possibility could 
pe more mal-apropos than that, for whatever the apostles 
were not uneducated men. /They had taken 






“more than a three-years’ course in the best theological 


seminary that ever existed upon earth, and in which our 
Lord Jesus Christ Himself was the sole but all-sufficient 


138 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


Teacher. They had been eye-witnesses of our Lord’s 
wondrous life on earth, eye-witnesses of His miracles, 
eye-witnesses of His death, eye-witnesses of His resur- 
rection from the dead, and they were about to be eye- 
witnesses of His ascension, as He was taken up into 
heaven bodily, right before their eyes, “and a cloud re- 
ceived Him out of their sight.” And what were they to 
do? Simply to go and tell a perishing world what their 
own eyes had seen and what their own ears had heard 
from the lips of the Son of God Himself. Were they not 
already fully prepared to go? With our modern ideas of 
preparation for the ministry we should say they were the 
most fully and perfectly prepared and equipped men who 
ever undertook the ministry of the Gospel. But our Lord 
Jesus here says: You are not adequately prepared at all; 
there is another preparation so all-necessary that you must 
not stir one step until you have obtained it. ‘That prepara- 
tion is the receiving of “the promise of the Father,” the 
being “endued with power. from.on high,” the Baptism 
with the Holy Spirit. |“ And till you receive it, do not 
‘undertake that ministry.”. Th d translated “ tarry,” 
means literally “sit down ”:)“ Sit down, until : ube 
clothed with power fr from on _on high. "| This is exceedingly 
solemn. If our Lord would not permit the men whom 
' He Himself had chosen and ordained for this work to 
undertake that work until they had received a definite 
enduement of power from on high for that service, 
namely, the Baptism with the Holy Spirit, what is it for 
ordinary mortals like you or me to undertake that service 
until we are thus baptized by the Holy Spirit and ioe 
it? It is the most daring presumption. 
One of the gravest mistakes that the Church of Jesus 
Christ is making today is in the way in which we set men 






te 





THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 139 


apart for the ministry of the Gospel. We take a man 
who is “hopefully pious,” send him for four years to a 
college, then three or four years to a theological seminary, 
and then, if he has succeeded in coming out of these in- 
situation with a fair modicum of faith left, we say, “ You 
are now fitted to undertake the ministry,” and we lay our 
hands upon him and set him apart for this solemn work. 
But is he prepared? He certainly is not, if that is all he 
has. It would be a great thing if to every candidate for 
the ministry, ees shinee him, we should put to him | 
the question :_“ € ed wi 





But this is not all ; nor, Pprolern as it is, is it the most 
solemn part. Turn in your Bibles to Acts 10:38: “ God 
anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with 
power; who went about doing good, and healing all that 
were oppressed of the devil; for God was with Him.” 
To what definite experience does this refer in the life of 
our Lord as recorded in the Gospels? Turn to the Gospel 
of Luke, the third chapter, twenty-first and twenty-second 
verses, and you will get your answer: “ Now it came to 
pass, when all the people were baptized, that Jesus also 
having been baptized, and pra 
and the Hol escended in a, bodily. 
on him, and a voice came out of heaven, Thou art my 
eloved Son; in Thee I am well pleased.” Now turn to the 
next chapter, the fourth, and the first verse,—nothing in- 
tervening but the genealogy of His mother: “ And Jesus, 
ull of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan.” Now 
turn to the fourteenth and following verses, the story of 
















140 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


His temptation being all that intervenes, and read again: 
“ And Jesus returned.in, the power of the Spirit into Gali- 
lee, and fame went out concerning Him through all the 
region round about, and He taught in their synagogues, 
being glorified of all. And He came to Nazareth, where 
He had been brought up: and He entered, as His custom 
was, into the synagogue on the Sabbath day, and stood 
up to read, And there was delivered unto Him the book 
of the prophet Isaiah. And He opened the book and. 


tidings to the poor: He hath sent me to proclaim . 
to_the captives, and pogo’ of s Se to the blind, ‘to. ‘set 


Lae fetta & 


Ms roclaim the acce ptable : 





pode to the attendant, and sat down: and the oe of all in 
the synagogue were fastened on Him.” 

From these verses we learn that it was at the Jordan 
that our Lord was endued with power from on high, that 
He was ba ptized with the Holy Spirit, and after that, and 


not till after that, He began. His. publ lic: “ministry, _ 
And who a our Lord? He was 


“The only begotten. 
ono 2} He wagtiodanantestein-the desh, He was 
xery Godot very God” He had been supernaturally. 


onceived by the power of the Ho pirit, but He was at 
| the same time man, and as a man setting an example to 
‘you and me to follow in His steps, He never undertook 
ithe public ministry, for which He came into this world, 
until He had been d efinitely. endued with power from on 
high.”} Now listen: If our Lord Jesus, though He had 
‘been supernaturally conceived by the power of the Holy 
Spirit, though He was the Word of God made flesh. 
though He “was God,” (Jno. 1:1), though in Him 


THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 141 


“dwelt all the fulness of the Godhead bodily ” (Clos. 
2:9), did not permit Himself to undertake His public 
ministry until He was definitely “endued with power 
from on high,” what is it for ordinary mortals, such as 
you and IJ are, to undertake service for Him until we also 
are thus endued and know it? To ME IT APPEARS LIKE 
THE MOST DARING PRESUMPTION; yes, something even 
beyond that. In view of what the Lord required of His 
apostles, and still more in view of what He required of | 
Himself, I dare not undertake service for Him until I, | 
too, have been baptized with the Holy Spirit and know it. | 
| But even that is not all. If you will turn to Acts 
8: 12-17, you will find that the apostles, when they came 
o a new church that had just been gathered, the very 
‘first thing they always saw to was that all the members of 
this new church “might receive the Holy Spirit.” And 
if you will turn to Acts 19: 1-6, you will find that the | 
Apostle Paul, when he came to a community where there 
was a young church, and where he discovered something 
about it that was not satisfactory, the first thing that he 


inquired into was, whether they had definitely “ received } 





142 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


of Christian service. We are told of the Apostle Peter in 
Acts 2:4 that he was definitely “filled with the Holy 
Spirit” on the day of Pentecost. But in Acts 4:8 we 
are also told that “ Peter” was again,“ filled. with. the... 
Holy Spirit.” ) The tense of the verb used in the original © 
(that is, in the Greek), shows conclusively that the filling 
spoken of here was anew, filling that.took place right 
then and there. But we are again told in Acts 4: 31 that 


‘ When..they had prayed,.the place was shaken wherein 
they were gathered together’, and.they were all filled with 
tie Holy Spirit, and they spake the Word of God with 
“boldness.” 


Here again the tense of the verb used in the 
original, that is, in the Greek, shows conclusively that it 
was a filling that took place right then and there. And 
we are definitely told that Peter was one of the “all” 
who were then and there filled with the Holy Spirit. 

So here are three separate occasions on which Peter 
was “ filled with t the Holy. Spirit,” | So then it is as clear 
as day “that one needs repeated fillings with the Holy 

Spirit, no matter how definitely and wonderfully he may jj 
, have been pa ie with the Holy Spirit in the past. 



















Christian service. | I am often asked if I 
| have acnoer me “The Second Blessing.” I certainly have, 

—and the third and the fourth and the fifth and the three 
hundredth and the three hundred and fortieth, and I am 
looking for the three hundred and forty-first today. One 
of the commonest mistakes today, and one of the gravest, 
is that many people are trying to work today in the power 
of some baptism with the Spirit that they received a year 
ago, or two years ago, or five years ago, or ten years ago, 
as the case may be. Don’t make that mistake. However 
definitely you may have been “baptized with the Holy 


THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 143 


ame in the past ok need 







A — many years ago, when I wa 
the International Convention of Ges ee. we 
held a meeting in the city of Detroit. I think it was our 
third annual gathering. I had a friend who had been led 
out into an experience of the Holy Spirit’s infilling that 
he had never had before through a well-known teacher in 
_ this country. He asked that I put this teacher on the 
program of the Detroit Convention. This I did. But to 
my dismay, when I reached Detroit I found that he was 
circulating a paper of his in which he took the ground 
that when one was once baptized with the Holy Spirit 
that ended it; there was nothing more to seek. When he 
himself came to speak, his utterances were utterly without 
}power. He himself ost manifestly needed a new fillin 

with the Holy Spirit. Ay 

During the World’s Fair in Chicago, in 1893, Mr. 
oody brought together, in Chicago, some of the most 
renowned and most able Bible teachers and Gospel preach- 
ers from all parts of the world. He said: “For years I 
have been going to the world; now the world is coming 
to me, and I am going to see that they get the Gospel 
through the best preachers in their different languages 
that I can secure.” He brought famous men from Eng- 
land, Scotland, Ireland, France, Germany, Austria, Rus- 
sia and other lands. Among others, he brought a man 
who had been wonderfully used in his own country. He 
took this man first to Northfield, and then brought him 
on to Chicago. When he was giving his first lecture iv 
the lecture-room of the Bible Institute in Chicago, Mr. 






144 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


Moody said to me: “I want you to hear this man and 
give me your opinion of him.” So when the crowd had 
gathered we slipped into a back seat where we would not 
be seen. After listening for a while, Mr. Moody slipped 
out and beckoned me to follow. We went up to his office 
and sat down. Mr. Moody turned to me and said: 
“What do you think of him?” I replied: “I have 
nothing I wish to say.” ‘ Well,” he said, “I have some- 
thing I wish to say: I would give every penny it cost me 
to bring him to this country if he were back home again. 
He has lost his unction!” | 

Oh, it is an awful thing to lose one’s unction! Mr. 
Moody used to say that he would rather die than to lose 
the power of the Holy Spirit in his work. But we cer- 
tainly shall lose our unction unless we seek a new filling 
with the Spirit for each new emergency of Christian 
service, 

I am often asked: “ Would you call these new fillings 
with the Holy Spirit ‘fresh baptisms with the Holy 
Spirit?’ No, I would not. I would not for two rea~ 
sons: First of all, because there is something initiatory in 
the very thought conveyed by the word “baptism:” and 
second, because these new fillings are never called “ bap- 
tisms ” in the Bible, and it is always wise to hold fast to 
Bible terminology. In the Bible the expression “ bap- 
tized with the Holy Spirit ” is always limited to the first 
experience of the individual. But I would much rather 
that people would speak of “fresh baptisms with the 
Holy Spirit” because they recognized that one cannot go 
in the power of a baptism with the Holy Spirit received 
some time before, but needs a new filling for each new 


emergency of Christian service, than that they be such 
sticklers for exact terminology that they lose sight of the 


THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 145 


imperative need of new. fillings with the Spirit for each 


new emergency of Christian service. In other words, I 
would rather have the right thing by the wrong name than 
the wrong thing by the right name, 


SPIRIT? 
We come now to the very practical and immeasurably 
important question: Who can have the Baptism with the 
Holy Spirit? Some years ago I was speaking at a con- 
vention in the state of Kansas, and a woman who was 
one of the leaders in church work in that state and who 
was also in a high position in the educational work of the 
state, sent me a little note in which she said: = You have , 
spoken about the necessity of be ’ 
Holy Spirit.) Will you kindly tell me who can abe. thus 
baptized? The church to which I belong teaches that the 
Baptism with the Holy Spirit was confined to the days of 
the apostles.” Well, who can be baptized with the Holy 
Spirit? We are not left to speculate about that. God 
Himself answers the question in the plainest possible 
words, Turn in your Bibles to Acts 2: 39, and you will 
get God’s own answer to this all important question : 
e promise is unto you,.and.to your children, an: 
that are afar off, even.as many asthe. Lord..our\ 


AINE th MBS ESS 






















a 
What is the ‘ “promise.” to which Peter refers in this 
verse? Doubtless many of you know that there are two 
differing interpretations of this verse. One saint 
is that “the,promise.”..of..this verse is the promise 
| salvation.and that the verse therefore sets forth the — 
nant privilege of believers to have their children saved. 
Now, no one believes in the Covenant privilege of believ- 






146 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


ers to have their children saved more firmly than I do. 
but is that the meaning of this verse? 

The other interpretation is that “the promise ”’ of this 
verse is the promise of the “gift of,” (or, to put it in 
other words, “th tism with”) the Holy Spirit.” 
Which of these two interpretations is correct? 

There are two laws of interpretation universally ac- 
cepted by all rational, or really intelligent, interpreters of 
the Word. The first law is called “the law of the usus 
loquendi.” ‘The other law is “ the law of context.” 

The law of the usus loquendi (or, to use plain English, 
which is far better than Latin, “the law of usage’’), is 
that when you find a word or phrase in the Bible and you 
wish to know exactly what it means, the thing to do is 
not to run for a dictionary to get the definition of the 
word or phrase, for the dictionary was not written by 
Bible scholars. The thing to do is to take your concor- 
dance and look up every place in the Bible where that 
word or phrase is used and interpret its meaning by its 
usage. The exact meaning of words is seldom determined 
by etymology ; it is determined by usage. 

Now, what is the usage of this phrase, “ the promise,” 
in the Bible, especially what is the usage in this particular 
book in the Bible in which this verse is found? ‘Turn 
back to Acts 1:4 and 5: “ He charged them not to depart 
from Jerusalem, but to wait for the promise of..the., 
Father, which, said He, ye heard from me: for John i in- 
deed baptized with water: but ye shall 
_the rel oly Spirit not many | days hen ce,” "What “the prom- 
sets ’ is here se are not left to Ecce: We are told that 

“the promise” is “ the promise” of being “ baptized with 
the Holy Spirit.” Now turn to Acts 2:33: “ Being there- 
fore by the right hand of God exalted and having received 














THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 147 
He hath 


poured forth this which ye see and hear.” Here again we 
are told that “the promise of the Father ” is “the prom- 
ise of the Holy Spirit ” which had just been poured forth 
on that very day when every one of the apostolic com- 
pany had been baptized with the Holy Spirit. In other 
words the meaning of the expression is precisely the same 
here as it was in the first chapter. Now, six verses 
further down we come to the verse we are now studying. 
Can anyone tell me any reasonable rule of interpretation 
by which this peculiar expression can mean one thing in 
Acts 1:4 and 5, precisely the same thing in the next place 
where it occurs, that is, Acts 2:33, and something en- 
tirely different in the next place where it occurs, only six 
verses further down? Beyond any ah lie aul 
question, the phrase. : > nm Acts 
2:39, refers to | 5 i the..-Holy it, Lhe 
law of the usus Lguense even if it stood alone, would 
settle the question, but it does not stand alone. 

Let us now apply the law of context. The law of con- 
text is this: That when you find a passage of Scripture 
of which there are two or more possible interpretations 
and you wish to know which one of the several different 
interpretations is the correct interpretation, you should 
look at the passage in its context, that is, in the light of 
what goes before it and in the light of what comes after 
it. Many a passage in the Bible, if it stood alone, might 
mean one, two, three, four or even more things. But 
standing where it does, it can mean but one of the two or 
more things. 

Now let us apply the law of context here. Let us read 
what goes immediately before—vs. 38: “ Peter said unto 
them, Repent ye and be baptized, every one of you, in the 









j 


j 






148 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


name of Jesus Christ, unto the remission of your sins: 
; gift of the Hol Spirit. 'Fo 
ou is the promise, and to your children, and to all that | 
are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call | 
unto Him,” Here Peter in the preceding verse « declares © 
exactly what the promise is to which he refers. He says: 
1 \ Ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. For to you 
he promise, and to your children, and to all that are | 
[unto 4 











“gift of ” (or, to use the synonymous phrase, “ the | 
Spirit. ” The two laws there- 











> promise eof A 


cts 2: 6 ‘is 
vith, the Hoi 





‘baptism wit 


“settled fact: “ For to you is the promise,’—that is, to the 
people whom he was addressing, who were for the most 
part Jews. Thus far there is nothing in it for you or 
me, for we were not there, and we are not Jews. But 
Peter did not stop there: “ And to your children,” that is, 
to the next generation of Jews, or, if you will, to all 
coming generations of Jews, and that does not take many 
of us in. But, thank God, Peter did not stop there, but 
added : “ And to all that are afar off.” nes does take us 

are the Gentiles. who were “once afar off, 

now, made nigh by - blood _of Christ” CGD cer re 
(But lest there be any doubt about it, Peter does not stop 
even there, but adds: “ Even as many as the Lord our 
God shall call unto him” (R. V.); that is the call not 
merely to service, but the call to salvation. We are thus 
here told in plain words, the meaning of which is unmis 
takable, that the Baptism with the Holy Spirit is fo 























THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 149 













every child of God, in every age of the Church’s histor 
[Utes Barniat wir ome Howy Senin is 1 nierin 
‘| RIGHT OF EVERY BELIEVER IN JESUS CHRIST. is true 
| that not every believer has claimed his brithright, but it 


..is-his, promised by_God and provided by God, through a 


icified risen and ascended Saviour, and if you have 





Sons years ago we had for a month a Ministerial In- 
stitute in the Bible Institute of Chicago. Ministers were 
gathered there from very many different states of our 
Union, and for a month we studied the Word of God 
together. At the closing session of the Institute, I spoke 
n the “ Baptism with the Holy Spirit,” and emphasized 
it if we were to do acceptable service for 
God. At the close of the meeting a minister from the © 
state of Texas came to me and said: “The church to 
which I belong teaches that the Baptism with the Holy 
Spirit was only for the apostles. What do you think?” 
I replied: “I don’t care what the church to which you 
belong teaches, nor what the church to which I belong 
teaches ; the only question with me is, 
he’? He said: “That fs right.” “ Well,” I 
said, “ take it and look at it,” and I handed him my Bible 
open at Acts 2: 39, and asked him to read. And he read: 
“For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and 
to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our 
God shall call.” I said: “ Has He called you? Are you 
a saved man?” He replied: “I am.” “Then is the 
promise for you?” He replied: “It must be.” He 
claimed it. He went back to his pastorate in Texas, a 
f man. For years I received letters from him 
od was blessing him in his works 


7a Fl. 










150 THE HOLY SPIRIT 
It..is.for.you, too, if you will claim it and mee 


conditions of receiving it. 

Let me illustrate this point again: I was at one of the 
early Y. M. C. A. conventions of the Students of South- 
ern Colleges and Universities, held at Knoxville, Ten- 
nessee, on the university grounds. ‘The meeting was 
presided over by Dr. , a very prominent and highly 
honored and much loved rector of the Protestant Epis- 
copal Church. I spoke on the closing Sunday morning 
upon the Baptism with the Holy Spirit. This Episcopal 
rector and I roomed in the same building, and on that 
hot July afternoon we drew our chairs up in front of the 
building for a talk together. He turned to me and said: 
“T was greatly interested in what you had to say this 
morning, and if your interpretation of Acts 2: 39 is cor- 
rect you have gained your case. But I question your 
interpretation of Acts 2:39, Let us talk it over.” And 
we did. Some years later I was at the Y. M. C. A. Stu- 
dent Convention at Northfield, Massachusetts, and this 
Episcopal rector was also present. One Sunday after- 
noon I entered Stone Hall, where the meetings were held 
in those days, by the back door, just as this Episcopal 
rector was entering through the front door, and we met. 
As he saw me approaching, he hurried toward me with 
extended hand, and said: “ You were right about Acts 
2:39, at Knoxville; but I think I can tell you something 
better than that, I think I have now the right to say that 
I have been baptized with the Holy Spirit.” I thank 
God that I was right. Not because it was at all important 
that I should be right, but because the doctrine is such a 
glorious one. Oh, to be able to go round this globe and 
face audiences of thousands—Americans, English, Scotch, 
Irish, Germans, Scandinavians, Russians, French, Swiss, 








THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 151 


Hindus, Japanese, Chinese, and others, as I have done, 
and to be able to tell them all, with the absolute certainty 
that you have God’s own immutable word supporting you 
when you tell them, that the Baptism with the Holy Spirit 
is for every one of them. What marvellous scenes I have 
seen, as believers in many lands have seen this truth and 
Jaimed for themselves the wondrous blessing of the Bap- | 
ism. : irit,; yes, and what marvellous re- 
sults Have followed i in many lands. 

But this glorious truth has its solemn side. If each one 
of us may be—and beyond a question we may—baptized 
with the Holy Spirit, then there rests upon us the most 
solemn. obligation. to. be. thus baptized.) It is not merely a 
matter of privilege; it is | 
If you and I pay the price of this blessing it will be ours 
and_sguls,.will.be..won.to, Christ who will not be thus won 
if we do not pay the price and therefore do not obtain the 
blessing ; and if we do not pay the price and therefore do 
not obtain the blessing, we shall be responsible before God 
for everyone that might have been saved who was not 
saved because we did not pay the price and therefore did 
not obtain the blessing. 

Beloved brethren, I oftentimes tremble for myself and 
for others who are in the ministry. And by the ministry 
I do not mean merely the ministry as ordinarily defined, 
as including only ordained ministers. I use it in the 
broader sense applying to all believers, for we are all 
called to minister the Gospel in some way. It may not 
be by preaching; it may be in quiet, humble, personal 
work, I say I tremble for myself and for my brethren 
in the ministry. Why? Because we are preaching error? 
Oh, no, I do not mean that now. It is true there are 
many in these days who claim to be preaching the truth 



















152 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


who are preaching in reality the most pernicious and de- 
structive error, and I do tremble for them: I would rather 
take my chance before the bar of God as a bootlegger 
than to take my chance there as one who is called to 
preach the Gospel, but who, instead, was preaching error 
—damnable and destructive error. But that is not what 
I refer to now. 

Do I mean that I tremble for those who are not preach- 
ing error, but are not preaching the truth? For you all 
know it is quite possible for a man never to preach a 
word of error and yet not preach the saving truth, There 
are many, many ministers nowadays from whose lips a 
heterodox word has never escaped, and yet they are not 
preaching the truth, They are preaching on all kinds of 
extraneous and unimportant questions. Take any daily 
paper that announces the subjects to be preached upon in 
any of our great cities, and your heart will certainly be 
heavy with sadness if you are at all thoughtful. In one 
of our American cities some time ago these three sub- 
jects were announced in the same newspaper by different 
prominent preachers in that city: “The Wit of an Irish- 
man,” “The Football Match,” “My Mother-in-Law.” 
Horrible! Think of it! Standing in the sacred desk, the 
place of such marvellous opportunity and possibility of 
power for God, and preaching on subjects like that! Yes, 
I do tremble for these faithless and foolish shepherds, 

But that is not what I mean now. What I mean is 
this: I tremble for those who are preaching the Gospel— 
preaching the Gospel in its simplicity, in its purity and in 
its fullness, but preaching it “with enticing words of 
man’s wisdom,” and not “i i iri 







Oh, a man may preach 
the most sound and most able orthodoxy and preach his 


THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 153 


audience right into hell! | The deadest thing on earth is 





can 1 do this only insofar as we are e definitely baptized with 
the Holy Spirit and insofar as we are definitely,.falled... 
i wer..for each new 
emergency of Ciikeas: eerste I repeat again, if we 
pay the price of this blessing and are therefore baptized 
with the Holy Spirit and filled again a 
there will be souls won to 
Christ through our ministry, whether it be through the 
ministry of public preaching or the ministry of personal 
work, who will not be thus won if we do not pay the 
price and therefore do not obtain the blessing, and there- 
fore if we do not pay the price of this blessing and con- 
sequently do not obtain it, we shall be responsible before 
God for every one who might have been saved but who 
was not saved because we did not pay the price and there- 


fore did not obtain the blessing. We must we must 
be, MusT BE baptized with the Holy Spirtt. 
Tomorrow we shall take up the price of obtaining this 


blessing. Or, to put it in other words, we shall take up 
the question of just what each one of us must do to make 
it sure that we shall be baptized with the Holy Spirit; 
and, if we have already been thus baptized with the Holy 
Spirit, how we may be_filled again and again with His} 


glorious presence and power. 















VII 


THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT: 
HOW TO OBTAIN IT 


FE, have seen that the Baptism with the Holy 
Spirit is a definite experience of which one | 


may know whether he has received it or not ; 


aera au and is sees for the purpose of testimony 
and_service and that the one great result of that baptism 


is power in the work to which God calls us. We have 





we of every believer in every age of the Church’s his- 
tory to have the Baptism with the Holy Spirit and that a 
most solemn responsibility rests upon every one of us to 
obtain it at any cost. We have seen that if we pay th 
rice of this blessing and therefore obtain it there will be 
} souls won to Christ through our work who, if we do not 
pay the price of this blessing and therefore do not obtain 
it, will not be thus won; and that therefore if we do not 
pay the price of this blessing and therefore do not obtain 
it, we shall be responsible before God for every one who 
might have been won but was not won because we did 
not pay the price and therefore did not obtain the blessing, 

This brings us face to face with the all-important ques- 


154 






THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 155 






tremendous importance; but it is a question that is very 
plainly answered in the Word of God. There is a very 
plain path laid down in God’s Word, consisting of a few 
simple steps that anyone can take, and 
CERTAIN THAT ANY ONE WHO TAKES THESE STEPS WILL 
ITH THE Hoiy Spirit.” 

That is a very positive statement and I would not dare 
be thus positive if the Word of God were not equally 


positive, but when the Word of God definitely and dis- 


tinctly says that if you do certain things there will be a 
certain result, what right have we to tone down the posi- 
tiveness of God’s Word and say that if we do certain 
things there will “ probably ” be a certain result ? 

If any one should come to me and ask me, “Can you 
tell me what to do right now and here, and guarantee that 
if I do it I will be saved at once?” Without the slightest 
hesitation I would reply, “I can.” I can tell any one 
what to do right now and guarantee that if they do it, 
they will be saved instantly. If I could not tell you that, 
I would not be fit to be preaching the Gospel. And just 
so, if any one should come to me and say, “ Dr. Torrey, 
can you tell me what to do right here and now and guar- 
antee that if I will do it, I will be baptized with the Holy 
Ghost? ”, without the slightest hesitation I would reply, 
“T can.” I can, because the Bible tells us in the plainest 
possible terms that very thing. It tells us that if we do 
certain things which are clearly defined in the Bible, we 
“ shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.’ What right, 
then, have we to qualify God’s statement and say that if 
we do certain things we shall probably receive the gift of 
(or, the baptism with) the Holy Spirit? 








156 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


It is oftentimes said that Dr. Torrey is a very dogmatic 
preacher. I trust that the charge is true. I aim to bea 
dogmatic preacher. I aim to be just as dogmatic as this 
Book. I do not think that I have attained to that as yet, 
but that is my aim, and if this Book says in the most posi- 
tive and dogmatic terms that if you do certain things you 
shall be baptized with the Holy Spirit, I do not hesitate to 
affirm without the slightest fear that my affirmation will 
prove untrue, that any one here who does these certain 
things, who takes these certain steps, will be immediately 

baptized with the oe Spirit.” 





refer to other passages that throw more Tote upon this 
passage and make some of the steps clearer, but they are 
all in this passage. 





shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.” 

Now, Peter’s statement here is just as positive as mine. 
He says if we do certain things, the result will be that we 
“shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.” What right, 
then, have we to say that if we do these things, perhaps 
we may receive the gift of the Holy Ghost? ‘There is no 
perhaps about it. We certainly shall, 

The First Step. ‘The first two steps are found in the 
word “spent.” What does repentance mean? Doubt- 
less many of you have been told time after time that 
‘When you were told 





THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 157 


that, you were told the exact truth. But a change of 
mind about what ? A change of mind about three things : 





i Genes: ” and we > read in verse thirty-seven: “ Now 
-when they heard this, they were pricked in their heart, 
_and said unto Peter and the rest of the apostles, ‘ Breth- 
ren, what shall we do?’”, and then we read verse thirty- 
eight: “ And Peter said unto them, ‘ Repent ye’ ”—that 
is, change your mind about Jesus Christ, change from 
that attitude of mind that rej ected chris and crucified 





‘accepted Him? If I should go down aon this platform 
and go to you as you sit there in the seats, one after 
another, and put to you the question, “ Have you received 
Jesus Christ as your Saviour?” I think that most of you 
would reply, “ Yes, I have.” But suppose I should put 
to you a second question, “ Upon what are you resting as 
the ground of your acceptance before God? ”—I am sure 
some of you would answer me something like this, “ Why, 
I go to church, I read my Bible, I have been baptized, I 
have joined the church (or, been confirmed, as the case 
may be), I go regularly to church, I partake of the com- 


158 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


munion, I give a tenth of my income to the church or the 
poor, and I am trying to live just as near right as I know 
how.” Well, if that is what you are resting upon as the 
ground of your salvation, you are not saved. All those 
things are your works; good things in their place, but 
every one of them your own works, and God tells us 
plainly in His Word, in Romans 3:20, “ By the works 
of the law shall no flesh be justified in His sight ” ; there- 
fore if these are the things you are trusting in as the 
ground of your acceptance before God, you are not justi- 
fied, you are not saved. 
But if I should go to some of you and put to you the 
» question, “ Are you saved?” you would reply at once, 
“Yes, I am,” and if then I should put to you the second 
question, “On what are you resting as the ground of 
your salvation? ”’, you would reply something like this: 
Ta ot_ resting upon. an hing I have done.or any- 
en irel upon 





TL ACCEPTAN BEFORE Gop. ne 

| This thought comes out again and again in the Bible. 

_We find it, for example, very plainly stated in Galatians 

3:2. In this passage, Paul says: “ This only would I 
learn from you, Received ye the Spirit by the works of 
the law, or by the hearing of faith?” What does Paul 
mean by this? On one occasion Paul was passing through 


THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 159 


(ralatia and was detained there by some physical infirm- 
ity. We are not told what it was; presumably it was 
some trouble with his eyes. But that does not matter for 
our present purpose. At all events, he was not so ill that 
he could not preach and he did preach to these Galatians. 
He preached to them that Christ had redeemed us from 
the curse of the law by becoming a curse in our place 
(Gal. 3:13), and that by simple faith in Him Who died 
in their place, all their sins were forgiven and they were 
justified from all things (2 Cor. 5:21; Acts 13:38, 39). 
The Galatians believed this proclamation of the Gospel 
and put their trust in the atoning death of Jesus Christ 
on the cross as their ground of acceptance before God, 
and God immediately set His seal to their faith by giving 
them as a conscious, experimental possession, the Holy 
Spirit. But after Paul had gone away, certain men came 
down from Jerusalem who mixed up the Jewish law 
with the simple Gospel of Christ and told these people, 
these believers in Galatia, that merely believing in Jesus 
Christ was not enough, that in addition to that, if they 
were to be saved, they must be circumcised according to 
the law of Moses. (Just as the Seventh Day Adventist 
people come along nowadays and tell young Christians 
that it is not enough to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, 
that in addition to that, they must keep the seventh day 
Sabbath according to the law of Moses. It is the same 
old controversy, only breaking out at a new point.) 

These young believers in Galatia were all upset. They 
did not know whether they were saved (or, justified) or 
not. ‘This reaches the ears of the Apostle Paul and he is 
very indignant. Nothing makes true Christian workers 
more indignant, nor more righteously indignant, than to 
“ave false teachers come along and try to upset young 


160 ; THE HOLY SPIRIT 


converts and get them confused. So he wrote this epistle 
to the Galatians to show the Galatian believers the truth 
and expose the error of these Judaizers. I am glad that 
these Judaizers came down, for, while they upset these 
Galatian believers for a while, the ultimate outcome was 
good, for it gave rise to this wonderful epistle to the 
Galatians, which is the greatest exposition of the doctrine 
of justification by faith that is to be found in the Bible, 
even greater on this one point than the epistle to the 
Romans. 

First of all, Paul called the attention of the young be- 
lievers in Galatia to the fact that Abraham himself was 
justified before he was circumcised, that ‘“ Abraham 
simply) believed God” and his simply believing God 
was “counted unto him for righteousness ” (Gal. 3:6). 
He showed them that after Abraham was thus justzfie 
by simple faith, he was circumcised, not in order to be 
justified, but as “a seal of the faith that he had while he 
was still in uncircumcision” (Romans 4:11, R. V.). 

Then Paul exposes the error of these Judaizers in a 
second way. He appeals directly to the experience of the 
believers in Galatia. He says to them, in effect, “ You 
received the Holy Spirit, did you not, as a definite ex- 
perience?” “Yes, Paul, we did.” “Well, then,” he 
says in substance, “let me ask you a question? How did 
you receive the Holy Spirit— by works of the law’ (that 
is, by keeping the Reis low) or ae the ele of 


> 











And they replied, “ Why, of course, Paul, — received 
the Holy Spirit by the ‘hearing of faith.’” And that is 











the way every one of us must receive Him. This, 
the very first step, the mo ndamental. step. of all in 
receiving the Baptism with the Hol Spirit, to rest abso- 





| Holy.Spirit, becomes, our. birthright... 

Some years ago an engineer on the Rock Island Rail- 
road was converted in the Moody church in Chicago. 
Not long after this, one of the well-instructed members 
of the church was crossing the Rock Island Railroad 
tracks in the south part of Chicago and this engineer 
came down the track on a switch engine. He saw this 
other man about to cross the track and slowed down the 
engine and said, “ John, don’t you want to take a ride?” 
He replied, “ Yes,” and climbed up into the cab with the 
engineer. They had not gone very far when Mr, Mor- 
rison began to draw the young convert out. After the 
young convert had talked some time, Mr. Morrison said 
quietly to him, “You have a different religion from 
mine.” “ What, John,” he said, “a different religion 
from yours? I thought we had the same religion.” 
“No,” Mr. Morrison replied, “you have a different re- 
ligion from mine. You have a religion of two letters. I 
have a religion of four letters.” “ What do you mean, 
John?” the man asked. John replied, “ Your religion is 
D-O, Do; ; you are all the time talking about what you do. 
My fatipion is D-O-N-F, pong, Iam ine. to...wha 

Jesus Christ has done, when He bore my sins in His own} 
TOSS [hat, let me repeat, is the first step 
to ree agrarae > the Baptism with the Holy Spirit, that 


we} rest_entirely and absolutely not on anything we do, 


but upon. what..Jesus..Christ has already done, in dying 








162 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


in our place upon the cross of Calvary (Gal. 3:13; 
2 Corea: 217. 


piel STEP 








mind that loves sin or indulges in sin, to that attitude of 
a The second a then, toward 
ism with the Holy 
Here again we touch on one of the most vital points in| 
receiving..the,.Baptism..with the Holy Spirit. The Holy 
Spirit is the Aoly.Spirit, and we must make a clean-cut 
choice between the Holy Spirit and unholy sin. We can- 
not have both, It is just at this point that many people 
fail of the blessing. They read books on the Baptism 
with the Holy Spirit, they go to conferences and listen to 
various speakers, they go to “tarrying meetings,” they 
pray long alone for the Baptism with the Holy Spirit, but 
with no results, Why is it? Because they are holding 
on to some sin. 

Men and women oftentimes come to me and say, “I 
have been praying for the Baptism with the Holy Spirit 
for a year,” or two years, or three years or five years, as 
the case may be. A missionary came up to me one day 
in the First Presbyterian Church in New York, at the 
close of the sermon, and said to me, “I have been praying 
for the Baptism with the Holy Spirit for twenty years. 
I have been twenty years a missionary in Persia and I 
have never had a convert.” Think of it! a missionary 
twenty years and not a convert. Then this minister said, 
“What is the matter?” When a man comes to me and 
tells me he has been praying for the Baptism with the 
Holy Spirit and gets no answer and asks what the trouble 











THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 162 


is, I generally look him right square in the eye and say, 
“My brother, it is S-I-N, sin.” And to you here this 
morning who have been praying for a long time for the 
Baptism with the Holy Spirit and receiving nothing, in 
all probability the trouble with you is sin; and if I could 
look down right into your heart right now, just as God 
is looking right down into your heart at this present 
moment, I could put my finger on the specific sin that is 
shutting you out of the blessing. Oftentimes it is what 
we are pleased to call “a small sin” that shuts us out of 
the Baptism with the Holy Spirit. In reality there are 
no small sins. There are sins about small things, but 
every sin is an act of rebellion against God, no matter 
how small the thing is in itself and no act of rebellion 
against God is a small thing. Suppose your little child 
in a fit of anger throws a book on the floor and you say 
to the child, “ Pick up that book.” Now that certainly is 
a small thing in itself, but suppose the child says, “I 
won't!” Is it a small thing now? And every sin, no 
matter how small the thing is in itself, is saying “I 
won’t ” to God, and seen in this light, every sin is an 
appalling thing. 

Mr. Finney somewhere tells of a woman in the central 
part of New York state, who became greatly concerned 
about the Baptism with the Holy Spirit. When the meet- 
ings were over at night, she would go to her room and 
pray long into the night and lose necessary sleep, and her 
friends were afraid she would go insane. But there came 
no answer to her prayers. One night she came home from 
the meeting and went up to her room, As she knelt there 
in prayer for the Baptism with the Holy Spirit, some 
little matter of head adornment came up before her, 
something that probably would not trouble anybody here, 


164 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


but which was a matter of controversy between her and 
God, and as she knelt there, she put her hand to her head 
and took out the pins, threw them across the floor and 
said, “’There! go!” and instantly the Holy Ghost fell 
upon her. Now, what was it that shut her out of the 


beessing # Pins? No, controversy..with God—sin. 





Some years ago I was So! a Bible conference at 


Dr. Broughton’s Tabernacle in Atlanta, Ga. One after- 


noon when I was to speak on this subject, a minister 
came in and took a seat over on the right hand side of 
the tabernacle. As he was taking his seat, Dr. Broughton 
nudged me and whispered, “ Don’t look now, or he will 
think we are talking about him, but that man who is 
taking his seat is the pope of our denomination in north 
Georgia. Everything he says goes, but he is not with us 
at all in this matter. I am glad he is here.” As I spoke 
that afternoon, I would occasionally look over toward 
that man. He was listening very intently. When the 
meeting was over and I had gone out into the vestibule 
of the church, that man was waiting. He came up and 
said, “I did not stand up this afternoon when you asked 
people to stand up.” I replied, “I noticed you did not.” 
“T thought,” he said, “that you said that only those 


should stand who could say that they were fully sur- | 


THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 165 


t 
rendered to God.” I answered, “ That was exactly what 
I did say.” “ Well,” he answered, “I could not say that.” 
“ All right, then you did perfectly right in not getting up. 
I did not want you to lie.” “ Say,” he continued, “ you 
hit me pretty hard this afternoon.” I replied, “That is 
what I am here for.” “You said that if there is any- 
thing that always came up when we got nearest to God, 
that was the thing to deal with. Well, there is something 
that always comes up when I get nearest to God. I am 
not going to tell you what it is. I think you know.” I 
replied, “I think I do”—I could smell it. “ Well,” he 
said, “I just wanted to tell you, that’s all.” This was on 
Friday. I left that evening for Augusta, Georgia. The 
following Tuesday I was coming back through Atlanta on 
my way to Chicago. The train stopped a few minutes in 
the station and I got off. Dr. Broughton was waiting in 
the station to speak to me. He said, “I wish you could 
have been in our Baptist preachers’ meeting yesterday 
morning. That man from north Georgia came into our 
meeting and got up and said, ‘ Brethren, we have been all 
wrong about this matter,’ then he told what he had done 
[he had put away his sin], then he ‘said, ‘ Brethren, I 
have a more definite experience now than I had when I 
was converted.’” A more definite experience, than. you.) 
had when you were converted i is awaiting you this morn-| 


ing, if you wi nodal put away your sin, 





‘THIRD STEP e 
he third step is also in this verse,|‘ Be baptized in © 
the name of Jesus Christ unto the remission of your sins.” 





i BE 
OF OUR RENUNCIATION oF SIN. AND. OF OUR "ACCEPTANCE 
Pure BRAM NIM AR AAR RIEE 


oF JESUS Curist. - The Baptism n with the » Holy “Spirit i is 








THE HOLY SPIRIT 9 


not for the secret believer, bu 


and I went around the world, there were efhadeets of peo- 
ple who had been trying to be secret disciples for years 
who came out and made a public confession of Christ in 
our meetings and who received blessing through that act. 

Of course, God’s appointed way of confession of our 
renunciation of sin and acceptance of Jesus Christ is 
baptism, and it is in the very act of baptism with water 
that many receive the Baptism with the Holy Spirit, be- 
cause that is where they make an open confession of 
renunciation of sin and acceptance of Jesus Christ. I 
never felt the importance of baptism before as I did 
when I was in India. I found that there were in India 
large numbers of men who really believed the truth about 
Jesus Christ, who did not hesitate to say that they be- 
lieved in His Deity and in His atonement, but who would 
not be baptized. Their reason was that being baptized in 
India meant great losses to many. For example: A stu- 
dent in the University of Calcutta came to me when I 
was holding meetings in Calcutta. He said to me, “I 
believe everything that you have preached.” JI said, 
“Why don’t you come out, then, and confess Christ in 
baptism?” He said, “Because if I did, it would cost 
me everything I have in the world. I am a student of 
law in the university here in Calcutta. I have not com- 
pleted my education. My father is a rich man in south- 
ern India and I am heir to a fortune; but if I should 
come out and be baptized, my father would cut me off 
without an ana. There is nothing I could do. I cannot 
work, for I belong to the Brahmin caste. I cannot prac’ 
tise law, because I have not yet completed my course. 





THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 167 


What shall I do?” TI replied, “Do what God tells you 
to do, be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ.” After 
some thought and some reasoning with him, he said, “I 
will.” I was leaving Calcutta, so I could not baptize 
him, but he went to Dr. Charles Cuthbert Hall, of Brook- 
lyn, New York, who was at that time lecturing in India _ 
on the Haskel Foundation, and asked him to baptize him. 

Dr. Hall consented. The young man sent to his father 
in southern India, telling him he was to be baptized. His 
father came up to witness the ceremony and as soon as 
his son was baptized, he cut him off without an ana, I 
tell you, baptism means something in India. It means 
something everywhere. If you have not been baptized, 
either as a child or as an adult, be baptized, ake an open 


But if you have been baptized, even then there should 
be that for which baptism stands, an open confession of 
your renunciation of sin and acceptance_o 





But some one may ask, “ Suppose one is a Friend, or, 
as they are commonly called, a Quaker, who do not be- 
lieve in the outward sacraments of either the Lord’s 
Supper or baptism? Are they never baptized with the 
Holy Spirit?” ‘To this I would say that some of those 
that I have known who gave the clearest evidence of 
being baptized with the Holy Spirit belonged to the 
Friends, but I am here to expound the Word of God, and 
this is what the Word of God says. Lf" 


THE FourtH STEP / 
Now let us turn to Acts 5:32 and t we will find 





168 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


the fourth step: “ And we are witnesses of these things ; 
and so is the Holy Spirit, Whom God hath given to them 
that obey Him.” ‘THE FouRTH sTEpP, as set forth in this 





to some of you will make it more clear. 

Let me repeat, the fourth step is,obedience. But what 
is obedience? Some one will say, it is doing what God 
tells you to do. Yes. But how much that God tells you 
to do. One thing? two things? three things? No, every- 
thing! There is a denomination that greatly emphasizes 
obedience, as well they might, for it is constantly em- 
phasized throughout the entire Bible; but this particular 
denomination makes obedience to consist in just one thing, 
that is, one certain ceremonial act. No, that is not the 

hole of obedience.| Obedience..is.not merely doing oné,\ 

wo or three things,that.God commands, but doing, ever \)- 


ca PER TOT Wise 


T 





More people miss the Baptism with the Spirit at 
this point, and more people enter experimentally into the 
Baptism with the Holy Spirit at this point than at almost 


| THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 169 


any other. There are many who go a long ways in the 
matter of sacrificing for Christ, they even go so far as 
to go as foreign missionaries and leave home and friends 
and all the comforts of their own land, to go through 
sacrifice and suffering on the foreign field, who still stop 
short of full surrender to God and so stop short of the 
blessing. Man after man and woman after woman told 
me in India, men and women who had gone so far as to 
go to the danger and discomfort of that trying climate, 
men and women who had given up home and friends and 
comforts of countless kinds and pretty much everything 
that most of us hold dear, to go as foreign missionaries, 
but nevertheless they had not made a full surrender to 
God as yet. Thank God many of them did then, and 
therefore were then and there baptized with the Holy 
Spirit. There is absolutely no use of your praying for 
the Baptism with the Holy Spirit, nor of going to “ tarry- 
ing meetings,” nor any other kind of meetings, if you 
will not surrender your will to God, holding absolutely 
nothing back. You will not receive the Baptism with the 
Holy Spirit though you pray for it to the crack of doom 
unless you make an absolute surrender of your will 
to God. 

Many are afraid to make a full surrender to God. 
They fear that if they should make a full surrender to 
God, that God would require of them some hard thing, 
or even some absurd thing. Who is your God, anyway? 
He certainly is not the God of the Bible. The name of 
God in the Bible is love, “ God is love;” and absolute 
surrender to God is simply absolute surrender to infinite 
love. Is there anything to be dreaded in that? And 
God’s love is not only wiser than that of any earthly 
father, but more tender than that of any earthly mother. 


170 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


Some years ago, at one of the Northfield conferences, a 
gentleman came to me and said, “ You must speak on the 
subject of full surrender. A good many of the men and 
women over at East Hall (one of the school buildings at 
which many attendants at the conference were stopping) 
are greatly troubled on the subject of full surrender. 
They are afraid that if they make a full surrender to 
God, that God will require some hard thing of them, or 
even some absurd thing. The women are afraid that if 
they tell God they will make a full surrender to Him, He 
will take away their husbands or do some other dreadful 
thing, and the men are afraid of some other things.” 
That afternoon I took up the subject of full surrender 
and repeated what this man had said. Then I said to 
them, “ Who is your God, anyway, that you are afraid to 
make a full surrender to Him? He certainly is not the 
God of the Bible, for the name of the God of the Bible is 
Love. Absolute surrender to God is simply putting your- 
self into the hands of Infinite Love. God’s love is not 
only wiser than that of any earthly father, but more 
tender than any earthly mother.” 

Then I used this illustration: “Suppose when I get 
back to Chicago, my son (who was then perhaps ten years 
of age), as soon as he hears my ring at the front door- 
bell, should come running down-stairs and open the door 
and throw himself into my arms and say, ‘ Father, I am 
so glad you are back. We have so greatly missed you 
since you were away. I want to make this a red-letter 
day to celebrate your homecoming. I am not going to 
have any will of my own at all today; I am going to do 
just what you tell me to do at every turn. Please sit 
down, Father, and make me out a program for the whole 
day, telling me just what to do at every hour of the day.’ 


THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 171 


Now,” I said, “suppose my son said that to me, what 
do you think I would do? Do you think I would call for 
my wife to bring me a sheet of paper and then sit down 
and say, ‘Clara, what are the things that Reuben most 
dislikes to do?’ and then make him out a program for the 
day, putting in all the things he most disliked to do? 
Don’t you know that I would not do that? Don’t you 
know that I would make that the brightest, happiest day 
that Reuben A. Torrey, Jr., ever knew in all his life?” 
And just so it is with God. When we make an absolute 
surrender of our wills and all we have to Him, He brings 
into play all the resources of infinite wisdom and grace 
and power, to fill our lives with sunshine. He may ask 
of us things that we would not of ourselves have chosen 
to do, but if He does, those things will be the very hap- 
piest things that we have to do. For years I held back 
from full surrender to God, indeed from becoming a 
Christian at all, because I was afraid that God would 
command me to preach the Gospel; and I was determined 
to be a lawyer. And God did tell me to preach the Gos- 
pel. But today I would rather preach the Gospel than de 
anything else I know. And so, if any of you are hold- 
ing back, make a full surrender of your will to God and 
God will bring into play all the resources of infinite wis- 
dom and love and power to fill your lives with sunshine. 

However that may be, you will not receive the Bap- 
tism with the Holy Spirit until you do thus make a full 
surrender to God, until you come to Him and say from 
our heart and re ean it, “‘ Heavenly 
Father, here I am. I am Thy property. Thou hast 
bought me with a price and I acknowledge Thine owner- 
ship. Send me where Thou wilt, do with me what Thou 
wilt, use me as Thou wilt.” Through not doing this, 










172 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


thousands today are missing the Baptism with the Holy 
Spirit and through doing it, thousands upon thousands 
have entered into blessing. 

Some years ago I was attending a Bible Conference at 
Grove City, Pa. One day a Presbyterian minister came 
to me and asked if he might have a private conversation 
with me. I made an appointment with him, and at the 
time appointed we met. ‘This man was one of the leading 
Presbyterian ministers in all that part of the state, a man 
greatly honoured and beloved. When we met, he told me 
this experience; he said, “Some time ago three young 
men from my church went to one of the Student Con- 
ferences at Northfield. They heard you speak on The 
Baptism with the Holy Spirit. When they came back, 
they called upon me in my study and said, ‘ Pastor, we 
think we have heard of something at Northfield about 
which you do not know.’” It seemed to me that that 
was a rather presumptuous thing for young men in their 
position to do with a pastor in his position. But notice 
the quality of the man. He said to them, “ Young men, 
if you have something that I have not, and I ought. to 
have, I want to know about it.” Then they told him 
what they heard at Northfield about the Baptism with 
the Holy Spirit. ‘“ Then,” he continued, “ when they had 
gone, I took my hat and walked out into the woods and 
sat down on a log and looked up to God and said, ‘Oh 
God, if these young men have something that I have not 
and that I ought to have, I want it right now, and the 
best I know, I make a full surrender of all I am and all 
I have to Thee.’ Immediately,” he continued, “ there 
_came stealing into my heart such a sense of peace and 


joy as I had never known before.” Oh, a filling with 
the Holy Spirit brings to ) you not only a peace and joy 


REP. ARETE L NS RIG IE ALR SEN SENT HE TED A I ts 


THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 173 





you never knew before, but a power in rer se vic 





Many years ago I was speaking in the city of Washing- 
ton, D. C., at an International Convention of Christian 
Workers on the Baptism with the Holy Spirit. God was 
wonderfully present that night. As I closed my address 
and we joined in prayer, the Holy Spirit manifested His 
presence in a wonderful way. As I came down from the 
pulpit, the Chaplain of the United States Senate came to 
e and said, “I never experienced anything like this 
efore. It seemed to me that if I had opened my eyes, I 
ould ave fairly seen the Holy Spirit in this place to- 
But, while many had really entered into the 
blessing, some had not; and we were there dealing with 
inquirers for about been hours. About eleven o’clock 
some one came to me and said, “ Do you see that young 
woman over on the right, with whom Miss Bertha © 
Wright, of Ottawa, Canada, is dealing? Well, she is in 
great agony. Miss Wright has been dealing with her 
for two hours. Won’t you go over and speak to her?” 
I went over and stepped into the pew just back of her 
and leaned over and said, “ What is your trouble?’ She 
replied, “I came from Baltimore for just one purpose, 
and that was that I might be baptized with the Holy 
Spirit, and I cannot go back to Baltimore until I am.” 
“Ts your will fully surrendered to God?” “T do not 
think it really is.” ‘“ Well,” I said, “it will do no good to 
pray unless your will is fully surrendered to God. Will 
you just surrender your will right now?” She replied, 
“T cannot.” “ Are you willing that God should lay your 








174 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


will down for you?” “ Yes,” she replied. “Then,” I 
said, “ask Him to do it.” - ig 
She bowed her head on the back of the pew in front | 







| [Sorat sen Th > 
Yes, it ct Tt be. I have soled 
God for sonieiing apes to His will and I know He 


has heard me and I have what I have asked (1 Jno. 


5:14, 15). Yes, it is done, my will is laid down.” Then 
‘T’said, .“ Now ask Him for the \Baptism with the Holy | 
irit.” | Again she bowed her head on the back of the 


seat in front of her and prayed, “Oh God, baptize me 
with the Holy Spirit at now. I ask it in ae name,” 










God is waiting ae pene pera to me any a you 
who never were baptized with the Holy Spirit before and 


you LTE Te oe the} 


Spirit before the moment 





' somewhere and do it at once. 


Vil 


THe, BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRE: 
HOW TO OBTAIN IT RIGHT NOW 


E, saw yesterday that there was a plain path 

W\ consisting of seven simple steps that any one 
could take, and that it was absolutely certain 

that any one who took those steps would enter into the 


blessing. Yesterday we took up the first four steps. The 
‘first step was, to rest_upon_the dol 





we closed yesterday. 7 


I. Toe Firra Step 
You will find the fifth step in John 7: 37-39: “ Now on 
the last day, the great day of the feast, Jesus stood and 
cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me 
and drink. He that believeth on me, as the Scripture has 
said, out of his body shall flow rivers of living water 


175 





él 


_lieveth on me 
‘word “ thirst,” “ ' Our Lord Jesus 


176 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


But this spake He of the Spirit, which thev that believe 
on Him were to receive.” 
Here again we have the first step upon which we dwelt 
it 


yesterday, name aith in. Jesus Chri Hle...tha be-) 
a But we have also a fifth step in the 


doubtless had in mind when He uttered these words 
Isaiah 44:3, “For I will pour water upon bi tht as 


thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: J will pour my 


S > piri it ice thy seed, and my blessing upon thine off- 


spring.’ or carefully the words “upon him that +. 

tHirsty.” |The fth step, then, is thirst} Do you know 
what it means to be th irsty, were you ever real thirsty? 
I have been, when I was with the troops at Chickamauga 
Park during the Spanish-American War. where 60,000 
soldiers were gathered together and where there was no 
rain for many days, and the air was full of dust thirty 
feet high day and night, and we ate dust and drank dust 
and slept dust and dreamt dust, and no water fit to drink; 
I surely knew what it meant to be thirsty. Again, when 
I was in Southern China in 1902, the cholera was raging 
and one needed to exercise the utmost care in regard to 
what water he drank, I knew what it meant to be thirsty 
then. When a man really thirsts, it seems as if every 
pore in his body had just one cry, ‘‘ Water, water, water.” 
Now apply this to the matter in hand. When a man 
thirsts spiritually, his whole being has just one cry, “ ‘The 
Holy Spirit, the Holy Spirit, the Holy Spirit, O God, 
give me the Holy Spirit.” 

Just as long as we think we can get on some way with- 
out the definite Baptism with the Holy Spirit we are not 
going to have it. Just as long as we are seeking to ac- 
complish by new tricks of oratory, or by a skillful use of 


THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 177 


words, or by all sorts of psychological and other trick 
methods to influence people, we are not going to have the 
Baptism with the Holy Spirit; but when we come to the 
place that we realize our utter need of the Baptism with 
the Holy Spirit if we are to do effective service for God, 
and long for it at any cost, then it will be ours, and not 
till then, 

Let me illustrate what I mean by two ministers. The 
first one heard me speaking at the State Convention of 
the Y. M. C. A. of New York State, at Jamestown, N. Y. 
I spoke upon this same subject upon which I am speak- 
ing to you today, and said very many of the same things 
I am saying now and said yesterday. This minister, 
coming out of the hall with another minister, said to him, 
“That kind of teaching (that is, the kind I have just 
been giving you) leads either to fanaticism or to despair.” 
He did not ask whether it was scriptural or not. He 
could not deny that it was scriptural, and he was con- 
demned by it, and tried to escape the condemnation of 
his own conscience by this smart remark. Now such a 
man as that is not going to receive the Baptism with the 
Holy Spirit. 

But take another minister. This was at Northfield at 
one of Mr. Moody’s conferences. I had spoken on Sat- 
urday night on “The Baptism with the Holy Spirit; 
What It Is and What It Does, Its Necessity, and Who 
Can Have It.” I was to speak on that Sunday morning 
on “The Baptism with the Holy Spirit, How to Get It.” 
Early in the morning, this minister came around to the 
house where I was stopping, and said, “ Mr. Torrey, I 
have come from (naming a city in New Jersey 
where he was pastor) to Northfield for just one purpose, 
the purpose of being baptized with the Holy Spirit, and 





178 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


I would rather die than go back to my church without it.” 
I said to him, “ My brother, you are going to have it.” 
The following Monday morning he had to leave by an 
early train, but he came around to see me before he went, 
and said, “I want to tell you I have received the Baptism 
with the Holy Spirit.” 

Do you thirst? Do you long for the Baptism with the 
Holy Spirit whatever it may involve and whatever it may 
cost? It may cost you a good deal. It may take you out 
of a nice, comfortable place here in America to China or 
to India or the heart of Africa. 

Some years ago I was at the International Christian 
Workers’ Conference at Hartford, Conn. At the close 
of one of my addresses on this subject, the pastor and 
assistant pastor of the church came to me and asked me 
to pray with them that the visitor for the church might 
be baptized with the Holy Spirit; and, when the crowd 
had gone we knelt together and prayed that she might 
be thus baptized. A year later one of the pastors said to 
me, “I hardly know whether we would have asked you 
to pray that our church visitor might be baptized with the 
Holy Spirit, if we had known what it meant, for we have 
lost her. She has gone as a foreign missionary,” and it 
may take some of you from a place of ease and comfort 
to a place of hardship and sacrifice, if you really are bap- 
tized with the Holy Spirit. Do you want the Holy Spirit 
at any cost? If you do not, there is no good whatever in 
your praying that you may be filled with the Holy Spirit, 
nothing will come of your prayer. 

Before i leave this part of the subject ae me say that 





THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 179 


You must desire the Baptism with the Holy Spirit in 
order that you may honour God with more effective 
service and not merely that you may get a new power or 
a new influence, or it may be a larger salary. 

One of the most solemn passages in the Bible on this 
whole subject brings this out in a very solemn way. You 
will find it in Acts 8: 20-22, “ Peter said unto him, thy 
money perish with thee because thou hast thought that the 
gift of God may be obtained with money. ‘Thou hast 
neither part nor lot in this matter: for thy heart is not 
right in the sight of God. ‘Repent therefore of this t 
i : -. thought of thine 
heart _may be forgiven thee.’ cere the magician, had 
seen the power that Peter and John had because they had 
been baptized with the Holy Spirit, and he desired a simi- 
lar power for himself. He was willing to pay large 
money for it and offered it, but his unholy desire, intense 
though it was, only brought denunciation and not a bless- 
ing on his head. Be very careful at this point. Get 
alone with God and ask God to search you and show 
you whether your desire for this wonderful blessing 
is a pure desire, in order that you may glorify God 
as you ought, or a selfish, unholy desire, simply in 
order that you may get greater joy or greater power for 
yourself. 










IL Tar Sixte Sire 
You will find the sixth step in a very familiar passage 
of Scripture, Luke 11:13, “If ye then, being a know 
how to give good gifts unto your children: 
more shall your heayenly Father give the Holy. oie to, 
HAT IS THE SIXTH STEP, JUST & 
ask Him, That is, ask God definitely for the definite © 
















180 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


Baptism with the Holy Spirit. THe stxTH STEP Ig DEFI- 
NITE PRAYER FOR THIS DEFINITE BLESSING. | There are 
many in these days, “and ‘they are often well known men, 
excellent men, too, who tell us that we ought not to pray 
for the Holy Spirit, and they reason it out very speciously. 
They say “the Holy Spirit was given to the Church as an 
abiding possession at Pentecost” (that is true), and then 
they ask “why pray for what you have already got?” 
To this the late Dr. A. J. Gordon replied conclusively, 
e“‘ Jesus Christ was given to the world as an abiding gift 
at Calvary (which is certainly true, see John 3:16), He 
was given to the world as a whole, but each individual in 
_the world must appropriate this gift for himself. Just 
so the gift of the Holy Spirit was given to the whole 
Church at Pentecost, but it was given to the Church as 
__a whole, and each individual member of the Church must | 


PPA OAS I PTE DS 


“appropriate the. “gift for ‘himself, and God’s way of ap- 


propriation is prayer.’ Sr scien cee 
But these brethren often go still further, and they say 
“every individual believer in Christ has the Holy Spirit,” 
and that is true also, as we saw a few days ago. Weare 
told definitely in Romans 8:9, “If any man have not 
the Spirit of Christ (and “ the Spirit of Christ ” here does 
not mean a Christlike spirit as it is so often misinter- 
preted, but is a name of the Holy Spirit), he is none of 
His ;” so it is clear that every believer has the Holy Spirit 
in some sense. And these brethren go on and say if then 
every believer already has the Holy Spirit why pray for 
Him? ‘To which the all-sufficient answer is, that it is one 
thing to have the Holy Spirit dwelling in us (as He does 
in every believer) way back in some hidden corner of our 
being where we are not distinctly conscious of His pres- 
ence, and quite another thing and a far more glorious thing 












THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 181 


to have this indwelling Spirit take entire possession of the 
house that He inhabits, as He does when one is baptized 
(or, filled) with the Holy Spirit. : 

Anyway, against all these specious reasonings of men 
we put the plain, unquestionable utterance of Jesus 
Christ, Luke 11:13, “If ye then, being evil, know how 
to give good gifts unto your children: how much more 
shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them 
that ask Him.” 

Some years ago I was on a program of the International 
Christian Workers’ Convention at Boston, to speak on the 
subject of the Baptism with the Holy Spirit, on the last 
evening of the convention, One of the men came to me 
at the noon hour (a most excellent brother) and he said, 
“T notice you are on the program this evening to speak 
on the Baptism with the Holy Spirit.” I said, “ Yes.” 
Then he said, “I think that is the most important sub- 
ject on the program.” I replied, “I think it is impor- 
tant.” “Be sure to tell them,” he continued, “ not to 
pray for the Holy Spirit.” “ My brother,” I replied, “TI 
will tell them to do the very thing that you tell me to tell 
them not to do; for God has said, ‘how much more shall 
your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that 
ask Him.” “Oh, yes,” he said, “but that was before 
Pentecost.” “ All right,” I said, “how about Acts 4:31, 
was that before Pentecost or after?” He replied, “It 
was certainly after.” “ Well,” I said, “take it and read 
it—And when they had prayed the place was shaken 
where they were assembled together; and they were all 
filled with the Holy Ghost, and they spoke the word of 
God with boldness.” ‘‘ How about Acts 8:15, 16, was 
that before or after Pentecost?” ‘ Well,” he said, “it 
was certainly after Pentecost.” I said, “Take it and 


182 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


read it.’ He read, “ Peter and John when they were 
come down, prayed for them, that they might receive the 
Holy Ghost: (for as yet He was fallen upon none of 
them: only they were baptized unto the name of the Lord 
Jesus).” So you may go right through your Bible, and 
after Pentecost.as well as before Pentecost you will find 
both by explicit statement and by illustrative example 
that men and women were “baptized,” or were “ filled 
with the Holy Spirit,” when they prayed, 

But with me this is not a mere matter of mere exegesis. 
If it were, I would believe it whether I had experience or 
not, for when I find a thing written in the Bible I believe 
it, experience or no experience, for I do not believe in 
trying to bring the Bible down to the level of our experi- 
ence but in bringing our experience up to the level of the 
Bible. But with me this is a matter of definite and abso- 
lutely certain experience. I know that God baptizes men 
with the Holy Spirit as they pray, and that He fills those 
that have been baptized with the Holy Spirit anew with 
the Holy Spirit as they pray, just as definitely as I know 
that water quenches thirst and that food satisfies hunger. 
I know it from my own personal experience. How often 
as I have prayed alone, or as I have prayed in the com- 
pany of like-minded believers, the Holy Spirit has fallen 
upon us just as definitely and consciously as I have heard 
the rain falling on the roof of a building or felt it pouring 
down over my whole body. 

Let me give you one illustration. Some years ago the 
ministers of Chicago were holding daily noon prayer- 
meetings in the Y. M. C. A. building in Chicago as a 
preparation for an expected visit of Mr, Moody to that 
city. It was my privilege to preside at those prayer- 
meetings. One noon in the midst of the meeting a 


THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 183 


Baptist minister sprang to his feet and said, “ Brother 
Torrey, what we need here in Chicago is an all-night 
prayer-meeting of the ministers.” “ Very well,” I re- 
plied, “if the ministers of Chicago desire an all-night 
prayermeeting, if they will come up to the Chicago Ave- 
nue Church (the Moody Church) next Friday night at 
ten o'clock, we will have a prayer-meeting and if God 
keeps us there all night we will stay all night, we will stay 
as long as God keeps us.” That night at \ten o’clock, 
perhaps six or seven hundred gathered in the prayer- 
meeting room of the Chicago Avenue Church. They 
were not all ministers. There were many other Christian 
workers, as well as some Christian women, 

Were you ever in a meeting where the devil made a 
dead set to spoil the meeting? Well, that was the kind 
of a meeting that we had at first. For example, three 
men got down near the door at the far end of the room 
by three chairs and commenced to pound and shout and 
shriek in a pretense of prayer, and when someone ex- 
postulated with them, saying that things should “ be done 
decently and in order,” they swore at the man who ex- 
postulated with them. A little later a man sprang to his 
feet over at my left and proclaimed that he was Elijah. 
The man was not to blame, he was a lunatic. There were 
seven of whom I knew in the United States at that time 
who claimed to be Elijah, and he was one of the seven. 
Some of the more timid ones began to think, “ Well, if 
this is the kind of a meeting it is going to be, I am 
going home.” But the great bulk of us were there for 
a blessing and we were determined to stay until we 
got it. 

About midnight God gave us complete victory. All the 
discordant elements were eliminated; and oh! what pray- 


184 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


ing there was from that time on up to a little after two 
in the morning. I think I had never heard such praying 
before and have seldom heard such praying since. At 
2:15 (I know the time, for I had taken out my watch a 
few moments before), we were all on our knees, and 
suddenly the Holy Spirit fell upon us. No one could 
speak, no one could pray, no one could sing. All you 
could hear was the subdued sobbing of joy unspeakable 
and full of glory. It seemed to me as I knelt there that 
if I had looked up I would fairly have seen the Holy 
Spirit in that place. This was early Saturday morning. 
The following morning, Sunday morning, at the close of 
my morning service, one of my deacons came to me, he 
could hardly speak yet, and grasped my hand and whis- 
pered, “ Brother Torrey, I will never forget yesterday 
morning to the latest day of my life.” 

But it was not all mere emotion, no, thank God, no. 
Men went out from that meeting in the early morning 
hours to different places with the power of God resting 
upon them, One business man went down to Missouri 
on an early morning train. After he had transacted his 
business he asked the proprietor of the hotel if there was 
any meeting going on in that town. He replied, “ Yes, 
Brother W.- , there is a protracted meeting going on 
up at the Cumberland Presbyterian Church.” The man 
was a Cumberland Presbyterian himself, and he went up 
to the church, After the meeting was opened, he arose 
in his seat, he was a well known man in his denomination, 
and asked the minister if he could say a few words. ‘The 
minister replied, “Certainly, Brother W——.” ‘That 
man poured out his soul, and a little after I heard that 
there were fifty-eight people converted while he was 
speaking. Another young man, Emil Lindfield, who 








THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 185 


afterwards died as a very successful missionary in South 
Africa, went in the early morning hours to Baraboo, Wis- 
consin, and I soon heard from Baraboo that there had 
been thirty-eight young men and boys converted while 
he spoke. And a little while later, I received a letter from 
a Methodist minister in Wisconsin, near Milwaukee, ask- 
ing me if we had a young man named Samuel J. in 
our Institute. He said that a young man had appeared 
in their midst, a perfect stranger, and said that he was 
Samuel J , of the Bible Institute of Chicago, that he 
had been speaking in the schoolhouses, Methodist Church 
and Soldiers’ Home and that there were conversions 
wherever he spoke. This man also had gone out early 
that morning and up to that section with the Spirit of 
God resting upon him. 

As I went around the world, in 1902 and the years 
that followed, in pretty much every field that I visited, 
Japan, China, New Zealand, Australia, England, Scot- 
land and Ireland, and other lands, I met with men or 
women who had gone out from that meeting with the 
power of God resting upon them. Yes, and we today 
can go out from this meeting to the uttermost parts of 
the earth, with the power of God resting upon us, to 
accomplish mighty things for Him. Yes, beyond the pos- 
sibility of honest question, God does baptize men and 
“women with the Holy Spirit, and fill anew with the Holy | 


Spirit_those..who..haye already beenthus. baptized, as” 
II. Tue SEVENTH STEP 
We have now come to the seventh and last step, in 


some respects the simplest of all and yet to many the 
most difficult of all, and also the place where more people 











186 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


miss the blessing than almost anywhere else. You will 
find this step set forth in the words of Christ in Mark 
11:24: “Therefore I say unto you, what things soever . 






\ ye desire, when ye pray, believe that eive th and 
_ye_shall have,them.. The seventh step is git SMU pl ion. 


‘ expecti Qf LOM GO ANAL. YOU ask THE..BaAr PTISM...WI 
jcHe, Hoty . SPIRI No matter how definite any prom: | 


Ase of God's “Word. may _be, _ we, never. “realize. it,in. our 

Voy expe ence,.until,,.we,..believe..it.. For example, we 
are told in James 1:5, “If any of you lacketh wisdom, 
Jet him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally and 
cupbraideth not; and i shall be given him.” | Now that 
1S certainly unqualifiedly positive, nothing could possibly 
be more positive. But ie did not stop there, he 
went on to say, “ But let, him, aie hing, doubt. 
ing: for he that doubteth is life the ort of ‘the sea 
driven by the wind and tossed. For let not that man 
think that he shall receive anything of the Lord.” Just 
) 80 it is in this matter,.God’s. promise. is. s, definite enough, 
but unless we believe the.promise and confiden : 
\God to do what He has,so, definitely. promised to. do,.our ; 


prayer will ‘bring 1 no result. Here is where a countless 
multitude of earnest seekers for the Baptism with the 
Holy Spirit fail of obtaining the blessing, they do not 
confidently expect. They meet the other conditions, they 
pray definitely and earnestly, but they do not confidently 
expect and therefore they do not get. 


j But there SQ ih tne 


There is a faith’ the hat puts out its hand and takes on Une 


“spot t uething it asks of cat That comes out in 
‘the Revised Version of Mark 24: “Therefore I say 


unto you, all things aherdoevee ye pray and ask for, 
believe that ye have received them, and ye shall have 














THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 187 


them.” (The American Standard Revision has gone back 
to the translation of the Authorized Version, “ believe 
that ye receive them,” but without warrant in the Greek 
text. Indeed, they say themselves in the margin, ‘ Greek, 
received, well if that is the Greek why do they not put 
it into the text, for we ought to know exactly what Jesus 
Christ said). This change in the Revised Version greatly 
bothered me when it first appeared. I got one of the 
earliest copies of the Revised New Testament. You will 
remember that the New Testament came out before the 
Old did, and I secured one of the very earliest copies. 1 
started in at the first chapter of Matthew, at the first 
verse, and noted every change in the Revised Version 
from “the Authorized Version,” and compared them 
both with the best Greek text, and noted every change 
in the margin of my own Bible with my own hand. I do 
not need to do that any longer; for the Oxford Publish- 
ing Company has published a Bible, the Two Version 
Bible, in which the changes are indicated in the margin. 
I got on very nicely for the most part, and saw in how 
many instances the Revised Version was from a better 
Greek text than “the Authorized Version,” or a more 
accurate translation, or a more modern rendering of the 
words and therefore in more easily understandable 
English. But one day I came to Mark 11:24, and I read 
the Authorized Version, “ What things soever ye desire 
when ye pray, believe that ye receive them and ye shall 
have them.” ‘That was plain enough; then I turned to 
the Revised Version and read, “ All things whatsoever ye 
pray and ask for believe that ye have received them and 
ye shall have them.” I said to myself, what nonsense, 
what a confusion of the tenses, “believe that ye have 
received them,” past tense, “and ye shall have them,” 


188 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


future tense, in other words, “ believe that you have re- 
ceived ” and “ you shall have what you have already got.” 

Then I turned to the Greek text, and I found out that 
whether it was sense or nonsense, the Revised Version 
was the right rendering of the Greek text, only it should 
have used the aorist instead of the perfect tense. “ Well,” 
I said, “it must be so, but what does it mean,” and for 
the life of me I could not tell and I did not discover for 
years. But some years later I said to my people in Min- 
neapolis, “I am going to take you through the First Epis- 
tle of John, verse by verse. I will study the verses during 
the week and will give to you on the Lord’s Day what I 
find during the week, and if I find anything in First John 
that does not agree with my theology, I will change my 
theology at that point.” Well, I got on very nicely until 
I got to the last chapter, although I did have to change 
my theology at some points. One day in my study, I 
came to 1 John 5: 14, 15, “ And this is the confidence that 
we have toward Him, that, if we ask anything according 
to His will, He heareth us: and if we know that He 
heareth us whatsoever we ask, we know that we have 
the petitions which we have asked of Him.” And then 
I understood Mark 11:24. Do you see it? 

I see that some of you do and some of you do not. 
Well, I will explain it so that every child here can under- 
stand it. When you come to God in prayer, the first 
question to ask is, “Is that petition that I asked of God 
‘according to His will’?” If it is definitely promised in 
His Word, then, of course, you know it is “according to 
His will.” Now then read 1 John 5: 14, “ And this is the 
confidence that we have toward Him, that, if we ask 
anything according to His will, He heareth us.”, Then 
saying to yourself, “I asked this definite thing, I know 


THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 189 


it is according to God’s will because it is definitely prom- 
ised in His Word, therefore according to 1 John 5:14 I 
know that He has heard me.” Then read the fifteenth 
verse, “ And if we know that He heareth us whatsoever 
we ask, we know that we have the petitions which we 
have asked of Him,” and claim the thing as yours, not 
because you feel it but because God so definitely says so 
in His Word. 

Now apply this to the matter of the Baptism with the 
Holy Spirit. You have taken all the other six steps, and 
you have come to God and asked Him definitely to bap- 
tize you with the Holy Spirit (or, to fill you with the 
Holy Spirit, as the case may be). Then ask yourself, “ Is 
this petition of mine according to His will?” You know 
that it is because Acts 2:39 and Luke 11:13 say so. 
Then read 1 John 5:14, “ This is the confidence that we 
have toward Him, that, if we ask anything according to 
His will, He heareth us.’ Then say, “I asked the Bap- 
tism with the Holy Spirit, I know that is according to His 
will because God says so in Luke 11:13 and Acts 2:39, 
therefore, I know He has heard me.” ‘Then read the fif- 
teenth verse, “and 1f we know that He heareth us what- 
soever we ask, we know that we have the petitions which 
we have asked of Him.” ‘The petition I asked was the 
Baptism with the Holy Spirit, I know He has heard me, 
I know I have what I asked, I kKNow I HAvE THE Bap- 
TISM WITH THE Hoy Spirit. And wuHat you THUS 
TAKE UPON NAKED FAITH IN THE WorpD OF Gop, 
YOU SHALL AFTERWARDS HAVE IN ACTUAL EXPERIMENTAL, 
POSSESSION. 

Let me give you a concrete illustration. Mr. F. B. 
Meyer, of London, and I had gone together to a Students’ 
Conference at Lake Geneva, Wisconsin. He spoke that 


190 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


night on the Baptism with the Holy Spirit. When he 
finished he said, “If any of you wish to speak to Mr. 
Torrey or myself about this matter, we will stay and talk 
with you after the meeting is over.” A young man came 
to me who had just graduated from the Illinois College. 
He said, “I heard of this blessing a month ago and [ 
have been praying for it ever since but I do not get it, 
what is the matter?” I said, “Is your will laid down, is 
your will fully surrendered to God?” He replied, “ No, 
I don’t think it is.” I said, “ Well, your praying will do 
no good until your will is laid down. Will you lay your 
will down now?” He said, “I cannot.” Then I said, 
“ Are you willing that God should lay it down for you?” 
He said, “I am.” Then I said, “ Let us kneel down and 
ask God to do it.” I put two chairs side by side, and we 
knelt down by them. I opened my Bible to 1 John 5:14. 
15 and laid it open on the chair in front of the young 
man. “ Now,’ I said, “ask God to lay your will down 
for you.” He prayed, “ Heavenly Father, lay my will 
down for me, empty me of my self-will, bring my will 
into absolute surrender to Thine own, I ask it in the name 
of the Lord Jesus.” I said, “Is it done?” He said, “It 
must be, I have asked something according to His will 
and I know He has heard me and I know He has done 
what I ask of Him.” I said, “ All right. What is it you 
want?” He replied, “I want the Baptism with the 
Holy Spirit.” I said, “Ask for it.” Again he prayed, 
“ Heavenly Father, baptize me with the Holy Spirit right 
now. I ask it in the name of the Lord Jesus.” I asked, 
“Is it done?” “He said, “ I don’t feel it."oul said) That 
is not what I asked you. Read again the verse before 
you,” and he read, “This is the confidence we have in 
Him, that, if we ask anything according to His will, He 


THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 191 


heareth us.” I said, “ Was what you asked something 
according to His will?” He said, “It was, Luke 11:13 
and Acts 2:39 say so.” Then I said, “ What, then, do 
you know?” He said, “I know He hears me.” “ All 
right, read the next verse,” and he read, “And if we 
know He heareth us whatsoever we ask, we know that 
we have the petitions that we have asked of Him.” I 
said, “ What do you know?” He said, “I know that I 
have the petition that I have asked of Him.” I said, 
“ What is the petition that you asked of Him?” He said, 
“The Baptism with the Holy Spirit.” I said, “ What 
do you know?” He replied, “J know that I have the 
Baptism with the Holy Spirit; I don’t feel it, but God 
says so.” We got up; I had a few more words with him 
and he went to his tent and I went to mine. 

The next morning I took the boat for an early train 
to Chicago. I came back a few days later; I saw this 
young man down in the audience, and standing on the 
platform I looked over to him where he was sitting in 
the amphitheatre and said, “ Did you really receive the 
Baptism with the Holy Spirit?” He did not need to 
answer, for his face told the story. But he did answer, 
that he had. Two or three years later I told this incident 
at a meeting of the Methodist ministers in Chicago, and 
an inquisitive brother asked me, “ Well, what became of 
the young man?” JI had to reply, “I do not know.” 
But within two weeks, as I was sitting in my office in the 
Bible Institute of Chicago, there came a rap at my door. 
I said, “Come in.” A fine-looking young fellow walked 
in. He said, “Do you recognize me?” [I replied, “I 
know I have seen you somewhere, but I cannot place 
you.” Weal, it was this young man. He was now in the 
Chicago Theological Seminary. A few days later a group 


192 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


of students from the Chicago Theological Seminary came 
over to invite me to speak at the seminary on the Day of 

Prayer for Colleges. I asked them how this young man 

was getting on, and they told me he was getting on in a 

wonderful way, that although he was only a middler in 

the seminary, the seminary had already given him a 
church up in Wisconsin, which, they added, was a very 

unusual thing, but they said something better still, “ He 

is having conversions all the time.” 

When The Day of Prayer came, I went over to the 
seminary and spoke on the Baptism with the Holy Spirit 
and the Spirit of God came upon them. After I had left 
the room they began praying in English, French, Nor- 
wegian, Swedish, Danish and German—no supernatural 
gift of tongues, these were the native languages of the 
different students—and President Fiske, President of the 
seminary at that time, wrote to the Boston Congregation- 
alist that they had a perfect Pentecost; and it all came 
through this young fellow who took the Baptism with 
the Holy Spirit by naked faith in the simple Word of 
God, at Lake Geneva, and any one in this auditorium 
this morning can take it the same way right now. 


IV. THREE QUESTIONS 

Now there are some very important questions that 
some of you would like to ask me, so I am going to ask 
them for you. 

1. The first question that some of you will want to 
ask is, MUST WE KNOW NOT THAT WE HAVE THE BAPTISM 
WITH THE HoLy SPIRIT BEFORE WE TAKE UP OUR WORK? 
Yes, we certainly should. Bur How KNow? ‘There are 
two ways of knowing things: First, by the plain state- 
ment of God’s Word, and Second, by experience; and 


THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 193 


knowing by God’s Word is a surer way of knowing than 
knowing by experience. Our experiences, or at least, our 
feelings, come and go, according to what we are eating 
or the state of our health; but the Word of God always 
remains the same; and as we have just seen, you can 
know by the naked Word of God right today that you 
have received the Baptism with the Holy Spirit. Whether 
you have felt it or not, you can claim it by simple faith 
in the inerrantly inspired Word of God. 

2. But some of you will desire to ask a second ques- 
tion, May WE NoT HAVE TO WAIT FOR SOME TIME FOR 
THE BapTisM WITH THE Hoty Spirit just as the 
Apostles had to wait ten days between the day when 
the Lord Jesus gave the promise and Pentecost? In 
answer to this question, I would ask, “Have you 
never noticed that the Bible tells us just why the dis- 
ciples had to wait ten days?” Read Acts 2:1, 2 and 
you will find out just why the disciples had to wait ten 
days: “ And when the day of Pentecost was fully come 
(the Greek is, ‘was being fulfilled’), they were all with 
one accord in one place. And suddenly there came a 
sound from heaven as of the rushing of a mighty wind, 
and it filled all the house where they were sitting.” In 
other words, the Holy Ghost could not come upon them 
until the day of Pentecost had fully come, Way back in 
the Old Testament types, yes, way back in the eternal 
counsels of God, the Day of Pentecost was set for the 
imparting of the gift of the Holy Spirit and the gather- 
ing of the Church; and He could not be given therefore 
until the Day of Pentecost was fully come. But now the 
Day of Pentecost has fully come and THERE IS NO NEED 
OF TARRYING Now. Was there any waiting after Pente- 
cost? Read Acts 4:31, “ And when they had prayed the 


194 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


place was shaken wherein they were gathered together ; 
they were all filled with the Holy Ghost.” 

Was there any waiting in the household of Cornelius? 
They were listening to the first gospel sermon they had 
ever heard and Peter reached the climax of his sermon, 
Acts 10:43, “’To Him (that is, to the Lord Jesus) give 
all the prophets witness, that through His name every 
one that believeth on Him shall receive remission of 
sins,” and instantly they all believed and immediately the 
Holy Ghost fell upon them, right then and there. Was 
there any waiting in the case of Saul of Tarsus? We 
read in Acts 9:17, “ And Ananias departed, and entered 
into the house (that is, the house where Saul of Tarsus 
was waiting in his blindness) ; and laying his hands on 
him said, Brother Saul, the Lord, even Jesus, who ap- 
peared unto thee in the way which thou camest, hath sent 
me, that thou mayest receive thy sight, and be filled with 
the Holy Ghost.” And he took him and baptized him, 
then prayed with him, and immediately he was filled with 
the Holy Ghost, baptized with the Holy Ghost; and we 
read two verses farther down, “ And straightway in the 
synagogues he proclaimed Jesus, that He is the Son of 
God. And all that heard him were amazed and said, is 
not this he that in Jerusalem made havoc of them which 
called on this name? ... But Saul, increased the more 
in strength, and confounded the Jews which dwelt at 
Damascus, proving that this is the Christ.” 

They did have to wait at Ephesus, but simply because 
the fault was entirely in themselves, they did not know 
that the Holy Spirit was yet given; but when Paul told 
them He had been given and they took the necessary 
steps, they were all baptized with the Holy Ghost right 
then and there, before the meeting broke up. So you 


THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 195 


may have to wait, but if so, the reason of waiting will 
not be in God but in yourself. It is the will of God that 
every child of His who has not already been baptized with 
the Holy Spirit should be so baptized today, but you may 
delay the blessing by not resting upon the finished work 
of Christ as the sole ground of your acceptance before 
God, or by not putting away every known sin, or by not 
openly confessing your renunciation of sin and your ac- 
ceptance of Christ before the world, or by not making a 
full surrender to God, or by not desiring the blessing at 
any cost, or by not definitely praying, or by not expect- 
ing and claiming it right here now. But if you do have 
to wait ten days or even ten minutes, the trouble will be 
entirely with you and not with God. ANy ONE oF you 
MAY BE BAPTIZED WITH THE HoLy SPIRIT BEFORE YOU 
LEAVE THIS BUILDING, or if you have already been thus 
baptized, be filled anew. 

3. But there is a third question that some of you will 
wish to ask, and it is a very important one, and that is 
this: WILL, THERE BE NO MANIFESTATION OF THE BAp- 
TISM WITH THE Hoty SPIRIT WHEN WE ARE THUS 
BAPTIZED, AND WILL EVERYTHING BE JUST THE SAME AS 
IT WAS BEFORE, AND IF IT IS, WHAT IS THE GOOD OF IT 
ANYWAY? Yes, indeed, there will be a manifestation; 
but please notice two things: First, the character of the 
manifestation ; Second, the time of the manifestation. 

First, let us take up The Character of the Manifesta- 
tion, or, How the Baptism with the Holy Spirit Will 
Manifest Itself in Your Case. Some of you possibly 
expect the manifestation to be “the gift of tongues,” or 
“ speaking in tongues,” and expect no other; but, as we 
saw the other day, such expectation is entirely unscrip- 
tural and such dictation to the Holy Spirit is contrary to 


296 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


the plain teaching of the Word of God. But some of you 
will expect an entirely different manifestation. Very 
likely you have read the story of the experience of John 
Wesley, and Charles G. Finney, and D. L. Moody. All 
of these tell very nearly the same story. Mr. Finney put 
it about this way, that when he was baptized with the 
Holy Ghost, great waves like electricity swept over him, 
and he had to pray to God to withhold his hand lest he die 
from very ecstasy on the spot. Mr. Moody, though he 
seldom told it, had a somewhat similar experience. Now 
many of you expect something like that. I do not deny 
the reality of these experiences. The word of men like 
Charles G. Finney and D. L. Moody is to be believed; 
and there is another reason why I do not deny them, 
which I probably would better not mention. But I chal- 
lenge any one to show me anywhere in the Bible one 
single record of any such an experience. I am inclined 
to think that the apostles had them; but if they did they 
kept them to themselves, and I am glad they did, for if 
any one of them had described such an experience that is 
what we would all have been looking for. 

What was the manifestation in every case recorded in 
the Bible? SomMx NEW POWER IN SERVICE. On the Day 
of Pentecost, they spoke with the tongues of the different 
people who were there present, spoke “the mighty works 
of God ” in those tongues (Acts 2:6, 8, 11). They were 
understood by the people there present, resulting in a 
great number of definite conversions of people who heard 
them speaking in the tongues in which they were born. 
The “speaking with other tongues ” on this occasion had 
not the slightest resemblance to the “ pee with 
tongues ” of which some boast today. 

In the case of Saul of Tarsus, there was no record of 


THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 197 


his speaking in tongues at that time, although we have 
reason to know that Paul did at some times alone by 
himself speak with tongues, but he declared that in the 
public assembly, “I had rather speak five words with my 
understanding, that by my voice I might teach others 
also, than ten thousand words in a tongue” (1 Cor. 
14:19). What was the manifestation in Paul’s case? 
Turn to Acts 9:17-22, and you will find the manifesta- 
tion was simply this, that he proclaimed Jesus as the 
Christ with irresistible power; and THAT WILL BE THE 
ESSENTIAL CHARACTER OF THE MANIFESTATION IN YOUR 
CASE, NEW POWER IN THE WORK THAT GOD HAS CALLED 
YOU TO DO. 

Now let us look at THE TIME OF THE MANIFESTATION. 
When will the manifestation come? AFTER WE TAKE THE 
BAPTISM WITH THE SPIRIT ON SIMPLE FAITH IN THE 
NAKED Worp oF Gop. God’s order is this: First, God’s 
Word, God’s promise; Second, our faith in the Word of 
God, simply because God says it; Third—experience. 
The human heart tries to change God’s order and have 
First, the Word, the promise of God; Second, experience ; 
and then Third, faith. But that is not faith at all, Take 
the case of Abraham. God told Abraham that he was to 
be a father of many nations. Abraham had no reason 
for believing it other than the Word of God. In itself it 
was incredible; he was 100 years old and his wife nearly 
that, They were both beyond the age of having children, 
but the record is that “ Abraham believed God,’ and 
“God reckoned” Abraham’s simple faith in the unsup- 
ported Word of God (just because God said it) “ for 
righteousness.” Abraham had no thrills then! No, just 
God’s Word, that and that alone. He had thrills enough 
when the child was born, and he saw Isaac with his own 


198 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


eyes, because he believed God’s naked Word, T HE ONE 
THING THAT GOD DEMANDS OF MEN IS THAT MEN BE- 
LIEVE WHAT HE SAYS JUST BECAUSE HE says IT; that’s 
faith. Whenever you require some feeling or some ex- 
perience before you believe God’s Word, you are making 
God a liar. 

Take my own experience. I had been a minister for 
some years before I came to the place where I saw that 
I had no right to preach until I was definitely baptized 
with the Holy Ghost. I went to a business friend of mine 
and said to him in private, “I am never going to enter 
my pulpit again until I have been baptized with the Holy 
Spirit and know it, or until God in some way tells me to 
go.” Then, just as far as I could, I shut myself up alone 
in my study and spent the time continually on my knees 
asking God to baptize me with the Holy Spirit. As the 
days passed, the devil tried to tempt me by saying, “ Sup- 
pose Sunday comes and you are not baptized with the 
Holy Spirit, what then?” I replied, “ Whatever comes, 
I will not go into my pulpit and preach again until I have 
been baptized with the Holy Spirit and know it, or God 
in some way tells me to go; even though I have to tell 
my people that I have never been fit to preach.” But 
Sunday did not come before the blessing came. I had it 
more or less definitely mapped out in my mind what 
would happen; but what I had mapped out in my mind 
did not happen. I recall the exact spot where I was 
kneeling in prayer in my study. I could go to the very 
spot in that house at 1348 N. Adams St., Minneapolis. 
It was a very quiet moment, one of the most quiet mo-. 
ments I ever knew; indeed, I think one reason I had to 
wait so long was because it took that long before my soul 
could get quiet before God. Then God simply said to 


THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 199 


me, not in any audible voice, but in my heart, “ It’s yours. 
Now go and preach.” Oh, if I had only known my Bible 
better. He had already said it to me in His Word in 
1 John 5:14, 15; but I did not then know my Bible as 
well as I know it now, and God had pity on my igno- 
rance and said it directly to my soul. You do not need 
to have it said directly to your soul; for I have shown it 
to you this morning in His Word. 

I went and preached, and I have been a new minister 
from that day to this. I was then the pastor of a very 
small and obscure church, though I had taken two degrees 
at Yale and had studied at two German universities, But 
from that time my field began to wonderfully enlarge until 
at last I had preached the gospel around the world and 
had seen I suppose hundreds of thousands converted to 
Christ. 

Some time after this experience (I do not recall just 
how long after), while sitting in my room one day, that 
very same room, I recall just where I was sitting, before 
my revolving bookcase, I do not know whether I was 
thinking about this subject at all, I do not remember, but 
suddenly, as near as I can describe it, though it does not 
exactly describe it, I was struck from my chair on to the 
floor and I found myself shouting (I was not brought up 
to shout and I am not of a shouting temperament, but I 
shouted like the loudest shouting Methodist) “glory to 
God, glory to God, glory to God,” and I could not stop. 
I tried to stop, but it was just as if some other power 
than my own was moving my jaws. At last, when I had 
succeeded in pulling myself together, I went down-stairs 
and told my wife what had happened. But that was not 
when I was baptized with the Holy Spirit. I was bap- 
tized with the Holy Spirit when I took Him by simple 


200 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


faith in the naked Word of God, and any one of you can 
be thus baptized today, yes, you can be thus baptized 
before you leave this building this afternoon. God grant 
that you may be. What I am trying to get you to do 
more than all else is just to get you to believe God’ 


Word without any other guarantee and.to.take.the Bap-| 
tism with the Holy Spirit by simple faith.in God’s Word. 


~~ Let me tell you one more incident before I close. July’ 

8, 1894, I was at a Students’ Convention at Northfield, 
Mass. The preceding night I had spoken in Stone Hall 
upon “The Baptism with the Holy Spirit; What It Is, 
What It Does, Who Needs It, and Who Can Have It,” 
and now the closing Sunday morning service was being 
held in the Congregational Church, and I was speaking 
on “The Baptism with the Holy Spirit, How To Obtain 
It.” I said very much what I have said to you this after- 
noon and yesterday afternoon. As I finished, I took out 
my watch and saw that it was exactly twelve o’clock. I 
turned to that great body of students and said, “ Mr. 
Moody has invited us to go up on the mountain this after- 
noon at three o’clock to pray that we may receive the 
Holy Spirit. It is now exactly twelve o’clock, it is three 
hours to three o’clock, some of you cannot wait three 
hours and you do not need to. Go to your room in the 
hotel, go to your room in the buildings, go to your tent, 
go out into the woods, go anywhere where you can get 
alone with God and have this matter out with God.” 

That afternoon at three o’clock we all met up in front 
of Mr. Moody’s mother’s house, she was still living then. 
Then we went down through the lane and through the 
gate, 456 of us in all, Paul Moody counted us as we went 
through the gate. Four hundred and fifty-six men from 
Yale, Harvard Amherst, Dartmouth and other Eastern 









THE BAPTISM WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT 201 


colleges, and went up the mountain side. After we had 
gone some distance, Mr. Moody said, “I think we do not 
need to go any farther, let us stop here.” He sat down 
on a stump, others sat down on logs, or on the ground. 
Mr. Moody said, “ Before we go to God in prayer, have 
any of you anything to say?” One after another of those 
men arose, I should think about seventy-five in all (as I 
recall it), and said in substance, “ Mr. Moody, I could 
not wait until three o’clock, I have been alone with God 
and I believe I have been baptized with the Holy Spirit.” 
When these testimonies were over, Mr. Moody said, “I 
can see no reason why we should not kneel down right 
here now and ask God that the Holy Spirit may come 
upon us just as definitely as He came upon the Apostles 
on the Day of Pentecost. Let us pray.” We knelt in 
prayer, some of us lay on the ground on our faces (there 
were no women present; all men), and we began to pray. 
As we had gone up the mountain side clouds had been 
gathering over the mountain, and as we began to pray, 
the clouds broke and the raindrops began to fall upon us 
through the overhanging pine needles, But another cloud 
‘had been gathering over Northfield for ten days, a coud! 
_big with the grace and power of God. As we began to 
‘pray our prayers seemed to pierce that cloud, and the 
/Hol Ghost fell upon us. jf 
* "Men and women, if T am any judge, a cloud has been 
“ gathering over this building for some days, a cloud big 
with the grace and power of God. Why not pierce that 
cloud with our prayers right now? 








Printed in the United States of America 


oe 


| te wh 
ye 35 


4 





























~pti21 .155_ ee 
~A. (Reuben Archer) , 
| Ey Git : who he is and what Ne Uy 


a ee 106977 


|, Br 
oat bak 
| T55 Torry, hasta 690% 
| The Holy Spirit, who | 
he is and what he dos 
es. 
| DATE DUE Fi 8 Mprrower’s NAME 
/ 
F 
1 
Torry 


Holy 


THEOLOGY LIBRARY 
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY AT CLAREMONT 
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA 


i 
i 


pa ens 
A) Mh in ; 
Hy a 





