of Theology 


“Til 





| 


at Claremont 


II 





AO: 


CEA 
a Zi ee Gt Oa 


ERE hs. BAS! 4 








Themen nara 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 
California 








THE HOLY SPIRIT in 
the NEW TESTAMENT 


: 

> ai AN EXEGETICAL EXAMINATION 

2) OF EVERY NEW TESTAMENT REF- 
ERENCE TO THE SPIRIT OF GOD 


2 
4 3 A TEXT BOOK FOR SEMINARIES, 
BIBLE INSTITUTES AND ALL 
CHRISTIAN WORKERS AND 

BIBLE STUDENTS 


BY 


ARNO CLEMENS GAEBELEIN 


aE 
Editor of “Our Hope”, author of the 
Annotated Bible in nine volumes 
and numerous other books 


PUBLICATION OFFICE “OUR HOPE” 
456 FOURTH AVENUE 
NEW YORK, N. Y. 


Uamversity of Southern alitorman 


Relqer 23) G17 h 


CHAPTER I 


The Promises of the Gift of the Holy Spirit in the 
Old Testament 


Transtersed | ° 


\ 


\ HEN Moses complained to the Lord on account 
: of Israel murmuring at Taberah, and confessed 
that the burden of the people was too heavy for him, 
the Lord told him to gather seventy men of the elders, 
and that He would give them the Spirit, who rested 
upon himself, so that they might bear the burden 
with him. When it was done the elders prophesied. 
Two of the seventy had not gone outside of the camp 
to the tabernacle, Eldad and Medad, but they also 
prophesied in the camp. Then Joshua rushed up to 
Moses and informed him of this fact, adding a demand, 
“My lord Moses, forbid them.” Moses answered him, 
“Enviest thou for my_sake? Would God that all the 
_ Lord’ s people were prophets and that the Lord would 
| put His Spirit upon them” (Num. xi:1-29). 

Moses knew that the only remedy for the unbe- 
lieving and complaining people was the Spirit of God. 
But in his wish he expressed something more. It 
becomes in later prophecy a definite promise for the 
nation God has chosen as His earthly people, that they 
were to receive the Holy Spirit and that the whole 
nation should be Spirit-filled. In Exodus xix:5-6 the 
calling of Israel is stated. They are to be, says the 
Lord, “‘A peculiar treasure unto Me (see Matt. xiii:44) 
above all people, for all the earth is Mine. And ye 
shall be to Me a kingdom of priests, and a holy nation.” 
In Deut. vii:6 we read, “For thou art an holy people 





2 GHA Pe Re 


unto the Lord thy God; the Lord thy God hath chosen 
'-thee to be a special people unto Himself, above all 
\ people that are upon the face of the earth.” ‘Two 
things are necessary for the. realization. of this calling, 
rédémption and ‘the Holy Spirit. It will be noticed 
that the’ calling stated.in the nineteenth chapter of 
Exodus. is conditional. It is in connection with the 
inauguration of the law-covenant. We read, “If ye 
will obey My.voice,..and keep My covenant, then ye 
shall be to Me a peculiar treasure.” As they were un- 
circumcised in their hearts, they could not keep His 
~ covenants nor walk in His ways as a nation. If their 
calling is to be realized they must have a circumcised 
SOO RTCE TE | 
heart (Deut. xxx:6), in other words, be born again, 
which is the result of..cedemption and. the..Spirit..of 
God. The law covenant says nothing about redemp- 
tion and a circumcised heart, because by the works 
of the law no one can be justified, nor receive the bless- 
ings of redemption. Neither does the law covenant 
promise to him who keeps the law the gift of the Holy 
Spirit (see Gal. ii1:2). 

The prophetic Word reveals the great future of the 
people Israel, when they shall be a holy nation, a 
kingdom of priests, a nation born again, a nation filled 
with the Spirit, a nation which ‘will show forth the 
Lord’s glory. This future will be realized through 
grace, when the remnant of Israel in the latter days 
turns to the once rejected Messiah, the pierced One, _ 
upon whom they look (Zech. xii:10). In connection 
with their future conversion as a nation, the fulfilment 
of the many promises of earthly glory, such as their 
restoration to their land and the kingdom, the gift of 
the Holy Spirit is prominently mentioned. 


CTA Pais ke I 3 


We shall examine briefly certain passages upon the 
understanding of which a great deal depends if we want 
to grasp the teachings of the New Testament as to the 
Holy Spirit. 

The first Scripture we select is Isaiah xxxii:13-18. 

“Upon the land of my people shall come up thorns 
and briers, yea, upon all the houses of joy in the joy- 
ous city; because the palaces shall be forsaken, the 
multitude of the city shall be left, the forts and towers 
shall be dens for ever, a joy of wild asses, a pasture of 
flocks; until the Spirit be poured upon us from on high, 
and the wilderness be a fruitful field, and the fruitful 
field be counted for a forest. Then judgment shall 
dwell in the wilderness, and righteousness remain in a 
fruitful field. And the work of righteousness shall be 
peace, and the effect of righteousness quietness and 
assurance forever. And my people shall dwell in a 
peaceable habitation, and in dwellings, and in quiet 
resting places.” 

We notice that this passage begins with a prophecy 
announcing that the curse of the Lord would rest upon 
Israel’s land. Thorns and briers, symbolical of the 
curse, would change Israel’s land into a wilderness, _ 
while the joyous city would be forsaken. This, how- ‘v 
ever, is not to be the permanent condition of the land. 
The time is to come when the wilderness will become 
again a fruitful field, when peace, the work of right-* 
eousness will prevail, when the people scattered and 
driven about among the nations, shall dwell in a 
peaceable habitation, in sure dwellings, and quiet 
resting places. The great change will come, when “the 
Spirit_is poured out_from.on high.” Inasmuch as the 
national and earthly blessings for Israel and Israel’s 


4. CHAT 1 Phage 


land have not yet come, and these blessings can only 
be realized by the Spirit poured upon them, there is 
yet to come the outpouring of the Spirit of God upon 
that people. 

We cite another passage from Isaiah, chapter xliv: 
2-5. 

“Thus saith the Lord that made thee, and formed 
thee from the womb, who will help thee; Fear not, O 
Jacob, my servant; and thou Jeshurun, whom I have 
chosen. For I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, 
and floods upon the dry ground. I will pour my Spirit 
upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thy offspring. 
And they shall spring up as among the grass, as willows 
by the watercourses. One shall say, I am the Lord’s; 
and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob; 
and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the 
Lord, and surname himself by the name of Israel.” 

This passage looks forward to the day when Israel 
is converted and knows the Lord. The outpouring of 
the Spirit of God is here likewise a leading feature. 

The xxxvi chapter of Ezekiel is a great chapter deal- 
ing with Israel’s future restoration blessings, and with 
their new birth as a nation before the kingdoin is 
restored unto them. When our Lord said to Nico- 
demus in the third chapter of John’s Gospel, “Art thou 
the teacher in Israel and knowest not these things?’’, 
He had the thirty-sixth chapter of Ezekiel in His 
mind. There is a beautiful chronological order in the 
closing chapters of Ezekiel. In the thirty-sixth.chap- 
ter the national conversion of Israel is predicted. In 
the next..chapter-we behold. their ‘national_restoration, 
as. seen. in the.vision. of the valley.of.dry.bones. The 
union of the house of Judah with the house of Israel 


CHAPTER I 5 


follows. In chapters xxxviii and xxxix the prophetic 
history is recorded of the last invasion of Israel’s land 
by Gog and Magog and their complete defeat. From 
the fortieth chapter to the end we hear of the great 
temple to be erected during the millennium, of the 
division of the land and the glory of the earthly Jerusa- 
lem. In the thirty-sixth chapter the people Israel are 
first of all reminded of their past history of sin and 
shame, as well as the judgment which the Lord meted 
out_to them asa nation. “Wherefore I poured my 
fury upon them for the blood that they had shed upon 
the land, and for their idols wherewith they had pol- 
luted it; and I scattered them among the nations, and 
they were dispersed through the countries; according 
to their way and according to their doings I judged 
them. And when they entered unto the nations, 
whither they went, they profaned my holy name, 
when they said to them, These are the people of the 
Lord, and are gone forth out of this land” (verses 
18-20). The dispersion which is mentioned here is not 
the Babylonian captivity, but it is the great disper- 
sion among all the nations. Then the Lord reveals 
their future. He does not say that they have repented 
and have become righteous by keeping the law, but 
He is gracious and merciful unto them that His great 
name may be sanctified, that the world might know 
the depths of His mercy. The first promise as to their 
future is contained in verse 24, “For I will take you 
from among the nations, and gather you out of all 
countries, and will bring you into your own land.” 
This is their restoration and it will be seen that it is 
accomplished by the Lord Himself and not by their 
own political efforts, as we witness today in Zion- 


Fe 


6 CHAP A ae 


ism. The Lord who made a covenant with Abraham 
and promised to him and to his seed the land, which 
he never possessed, will bring them again to their land. 
Next we read of their cleansing. ‘“Then will I sprinkle 
clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean; from all 
rout filthiness, and from your idols, will I cleanse 
you.” It is folly to quote this verse, as it has been 
done, to show that sprinkling is sa only scriptural 
mode of baptism. ‘It has nothing whatever to do with. 
baptism nor with the church, The foolish spiritual- 
izing of the national promises which belong to Israel 
has worked, and is still working, untold harm. The 
Lord in His grace will cleanse them from their sins 
and defilement. As Paul states by the Spirit of God, 
“This is my covenant unto them, when I shall take 
away their sins” (Rom. xi:27). The prophetic Word 
contains many promises as to their national cleansing. 
Their cleansing is followed by the new birth of the 
nation, “A new heart also will I give you, and a new 
spirit will I put. within you,.and I will take away ‘the 
stony heart out_of your. flesh, and I will give you a 
heart of flesh. “This is the circumcision of their heart 
(Deut. xxx:6). Next to the promise of their rebirth, 
when their iniquity will be removed in one day (Zech. 
i1i:9) and the nation will be born in a day (Isa, lxvi:7-8), 
we find the gift of the Spirit. “And I will put my 
Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my stat- 
utes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them. 
And ye shall dwell in the land that I gave to your 
fathers, and ye shall be my people, and I will be your 
God.” The Holy Spirit is bestowed upon them as a | 
nation and the result will be their sanctification and 
walk of righteousness. Over and over again in this 


CATACRDE RE 7 


chapter we read the divine “I will,”’ the word of sov- 
ereign grace. The remnant of Israel living in that 
day will be saved, blessed, cleansed, born again and 
filled with the Spirit by grace. 

When we turn to the last verse of the thirty-ninth 
chapter we find the statement again that the Lord has 
gathered them out of all nations and brought them 
back to their land. Then the final assurance, “Neither 
will I hide my face any more from them, for I have 
poured out my Spirit upon the house of Israel, saith 
the Lord God.” No intelligent believer will claim that 
this has taken place, nor will any one who divides the 
Word of Truth rightly say, as we read in commen- 
taries, that it will never be fulfilled in Israel, but has 
found its fulfillment in the church. 

The second chapter in the prophecy of Joel con- 
tains the most outstanding prediction and promise as 
to the outpouring of the Holy Spirit in connection with 
the chosen people of God, the nation Israel. We refer 
the reader to our larger exposition of the Book of Joel, 
in which the writer examines every detail of this in- 
teresting prophecy and shows its relation to the com- 
ing Yom Jehovah, the Day of the Lord. The proph- 
ecy of the outpouring of the Spirit is found in chapter 
11:28-32, “‘And it shall come to pass afterward, that I 
will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh; and your sons 
and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall 
dream dreams, your young men shall see visions. And 
also upon the servants and the handmaids in those 
days will I pour out my Spirit. And I will show won- 
ders in the heavens and in the earth, blood, fire, and 
pillars of smoke. The sun shall be turned into dark- 
ness, and the moon into blood, before the great and 


8 CHA Pare Rae 


the terrible day of the Lord come. And it shall come 
to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the 
Lord shall be delivered, for in Mount Zion and in 
Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord hath said, 
and in the remnant whom the Lord shall call.” 

The context shows when this great prophecy will 
be fulfilled. That it is a Jewish national promise is so 
plainly written in this chapter that one must be wil- 
fully blind in not seeing it. The first part of the chap- 
ter gives a prophetic description of the coming great 
tribulation, the time of Jacob’s trouble, preceding the 
Day of the Lord, which brings the visible manifesta- 
tion of the Lord for the deliverance of the remnant of 
Israel. Jerusalem is in great distress once more. Then 
a remnant turns to the Lord and calls upon Him. He 
answers and pities His people. The enemy from the 
north, who had invaded the land, is repulsed. The 
Lord does great things. The former rain and the 
latter rain comes upon the land, and what the locusts 
had devoured, devastating the land, will be restored. 
It is Bible interpretation gone to seed when a certain 
woman-leader in Los Angeles claims that all this 
means the church and that she herself has a prominent 
part in the fulfilment of this prophecy. Such egotism 
is obnoxious to every true child of God. The proph- 
ecy as to the great outpouring of the Spirit is closely 
related to the Day of the Lord. It can therefore not 
be fulfilled as long as this day has not come. Here, 
again, these latter day delusionists, a good many of 
whom are women, claim fulfillment. They try to justify 
their speaking “in tongues,” usurping authority over 
man, taking the place as’ teacher, by the passage 
before us, because it says, “‘your daughters shall 


Cre Atrio er 1 9 


prophesy.” They claim to have visions; we do not 
doubt that they are visions, but certainly not the 
visions of God, but lying visions. All these delusions 
might have been avoided and also with it the havoc 
and heartaches among a certain class of Christians, if 
the context had been studied. They would have dis- 
covered that all this has nothing whatever to do with 
the church of Jesus Christ and with the present_age. 
We mention the quotation of this passage by Peter 
on the day of Pentecost in the chapter on “The Holy 
Spirit in the Book of Acts.” 

The third chapter in Joel shows what else will take 
place in that day, when Israel is saved and the Holy 
Spirit is poured out upon them. We give one more 
passage. In Zechariah xii:10 we read: ‘“‘And I will 
pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabi- 
tants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace and of supplica- 
tions, and they shall look upon Me, whom they have 
pierced, and they shall mourn for Him, as one that 
mourneth for his only son, and shall be in bitterness 
for Him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn.” 
This also is future and its fulfillment awaits the day 
when they shall see Him coming in the clouds of 
heaven and shall know Him by the prints of the nails 
in His hands and His feet. 

We give a summary. The promise of the gift of 
the Holy Spirit in the Old Testament is confined to the 
people Israel. The Spirit of God will be given to them | 
in the day of their restoration, when the Lord is mani- | 
fested. The promise is therefore unfulfilled. Nowhere © 
do we read in the Old Testament that the Spirit of . 
God is to be given to the Gentiles, that Gentiles are 
to be united with believing Hebrews in one body and 


10 CHAP Tick] I] 


that the middle wall of partition was to be broken 
down. Nor do we read the promise in the prophets 
that believing sinners should receive the Spirit of Son- 
ship, by whom they are enabled to cry “Abba, Father,” 
that their bodies become the temples of the Holy Spirit. 
Not a word is said, furthermore, about the Holy Spirit 
sealing the believer until the day of redemption, and 
that He is the earnest of the purchased possession, 
abiding in the believer. Nor is there a word as to the 
gifts of the Spirit and the unity of the Spirit. Old 
Testament believers were visited by the Spirit and 
guided as well as helped by Him, but the teachings of 
the New. Testament. concerning the Spirit, and the 
blessings and relationships, all the results..of..the 
finished work of Christ on.the cross, were unknown_to 
them. 

We are now prepared to examine the different refer- 
ences in the New Testament Scriptures dealing with 
the Holy Spirit. What we have written as to the rela- 
tion of Israel to the Holy Spirit we shall have occasion 
to mention again. 


CHAPTER II 
The Holy Spirit in the Synoptic Gospels 


HE first three Gospel records of Matthew, Mark 

and Luke are called the Synoptic Gospels. Mat- 
thew gives us the record of our Lord as the promised 
King, who came as such and offered the kingdom, only 
to be rejected by His own; Mark gives the record of 
Christ as servant and Luke the record of His perfect 
manhood. The first chapter in Matthew mentions the 
Holy Spirit for the first time. 

Matthew i:18. ‘Now the birth of Jesus Christ was 
on this wise: When as His mother Mary was espoused 
to Joseph, before they came together, she was found 
with child of the Holy Spirit.”* When Joseph thought 
of putting her away an angel informed him that “that 
which is conceived in her is of the Holy Spirit” (verse 
20). When Gabriel brought the heavenly announce- 
ment to Mary, the Virgin mother of our Lord, he 
mentioned the Holy Spirit likewise. Luke i:35, “The 

‘Holy Spirit-shall. come upon thee, and the power of the 
Highest shall overshadow thee, therefore also that 
ead thing which shall be born of thee shall be called 
the Son of God.” 
The Holy Spirit produced the human.body.for the 
Son of God.by.a.creative.act. Of that body the Son of 
God spoke as a prepared body (Heb. x:5). It was 





*We use the word “Spirit” throughout instead of “Ghost.” 
The only difference is that “Ghost” is an Anglo-Saxon word and 
Spirit is Latin from Spiritus. The Greek has but one word, 
“Pneuma.” 


11 


12 CHAP TL Raid 


impossible for One who is absolutely holy to clothe 

Himself with a body coming into existence by the 

natural generation. Ifthat had been the case He would 

have had a body to which the taint of sin was attached. 

While it is true that Mary had a body which was sinful, 

yet the power of holiness in the Son of God, repulsed 

every particle of that, and the Holy Spirit in preparing 
the body could not permit anything unholy to enter the 
physical body of our Lord. 

“& This is typically indicated in the meal offering 
(Lev. ii). The meal-offering (erroneously called ‘‘meat- 
offering’’) speaks of the holy humanity of our Lord. It 
consisted of fine flour, unleavened, mixed with.oil and 
frankincense put upon it. No meal offering was _per- 
mitted to have leaven in it, nor any honey. Salt was 
to be offered with it. 

The fine white flour stands for His spotless humanity. 
The oil is the emblem of the Holy Spirit. He.was.con- 
ceived bythe Holy Spirit, Leaven is the type of evil 
and.sin. There was no evil nor sin in Him. _Frank- 

incense denotes worship. Honey, which was also  for-) 

/ bidden, is symbolical of the amiableness of the natura]/ 

‘man. All what was in Him was the result of His own 
holy character. Salt typifies the separating power.of 
holiness. ‘The Holy Spirit is thus eminently identified 
with the physical body of our Lord. 

7 Luke i:15, 41 and 67. These passages also mention 
the Holy Spirit. John, the forerunner was. filled with / 
the Holy Spirit from his mother’s womb. Elisabeth, / 


the mother of John, was filled with the Holy Spirit, and ; 


so was Zechariah when he prophesied. The trinity is 
therefore seen. in, holy. action in, the very-beginning of 
the New Testament. The 


EAGLE 





)) 


CHA REE RT-L 1a 
Son of God came to be incarn te. The Holy | spisit 





Spirit. John w was filled wi 

Zechariah and Elisabeth. ~The saie ts said’ a 

who had received a special revelation by the Spirit and 

was led by Him to the temple (Luke ii:25). 

Matthew iii:11-12. “I indeed baptize you with 

water unto repentance, but He that cometh after me is 

mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear; 

He shall baptize you with the Holy Spirit-and.with fire; 

whose. fan is in His hand, and id He vy will 1 purge His floor, 

and gather ‘His wheat into the garn garner but He will burn 

up the chaff with unquenchable fire” (Mark i:18 and 

Luke iii:16 and 17 and the reference to the same 

promise in John i:33). These are fundamental 

passages and need our closer attention. 

We must remember that John, the Baptist, as we call 

him, was the herald of the King. He still belonged.to 
the Old Testament prophets and did not—announce ‘!” 
under the name “the kingdom.of-heaven,” the church, 

nor this present dispensation of grace, but.the kingdox kingdom, ink 
which is-promised.to_Israel. The baptism which he sae 
practised is not Christian baptism. It was a baptism [}? rise 
unto repentance by which the Israelite signified that 

he was worthy of death on account of his sins. Then he 

announced that He, who came after him, the Messiah- 

King, would baptize. them with the Holy Spirit.and 

with fire. Every Jew who knew the Scriptures and the 
‘promise of God as to the gift of the Spirit must have \ 
understood by this statement, that these promises were | 

to be accomplished for the nation through the.Messiah, / 

‘the Son of David, on the condition of repentance 


The baptism with fire is something entirely different 


14 CHAP i Uk wrt 


and has-nothing.whateverto-do-with the baptism with 
the Spirit. Strange confusion exists here. ‘There are 


‘certain sects which actually differentiate between the 


baptism with the Spirit and the baptism with fire. 
They teach, that a believer may be baptized with the 
Spirit and not be baptized with fire. Then they 
exhort others to “‘seek the fire baptism,’’ which they 
claim, is evidenced by some startling outward 
phenomenas, falling to the floor and talking in a strange 
oe) etc. ‘The men who teach that a believer must 

“seek” a _baptism_ with the Holy Spirit. after he has 
been born again are responsible for a good deal of the 
confusion which exists among Christians. This fact is 


taken up elsewhere in this volume. 


The baptism with fire did not take place on the day 
of Pentecost, nor is there a baptism with firenow. The 
baptism with fire means the judgments. which will be 
executed with the. “second coming of our Lord. “The 
words of our Lord demonstrate this. He ‘speaks of 
gathering His wheat (the children of the kingdom) into 
his garner and of burning the chaff with unquenchable 
fire (see Matt. xiii:37-43). It is the fire ire baptism of 
judgment which He will bring, to. gto this ‘earth when He 
returns. The word ai is used differently. There 


\ baptism stism with enae yment. “Our Lord ae used the 


word baptism when He said “‘But I have a baptism to 
be baptized with, and how am I straitened till it be 
accomplished” (Luke xii:50). It was His suffering and 


_ His death to which He referred.as.a baptism. The 


conclusive evidence that the fire baptism has nothing 
to do with the baptism with the Spirit is found in 
Acts i:5 “For John truly ‘baptized “with water, but ye 


) 


Ciba Pr Reo bt 15 


shall be baptized with the Holy Spirit not many days 
hence.” The Lord omitted “and with fire’? because 
there is no such thing as a fire baptism during the 
present age. 

Matthew iii:16. “‘And Jesus, when He was baptized, 
went up straightway out of the water, and, lo, the 
heavens were opened unto Him, and He saw the 
Spirit of God descending like a dove, and lighting upon 
Him. And lo a voice from heaven, saying, This is my 
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased” (see also 
Mark i:10-11; Luke iii:21-22, and John i:32-34). 


With His baptism in peee ceed eole our Lord entered upon 


His official ministry as “‘a minister of the cir > circumcision 


for the truth of God, to -o confirm. the Promises 1 made unto 


the fathers (Rom. xv:8). As John said, “He needed \ 


not to be baptized.” In His baptism ie showed forth | 
the BueRsss. LhElis,< coming into t] the world; He came to. 


take the sinner’s place i in death. Tn ‘His baptism there 


is also indicated His resurrection, His _ ascension, the 


gift of the Spirit and the ‘dedlatation of S Sonship. 


1 Sober toate 


upon-Him anointing Him 
for the great work He.came.to.do. This also is seen 
in a typical way in the meal offering, for oil was not 
only to be mixed with fine flour (His incarnation) but 
before the meal offering was exposed to the fire (typ- 
ical of His sufferings), oil was poured upon it. So our 
Lord before He began His work as the Prophet, in His 
public ministry, ending with His death on the cross, 
was anointed with the Spirit. Many in Old Testament 
times _were_ also. anointed with the Spirit to do the 
work into which the Lord had. called them. But there 
is a difference between them and our Lord. The 


Spirit of God came upon prophets, priests and kings 





wy 


ff 


' 
i 


16 CHCA PAL GR? 


in a certain measure, but John iii:34 tells us that the 
Spirit was not upon Him by measure, that is, He did 
not receive a portion of the Spirit, but the Spirit, the 
Person Himself came upon Him. This is a blessed 
indication how those who are dead with Christ and 
risen with Him should also receive the Spirit, not by 
measure, but He Himself, the third person of the 
Trinity, comes to dwell in their hearts. 

He came upon Him in the form of a dove. The 
Holy Spirit took the emblem of a dove. The charac- 
teristics.of the dove are too well known, its.lowliness 
and harmlessness, to need.further.mention. Even so 
He manifested meekness and lowliness, the dove char- 
acter; He did not cry, nor lift up, nor cause His voice 
to be heard in the street. If one visits nowadays cer- 
tain meetings of the Pentecostalites and other sects, 
and sees the disorder, the howling noises and emational 
fits, all claimed to be the operation of the Spirit of 





. God,-one feels at once that all is contrary to the Holy 


Spirit, the Spirit of order, quietness and peace. 
Matthew iv:1. “Then. was Jesus, led up.of.the.Spirit 
into the wilderness to be tested.of,.the.devil.” Also 
Mark i:12 and Luke iv:1. The passage in Luke tells 
us that Jesus was full of the Holy Spirit and_was led 
by the Spirit to be tested of the devil. The Son of 
God full of the Spirit is now guided by the Spirit to 
fulfill all which is written, concerning. Himself. The 
life He lived before He began His public ministry was 
also a life of perfect trust and obedience (see Psa. 
xxii:9-10). The Spirit, as Mark states, drove Him 
into the wilderness. Some have said, that our Lord 
was anxious to meet the enemy face to face. That it 
was His own spirit which led Him into the wilderness. 


( 


CHART BR, Li 17 


This-is_incorrect. If our Lord had gone forth impa- 
tiently to meet the old serpent, He would have been 
the tempter of the devil. It was the Holy Spirit who 
led Him forward, who impelled Him to meet the foe, so 
that a test. ae eg be applied by.Him, to find out that 
He is the Son of God, the holy One. There are two 
Teasons why the Son of God could not sin. The first 


sin. The second is because the Holy. ‘Spirit, of God 
was upon ‘Him and He is the Spirit. of holiness. 

“Matthew xii:18, Luke iv:14, 18. These three pas- 
sages describe His ministry in the power of the Spirit. 
Matthew quotes Isaiah’s prophecy, who spoke of Him 
as the Spirit filled servant of the Lord. Luke tells us 
that after His victory over the devil He returned “‘in 
the_power of the Spirit into Galilee.” As God mani- 
fested in the flesh our Lord had power over all things. 
He had omnipotence and omniscience. But the Spirit 
of God also acted in Him and through Him. His 
words were the words of the Spirit, of life and of power. 
His works were also done in the power of the Spirit. 
Luke quotes Isaiah ]x1:1-2. 

Matthew xii:28. “But if. in YT cast out demons by the 
Spirit of God, then the ‘kingdom is come unto you.” 
These words were occasioned by the blasphemous 
charge that our Lord used Beelzebub, the prince of 
demons, in His work of delivering the victims of demon 
possession. His divine logic shows the fallacy of such 
a charge. 

Matthew xii:31-33: Mark iii:29-30, Luke xii:10. 
Here our Lord speaks of the. blasphemy against the 
Holy .S pirit, the sin for which there is no forgiveness 
neither i in | this world ‘nor in the world to come; he who 


= 


. pe nee 


18 CHAPTER alt 


commits this sin is in danger of eternal damnation. 
What is the blasphemy, or sin, against the Holy Spirit? 
Apart from these three passages this sin is nowhere 
else mentioned in the New Testament. Satan has 
often used the statement of our Lord, leading souls 
into despair, as under his accusation they charge them- 
selves with having committed the unpardonable sin. 
The context explains what that sin is. ‘The scribes 
which charged the Lord that He had the spirit of 
Beelzebub, used his’ ‘power, and. not the , power of the 


a ae 


Spirit of God, were e guilty c of that. _ blasphemy. They 
did so against their better “knowledge. In this sense 
the blasphemy against the Spirit can no longer be 
committed. 

Matthew x:20; Mark xiii:11; Luke xi:13. These 
passages contain the promise of what should take place 
after the disciples had received the promise of the 
Father, the gift of the Holy Spirit. The book of Acts 
shows the fulfillment, especially Chapter iv:8-13. 

Luke xi:13. “If ye then being evil, know how to 
give good gifts unto your children, how much more 
shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit..to 
them that ask Him.” This promise is often quoted by 
Christians who think that it is to be used today. They 
think that we must ask continually for the gift of the 
Holy Spirit, so that we might receive Him. As our 
examination of the testimony of the epistles shows, a 
believer..in Christ ~-has«receiyed.the..Holy...Spirit; the 
Holy..Spirit, dwells. in every,.child.of God. ‘Therefore 
there is no longer any need to ask for the fulfillment of 
a promise which has been fulfilled. These words were 
spoken by.our Lord before the gift of the Spirit had 
been..given..on, the. day. of, Pentecost. “It was perfectly 


CHAPTER II Ko NL9 


in order for them to ask the Father for that gift, but 
we have no right to fall back on this promise. 

Two more references are found in the Synoptic 
Gospels to the Spirit of God. In Matthew xxii:43 and 
Mark xii:36, our Lord states the fact that David wrote 
by the Holy Spirit the one hundred and tenth psalm. 
In Matthew xxviii:19 the Holy Spirit is mentioned 
with the Father and the Son in the commission to 
teach all nations and to baptize them. 


f 


j 


i 
' 


, 


\,but one other promise by our Lord that His Father - 


CHAPTER Ill 
The Holy Spirit in the Gospel of John 


E have seen that the Holy Spirit is compara- 
tively little mentioned in the Synoptics. Be- 
sides the promise made by John the Baptist, there is 


would give the Spirit to them that ask Him. 

\It is different in the fourth Gospel, the Gospel of 
John. In this Gospel is revealed the truth that Jesus 
is the Christ, the Son of God and that believing we have 
life through His name (xx:31). John bears witness to 
the full glory of the Lord Jesus and makes..known_the 
teaching.He gave.concerning..the.Holy-Spirit and. His 
work. in andfor-the-believer. The Holy Spirit held 
back from the pens of the Synoptics all these teachings 
which the Lord gave concerning eternal life and the 
work of His Spirit, as well as the more definite promises 


' of the Spirit as the Paraclete, because it was outside of 
_ the scope.and.purpose.of.the.first three Gospels. We 


may well call the Gospel of John, written several 
decades after the Synoptics, the..bridge..which..leads 
from. Judaism.into..Christianity. The Gospel of John 
is the portal through which we enter into the highest 
revelation as to RRS and Pei mees 's bar. 


Pa 


testimony of John the Baptist, John i:32 and 33, also 
ii1:34, so that we do not need to quote these verses 
again. 

20 


\ 


*, 


CHARTER  IiT 2h 


Chapter iii:5 is the first passage in which our Lord 
speaks of the Spirit in this Gospel. “Jesus answered, 
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except asman_be born 
of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the king- 
dom of God.” Our Lord had told Nicodemus the 
absolute necessity of the new birth in order to see the 
kingdom of God and when Nicodemus expressed a 
desire to know how a man can be born a second time, 
the Lord answered him in the above words. The new 
birth is brought about by “water and _the Spirit.” 
Ritualists claim thatthe water—is. ter_is-baptism. ~ Others 
claim that the right kind of water baptism is necessary 
to salvation. The water our Lord mentions in con- 


nection with the Spirit is not baptism at all. Water.is- 


__the symbolical figure of the Word of God. Ephesians 


79:26 employs the same figure. Then 1 Peter i:23 and 
James i:18 show that it is the Word of God out of 
which we receive our new birth. In the Word the 
Holy..Spirit_is active. Faith cometh. ‘by hearing and 
hearing by the Word of God. When man hears the 
Word of God, the Holy Spirit in the Word and through 
the Word, acts upon the dead condition of the human 
soul, and when the Word is believed the Holy Spirit 
imparts to the believing sinner the new nature and he 
receives eternal life. 

In the next verse John iii:6 the Lord tells Nicodemus 
that “that which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that 
which is born of the Spirit.is spirit.” By the natural 
generation man has a nature which is flesh, the.sin 


erg It never can be anything else. In ot new 


birth the believer receives the divine nature; 
bem.of. God and. he possesses a. ee a 
enables him tg be in the presence of God and also to 


ore 


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA SCROOL 
OF THEOLOGY LIBRARY 


22 CHAP Th ehis 


live and walk in the Spirit. Then again in Verse 8 
He mentions the Spirit. ‘The wind bloweth where it 
listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst 
not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth, so is 
every one. that 1 is born.of.the.Spirit.” ‘Thisemeans the 
ofthe Holy. Spirit. 
(In John iv in speaking to the Samaritan woman the 
| Lord gives also teaching about the Spirit, though He 
' does not mention Him by name. He said to her 
\ “Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him 
? shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him 


/ shall be in him a well of water springing up into ever- 
\ lasting life.’ ‘Fhesfountain.of wa: ' 
| the.indwelling. Spirit. In chapter vii:37-39 our Lord 
- speaks again of living w and there we learn that 
He spake under this term erm of the Holy. Spirit whom they 

that believe on Him should receive. 

John iv:23-24. These words addressed to the 
Samaritan woman, tell us of the new worship which 
jwould come with the gift of the Holy Spirit. “God ") 





' a Spirit and they that worship Him must worship Him 
\in Spirit and in truth.” Such worshippers the Father 
seeketh. Only true believers can be such worshippers. 
for it needs the Holy Spirit (Phil. iii:3). 
John vi:63. “It is the Spirit that quickeneth; the 
‘flesh profiteth nothing. The words that I speak unto 
you, they are Spirit, and they are life.” After feeding 
the multitudes miraculously He spoke of Himself as 
the living bread come down from heaven. He taught 
again concerning eternal life and how it is obtained. 
“T am the living bread which came down from heaven; 
if any man eat of this bread, he shall live forever; and 
the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give 


CHAPTER: TI 23 


for the life of the world.” Eating of Him means. to 

believe.on.Him and. become.identified with Him. Those 

who.hear.His.words.and believe.on.Him are. quickened 

tt the Spirit. The word “quicken” means imparting 
ife, so . that our Lord teaches once more what He said 

to Nicodemus, that the work of the Spirit is to.impart Le 

spiritual | lif Jife_in.. the. new.birth. And the words He 

speaks are Spirit and are life. The Spirit. and. Life 

is in sin them. 

“John vii: 37-39. “In the last day, that great day of 
the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man 
thirst, let Him come to Me and drink. He that be- 
lieveth on Me, as the Scripture hath said, out of his 

Peeieahatt tow rivers of living water. (But this He 
spake of the Spirit, which they that believe on Him 
should receive, for the Holy Spirit was not yet given, 
because that Jesus was not yet glorified.” 

These words of promise were spoken by Him during’ 
the feast of tabernacles. Daily there was drawn from; 
the pool of Siloam water and then poured out. O 
the last day this ceremony was omitted. It had a 
symbolical meaning. They commemorated the fact 
that the Lord had supplied the water during the wil- 
derness journey. On the eighth day no water was 
poured out, for that day stands in type for the day 
when they entered the land and drank of the springs® 
there. These waters are typical of the living water 

, promised to His people Israel (see Zec. xiv:8; Isa. 

xii; Ezek. xlvii, etc.). It was on that.last.day, typical Sider 
of Israel’s _Promised. blessing, that. He..spoke..these 
words. The nation had rejected Him and the promised 
national blessings could not come then. Instead He 
offers ers individual blessing - to him who comes by faith. 


Geran Cores mete rrt de 
é 


24 CHAPTER ATI 


To such He gives the living water, which in return shall 
flow forth from the believer’s heart, as streams of liv- 
ing water. He.spoke-of the Spirit. which. they, should 
receive. who-believe.on.Him. Here we read that all 
these promises of the gift of the Spirit are dependent 
on His glorification, following His sacrificial death. 
We discover that His teaching concerning the Spirit is 
progressive. In the third..chapter He speaks of the) 
Spirit. communicating eternal..life_in.the new. birth; / 
He is. the. life-giving Spirit. Inthe ; fourth chapter J He | 
‘teacheth. under.the well of living water springing up / 
into eternal life the ‘indwelling Spirit. In.the seventh | 
“chapter. He. reveals Him_as the outflowing. Spirit, ‘flow- 
ing forth. to, others. 

John xiv:16-18. “And I will pray the Father, and 
He shall give you another. comforter, that.He may 
abide with you for.ever; even the Spirit.of truth, whom 
the world cannot. receive, because_it.seeth..Him.-not, 
neither _knoweth Him; but ye know Him; for He 
dwelleth with you, and shall be in you. I will not 
leave you-orphans;_I will come to you.’ 

All believers know that the blessed chapters in this 
Gospel in which our Lord has His own disciples with 


\ 


— 


Him to give to them His last words of instruction and’ 


promise, ending with His great prayer (xili-xvii), are 
not found in the Synoptics. 

He was about to leave His disciples, who were 
gathered about Him, except Judas, who had gone 
out into the night to betray the Lord. He assured His 
perplexed disciples that He would not leave them 
comfortless. It means literally, “I will not leave you 
orphans.” So He promised them another comforter. 
The word comforter is in the original “Paraclete,” 


- Cr Ar rE LET 25 


- 


_ which means one w ngside. p and to 
defend. The same word appears in 1 John ii:2, where 
it is translated with ‘“fadvocate.” “If any man sin 
we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ 
the righteous.” The other Paraclete, or advocate, is 

the Holy Spirit. During the absence of the Lord Jesus 

7 Christ He is to take His place alongside of F > of His | believ- 

ing people. The passage before us reveals some im- 
portant facts: (1) The other comforter, the Holy Spirit, 
is the gift of the Father through the Son, for our Lord 
says, “I will pray the Father and He sha 
another comforter.” This_is a new revelation for we! 
do not find anywhere in the Old Testament such a 
promise. (2) The Holy Spirit, the Pa Paraclete_ is to 
abide with God’s children for ever. This 
In the Old Testament the Spirit of God wa was with ieee 
who believed in the coming of the Messiah, who trusted 
the Lord. But He was not known as the abiding Spirit. 

was no assurance given that He would remain. © 
That is why David prayed in his penitential psalm, 

“Take not Thy Holy. Spirit from me” (Psa. li:11). No 

believer in the New Testament needs to pray this 

rayer. (3) Hejis the Spirit of Truth, because He is 
the author of the Word of God which is Truth, and He 
brings Christ, the Truth, to the hearts of God’s people. 

(4) The ee knew Him already, for the Lord said, 

“He dwelleth with you.” They were believers on 


Him the Son of God (except Judas) and therefore were 
born again, clean every whit as the Lord had told them. ¥ 
Because they ~ had accept ted_Christ. the. Holy.Spirit © F 


was with them, in the same sense as He was with all 
Old Testa i lieyers, (5) The Lord gives a promise 


which was to be fulfilled in the future “and | shall be in 









Sea 





26 CRA TVD E Raut 


you.” When the Lord spoke this to the eleven men 
the Holy Spirit as the_indweller, who makes the be- 
liever’ s heart a temple, had not yet been given. He 


| came to dwell in them and to fill them, on the day_of 


Pentecost. 
“R be comforter, the Holy Spirit, whom th the 


Father_will send in My name, Hes shall teach you h you all 
things, and bring ‘al hing O emembran 
whatsoever I have Said unto you.” The Sisto 
Truth i is, tote ach..the ‘belie ver. just_as t 
iis disciples, and the worlls whi learns ane 
disciple ¢ id..not.understand ere would bring to their 
remembrance air ‘He had satd to them. A number of 
times the Lord told them tha the should know the 
caning of His words afterwards, that is, when_the 
Spirit had come. See John ii :22\and xii:16, in both 
passages we read of the fulfillment of this promise. 
The Holy Spirit then supplies the spixitual needs. 
John xv:26. “But when the Comforter is come, 


whom I will send unto you from the Father, the Spirit 


of ‘Truth, who proceedeth from the Father, He_shall > 


testify of Me.” It is the same we have pointed out 
before. As the Spirit of Truth He testifies of Him who 
is the Truth. 


John xvi ‘7-14, pirat the effect. of the presence of 


our Lord. There acre aid eee ea 
The. SENT Tk. n_is that the Holy Spirit 

convinces people that they are lost sinners, that they 
need_righteousness and also convinces them of a com- 
ing judgment. Conviction of sin is certainly the work. 
of the. Holy Spirit, who also quickens those who be- 
lieve, but.this.is not the teaching of the passage before 








\ 


Ce AP LE RS Lit 27 


us in this paragraph. Much depends on the right 
rendering of the word “reprove.” It has not the 
meaning of an inward conviction, but rather means a 


conviction by demonstration. It means conviction.by 
an n unanswerable argument. ‘The Holy Spin on earth 
‘ f 








) having.cast_ Him oot velcen 8 the ee Glory, 


believed..on Him. 
fore is eR Sacre tia and the Holy Spirit in His” 


presence on earth bears witness to_ it, Then ae 
ence of the Holy Spirit is the convicting demonstz 
eesieaaananse: because He has gone_ to TIS Ze ater 
he Son of God who lived the life of perfect righteous- 
ness on earth, who pleased God always, was condemned 
by t the world as an unrighteous man. They. cast-Him 
out and all was done i in the name.of God. Perhaps 
some of them stood before the Cross when that dread 
darkness enshrouded the Lamb of God and heard the 
cry “My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?” 


and they may have imagined a vindication of their 
awful deed. But God in His righteousness acted in 





His beha behalf. He raised. Himfrom.the.dead and gave 2 


Him, glory. He rewarded Him who. had been. obedient 
to Him in His-holy life, obedient.unto death, the death 
of the cross. The world sees Him no more but the 


presence of the. Holy. Spirit demonstrates His sight- 
eousness and is the convicting argument that He is at 


the right I hand of God. And therefore but one thing 
remains for r the “unbelieving _world with its ; guilt, and 
that is jud t. Already the prince of this world is 
judged, though the full sentence of judgment in the 
all-wise purpose of God is not yet executed. The Holy 


The world there-} 


b. 


“% 


ee wal 


a 


28 CHAPTER 42i1 


Spirit on earth therefore is the convicting, OVA 
that coming judgment. 

The many things which were on His loving heart 
they could not understand in their present condition. 
The coming..of..the, Spirit. would. bring.to them the 
revelation of.these things. He is the Spirit of truth 
and therefore He will lead into all truth. The word 
truth, means both the written.Word and the living 
Word. Of the written revelation of God our Lord 
bears witness in the next chapter, when He says “Thy 
Word i a ‘Truth. ” Of Himself He witnessed, ‘“‘I.am_ the : 





f ‘Truth ~The Spirit has come to guide us. into,all truth, 


ciehanas bs ASat--ase revealed. -in.the..Bible. Believers, 
many of whom are found in certain Pentecostal sects, 
who believe and teach that there is a Spirit-guidance 
; independent of the Bible, by inward impressions, by 
dreams and visions, are deluded. Some have gone so 
‘ far as to declare ae their inward experiences are suf- 
ficient and that they have no more need to study the 
Word of God. And the Word.of God, which is. truth, 
witnesses of Him Who is. the ‘Truth. It is Perera e 
that in.the Greek the word truth in. the. above passage 
has the definite article—He shall guide you into all 

the truth. rough the written. Word He guides..to 
Him ial is the. Truth, our Lord. 

He does not speak om..Himself, that is in inde- 
pendence of the Father and the Son. His testimony 
is the testimony of the Father and the Son, as the Sonon 
earth heard the Father’s voice and ‘spoke FE. that which 
He heard from the Father. Furthermore, He will 
show things to come. He has done so through the 
testimony of the apostles. The, Word.of.God.is.now 
complete..and..He does no longer reveal. the future 


CIAP TE Ret Pi 29 
through individuals. His great work is to_ glorify 


Christ, to take of the things of Christ and to show them 
unto those who belong to Christ and in whom He dwells. 

John xx:22. “And when He had said this, He 
breathed on I and saith unto them, receive ye 
the Holy Spirit.” This passage contains the first men- 
tion of the Holy Spirit after His resurrection. He 
breathed on. them, which was a “symbolical action. 
Never before had He done this, nor is the Greek ex- 
pression used elsewhere inthe New Testament. It is 
also significant that the definite article before Holy 
Spirit is not in the original text. In Gen. ii:7 we read, 
“The Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground 


and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and . 


man became a living soul.” It was the same Lord who 
did that in the hour of creation, who now breathed on 
His disciples, the breath. of a.bettertife, that, His.own 
life, which had passed through death, the life which 
delivers from the law of sin and death. And so it is 
written, “The first. man Adam was made.a_living soul; 


the last Adam was made a guickening.spirit” (1 Cor. 


‘xv:45). 


Inasmuch as He said, “Receive ye Holy Spirit” and 
not “the Holy Spirit,” it is evident that the Person of 
the Holy Spirit was not sent down from heaven at this 
time when He breathed on them, for He had not yet 
ascended to the right hand of God. He communicated 
to them the energy of His own life through the Spirit 
of God. It has been suggested that this breathing 
RRA 
pointed to a revival of faith in the hearts of the dis- 
ciples, while others see in it a gift of understanding 
corresponding to the statement in Luke xxiv:45, “then 
opened He their understanding that they might know 


30 CHAP TERe tad 


/ ‘the Scriptures.” Still others think that the Spirit was 
| bestowed upon them for the fifty days between oa) 
\ resurrection and the day of Pentecost. We believe, as/ 
pointed out above, it was.a symbolical action. In the 
23d_verse the church, the body..of Christ, ‘composed of 
those who are born again and possess the life in Him, 
is anticipated. The authority to discipline is not.con- 
ferred..upon, a priestly..class, as_Rome teaches, but 
upon.the assembly. of, believers. 
*Repentant souls were baptized for the remission 
of sins, whilst a Simon Magus was yas_pronounced in. the 


So the wicked person "was put away from among the 
saints, and the same. man after the judgment < of his 
evil and his own deep grief over. his. sin, was to be 
‘assured of love by being received back by the church 
(1 Cor. v and 2 Cor. ii). It was the action of the 

church. “To whom ye forgive anything, I also; for 
also what I have forgiven, if I have forgiven anything, 
it is for your sakes in the person of Christ.’’* 





*W. Kelly. 


CHAPTER IV 
The Holy Spirit in the Book of Acts. 


HE Book of Acts gives the historical account of 
the fulfillment of the promises of our Lord as to 
the other Comforter. On the day of Pentecost the 
Holy Spirit, the third person of the Trinity, came down 
to earth. That historical day marks the birthday of 
the Church. After.this great event we see Him present 
with His.people, as well as Upon. them and in andinthem. He 
filled the Lord’s servants, guided them, fitted them, 
“gaye.them. power and sustained them i in trials and in 
suffering. In the affairs of the gathered company, 
representing the Church, we trace His activities; He is 
the administratorin.the-Church. Over fifty times He 
is mentioned in Acts, so that we might call this book 
“the Book of the Acts of the Holy Spirit.” As it is a 
istorical book we do not find any doctrines concerning 
the Spirit of God. But we discover in it practical illus- 
trations of the doctrine of the Holy Spirit found else-. 
where in the New Testament. Everything the Lord \ 
Jesus Christ promised the Holy Spirit would be for His ¥ 
Seciles seen fulfilled. 

Chapter i:2. This is an interesting passage for it 
teaches us that our Lord Jesus Christ after His resur- . 
rection gave to His apostles commandment through the 
cin The risen Christ speaks and acts by the; 


Se 


Holy Spirit as He did i in the days of His humiliation. 


aati 


Holy Spirit after our resurrection and glorification. 
Then, delivered from this old body, the Holy Spirit 
31 


32 CHAPTER LY 


needs no longer to restrain and mortify the flesh, and 
His power will be fully displayed in the eternal service 
of God. What.a day of glory that will be! 

Chapter i:5-8. Two statements as to the Holy 
Spirit are found in these verses. He reminds them of 
John who baptized with water “‘but ye shall be bapti 
with the Holy Spirit not many days hence.” Nothing 
is said here of fire, as already explained i in our comment 
on Matthew iii:11, 12. The second statement is “but 


ye shall Feccive ROWE’, after that the Holy Spirit_is 


come upon you.” It is significant that they asked the 
Lord the question as to the restoration of the kingdom 
to Israel. The thought must have arisen in their 
minds, when that baptism takes place, will the promised 
kingdom also come? He did not tell them that they 
erred, that there will be no such kingdom, or that the 
church takes the place of the kingdom. He told them 
that it was not for them to know the times and the 
seasons when the kingdom comes. They were called 


to do another work, they were to be His witnesses. But 


this witness bearing would begin with the gift of the 


Holy, Spirit, who would enable them to act in. power. 


A waiting, or as it has been called, a tarrying meeting, 


_ followed for ten days. Misguided believers frequently 
_ appoint and call a “waiting meeting” for the purpose of 
| having ‘“‘another Pentecost,” another outpouring of the 


Holy Spirit. They act in ignorance, not realizing that 
this meeting. in Acts i is unique, and..can.never be 
repeated. : There can never be “another Pentecost,” 
just as there cannot be another birth of Christ, anna hs 
death of Christ and another apm St re ae 
Chapter i:16. Peter in addressing the assembled 
company speaks of the fact that the Holy Spirit through 


f 


CHAPTER IV 33 


the mouth of David had revealed the tragedy of Judas. 
The action which followed in putting another brother 
into the apostolate in place of the traitor was perfectly 
in order and not a mistake, as some teach. 

Chapter ii:1-13. The great day of Pentecost had 
come and the Holy Spirit was given to them. “And 
they were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and began to 
speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them 
utterance.” There were outward signs; a_rushing (2) 
mighty wind filled the house and cloven.tongues_as.of 
fire, sat upon each of them. A new dispensation is 
inaugurated with outward rd signs, just as the law dis- 
pensation in its s beginning was -accompanied by similar 
phenomena (Heb. xii:18-19). The rushing mighty 
wind was the symbol that He had come to fill and to 
possess € each | heart, as well as to fill the house, that is 
the church. ret our Lord the Spirit had come in 
the form of a dove; upon each of the assembled com- \ 
pany He came not as a dove, but in the form of.cloven 
tongues like as of fire. He came on the Lord in the 
shape of a dove, because He was not to make His voice 
heard in the streets. But His disciples were to give 
the testimony, the Word. with power, which is like a ©” 
consuming fire. The t two outward signs witnessed to 
the internal gift they hi had received. Then they spoke 
in different languages, which was a miracle produced \ 
by the Spirit of God. They became the mouthpieces 
of the Holy Spirit, uttering in at least sixteen digesent J 
languages the praises of God. 

It was the oral manifestation of the parted tongues \/ / 
of fire. It proclaimed outwardly the great fact that the / 
Holy Spirit would make known the Gospel! to all the 
nations under heaven, and though no Gentiles were 


34 CHAPTER IV 


present when all this took place, the languages of the 
Gentiles were heard, and that from Jewish lips. They 
did not preach the Gospel-message. Peter did that in 
the native tongue, they all understood. The gift of 
tongues was an.ecstatic utterance, a sign to all of the 
supernatural person who had come_to_their. hearts. 
We look in vain through this book for the evidence 
that these believers continued speaking these different 
languages. The error oi Pentecostalism which claims 
that this sign gift must today be the evidence to each 
Christian that he has the Holy Spirit is more fully 
dealt with in other parts of this volume. 
Chapter ii:14-36. In his bold testimony Peter, the 
) erstwhile denier of Christ, manifests the power of the 
| Holy Spirit. His inspired testimony shows what 
\ witness the Holy Spirit will bear through the believer, 
when He is unhindered. Peter preached the Word and 
. through the Word he preached the.Person, the.Work 
and the Glory of Christ. The Spirit-filled believer will 
\ do the same today. en certain Christians claim the 
é - filling with the Spirit and then speak always of their 
; own experiences, their_ r feeling, their emotions and 
4 exhort others to eee these things, ‘it is a good 
i evidence that whatever they. possess it is not the real 
‘ filling with the Spirit. 

Peter quotes the prophecy of Joel (Joel ii) to his 
Jewish hearers. It must be noticed in quoting Joel he 
is led by the Spirit of God not to use the phrase so 
frequently used in the New Testament “that it might 
be fulfilled.” He said “This is that which was spoken 
by the prophet Joel.” As we have seen in the first 
chapter of this work the prophecy of Joel is to be ful- 
filled in the future, when Israel is restored and the 





CHAPTER iTV 35 


kingdom is restored to them. As they were all Jews, 
to whom the promise is given as a nation, Peter re- 
minded them that something like what they saw and 
heard now had been predicted by Joel, in connection 
with the Day of the Lord, the visible and glorious man- 
ifestation of the Lord. 

_ The second time Peter mentions the Holy Spirit in 
his address is in verse 33. He teaches that the presence 
_of the Holy Spirit on earth is the evidence that Christ 
is risen from among the dead and that He is exalted at 
the right hand of God. 

Chapter ii:38. ‘Then Peter said unto them, 
Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name 
of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall 
receive the Holy Spirit.” This was spoken in answer 
, to the question of the people “What shall we do?” 


' Repentance and baptism are the conditions Peter 


names. These conditions fulfilled, result in the re- | 


mission of sins and the gift of the Ia Spirit. These 
words wrongly interpreted have led to much con- 
fusion. The words with which Peter answered the 
question of his co-religionists are being used by certain 
sects in making water-baptism a saving ordinance. 
To understand Peter’s words we must remember that 
he addressed those who had openly rejected Jesus, as 
the promised Messiah. They had, therefore, openly 
to acknowledge their wrong and openly own Him as 
the Messiah, whom they had disowned by delivering 
Him into the hands of lawless men. Repentance 
means in their case to own their guilt in. having.opposed 
and | rejected. the Lord Jesus. Baptism in His name was 
the outward expression of this repentance. How great 


the 2 arenes... when _ en | _Peter _ preached. to. 0. Gentiles 


os 


a 


i 


36 CHAP Ti Re Ly 


(Chapter x). Of this more later. The lastverses. of 


the second chapter show. what the Holy. Spirit had ‘ 


accomplished in uniting them. into. a.company, th 
Church, the body of Christ. | 

Chapter iv:8. In fulfillment of the words of the Lord, 
what should happen when they are brought before the 
authorities, Peter was d_with the Holy Spirit for 
this occasion, and-was enabled to speak _words_of 
wisdom and power. Let us notice there was not 
“another baptism with the Holy Spirit” but_there was 
another filling. There was only one ba tism, the 
significance of it the reader will Yind explained in 
1 Cor. xii:13, But there are many. fillings, daily, 
whenever He is needed in the believer’s service and 
witness. 

Chapter iv:31. This passage illustrates what we 
have stated. They returned to their own company and 
after they prayed and had expressed their determin- 
ation to continue in their witness for Him, asking “‘that 
with all boldness they may speak the Word,” the place 
was shaken and they were all filled with the Holy 
Spirit. Peter also received another filling. As_a. 
result.they spake the Word of God more boldly. The, 
Spirit-of-God_gave-them-strength to suffer and to con—' 


tinue to. witness inspite of the threatenings of the “ 


enemy. 

Chapter v:3, 9. Ananias, with Sapphira, his wife, 
lied against the Holy Spirit and tempted (tested) Him. 
They committed a sin unto death (physical death). 
The swift judgment reminds of the judgment which 
came upon the two sons of Aaron, when they came into 
the_presence of the Lord with strange fire. The same 
Holy One, in the person of the Holy Spirit, dwells in 


\) 


se 


/ 


CHAPTER 1V 37 


the midst of the assembled company; He dwells 
within, against evil. May we, as God’s children, 7 
remember always that in-us dwells He that is holy and Vi 
- if we sin we sin against Him and grieve Him. The 
sudden dee death of both was a mighty, convincing testi- 
mony to all, believers and the unbelieving Jews, of His 
presence. As a result fear pervades each heart, both 
within and without. Such a godly fear not to offend 
the indwelling guest should be our daily portion. 
Chapter v:32. Peter with the other apostles bears 
another great witness before the council. He mentions 
the Holy Spirit as given to them that obey Him. The 
obedience _is the obedience of faith, in believing on 
Him whom God has sent. 
Chapter vi:3, 5, 10. Here the Holy Spirit acts as \* 
the administrator.in.the..church. It is a practical / 
illustration of the different gifts He has given to be 
exercised in the body of Christ (1 Cor, xii; Eph. iv). 
The men to be chosen were to be full of the Holy Spirit 
and nd wisdom. Stephen is especially mentioned as a 
man full of faith and the Holy Spirit. Therefore, not 
because he was a learned and able man, but because an 


He was filled with the Spirit, they _.were..not able. to 


Chapter vii:51, 55. Stephen in his great testimony, 
_ the final national testimony born in Jerusalem, char-; Y 
acterized Israel’s past history as a history of eect 
.. the Holy Spirit. When he had finished the testimony 
are “they gnashed on him with their teeth” we read 
“But he, being full of the Holy Spirit, looked up stead- 
fastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus 
standing on the right hand of God.” ‘The Holy Spirit 
filling the believer directs the belieyer’s heart and mind 


38 CHAP ER ALY. 


to _Christ..above, sitting at the right hand of God 
(Col. iii:1-3). 

Chapter viii:15-17._ Peter and John went to Samaria 
and “prayed for them (the Samaritan converts), that 
they might receive the Holy Spirit.” The gift of the 
Spirit had been withholden from these converts and 
only after these two apostles came and laid hands on 
- them did they receive the Spirit. This is, to many, 
another puzzling passage, while others have built upon , 
it erroneous doctrines. The Samaritan believers had 
to be brought into union with those in Jerusalem, so 
much the more because there existed a schism between 
Samaria and Jerusalem. Samaria had _ rejected the 
authority of Jerusalem; instead of worshipping at an 
appointed place they worshipped on a mountain. This 
controversy had to be ended as far as the converts were 
concerned. It was therefore divinely ordered that the 
gift of the Spirit in their case should not be bestowed 
till the two apostles came from Jerusalem. This meant 
some kind of a submission to Jerusalem. If the Holy 
Spirit had been imparted unto them at once it might 
have resulted in a continuance of the existing rivalry. 
Nowhere_in_ the. church-epistles, in which its fullest 
meaning is revealed, is there a. word said about receiv- 
ing the Holy. Spirit by. the laying on of hands, or that 
one who trusts in Christ and is born again should 

“seek” the gift, or baptism of the Spirit afterwards. 
The case of wicked Simon Magus, who wanted to pur- 
chase the gift of the Holy Spirit, chapter viii:18-19, 
needs no comment. The Holy Spirit is the gift of 
grace, neither money, nor works, can secure this gift. 

Chapter viii:29, 39. Philip, one of the seven deacons 
chosen, was led by the Spirit to join himself to the 


CHAPTER IV 39 


chariot on the road to Gaza, after an angel had di- 
rected to leave Samaria. The Holy Spirit spoke to 
him. After the conversion and baptism of the eunuch 
had taken place “the Spirit of the Lord caught away 
Philip that the eunuch saw him no more.” And Philip 
was found at Azotus, twenty miles north of Gaza. A 
similar action of the Spirit of God occurred in the ex- 
perience of Ezekiel. It was not some undefinable 
“spiritual” catching away, but a physical experience. 
It foreshadows the coming event when the true church 
on earth, her testimony finished, will be caught up in 
clouds to meet the Lord in the air. The Spirit of God 
will have a part in that (Rom. viii:11). 

Chapter ix:i17. Saul, the great persecutor of the 
church, converted by seeing the Lord in the glory 
light on the road to Damascus, received the Holy 
Spirit when the Lord sent Ananias to him, and this 
disciple put his hand on him. The influential Pharisee 
and son of a Pharisee, Saul, the commissioned enemy 
of the truth and of Christ, in possession of documents 
from the high-priest, had to make this experience for 
his humiliation. Blind for three days, the Lord sent 
to him an humble disciple and used him as the channel 
in blessing Saul and in receiving the Holy Spirit. 

Chapter ix:31. After Saul’s conversion the churches 
had rest, ‘‘Walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the 
comfort of the Holy Spirit, were multiplied.” The 
comfort of the Holy Spirit means His gracious help in 
all our walk and service. 

Chapter x:19. A vision had been given to Peter on 
the housetop of Simon, the tanner. While Peter 
meditated on it, to ascertain its meaning, the..Spirit 
of God informed Peter that three men were down- 


40 CHAPTER IV 


stairs, and told him to go with them, assuring him ny 
they were sent by Himself. Peter.brushed his Jewish~,' 
prejudice aside when he found they were Gentiles.» | 


He is obedient. to.the. Spirit. 

Chapter x:38, 44, 45, 47. In preaching his first 
sermon to the Gentiles Peter refers only once to the 
Holy Spirit in a historical way. “Gad. ancinted Jesus 
with the Holy Spirit and with power.” After speak- 
ing of His death and resurrection and His coming 
judgeship, Peter said, ““To Him give all the prophets 
witness, that through His name whosoever believeth 
on Him shall receive remission of sins.” At this point 
his address was suddenly ended. ‘‘While Peter yet 
spake these words, the Holy Spirit. fell.on all them 
which heard the Word.” Peter and his companions 
were astonished, because that on the Gentiles also was 
poured out the gift of the Holy Spirit. In order to 
leave no room for doubt, to convince Peter and his 
Jewish companions, that the same gift was given 
to the Gentiles, and that there was no difference, they 
also spoke.in tongues, magnifying God. Peter did not 
use the word “repentance”? once. In Acts ii he told 
the Jews to repent and be baptized; neither repen- 
tance nor water baptism are mentioned here. The 
assembled company believed the Word and that is 
sufficient for salvation and the gift of the Spirit. There 
was no process of seeking, surrendering, examining 
themselves, giving up, praying for it, to receive the 
Holy Spirit. It was solely by the. PPR crs of faith, in 
believing the Gospel message that the Holy Spirit was 
given to these Gentile believers. It is so still (Gal. 
ii1:2). 


CHAPTER IV 41 


Chapter xi:15, 16. Peter rehearsed the facts in Jeru- 
salem of what had happened in the house of Cornelius 
when they received the Holy Spirit. 

Chapter xi:24 and 28. The first verse speaks of 
Barnabas as a good man full of the Holy Spirit and of 
faith; such every believer should be. In verse 28 we 
have the first mention of Agabus who predicted by 
the Spirit a great drought throughout the world. Such 
predictions are possible with the Spirit of God, who 
knows all things, and when the Word of God was still 
uncompleted, they were quite in order in connection 
with the establishment of the church. A second pre- 
diction, by Agabus, is recorded later. 


Chapter xiii:2, 4, 9. This chapter contains the \~ 


\ 


record of a new beginning, the first.great missionary ~ 


effort to carry the .Gospel.to the regions beyond. In 
Antioch, the great Gentile center of the church, a num- 
ber of prophets and teachers were together ministering 
to the Lord and fasting. Ministering to the Lord 
means that they were engaged in prayer. It was at 
this time when the voice of the Holy Spirit was heard 
in their midst. ‘The Holy Spirit said, Separate Me 
Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have 
called them.” Here is the order: prayer and fasting, 
followed by the direction given by the Holy Spirit. 


Every other true missionary. movement, in. the church ‘\ 


_has started in the sameway. The Holy Spirit, as the 
administrator in the church, is seen here calling the 
instruments He desires to use, to the work He has for 
them. This is the source of all true ministry for Christ. 
In the fourth verse we read that, when they departed 
in obedience to the voice of the Holy Spirit, they were 
sent forth by. the Holy Spirit, not by the church or by 


| 


42 CHAPTER IV 


a missionary society. As the Holy Spirit had called 
them into a special work and sent them forth, He also 
guided them and used them in the places they visited. 
Saul, whose name is from now on Paul, was filled with 
the Holy Spirit and with the discernment the Spirit 
gave to him, pronounced judgment upon Elymas, Bar- 
Jesus, the instrument of Satan to keep the Gospel 
away from the Gentile Deputy. Here is the gift of 
the Holy Spirit.in discerning the. spirits. 

Chapter xiii:52. In this verse we find another filling 
with the Spirit. They were persecuted and expelled. 
They suffered for Christ’s sake and as they departed 
they were filled with joy and the Holy Spirit. 

Chapter xv:8, 28. ‘These are incidental references to 
the Holy Spirit; the one in connection with Peter’s 
rehearsal of the gift of the Spirit bestowed upon the 
Gentiles; the other in connection with the document 
sent forth from this first General Church council. 

We must not overlook the closing verses of the 
fifteenth chapter, though the Spirit is not mentioned. 
Barnabas and Paul became separated. Paul had 
suggested | to go forth again and to visit the same 
places to see how the brethren were getting along. 
Barnabas wanted to take again John Mark, who had 
left them in the first part of their journey. Paul 
refused and a sharp contention resulted. Why this 
failure? ‘There is no record of any prayer, nor of the 
Spirit’s voice. The guidance by the Holy Spirit is 
impossible without prayer and true waiting on the 
Lord. 

Chapter xvi:6, 7. The Holy Spirit is seen here 
acting in forbidding 1 them to go to certain places, 
though the intention of the messengers was the very 


CHAPTER IV 43 


best. He did not allow them to go their own path. 
He knows when and where to send the servants of the 
Lord. 

Chapter xix:2,6. The disciples whom Paul found at 
Ephesus were disciples of .John..the.Baptist. The 
question Paul asked of them has been misused even by 
good and well meaning teachers of the truth and as a 
result many have been misled into serious error.. These 
brethren teach that the disciples were Christians, but 
they had never received the Holy Spirit. From this 
they reason that one may be saved, born again and not 
have the Spirit. They preach from this text: “Have you 
received the Holy Spirit since you believed?” They 
tell their hearers their own experience and exhort them 
to make a similar experience by seeking the gift of the 
Spirit. At the same time they lay down certain rules 
how they may receive the Spirit. All this is. funda- 
mentally wrong. When we examine the testimony 
concerning the Holy Spirit in the epistles. we.shall 
discover that there is no such thing as a sinner saved 
by grace, born again and destitute of the Spirit, nor is 

® there a single exhortation anywhere in these epistles 
that a believer should receive the Spirit in a certain 
“second blessing” experience. 

In the first place there is a little word in the question 
of Paul which we are obliged to change. The word 
“since” means in the original “when.” The question 
then is “Did ye receive the Holy Spirit when you 
believed??? Paul makes the gift of the Holy Spirit the 
test of true discipleship. If they. were true. believers 
they received the Spirit when they believed, in the act 
of believing. If they did‘not have the Spirit it was an 
evidence that they were not true believers. They 


44 GHAR ERAaY 


acknowledged this fact and Paul gave them the full 
_ truth. Hawing,believed they were baptized in the name 
of the Lord Jesus. Then they received the Holy 
Spirit, spoke with tongues and prophesied. ~ This is the 
third and last time we read of speaking with tongues 
in the book.of Acts. The disciples _ numbered twelve. 
They stand evidently for the tribes ‘of Israel in dis- 
persion, hence the same supernatural evidence followed 
the reception of the Spirit in their case. Of the many 
thousands. who were saved among the Gentiles and 
received the Holy Spirit nothing is said that. they 
received the gift of tongues. 

Chapter xix:21. The word “spirit” occurs in this 
verse. Did Paul purpose in his own spirit to go to 
Jerusalem again, or did he purpose in the Holy Spirit? 
Was he led to visit again the city of his fathers by the 
Holy Spirit or did he do it on his own initiative? We 
shall find that it was not the Holy Spirit who led him 
to go back to Jerusalem. 

Chapter xx:22, 23,28. Here is the first evidence that 
Paul purposed in his own spirit. The Holy Spirit 
witnessed in every city, probably through others, that 
bonds and afflictions were in store for him. The Lord 
had told him “I will send thee far hence to the Gentiles.” 
The order had been, beginning at Jerusalem. Jeru- 
salem had heard and had rejected. Therefore the Holy . 
Spirit did not lead Paul to go back to the city. 

In verse 28 the Holy Spirit is again seen as the 
yr appointing power in the Church. 

Chapter xxi:4, 11. These verses contain two solemn 
warnings given by the Spirit through others. Disciples 
said to Paul through the Spirit that.he should not go 
up to Jerusalem. Agabus appears once more as a 


GHAP TER. 1V 45 


prophet. He bound himself with Paul’s girdle and said 
, that Paul would be bound and delivered into the hands 
' of the Gentiles. Why did Paul go? It was his all- 
- consuming love for his brethren and his kinsmen 
(Rom. ix:3). His strange actions in Jerusalem which 
* resulted in his arrest and other incidents, such as the 
claim he made of being a Pharisee and his refuge under 
Roman citizenship, show that he did not act in the 
Spirit. The lesson is that the warnings of the Holy 
Spirit must be heeded. 

Chapter xxviii:25. This is the last reference in Acts 
to the Holy Spirit. Paul quotes from the sixth chapter 
of Isaiah showing that the Holy Spirit had predicted 
the judicial blindness of the people Israel and their 
rejection. Then the Holy Spirit spoke through him to 
the assembled Jews that the salvation of God is to be 
sent to the Gentiles. 


CHAPTER V 
The Holy Spirit in the Epistle to the Romans 


HE last statement in the Book of Acts, coming 

from the lips of the Apostle to the Gentiles, is, 
that the salvation of God is to go forth to the Gentiles. 
What this salvation of God is and what it includes is 
the great revelation of the epistle to the Romans. In 
the first place Romans shows that Jews and Gentiles, 
with the law and without the law, need salvation, 
because both are guilty before God and therefore lost 
and under condemnation. Then we learn if man is 
to be saved, God must do it for him. After this we 
read how the salvation man needs is given to man 
through the blessed sacrificial work of the Son of God. 
It is in His great sacrificial work that God declares His 
righteousness in saving guilty and lost sinners. God 
justifies, that is, acquits, all who believe on Jesus, 
that He died for our sins and was raised from among 
the dead. Then we read, “Being justified by faith, 
we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ; 
by whom also we have access by faith into this grace 
wherein we stand, and rejoice in the hope of the glory 
of God” (v:1-2). But we read more than that. The 
believer who has believed on Christ is not only justi- 
fied, in possession of peace with God, accepted by Him 
and having the hope of the glory of God, but he is 
also identified with Christ, one with Him, who is the 
head of the new creation, the last Adam. The be- 
liever has received a new nature and is saved from 
the power and dominion of indwelling sin. 


46 


CHAPTER) V 47 


It is significant that in the opening chapters of the 
epistle of our salvation not a word is said about the 
work of the Spirit. It is true, of course, that the Holy 
Spirit is active in the sinner’s salvation. He quickens 
because man is dead in his spiritual nature. In the 
fifth chapter the Holy Spirit is mentioned for the first 
time. 


Chapter v:5. “And hope maketh not ashamed, be- | 


cause the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts 


\ by the Holy Spirit who is given unto us.” The first 


mention of the Spirit is only incidental, but it shows 
conclusively that the sinner is not saved by the work 
ot the Holy Spirit, but by the work of the Son of God. 


‘While the Holy Spirit is absolutely needed in the | 


_ salvation of a sinner, the Holy Spirit is not the Saviour, | 


but the Lord Jesus Christ is. That the Holy Spirit 
is not mentioned in these great opening chapters of 
this epistle illustrates the words of our Lord in John 
xvi:13, 14. ‘For He shall not.speak of Himself. He 
shall. glorify Me, for He shall receive of Mine, and 
shall show it unto you.” He is the blessed author of this 
great document, yet He bears the first witness to 
Christ, and His blessed redemption werk. He gives 
Him the first place. 


We notice, then, that Romans v:5 shows conclu-| 
sively that the Holy Spirit shedding the love .of.God 


abroad in the believer’s heart is given by the grace-of 
'God in redemption. Each justified believer has re- 


what this gift includes. According to the twisted | 


ceived this gift. We shall find in the eighth chapter 


teachings of Pentecostalism, Perfectionism and other) 


‘Holiness “isms,’’ the Holy Spirit and the baptism with | 


'the Holy Spirit should occupy the most prominent| 


48 CHAP TER? ¥ 


place in the very foreground of this epistle. Paul, 
according to their conceptions, should have told them 
that they were justified, had their sins put away, but 
what they needed now was to seek the Holy Spirit. | 
‘Instead of it there is just this passing statement that | 
the Holy Spirit is given to those who are justified by | 
faith. Equally significant is it that no other mention 
of the Holy Spirit is made till we reach the eighth 
chapter. In the next two chapters we are told how 
God has dealt with sin (our old nature) in the sacri- 
ficial work of His Son; in the preceding chapters we 
learn what was done with our sins, the fruits of our 
fallen nature. The justified believer is both dead with 
Christ and risen with Christ. He is under grace and 
the assurance is given him that sin is not to have 
dominion over him. He is to reckon himself dead 
unto sin and alive unto God through Jesus Christ our 
/ Lord. This means the sanctification of the justified | 
believer. In all this, the deliverance of the justified/ 
believer from the power and dominion of sin, the Holy 
Spirit does not. mention Himself. Weare sanctified 
by the work of Christ. He is not only our righteous- 
ness, but our sanctification. The Holy. Spirit is of 
course needed to make. this_real_in our hearts..and 
lives. He is the power of sanctification, but He is not 
our sanctification. We now turn to the eighth chapter. 
Chapter viii:2. ‘For the law of the Spirit, of life 
in Christ Jesus, hath made me free from the law of 
sin and death. For what the law could not do in that 
it was weak through the flesh, God sending His own 
Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, con- 
demned sin in the flesh. That the righteousness of 
the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the 


CHAPTER V 49 


flesh but after the Spirit.” It is not_the question here 
of our-sins, but of being identified with Christ_risen 
from the dead. We-have.in. Him the new_life and the 
power in that new_life, risen with Christ, is-the-Holy 


Spirit. This law of the Spirit, operating in the new 


{ 


life, delivers, if permitted to operate, from the law of 
sin_and death which before reigned_in.the.old-nature, 
producing its fruit.unto.death. As in Christ, risen 
with Him, one with Him, in possession of His_life, the 
Holy Spirit dwelling in our hearts, walking by faith, 
we walk after the Spirit and as.a.result_the righteous 
requirements of the law are fulfilled.in-us. Weare, 
as in Christ, perfect before God without any_right- 
eousness of the law whatever. But as we walk accord- 
ing to the Spirit, as risen with Christ, the law is fulfilled. 
in us, though we are not under the law. This is the ) 
gracious result of the Holy Spirit dwelling in our 
hearts. He has the pow er, if we let Him, to manifest 
His energy in our lives in giving us power over. in- 
, dwelling s sin; in the resurrection of the believer (or the 


é promised change in a moment, when He comes) the 


energy of the Spirit will deliver from the law of death. 
Chapter viii:5. ‘For they that are after the flesh 
mind the things of the flesh; but they that are after 
the Spirit the things of the Spirit.” The natural man 
desires the things which his nature craves; the spiritual 
man, in whom the Spirit of God dwells, desires the, 
things of the Spirit. The carnal mind is death, but to } 
be spiritually minded is life and peace. Therefore the 
affection of the flesh is enmity against God, and they 


‘ that are in the flesh, who live according to the old 


nature, cannot please God. The Spirit of God dwells 
in the believer so that he can be spiritually minded. 


50 CHAPTER V 


Chapter viii:9. “But ye are not in the flesh, but 
in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in 
you. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, 
» he is none of. His.” God looks upon those who have 


| believed on Christ, who are in Him, as no longer in | 


~ 


| the flesh. They are a new creation and old things have’ 


passed away. The flesh certainly exists for there is 
as long as we are in the body the conflict between the 
flesh and the Spirit, but in God’s sight we are no 
longer in the flesh, but having received-the Holy. Spirit, 
and having life of the Holy Spirit we are before God 
in the Spirit and no longer in the realm of the old 
nature, the flesh. The Holy Spirit indwelling the be- 
liever_is the power to realize this and to act as no 
longer in the flesh. ‘“‘Now if any man_have not the 
Spirit of Christ-he is none of His.” The possession of 
the Spirit of Christ makes a man a Christian. All 
who believe on Christ become His and immediately 
the Spirit of God seals them. This verse disposes of 
the false teaching that a man may be a Christian, 
\tbelong to Christ, know that he is saved, and yet have 
not the Spirit. A man is a Christian because He has 
the Spirit of Christ. 

Chapter viii:11. “But if the Spirit of Him that 
/ raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, He that 


raised Christ from the dead shall also quicken your | 


mortal bodies by His Spirit who dwelleth in you.” 
This is one of the star-texts of divine healers. They 
teach that the Holy Spirit dwells in the believer to 
quicken his body in case of illness. The quickening 
refers to resurrection. When the Lord Jesus Christ 
was raised from among the dead the Holy Spirit was 
active. (see note on 1 Peter iii:18). He is the Spirit 


—" 


— 


CHAP EE RO V 51 


of Him who raised up Jesus from among the dead. On 
account of the Spirit dwelling in the believer the same 
will also be accomplished for the mortal body of the 
believer. He will raise up our mortal bodies. Then 
the question, “Who shall deliver me from this body of 
teach that the Holy Spirit pee now..Our. bodies, 
and is in our mortal bodies to give them perfect health 
and immunity from sickness. Some of the choicest 
saints, filled with the Spirit, mightily used by Him, 
have been frail in their bodies and troubled with much 
sickness. Paul had his thorn in the flesh and Timothy 
oft infirmities, though both were filled with the Spirit. 

The “Synopsis by J. N. D.” calls attention to the 
designation of the Spirit in verses 9-11. “He is desig- 
nated in three ways: the Spirit of God, in contrast 
with sinful flesh, the natural man; the Spirit of Christ, 
the formal character of the life which is the expression 
of His power; the Spirit of Him that raised Jesus from 
the dead. Here it is the perfect and final deliverance ‘ 
of the body itself by the power of God acting through / 
His Spirit. We see that Christian life in its true char- 
acter (that of the Spirit) depends on redemption. It is 
by virtue of redemption that the Spirit is present with 
us.” 

Chapter viii:12-13. As redeemed, indwelt by the 
Spirit, believers are not debtors to the flesh, the old 
nature, to live after the flesh. We do not owe any- 
thing any more to that old nature, which was put to 
death in the death of Christ. If we live after the flesh, 
we are on the road to death (about to die), but if the 
believer through the Spirit mortifies, puts into the 
place of death, the deeds of the body, the old nature, 


52 CHAP TER ey 


he shall live. The Spirit of God is the power, which 
makes it possible not to live after the flesh, the power 
which enables the believer to mortify the flesh and 
live unto God. 

Chapter viii:14-16. Here the Spirit of adoption, of 
Sonship is made. known. They are the sons of God, 
who are led by the Spirit. The Spirit of God is in the 
believer as a Spirit of adoption. We have not received 
a spirit of bondage to be again in fear, as it was with 
the Old Testament believers, but a spirit that answers 
to our sonship in Christ, and by that Spirit we cry,| 
' Abba, Father. He is called a Spirit of adoption because 
_ He produces in the believer the reality of divine Son-/ 
ship as well as all which appertains to this relation- 
ship. The Holy Spirit does not make believers sons, 
but He is given to them, and is in the believer as the 
Spirit of sonship, because they are sons. It must be 
noted that believers are spoken of as children.of God 
and also as sons of God. In our relationship we are 
children, born into the family of God; in our position 
and future glory we are sons. Indwelling the believer 
the Holy Spirit bears witness “with our spirit, that we 
are the children of God.” The witness of the Spirit 
is in the Word of God, and because the believer has 
accepted His witness as to redemption he knows there- 
fore that God is His Father, and, being born again, that 
he is in the family of God. He produces in the be- 
liever the consciousness of being a child of God, as 
well as the affections of a child. ‘We have this tes- 
timony in our hearts in our relationship with God; 
but the Holy Spirit Himself, as distinct from us, bears 
this testimony to those in whom He dwells. The true 
believer knows that he recognizes in his heart God as 


CHAPTER V 53 


his Father, but He also knows that the Holy Spirit 
bears the same testimony to him. That which is 
founded on the Word is realized and verified in the 
heart.” The witness of the Spirit is more than “‘a good 
feeling,” it is the deep consciousness produced by be- 
lieving the Word in the power of the Spirit of God that 
we are the children of God. 

Chapter viii:23. In the context the future is 
revealed to the children of God, the heirs of God and 
joint heirs with Christ. A day is coming when 
groaning creation will be delivered and share the 
glorious liberty of the children of God. All is awaiting 
the manifestation of the sons of God, which comes with 
the Return of the Lord Jesus Christ. The same Spirit 
who reveals to believers through the Word. that.they 
are children and heirs, gives intelligence as to the 
coming glorious deliverance, and therefore those who 
have the first fruits of the Spirit (elsewhere called the 
earnest of the Spirit), in possession of this knowledge 
given by the Spirit of a coming redemption,.groan 
within themselves, waiting for the full adoption, the 
fullest manifestation of their sonship, which is the 
redemption of the body. This groaning and waiting is 
the effect of the indwelling Spirit (see note on Gal. v:5). 

Chapter viii:26-27. Another blessed and deep 
activity of the Holy Spirit in the believer is revealed 
in these verses. He not only witnesses to us that we 
are the children of God, but He enters into the life of 
the children of God in connection with their infirmities, 
their_ weaknesses and their sorrows, in infinite grace 
and sympathy. He acts as intercessor, so that the 
believer has two intercessors, Christ in the presence 
of God and the Holy Spirit dwelling in the believer. 


54 CHAPTER V 


The Holy Spirit takes part in us in our sorrows in the 
midst of suffering creation and helps our infirmities, 
and then He pleads in our hearts in groans which cannot 
be expressed in words, while we do not know what to 
ask for as a remedy. “And He (God) that searcheth 
the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit, 
because He maketh intercession for the Saints according 
to God.” While He acts in divine sympathy in us, 
in the infirmity of our body and the suffering of 
creation, in the midst of which the children of God still 
are, His intercession and pleading with unutterable 
groans, becomes through us the voice of this suffering 
before God. “What a sweet and_ strengthening 
thought, that when God searches the heart, even if we 
are burdened with the sense of the misery in the midst 
of which the heart is working, He finds there, not the 
flesh, but the affection of the Spirit; and that the 
Spirit Himself is occupied in us, in grace, with all our 
infirmities. What an attentive ear must God lend to 
such groans!’’* 

Chapter ix:1; xiv:17; xv:13, 19 and 30. These 
passages contain statements showing the activities of 
the Spirit of God in the believer. The apostle Paul, in 
deploring the condition of his kinsmen, and expressing 
his deep love for them, speaks of his conscience bearing 
witness in the Holy Spirit, a different thing from the 
natural man, who has also a conscience, but not the 
Spirit of God. The Holy Spirit gives joy as well as 
peace in believing and if we abound in hope it is through 
the power of the Holy Spirit (xv:13). In chapter xv:19 
Paul speaks of his own God-given ministry which was 





*Synopsis of Romans. 


CHAP EER. Vv 55 


attended by mighty signs and wonders by the power of 
the Spirit of God. But the Spirit of God produced 
also in the great instrument a great and Christ-like 
humility, for he wrote “I will not dare to speak of any 
of those things which Christ hath not wrought by me.” 
Finally in asking the Roman believers to pray for him, 
he beseeches them for the sake of the Lord Jesus Christ 
and for the love of the Spirit (Chapter xv:30). It is 
interesting to find that not a word is said in this epistle 
about the “Baptism with the Spirit” nor a word about 
the gift of tongues and other supernatural mani- 
festations of the Spirit. 


So, 


CHAPTER VI 
The Holy Spirit in First and Second Corinthians 


Ee the second chapter of this epistle the Holy Spirit 
is mentioned by the Apostle Paul several times. 
Chapter ii:4. Paul went to Corinth declaring that 
he would know nothing but Christ in contrast with 
philosophy among these heathen. He preached Christ 
and Him crucified. This he did not, by embellishing 
his speech, or by words of human wisdom and elo- 
quence. He preached Christ from the Word of God, 
and the Holy Spirit accompanied the message he 
preached, so that it was in the demonstration and power 
of the Holy Spirit. If Christ is preached in His blessed 
person and His work as Saviour and Lord, the Holy 
Spirit will stand back of this message and use it. 
Chapter ii:9,10. ‘But as it is written, Eye hath not 
seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the 
heart of man, the things which God has prepared for 
them that love Him. But God hath revealed them 
unto us by His Spirit;. for the Spirit searcheth all things, 
yea, the deep things of God.” The ninth verse has ) 
nothing whatever to do with heaven. It is a quotation — 
from Isaiah lxiv:4. It was not revealed in the Old 
Testament what man redeemed in Christ, saved by 
grace and indwelt by the Holy Spirit, would. be. The 
glory of ‘sonship and that redeemed sinners should be 





Christ, was not known to anyone in ‘the Old Testament. 

But now God has revealed it by His Spirit, for His 

Spirit searches the deep things of God; these deep 
56 


| 
j 
; 


CHAPTER VI bY | 


things are the things of Christ in whom are hid the 
treasures of wisdom and knowledge. 

Chapter ii:11, 12. Only the spirit which is in man 
knows the things man has left unexpressed in words; 
even so no one knows the things of God save the Spirit 
of God. And this Spirit who knows the things of God 
was given to Paul and to others who revealed the 
truth of God, that they might know the things which 
are freely given of God.* 

Chapter ii:13, 14. Paul and the other chosen 
instruments who received the revelation of God and 
communicated it to others, received the knowledge of 
the things of God first of all by the Spirit of God. And 
when they wrote it down, as we possess it now, they 
did not write in their own words, in words which man’s 
wisdom teacheth, but in words taught by the Spirit of 
God. It means nothing less than verbal inspiration. 
The truth of God has been given by the Spirit of God 
in the very words which the Holy Spirit dictated. 
There was given a spiritual message, a spiritual reve- 
lation by spiritual means. 

Chapter iii:16. He reminds them of their great 
dignity as believers, “Know ye not that ye are the 
temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in 


_ you?” Solemn truth it is! How different many a/ 


\ Christian’s life would be lived if daily this great truth, 


\that the Holy Spirit indwells the heart would bé 


remembered. 
Chapter vi:11. What the Corinthians were in their 





*Verse 12 must be applied first of all, as we have done, to Paul 
and the other instruments chosen to write down the revelation 
of God. But it applies to all believers ‘‘we know the things that 
are freely given to us of God”. 


58 CHAP Ra 


’ old nature is stated in the preceding verse. Having \ 


accepted the Gospel they were washed, sanctified and 
justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the / 


Spirit of God. 

Chapter vi:17. The Corinthian church was given 
to worldliness. Many evils existed in their midst._ In 
spite of it all they were saints, separated ones. The 
apostle did not exhort them to seek a remedy in a 
“second blessing experience” or in getting “their Pente- 
lcost” or in anything else. But he reminded them, that) 

\the Spirit of God dwelled in them, in spite of their 
worldliness. ‘‘What? know ye not that your body_4s 
the temple of the Holy Spirit, who is in you, whom ye 
shave of God and ye are not your own?” This is an- 

_ other strong argument against the false teachings that 
the Holy Spirit dwells only in a certain class of believers. / 

Chapter xii:3-13. This is an important and funda- 
mental chapter as it deals with the different gifts of 
the Spirit and mentions for the last time the baptism 
of the Spirit. 

The chapter begins with a significant statement. 
‘Wherefore I give you to understand, that no man 
speaking by the Spirit of God calleth Jesus accursed, 
and that no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but 
by the Holy Spirit.’ The Corinthians had been 
heathen Gentiles who were carried away by dumb 
idols and were as idolators under the influence of 


demons. After their conversion the Holy Spirit had \ 


/ 


been given to them and He manifested His power in | 


their midst through the different gifts. The power of 
the Spirit of God attracted the attention of the world 
about them and also stirred up the enemy who at- 
tempted to creep in among them through evil spirits, 


} 


Gere TER. Vi 59 


who generally try to imitate and counterfeit the mani- 
festations of the Holy Spirit. As these Corinthians 
lacked in discernment they were in danger of being 
again deceived by certain manifestations, which ap- 
peared to be the work of the Spirit of God, when they 
were the work of demons. So the apostle gives a test. , 
( A demen would not acknowledge the Lordship of | 
Christ; the true confession that Jesus is Lord is only 
| possible by the Spirit of God, nor would any man who | 
speaks by the Holy Spirit call Jesus accursed. It 
seems that there were powers in their midst which did 
this and while they spoke of Jesus, they did not ac- 
‘knowledge Him as Lord. It is a striking fact that in | 
the different sects which claim a restoration of apos- 
tolic gifts, such as the gift of healing, the gift of miracles | 
‘and especially the gift of tongues, our Lord is/ 
‘called exclusively by the name of His humiliation. 
They constantly speak of Jesus and rarely of the Lord) 
Jesus Christ. The damsel in Philippi who had a demon 
acknowledged the apostles as servants of God, but 
the demon in her would not own and acknowledge the 
name of the Lord Jesus Christ. And when Paul used 
that worthy name, the girl was delivered. The vaga- 
bond Jewish excorcists also used the name Jesus,-but 
did not speak of Him as Lord.* 


A 





*We quote an interesting paragraph from the Synopsis: “When 
a man is not filled with the Spirit, who gives force to the truth 
in his heart, and clearness to his moral vision, the seductive 
power of the enemy dazzles the imagination. He loves the 
marvellous, unbelieving as he may be as regards the truth. He 
lacks holy discernment, because he is ignorant of the holiness 
and character of God, and has not the stability of a soul that 
possesses the knowledge of God, so that he needs no other 
miracles. If a man is not thus established by the knowledge 
of God, the power of the enemy strikes and pre-occupies him; 
he cannot shake it off. He is a victim to the influence which 


60 CA AP Threw 


From verses 4-13 we have a revelation concerning 
the gifts of the Spirit. First, we read of the diver- 
sities of gifts, but it is the same Spirit. Then the 
Lord is mentioned, that there are differences of min- 
istrations, but it is the same Lord; and there are 
diversities of operations, but it is the same God. They 
are bestowed through Him. These gifts are in rela- 
tion to the Lord; they are to be used in ministry, 
that is, in service for the Lord, under whom and for 
whose glory these gifts are to be used. The whole 
operations are of God who worketh all in all. All is 
confined to the church, the body of Christ. ‘“‘But the 
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man (a 
true believer) for profit.” The gift bestowed upon 
one member of the body is not for self-gratification, 
to please oneself, but the gift is given for the whole 
body, for the edification of each member of the church. 

Then follows the enumeration of the gifts of the 
Spirit. There are nine: The Word of wisdom; the 
Word of knowledge; the gift of faith; the gift of 
healing; the working of miracles; prophecy; discern- 
ing of spirits; gift of tongues and the gift of the inter- 
pretation of tongues. The miraculous sign-gifts hold 
a secondary place, the last mentioned are the gift of 
tongues and the interpretation of tongues. The high- 
est gifts are the gifts of wisdom and knowledge. By 
these gifts the deep things of God are understood and 


this power exercises over his mind; the flesh is pleased with it, 
for in one shape or another the result is always liberty to the 
flesh.”’—The latter is only too true in numerous sects, who claim 
' to have had supernatural manifestations of the Spirit. The 
grossest, the most vicious things of the flesh flourish amongst 
them, especially when women are the leaders, as they generally 
are in delusion cults, 


\ 


) 


Ciarirs kV 61 


the ability is given to communicate them to others. 
The gift of faith is a special endowment of confidence 
in God and His promises, which enables the possessor 
to lay hold on God and accomplish great things by 
faith. Of course all believers have faith and live by 
faith. The gift of healing and the working of miracles 
were sign gifts specially bestowed for the beginning of 
Christianity when the present dispensation started. 
There is no intimation that these sign-gifts were to 
continue throughout the present dispensation; on the 
other hand, we do not find a statement that they 
should be withdrawn. It is, however, a fact that these 
gifts, like the gift of healing, of working miracles, of 
tongues and interpretation of tongues, began to dis- 
appear even in apostolic days. Many times in church 
history persons appeared who claimed that these gifts 
had been restored. Each time it was found out that 
they were imitations brought about by satanic powers, 
for Satan’s sphere is counterfeiting the manifestations 
of the Spirit. Such is the case in Irvingism, Mormon- 
ism, Spiritism, Christian Science and in certain other 
sects. The Pentecostal sects, for instance, claim a 
restoration of the gift of tongues and their interpreta- 
tion, under the plea that the age is about to close, and 
the church should expect a revival of apostolic powers. 
But where is it taught that the end of the age should 
bring back apostolic powers and supernatural mani- 
festations? ‘There is a prophecy in Scripture that 
before the coming of the Lord signs and wonders will 
be manifested, but they are the lying signs and won- 
ders of the man of sin (2 Thess. ii). There is a gift of 
tongues, besides the gift of prophecy and discerning 
the spirits (trying the spirits whether they are of God). 


62 CHAPTER VI 


As we find in chapter xiv of this epistle, the Corinth- 
ians, whose spiritual state was so unsatisfactory, 
esteemed the gift of tongues the highest, while the 
Spirit of God put it in the lowest place. They seemed 
to have been destitute of the gifts of wisdom and knowl- 
edge, and magnified the gift which was for an out- 
ward, demonstrative display, because it exalted them- 
selves. The fourteenth chapter enters more fully into 
this. That chapter also gives an important injunction 
against women speaking and taking part in the exer- 
cise of gifts in the church.* 

We have pointed out in the comment on Ephesians 
iv that the permanent gifts of the Lord through the 
Spirit are mentioned there, the gifts which will remain 
till the Lord comes; the_sign gifts.are.omitted. Nor 
are these gifts of miracle-working mentioned in Rom. 
xii:3-8. Of much importance is verse 13, ‘For by one 
Spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we 
be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free; and 
have been all made to drink into one Spirit,” 

The passage is important, for it mentions for the 
very last time the Baptism of the Spirit. First, John 
the forerunner and herald of Christ had spoken of it. 
Then our Lord before His ascension had told His 





*A strange contradiction it is when certain women preachers 
of today, who claim almost every gift of the Spirit, preach, 
teach, heal the sick, have visions, prophesy, like a certain woman 
leader in Southern California. If the Holy Spirit has given to 
these women these gifts then He contradicts Himself, for His 
command is ‘Let your women keep silence in your churches.” 
But the Holy Spirit has not changed. The demand He makes, 
because it also involves the glory of Christ, is still in force, and 
for this reason we know that these women who talk in a jibberish, 
which they designate the gift of tongues, who anoint the sick 
by the wholesale, promising healing, do not possess the real 
gifts of the Spirit. 


CHAPTER Vi 63 


disciples to tarry in Jerusalem, and that they would be 
baptized with the Holy Spirit not many days hence. 
On the day of Pentecost the baptism took place. But 
never again do we read anything of the baptism of the 
Holy Spirit in the book of Acts. The only other pas- 
sage in which the Baptism of the Spirit is mentioned 
is 1 Cor. xii:13. What, then, is the baptism of the 
Spirit as revealed here? That baptism which took 
place on the day when the Holy Spirit came down to 
earth, the day of Pentecost, united the 120 believers, 
who were gathered in Jerusalem in one body. The 
baptism of the Spirit constituted them the body of 
Christ; Christ is the glorified head, and every believer 
is a member in that body. The body of Christ, the 
church, was formed by this baptism of the Spirit. 
Scripture knows nothing whatever of different bap- 
tisms of the Spirit, repeated baptisms, or individual 
experiences of baptism with the Spirit, nor is there in 
Scripture a single word of command to seek the bap- 
tism with the Spirit. The baptism of the Spirit hap- 
pened once and does not need to happen again. Ever 
since that event took place, whenever or wherever, a 
sinner trusts on Christ, he is at once joined by the 
same Spirit to that body. He makes the believer a 
member of the body of Christ, so that he shares in the 
one Spirit. The baptism of the Spirit is a dispensa- 
tional act in which the church, the body of Christ 
was formed. 

In the fourteenth chapter several references as to the 
Spirit are made, in connection with the gift of tongues 
(xiv:2, 14, 15, 16) which need no further comment. 

Much less is said of the Holy Spirit in the second 
letter to the Corinthians than in the first. The rela- 


64 CHAPTER VI 


tion of the first epistle to the second epistle and the 
purpose and scope of each is not our object to examine. 
We have done so in our “‘Annotated Bible.” 

Chapter i:21, 22. “Now He who stablisheth us 
with you in Christ, and hath anointed us, is God; who 
hath also sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit 
in our hearts” (see also chapter v:5). Three opera- 
tions of the Holy Spirit are here mentioned for the 
first time in the New Testament. The first is anoint- 
ing; He anoints the believer. This phase of His work 
is fully explained in the notes on 1 John ii:20, 27, where 
the purpose and effect of the anointing are stated. 
The second is, the Spirit seals the believer. As the 
Ephesian epistle speaks of this twice, as sealed by the 
Spirit of promise and sealed unto the day of redemp- 
tion, the reader will find the meaning unfolded in the 
comments there. The third is, the Holy Spirit is the 
earnest. This also is found in Ephesians and explained 
there. Here we simply call attention to the fact that 
all believers have the anointing, are sealed by the 
Spirit and possess Him as the earnest. 

Chapter iii:3, 6, 8, 17, 18. In this chapter the Spirit 
of God is mentioned six times. The chapter contains 
a contrast between the dispensation of the law, that 
which is now passed away, and the new dispensation 
of grace. The church is called in verses 2 and 3 “the 
Epistle of Christ,” and that Epistle is not written 
with ink, nor is it written as the law was, in tables of 
stone, but it is written with the Spirit of God in the 
fleshy tables of the heart. Paul speaks of the Corinth- 
ians as being his letters of commendation. These con- 
verted heathen were his letters of commendation, 
because they were the evidences of the power of the 


CHAPTER VI 65 


Spirit of God in his ministry. In their faith they were 
the living expression of the truth and doctrines he 
preached. In verse 6 we find another contrast. ““Who 
also hath made us able ministers of the New Testa- 
ment; not of the letter, but of the Spirit; for the letter 
killeth, but the Spirit giveth life.” All the law can do, 
being a rule imposed upon man, is to slay him, to put 
the sentence of death upon him. The power of the 
grace of God in the heart is His Spirit and He quickens, 
gives life to the believer. 

Chapter iii:8. “How shall not the ministration of 
the Spirit be rather glorious.” The contrast between 
the two dispensations continues. The ministration of 
the law dispensation, a ministration of death (verse 
7) was introduced with glory, which was seen reflected 
upon the face of Moses, which the children of Israel 
could not behold, and which faded away. The minis- 
tration of the Spirit, who gives life, is much more 
glorious. “For if the ministration of condemnation 
be glory, much more doth the ministration of right- 
eousness exceed in glory” (verse 9). The law required 
righteousness so that a sinner might stand before God, 
and as he has not this righteousness the law condemns 
him to death. But the gospel is the ministration of 
righteousness in that it reveals Christ the righteous- 
ness of God and this is revealed by the Spirit of God. 

Chapter iii:17, 18. Now the Lord is that Spirit; 
and where the Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty.” 
The thought of the Spirit which in the law dispensa- 
tion was hidden under types and figures, is Christ 
glorified. The glory of Christ was veiled in the Old 
Testament, but now after Christ died and rose again, 
has gone to heaven and is there glorified, the Holy 


66 CHAPTER VI 


Spirit reveals Him and His glory; indwelling the be- 
liever He enables him to know and te enjoy that glory. 
Where that Spirit dwells, who reveals the glory of 
Christ, there is liberty, perfect freedom from the fear 
of death and condemnation. The glass, or mirror, 
mentioned in verse 18 is the Word of God. There we 
see the glory of the Lord. As we look there and let 
the Spirit of God take the things of Christ to show 
them unto us, the Spirit of the Lord does His blessed 
work in changing us into the same image from glory 
unto glory. 

Chapter vi:6. Paul speaks of the things in which 
he and his fellow ministers were attested as the minis- 
ters of God. Among these things the Holy Spirit is 
mentioned. The Holy Spirit manifested through them 
was an evidence that they were sent of God to minister. 

Chapter xiii:14. “‘The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, 
the love of God the Father, and the communion of the 
Holy Spirit, be with you all.” This is the prayerful 
wish of the apostle Paul for the Corinthian Saints. It 
should be used in conclusion of every assembly of God’s 
people. It will be noticed while this prayer concludes 
this epistle, no epistle in the greetings ever mentioned 
the Holy Spirit. The greetings are from the Father 
and from the Son; the Holy Spirit is omitted for the 
reason that He dwells in those to whom the greeting 
is sent. How perfect is the Word of God! Again we 
repeat though the Corinthian church was partly given 
to worldliness, the scene where the carnal spirit of 
denominationalism, that is sectarianism, manifested 
itself first, the presence of the Holy Spirit in them is 
acknowledged and not a single exhortation is given to 
seek “the baptism with the Spirit” or some “deeper 
experience.” 


CHAPTER VII 
The Holy Spirit in Galatians 


HILE the epistle to the Romans contains the 

divine revelation of the Gospel, the salvation of 
God, the epistle addressed to the Galatians is the de- 
fense of that Gospel through the same inspired pen. 
Such a defense had become necessary in the days of 
the apostle Paul, because certain teachers dogged his 
footsteps, wherever he preached that Gospel, teaching 
a_perverted, a counterfeit Gospel. Their false teach- 
ings consisted in the denial that faith in the Lord Jesus 
Christ is sufficient for salvation. They taught that 
the law must also be kept; they emphasized _circum- 
Pee keeping of the Sabbath and other ordinances, 


Bee cite: bclinc God It was the vicious 


_ leaven of legalism which they were - spreading, that same 
‘leaven_which has leavened well nigh everything in 
Christendom. 


Chapter iii:2. “This only would I learn of you, 
ived ye the Holy Spirit by the works of the law, 

or by the hearing of faith? Are ye so foolish? having 
begun in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect by the 
flesh? . . . He therefore that ministereth to you the 
Spirit, and worketh miracles among you, doeth he 
it by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith?” 
They had been pagan idol worshippers, but when they 
heard the Gospel of Jesus Christ preached_and_be- 


“lieved, ‘they_ received also the gift of the Holy Spirit. ° 


He dwelled in their hearts. How, then, did they 
67 





68 CHA PIPR Val 


receive Him, by_the works of the law, by their own 
efforts, by vows and ordinances, or bythe hearing of 
faith? They knew the answer. The Spirit of God 
was God’s gift of grace to them. ‘There is no promise 
in the law, 1 that law keeping would insure the gift of 
the. “Holy Spirit. . The Holy Spirit i is sufficient and_no. 
law, no ordinances, no holy days or other observances, 
are needed to help the believer in a life before God. 
Chapter iii:14. “That the blessing of Abraham 
sae come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ, that 





ane ne ny RN Pn ee 


faitk 12? Once more it is stated that the gift ‘of the 
Sone is inseparably connected with faith in the Lord 
Jesus Christ. 

Chapter iv:6. “And because ye are sons, God hath 
sent forth the Spirit of His Son into your hearts, cry- 
ing, Abba, Father.” This is the same precious truth 
as already explained in Romans viii. The word “Abba” 
is the Aramaic for Father. It is found in the same 
form in the branches of the Semitic language. 
“Father” is the word used by the Gentiles. Jews and 
Gentiles believing on Christ receive the same Spirit of 
Sonship and are brought into the same family. 

Chapter iv:29. In the allegory illustrating the two 
covenants, the Holy Spirit is mentioned, showing how 


flesh and Spirit are antagonistic to each other. 


sn nee net ten Ae em Ase 


Chapter v:5. “For we through the Spirit wait for 
the hope of righteousness by faith.” What is “the 
hope of r f righteousness by faith”? It is the coming of 
the Lord for | His Saints. The righteousness which we 


are in Christ"h “has ‘a hope attached to it. The hope of 
His calling is that we should be like His Son, trans- 


CHAPTER Vil 69 


formed into the same image. The Holy Spirit in us 
teaches us to wait and long for that blessed paced 


Chapter v:16-18. Here it is t j it 


and its blessed_results. ee an te Sine ii. to 
live and walk in Christ, to have Him always before 
the heart in the power and energy of the Holy Spirit, 
who is in us to make Christ a blessed reality. In such 
awa ‘walk, abiding in Christ, the. lusts of the flesh have no 
“place. The new life in Christ loves to obey, loves holi- 
ness, and Christ is its strength and wisdom through the 
Spirit. The flesh is still present, for it lusteth against 


the Spirit, and the Spirit is envious of the flesh. The 
flesh tries to prevent the believer from walking. in the 
, Spirit. This passage contradicts another error of cer- \ 
/ tain holiness sects and Pentecostalites, who teach and , 
Naccless the eradication of the old nature. The first 
Epistle of John brands the denial of the presence of 
sin, as self-deception, 

Chapter v:22-25. Here we find the fruit of the Spirit. 
It_is the description of a true Christian character. 
That character consists in Christlikeness. The Spirit 
of God indwells the believer to produce these fruits and 
reproduce _in him the very mind and character of.our 
blessed_ _Lord, so that _the believer, abiding in Him,can 
walk even as He walked. Love, joy and peace are 
first. These give blessed assurance of the believer’s 
relationship to God. This is the great foundation 
upon which all rests. If love, joy and peace are en- 
joyed_in the Holy Spirit, theerestof the fruits will 
fallow. These, long-suffering, kindness, goodness, fidel- 
ity, meekness and self-control, witness.in the believer’s 


life ‘and walk that the unseen love, | joy and peace in 





70 CHAPTER VII 


the Holy Spirit are realities. If our confession is that 
we are in the Spirit, let it be shown by a walk in the 
Spirit. 

Chapter vi:8 is the last reference to the Spirit in this 
epistle. Like produces like. He that sows to his flesh 
reaps a harvest accordingly. He that sows to the 
Spirit reaps also his harvest. 


Ap 


CHAPTER VIII 
The Holy Spirit in the Epistle to the Ephesians 


HIS epistle contains the highest revelation which 

God has given to His people concerning Himself 
as the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and 
as to themselves, redeemed by the blood of His Son, 
and destined to be like Him and to be with Him. In 
our exposition of the first three chapters we have called 
the revelation contained in them “the Masterpiece of 
God,”’* for the redemption of sinners planned before 
the foundation of the world is the masterwork of God. 
The church of Jesus Christ as the glory of Christ, the 

ee 
fullness of Him who “filleth all in all, is nowhere else in 
the New Testament revealed as it is in this epistle. 


ee eT ET EOS formed_on the day 


Caren ae is peoth ss Body of Christ and 
the Bride of Christ. We must then expect in this 
highwater mark of the revelation of God concerning 
the church the highest revelation as to the Holy Spirit 
and His work in the members of the body of Christ. 
We are not disappointed in this expectation for this 
epistle contains more about the work of the Spirit of 
God than any other epistle. 

In the first chapter the work of the Godhead in the 
production of this Masterpiece is wonderfully made 
known. First we read how God the Father planned 
it all before the foundation of the world; then the fact 





*‘The Masterpiece of God,” an exposition of Ephes. i-iii. 


vA 


az CHAPTER -Vidi 


is brought out that the Son has redeemed us and finally 
we read of the part the Spirit of God takes in this work. 

Chapter i:13, 14. We give this text in a correct 
rendering. “In whom ye also trusted, after that ye 
heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation; 
in whom, having believed, ye were sealed with that 
holy Spirit of promise, who is the earnest of our in- 
heritance until the redemption of the purchased pos- 
session, unto the praise of His glory.” 

We have here three operations of the Spirit of God. 
The first is that the Holy Spirit operates through the 
word of truth, the gospel of our salvation. Faith 
cometh by hearing and hearing cometh by the Word 
of God. Hearing the Word of God is the means used 
by the Spirit of God to produce faith in the heart of 
the sinner. When the Word is heard and believed, 
then the Spirit of God acts and quickens the believ- 
ing sinner, so that he, trusting in Christ, receives life 
(John iii:5). All who have heard the Word of truth, 
the gospel, and believed are at once sealed by the Holy 
Spirit of promise. The authorized version is faulty 
as it reads, “In whom also after that ye believed”— 
it is “‘In whom having believed,” that is, in the very 
act of believing ye were sealed with that Holy Spirit 
of promise. Some claim that between believing in 
Christ and the sealing with the Spirit years may in- 
tervene, and that the sealing can only be had if sought 
for in a definite experience. We have known poor 
misguided Christians who said they knew their sins 
were forgiven, but they were still seeking the sealing 
with the Spirit and had not yet received that. All 
this has no foundation in the Word of God. The seal- 
ing with the Spirit is not an inward experience at all, 


CHA BReR VilbhI 73 


which must be sought after conversion. Nowhere is 
there a command in the New Testament that we 
should be sealed by the Spirit. Sealing is a figurative 
expression. It denotes ownership. As soon as a 
sinner hears and believes the gospel, the Holy Spirit 
comes to dwell in his heart. In this way God seals 
those who believe in His Son, by giving to them His 
Spirit. Every true believer receives by the hearing 
of faith, in the act of believing (Gal. iii:2), the Holy 
Spirit, and is thus marked as belonging to God. The 
seal is therefore the Person of the Holy Spirit; His 
presence in the child of God denotes both ownership 
and security. Nowhere are we told “to feel”’ the seal- 
ing of the Spirit; we know it because the Word of God 
tells us it is so. In the 14th verse we read that the 
indwelling Spirit is “the earnest of our inheritance.” 
This is the same as “the First fruits of the Spirit” 
(Rom. viii:23). His presence in us, the blessed things 
He does in us and makes possible, so that we can have 
joy and peace, and receive more and more, through 
His gracious ministrations out of the fulness of Christ, 
is the pledge that better things are yet to come. The 
gift of the Holy Spirit in us, is so to speak the first 
installment of the inheritance which we shall have 
when the Lord Jesus comes to redeem us by power 
and give us the redemption of our body. 

Chapter i:17. In the first prayer in this epistle, 
addressed to the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the 
Father of glory, request is made for the spirit of wisdom 
and revelation in the knowledge of Him. The Holy 
Spirit produces in the spirit of the child of God wisdom 
and, through the Word of God, revelation in the knowl- 
edge ot the Son ot God. 


74 CHAPTER Vili 


Chapter ii:18. ‘For through Him we both have 
access by one Spirit unto the Father.” In the context 
we read that Gentiles, once without Christ (the promises 
of Christ) aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, 
strangers from the covenants of promise, without hope 
and without God in the world, are now in Christ Jesus 
made nigh by the blood of Christ. The middle wall of 
partition, between Jew and Gentile is broken down. 
In Christ they are both constituted one body, the work 
accomplished by the baptism of the Spirit (1 Cor. 
xii:13). Both have now access by one Spirit, the Holy 
Spirit, unto the Father. Both are in the family. of 
God; both cry Abba, Father. 

Chapter ii:22. “In whom ye are also builded to- 
gether for an habitation of God through the Spirit.” 
This habitation is the church. The Holy Spirit 
dwells in each member of the body of Christ, and this 
makes the body of Christ the habitation of God by 
the Spirit. As He dwelt as the Holy One in the 
tabernacle, so He dwells now in the church, through 
the Holy Spirit. God has His habitation there. 

Chapter iii:5. “Which in other ages was not made 
known unto the sons of men, as it is now revealed unto 
His holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit.”? The 
church of Jesus Christ, as His body, was a mystery 
unrevealed in the Old Testament. No prophet ever 
knew that Gentiles, those outside, should be fellow- 
heirs, and of the same body, and partakers of His 
promise in Christ by the Gospel. The Holy Spirit has 
revealed it. The prophets mentioned in this verse are 
not the Old Testament prophets, but the prophets of 
the New Testament. 

Chapter iii:16. “That He would grant you, accord- 


CHAPTER VIII 75 


ing to the riches of His glory, to be strengthened with 
might by His Spirit in the inner man.” The indwelling 
Spirit strengthens the believer with might in’ the.inner 
man. For this great purpose He is in us, not for out- 
ward demonstrations but for inward strengthening. 

Chapter iv:3. “Giving all diligence to keep the 
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.” There is a 
unity of the Spirit. It exists and we are not asked as 
believers to produce a unity, but to keep, or guard it. 
What is this unity? The preceding chapters give the 
answer. The Holy Spirit as the seal is dwelling in 
every believer. All are members of the one body, the 
church, whether Jew or Gentile, bond or free. The 
oneness which is the result of the indwelling of the same 
Spirit in each member united to Christ, constitutes the 
unity of the Spirit. God Himself has made this unity 
by His Spirit and revealed it in His Word. Our Lord 
prayed for it in His great prayer in John xvii, when He 
asked that His own may all be one. This is the unity 
which we are to own and keep in the bond of peace. It 
can never be destroyed for it is the workmanship of 
God. But it may be denied and the expression of it 
lost. The denial of this unity is sectarianism. We 
keep the unity of the Spirit when we recognize in every 
child of God a member of the same body, when we 
look upon each redeemed one as being indwelt by the 
same Spirit. Blessed are we in these days of confusion 
if we act according to this divine truth. The ‘‘one 
Spirit” of verse 4 is also the Holy Spirit. 

In Chapter iv:11 the gifts of the Lord for His body 
are given. These are communicated through the Holy 
Spirit. The gifts here are the permanent, the abiding 
gifts needed for the edification and completion of the 


76 CHAPTER VIII 


body of Christ. It will be seen that the sign gifts are 
not here. There is nothing said of gifts of healing, 
prophecy, miracles or tongues. From this we con- 
cluded that these gifts are no longer essential. 

Chapter iv:30. ‘And grieve not the Holy Spirit of 
God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemp- 
tion.” He is the Holy Spirit and all which is unholy 
must be avoided so as not to displease the guest who 
dwells in the heart. Every sin is a sin against Him, 
who is in us. Especially is He grieved when the Lord 
Jesus Christ is not honored and given the pre-eminent 
place. Confession and self-judgment will end the 
grieving of the Spirit. He Himself leads to this 
through the Word of God. But let us notice that it 
does not say, as Christians sometimes say, the Spirit 
has been grieved away. He cannot be grieved away 
for He has come to abide with the believer for ever. 
By Him we are sealed, not as long as we are faithful, 
or as long as we do right, but we are sealed unto the 
day of redemption. This is therefore one of the 
evidences of the eternal security of the child of God. 
The day of redemption is the blessed day when the 
saints of God will receive their glorified bodies, the day 
when the Lord Jesus Christ comes for His own. 

Chapter v:9. Here the fruit of the Spirit is 
mentioned. ‘That fruit produced by Him is in all 
goodness, righteousness and truth. 

Chapter v:18. ‘Be not drunk with wine, wherein is 
excess, but be filled with the Spirit.” Here we have an 
exhortation to be filled with the Spirit. It is a divine 
command. But how can we be filled with the Spirit? 
Are we to sit down and say, I want to be filled with 
the Spirit, I believe I shall be filled with the Spirit and 


CHAPERER VILI 77 


then pray for it and reckon that we are now filled with 
the Spirit? This is the teaching of some, but it is not 
the teaching of the Word of God. We have seen from 
the Book of Acts that the apostles were repeatedly 
filled with the Spirit. They were filled on the day of 
Pentecost and filled at different times afterwards. The 
record shows that these different fillings occurred when 

they were walking and serving in obedience to the 
Word 01 God. As the believer obeys the Word of God, 


is is yielded to to the Lord, is occupied with Christ, walking ~ 


in the Spirit, the Spirit of God fills his heart. If we 


rs em e 


‘sin and have been disobedient, the Spirit i is still in us, 
but instead of filling us and leading us deeper into the 


things of Christ, He will direct our attention to our_ 


failures, so that_we may judge ourselves and and “confess 


our_sins to to God our Father. If the ‘believer 1 walks i in 
self- “judgment before God, walking i in_ the light as. He 


is in the light, obedient to His W Holy Spirit 


is well pleased and then fills him. A believer may 


filling “may no longer be enjo it because there was 
as we retrace our r steps and eae, our sin into the light. 
The Spirit of God is to control us. In order to be filled 
with Him and controlled by Him no “second blessing” 
experience is needed, but simple obedience to the Word. 

Some of the sects which stress the work of the 
Spirit and are given to all kinds of false teachings 
claim that when one is really filled with the Spirit it 
should be manifested in an outward manner. They 
experience uncontrollable shakings of the body, twitch- 
ings of the facial muscles, hysterical laughter, con- 
vulsions, and some power forces them to utter sounds 


) 


78 CHAPTER VIII 


which are unintelligible. All this is claimed as the 
work of the Spirit. We read in the Gospels of those 
who had convulsions and gnashed with their teeth and 
talk incoherently, but these symptoms were those of 
demon-possession. The filling with the Spirit does not 
produce such actions but He reproduces Christ in His 
meekness and lowliness in the believer’s life. 


Chapter vi:17. “And take the helmet of salvation, 
and the sword of the Spirit which is the Word of God.” 
In the context we read of the armour which God has 
supplied for the believer in his conflict with the wiles 
of the devil. The sword of the Spirit, which is the 
Word of God is the only article used for the offensive. 
We have seen all along how the Spirit of God is insep- 
arably connected with the Word of God. So the Word 
of God is the sword of the Spirit through which He 
strikes and pierces. It is needed by God’s people at 
all times. The more we are filled with the Word and 
use the Word in obedience, the more the Spirit will 
fill us and use us. Our blessed Lord used the sword of 
the Spirit when He defeated the devil with His majestic 
“It is written.” One of the strangest hallucinations 
which we have ever met is the delusion that a believer 
may be filled to such a degree with the Holy Spirit that 
he needs no longer the Bible. This is the actual 
teaching of some of the Pentecostal sects. 


Every true child of God knows that this is a satanic 
delusion. Only as we search the Word and let the 
Word search us, as we feed on the Word, yield to the 
Word, hide it in our hearts and obey it, can the Holy 
Spirit work in us. 


_ Chapter vi:18. This is the last mention of the Spirit 


GHAPTER VIII 79 


in this epistle. The supplication of the believer is not 
to be for the Spirit, but in the Spirit. 

What are the teachings of Ephesians concerning the 
Spirit? He quickens, He seals, He is the earnest, He 
gives wisdom and knowledge, by Him we have access 
tothe Father, He has formed the church and makes her 
the habitation of God. Furthermore, He has revealed 
the church as the mystery of God, strengthens the 
individual members, and has produced the unity, 
which believers are to keep. He has sealed the 
believer unto the day of redemption, He is not to be 
grieved, He is to fill the believer, He is the sword, and 
prayer is to be in the Spirit. Nothing is said of “‘the 
baptism with the Spirit,” nor the sign gifts, the healing 
gift, the tongue gift nor the miracle gift. 


CHAPTER 1X 
The Holy Spirit in the Epistle to the Philippians 


HE epistle is not a doctrinal epistle like Romans, 

First Corinthians, Galatians, Ephesians, Colos- 
sians, etc. It is a practical epistle unfolding true Chris- 
tian experience, which is a different thing from the ex- 
perience of a Christian. We do not find anything said in 
this document about some supernatural manifestation 
of the Holy Spirit, or that a true Christian experience 
consists in some great emotional experience, which 
brings with it extraordinary powers or certain gifts, 
like the gift of tongues. Of all this Philippians has 
not a word, nor is the teaching found in this epistle 
or in any other epistle, that a true Christian experience 
must start with an “‘individual Pentecost” or a second- 
blessing holiness experience. ‘These are terms nowhere 
sanctioned by the Word of God. Paul was the prisoner 
of the Lord in Rome and in writing this epistle he gives 
an inspired account of his own experience and what the 
true experience of every believer ought to be. A true 
Christian experience is the walk of faith in fellowship 
with the Lord Jesus Christ. Four aspects of true 
Christian experience are revealed. Christ is the 
believer’s life. ‘The believer is in Christ and Christ is 
in him, therefore the believer is to live Him, for Him, 
and his whole life is to be controlled by the Lord 
(Chapter i). In the second chapter Christ is seen as 
the believer’s pattern. “Let this mind be in you, 
which was also in Christ Jesus.” In the third chapter 
Christ is revealed as the bright object before the 
believer’s heart. The goal is'to be with Him and like 


80 


GAP TER? TX 81 


Him in resurrection glory. In the last chapter we 
learn that Christ is sufficient for all circumstances in 
which a believer may be found, and faith can say “I 
can do all things through Christ who strengtheneth 
me.” To live Christ, to be conformed to His image, 
to have Him constantly before the heart, ever reaching 
out for that blessed goal, to find Him sufficient in all 
things—that is true Christian experience. It is 
impossible without the Holy Spirit. He is the power 
and energy in the believer which makes such an 
experience possible. He is mentioned only three times 
in Philippians. 

Chapter i:19. “For I know that this shall turn to my 
salvation through your prayer, and the supply of the 
Spirit of Jesus Christ.”” What salvation does the 
apostle mean? Salvation in the New Testament is 
used ia a threefold way. We_are saved in Christ, 
having believed on Him, and therefore delivered from 
the guilt of sins and from judgment. There is a future 
salvation, which takes place when the Lord comes. It 
will complete the believer’s redemption. But there is 
also a present salvation which every child of God needs 
daily as he journeys towards the heavenly home. In 
the midst of trials, sorrows and many testings, hard- 
ships and different perils, salvation is needed. It was 
for this present salvation that Paul desired the prayers 
of the Philippians; for this he needed, as we all need, 
the supply of the Spirit. The latter does not mean 
another baptism with the Spirit, nor another out- 
pouring. The Holy Spirit dwells in the child of God, 
as we have seen in the previous epistles. If the heart 
is set upon Christ and controlled by Him, the needed 
supply of the Holy Spirit will never be lacking. He 


82 CHAPTER IX 


always fills the heart of the believer who honors and 
exalts the Lord Jesus Christ. 

Chapter ii:1. “If there be therefore any consolation 
in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of 
the Spirit, if any bowels of mercies, fulfil ye my joy, 
that ye be likeminded, having the same love, of one 
accord, of one mind.” Believers are one in Christ and 
in fellowship with the Saints of God. In this fellow- 
ship is to be manifested the humility of Christ. Theré 
is to be likemindedness, nothing to be done through 
strife and vain glory. All this is made possible through 
the fellowship of the Spirit. He has united all the 
children of God into one body. There is the unity of 
the Spirit and if this unity is acknowledged, and the 
walk in the Spirit maintained there will be no discord 
and no division among the saints of God. Divisions 
and parties are never the work ot the Spirit of God, but 
the work of the flesh. 

Chapter iii:3. ‘“For we are the circumcision, which 
worship God in the Spirit and rejoice in Jesus Christ, 
and have no confidence in the flesh.” True worship 
is only possible by the Spirit. The indwelling Spirit 
fills the heart and the eyes of the believer with Christ. 
He rejoices in Christ, in what He is and what He has 
done; He glories in Him and this leads to and produces 
the worship in the Spirit. 

It is a sad fact that misguided Christians who seek 
special experiences, such as Pentecostal powers (so 
called) evidenced by talking in a strange tongue,are 
woefully ignorant of these truths. If they knew what 
Christ is and what the grace of God in Christ Jesus has 
accomplished for them, they would not become the 
victims of these most subtle delusions, the counterfeits 
of the enemy of the truth, garbed as an angel of light. 


CHAPTER X 
The Holy Spirit in the Epistle to the Colossians 


A ee epistle to the Colossians is the twin epistle to 
Ephesians. Both epistles embody the highest reve- 
lation God has given to man. In them the Word of 
God is completed (Col. i:25). In Ephesians, as we 
have seen, the revelation concerns the body of Christ, 
which is His fullness. Here we have the deepest truths 
revealed as to that body, the church. The church is the 
glory of Christ, destined to be like Him and with Him. 
In Colossians the church is also mentioned, but the 
truth unfolded is the glory of Him, who is the head 
of Creation and the head of the Body, the Lord Jesus 
Christ. One of the most marvellous revelations con- 
cerning the Person and Glory of the Son of God is 
found in the great epistle. But there is a very striking 
contrast between these two epistles. Ephesians con- 
tains the fullest teachings concerning the Holy Spirit 
and His work; each chapter mentions Him. In the 
Colossian epistle the Holy Spirit and His work is not 
mentioned at all. Only once is He mentioned and then 
only incidentally (1:8). Nothing is said in this epistle 
about His indwelling, nor about the sealing, the 
anointing, the filling and the gifts of the Spirit. The 
whole subject is omitted. There is a very vital reason 
for this omission which carries with it an important 
lesson. 

The Colossian believers were facing grave errors in 
their midst. A number of false doctrines consisting in 
philosophical speculations,“ oriental mysticism, as- 

83 


84 CHAPTER X 


ceticism and legalism along with other things, were 
advocated amongst them and threatened the complete 
corruption of the church. Some of these philosophical 
theories to which they were listening became later 
known by the name of Gnosticism, a system which 
denied the Glory of Christ, His essential and eternal 
Godhead and His atoning work in its all-sufficiency. 
Gnosticism flourishes today in that system known as 
“Christian Science.” Russellism, called now “the 
International Bible Students’ Association,”’ makes the 
same denials. ‘The second chapter of this epistle warns 
against these denials, while the first chapter unfolds 
in that great revelation the Person, the glory and the 
work of the Son of God. The Colossians had evi- 
dently already lost sight of Christ and His glory, 
giving ear to strange doctrines and unscriptural in- 
ventions. Their eyes were no longer fully on Christ. 
They tolerated in their midst teachings which dis- 
honored the Lord of glory. 

Now, where the Lord Jesus Christ is not exalted, 
where His glory and honor are not fully maintained, 
the Holy Spirit is grieved and hindered. His work is 
not to speak of Himself, but to glorify Christ. Because 
the Colossian believers were drifting away from the true 
estimate of the Lord Jesus Christ, and did not give 
Him the pre-eminent place, the Holy Spirit has 
nothing to say to them about Himself and His work in 
the believer. Instead He bears witness to the Person of 
Christ to lead them back to the Son of God and thus 
give to their hearts the right conception of His glory, 
His fullness and their completeness in Him. This is the 
reason why no teaching concerning the Holy Spirit is 
found in this epistle. 


CHAPTER. X 85 


He always exalts Christ. Any movement in which 
the Holy Spirit is first of all exalted, in which the full 
glory of Christ is not owned, and He and His perfect 
work on the Cross are given a secondary place, must be 
looked upon with grave suspicion. ‘To be occupied in 
an introspective way with experiences, with feelings 
and emotions, supposedly the work of the indwelling 
Spirit, is not according to Scripture. The child of God 
is to be constantly occupied with the Lord Jesus Christ, 
exalting and glorifying Him, and walking in His fellow- 
ship. When this is done the Holy Spirit does His 
gracious work, but never where Christ in any way is 
not fully honored and acknowledged. 


CHAPTER XI 
The Holy Spirit in the Epistles to the Thessalonians 


T is well known that the epistles to the Thessalonians 
were the first epistles the apostle Paul penned by the 
Spirit of God. In Acts xvii we have the historical 
record of his visit to Thessalonica. He preached the 
gospel in the synagogue and elsewhere. The blessing 
of God rested upon it. Without touching upon the 
leading teaching of these two epistles, which are 
prophetic in that the testimony most prominent is the 
coming of the Lord, we point out the few references to 
the Holy Spirit in both of these epistles. 

Chapter i:5-6. ‘For our gospel came not unto you 
in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Spirit, 
and in much assurance, as ye know what manner of 
men we were among you for your sake. And ye 
became followers of us, and of the Lord, having received 
the word in much affliction, with joy of the Holy Spirit.” 
The Holy Spirit manifesting His power in the preaching 
of the good news, giving much assurance to those who 
believed, as well as the subsequent results in their 
salvation and the accompanying joy are here mentioned. 
They turned to God from idols. ‘They served the true 
and living God and became His followers. They 
waited for His Son from heaven, for the apostle had 
taught them in the very beginning the blessed hope, 
which brings the consummation of the believer’s 
redemption. In all this the Holy Spirit acted as He 
still does. He quickened them so that they could turn 
to God; He enabled them to serve God in a separated 


86 


OP FG oa et OS ew, | 87 


life, and gave them the patience of hope. Let it be 
noticed that neither in this epistle nor in the book of 
Acts is anything said that there were extraordinary 
manifestations of the Spirit of God amongst them. 
There is no mention made of the gift of tongues, the 
working of miracles and other sign gifts. It is indeed 
very significant that in the great Pauline epistles 
addressed to the church, except in Corinthians, nothing 
is said of the baptism with the Holy Spirit, the gift of 
tongues, the gift of healing and the gift of working 
miracles. Not a word of all this in Romans, Galatians, 
Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, Thessalonians and 
the cther epistles. 

Chapter iv:8. Another passage showing that be- 
lievers have the Holy Spirit as the gift of God. 

Chapter v:19. “Quench not the Spirit.””. In Ephe- 
sians we read the warning not to grieve the Spirit. 
Quenching the Spirit is not the same as grieving Him. 
The verse preceding and the verse which follows this 
brief exhortation explains what quenching the Spirit 
means. If we neglect to be thankful and do not praise 
Him for everything, then we quench the Spirit, for 
He is in us as the Spirit of praise and worship. If we 
do not follow His leading when we should speak of the 
Lord Jesus Christ, whether in a public meeting or in 
private, we quench Him. To quench the Spirit means 
to hinder His action in the midst of the church or in 
individual service. As we said in connection with the 
exhortation not to grieve the Spirit, so we say here, 
we may quench Him, but He will never leave us, in 
spite of our unfaithfulness. 

In the second epistle the Holy Spirit is mentioned 
only once by name, at the close of the second chapter 


88 CHAPTERGX 


(ii:13). This second chapter is prophetic and we can 
not pass it by without saying a word on the hindering 
One, who will be taken out of the way. In the first 
epistle is revealed the blessed hope of the coming of 
the Lord for His Saints. From the beginning of the 
second chapter in the second epistle we learn that the 
Thessalonian believers had been disturbed by false 
teachers who taught that the day of the Lord, the day 
of judgment and wrath for the unbelieving world was 
at hand. They went so far, it seems, as to send a 
spurious letter in the name of Paul. The inspired man 
of God informs the troubled Thessalonian Christians 
that the day of the Lord does not come till the falling 
away has come and the man of sin, the final, personal 
antichrist is revealed. He gives a picture of the char- 
acter and work of this masterpiece of Satan, the man 
of sin. All this he had taught during his stay in Thes- 
salonica (verse 5). Then we read the following words, 
“And now ye know what withholdeth that he might be 
revealed in his time. For the mystery of iniquity does 
already work, only He who now letteth will let, until 
He be taken out of the way.” We have written the 
person mentioned as the hindering One with a capital 
H—for we believe the person is the Holy Spirit. As 
long as He is in the world as He is now, the final great 
apostasy cannot come, nor can the man of sin be re- 
vealed. As we have seen the Holy Spirit dwells in the 
individual believer and He dwells therefore in the true 
church, which is the habitation of God by the Spirit. 
Some day the true church will be taken out of the 
world to meet the Lord in the air. Then the Holy 
Spirit will be no longer in the world as He is now here, 
that is, in the body of Christ. Through the true 


CHAPTER XI 89 


church, constituted of all believers, He keeps back the 
falling away and restrains Satan from putting his man 
into the world. But when He has finished the work 
in the completion of the church and her subsequent 
glorification, this restraining influence will be gone; 
“Then shall that Wicked be revealed.” Of course the 
Spirit of God will still do a work on earth after the 
true church has been raptured, just as He worked before 
the day of Pentecost. 

The one reference to the Holy Spirit in chapter ii:13 
needs no further comment. 


CHAPTER XIl 


The Holy Spirit in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus 


HE first epistle of Paul to Timothy is a confi- 

dential communication concerning the church as 
the house of God. It contains practical and important 
instructions as to the order which is to be maintained 
in this house. Pure doctrine, pure worship and a faith- 
ful ministry are the leading thoughts of this pastoral 
letter. 

The second epistle is the last Paul wrote. In this 
second epistle the church as the house of God is no 
longer mentioned. Instead of this we read of “the 
great house” in which are vessels to honor and some 
to dishonor and the believer is urged to purge himself 
from the vessels of dishonor. The great house is the 
prophetic picture of the professing church, which is 
the house in disorder. It is prophetic. What was to 
come in Christendom down to the days in which we 
live is foretold in this epistle. 

Chapter iii:16. “And without controversy great is 
the mystery of godliness: God is manifested in the 
flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of angels, preached 
unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received 
up into glory.” These are the facts connected with 
the person and work of the Lord Jesus Christ. His 
incarnation is mentioned first. Then comes ‘“‘justi- 
fied in the Spirit.” It tells us once more that the 
Lord Jesus Christ walked on earth in the Spirit of 
holiness, that, after having offered Himself by the 


90 


CHAPTER XII 91 


eternal Spirit, He was raised from among the dead 
also by the operation of the Spirit (Rom. viii:11). 

Chapter iv:1. “Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, 
that in the latter times some shall depart from the 
faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and the doctrines 
of demons.” Here the Spirit of God shows ‘“‘things 
to come” as promised by our Lord. He revealed 
through Paul the fact that as this present age proceeds 
and nears its close, a falling away will take place, and 
the apostates will give heed to seducing spirits and the 
doctrines of demons. How abundantly this prediction 
is verified in our times is known to all. These are the 
only two references in the first Epistle to Timothy in 
which the Holy Spirit is mentioned. 

2 Tim. i:7. “For God has not given us the Spirit 
of fear, but of power, and of love and of a sound mind.” 
Let us not overlook the ‘‘sound mind.” Many are 
not manifesting a sound mind, but are given to an 
enthusiasm as to spiritual things, fanaticism, if not 
worse, which is of a carnal origin. The Holy Spirit in 
the believer is not the Spirit of fear, but power, love 
and a sound mind are His marks. 

2 Tim.i:14. ‘That good thing which was committed 
unto thee keep by the Holy Spirit who dwelleth in you.” 
The preceding verse speaks of holding fast the form of 
sound words. This expression is a striking argument 
for verbal inspiration. The truth of God is conveyed in 
the very words of God by the Spirit of God (1 Cor. 
ii). It is to be held fast in faith and in love. It does 
not mean a certain creed put together by man, but 
the whole truth of God as revealed by Him. And 
whatever good thing is committed unto the believer, 
in the form of a gift, must be kept by the energy and 


92 CHAPTER it 


power of the Holy Spirit, who dwells in the believer. 
What we have received, the knowledge of the form of 
sound words and the gift imparted, must be used. ‘In 
proportion as we do not care to communicate to others 
the things which we have received, we shall find their 
power over our own souls diminishing and their sweet- 
ness also.” 

These are the only two passages in which the Spirit 
of God is referred to in the second epistle to Timothy. 

In the Epistle to Titus the Holy Spirit is mentioned 
but once. In chapter iii:5-6 we read, “Not by works 
of righteousness which we have done, but according to 
His mercy He saved us, by the washing of regenera- 
tion, and renewing of the Holy Spirit, which is shed 
on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Saviour.” 
The believer born again is born of the Spirit. He is 
also shed upon us abundantly, as the gift, to be in 
and with the believer. The renewing of the Spirit 
does not mean, as it has been explained, another com- 
ing of the Spirit to the believer’s heart, or a greater 
measure of the Spirit. But it means that He works 
in the believer, communicating daily, if He is unhin- 
dered, all that is ours in Christ. He takes of the things 
of Christ and shows them unto us. It is in this way 
He renews us and keeps us in the real enjoyment of 
the salvation which we have, and the redemption of 
the future “the hope of eternal life.” 


CHAPTER XIII 
The Holy Spirit in the Epistle to the Hebrews 


HAT this epistle was originally addressed to Jews 

who professed the name of the Lord Jesus is shown 
by its contents. This fact and their peculiar condition 
must never be lost sight of in the study of it. We may 
assume that the epistle was especially addressed to the 
church in Jerusalem with its thousands of Hebrew- 
Christians, who were still zealous for the law. There 
are a few references to the Holy Spirit in this epistle 
which we have to examine. 

Chapter ii:4. “God also bearing them witness, both 
with signs and wonders, and with divers miracles, and 
gifts of the Holy Spirit, according to His own will.” 
This evidently refers to the days of the apostles, when 
the gospel was preached to the Jews first. As we saw 
in the comment on the Holy Spirit in Acts, He mani- 
fested His power in signs and miracles, because the 
Jews asked for signs. 

Chapter iii:7. ‘‘Wherefore as the Holy Spirit saith, 
today if ye will hear His voice.” This is a significant 
expression. It embodies the belief of the Jews, that 
it was not David who spoke, or the prophets, but the 
Holy Spirit. It might be well to use this phrase more 
in these days of the denial of the inspiration of the 
Word of God and to say instead of, as Paul, Peter or 
John said, ‘‘as the Holy Spirit saith.” 

Chapter vi:4. “For it is impossible for those who 
were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly 
gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Spirit, and 


93 


94 CHAPTER XIII 


have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of 
the world to come, if they shall fall away, to renew 
them again unto repentance, seeing they crucify to 
themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an 
open shame.” This is a solemn warning addressed 
to those Hebrews who were undecided and in danger 
of turning back to Judaism after they had been under 
the influence of the gospel and the Spirit of God. In 
abandoning the truth brought to them by the Spirit 
of God that Christ is the Lamb of God and turning 
once more to the Jewish sacrifices, they crucified the 
Son of God afresh and put Him to open shame. There 
is nothing in the passage, so often used by Arminian 
theologians, to contradict the perseverance of the 
Saints, which would warrant the belief that those who 
are warned were real believers. The description of 
these apostates does not speak of them as justified 
believers, born again and children of God. As the 
‘‘Numerical Bible” states, “the apostle after describ- 
ing them, immediately adds, as to those whom he is 
addressing: But beloved, we are persuaded better 
things of you even things that accompany salvation, 
though we thus speak. This is the most distinct 
assurance that he had no thought of one who had 
known salvation incurring the doom of an apostate.” 
The phrase ‘‘partakers of the Holy Spirit” does not 
mean at all the gift of the Spirit. The Holy Spirit is 
the power which is present in Christianity; it is pres- 
ent when the gospel is preached. Those who come 
under the preaching of the gospel in the energy of the 
Holy Spirit partake of the Spirit, but that does not 
mean salvation or the gift of life. 

Chapter ix:8. “The Holy Spirit thus signifying, 


CHAPTER X1hI 95 


that the way into the Holiest of all was not yet made 
manifest, while as the first tabernacle was yet stand- 
ing.” ‘This is another interesting passage. It teaches 
that the Holy Spirit is the author of the types, the 
shadow things in the old dispensation. He is the 
author of the Word of God, the communicator of the 
revelation of God and He also reveals the same truth 
in the levitical institutions, the tabernacle service, the 
sacrifices, the offerings, the priesthood and its differ- 
ent ceremonies. ‘The marvelous teachings revealed 
through these institutions are sufficient evidence that 
the Holy Spirit has produced all. 

Chapter ix:14. “How much more shall the blood of 
Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered Himself 
without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead 
works to serve the living God.” It is an additional 
truth as to the relation of the Holy Spirit to the Lord 
Jesus Christ. As man on earth, in the perfection and 
value of His person, He offered Himself, by the eternal 
Spirit, without spot unto God. This offering by the 
eternal Spirit took place on the cross. Therefore, on 
account of this spotless offering by the eternal Spirit, 
every sinner who comes to God through Him, is purged 
from dead works to serve the living God. 

Chapter x:15. ‘‘Whereof the Holy Spirit also is a 
witness to us.” ‘This is spoken in connection with a 
quotation from the prophet Jeremiah. The passage 
shows that the Spirit of God witnesses and speaks 
through and in the prophets. The witness of the 
Spirit is in the Word of God. 

Chapter x:29.* He is called in this verse “‘the Spirit 
of Grace’: because He is given through the grace of 
God and He communicates that grace to the heart and 


96 CHAP DER Await 


life of the believing sinner. This exhortation had its 
special meaning for those Hebrews who had not been 
fully converted and were halting between two opinions; 
it is of the same meaning as chapter vi:1-6. 

There is no mention of the Holy Spirit in the Epistle 
of James. The passage in chapter iv:5 has reference 
to the spirit of man, which lusteth to envy. Those 
addressed by James in his epistle (the earliest of all 
written, about 45 A. D.) the believers among the twelve 
tribes of Israel scattered abroad, possessed the gift of 
the Spirit like all other believers. Being an intensely 
practical epistle, the doctrine of Christianity not being 
the subject unfolded, nothing is said of the Holy 
Spirit. 


CHAPTER XIV 
The Holy Spirit in the Epistles of Peter 


HESE two epistles are of a practical nature, ad- 

dressed to the sojourners in the dispersion, that is, 
to Jewish Christians who were scattered throughout the 
provinces mentioned in the opening verse of the first 
epistle. 

Chapter i:2. “Elect according to the foreknowledge 
of God the Father, through sanctification of the Spirit, 
unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus 
Christ, Grace unto you, and peace be multiplied.” 

Here the Holy Spirit is mentioned as He who sets 
the believer apart for a certain action. Israel as a 
nation was set apart externally and by ordinances; the 
believer’s sanctification, or setting apart, is through the 
Spirit. The setting apart by the Spirit is unto the 
obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. 
He sets the believer apart unto the obedience of Christ 
to obey as He obeyed, as well as the sprinkling of the 
blood, which cleanses from all sin and gives confidence 
before God, as well as liberty and power to practice the 
obedience of Christ. 

Chapter i:11-12. The Spirit of Christ was in the 
prophets and testified through them beforehand the 
sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow. 
Our Lord said to the Jews “Search the Scriptures . 
for they are they which testify of Me.” The Spirit of 
God revealed in the Old Testament the sufferings and 
the glory of Christ. But it was only when the Holy 
Spirit was sent down from heaven that the full salvation 
was made known. 

97 


98 CHAPTER XIV 


Chapter i:22. Obeying the truth is through the 
energy of the Spirit of God. 

Chapter iii:18. This much misunderstood passage 
mentions the Holy Spirit. The false doctrines of Rome 
are built upon 1 Peter iii:18-20. Many protestant 
teachers also believe in a literal descent of Christ into 
Hades. The text is fully examined and explained in 
Volume IX of the Annotated Bible. The question is 
what does “quickened by the Spirit” mean? Those 
who believe that Christ between death and resurrection 
descended into the lower regions believe that He went 
there in His human spirit and therefore they hold that 
it was His human spirit which was quickened. But if 
His human spirit was quickened, that is received life, 
after His body died on the cross, His Spirit whom He 
commended into the hands of the Father, must have 
also died, for if His Spirit had not died, it needed no 
quickening. But this is an unsound doctrine, for the 
teaching of the Word of God is that only His body died. 
This is what we read here, “He was put to death in 
the flesh.” The word quickened applies to His 
physical resurrection. ‘The Spirit of God quickened 
Him (Rom. viii:11)._ The same Spirit also was in Noah 
and preached through him during the days while the 
ark was preparing, in which only eight souls were saved, 
while the unbelieving mass of that day are now the 
spirits in prison. 

Chapter iv:6. This verse does not teach that the 
gospel is preached to the dead now, but that the gospel 
was preached to them, who are now dead, that is, when 
they were living. They heard the preaching that they 
might either live according to God in the Spirit, or be 


CHAPTER XIV 99 


judged as men responsible for what they had done in 
the flesh. 

Chapter iv:14. “If ye be reproached for the name 
of Christ, happy are ye, for the Spirit of glory and of 
God resteth upon you; on their part He is evil spoken 
of, but on your part He is glorified.” This is a blessed 
comforting promise. Whenever a believer is reproached 
for the name of Christ, the Spirit of glory and of God 
rests upon him. If Christians were more separated, 
more faithful, more loyal and devoted, they would 
also suffer more reproach outside of the camp and then 
know more of the presence and power of the Spirit of 
glory. 

In the second epistle of Peter the Spirit of God is 
mentioned in only one passage, chapter i:21. ‘For 
the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, 
but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the 
Holy Spirit.”” It is not without meaning that in the 
epistles of Peter and in the epistle to the Hebrews the 
Holy Spirit is repeatedly revealed as the author of the 
Old Testament Scriptures. In Hebrews we read in 
the very beginning of the epistle that God hath spoken 
unto the fathers by the prophets. As we have pointed 
out the phrase is used in quoting in that epistle from 
the Old Testament “‘the Holy Spirit saith.” Peter in 
his first epistle declares that the Spirit of Christ was 
in the prophets, and in this passage he shows that 
prophecy came as holy men were moved by the Holy 
Spirit. These epistles are Hebrew-Christian epistles, 
the original documents were sent to believers among 
the Jews, which does not mean that they have less 
authority for us. It shows that the Hebrews believed 
that the Old Testament is God-breathed, that the Holy 
Spirit is the author. 


CHAPTER XV 
The Holy Spirit in the Epistle of John 


HE purpose and message of this epistle, which has 
rightly been called ‘‘a family letter,” are stated 
in the following passages: Chapter i:1-3, i:4, v:13. 
The great truth which is developed by the Spirit of 
God is not so much the life which the believer has in 
Christ, that is, the eternal life imparted unto him, as 
it is that life which is in the believer in its manifesta- 
tion, corresponding to the life which the Lord Jesus 
lived on earth. John does not speak in his inspired 
writings of believers as “sons of God” (John i:12; 
1 John iii:1, 2 are mistranslations) but as children. 
The Greek word means ‘“‘born ones.” We become 
members of the family of God by the new birth. 
Chapter ii:20-27. “But ye have an unction from 
the Holy One, and ye know all things.” “But the 
anointing which ye have received of Him abideth in 
you, and ye need not that any man teach you, but as 
the same anointing teacheth you all things, and is 
truth, and is no lie, and even as it has taught you, ye 
shall abide in Him.” The Holy Spirit is not mentioned 
by name, but He is the unction and believers possess 
this anointing of which John speaks. The Greek word 
for anointing is the word ‘‘chrisma.” The same word 
is used in Luke iv:18; Acts iv:27, x:38 and Heb. i:9, 
and in each case it is applied to the Lord Jesus as the 
anointed One. In 2 Cor. i:21 it is used as here of the 
believer. The word employed in James v:14 “anoint- 
ing the sick with oil’ is the word aleipho, and it is 


100 


GHAPTER XV 101 


always used to denote a physical anointing; the fol- 
lowing passages use this word: Matt. vi:17; Mark 
vi:13, xvi:1; Luke vii:38, 46; John xi:2, xii:3. It 
seems to prove that the anointing with oil in James 
v:14, so misinterpreted in our times, does not mean 
a spiritual anointing but a physical anointing for the 
benefit of the suffering of the body. Who ever has 
invented the practice of the present day “divine heal- 
ers” of taking a drop of oil and putting that drop on 
the forehead, calling it “anointing” must have been 
ignorant of the meaning of this word. 

The anointing, or unction, which John mentions in 
this passage comes with the gift of the Spirit. The 
Holy Spirit dwelling in the heart of the believer is the 
anointing the believer has. Prophets, priests and kings 
were in the old dispensation anointed with oil. Our 
Lord was anointed with the Holy Spirit, because He 
is the Prophet, the Priest and the King. We also 
mention the outcast leper and the ceremonial appointed 
in the Old Testament for his cleansing. In his un- 
clean and vile condition he is the type of the sinner. 
He was cleansed by blood and anointed with oil, the 
emblem of the Spirit of God. 

Like the Lord Jesus, the believer is anointed with 
the Holy Spirit, to share in His work. In conversion, 
having been cleansed by the blood of the Son of God, 
we are anointed by the Spirit, having received Him, 
and therefore the believer can act as a prophet, as one 
who tells forth the story of redeeming love, sent into 
the world even as He was sent into the world. This 
anointing constitutes the believer a priest, to exercise 
a holy priesthood in offering up spiritual sacrifices 
(1 Peter ii:5). The same anointing is ours in view of 


QWemversary of Southern Calitosm’9 





102 CHA PRR 


the coming glory when we shall reign with Him as 
kings. 

Here again we meet the perversion of the truth, for 
some teach that this anointing is the portion of only 
a small number of Christians, who have sought this 
unction in a special experience. This experience is 
generally called by some unscriptural term, or identical 
with the baptism of the Spirit. The context teaches 
something different. It will be noticed that the apostle 
John, in speaking of the anointing, addresses not the 
fathers in Christ, those of riper experience, who have 
walked in the truth for years, nor does he address the 
“young men,” those spiritually so, but he addresses 
the’very youngest in the truth, the “little children,” 
those who were but recently brought into the family 
by the new birth. The anointing by the Spirit is there- 
fore the gift of God to the feeblest believer, to the 
youngest in the truth; it is a family gift and comes 
along with the new birth. This anointing, the in- 
dwelling Spirit, may be called the instinct of the new 
nature. By it the believer knows what is of the truth 
and what is not. The anointing abides in us that we 
may know the truth and understand the Scriptures. 
We give an illustration. 

It has happened to us a number of times that young 
Christians appealed to us for help in connection with 
certain books they had bought and had begun to study. 
One wrote as follows: ‘Some person came to my home 
and showed me certain helps for Bible study. The 
person said the proceeds were to be used in missionary 
work and therefore urged me to make a purchase. As 
I looked through them I found many Scripture refer- 
ences_and here and there saw something about the 


GHAR DER (-X0V 103 


coming of the Lord. As they were cheap I purchased 
them. But I must tell you after having read a good 
many pages I am really afraid to go on in the study 
of these volumes. A heavy feeling comes upon me, as 
if something is wrong and a voice seems to warn me 
against these books.” ‘Then the writer informed us 
that the books were by a pastor, Charles T. Russell, and 
published by the “International Bible Students Asso- 
ciation,” that evil cult which denies the essential and 
eternal Deity of the Lord Jesus Christ along with other 
denials of fundamental truths. The writer said that 
she was young in the faith and could not detect error, 
but felt that something was wrong. This illustrates 
the anointing and what it does for the child of God. 
Chapter iii:24; iv:13. ‘And hereby we know that 
He abideth in us, by the Spirit which He hath given us.” 
The presence of the Spirit of God in the child of God is 
the evidence that Christ is in us and abides in us. 
Chapter iv:1-2. How do we know the Spirit of God 
in the midst of the many spirits, which come under,the 
guise of being the Spirit of God? The spirits are’to,be 
tried (tested) for many false prophets are gone*out.into 
the world. The true test is the person of the Lord 
Jesus Christ. Anything which denies the full glory 
of the Lord Jesus Christ, which in any way detracts 
from His glory, emanates from the spirit of anti-christ. 
It may be a small matter in the eyes of man, 
which is unscripturally taught concerning the person 
of Christ, but that small thing will finally show 
itself as an error which leads to the denial of Christ. 
Over a hundred years ago a movement was in existence 
in England which claimed to be another Pentecost, just 
like the movements of our times. The leader, Edward 





104 CHAP TE Rex y 


Irving, put great stress upon the incarnation, that 
Christ is come in the flesh, and other doctrines which 
are true. But the power in that movement suggested 
that Christ might have sinned and then the demons 
brought forth the evil doctrine of the peccability of our 
Lord, that He had a corrupt nature, that sin was in 
Him. Such is the subtilty of the serpent. 

Chapter v:6-8. We must omit the seventh verse, as 
the oldest manuscripts do not contain it and it is 
generally agreed that the verse is an interpolation. In 
verses 6 and 8 the Holy Spirit is mentioned as the Spirit 
of Truth who bears witness. Christ came by water 
and blood, the water stands for cleansing, the blood 
..for.expiation, and therefore the Spirit is here; by Him 
we are enabled to appreciate and to rest in the value of 
the water and the blood, as it came from His side, and 
know the blessed power of both. 

The second and third epistles of John, being private 
letters, do not mention the Holy Spirit. 


CHAPTER XVI 
The Holy Spirit in the Epistle of Jude 


HIS little epistle has been put into the very last 

place in the canon of the New Testament, because 
it reveals prophetically the final conditions which will, 
prevail in the professing church on earth. The end 
| will be apostasy from the faith delivered once and for | 
\ all to the saints. Believers are therefore called upon / 
by the Spirit of God to contend earnestly for that 
faith. Twice Jude mentions the Spirit of God. 

Verse 19. ‘“These be they who separate themselves, 
soulical, having not the Spirit.” Here is a picture of 
the Modernist. He separates himself from the true 
church by his infidelity and denials of the doctrine of 
Christ. But the trouble with the modernist.is that he. “75 
has not the Spirit. He may be an educated man, a 
moral man and very ‘“‘soulical” and religious, as any 
natural man may be, but he has not the Spirit of God, 
and that is why he is_a_modernist. He has not the 
Holy Spirit because he never was born again. 

Verse 20. ‘Praying in the Holy Spirit.” Again we 
call attention to the fact that there is no exhortation 
or command after Pentecost to pray for the gift of the 
Spirit. 


105 





CHAPTER XVII 
The Holy Spirit in the Book of Revelation 


HE book of Revelation, being the great New 

Testament book of prophecy, gives a forecast as to 
the church on earth, the time of tribulation and judg- 
ment, after the true church has left this earthly scene, 
the coming of the Lord, the reign of Christ on earth and 
the consummation of all things when time merges into 
eternity. We look therefore not for any doctrines 
about the Holy Spirit in this book. He is mentioned 
in a number of passages. 

Chapter i:4; iii:1; iv:5. The seven spirits of which 
these three verses speak is the Holy Spirit, the third 
person of the Trinity in His own completeness and 
diverse activities. 


Chapter i:10. “I was in the Spirit on the Lord’s 
Day.” ‘This statement has been perverted by some as 
meaning that John found himself transported by the 
Spirit to the day of the Lord, that is, the day of His 
visible manifestation. The Lord’s day means here the 
first day of the week, and not the future day of His 
coming. On the first day of the week, the day which 
tells out the glory of Him who died for our sins, was 
buried and rose again, John enjoyed the special up- 
lifting power of the Holy Spirit. And so may we also 
when we think of Him and remember Him. 

Chapter ii and iii. Seven times we read here “let 
him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches.” 
The seven church messages are prophetic of the history 


106 


CHAPTER XVII 107 


of the church on earth and the message of the Spirit is 
found in each and is to be heeded. 

Chapter xi:11. ‘And after three days and a half the 
Spirit of Life from God entered into them, and they 
stood upon their feet, and great fear fell upon them 
which saw them.” The Spirit of life is the Holy Spirit 
active in resurrection. 

Chapter xiv:13. This is the message of the Spirit 
concerning the blessed dead who die in the Lord during 
the time of the great tribulation; they die the martyr’s | 
death to be sharers of the first resurrection. 

Chapter xix:10. ‘The testimony of Jesus is the 
Spirit of Prophecy.” In prophecy the Holy Spirit 
bears His testimony to the Lord Jesus Christ (1 Peter 
into}: 

Chapter xxii:17. “And the Spirit and the bride say, 
Come. And let him that heareth say, Come. And 
let him that is athirst.come. And whosoever will, let 
him take the water of life freely.” 

This is the last time the Spirit of God is mentioned 
in the Word of God. He utters a Come. This does 
not mean that He invites the sinner to come, but the 
“Come” is addressed to Him, who speaks in the 
previous verse: “I am in the root and offspring of 
David, the bright and morning star,” the Lord Jesus 
Christ. He desires His Coming again, to receive the 
Kingdom, the power and the glory. The bride is the 
church. The Spirit in her also calls, Come. Some 
blessed day the “Come” of the Spirit and the bride 
will be answered and He who promised to come again, 
come to take His Saints into the Father’s house. And 
while we wait for Him we pray in the Spirit “Even so, 
come Lord Jesus.” 


108 CHAPTER VAV EL 


The invitation for him who is athirst to come, and 
the final “whosoever” to come and take the water of 
life freely, is the last gospel invitation extended by the 
Spirit of God. 


CHAPTER XVIII 


One Hundred New Testament Facts as to the 
Holy Spirit 


E give a summary of the teaching of the New 
Testament concerning the Holy Spirit. 

1. The Holy Spirit and the Lord Jesus Christ. He 
was conceived by the Holy Spirit; anointed by the 
Spirit; the Spirit was not given to Him by measure, 
but was upon Him in His divine fulness; He was led 
by the Spirit; His ministry was in the power of the 
Spirit; His works were done by the Spirit of God; He 
promised the Spirit to His disciples; He offered Him- 
self by the eternal Spirit; He was raised by the Spirit; 
He gave commandment by the Spirit; He sent forth 
the Spirit. 

2. John the Baptist and the Spirit. John the Baptist 
was filled with the Spirit from his mother’s womb; 
being the greatest of the Old Testament prophets he 
witnessed concerning the kingdom, the first and second 
advent of Christ. The national promise to Israel as to 
the gift of the Spirit and the new birth of the nation 
is included in his message. The promised outpouring 
of the Holy Spirit upon the people Israel is still un- 
fulfilled. It will be fulfilled in the day of the second 
coming of Christ. 

. The Spirit and the New Birth (John iii:5). 

. The Spirit the well of living water (John iv:14). 

. The Spirit and true Worship (John iv :23-24). —- 

. The Spirit and the Words of Christ (John vi:63). 

. The Spirit and outflowing service (John vii:37-39). 
109 


SIA Oh W 


if 


110 CHAPTER XVilf 


8. The Spirit as the other Comforter, the Spirit of 
Truth (John xiv:16; xv:26). 

9. The convicting Demonstration of the Spirit (John 
xvi:7-14). 

10. The testimony of the Spirit (John xvi:13-14). 

11. The In-breathing of the Spirit (John xx:22). 

12. The Spirit and Power (Acts i:8). 

13. The Advent of the Spirit (Acts ii:1-4). 

14. The outward manifestations of the Spirit (Acts 
ii:1-13). 

15. The Witness of the Spirit through Peter (Acts 
i1:14-36). 

16. The Holy Spirit and the Jews (Acts ii:38). 

17. The Filling with the Spirit (Acts iv:8, 31; Eph. 
v:18). 

18. The Spirit and Ananias and Sapphira (Acts 
v:3, 9). 

19. The Holy Spirit and Obedience (Acts v:32). 

20. The Holy Spirit as Administrator in the Church 
(Acts vi:3, 5, 10). 

21. The Spirit of God and Stephen’s Vision (Acts 
vii:51, 55). 

22. The Spirit catching away Philip (Acts viii:39). 
23. The Spirit filling Saul of Tarsus (Acts ix:17). 

24. The Comfort of the Spirit (Acts ix:31). 

25. The Spirit and the Gentiles (Acts x:38-47). 

26. Prophecy by the Spirit (Acts xi:28 and xxi). 
- 27. The Holy Spirit and Missions (Acts xiii:1-9). 

28. The guidance of the Spirit (Acts xvi:6, 7). 

29. The Holy Spirit and John’s Disciples (Acts 
xix:2, 6). 
fe. 30. Disobeying the Spirit of God (Acts xx:22, 23, 28; 
xxi:4, 11). 


— 


CHARTER XVILI 111 


31. The Spirit the appointing power in the church 
(Acts xx:28). 

32. The Law of the Spirit (Rom. viii:2). 

33. The Spirit and the Flesh (Rom. viii:5-6). al 

34. The Spirit quickening the body in resurrection 
(Rom. viii:11). 

35. The Spirit of Adoption and His witness to Son- 
ship (Rom. viii:14-16). 

36. The First fruits of the Spirit (Rom. viii:23). 

37. The Intercession of the Spirit (Rom. viii:26-27). 

38. The Activities of the Spirit in the Believer (Rom. 
ix:1, xiv:17, xv:13, 19). 


39. Preaching in the power of the Spirit (1 Cor. ii:4)...+ 


40. The fullness of Redemption revealed by the Spirit 
(1 Cor, 33:12), 

41. The Spirit and the Word of God (1 Cor. ii:13, 14). 

42. Every believer the temple of the Holy Spirit (1 Cor. 
iii1:16, vi:17). 

43. The different gifts of the Spirit (1 Cor. xii:3-13). 

44. The Baptism of the Spirit and its scriptural 
meaning (1 Cor. xii:13). 

45. The Spirit and the Gift of Tongues (1 Cor. xiv:2, 
14, 15, 16). 

46. The Earnest of the Spirit (2 Cor. 1:22, v:5; Ephes. 
1:13). 

47. The Holy Spirit in His life-giving and trans- 
forming power (2 Cor. iii). 

48. The Communion of the Holy Spirit (2 Cor. 
xiii:14). 

49. The Spirit and the Works of the Law (Gal. iii:2). 

50. The Spirit given to the sons of God (Gal. iv:6). 

51. The Conflict between the Spirit and the flesh (Gal. 
iv:29). 


O 


112 CHAPT BR AW hit 


52. Waiting by the Spirit for the hope of righteousness 
(Gal. v:5). 

53. Walking in the Spirit (Gal. v:16-18). 'D, 

54. The Fruit of the Spirit (Gal. v:22-25). 

55. The Spirit and the Gospel of Salvation (Ephes. 


56. The Spirit sealing every true believer (Ephes. i:14, 
iv:31). 

57. The access by the Spirit to the Father (Ephes. 
11:18). 

58. The Habitation of God through the Spirit (Ephes. 
43:22). 
= 59, The Spirit revealing the Church (Ephes. iii:5). 

60. The Spirit strengthening the inner man (Ephes. 
iii:16). 

61. The Unity of the Spirit (Ephes. iv:3). : 

62. The abiding gifts of the Spirit (Ephes. iv:11). .) 

63. The Spirit in goodness, righteousness and truth 
(Ephes. v:9). 

64. The Sword of the Spirit (Ephes. vi:17). 

65. The Holy Spirit and Prayer (Ephes. vi:18). ~~ 

66. Grieving the Holy Spirit (Ephes. iv:30). 

67. The Supply of the Spirit (Phil. i:19). 

68. The Fellowship of the Spirit (Phil. ii:1). — 6 

69. The Spirit and the Colossians (Col. i). 

70. The Power and Assurance of the Spirit (1 Thess. 


. 71. The Quenching of the Spirit (1 Thess. v:19). 
72. The Hindering Power of the Spirit (2 Thess. ii). 
73. The Spirit predicting Apostasy (1 Tim. iv:1-2). 
74. The Spirit and love and a sound mind (2 Tim. i:7). 
75. The Spirit and sound words (2 Tim. i:14). 
76. The Renewing of the Spirit (Titus iii:6). 


Crna CER XVII 113 


77. The Holy Spirit and miracles (Heb. ii:4). 

78. The utterance of the Spirit (Heb. iii:7). 

79. The Participation in the Holy Spirit (Heb. vi:4). 
80. Truth revealed by the Spirit through Types (Heb. 


81. The Spirit and the Sacrifice of Christ (Heb. ix:14). 

82. The Witness of the Spirit through the Word of 
God (Heb. x:15). 

83. The Sanctification of the Spirit (1 Peter i:2).<— @& 

84. The Spirit revealing Christ through the prophets 
(1 Peter i:11-12). 

85. Obeying the Truth through the Spirit (1 Peter 1:22) 

86. The Spirit and the spirits now in Prison (1 Peter 
iii:18). 

87. The Spirit and those now dead (1 Peter iv:6). 

88. The Spirit and Suffering (1 Peter iv:14). 

89. The Holy Spirit and Inspiration of the Old Testa- 
ment (2 Peter i:21). 

90. The Unction of the Spirit (1 John ii:20-27). 

91. Knowing the Truth by the Spirit (1 John ii:27). 

92. Christ abiding in the believer by the Spirit (1 John — 
i1i:24, viii:13). 

93. Trying the spirits by the Spirit of God (1 John 
iv:1-2). 

94. The realizing power of the Spirit (1 John v:6-8). 

95. Apostates without the Spirit (Jude, verse 19). 

96. Praying in the Spirit (Jude, verse 20). ¢ 

97. The Spirit's messages to the churches (Rev. ii 
and ili). 

98. The Holy Spirit in His own completeness (Rev. 
i:4, iii:1, iv:5). 

99. The Testimony of Jesus the Spirit of Prophecy 
(Rev. xix:10). 

100. The Longing of the Spirit (Rev. xxi:17). 

FINIS 


oe 


Odtiversity of Southern Califeraisa 








| 


rh . 


rat 


ihe ; ES ie 


; ty y > = fia i : a re i) iy 7 
¥ eae eke TS es, — 
a " ae 7% maple Somers +i ae Bs Phe 


Pa ae 5 
ind sagen a 
al o ty Sea » t 


hae Kay oe an 





BT121 .G3 


| Gaebelien, Arno Clemens, 1861- 
The Holy Spirit in the New Testament : 


BT 
[21 
G2 





330981 


os 
ee 
mene nes 


ie 
Pade 
Etat 





