Gardner-Webb University 


M. CHRISTOPHER WHITE 
SCHOOL OF DIVINITY 


‘Donated 


Giom the Library of 
Tas (temp ible 


Dover Memorial Library 
Gardner-Webb University 
P.O. Box 836 
Boiling Springs, N.C. 28017 


Dover Memorial Library 
Gardner-Webb University 
_. P.O. Box 836 
Boiling Springs, N.C. 28017 


LEE 


GOSPEL OF MATTHEW 


AN EXPOSITION 


By 


A. C. GAEBELEIN 
Editor of “Our Hope.” 


VOLUME I. 


PUBLICATION OFFICE, OUR HOPE 
456 Fourth Avenue 
NEw York City 


PAGE 

EN GRODUGUION® (ic sie esis Coo Eak ocak oe ChoE arene arene core Tienes ogee 3 
CHAPTER Mig Mat rN ae oth aeton sl cea tos cn Ahan 17 
‘ DEL aetoty, staat ates te shar ma ee ira ks ERE aso Be 38 

ss LD sy Segoe cc REO He MITES in mee ee 53 

= TEAES 0 OO RP ce ea NO a 3 RT ANRC  R SS Deal 79 

a/c apa Ree ae rary ty FORT =o Se in a a Det RT 105 

- A [oie c, ego t AP  ae ase Nes et Wa te ERE Une REE A 131 

ce NOU em ae cus ets te Seva titamsitinre uw a UE) cht al 150 

Ei? OUEST reac eee 165 

oy TENG eee re, ab cs Cnaaentr och setae omer GA ENS Dl a 184 

5 DR pee ee oer names an isie R OTR ide Bie Mane ee 203 

Fe 2B Eee Ry ea tg KS OL ROD Ry A ae: 218 

ss A ae ge aig Rowe oe, Ce 234 

EMME AL Tete oes hay Oe ainda NE ae TRO Sisal ose «ose, oleroe wie eRe DETe eas he 259 


INTRODUCTION. 


The Gospel of Matthew stands first among the Gospels 
and in the New Testament, because it was first written and 
may be rightly termed the Genesis of the New Testament. 
Genesis, the first book of the Bible, contains in itself the 
entire "Bible, and so it is with the first Gospel; it is the book 
of the beginnings of a new dispensation. It is like a mighty 
treé. The roots are deeply sunk in massive rocks while its 
uncountable branches and twigs extend upward higher and 
higher in perfect symmetry and beauty. The foundation is 
the Old Testament with its Messianic and Kingdom prom- 
ises. Out of this all is developed in perfect harmony, reach- 
ing higher and higher into the new dispensation and to the 
beginning of the millennial age. 

The instrument chosen by the Holy Spirit to write this 
Gospel was Matthew. He was a Jew. However, he did not 
belong to the religious, educated class, to the scribes; but he 
belonged to the class which was most bitterly hated. He 
was a publican, that is a tax gatherer. The Roman govern- 
ment had appointed officials whose duty it was to have the 
legal tax gathered, and these officials, mostly, if not all Gen- 
tiles, appointed the actual collectors, who were generally 
Jews. Only the most unscrupulous among the Jews would 
hire themselves out for the sake of gain to the avowed 


4 


enemy of Jerusalem. Wherever there was still a ray of 
hope for Messiah’s coming, the Jew would naturally shrink 
from being associated with the Gentiles, who were to be 
swept away from the land with the coming of the King. 
For this reason the tax gatherers, being Roman employees, 
were hated by the Jews even more bitterly than the Gentiles 
themselves. Such a hated tax gatherer was the writer of 
the first Gospel. How the grace-of God is revealed in his 
call we shall see later. That he was chosen to write this 
first Gospel is in itself significant, for it speaks of a new 
order of things about to be introduced, namely, the ‘call of 
the despised Gentiles. F 
Internal evidences seem to show that most likely original- 

ly Matthew wrote the Gospel in Aramaeic, the Semitic dia- 
lect then spoken in Palestine. The Gospel was later trans- 
lated into Greek. This, however, is certain, that the Gospel 
of Matthew is pre-eminently the Jewish Gospel. There are 
many passages in it, which in their fundamental meaning 
can only be correctly understood by one who is quite familiar 
with Jewish customs and the traditional teachings of the 
elders. Because it is the Jewish Gospel, it is dispensational 
throughout. It is safe to say that a person, no matter how 
learned or devoted, who does not hold the clearly revealed 
dispensational truths concerning the Jews, the Gentiles and~ 
the church of God will fail to understand Matthew. This~ 
is, alas, too much the case, and well it would be if it were 
not more than individual failure to understand; but it is 
more than that. Confusion, error, false doctrine is the final 
outcome, when the right key to any part of God’s Word 


5 


is lacking. If the dispensational character of Matthew were 


- understood, no ethical teaching from the so-called Sermon 
- on the Mount at the expense of the Atonement of our Lord 


Jesus Christ would be possible, nor would there be room 
for the subtle, modern delusion, so universal now, of a “so- 


cial Christianity” which aims at lifting up the masses and 


the reformation of the world. How different matters would 
be in Christendom if its leading teachers and preachers, 
commentators and professors, had understood and would 
understand the meaning of the seven parables in Mat- 
thew xiii, with its deep and solemn lessons. When we think 
how many of the leaders of religious thcught reject 
and even oppose all dispensational teachings, and never 
learned how to divide the Word of truth rightly, it is not 
strange that so many of these men dare to stand up and say 
that the Gospel of Matthew as well as the other Gospels and 
the different parts of the New Testament contain numerous 
contradictions and errors. Out of this failure to discern 
dispensational truths has likewise arisen the attempt, by a 
very well meaning class, to harmonize the Gospel records 
and to arrange all the events in the life of our Lord in a 
chronological order, and thus produce a life of Jesus Christ, 
our Lord, as we have a descriptive life of Napoleon or other 
“great men. The Holy Spirit has never undertaken to pro- 
duce a life of Christ. That is very evident by the fact that 
the greater part of .the life of our Lord is passed over in 


_ silence. Nor was it in the mind of the Spirit to report all the 


words and miracles and the movements of our Lord, or to 
record all the events which took place during His public 


6 


ministry, and to arrange them in a chronological order, 
What presumption, then, in man to attempt to do that which 
the Holy Spirit never attempted! If the Holy Spirit never 
intended that the records of our Saviour should be strictly 
chronological, how vain and foolish then, if not more, the 
attempt to bring out a harmony of the different Gospels! 
One has correctly said, “The Holy Spirit is not a reporter, 
but an editor.” This is well said. A reporter’s business is 
to report events as they happen. The editor arranges the 
material in a way to suit himself, and leaves out or makes 
comment just as he thinks best. This the Holy Spirit has 
done in giving four Gospels, which are not a mechanical 
reporting of the doings of a person called Jesus of Naz- 
areth, but the spiritual unfoldings of the blessed person and 
work of our Saviour and Lord, as King of the Jews, ser- 
vant in obedience, Son of Man and the only begotten of the 
Father. We cannot enter more deeply into this now, but in 
the exposition of our Gospel we shall illustrate this fact. 

In the Gospel of Matthew, as the Jewish Gospel, speak- 
ing of the King and the kingdom, dispensational throughout, 
treating of the Jews, the Gentiles and even the church of 
God in anticipation, as no other Gospel does, every*hing must 
be looked upon from the dispensational point of vw. All 
the miracles recorded, the words spoken, the events which - 
are given in their peculiar setting, every parable, every 
chapter from beginning to end, are first of all to be looked 
upon as foreshadowing and teaching dispensational truths. 
This is the right key to the Gospel of Matthew. It is like- 
wise a significant fact that in the condition of the people 


7 


Israel, with their proud religious leaders rejecting the Lord, 
their King and the threatened judgment in consequence of 
it, is a true photograph of the end of the present dispensa- 
tion, and in it we shall see the coming doom of Christendom. 
The characteristics of the times, when our Lord appeared 
ariong His people, who were so religious, self-righteous, 
being divided into different sects, Ritualists (Pharisees) and 
Rationalists (Sadducees—Higher Critics), following the 
teachings of men, occupied with man-made creeds and doc- 
trines, etc., and all nothing but apostasy, are exactly repro- 
duced in Christendom, with its man-made ordinances, rituals 
and rationalistic teachings. We hope to follow out this 
thought in our exposition. 

There are seven great dispensational parts which are 
prominent in this Gospel and around which everything is 
grouped. We will briefly review them. 


I.—The King. The Old Testament is full of promises 
which speak of me coming, not alone of a deliverer, a sin- 
bearer, but of the coming of a King, King Messiah as He 
is still called by orthodox Jews. This King was eagerly 
expected, hoped for and prayed for by the pious in Israel. 
It is still so with many Jews in our days. The Gospel of 
Matthew proves that our Lord Jesus Christ is truly the 
promised King Messiah. In it we see Him as King of the 
Jews, everything shows that He is in truth the royal person, 
of whom Seers and Prophets, as well as inspired Psalmists, 
wrote and sang. First it would be necessary to prove that 

He is legally the King. This is seen in the first chapter, 


8 


where a genealogy is given which proves His royal descent. ; 
The beginning is, “Book of the generation of Jesus Christ, 
Son of David, Son of Abraham.’* It goes back to Abraham 
and there it stops, while in Luke the genealogy reaches up 
to Adam. In the Gospel of Matthew He is seen as Son of 
David, His royal descent; Son of Abraham, according to 
the flesh from the seed of Abraham. 

The coming of the Magi is only recorded in Matthew. 
They come to worship the new born King of the Jews. His 
royal birthplace, David’s city, is given. The infant is wor- 
shipped by the representatives of the Gentiles and they do 
homage. indeed before a true King, though the marks of 
poverty were around Him. The gold they gave speaks of 
His royalty. Every true King has a herald, so the King 
Messiah. The forerunner appears and in Matthew his mes- 
sage to the nation is that “The Kingdom of heaven has drawn 
nigh”; the royal person so long foretold is about to appear 
and to offer that Kingdom. When the King who- 
was rejected comes again to set up the Kingdom, He will 
be preceded once more by a herald who will declare His 
coming among His people Israel, even Elijah the prophet. 
In the fourth chapter we see the King tested and proven 
that He is the King. He is tested thrice, once as Son of. 
Man, as Son of God and as the King Messiah. After the 
testing, out of which He comes forth a complete victor, 


*We use a translation of the New Testament which was made 
years ago by J. N. Darby, and which for correctness is the very” 
best we have ever seen. We can heartily recommend it to our 
readers. It is published in New York City. Price 60 cents a copy. 
Order from 80 Second Street, N. Y. 


9 . 

He begins His minjstry.. The Sermon on the Mount (we 
shall use the phrase though it is not scriptural) is given 
in Matthew in full. Mark and Luke report it only in frag- 
ments and John has not a word of it. This should at once 
determine the status of the three chapters which contain 
_ this discourse. It is teaching concerning the Kingdom, the 
magna charta of the Kingdom and all its principles. Such 
a kingdom in the earth, with subjects who have all ths 
characteristics of the royal requirements laid down in this 
discourse will yet be. If Israel had accepted the King it 
would then have come, but the kingdom has been postponed. 
The Kingdom will at last come with a righteous nation as 
a center, but Christendom is not that kingdom. In this 
wonderful discourse the Lord speaks as the King and as the 
Lawgiver, who expounds the law which is to rule His King- 
dom. From the eighth to the twelfth chapters, we see the 
royal manifestations of Him who is Jehovah manifested in 
the flesh. This part especially is interesting and very in- 
- structive, because it gives in a series of miracles, the dis- 
pensational outline of the Jew, the Gentile, and what comes 
after the present age is past. 

As King He sends out His servants and endues them 
‘with kingdom power, preaching likewise the nearness of 
the kingdom. After the tenth chapter the rejection begins 
followed by His teachings in parables, the revealing of 
secrets. He is presented to Jerusalem as King, and the 
Messianic welcome is heard, “Blessed is He who cometh 
in the name of Jehovah.” After that His suffering and His 
death. In all His Kingly character is brought out, and the 


Io 


Gospel closes abruptly, and has nothing to say of His ascen- 
sion 0 heaven; but the Lord is, so to speak, left on the 
earth with power, all power in heaven and on earth. “In 
this closing it is seen that He is the King. He rules in 
heaven now and on the earth when He comes again. 


II.—The Kingdom. The phrase Kingdom of the Heav- 
ens occurs only in the Gospel of Matthew. We find it 
thirty-two times. What does it mean? Here is the failure 
of the interpretation of the Word, and all error and the 
confusion around us springs from the false conception of 
the Kingdom of the Heavens. It is generally taught and 
understood that the term Kingdom of the Heavens means 
the church, and thus the church is thought to be the true 
Kingdom of the Heavens, established in the earth, and 
conquering the nations and the world. The Kingdom of 
the Heavens is not the church, and the church is not the 
Kingdom of the Heavens. This is a very vital truth. May 
the exposition of this Gospel be used in making this dis- 
tinction very clear in the minds of our readers. When our 
Lord speaks of the Kingdom of the Heavens up to the 
twelfth chapter He does not mean the church, but the King- 
dom of the Heavens in its Old Testament sense, as it is 
promised to Israel, to be established in the land, with Jeru- 
salem for a center, and from there to spread over all the 
nations and the entire earth. What did the pious, believ- 
ing Jew expect according to the Scriptures? He ex- 
pected (and still expects) the coming of the King Messiah, 
who is to occupy the throne of His father David. He was 


II 


expected to bring judgment for the enemies of Jerusalem, 
and bring together the outcasts of Israel. The land would 
flourish as never before; universal peace would be estab- 
lished; righteousness and peace in the knowledge of the 
glory of the Lord to cover the earth as the waters cover the 
deep. All this in the earth with the land, which is Jehovah’s 
land, as fountain head, from which all the blessings, the 
streams of living waters, flow. A temple, a house of wor- 
ship, for all nations was expected to stand in Jerusalem, to 
which the nations would come to worship the Lord. This 
is the Kingdom of the Heavens as promised to Israel and as 
expected by them. It is all earthly. The church, how- 
ever, is something entirely different. The hope of the 
church, the place of the church, the calling of the church, 
the destiny of the church, the reigning and ruling of the 
church is not earthly, but it is heavenly. Now the King 
long expected had appeared, and He preached the Kingdom 
of the Heavens having drawn nigh, that is, this promised 
earthly kingdom for Israel. When John the Baptist 
preached, “Repent ye, for the kingdom of the Heavens has 
drawn nigh,” he meant the same. It is all wrong to preach 
the Gospel from such a text and state that the sinner is to 
vepent and then the Kingdom will come to him. A very 
well known English teacher of spiritual truths gave not 
long ago in this country a discourse on the mistranslated 
text, “The Kingdom of God is within you,” and dwelt 
largely on the fact that the Kingdom is within the believer. ’ 
The context shows that this is erroneous, and the true 
translation is “The Kingdom is among you,” that is, in the 
person of the King. 


12 


Now if Israel had accepted the testimony of John, and 
had repented, and if they had accepted the King, the King- 
dom would have come, but now it has been postponed till 
Jewish disciples will pray again in preaching the coming 
of the Kingdom, “Thy Kingdom come, Thy will be done 
in earth as it is done in heaven.” That will be after the 
church has been removed to the heavenly places. The his- 
tory of the Kingdom is given in the second chapter. The 
Gentiles first, and Jerusalem does not know her King and 
is in trouble on account of Him. 


Il1I]—The King and the Kingdom is rejected. This is 
likewise foretold in the Old Testament, Isaiah liii, Daniel» 
ix:25, Psalm xxii., etc. It is also seen in types, Joseph, 
David and. others. The herald of the King is first rejected 
and ends in the prison, being murdered. This speaks of 
the rejection of the King Himself. In no other Gospel is 
the story of the rejection so completely told as here. It 
begins in Galilee, in His own city, and ends in Jerusalem. — 
The rejection is not human but it is Satanic. All the wick- 
edness and depravity of the heart is uncovered. and Satan 
revealed throughout. All classes are concerned in the re- 
jection. The crowds who had followed Him and were fed 
by Him, the Pharisees, the Sadducees, the Herodians, the 
priests, the chief priests, the high priest, the elders. At 
last it becomes evident that they knew Him who He was, — 
their Lord and their King, and wilfully they delivered Him 
into the hands of the Gentiles. The story of the cross in 
Matthew, too, brings out the darkest side of the rejection. 
Thus prophecy is seen fulfilled in the rejection of the King. 


2A Sa 


13 
IV.—The rejection of His Earthly People and their 
Judgment. This is another theme of the Old Testament 


which is very prominent in the Gospel of Matthew. They 


rejected Him and He leaves them, and judgment falls upon 


them. In the eleventh chapter He reproaches the cities in 


_ which most of His works of power had taken place, be- 


cause they had not repented. At the end of the twelfth chap- 
ter He denies His relations and refuses to see His own, while 


_in the beginning of the thirteenth He leaves the house and 
-goes down to the sea, the latter term typifies the nations. 


After His royal presentation to Jerusalem the next day early 
in the morning He curses the fig tree, which foreshadows 
Israel’s national death, and after He uttered His two para- 
bles to the chief priests and elders, He declares that the 
Kingdom of God is to be taken away from them and is to 
be given to a nation which is to bring the fruit thereof. The 
whole twenty-third chapter contains the woes upon the Phar- 


_ isees, and at the end He speaks to Jerusalem and declares 


that their house is to be left desolate till they shall say, 
Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord. 


V.—tThe mysteries of the Kingdom of the Heavens. The 
kingdom has been rejected by the people of the kingdom 


and the King Himself has left the earth. During His ab- 


sence the Kingdom of the Heavens is in the hands of men. 


There is then the kingdom in the earth in an entirely differ- 


ent form than it was revealed in the Old Testament, the 
mysteries of the kingdom hidden from the world’s founda- 
tion are now made known. This we learn in Matthew 


14 


xiii, and here, too, we have at least a glimpse of the church. 
Again it is to be understood that both are not identical. 
But what is the kingdom in its mystery form? The sev- 
en parables will teach this to us. It is seen there in an 
evil mixed condition. The church, the one body, is not evil, 
for the church is composed of those who are beloved of God, 
called saints, but Christendom, including all professors, is 
properly that Kingdom of the Heavens in the thirteenth 
chapter. The parables bring out what may be termed the 
history of Christendom. It is a history of failure, becoming 
that which the King never meant it to be, the leaven of evil, 
indeed, leavening the whole lump, and thus it continues till 
the King comes back, when all the offences will be gathered 
out of the kingdom. The parable of the pearl alone speaks 
of the church. 


VI.—The Church. In no other Gospel is anything said 
of the church except in the Gospel of Matthew. In the 
sixteenth chapter Peter gives his testimony concerning the 
Lord, revealed to him from the Father, who is in the heav- . 
ens. The Lord tells him that on this rock I will build My 
assembly—church—and hades’ gates shall not prevail 
‘against it. It is not I have built, but I will build My 
church. Right after this promise He speaks of His suffer- 
ing and death. The transfiguration which follows the first 
declaration of His coming death, speaks of the glory which 
will follow, and is a type of the power and coming of our 
Lord Jesus Christ (2 Peter i:16). Much that follows after 
the declaration of the Lord concerning the building of the 
church is to be applied to the church. 


‘e 


VIL—The Mount of Olivet Discourse. Prophetic 
Teachings Concerning the End of the Age. This discourse 
was given to the disciples after the Lord had spoken His 
last word to Jerusalem. It is one of the most remarkable 
sections of the entire Gospel. We find it in the 24th 
and 25th chapters. In it the Lord teaches concern- 
ing the Jews, the Gentiles and the Church of God; Chris- 
tendom is in it likewise. The order is different. The Gen- 
tiles stand last. The reason for that is because the church 
will be removed first from the earth and the professors of 
Christendom will be left, and are nothing but Gentiles and 
concerned in the judgment of nations as made known by the 
Lord. The first part of Matthew xxiv is Jewish throughout. 
From the fourth to the forty-fifth verse we have a most 
important prophecy, which gives the events which follow 
after the church is taken from the earth. The Lord takes 
here many of the Old Testament prophecies and blends 
them in one great prophecy. The history of the last week 
in Daniel is here. The middle of the week after the first 
three years and a half is verse 15. Revelation, chapters 
vi-xix is all contained in these words of our Lord. He gave, 
then, the same truths, only more enlarged and in detail, 
from heaven as a last word and warning. Three parables 
follow in which the saved and the unsaved are seen. Wait- 
ing and serving is the leading thought. Reward and casting 
out into outward darkness the twofold outcome. This, then, 
finds an application in Christendom and the church. The 
ending of Matthew xxv is the judgment of nations. This 
is not the universal judgment, a popular term in Christen- 


16 


dom, but unscriptural, but it is the judgment of the nations 
at the time when our Lord as Son of Man sits upon the 
throne of His glory. 

Many of the most interesting facts in the Gospel, the pecu- 
liar quotations from the Old Testament, the perfect — 
structure, etc., etc., we cannot give in this introduction 
and outline, but we hope to bring them before us in our 
exposition. May, then, the Spirit of Truth guide us into all 
the truth. 


17 


CHAPTER I. 


The first chapter of the Gospel of Matthew is divided into 
two parts. In the first to the seventeenth verse we find the. 
genealogy of Jesus Christ, and in the last part of the chap- 
ter the account of the birth of the promised One. In the 
second half we see Him as Son of God and Saviour, while 
in the first, in the genealogy, His royal descent is proven. 
He is the rightful heir to David’s throne, and thus His King- 
ship is legally established. 

The two Greek words with which this Gospel begins are 
“Biblos geneseos,” the book of the generation, which corre- 
- sponds to a similar Old Testament expression frequently 
found in the Scriptures (Genesis vi:9, etc.) The very be- 
~ ginning of this Gospel shows clearly that this is the Jewish 
Gospel. The question of genealogy is an all important one 
for the Jew. The genealogy which appears in the Gospel of 
Luke does not stand there in the beginning, but it comes in 
with the third chapter, after the account of the Saviour’s 
birth, and the ministry of the forerunner, and when He be- 
gins His public ministry. In the Gospel of Luke He is the 
Son of man, and not as in Matthew, the King. In Luke it 
is a going backward clear to Adam, while in the genealogy 
in Matthew it is the opposite; not like in Luke, beginning 
with His earthly name, Jesus, but beginning with Abraham, 


oe it goes forward till the end is reached in Joseph, the husband 


18 


of Mary. The first verse in Matthew may be termed a super- 
scription for the genealogy which follows, Book of generation 
of Jesus Christ, “Son of David, Son of Abraham.” How 
truly He is all that, is now to be established, Son of David, 
because a King is promised to rule in righteousness upon 
the throne of His father David; but in a larger sense, Seed 
of Abraham, through whom all the families of the earth are 
to be blessed, and the nations to receive spiritual blessings. 
How incorrect it would have been if it had said, Book of 
generation of Jesus Christ, Son of Abraham, Son of Da- 
vid. That would have been the rendering by man, but the 
Holy Spirit puts David here before Abraham, though in the 
genealogy itself Abraham is the head, the first one. Jesus 
Christ is first the Son of David, and as such He is to be pre- 
sented to the nation Israel, as King, and to be rejected by 
them. He is after that in the wider sense the One through 
whom the promises of blessing in Abraham to the nations 
are to be fulfilled. How clearly this proves the verbal in- 
spiration! Indeed, if there is no verbal inspiration there is 
no inspiration at all. 

It is not rarely the case that readers of the New Testament 
have asked themselves why all these names appear in the 
first chapter. We have answered many questions and 
have written numerous letters during the last eight years 
in answer to inquiries from the Jews on account of the gene- 
alogy, as it appears here, and the apparent contradictions 
_and discrepancies between Matthew and Luke. Many a Jew 
has come and asked, Why must a man have two genealogies, 
and which is the right one? When the Jew takes the New 


19 


Testament and opens it with Matthew, he finds himself upon 

familiar ground. It is the first question with him, if Jesus 
of Nazareth is the Messiah, Son of David, it must be 
proven by a genealogy. Does the New Testament, in the 
genealogies in Matthew and in Luke, prove this? is the im- 
portant question the Jew asks. We have often asked the 
Jewish inquirer, Supposing Jesus of Nazareth was not the 
Messiah, not the Son of David, then you would expect the 
coming of a Messiah who is a Son of David, born in Beth- 
lehem ; how could that coming Messiah prove that he is real- 
ly the Son of David, when your genealogical registers have 
been lost centuries ago? Others, too, have had difficulty on 
account of these two genealogies. We will state the case 
and what they teach in a few words. 

In the genealogy of Matthew Jesus Christ is shown to 
be the King legally; in the Gospel of Luke we have His 
genealogy as the Son of Man, and as such linked with the 
whole race. The genealogy in Matthew proves that Joseph 
is a descendant of David through the house of Solomon. 
The one in the Gospel of Luke proves that Mary, the virgin, 
is likewise a descendant of David, but not through the 
house of Solomon; she is connected with David through the 
house of Nathan. The Messiah was to be born of a virgin, 
one who must be a descendant of David. But a woman has 
no right to the throne. As the son of the virgin alone He 
could not have a legal right to the throne. For this reason 
to make the One begotten in her of the Holy Ghost, the 
rightful heir to the throne of David in the eyes of the nation, 
the virgin had to be the wife of a man who had a perfect, 


20 


unchallenged right to the throne. Now the genealogy in 
Matthew shows that Joseph is a son of David, and thus en- 
titled to the throne, therefore Jesus is Jegally in this way 
heir to the throne. He is the legal descendant and heir of 
David through Joseph, but never Joseph’s Son. He was 
supposed by the people to be the Son of Joseph. “And 
Jesus Himself, when He began to teach, was about thirty 
years of age; being, as was supposed, the Son of Joseph” 
(Luke iii:23). “And they said, Is not this the Son of Jos- 
eph?” (Luke iv:22). His claim as being truly the Son of 
David was therefore never disputed. Now if He had been — 
the Son of Joseph according to the flesh, He would never 
be and could never be our Saviour. The 51st Psalm would 
then have found an application. “I was shapen in iniquity 
and in sin did my mother conceive me.” On the other hand, 
if He had been the Son of Mary, without she being legally 
the wife of a Son of David, the Jews would have rejected 
His claim from the very outset. We see then that legally 
He was the Son of Joseph; in His humanity, He is the Son 
of Mary, and then one step higher, as we read in the closing 
verses, He is the Son of God. The two genealogies show 
Him as King—Son of-man and Son of God—as the One 
born of Mary, but begotten in her of the Holy Ghost. 
The genealogy in Matthew speaks of decadence. Corrup- 
tion, ruin and hopelessness is clearly brought out in it. It — 
begins with Abraham. And as generation after generation 
is mentioned, it puts before us the shameful history of 
Israel, with their unbelief, apostasy and judgments. At last 


it becomes all dark and all hopeless as far as Israel is con- 


2I 


cerned. Like Sarah’s womb, as she indeed stands in type 
for the nation, the whole nation was dead, no hope, all ruin 
and corruption. But God can bring life from the dead. 
“But when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth 
His Son, come of woman, come under the law, that He 
might redeem those under the law, that we might receive 
sonship” (Gal. iv:4). It is so with this present dispensation, 


-. for after awhile when the Lord has taken to Himself His 


Church, darkness, ruin and evil will prevail, and in the 
darkest hour of Israel’s believing remnant and in the history 
of the world, the Firstborn will come again into the habit- 
able world surrounded by worshipping angels (Heb. i:6). | 

The division of the genealogy is threefold. From Abra- 
ham to David, from David to the carrying away into the 
Babylonian captivity, and from the carrying away into Baby- 
lon to Christ (verse 17). In each division are fourteen 
generations, twice seven in each division. This brings in 
perfect harmony and order, as He who has given it all is the 
Spirit of order and not disorder (1 Cor. xiv:33). Seven 
is a highly symbolical number, peculiar to Israel. Much of 
the history of Israel is divided into seven; the seventy years 
of Captivity, the seventy prophetic weeks in Daniel, the last 
week still future composed of seven years, etc., are well- 
known facts to every reader of the Word. Here it is three 
times twice seven, which means fulfillment and completeness. 

A closer investigation shows at once that a number of 
_ generations have been left out. Attempts have been made to 
explain this in different ways. Many poor, shortsighted men 
~ have put it down as an error, and higher critics and unbe- 


22 


lievers have pointed it out as an argument against the in- 
spiration of the Word, and as an example of the contra- 
dictions, which, according to them, exist in the Scriptures. 
Others have charged Matthew with ignorance, and that by 
not knowing any better, he left these generations out. As 
a Jew, he was, without question, well acquainted with the Old 
Testament writings. He had full access to all the collections 
of books which we term Old Testament. Out of the histori- 
cal books it would have been a very easy matter to get to- 
gether a complete register of names, such as would have been 
in full accord with the object in view to satisfy the Jew. Man 
indeed would have done that if he had to write the genealogy, 
but Matthew did not write according to his own taste or 
wish; the Holy Spirit wrote every word, and He has found 
it good to make a number of omissions. For this reason, 
that which is so often claimed to prove that there are con- 
tradictions in the Bible, and that the Bible is not infallible, 
is really a witness for the divinity of the Scriptures. In all 
this arrangement, leaving out and changing, the Holy Spirit 
has a wise purpose, and it does not follow, if we in our short- 
sightedness do not understand it all, that there must be an 
error involved somewhere. He has the right to do it, and it 
has been His pleasure to leave out generations. This is also 
so in the case of another Old Testament genealogy (see 
Ezra vii). 

The most prominent omission is in verse eight. Three 
kings are left out. These are Ahaziah, Joash and Amaziah. 
Who were they? They are the descendants of the daughter 
of wicked Ahab, Athaliah. Athaliah desired to annihilate 


23 
the kingly seed of the house of Judah. This was a satanic 
attempt to frustrate the purposes of God. It was, like Ha- 
man’s attempt, inspired by him who is a murderer from the 
beginning. It may be called Anti-Messianity. This is un- 
doubtedly the reason why the Holy Spirit left out these three 
kings. 

Another apparent difficulty is the one concerning Jech-_ 
oniah (verse 11), Zorobabel and Salathiel. The last two are 
in the genealogy in Luke, and Zorobabel being called a son 
of Salathiel when 1 Chr. iii:19 speaks of him as a son of 
Pedaiah. 

We give a few hints, which will be helpful in the correct 
understanding. Jehoiakim is often called by the name of 
his son Jechoniah. Both have the same meaning translated 
from the Hebrew, Jehovah will establish. Jehoiakim was 
carried away into Babylon (2 Kings xxiv:15). He has had 
brethren, which Jechoniah had not (1 Chr, iii:15). Thus it 
becomes clear that Jechoniah is Jehoiakim. In the twelfth 
verse we have Jechoniah, the son of Jehoiakim, because Sa- 
lathiel is the son of Jechoniah (1 Chr. iii:17). Read also 
Jeremiah xxii:30. 

Upon the line of Solomon there was then a curse, and Jos- 
_ eph is in connection with that line. Upon the line of Nathan 
there was’no curse, and thus in His birth from Mary He is 
in truth the Son of David, still in the eyes of the nation He 
was it legally in Joseph. 

If Zorobabel and Salathiel appear in Luke we may take 
them as different persons. The difficulty of Zorobabel being 


24 


the son of Salathiel here and the son of Pedaiah in Chronicles 
may be solved by the levirate law. : 

Other striking facts come to our knowledge when we go 
through the list of the generations, each one is highly sig- 
nificant. We mention a few only. Judah is mentioned, be- 
cause the prophecy of Jacob makes it clear that from him 
the Shiloh would come (Gen. xlix:10). We are reminded 
of something else in the phrase, Judah and his brethren, 
namely, of Judah’s sin and his brethren’s in selling their own 
brother, and all that is connected with it. 

David alone has the title, the king (verse 6). Solomon’s 
name is there, but there is no kingship attached to it. The 
unbelieving Jew, as he tries to reject prophecies concerning 
the Messiah, has always made a strong point of this, that the 
promises given to David concerning a son were all fulfilled 
in Solomon. Solomon according to them is the king, and 
higher than David in his rule and dominion. How striking. 
then that the Holy Spirit gives the name simply Solomon 
without adding, the king, to it. David is the king and no 
other can have the title, till his son come: even He who came 
and whom David called Lord (Ps. cx:1).. Thus the angel 
announced Him, the Lord God shall give unto Him the 3 
throne of His father David: and He shall reign over the 
house of Jacob forever; and of His kingdom there shall be 
no end. , 

In the last fourteen generations beginning with Zorobabel, 
we find no more prominent names. Only two of them are 
recorded in the Old Testament. Zorobabel means, Born in 
Babel, and his son Abiud, which means, Perishing. However, 


25 


the most interesting fact is the four women who are men- 
tioned in the genealogy. Three of them are found in the first 
division and the fourth in the second one. Women in a gene- 
alogy is something which is very rarely the case. There were 
many noble, devoted and believing women in the Old Testa- 
ment. Sarah, Rebekah, Deborah, and women received their 
dead raised to life again, and others were tortured not ac- 
cepting deliverance (Heb. xi:35). One would naturally 
expect that in the genealogy of Him who is the seed of the 
woman to bruise the serpent’s head, some of these women 
who believed the promise would be mentioned. However, 
we look in vain for them. Instead of them we discover four, 
who are only known, at least three, by their shame, and the 
other belonged to a race which was according to the law 
cursed. Let us look’into the names and history of these 
four women. 

Tamar is the first. Her shameful history of fornication 
is recorded in Genesis xxxviii. What a dark story it is, full 
of the evil deeds of the flesh. Sin in its blackness is seen 
there. But how did she get into the genealogy? The 
answer is, by her sin. It was her shameful sin that puts her 
here in the genealogy of Him who has come to save that 
which is lost, the Saviour of men. The Holy Spirit has put 
her name in and shows by it that the Lord Jesus Christ is 
the Saviour of sinners. He has come to save the vilest and 
the lowest. And the second one is Rahab. Who was she? 
A Canaanitess. Unclean and outcast, a harlot full of abom- 


ination. Yet here is her name too. linked with Salmon 
(meaning clothed) and Boaz, her son, which means, “In 


26 


strength.” She had believed the messengers as they had 
come, and the scarlet thread, the sign of her deliverance 
from the doomed city, was in her window. “By faith the 
harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not, when 
she had received the spies with peace” (Heb. xi:31). It was 
faith by which she came into line. Every Jew knew her 
history and knew too that she had come in to share Israel’s 
blessings. Still the proud Pharisees murmured when Jesus 
sat down and ate and drank with the publicans and the sin-’ 
ners and the outcasts gathered around Him, murmuring 
because He sought the lowest. 

Ruth, the third woman mentioned, is an exception, for 
there is no stain upon her character. She was a Moabitess. 
The law was against her and cursed her. It is written, “An 
Ammonite or Moabite shall not enter into the congregation 
of the Lord; even to their tenth generation shall they not 
enter into the congregation of the Lord forever” (Deut. 
xxiii : 3). But in faith too she enters into the congregation 
with her children, and the third after her, her grandson, is 
King David himself. The law which had pronounced the 
curse is completely set aside in her case. 

The fourth woman is not mentioned by name—Her of 
Uriah, that is all it says. We know it is Bath-Sheba, the 
one with whom King David committed adultery. Here it is 
sin in connection with a believer. Did that sin com- 
mitted by King David then undo him as a believer? No, he 
had believed and grace had full sway over him. 

What a wonderful’demonstration of the whole and full 
Gospel of Grace as it is in Him, the Lord Jesus Christ! We 


27 


see sin—Faith as it lays hold and salvation by faith—deliv- 
erance from the law—and then the case of the believer, the 
assurance of salvation. Grace—nothing but grace shines out 
as nowhere else in the genealogy, in the four women, 
all four Gentiles. Hannah broke out in her prophetic 
song and said, “He lifteth up the needy from the dunghill, 
to make them sit with princes and inherit the throne of 
glory” (1 Sam. 11:8). How truly this is seen with Tamar, 
Rahab, Ruth and Bath-Sheba. What comfort in this fact 
for us all! 

He is Son of Abraham. Through Him the blessing is to 
go out to the greatest sinner, to the deepest in misery and in 
want, blessing to the Gentiles in the new dispensation of 
grace, 

We come now to the account of His birth. Here He is 
presented as human and divine, born of a virgin and at the 
same time Jehovah-Saviour, Emmanuel, God with us. If 
Matthew i:1-17 were all that could be said of His birth, He 
might then have had a legal right to the throne, but He 
could never have been He who was to redeem and save from 
sin. But the second half before us shows Him to be truly 
the long promised One, the One of whom Moses and the 
prophets spake, to whom all the past manifestations of God 
in the earth and the types, pointed. To accomplish the work 
of salvation, to suffer the penalty of sin and to put away sin 
He had to be divine and human. 

“Now the birth of Jesus Christ was thus: His mother, 
Mary, that is having been betrothed to Joseph, before they 
came together, she was found to be with child of the Holy 


28 


Ghost. But Joseph, her husband, being righteous, and un- 
willing to expose her publicly, purposed to have her put 
away secretly ; but while he pondered on these things, behold, 
an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying, 
Joseph, son of David, fear not to take to thee thy wife, for 
that which is begotten in her is of the Holy Ghost. And she 
shall bring forth a Son, and thou shalt call His name Jesus, 
for He shall save His people from their sins. . 

“Now all this came to pass that that might be fulfilled 
which was spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying, 
Behold the virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth 
a Son, and they shall call His name Emmanuel, which is, 
being interpreted, God with us. But Joseph having awoke 
from his sleep did as the angel of the Lord enjoined him, 
and took to him his wife, and knew her not until she had 
brought forth her firstborn Son; and he called His name 
Jesus (verses 18-25).” 

How simple all this sounds; yet here are depths which — 
no human mind can or ever will fathom. All attempts to 
explain will utterly fail. Faith worships here and looks 
with profound adoration upon the mystery made known, 
God manifested in the flesh. The Lord stood before Abra- 
ham, clothed in the form of a human being, eating and 
drinking (Genesis xviii). What humiliation that was for 
Him even then, but how much deeper and far-reaching it is 
here? It is now His mother, Mary, which is prominent in 
the record. Born of a woman Paul says in Galatians iv. 
This directs our attention to the very first promise made in 
Genesis i11: “I will put enmity between thee and the woman, 


29 


and between thy seed and her seed: He shall bruise thy 
head and thou shalt bruise His heel.” This is the first 
promise of a Deliverer. 


We often read in the prophetic Word, I am He. The 


Hebrews have the word “Hu” (He) as a divine name. 


In the ancient book of Zohar the word “He” is applied to the ° 


eternal God bruising the serpent’s head. He is to be the 
seed of the woman, not of Adam, the man. Interesting 
is the following quotation from an ancient exposition of 
the Jews. “The voice which our first parents heard walk- 
ing in the garden was the Word of the Lord, or the Messiah. 
Before they sinned they saw the glory of the blessed God 
speaking with them, but after their sin they heard only the 
voice walking. The seed of the woman shall bruise the 
head of the serpent, and they shall obtain healing in the 
days of the Messiah.” 

Mary was that elect woman, a virgin, from whom the 
One seed came. She was betrothed to Joseph, the Son of 
David, and so that there should not even be the shadow of 
a doubt, it is added, before they came together she was 
found to be with child of the Holy Ghost. Righteous 
Joseph pondering on these things and as a righteous man 
undoubtedly praying to God about it, is visited by an angel 
of the Lord. Even the little word “an” is here of import- 
ance. We hear much in the Old Testament of the angel of 
the Lord. He appears often as the mediator between God 
- and man. He has divine names and attributes. He ap- 
peared in the form of man to Hagar, Abraham, Jacob, the 
children of Israel, Joshua, Gideon, Manoah, and to Man- 


30 


oah’s wife. Jacob calls him the angel, the Redeemer. In 
Isaiah Ixiii:g he is called the angel of His face. Indeed all 
through the Old Testament Jehovah and His glory is in 
him revealed, so that in these manifestations we see the in- 
carnation foretold. The very name of God was in him 
(Exodus xxiii:20). The old Jewish synagogue believed 
correctly that this angel of the Lord is the word of God, 
the Messiah. The One who appeared as the angel, is 
now to be born of the virgin. He emptied Himself, taking 
a servant’s form, taking His place in the likeness of men 
(Phil. ii:7). Ifthe writing of the Gospel of Matthew had 
been the work of an impostor, he would surely have written, 
that the angel of the Lord came to Joseph, instead of an 
angel. So even the little word, an, brings out the verbal in- 
spiration. 

In the Gospel of Luke we read that the angel Gabriel (the 
same who announced to Daniel the coming of the Messiah 
and the time of the end), was sent of God to Mary, and 
came in to her and said, “Hail, favored one! the Lord is with 
thee. But she, seeing the angel, was troubled at his word, 
and reasoned in her mind what this salutation might be. 
And the angel said to her, Fear not, Mary, for thou hast 
found favor with God. And, behold, thou shalt conceive in 
the womb to bear a Son, and thou shalt call His name Jesus. 
He shall be great and shall be called Son of the Highest : 
and the Lord God shall give Him the throne of His father 
David; and He shall reign over the house of Jacob for the 
ages, and of His kingdom there shall not be an end.. But 
Mary said to the angel, How shall this be, since I know not 


31 


a man? And the angel answering said to her, The Holy’ 
Spirit shall come upon thee, and power of the Highest over- 
shadow thee, wherefore the holy thing also which shall be 
born shall be called Son of God” (Luke i:28-35). In read- 
ing this one almost hears the voice which spoke to Moses, 
Take off thy shoes from thy feet, for the place whereon thou 
standest is holy ground. Both Gospels bring it out clearly 
that it is the Son of God, the eternal Word, who becomes a 
man, truly the child of His virgin mother, flesh and blood, 
a real human body like ours, but a holy thing, that is abso- 
lutely without sin. His human nature proceeded 
directly from the Spirit of God. No other being could have’ 
saved us. 

The Old Testament speaks often of this great event, the 
birth of the Saviour, and that He is to be divine and human 
in His person. He is called the Branch (Zemach). In. 
Isaiah He is called, The branch of Jehovah, and in other 
prophets, The branch of David. “For unto us a child is 
born, unto us a Son is given; and the government shall be 
upon His shoulder ; and His name shali de called Wonder- 
ful, Counsellor, Mighty God, Everlasting Father, Prince of 
Peace” (Isaiah ix:7). There is a very important and re- 
markable passage in Jeremiah, “The Lord hath created a 
new thing in the earth, A woman shall encompass-a man” 
(Jer. xxxi:22). This belongs to a Messianic prophecy as 
shown by the context. It is a new thing which is to take 
place, and a creation. This could never be said of the birth 
of a child in the natural way. Even one of the ancient 
rabbis acknowledges that Jer. xxxi:22 speaks of Messiah, 


32 


and that by the woman a virgin is meant. In the Jew- 
ish writings, some of them of great antiquity, much is 
said on the origin and birth of the Christ. We quote but 
a few of the most important words of the rabbis. “Several 
state that Messiah is to have no earthly father.” “The birth 
of the Messiah alone shall be without any defects.” “His 
birth shall not be like that of other men.” “The birth of the 
Messiah shall be like the dew of ue Lord, as drops per the 
grass without the action of man.’ 

That this exposition of the Scriptures concerning the mi- 
raculous birth of the Messiah was generally believed at the 
time of our Lord is seen from the Gospel of John. “Is not 
this He whom they seek to kill? and behold He speaks open- 
ly and they say nothing to Him. Have the rulers then in- 
deed recognized that this is the Christ? But as to this man 
we know whence He is. Now, as to the Christ, when He 
comes no one knows whence He is (John vii:27). With 
this they acknowledged that they believed that with the birth 
of the Christ a mystery is connected. They thought then 
they knew who Jesus of Nazareth is; “And they said, is 
not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother 
we have known? How then does he say I am come down 
from heaven?” (John vi:24). Many centuries later wick- 
ed Jews wrote a vulgar and blasphemous account of the — 
birth of our Lord, but the early Jews, it seems never at- 
tempted to contradict the first chapter in Matthew. 

The angel bade Joseph not to fear, and make known to— 
him not only that that which is begotten in Mary is of the 
Holy Ghost, but he said also, “She shall bring forth a son, 


33 

and thou shalt call His name Jesus, for He shall save His 
people from their sins.” 

The word Jesus is taken from the Hebrew Jehoshua, 
which means, Jehovah is the Saviour. It is the precious 
name in which the whole story of salvation is contained. 
The people of Jehovah are His people, because He is Jeho- 
vah, and left His eternal glory, His riches, and became 
poor, to save them from their sins. When Moses stood in 
the presence of this descended Lord, who proclaimed before 
him the name of the Lord, Moses said, “If now I have found 
grace in Thy sight, O Lord,” saying this looking to heaven, 
“let my Lord,” the One who had come down and stood be- 
fore him, “I pray thee go among us; for it is a stiff-necked 
people, and pardon our iniquities and our sin, and take us 
for Thine inheritance.” (Exodus xxxiv:9). And He has 
come, Jesus, who is able to save His people from their sins, 
because He is God, and gracious, as revealed to Moses in > 
the mountain. They rejected Him and His salvation. They 
are scattered among the nations, blinded and hardened, but 
He is neverthless Jesus who shall save His people. He has 
bought the field and the treasure in it. He will come again 
and turn away ungodliness from Jacob and remember their 
‘sins no more. Yes, He will come again and the Lord God 
_ will give Him the throne of His father David, and He shall 
reign over the house of Jacob for ever. Saul of Tarsus 
heard the voice from heaven, which said, “I am Jesus!” 
It is very significant that He spoke thus to the one who 
became the apostle to the Gentiles, and who in many respects 
- is a type of the whole nation in unbelief and in their com- 


34 


ing conversion. He saved Saul of Tarsus. He will save 
all Israel yet. For believers, His name is not simply Jesus, 
but for us, the church, He is both Saviour and Lord, and the 
right way to address Him is by His full name, as it is 
by the resurrection from among the dead, our Lord Jesus 
Christ, 

With the declaration that He shall save His people from 
their sins the message of the angel was completed. It is 
now Matthew, and through Matthew of course the Holy 
Spirit, who continues. The most vital passaye of the Old 
Testament is brought to the front. This is the familiar 
prophecy in Isaiah vii:14, which reads, “Behold a virgin 
shall be with child and shall bring forth a son, and they 
shall call His name Emmanuel.” Like most all the other 
Messianic prophecies, this one has also been the target of 
“Higher Criticism.” These learned (?) critics have made 
some very ridiculous utterances on this sublime prophecy, 
and said that it is anything but Messianic. They stand not 
alone, but are in company with rationalistic Jews and other 
infidels, who serve the power of darkness—the one who is 
the falsifier of God’s Word from the beginning. Some of 
this infidel trash of Wellshausen, etc., is continually being 
rehashed by some of the so-called professors in theological 
“evangelical” seminaries in this country. Alas! how true 
still, professing themselves wise, they became fools. Higher 
criticism is nothing else but infidelity and foolishness. 

Tt is with these critics, who are the educators of the com- 
ing preachers in the different denominations, a question what 
Isaiah wrote and what he did not write, what is genuine 


35 


and what is added to by another hand. So it is being taught 
that Isaiah spoke of his own wife when he uttered the words 
which are before us. Now beware how you treat this 
prophecy! Matthew i:22 says that not the prophet said 
these words, “Behold, a virgin shall be with child,” but the 
Lord Himself spoke these words through the prophet. A 
denial of Isaiah vii:14 that it is not a Messianic prophecy is 
a denial of the integrity of the New Testament, a denial of 
the Lord. How does any one dare to say the prophet did not 
utter a prophecy at all, that it is not to be understood as 
meaning the Lord Jesus Christ, when the Holy Spirit in 
the very first chapter in the New Testament declares that 
it is a Messianic prophecy, and that it has found its fulfill- 
ment in the person of our Lord? If there were no other 
evidence whatever in the Old Testament, nay, if there were 
many difficulties connected with it Matthew 1:22 would 
settle it all and would be sufficient proof in itself for what 
the Lord meant when He spoke these words through Isaiah 
the prophet. 

But there is nothing whatever in Isaiah vii. which would 
in any way show that the prophecy is not Messianic. The 
Lord spoke the promise at a time when the house of David 
was discouraged and disheartened, and King Ahaz, instead 
of trusting the Lord, continued in unbelief. The prophet asks 
him to demand a sign from the Lord, but he rejects the offer 
under the plea that he would not tempt God. Upon this the 
prophet said that the Lord Himself shall give you a sign, 
and the prophecy then spoken is the sign for the discour- 
aged king and the house of David. In other words, Messiah 


36° 
is to be born, He is to come from Judah, and from the house 
of David. How could he, the king, fear destruction and ex- 
termination? This was the comfort of the sign. The birth 
of Him is a sign—something extraordinary, a,miracle, and 
therefore the promise of comfort begins with the prophetic 
word, “Behold.” We will not enter into fuller discussion 
of the seventh chapter of Isaiah, nor answer the arguments 
which are brought against the Hebrew word used here for 
virgin; all this would be of little value and profit to most 
of our readers.* Some have seen a difficulty that the child 
was to be named Emmanuel? and instead of this name, He is 
named Jesus. The Jew often comes with this question. We 
point out to him that this apparent contradiction is really a 
proof of the inspiration. How easy it would have been for 
Matthew to have all fit in so that every word would be in 


*“That the word almoh, in Isaiah denotes an untouched virgin, 
sufficiently appears from the sense of the passage Isa, vii:14. King 
Ahaz was afraid lest the enemies that were now upon him might 
destroy Jerusalem and utterly consume the house of David. The 
Lord meets this fear by a sign and most remarkable promise, 
namely, ‘that sooner should a pure virgin bring forth a child than 
the family of David perish. And the promise yields a double 
comfort: namely, of Christ hereafter to be born of a virgin; and of 
their security from the imminent danger of the city and house of 
David. So that, although that prophecy, of a virgin’s bringing 
forth a son, should not be fulfilled till many hundreds of years — 
after, yet, at that present time, when the prophecy was made, Ahaz 
had a certain and notable sign, that the house of David should be 
safe and secure from the danger that hung over it. As much as 
if the prophet had said: ‘Be not so troubled O Ahaz, does it not 
seem an impossible thing to thee, that never will happen, that a 
pure virgin become a mother? But I tell thee such a virgin shall 
bring forth a son, before the house of David perish” ”"—Horae 
Hebraicae et Talmudicae by Lightfoot. 


37 


harmony with the Old Testament. The Holy Spirit guided 
his hand in writing. The prophecy in the Old Testament 
says, “And call His name Immanuel.” Here it says, “They 
shall call his name.” In the first chapter of Matthew. we 
read that Joseph called the child’s name Jesus, but in Luke 
we read that Mary calls His name Jesus. The name Emman- 
uel, God with us, is only given in Matthew. He is Emman- 
uel, and as such Jehovah the Saviour, so that in reality both 
names have the same meaning. “And the Word became 
flesh and dwelt among us (and we have contemplated His 
glory, a glory as of an only begotten with his Father) full 
of grace and truth” (John i:14). He is the exalted One over 
all. 

Joseph was obedient to the word of the Lord as it had 
come to him through the angel. That Mary had other chil- 
dren is clearly seen from the sixty-ninth Psalm, verses 7 and 
8, where it speaks of His suffering: ‘Because for thy sake 
I have borne reproach; shame has covered my face. Iam 
become a stranger to my brethren, even an alien to the chil- 


dren of my mother.” 


38 


CHAPTER IL 


The second chapter in Matthew relates events which are 
nowhere else recorded in the Gospels. For this reason, and 
this is the only reason, the authenticity of the chapter has 
been doubted more than once. All that which the second 
chapter contains belongs properly into the Jewish, dispen- 
sational Gospel, and would indeed be entirely out of place 
in the other three Gospels, therefore the Holy Spirit has 
seen fit to put it only in the first Gospel. The chapter con-. 
tains the story of the coming of the Magi or wise men to 
Jerusalem in search of the King of the Jews, to worship 
Him, and to bring Him the gifts they had brought from 
afar; the wrath of Herod the king, and the flight of the child 
into Egypt, the slaughter of the children in Bethlehem, the 
return from Egypt, and the dwelling of the Lord in Nazareth 
as the rejected One. All these events are foretold in the 
Old Testament, to which we are referred and where we 
learn the meaning of them. The chapter is an in- 
tensely interesting one, full of important teachings. It 
gives us in a nutshell the story of the entire Gospel. The 
true King is not known in Jerusalem, the City of a great 
King; in His own royal residence, His people do not 
know He has come. Strangers from distant lands seek Him 
and are desirous to know and to worship Him. Still worse, 
the ecclesiastical authorities, the chief priests and the scribes, 


39 


are indifferent, and the civil ruler is filled with hatred against 
-Him and seeks His life, and later both combined to kill Him. 
Thus in one of the shortest chapters and narratives the 
trend of the whole Gospel is given. But it is reaching still 
farther. The whole history of the kingdom of the heavens 
in its hidden form is here outlined, and the character of the 
entire new dispensation is manifested. 

“Now Jesus having been born in Bethlehem of Judea in 
the days of Herod the king, behold Magi from the East ar- 
rived in Jerusalem, saying, Where is He that hath been 
born, King of the Jews, for we have seen His star in the 
East and have come to worship Him?” (verses 1, 2.) 

The first question would be to ascertain the time when 
these wise men came to Jerusalem. It is generally believed 
that it was immediately after the birth of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. The old masters have taken most of the subjects 
for their paintings from biblical history, but many of these 
productions, if not all, are unscriptural and misleading. Thus 
the birth of the Saviour has been put on canvas, so familiar 
to our readers, a stable, a manger, Mary and Joseph, do- 
mestic animals, a star shining over the building, shepherds 
with their staffs on the one hand and on the other three 
gaudily attired persons on their knees, glittering crowns on 
their heads, and in the extended hands the gift upon which 
the eyes of the babe rest. Such a picture of course is incor- 
rect. The authorized version, too, has helped such a wrong 
conception along by having it translated, “But when Jesus 
was born.” The correct reading is, But Jesus having been 
born, that is some time after and not immediately after. 


40 


Other evidences in the chapter show that the child must 
have been about a year old when the visit of the wise men 
occurred. They had seen His star, announcing to them in 
their far away homes that the expected king had been born. 
They had to travel over a large territory, and the journey 
must have taken many months, and then there is nothing to 
show that they started at once. In the eleventh verse we _ 
read, “And when they had come into the house, they saw 
the young child with Mary His mother, and they fell down 
-and worshipped Him.” In Luke it says, “And she brought 
forth her first born Son, and wrapped Him in swaddling 
clothes and laid Him in a manger, because there was no 
room for them in the inn.” In Matthew it is a house where 
the child is found, in Luke there was no room in the inn. 
Perhaps the most important evidence is in the sixteenth 
verse. Herod had privately called the wise men and in- 
quired of them exactly the time that the star appeared. 
Their answer is not given, but from the sixteenth verse we 
may conclude that Herod had received a very definite answer 
by which he knew that the child could not be over two years 
old. . 

; The second question would be about these strange visi- 
tors, who came. to do homage before the King. Who were 
they? How many of them came? They are called in the 
Greek, Magi from the East. Magi is the name by which in 
olden times a large class of people, who were occupied with 
occult things, were known. These were the astrologers, in- 
terpreters of dreams and omens, medical men, necromancers, 
etc. Among the Persians and Medes they formed a special 


41 


~ class of priests, and were chiefly occupied with foretelling 
events from the stars, and preparations of medicines for bod- 
ily ills. From Magi has come the more modern word magic; 
in an evil sense, sorcerer. Daniel was chief over such a 
class of wise men. “And the king made Daniel to be chief 
governor over all the wise men of Babylon” (Daniel ii:48). 
These wise men of the East were not all impostors. Many 
of them were earnest seekers after the truth, and students of 
natural forces. They did not have the true light. What a 
significant fact it is that now in the beginning of the twen- 
tieth century, in the midst of so-called Christian nations, * 
soothsayers, ‘readers of “human destiny” through the stars, 
those who claim to ask the dead, others having familiar 
spirits, are practicing their deceptions, wickedness and 
_abominations, and are advertising their evil things openly, 
and find among these so-called “Christians” thousands and 
thousands to consult them. It cannot be otherwise. The 
true Light rejected, the truth not believed, strong delusions 
and utter darkness follow (2 Thess. ii). The Magi here 
were unquestionably earnest seekers after truth. There is 
nothing to show how many came thus to Jerusalem, That 
three came and that these three were kings is incorrect. We 
would rather think that a larger number made their appear- 
ance in the city, followed perhaps by a large train of atten- 
dants. Their appearance in number was striking enough 
to startle Jerusalem, and to bring trouble into the heart of 
its wicked king. 
They had seen “His star,” the star of the born King of 
the Jews. There has been much speculating about the star, 


42 


likewise. Many think that the star was a constellation of 
Jupiter and Saturn. The great astronomer, Kepler, issued 
in 1606 a book in which he attempted to show the year of 
the birth of our Lord by such a constellation. In 1463 the 
great Jewish teacher, Abarbanel, concluded from a similar 
constellation which happened then that the coming of the 
Messiah must be near. But it does not say stars, but it is 
star, and that His star. It is also incorrect to think that 
the star guided the Magi from the East across an immense 
stretch of country and brought them at last to Jerusalem. 
The star they had seen in the East went before them only 
after they had departed from Jerusalem. It says then, 
“When they saw the star they rejoiced with exceeding great 
joy.” This shows that for a time they did not see the star. 
Perhaps in their ancient traditions there was something left 
of Balaam’s prophecy (Numbers xxiii and xxiv). Might 
they not have had fragments of Daniel’s prophecies? It is 
a well known fact that throughout the East there was at | 
that time a universal expectancy of the coming of a King, 
and Jerusalem was connected with this King. A similar 
expectancy is even now noticeable among Oriental nations. 
A marvelous light was seen by these men. It burst forth in 
a brilliant brightness, as once more in the near future the 
heavens will be lit up by the sign of the Son of man, return- 
ing in power and glory. With that strange light in the 
heavens, a brilliant star, the intelligence was conveyed to 
them that the King, the One who is the desire of all nations 
(Hag. ii:3) was born. And that light was sufficient for these 
seekers to make them set out with their gifts, to undertake 


43 


the long and dangerous journey to find the King and bow 
before His royal person. 

What a day it was when they arrived at last in Jerusalem, 
not guided there by the star, but by the knowledge that in 
Jerusalem the King was to reign, and where they expected 
to find Him! But what did they find? Jerusalem under the 
regime of an Edomite. Herod upon the throne and his 
heart filled with Edomite hatred. No question that these 
evil rulers, including this one, are types of the final usurper, 
the Antichrist, whom the Lord will find in possession of the 
city when He comes the second time, and whom He will 
destroy with the breath of His mouth and the brightness of 
His coming. “Where is He that hath been born King of 
the Jews?” Where is He? In vain they go after their long 
journey through the streets of Jerusalem asking the ques- 
tion; there is no answer. The great city with its magnifi- 
cent religious institutions, its wonderful Herodian temple, 
then still in process of erection, its aristocratic priesthood 
and benevolent institutions, had no knowledge of that King; 
nay, they did not desire that King to come, they were self- 
satisfied. This foreshadows the whole story of the rejection 
of the King, the Lord from heaven, that there was not alone 
no room for Him in the inn, but there was likewise no room 
for Him among His own; they received Him not. Herod, 
the king, was troubled and all Jerusalem with him. He 
feared for his throne, which was not his. Jerusalem knew 
what Herod’s fear meant—rebellion, bloodshed, and suffer- 
ing. ; 

How true this is still, and how truly it describes the en- 


44 


tire dispensation in which we live! Jerusalem knows not 
the King, has rejected Him who is their Messiah, and ever 
since, Jerusalem and Israel’s sad history of blood and tears 
has begun and will surely not end till the false king is de- 
throned and Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews, is 
crowned as Lord of all. 

And these men from the East were not Jews, they were 
not Israelites, but Gentiles. For months, while Jerusalem 
is not acquainted with the fact of the birth of the long prom- 
ised One, they had knowledge that He had come. Gentiles 
were first to acknowledge and to worship Him. The first be- 
came last and the last became first. By their fall salvation has 
come to the Gentiles to provoke them to jealousy. He, the 
Saviour, is first, a light for the “unveiling of the Gentiles, 
but in the end, too, the glory of Thy people Israel’? (Luke 
11:32). Still it is to be seen here likewise that not all the 
Gentiles came to worship Him, only a small number, and 
so throughout this dispensation the promise is not that the 
nations will walk in His light and worship Him, but only a 
people is called out from the nations for His name. We 
will see later in the exposition of this chapter that these 
Gentiles who came to Jerusalem are typical of all the nations 
going up to Jerusalem to worship the King, the Lord of 
Hosts. 3 

But in Jerusalem there was not only a king who was the 
enemy of the right heir to David’s throne, but there were 
the religious leaders of the people, the Pharisees, the scribes, 
the priests and the chief priests. The learned doctors of the 
‘aw, the students of prophecy, the orthodox; had they no 


- 45 


knowledge of Him of whom Moses and the Prophets spoke? 
Surely if they hear He has come they will run to meet Him 
and welcome Him! Far from it; they were ignorant, like- 
- wise, and all indifferent to the startling news which had 
come to Jerusalem from such an extraordinary source. 

“And when Herod the king heard it he was troubled, . 
and all Jerusalem with him; and having gathered together 
all the chief priests and scribes of the people, he inquired of 
them where the Christ was to be born. And they said unto 
him, In Bethlehem of Judea; for it is written through the 
prophet, And thou Bethlehem in the land of Juda, art in no 
wise least among the governors of Juda; for out of thee 
shall come forth a leader who shall be a shepherd to my 
people Israel.” 

By order of the king they were called together, not in a 
special session of the Sanhedrim, but in a larger gathering, all 
the chief priests and scribes are commanded to show them- 
selves and to produce the scrolls of the law, the prophets 
and the writings. And now Herod puts his question, Where 
is Messiah to be born? The answer comes at once from the | 
prophecies of Micah in the beginning of the fifth chapter, 
“Bethlehem in Juda.” There was no dissenting voice. They 
were all orthodox and had a perfect knowledge of the scrip- 
tures, but it was head knowledge, and their consciences 
were not touched by it. The quotation itself differs from 
the original Hebrew and from the Septuagint. They used 
undoubtedly the text from a Chaldee paraphrase. The meet- 
ing is dismissed and all goes on in its usual way. Nothing 
is said that these priests and scribes were awakened and 


= 46 


joined the seeking strangers-to find Him, who is their Mes- 
siah, Sad was their state. Knowledge sufficient, but 
no interest in Him, no love for Him, the living Word. Their 
hearts were not filled with joy, and perhaps in their indif- 
ference the incident was soon forgotten, till one day the 
slaughter of the children in Bethlehem reminded them once 
more of what had happened. It is the first time we meet 
these chief priests and scribes in the Gospel; they will soon 
stand before us in all their religiousness in another charac- 
ter. Indifferent they were once, and soon we shall see 
them in their hatred, wickedness, and at last, with a perfect 
knowledge of the person who is in their midst, they deliver 
Him into the hands of the Gentiles. 

And is this not true in Christendom at this present time? 
How much there is of religiousness, rituals, ceremonies and 
creeds of men, but with all this it is nothing but profession 
outwardly, the heart cares not for Him and has no interest 
in Him. The indifference of our times in the midst of Chris- 
tendom is appalling. There is no interest in the coming 
again of our Lord as there was no interest in the religious 
leaders of the people at His first coming. Indifference ends 
with this age also in opposition and apostasy, followed by 
judgment. Perhaps for the first time had these wise men 
from the East heard the Word of God. The flash of light, 
the brilliant star, that supernatural sign, was sufficient to 
start them on their way. The light they had they followed, 
and soon there is added to it. The Word of God they heard 
perhaps not at all from any of the scribes and chief priests. 
These strangers were despised by them and considered as 


47 


dogs, in spite of the prophetic scriptures which speak of the 
salvation of the Gentiles. The presence of them in Jerusalem 
should have taught them the fulfillment of prophecy. No, 
not the scribes and-chief priests acquaint the wise men with 
the Word, but wicked King Herod, with his wicked thoughts 
and intentions, transmits it to them. “Then Herod, having 
privately called the Magi, inquired of them exactly the time 
that the star appeared; and sending them to Bethlehem he 
said, Go and search out exactly about the child and when 
ye have found Him bring me back word, that I may come 
and worship Him also.” They are obedient to the word 
spoken ; though it came from Herod’s lips, it was neverthe- 
less the truth. Jerusalem is left behind, and their faces are 
set towards Bethlehem. “When they had heard the king 
they departed; and lo, the star they had seen in the East 
went before them until it came and stood over where the 
young child was. ~And when they saw the star they rejoiced 
with exceeding great joy.” 

The question has been raised, Where did they find the 
child?. In Luke we read, “And when they had performed 
all these things according to the law of the Lord, they re- 
turned unto Galilee, their own city Nazareth’ (Luke 
ii:39). Now if the wise men came about a year later, did 
they find the child in Bethlehem or were they guided all the 
way up to Nazareth? We think they were guided by the 
star to Bethlehem in fulfillment of the word they had heard. 
Bethlehem is in a southern direction from Jerusalem and 
Nazareth directly north. They were put without question 
on the right road by Herod, when the star appeared again. 


48 


But if the parents were in Bethlehem a year later with the 
child, why did they go there? The Gospel of Luke gives the 
answer. “Now His parents went to Jerusalem every year 
at the feast of the Passover. And when He was twelve years 
old they went up to Jerusalem after the custom of the feast” 
(Luke ii:41, 42). This brings out that they were a year 
after again in Jerusalem for the feast, and were therefore 
not in Nazareth. Bethlehem was truly their city, and the 
very short journey was made there from Jerusalem, where 
the wise men now found the young child with Mary His 
mother. 

“And having come into the house they saw the little child 
with Mary, his mother, and falling down did Him homage. 
And having opened their treasures, they offered him gifts, 
gold, frankincense and myrrh.” With exceeding great joy 
they had welcomed the reappearing of the star; it came and 
stood over the place where the child was. They enter into 
the house and find the little child and Mary, his. mother. 
Even the order of words teaches us something. It is not 
Mary, his mother, and the little child, but the one who is 
God manifested in the flesh stands first, and Joseph is not at 
all mentioned. What a rebuke to the corrupt systems in 
Christendom where Mary and Joseph occupy a prominent 
place and are worshipped. The wise men worshipped Him, 
there was no adoration for Mary, while Joseph was com- 
pletely ignored. All the worship and bowing of knee is for 
Him of whom it is written that at His name every knee 
should bow, of heavenly and earthly and infernal beings, 
and every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to God 


49 


the Father’s glory (Phil. ii:10). The outcome of their long 
and tedious journey, of their searching and seeking Him 
who is the King, was worship. A little light was followed, 
and soon the increase came. The Word of God showed them 
the way, and there was a second outburst of light from the 
star which brought them to the right place. What else could 
they do then but do homage to Him and to adore Him? 
Their first business was worship. It should be so with every 
true believer. We often hear it said, “saved to serve.” 
This is not strictly true. We are saved by grace to worship 
and adore our God and Father and His Son, our Saviour 
and Lord. Service comes in, too, but only after worship. 
Where grace is rightly understood there will be a great deal 
of worship and praise, followed by true service, but where 
there is a dim conception of what God has done for us, what 
He has made us in His Son, and where that blessed and 
comforting doctrine, the assurance of salvation, is not known, 
there will be much service or attempted service, with much 
unrest, but little worship, or none at all. May our readers 
understand that worship stands first and is the first thing. 
The Father seeks worshippers (John iv:23). We are saved 
by grace to be worshippers of Him. All our joy and peace 
as believers, as well as fruitbearing, comes from being at 
His feet and doing homage to Him. 

How long the worship of the wise men lasted we do not 
know, nor how long they tarried. After their worship they 
opened their treasures and offered to Him gifts, gold, fran- 
kincense and myrrh. This was their service, the offering of 
gifts. 


go 


Prophetically, this homage of the wise men, and the gifts 
they brought, is of much importance. It was, of course, and 
still is a custom of the Orient to appear before a person of 
royal descent with many presents, but here we have more 
than a simple custom. Without knowing it, nor knowing 
the significance of what they did, their hands, in selecting 
the gifts, were divinely guided. As King they had sought 
Him, as such they worshipped Him, and now the presents 
are in full harmony with the character of the King. The 
gold speaks of His divine and kingly glory, the frankin- 
cense of the fragrance of His life, as Son of God in power, 
according to the spirit of holiness, and myrrh, the balsamic 
juice of Arabian myrtle, which is used for buria’, speaks of 
His death, that this King is to lay-down His life. What 
lessons there come even from the gifts the wise men spread 
before our Lord. : 

Quite often we are told that this is in fulfillment of 
Isaiah Ix:6. However, in looking at this passage, we dis- 
cover that the wise men could not be spoken of there, nor 
that they fulfilled that prophecy. We read in Isaiah: 
“They shall bring gold and frankincense, and shall pro- 
claim the praises of the Lord.” We notice at once that 
Isaiah does not say anything at all about myrrh. Why, 
then, is there no myrrh in Isaiah, and why is there a men- 
tion made of myrrh by Matthew? The passage in Isaiah 
refers to the coming of the Gentiles at the time when the 
rejected King has come again in power and in glory, and is 
King of kings; hence there is no need of myrrh. The whole 
scope of Isaiah Ix brings this out. “For behold, darkness 


51 


shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the nations (yet to 
come during the tribulation), but the Lord shall arise upon 
thee (Israel) and His glory shall be seen upon thee. And 
nations shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness 
of thy rising.” If we read through this chapter we find 
multitudes coming, and they seek not a small humble house 
like the wise men did, but they seek the house of glory, and 
there they meet the King of Glory in His beauty, and spread 
before Him gold and frankincense, shouting aloud His 
praises and the glory of His name. What a glorious chapter 
this is, and, oh, the joy which fills us as believers in the an- 
_ticipation when all this shall be so. May it soon be when 
violence shall no more be heard in the land, desolation nor 
destruction within thy borders; but thy walls shall be called 
salvation and thy gates praise. We would say, then, that it 
is incorrect to state that the wise men came in fulfillment. 
of Isaiah 1x :6; they were but faint types of what shall take 
place after the Glory, when no more bloodthirsty Herod will 
be upon the throne, and Jerusalem and not Bethlehem will 
be the city to which the Gentiles journey, the city of a great 
King. 

“And being divinely instructed in a dream not to return 
to Herod, they departed into their own country another 
way.” This is all the Word has to say about the departure 
of these strangers. After their worship and offering of 
gifts, divine guidance instructs them. It is guidance, like- 
wise, we have as believers, but it is a guidance through 

the Spirit in the Word. 
“Now they having departed, behold an angel of the Lord 


52 

appeared in a dream to Joseph, saying, Arise, take to thee the 
little child and His mother, and flee into Egypt, and be there 
until I shall tell thee; for Herod will seek the little child to 
destroy it. And having arisen, he took to him the little child 
and His mother by night, and departed into Egypt, and he 
was there until the death of Herod, that it might be ful- 
filled which was spoken by the Lord, through the prophet, 
saying, Out of Egypt have I called my Son” (verses 13-15). 

Thus the narrative continues. The child is the only prom- 
inent figure in it. There is a spurious gospel, called the 
Gospel of the Infancy of our Lord,* in which the flight to 
Egypt is adorned with many miracles. We mention some 
of them. Idols broke to pieces wherever the child came; 
the three-year-old child of an Egyptian priest who was pos- 
sessed by demons put a swaddling cloth of the child upon his 
head, and the demon fled; a woman possessed by a demon 
was healed by looking upon Mary; robbers fled in terror 
before the child; all manner of diseases were healed, in- 
cluding leprosy, etc. The whole book shows that it is a 
counterfeit, gotten up by some one who favored the worship 
of Mary and the child. How simple the story is here in 
Matthew. The child is dependent upon Joseph, who is now 
mentioned, and in poverty, under great danger, at night, 
they had to flee. God could have transported His Son by a 
miracle, but the Son of God had become man, and now it 
was for Him to enter into all. He has to go the long and 
weary road. The cause of the flight was Herod, who under 


*Evangelium Infantia. 


53 


the power of Satan sought the life of the child. He shows 
himself here as the murderer from the beginning. Satan is 
that still, the great red dragon with seven heads and ten 
horns, ready to devour the man-child (Rev. xii). The place 
of refuge is Egypt. There He is to go, to be called back 
after a while in fulfillment of the prophetic Word, “Out of 
Egypt have I called my Son.” 

This prophecy is found in Hosea xi:1. ‘When Israel was 

a child then I loved Him, and called My Son out of Egypt.” 
This was spoken about 700 years before and is about Israel, 
but here we learn through the Holy Spirit its true and full 
meaning. Jews, infidels and higher critics have stumbled 
at this, but how simple even this is, no difficulty, as commen- 
taries sometimes say. Israel is, according to Exodus iv:22, 
God’s first born Son, and in Jeremiah xxxi:g: we read, “I 
am a father to Israel and Ephraim is my first born.” Christ 
and Israel are closely identified in the prophetic Word, Thus 
the Messiah, our Lord, is called in Isaiah the servant of the 
Lord, and Israel is spoken of there, too, as the servant of 
the Lord, that is Israel’s Messiah is the servant of the Lord 
through whose obedient suffering and death Israel becomes 
at last in the earth the righteous servant of Jehovah. Israel 
is God’s first born, but the Lord Jesus Christ is not alone 
the only begotten of the Father, but also the first born from 
the dead. In resurrection He will be the first born among 
many brethren, which is the Church, His body. But through 
Him and in Him alone, Israel, God’s earthly people, His 
first born will become that for which God has called them ac- 
cording to His merciful purposes. Israel’s history beginning 


54 


with Egypt, has been a history of sin, disobedience, apostasy 
and shame. Therefore the true One had to come, the true 
servant of the Lord in obedience—obedience unto death. 
He had to go through the history of His people. This is the 
reason why He had to go down to Egypt, the house of bon- 
dage. Of course, there was no bondage for Him. And 
when He is called out of Egypt, He comes to pass through 
the wilderness to be tested and tried, going the long journey 
through all in the spirit of holiness without sin, far differ- 
ent from that which Israel was. How blessedly He became 
identified with all. 

In the following three verses we read of the satanic rage 
of Herod when he finds that the wise men did not return 
and all the boys in Bethlehem and in all its borders from two 
years and under were slain. “Then it was fulfilled that 
which was spoken through Jeremiah the prophet, saying: A 
voice has been heard in Rama, weeping and great lamenta- 
tion; Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be 
comforted, because they are not.’”’ The wicked deed is but 
a beginning of the sorrows of Israel on account of the re- 
jection of the King. His blood indeed has been upon them 
and their children, the worst is still to come in the time of 
Jacob’s trouble when the false Messiah will be like Her- 
od, shedding their blood. The quotation is from Jeremiah 
Xxx1:15. It is an application here of that prophecy. Ra- 
chel was buried near Bethlehem. Dying there she called 
the son who was born to her Ben-oni, which means the son 
of my sorrow, but his father Jacob soon changed his name, 
and the son of sorrow becomes Benjamin, which means, the 


55 


son of the right hand. Rachel is seen here as weeping and 
lamenting over the slaughtered children, the children of 
Bethlehem. They were no more, and would not be com- 
forted. What greater crying and lamentation there shall be 
in the future in the land! In Jeremiah, in the context, we 
read: “Thus saith the Lord, refrain thy voice from weeping 
and thine eyes from tears—they shall come again from the 
land of the enemy.” The child had escaped the murderous 
onslaught of Satan through Herod, but He comes back to 
lay down His life, that through death He might annul him 
who has the might of death, that is, the devil; and might set 
free all those who through fear of death through the whole 
of their life were subject to bondage (Hebrews ii.). The 
return of the child, how long they stayed in Egypt is not 
said, is next described in our chapter and needs no further 
comment. The child is kept as He now keeps the feet of 
His saints, His church, and hades’ gates shall not prevail 
against it. 

There is one more prophecy which is to be mentioned. 
“And having been divinely instructed in a dream, he went 
away in the parts of Galilee, and came and dwelt in a town 
called Nazareth; so that it should be fulfilled which was 
spoken through the prophets, He shall be called a Naza- 
rene” (verses 22, 23). It is next to the questions from the 
first chapter in Matthew, the most important the inquiring 
Jew brings in reading the New Testament: “Where is it 
written, or in what prophet is it written, that Messiah should 
be called a Nazarene?’’ It does not say here that it is writ- 
- ten by one prophet, but by the prophets. Therefore all the 


56 


prophets have spoken of Him as being a Nazarene. A Naz- 
arene is an inhabitant of Nazareth. That city is in Galilee, 
which is called the Galilee of the Gentiles, because so many 
Gentiles lived there. The Pharisees and scribes in Jeru- 
salem hated and despised Galilee, and especially was Naza- 
reth despised. The inhabitants were called Am-horatzim, 
that is ignorant men. Even the Galileans looked down.upon 
the town and despised everybody who lived there. The ruin 
and corruption was there the greatest. Therefore we read 
in another Gospel: “Can any good thing come out of Naza- 
reth?” To that mean, despised place the Son of God is to 
go, there He, who was rich in all eternity, found His abode. 
Now, this is spoken by all the prophets, that the Messiah, 
the Saviour, was to be rejected by men. The rejection be- 
gan with the very start, and there in the little town He is 
to spend thirty years of His life, and when He comes forth 
and begins His ministry in Galilee, it is only to be rejected 
again, ending at last in Jerusalem outside of the camp. 
How true, He was despised and rejected of men. And our 
place is with Him now in rejection, outside of the camp, 
to bear His reproach. May this be our place, and like Him, | 
the leader and completer of the faith, may we, for the joy 
set before us, endure the cross and despise the shame, 


57 


CHAPTER Ill, 


The third chapter relates the ministry of the herald of the 
King, who announces that the kingdom of the heavens has 
drawn nigh, and the presence of the King Himself, who is 
to come after him; the baptism of the King, who comes from 
Galilee to the Jordan to John, and the events connected 
with it, are given in the second half of the chapter. 

“Now in those days comes John the Baptist, preaching in 
the wilderness of Judea, and saying, Repent, for the king- 
dom of the heavens has drawn nigh. For this is He, who 
has been spoken of through Esaias the prophet saying, A 
voice of Him that crieth in the wilderness: Prepare ye the 
way of the Lord, make straight His paths. And John him- 
self had his garments of camel’s hair, and a leathern girdle 
about his loins, and his nourishment was locusts and wild 
honey” (verses I-4). 

The forerunner is John the Baptist, a typical Old Testa- 
ment person, of whom the Lord says later in the Gospel, 
“Yea, I say to you, and more than a prophet, this is he of 
whom it is written, Behold I send My messenger before Thy 
face, who shall prepare Thy way before Thee. Verily I 
say to you, that there is not arisen among the born.of women 
a greater than John the Baptist, but he who is a little one 
in the kingdom of the heavens is greater than he” (chapter 
xi:9-12). In the same discourse the Lord says, in vindi- 


58 


cation of John, who was then in prison: “And if ye will re- 
ceive it, this is Elias who is to come.” In the first chapter 
of Luke the angel announces his birth and says: “For he 
shall be great before the Lord, and he shall drink no wine or 
strong drink; and he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, even 
from his mother’s womb. And many of the sons of Israel 
shall he turn to the Lord their God. And he shall go be- 
_fore Him in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn hearts of 
fathers to children, and disobedient ones to the thoughts of 
just men, to make ready for the Lord a prepared people” 
(Luke 1:15-17). In these words, given through the Holy 
Spirit, the Lord Himself and an angel of the Lord, we have 
the three prophecies of the Old Testament concerning the 
forerunner quoted. These are: Isaiah xl:3-5 ; Malachi iti:1; 
iv:5, 6. That he was sent in fulfillment of these prophecies 
is therefore unquestionable. To this comes the manner of 
his dress and the nourishment. It reminds us of the great 
prophet Elias, the Tishbite. “He was an hairy man, and 
girt with a girdle of leather about his loins” (2 Kings i:8). 

John knew His personality and His mission, for he said: 
“I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make 
straight the way of the Lord, as said the prophet Esaias”’ 
(John 1:23). But when asked, Art thou Elias? he an- 
swered, Iam not. The Jews expected Elijah, as the ortho- 
dox Jews expect him still, as the forerunner of King Mes- 
siah. At every passover ceremony a cup is reserved for the 
prophet Elijah, and at the circumcision of the child a chair 
is placed for that person, and many are the prayers which 
are said, that God may send soon the prophet Elijah, for his 


59 


,presence would indicate to them the nearness of the King. 
The character and preaching of Elijah were clearly repro- 
duced in John. He was the Elias for his day. If they had 
received it, he would have been Elias. In this sense, Mat- 
thew xvii:12, is to be understood: “Elias cometh and restor- 
eth all things; But I say unto you, that Elias is come al- 
ready, and they did not recognize him, but did unto him 
whatever they would.” He was rejected, and his rejection 
foretold how things would go, that the King Himself would 
be rejected. We would only mention that before the King 
comes again there will be once more a forerunner. Once 
more the message will be heard, The kingdom of the heavens 
draweth nigh. It will be the Gospel of the Kingdom preached 
by the remnant during the great tribulation All 
we have in Malachi iv:5, “Behold, I will send you Elijah 
the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful 
day of the Lord,” will then be fulfilled. In Revelation xiii 
one of the two witnesses is, without question, one like Eli- 
jah. It is necessary to state, that no great and miracle-work- 
ing preacher of repentance, in the spirit of Elijah, is prom- 
ised to Christendom. We make this remark, because in our 
days persons stand up and declare that they are forerunners, 
or one of the witnesses or messengers of the covenant. 
These poor people err and know not the Scripture, and by 
their conceited claims work untold harm. 

John the Baptist appears in the wilderness. He is not in 
the temple in the midst of the learned and the great. There 
was no room for him there. He is outside of the camp, and’ 
the people too have to leave Jerusalem and go out to him. 


60 


This is once more significant. It shows what the end will be., 
His preaching is, ‘Repent, for the kingdom of the heav- 
ens has drawn nigh.” 
The phrase, kingdom of the heavens, is mentioned thirty- 
two times in the Gospel of Matthew. Here it is for the first 
time. The strangest meaning has been put upon this term. 
Christendom at large is all at sea about the meaning of it. 
Heaven or the church are the general interpretations which 
are given. Both are wrong, and because the meaning of 
this term is so grossly misunderstood, there is no conception 
whatever of the thoughts and purposes of God. The king- 
dom of the heavens is an Old Testament term. It is to be 
in the earth and not in heaven. It is a kingdom in which 
the heavens rule (Daniel iv:26). The setting up of that 
kingdom is spoken of in Daniel ii :44, and in the seventh 
chapter, verse 14. It is in the hands of One who is the Son. 
of Man, Messiah, the Son of David, who is to rule in 
righteousness. In that kingdom there will be universal 
peace, and the knowledge of the glory of the Lord shall 
cover the earth as the waters cover the deep. His own peo- 
ple, the house of Judah and the house of Israel, will all be 
regathered into the land, Jerusalem built again and become 
the great centre of blessing for the nations of the earth. In 
one word, the kingdom of the heavens is the literal fulfilment 
of all the prophecies and promises contained in the Old 
Testament, which the Lord gave to the seed of Abraham, 
_and the blessings of the nations of the earth to come after 
this kingdom is set up. The Church is not known in the 
Old Testament, nor is it seen in the opening chapters of 


61 


Matthew. This kingdom, the forerunner declares, now has 
drawn nigh, it is at hand. The King is in the earth, Eman- 
uel, He whose name is Wonderful, Counsellor, the Mighty 
God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, and con- 
cerning whom it is said, “that of the increase of his govern- 
ment and peace there shall be no end upon the throne of 
- David, and upon His kingdom, to order it and to establish 
~ it with judgment and with justice from henceforth even for- 
ever.” Not alone did John preach this kingdom to its Jewish, 
earthly form, but the Lord Himself declared that it had 
drawn nigh, and when the King sent out His disciples He 
told them to preach, “The kingdom of the heavens has drawn 
nigh,” the special Messianic kingdom power was put upon 
them to heal the sick, to raise the dead, cleanse the lepers, 
and cast out demons (Matthew x). | 
But as the forerunner and his testimony is rejected, and 
the King Himself, the coming of that kingdom of the 
heavens is postponed. It is not set aside completely, but 
only postponed, and all the glories of that earthly Messianic 
Kingdom, which will reach from sea to sea, so minutely 
pictured in Old Testament prophecy, will yet be established 
in the earth with Jerusalem as the center, for the gifts and 
callings of God are without repentance. The kingdom of 
the heavens is not the church, and the church is not the 
kingdom. How great the confusion is on this point in all 
_ Christian denominations who read the “history of the church” 
in the establishment and glory of the kingdom predicted by 
_ the prophets. 
The proper word for John to utter when appearing in the 


62 


wilderness was, repent. That kingdom which had now | — 


drawn nigh was to bring judgment of all that is evil. Judg- 
ments upon all unrighteousness are associated with the com- 
ing of that kingdom. Every Jew was acquainted with that 
fact. It is true the earthly glories of the kingdom of the 
heavens had been announced by every prophet, but equally 
true is it that the coming judgments were announced, and 
at all times in past generations of the earthly people of God, 
the cry, “Return! Repent!” was heard. Now the greatest 
one of all the prophets has come, and the cry of the Law 
and the Prophets, Repent, sounds forth once more, so strong 
and clear as never before. : 

Before we take up the meaning of repentance here and the 
baptism unto repentance wherewith he baptized, and com- 
pare them with repentance and baptism which are connected 
with the Gospel of Grace, we must call attention to the quo- 
tation from Isaiah which follows. The words are taken from 
that sublime chapter which begins with, Comfort ye, comfort 
ye, my people, the fortieth chapter. In comparing Matthew 
with Luke we find that the quotation in Luke is complete, 
in Matthew it is only in part. Luke, or rather the Holy 
Spirit through him, adds, “Every gorge shall be filled up, 
and every mountain and hill shall be brought low, and the 
crooked shall become straight, and the rough places smooth 
ways, and all flesh shall see the salvation of God (Luke iii: 
5-7).”. One would look to the Gospel of Matthew as the 
Jewish Gospel, to find such a complete quotation from the 
Old Testament. Why then, is it not all quoted in Matthew, 
and why does it stand in Luke? The reason is easily found. 


' 


63 


Luke’s Gospel is for the Gentiles, to show that salvation is 
to be indeed offered to all flesh. For this reason the full 
quotation is perfectly in order in that Gospel, while in Mat- 
thew, here in the beginning in its narrower scope, it would 
be out of order. It is likewise to be remarked that the tes- 
timony of John was_not only the cry in the wilderness, the 
loud and continued “Repent!” Such is heard here, and 
when the kingdom hopes are not realized, we shall see him 
later sending from the prison to the Lord with his question. 
But John had a more perfect knowledge, which he im- 
parted to his disciples. The proper place for that testimony 
is neither Matthew, Mark nor Luke, but the Gospel where 
the Holy Spirit shows us our Saviour and Lord as the only 
begotten of the Father, the Gospel of John. There John 
points to Him and says, Behold the Lamb of God who taketh 
away the sin of the world. “I have seen and borne Him, 
witness that He is the Son of God (John i:29-34).” Bud 
clearer still is that wonderful address he delivers to his dis- 
ciples when they came to him. “And John answered and 
said, A man can receive nothing unless it be given him out 
of heaven. Ye, ourselves, bear me witness that I said, I . 
am not the Christ, but that I am sent before Him. He that 
hath the bride is the bridegroom; but the friend of the bride- 
groom, who stands and hears him, rejoices in heart because 
of the voice of the bridegroom; this my joy then is fulfilled. 
He must increase, but I must decrease. He who comes 
from above is above all. He who has his origin in the 
earth is of the earth, and speaks as of the earth. He who 
comes out of heaven is above all, and what He has seen 


64 


and what He has heard this He testifies; and no one 
receives His testimony. He that has received His testimony 
has set to his seal that God is true; for He whom God has 
sent speaks the words of God, for God gives not the Spirit by 
measure. The Father loves the Son and has given all things 
in His hand. He that believes on the Son has life eternal, and 
he that is not subject to the Son shall not see life, but the 
wrath of God abideth upon him (John 111:27-36).” 

Such a testimony then was given by John, he knew of life 
through Christ and that the bridegroom is the Son of God. 

Repentance is his foremost message to the nation. Let us 
consider briefly what it means. Repentance as it is found in 
the Old Testament, is God’s request to His earthly people to 
return unto Him. This is the call of John the Baptist in this 
third chapter. It is the Gospel of the Kingdom which he 
preaches. The Gospel of Grace is something different. It 
was not known then, it could not-be fully made known and 
preached till after the death, the resurrection, ascension of our 
Lord Jesus Christ and the gift of the Holy Spirit. To preach 
the Gospel of Grace from the words of John the Baptist,‘‘Re- 
pent, for the kingdom of the heavens has drawn nigh,” would 
be misleading. Still it. is being done throughout 
Christendom. Not knowing what the kingdom of the heavens 
is, what the church is, and the differences between the Gos- 
pel of the Kingdom and the Gospel of Grace, there is a con- © 
stant misapplication of the scriptures and preaching of a re- 
pentance which is Jewish. Theological systems, especially 
Arminianism, have produced a way of salvation, which is 
surely nothing less, than the new wine in old wineskins. There 


65 


is the demand of a repentance, a certain form of penitence, 
a deep feeling of being lost, grief and despair, turning away 
from the world and worldly pleasures, seeking the Lord, per- 
haps for many weary months, then at last, after such a weird — 
experience, believing in the Lord Jesus Christ. After this 
the receiving of what is termed, the witness of the Spirit, a 
good feeling, by which it is claimed one alone can know that 
he is saved, a feeling which can be lost, after which the per- 
son is once more unsaved. That all this is not according to 
the Gospel of Grace, the teachings of Romans, as well as the 
other epistles is evident. One who has written on the sub- 
ject of repentance has done it in such a scriptural and simple 
way that we desire to quote from his book :* 

“What then about repentance? Are faith and the Spirit’s 
work enough? Or is not repentance no less a necessity if 
men are to be saved? I meet this question boldly and at once 
by denouncing it as based, not so much on ignorance as on 
deep seated and systematic error. The repentance which thus 
obtrudes itself and claims notice in every sermon is not the 
friend of the Gospel but an enemy. It is like the officious 
guide, who forces himself upon the traveler only to mislead 
him. Faith and repentance are not successive stages on the 
road to life; they are not independent guides to direct the 
pilgrim’s path; they are not separate acts to be successively 
accomplished by the sinner as a condition of his salvation. 
But, in different phases of it, they represent the same God- 
ward attitude of the soul, which the truth of God believed 


produces. 


*“The Gospel and its Ministry.” By Robert Anderson. 


66 


“Salvation there cannot be without repentance any more 
than without faith, but the soundest and fullest Gospel 
preaching need not include any mention of the word. Neither 
as verb or noun does it occur in the Epistle to the Romans— 
God’s great doctrinal treatise on redemption and righteous- 
ness—save in the warnings of the second chapter. And the 
Gospel of John, pre-eminently the Gospel-book of the Bible 
—will be searched in vain for a single mention of it. The 
beloved disciple wrote his Gospel that men might believe and 
live, and his Epistle followed to confirm believers in the 
simplicity and certainty of their faith; but yet from end to 
end of them the word ‘repent’ or ‘repentance’ never once 
occurs. It is to these writings before all others men have 
turned in every age to find words of peace and life, and yet 
some who profess to hold them inspired will cavil at a Gospel 
sermon because repentance is not mentioned in it—a fault, if 
fault it be, that marks the testimony of the Apostle John and 
the preaching of our Lord Himself, as recorded by the fourth 
evangelist. The repentance of the Gospel is to be found in 
the Nicodemus discourse and in the gracious testimony to the 
woman at the well; and, I may add, any repentance that 
limits or jars upon those sacred words is wholly against the 
truth.” 

In Acts iii:19 we hear Peter preaching, “Repent.” It is 
here still to the nation connected with a national hope: The 
restoring of all things of which God has spoken by the mouth 
of His holy prophets. After the calling out of people for 
His name is accomplished, and the fullness of the Gentiles 
has come in, there will be once more the call heard, “Repent !” 


67 


But the call to repentance is associated with baptism—the 
baptism unto repentance. “Then went out to Hitn Jerusalem 
and all Judea, and all the country round the Jordan, and were 
baptized by Him in the Jordan, confessing their sins (verse 
5).” Concerning his baptism He said, “I indeed baptize you 


” 


with water unto repentance.” There was then a great stir, 
and large were the multitudes from the city who came out to 
hear and to follow the call to repent. Among them were 
many Pharisees and Sadducees, to whom He said, “Offspring 
of vipers, who has forewarned you to flee from the coming 
wrath? Produce, therefore, fruit worthy of repentance. 
And do not think to say within yourselves. We have Abraham 
for our Father; for I say unto you that God is able of these 
stones to raise up children to Abraham. And already the 
axe is applied to the root of the trees; every tree therefore 
not producing good fruit is cut down and cast into the fire.” 
“And all the people when they heard it, and the publicans, 
justified God, having been baptized with John’s baptism; 
but the Pharisees and the lawyers rejected God’s counsel 
with regard to themselves, not being baptized by Him” (Luke 
wiit20, 30). 

The baptism of John shows clearly what repentance means. 
Jordan is always in the Word the type of death. Thus John 
baptized in the river of death, which would mean unto death.* 
The people came, confessed their sins, seeing then their true 
position, what they were and what they deserved ; they went 


*Baptism in water was known and practiced among the Jews 
centuries before John. Proselytes were not only circumcised but 
also dipped in water. 


68 


down into Jordan to be buried in water, thus typifying death. 
They heard, they believed, they confessed and witnessed to it 
outwardly. In this way they justified God, as recorded in the 
above passage from Luke. Christian baptism is, of course, 
something essentially different. It is not a baptism unto 
repentance of deserved death, but it is unto Christ’s death, 
who has taken our place and died for us. “Are you ignorant 
that we, as many as have been baptized unto Christ, have 
been baptized unto His death? We have been therefore 
buried with Him by baptism unto death, in order that even 
asChrist has been raised up from among the dead by the 
glory of the Father, so we also should walk in newness of 
life’ (Rom. vi:3-5). Christian baptism is not taught in the 
third chapter of Matthew. How much confusion has re- 
sulted from giving it such a meaning, placing believers into 
a sad legalism. 

Many then were baptized unto repentance by the fore- 
runner. But now for the first time we meet with the two 
great religious classes and leaders among the Jews, the 
Pharisees and the Sadducees, who came out to John. These 
two classes play an important role in the Gospel. The 
Pharisees* were the strictly religious, orthodox-ritualistic 
class. They were well versed in the traditions of the elders, 
and occupied themselves with creating new commandments 
and strange interpretations of the law. They are the fathers 
of the talmudical Jews of the present day and typical of 


*The name Pharisee means a Separatist. One who says: “I 
am holier than thou.” 


ae 


ritualistic Christendom, having the form of godliness and 
not the power. The Sadducees were the rationalists, the 
unbelieving class. They were much given to reform. Their 
offspring to-day are the reformed Jews, who reject the 
greater part of the Word of God, and in Christendom they 
are remarkably reproduced in the unevangelical “Isms,” 
though they call themselves “Christian” (as the Sadducees 
called themselves Jews), who reject portions of the Word, 
who do not believe in the inspiration of the Bible. 
“Offspring of vipers!” thus the Holy Spirit declared 
through the forerunner their true character. What a strong 
and cutting word it is, which applies not alone to the Phari- 
ses and Sadducees, but to all ritualistic-religiousness and un- 
believing criticism. They are the offspring not of God but 
of vipers. But still they were the proud boasters of being 
the seed of Abraham and as such entitled to the promised 
blessing. They believed that they were to be saved from the 
wrath of God connected with the establishment of the king- 
dom, and the wrath would fall entirely upon the Gentile 
nations. One only needs to peruse some of the tracts of the 
Talmud to find the reflection of their proud, self-righteous 
belief. When they came, they were far from taking that true 
position in repentance, in death. And so John demands of 
them that they are to bring forth fruit worthy of repentance. 
He uncovers their false pretensions, and shows that no 
natural birth, no religious attainment would deliver them in 
the day of wrath. This is followed by the announcement of 
_ the nearness of the judgment, the axe laid at the root of the 
trees, ready to fell the mighty trees void of fruit. All this 


70 


finds an application in the day in which we live, when the 
axe is once more laid at the roots to cut off and cast into the 
fire that which has not brought fruit.* 

From the words of condemnation upon the proud, self- 
righteous Pharisees and Sadducees, the herald of the King 
now turns to speak, as it became him in humility, of the 
glorious Person of the King Himself. And what a far- 
reaching testimony it is we have in the eleventh and twelfth 
verses! “TI indeed baptize you with water unto repentance, 
but He that comes after me is mightier than I, whose sandals 
I am not fit to bear; He shall baptize you with the Holy 
Spirit and fire; whose winnowing fan is in His hand, and 
He shall thoroughly purge His threshing floor, and shall 
gather His wheat into the garner, but the chaff He will burn 
with fire unquenchable.” 

Here we have another passage which is of vital import- 
ance. Let us understand in the first place that the words 
spoken refer to the first and second coming of our Lord. 
Let this be clearly fixed in our minds, and all will be plain. 
The promise connected with the first coming is, He shall 
baptize you with the Holy Spirit. The second coming of the 
Lord will bring the baptism with Fire, as it is seen at once 
in the words which follow, which speak clearly of judgment 
and fire unquenchable. It may appear strange at the first 
glance that John says in one breath: “He shall baptize you 
with the Holy Spirit and fire’—that the Holy Spirit should 


(Ne, 


*The conditions in nominal Christendom now, immediately before 
the Second Coming of Christ, are the same as the conditions in 
professing Judaism at the time of His first coming. 


wae 


refer to His first coming and the fire to His second appear- 
ing, but let us take into consideration that John still belongs 
to the Old Testament, and he expresses himself in a way as 
many of the prophets did, who frequently spoke in one 
clause of the Lord’s first and second coming. However, 
the fifth verse in the first chapter of Acts puts into our 
hands the key. The Lord said then to His disciples, “John, 
indeed, baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with 
the Holy Spirit not many days hence.” That our Lord 
speaks of what John said in our passage here is evident, yet 
He does not mention baptism with fire. If He had added, 
and with fire, it would clearly prove that the baptism con- 
nected with His first coming is a baptism with the Holy 
Spirit and fire. But He leaves out the fire because it stands 
in connection with His second coming. Thus it is seen in 
the entire prophetic Word, which speaks of the day of wrath 
and vengeance as being a day of burning and fire. How 
could we even undertake to mention but half of the errone- 
- ous doctrines which are more or less emanating from this 
passage wrongly applied? The doctrine of the Holy Spirit, 
the work of the Holy Spirit, etc., has of late years been made 
very prominent. Conventions for baptisms, fillings with 
the Holy Spirit, the enduement of the Spirit for power in 
service, and many other topics in relation to the doctrine of 
the Spirit and for a so-called “second blessing” (a term 
which is nowhere found in the Word) are being held. But 
how sad it is to see the contortions of the Scriptures as well 
as the unscriptural, abnormal applications which have been 
made. A good deal comes from teaching that the believer 


72 


is to be baptized not alone with the Spirit but also with fire. 
It is not enough to have believed, so they teach, and be 
saved by Grace, but there is to be a baptism with fire, a 
second experience which outshines all others. Hence we 
find the most extravagant terms which are used in connec- 
tion with the Holy Spirit, such as Holy Ghost preachers and 
Holy Ghost fire. 

The baptism with the Holy Spirit promised by the Lord 
took place on the day of Pentecost. By this one Spirit are 
we all baptized into the one body, which is the Church (1 
Cor. xii:13). We are not born again by the baptism of the 
Spirit, but those who are born again become by it the mem- 
bers of that one body. Every believer who has believed in 
the Lord Jesus Christ hath the Holy Spirit. He the blessed 
Paraclete, is abiding in him. It is wrong for a believer 
to plead or pray for the Holy Spirit to come unto him, and 
equally unscriptural is it to pray for a baptism with fire, for 
there is no such baptism now, and no believer could pray 
for the flaming fire to fall upon him, for he is delivered 
from that wrath. : 

The Lord comes again, and then it will be with a bap- 
tism of fire. The wheat will be gathered into the garner, 
and then the chaff upon the threshing floor swept together, 
corresponding with the tares in the parables put together 
in bundles, will be given over to the fire unquenchable. 

John unquestionably waited anxiously for the appearing 
of Him whose advent he had announced. God, who had sent 
him to baptize with water, had told him that upon whom 
thou shalt see the Spirit descending and abiding on him, 


73 


he it is who baptizes with the Spirit (John 1:32-34). At — 
last the moment came. What a moment it was! It termin- | 
ated the ministry of the forerunner. It was the beginning 
of the public ministry of the King Himself. He now steps 
to the front to go that path of obedience marked out for 
Him, to be presented as King to the nation, to be rejected, 
and to do that work which no Prophet, no John, no Angel 
or Archangel could do, but He alone. 

“Then comes Jesus from Galilee to the Jordan to John, to 
be baptized of him.” The Lord, He who baptizes with the 
- Holy Spirit and with fire, He who is greater than John, to 
whom the Baptist bowed in humility and worship, He who 
is the creator of all things, comes to the preacher of re- 
pentance and presents Himself to be baptized. What a 
scene! John stood amazed. “He forbade Him, saying, I 
have need to be baptized of Thee, and comest Thou to me?” 
In other words, I am the sinner, I need repentance, I de- 
serve to go into that river of death, but Thou art holy—no 
evil in Thee, nothing worthy of death. 

Thus in the very beginning of His public ministry we 
have the testimony of His holiness. He is the one who 
alone is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners ; 
He knew no sin, who could not sin, neither was guile found 
in His mouth. When at last the prince of this world came 
he had nothing in Him. But why then should He, the holy 
one, this spotless, pure being, present Himself to the preacher 
of repentance? Why should He go into the river of death 
and take His place in death? Where there is no sin there 
need be no confession. Where there is no sin there can 


74 


be no death. How could He, the King, that holy thing born 
of the virgin, God manifested in the flesh, ever confess sin 
when there was no sin? Yet He not only came to be baptized, 
but He was baptized. The question has had many answers. 
We said above that His baptism marks the beginning of His 
public ministry, He enters upon His work, and there can be 
only one meaning to His baptism, which is in fullest harmony 
with that work He came to do. Baptism means death and res- . 
urrection. He had no sin, but came to be the substitute for 
sinners, and so He takes in the very beginning their place, the 
sinner’s place in death. He knew His work before. It is not 
to be understood as if now He had learned for the first time 
who He is and what His work is. But publicly He declares in 
presence of men, angels, demons, and in the presence of 
God that He is here to fulfill all righteousess. ‘Suffer it 
now, for it thus becometh us to fulfill all righteousness” 
(verse 13). No confessing or repenting on His part, He 
was fulfilling all righteousness. As one has said, “He saw 
His sheep struggling in the dark waters of the river of 
judgment, the meaning of the Jordan, and He must go in 
for their rescue. He must become identified with them, 
taking their place in judgment that they might be made the 
righteousness of God in Him, bringing in ‘the righteousness 
of God by faith of Jesus Christ towards all and upon all 
those who believe” (Rem. iii:22). He knew no sin, was 
made sin for us, and His baptism declares this. The de- 
tails of His baptism are not given. Then he suffers Him. 
He placed Himself into the hands of John and went into 
the waters of Jordan. Later He said, I have a baptism to 


75 


be baptized with, and how I am strengthened until it shall 
have been accomplished! The man of sorrows and ac- 
quainted with grief soon reached that place, when He went 
into the deep waters of suffering and death, when all the bil- 
lows broke over His head. His baptism was but a type of 
this. 

“And Jesus, having been baptized, went straightway from 
the water, and lo, the heavens were opened to Him, and He 
saw the Spirit of God descending as a dove and coming 
upon Him; and behold a voice out of the heavens saying, 
This is my beloved Son in whom I have found My delight 
(verses 16 and 17).” 

Here we have something which leads us still deeper. It 
is a glorious manifestation of the Father, the Son and the 
Holy Spirit. The Son who has gone down comes out to be 
anointed by the Holy Spirit, and proclaimed as the beloved 
Son by the Father’s voice. He is anointed for the work He 
had to do. He was begotten by the Holy Spirit, filled with 
the Spirit, and through the eternal Spirit He offered Him- 
self without spot to God. John learned now that He was 
the true One. The Holy Spirit came upon Jesus in the 
form of a dove. The dove is the type of the Holy Spirit. 
We are reminded of the dove which flew across the dark 
waters of judgment, come from the ark, lifted above all 
judgment, finding no resting place and returned to the ark. 
And when sent out the second time the dove returns with 
an olive branch and the third time there was no return to 
the ark. This speaks of the sending forth of the Holy 
Spirit in the different dispensations. But here is the One 


76 

upon whom the Holy Spirit came to abide. We are re- 
minded of the prophet whose book and experience is a type 
of Christ, Jonah the son of Amittai, translated, the Dove, 
the Son of Truth. The dove is, as one of the sacrificial 
birds, a type of Christ. And through Him and in Him we 
have the Holy Spirit as the abiding one, the Paraclete. He 
was poured out after His death and resurrection. 

The heavens were opened unto Him. This is a significant 
word which is often overlooked. For Him alone the heavens 
are open. No one has gone up into heaven save He who 
came down out of heaven, the Son of Man, who is in 
heaven (John iii:13). He came out of heaven. The heav- 
ens were opened unto Him and He has passed through the 
heavens. In Him the heavens are opened for us, and He 
has taken us all, who believe, into heaven, bringing many 
sons to glory. And now a voice is heard. It is not the 
voice of an Angel, but the voice of the Father. Wonderful 
fact, that now after He, who is eternally the Son of God, 
subsisting in the form of God, and who became Son of God 
incarnate, after He has thus taken the place in death for 
sinners, that the Father speaks to approve of Him. He had 
seen Him, His beloved Son, go down to fulfill all righteous- 
ness, and now He vindicates Him by declaring, This is My 
beloved Son in whom I have found My delight. This cor- 
responds to the word in the second Psalm, Thou art My 
Son, this day have I begotten thee. The Lord Jesus Christ 
is eternally the Son of God, but here in both passages we 
see Him as the Son of God incarnate. Never could it be 
said of Him as the Only begotten of the Father, This day 


77 


have I begotten Thee. Equally true is it that eternally the 
Father’s. delight has been in the Son. But Romans i:3 
‘speaks of Him as His Son, come of David’s seed according 
to flesh, marked out as Son of God in power, according to 
the spirit of holiness by resurrection of the dead Jesus Christ 
oui Lord. He is the first begotten, and in Acts xiii we 
have the true application of that word, Thou art My Son— 
“having raised up Jesus ;” as it is also written in the second 
Psalm, “Thou art My Son, this day have I begotten Thee” 
—it is then in resurrection, by the resurrection from the 
dead that He is marked out Son of God. 

And thus we see it here. In going down into Jordan He 
typifies, His own death, but His coming up straightway is 
the type of resurrection, and in this coming up the Father’s 
voice is heard declaring Him the well beloved. “Therefore 
doth My Father love Me—because I lay down My life that 
I might take it again”. Well pleasing to the Father He 
was, and how else could it be with the Sinless One, who 
was made like unto His brethren. It is then seen from the 
baptism of our Lord that He is the Lamb of God for the 
sacrifice, even as John recognized it in pointing to Him, 
Behold the Lamb of God who taketh away the sin of the 
world. He is perfectly pleasing to the Father, and by the 
‘Holy Spirit who came upon Him He is consecrated to the 
work before Him. It is also clear from these meditations 
that the baptism of the Lord is typical of His death and 
resurrection. ; 

And now, after all this took place and He entered thus 
upon His official work—then Jesus was carried up into the 


78 


wilderness by the Spirit to be tempted of the devil (chap. 
ivr): 

Many other teachings could be given in connection with 
the third chapter in which we tarried longer than we ex- 
pected. How rich, how unfathomable is God’s Word! Di- 
vine from beginning to end, a living Word, energetic, and 
sharper than any two-edged*sword. May we praise our 
God for His written Word, and for Him who is the living 
Word, who took our place in death, delivered for our 
offences, but raised from the dead on account of our justi- 
fication. All honor and praise and glory to Him who 
loveth us and has washed us, to Him the Son who has made 
us sons, and in whom we hear the Father’s loving voice. 
“And because ye are sons, God has sent the Spirit of His 


Son into our hearts, crying, Abba Father” (Gal. iv:6). 


79 


CHAPTER IV. 


The first part of this chapter gives us the history of the 
temptation of the King. This is a most important topic, 
many-sided in its applications; large volumes have been 
written on it without exhatisting it. We will therefore have 
to confine ourselves to the bringing out of some of the most 
important teachings, without attempting to go into many of 
the precious details and applications to the believer. 

The baptism marked, as we saw in the last chapter, our 
Lord’s entrance upon His official work. He is declared as 
the Son of God by His Father, and anointed with the Holy 
Spirit ; and the third act is that He, who is declared the Son 
of God, anointed with the Spirit, come to do the eternal will 
of God, to suffer and to die, is to be tempted by the devil. 
“Then was Jesus carried up into the wilderness by the Spirit” 
(verse 1). It came immediately after he had come out of 
the waters. There was no interval between. This is seen 
from the Gospel of Mark. “And immediately the Spirit 
drives Him out into the wilderness” (Mark i:12). It was 
the first thing to be done in fulfilling the Scriptures. He 
was carried into the wilderness, and in Mark it is stronger 
still: driven there. Some have said, as if our Lord was 
anxious to meet the enemy, desirous of coming face to face 
with that old serpent, the devil, who has the power of death, 
and whom to annul He had come. But that cannot be. If 


oe 80 


it had been our Lord Himself who hastens impatiently to 


=a 


meet the adversary, He would have been the tempter of the 
Evil one. Not His Spirit drove Him, but the Spirit carried 
Him into the wilderness. It was the Holy Spirit who took 
Him to meet the enemy. The Spirit, who had come upon 
Him and rested on Him—He impels Him. The Christ, the 
second man and last Adam, meets the devil in another place, 
far different from the garden where Adam and Eve had 
their abode. What a contrast! Even the earth, though 
good and perfect it was, did not seem to be a good enough 
place for Adam and Eve. So the Lord planted a garden 
eastward in Eden, and there He put the man He had 
formed. And out-of the ground made the Lord God to 
grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight and good for 
food (Gen. 11:8, 9), What a beautiful spot that garden 
must have been! Surrounded by all this, with all wants 
- supplied, the enemy came to tempt, and with it came the 
failure. But here is the second Man, and He is not brought 
into a garden, but He is driven into the wilderness—‘the 
great and terrible wilderness wherein were fiery serpents 
and scorpions, and thirsty ground where was no water” 
(Deut. viii :15). He was there in the wilderness with the 
wild beasts (Mark 1:13). In that terrible wilderness, sur- 
rounded by serpents, scorpions, adders and the wild beasts, 
the Messiah, the King, stands to meet the foe. And having 
fasted forty days and forty nights, afterwards He hungered ; 
His blessed body, a body of flesh and blood, felt hunger and 
thirst. How reduced in His outward appearing He must 
have been, the Man of Sorrows and acquainted with grief! 


81 


~ 


We would call attention to the fact, that the tempter did 
not come to Him for forty days, as it is often said in mis- 
quoting scripture, but afterward, when, having fasted, he 
came to Him. | 

And the tempter came to Him. It is the adversary, the 
accuser of the brethren, that old serpent, the devil. He is 
as truly a person as God and our Lord is a person. How 
terrible itis that in the very midst of Christendom the per- 
sonality of the devil is denied. If there is no personal devil 
there is no need of a personal Saviour. The “new” theol- 
ogy, whose father the devil is himself, has no use for a 
belief in the personal devil. That person is simply put down 
as an invention of the dark middle ages, and spoken of as _ 
an old relic, which still survives in the minds of some old 
fogies. It is no longer a person with most of these modern 
theologians, but an evil principle. The Lord’s temptations, 
according to this new interpretation, were only imaginations, 
they were the workings of the mind, a kind of weakness 
which was produced by the prolonged fastings. If we ask 
these men who got rid of the personal devil, how they can 
explain the belief of the Jews in a personal devil and in the 
demons, as well as the demoniacal possessions in the days 
of our Lord? they answer us and say, The Jews brought 
this superstition from the Babylonian captivity. But if we 
ask these “critics” Why, then did the Lord and His apostles 
not correct so grave an error? they give us an answer which 
dishonors our Lord. The denial of the existence of a per- 
sonal devil, as it is becoming almost universal in Christen- 
dom, is stirely the masterpiece of all the dreadful work 


82 


Satan has done, and we can well imagine what fiendish joy 
he must have in seeing his existence denied, and by and by 
he will have the world in security ensnared by his delusions, 
Then, when he himself and with him his demons are cast 
out of heaven into the earth, the earth will know that there 
is a personal devil, for he comes on the earth and brings 
with it that which is his work, the great tribulation. His 
wrath will be great for a short time (Rev. xii). What a 
terrible awakening that will be for all those who denied the 
existence of that Evil one! The dreadful chain in denying 
the personality of the devil is: No devil, no sin,“no judg- 
ment, no wrath, no atonement, no Saviour, and at last no 
God. 

We do not know in what form of a person the devil ap- 
peared to our Lord. There is a scripture which tells 
us of a form he took that is in Genesis the third chapter. | 
The serpent must have been perhaps the most attractive of 
all the creatures and not as the serpent is now, creeping upon 
its belly, having become this by the curse. In the New 
Testament we read that he goes about as a roaring lion 
and that Satan transforms himself into an angel of light. 
' Perhaps in that subtle form he came to meet Him, whom he 
knew to be the eternal Word made flesh. 

There is but one more word to be considered before we 
turn to the temptations themselves and take them up in their 
order. It is the word tempt. It is here where much misun- 
derstanding comes in. The word tempt has different mean- 
ings. One of them is inciting or enticing to evil, to seduce. 
This always presupposes evil present in some form, the 


83 


possibility that the person can be enticed and incited to evil, 
that in the person there is something which responds or may 
respond to the evil placed before the soul. This could never 
be the case with our Lord. There was no sin, no evil in 
Him. He is absolutely holy. Therefore the word tempt in 
this form can never apply to Him. But the word tempt 
means also, put to test. To test means to bring to trial and. 
examination; compare with a standard; in this sense only 
it can refer to our Lord. He was tempted means, He was 
tested as to His ability to do that for which He had come. 
The test or tempting is to bring out that He is the pure 
gold, the Holy One, the spotless One, the One who alone 
can do the work for which He appeared, to put away sin by 
sacrificing Himself. Therefore the Spirit led Him up into 
the wilderness. The word tempting or testing has also a 
special significance in connection with Israel. The Lord, 
as Messiah and King, is closely identified with His people. 
He goes through their history, so to speak, and fulfills all, 
and at last He died for that nation. Israel was tested or 
proved, and failed. “There He made for them a statute 
and’ an ordinance,-and there He proved them.” . The 
Septuagint translates the Hebrew “Nissohu’” with a 
Greek word which is used in the fourth chapter of 
Matthew. The Hebrew means testing, to find out if it is 
really so by a test. The same word is used in Deuteronomy 
the eighth chapter. “And thou shalt remember all the 
way which the Lord thy God has led thee these forty 
| years in the wilderness that He might humble thee, to prove 
(test) thee, to know what was in thine heart, whether thou 


84 


wouldest keep His commandments or no” (Deut. vili :2). 
The Lord, the true Israel then is tested and He does not fail. 

And now we come to the temptations themselves. The 
devil begins to address Him, who has come to crush his 
head. It would be very interesting to make a careful 
study of the words of Satan we have in the Word of God. 
They are contained in Genesis the third chapter, the first 
chapter of Job, and here in the Gospel. The words he 
speaks in these passages establish him in his true character, 
the liar and murderer from beginning, the accuser. He 
places before our Lord three temptations, the test is three- 
foid. . 

I. “And the tempter coming up to Him said, Jf thou be 
Son of God, speak that these stones may become bread.” 

The answer from the Lord: “But He answering said, It 
is written man shall not live by bread alone, but by every 
word which goes out through Gods mouth” (Deut. viii:3). 

II. Then the devil takes Him to the holy city and sets_ 
Him upon the edge of the temple, and says to Him, Jf Thou 
be Son of God cast Thyself down; for it is written, He shall 
give charge to His angels concerning Thee, and on their 
hands. shall they bear Thee, lest in any wise Thou strike 
Thy foot against a stone” (Psalms xci). 

The answer: “Jesus said to him. It is again written, thou 
shalt not tempt the Lord thy God” (Deut. vi :16). 

IIT. “Again the devil takes Him to a very high mountain, 
and shows Him all the kingdoms of the world and their 
glory, and says to Him, All these things will I give Thee, if, 
falling down, thou wilt do me homage. Then Jesus says to 


85 


him, Get thee away, Satan, for it is written, Thou shalt do 
homage to the Lord thy God, and Him alone shalt thou 
serve’ (Deut. vi :13). 

Tirst, a few general remarks. Twice Satan takes the name 
Son of God in his mouth. He knew that the Person before 
him is the Son of God, but he hates Him as such. Later 
this hatred is fully seen in those of whom the Lord said, 
“Ye are of the devil, as your father, and ye desire to do the 
lusts of your father” (John viii:44). The Pharisees and 
elders of the people, who are seen in the Gospel of Matthew, 
knew Him as Son and Heir, and with this knowledge they 
rejected Him and delivered Him into the hands of the Gen- 
tiles. This was surely Satanic. Each of these temptations 
leads higher. In the first it seems but a small matter to 
turn a stone into bread. He knew this Lord had spoken in 
creation, and the heavens were blazing with millions of 
worlds, now but speak and change a stone into bread. The 
second demands more, but the third is the climax, when he 
asks Him, who is the Heir of all things, and in whose name 
every knee must bow, to fall down and do him homage. All 
the forces at Satan’s command were unquestionably brought 
to bear in this last temptation. With one stroke of His hand 
- He could produce before Him, who is the King of kings, 
all the kingdoms of the world. 

Only once the tempter says, It is written. He knows 
what is written and he knows more of the written Word, 
which is forever settled in the heavens, than all the higher 
critical professors in the world. Higher criticism of the 
Word is but his child, his production. But whenever he 


quotes scripture it is always:in the wrong way. It was so 


86 


in the Garden of Eden and it is so here. He quotes from the 
ninety-first Psalm, but leaves out the words, “In all thy 
ways.” Another interesting fact is that the tempter knew’ 
that this psalm was spoken prophetically of the second man, 
the Lord from heaven. What sneering remarks have been 
made on the Book of Psalms by the critics. What. they 
deny is a denial of the truth, which the devil knows, believes 
and trembles. Our Lord speaks three times, It is written. 
What a testimony to the Word of God! He knows no other 
weapon than the written Word. In quoting the scriptures 
to the enemy He does it from but one book, that is the book 
of Deuteronomy. More than any other book in the Old Tes- 
tament this one has been denied an ancient date. Higher 
criticism has declared and declares to-day, that Moses never 
wrote that book, but that it is the work of some priest liv- 
ing centuries later. The late J. H. Brookes wrote very 
pointedly on this, saying, “Our Lord took refuge, so to 
speak, behind the written Word of God, quoting each time 
from the book of Deuteronomy, as if foreseeing the con- 
tempt with which this precious book is treated by modern 
higher criticism, and defending it against the attacks of the 
enemy. It is perilously near blasphemy to assert that He 
quoted from a book which this insolent criticism declares to 
be a forgery. For if He did not know the date of its com- 
position He is not divine. And if He did not know but 
chose to humor a popular error, He connived a falsehood. 
Genesis tells us of election; Exodus of redemption; Leviti- 
cus of worship; Numbers of warfare in the wilderness; 


87 


Deuteronomy. of obedience; and hence the appropriateness 
of quoting from this book, which the Lord knew as divinely 
inspired. It is written, was enough for Him in the conflict 
with the devil, and It is written enough for us amid all the 
temptations we may encounter on our way to meet Him in 
the air.” 

We will leave it, then, as we suggest above, to the reader 
to make a careful comparison between the opening verses of 
the third chapter in Genesis and the temptations of our 
Lord. The Satan there is the same, that old serpent, the 
devil. He came to Eve with the lust of the flesh, the lust 
of the eyes and the pride of life, and the same he brings to 
bear upon the Lord. He said to Eve, “Is it so that God 
said?” and to Christ he said, “If thou art the Son of God.” 
It is doubt, unbelief with which he always advances. He 
misquoted the Word of God to Eve. God had said, “Thou 
shalt surely die,” and he said, “Lest ye die.” He does the 
same in the temptations of Christ. These hints will be 
sufficient to help in the comparison, 

The first temptation is of course the principal one. De- 
feated in this one he is defeated in all. He is detected at 
once as the enemy and with the first victory the whole vic- 
tory is won. It is the most subtle of all; it appears extreme- 
ly plausible and one might think it hardly a temptation at 
all, while in the third it is the most blunt attempt; we might 
almost say a desperate, despairing attack. But what was 
the first temptation and what does it teach us? “If thou be 
Son of God, speak that these stones may become bread.” 
That the Christ is the Son of God as He stands before the 


88 


tempter was well known to the evil one. He knew it before 
and attempted to take the life of the child through Herod, 
and the demons cried out before Him in terror, ““What have 
we to do with the Son of God—hast Thou come here before 
the time to torment us?” But it can hardly be said that the 
temptation is to make Jesus doubt that He is the Son of 
God, because He is suffering hunger. The first temptation 
is one in which He is assailed as the Son of man. He was 
truly man, and this is seen here in the wilderness. He fasted 
and He hungered. Is there anything wrong in being 
hungry? Certainly not. It is in this that the subtlety of the 
tempter shows itself. The enemy comes with a natural 
want.and appeals to our Lord’s power to relieve Himself 
from that want. He is still the same evil, cunning deceiver, 
who begins with the most subtle temptations. Here one 
might ask, What wrong is there in satisfying hunger? The 
Lord could easily have done this, turning stones into bread. 
He, who spoke in the hour of creation, “Let there be 
light,” “let the earth bring forth,’ He by whom and for 
whom are all things could have at once changed all the — 
stones into bread. Later He fed thousands in a miraculous ~ 
manner. He could have done so now for Himself, but if 
He had done it He would have been proven at once unfit to 
be our Saviour, who could die for us. He came to do the 
will of God. Thus it is written, “Sacrifice and offering 
Thou willedst not, Thou hast prepared me a body, * * * * 
Lo I come, O God, to do Thy will” (Hebrews x:5-8). He 
had not esteemed it robbery to be on an equality with 
God; but had emptied Himself, taking the form of a ser- 


2 tg4 


vant, taking His place in the likeness of men: Now the 
path for Him has begun. He is here as true Man, God man- 
ifested in the flesh, but the path is to do the will of God, 
_ that eternal will of salvation. The path leads downward in 
humiliation, suffering, it is to end in the cross, suffering 
death and tasting death for everything. Hunger is a part 
of His humanity. Was there or is there in the Word of 
God one word which could have told Him to change stones 
into bread? On the cross in deep agony He remembered 
but a little Scripture concerning Himself, which had to be 
fulfilled, and so it was by His own request so that even not 
one of the smallest prophecies about His sufferings might 
be unfulfilled (John xix:28). But had God given anywheve 
one word to Him, who had come to do His will that He was 
to end His suffering as man, His hunger by a miracle? ~ 
Nowhere is to be found such a direction. If He had entered 
upon the suggestion of Satan He would have acted accord- 
ing to His own will and that would have been the will of 
the enemy. He would have taken His case in His own 
hands. Al] the elements of disobedience and distrust to 
God are in it involved. Now having failed in this one 
thing, having satisfied His hunger and saved Himself by 
using powers which were not according to the will of God, 
He would have been unfit to endure the cross and to despise 
the shame. When it came to Gethsemane He might have 
shrunk from drinking the cup, He might have called upon 
legions of angels at His command to deliver Him, and when 
the billows of wrath and judgment were coming He could 
not have stood them. Thus the changing of stones into — 


go 


bread would have shown that He who did it was not fit to 
die for us, for He had chosen His own will by the suggestion 
of Satan and not done the Father’s will, which is that He 
should suffer. 

This is clearly seen from His answer. He detects the old 
serpent at once. There is no parleying from His side as it 
was with Eve. He resists the devil at once. The perfect, 
sinless and spotless One has His “It is written” to hand 
and this Word, bringing out the Father’s will which He is 
here to-do, ends this first temptation. “It is written man 
shall not live by bread alone, but by every word which 
goes out through God’s mouth” (Deut. viii:3). The mean- 
ing of the word He uses here is that man lives truly not by 
bread alone, but by the Word of God, that is, in obedience 
to this Word. And there is an application for us as be- 
lievers. One has said on this,* “We realize the wondrous 
privilege that is ours, the solemn responsibility that lies 
upon us. For we are sanctified into the obedience of Christ, 
and He has left us an example that we should follow in 
His steps” (1 Peter i:2,°ii:21)> This principle of His life 
must then be the principle of our lives. If with Him the 
governing motive was to do the will of God, how simple 
is it that for us also the will of God must be our motive for 
action. By every word that goes out of the mouth of God 
doth man live. What a sustenance of the true life within 
us to be thus, day by day, receiving the messages of His 
will guided by that wondrous voice, learning more contin- 


*Numerical Bible, New Testament, page 62. 


OI 


ually the tenderness of His love for us: “He wakeneth 
morning by morning, He wakeneth mine ear as the learner” 
(Isaiah 1:4). This is the utterance of the Lord Himself. 
How blessed to be able to make it our own, and to have the 
fulfillment of those words: “TI will instruct thee and teach 
thee in the way in which thou shalt go; I will guide thee 
with mine eyes.” 

For the next test the tempter took the Lord to the Holy City 
and sets Him upon the edge (the pinnacle) of the temple, and 
said to Him, “If Thou be Son of God cast Thyself down; 
for it is written, He shall give charge to His angels con- 
cerning Thee, and on their hands they shall bear Thee, lest 
in any wise Thou strike Thy foot against a stone.” 

The Psalm which Satan quotes (Psalm xci.) is a Mes- 
sianic Psalm. He takes Him to the Holy City, Jerusalem, 
and upon the pinnacle of the temple, because the second 
temptation is the temptation of Him as the Messiah. Standing 
upon that high place the people below must have seen Him 
and recognized Him; Satan was hid from their view. What 
a test and proof of His Messiahship if slowly He had de- 
scended, the laws of gravitation completely set aside, land- 
ing unharmed on His feet before the astonished multitude. 
Would they not at once accept Him? Why should He be 
rejected if by doing this He might become in the shortest 
order their leader, their King and redeemer from the yoke 
of the Roman oppressor? Now Satan defeated had heard 
the Word upon which the Lord stood. He was defeated by 
the Word. He comes now with the Word himself, quoting 
scripture and that from a Psalm which speaks of the Mes- 


g2 


siah, the second man. However, he misquotes the Word 
and leaves out the seven words, “and keep Thee in all Thy 
ways.” It is as subtle as the first temptation. Here he 
presents the Word and tries to make our Lord act in obedi- 
ence to the Word by testing God’s Word and by doing so 
to prove that He is the Messiah and the Son of God at the 
same time. But why did he leave out those seven words? 
Because the ways in which He, the Messiah, willbe kept are 
the ways of God. “Thy ways” are indeed His ways. It was 
not the way of faith in impatience to test the truth of the 
’ Word and casting Himself down and to prove thereby that 
He is Messiah and Son of God. It was impossible that He 
could have even given this temptation a moment’s thought. 
The answer is at once ready as soon as the tempter has 
uttered his lie. Jesus said, “It is again written, Thou shalt 
not tempt the Lord thy God.” It would have been testing, 
proving God and as such again distrust and disobedience. 
We see how closely the two temptations are connected. It 
is tempting Him to choose His own will and not the Will 
of God, to act in His own behalf and to escape the suffering 
before Him. 

It is very suggestive that Satan should demand of Him to 
cast Himself down from the edge of the temple, and to 
prove by this act His Messianity and Divinity as well. Our 
Lord is gone into the presence of the Father with a glorified 
body of flesh and bones. Ina future day He who ascended 
upon high, will descend. The heavens will be covered with 
His glory, and He who is the leader and completer of faith, 
the great Exemplar of faith, in whom patience had its com- 


93 

plete, perfect work, will come again in glory and majesty, 
seen by all eyes, the Messiah-King of Israel, the Son and 
_ Heir. Then at the name of Jesus every knee will bow, and 
every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to God the 
Father’s glory. The adorable One knew the Father’s will; 
He knew the suffering and the patience, the only road that 
leads to glory. He begun to go the path, and His face is 
set like a flint. He could not fail in what He had come to 
do. Again the old serpent is conquered. 

~ Let us, like our Lord, be patient and go the way which is . 
for us now in humilitation, never murmuring or tempting 
God. “Count it all joy, my brethren, when ye fall into vari- 
ous temptations (trials), knowing that the proving of your 
faith works patience. But let patience have its perfect work, 
that ye may be perfect and complete, lacking in nothing” 
(James 1:2-4). 

And now they stand upon a high mountain. What a pic- 
ture is presented to our view! The liar and murderer from 
the beginning, and alongside of him stands He who is 
Jehovah, the eternal Word made flesh. What must have 
been His outward appearance with the fasting of forty days, 
with perhaps the tattered robes which hung upon His 
body rent by the thorns of the wilderness. The 
_tempter’s eyes must have beholden such a weak and frail 
Person—a man of sorrows, One who knew not where to 
lay His head. But the scene changes, The serpent hisses, 
and by his immense power still at his command the darkness 
of the night and the gloominess of the mountain top are 
dispersed. Marvelous visions of beauty! Right here is 


94 


Egypt with its pyramids and wonderful buildings, treasures 
of art and precious things. It disappears, and in its place 
ancient Greece, Athens and Corinth come up in all their 
splendor. Once more the scene shifts, and now Rome, the 
mistress of the world, that great city, is revealed. Satan 
shows Him all the kingdoms of the world, and their glory. 
Yes, all the kingdoms of the world, and they are in the 
tempter’s grasp still, are passing by, one startling vision 
after the other. And when the glory has passed, or perhaps 
while still in view, driven to the very last, Satan speaks, 
but now no longer mentioning the Lord as Son of God, but 
treating Him as mere man. He says to Him, “All these 
things will I give Thee if falling down Thou wilt do me 
homage.” The very words speak of despair. All things are 
His—all the kingdoms of the world and their glory shall 
yet be the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the prince 
of this world, whose eternal abode with all his demons is 
the lake of fire, could dare and stand by Him who is the 
King, the second Man, and offer all the world to Him. Per- 
haps the very appearance of our Lord may have 
brought the tempter to this despondent act. But when all 
the kingdoms of the world and their glory pass along and 
the eyes of Jesus rest upon them, what thoughts must have 
been His? What did He behold in all the grand and glorious 
scenes? Surely we can venture to say that He must have 
thought of this poor, benighted world under sin, death and 
judgment, in the grasp of this dark and dreadful being 
standing there at His side. And He had come to be the 
Lamb of God and to take away the sin of the World. He 


95 


had come to annul him, who has the might of death, that is, 
the devil (Hebrews ii:14). That He is the future heir of 
all things Satan must have felt, and now he offers Him all 
at once to turn over all the kingdoms of the world and their 
glory to Him if He will but do him homage—again if He 
but turn aside from the will of God. It is now clear that 
Satan feared Him going that path of faith as the second 
man—going it to the very end where He would crush the 
serpent’s head. Through death, through His death on the 
cross, the might of death in the devil’s hand, and eventually 
the control over this world, were to be wrested from Satan’s 
hands. All three temptations bring this out, ‘““The tempter 
would keep Him back from doing the will of God.” But our 
Lord has gone that way. He was obedient unto death, even’ 
unto the death of the cross. God has exalted Him, the eter- 
nal victor, by whom we are forever separated from sin and 
death. He has put all things in subjection under His feet; 
He has left nothing unsubject to Him. He has been wel- 
comed in heaven by the Father and taken His place at His 
right hand, waiting till the time comes when heaven and 
earth shall be shaken, when He, the First-born, is brought 
into the habitable world, and with Him in glory the many 
sons, and when at last the glorious shout shall ascend, ‘““The 
kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our 
Lord and of His Christ, and He shall reign forever and 
forever.” 

With threatening, defying words the Lord might have 
hurled the tempter down the mountainside, but it is a ma- 
jestic “Get thee away, Satan” (He calls him now by name), 


96 


“for it is written, Thou shalt do homage to the Lord thy 
God, and Him alone shalt thou serve.” The devil leaves 
Him, and behold, angels came and ministered to Him. 
What a ministry that must have been! 

Satan could not conquer Him. He has met Him whom 
he could not harm, and the temptations were the tests and 
show that our Lord is He, the only One who is able to do 
the work He came to do.. But the tempter has gone on 
with the same temptations, and how astonishingly he has 


succeeded in that monstrosity which calls itself Christen- 
dom! He has brought about a perfect blindness. Christen- 


dom attempts to rule, to control the world, to be on the 
throne; world-conquest, influence and power are its watch- 
words. Christendom has bowed the knee before Satan. It 
would not go the way the Lord went, doing the will of 
God, in obedience, patience and suffering, and then the 
glory. Hence Christendom has become the enemy of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. 

The remainder of the fourth chapter describes the en- 
trance of our Lord upon His public ministry. The ministry 
which the Holy Spirit describes in Matthew is the Galilean. 
The events which show Him and make Him known as the 
true Messiah, the Jehovah-Jesus, in fulfillment of Old Testa- 
ment prophecy, are vividly described. As Jehovah in the 
earth, He does miracles, announces the kingdom of heaven 
to be at hand, but soon is in want, despised and rejected 
by the leaders of the nation and by the nation itself. The 
events of His Judean ministry in Jerusalem are passed over 
in Matthew. The fourth Gospel describes these events in 


o7 


detail, in which He is manifested as the only-begotten of 
the Father. There has been and is still a great deal of 
wrestling, so to speak, with these events as they are re- 
corded in the different Gospels, to arrange them in a perfect 
chronological order, or, as it is said, to harmonize the Gospel 
records. The infidels of all ages have made the most of it 
to prove contradictions, and the rationalistic preachers and 
professors in the camp of Christendom have generally 
founded their accusations of numerous contradictions in the 
New Testament upon these apparent discrepancies, which 
they think exist in the different statements concerning the 
public ministry of our Lord. The Holy Spirit could have 
written a perfect account of the earthly life of our Lord 
Jesus Christ and arrange a biography of Him accounting 
for every detail, but He has not done this. To charge the 
writers of the Gospel with ignorance of certain facts is 
charging the Holy Spirit with it. In each Gospel the Holy 
Spirit makes prominent the events which are calculated to 
impress the specific teachings of the respective Gospels, and 
He has always arranged the events in such an order to suit 
Himself. Every Gospel is therefore to be studied and read 
separately from the others. They are in their contents not 
the mechanical reporting of the life of Jesus of Nazareth, 
but the spiritual unfolding of the blessed person and work 
of our Lord and Saviour as King of the Jews, servant in 
obedience, Son of man and the Only-Begotten of the Father. 

In Matthew we have before us the King and His rejec- 
tion; therefore in the matter of His public ministry all is 
brought together by the Holy Spirit to show Him as King 


98 


and to bring out as in no other Gospel that He is rejected 
of men. 

We divide the account of the beginning of His public 
ministry, as given in the fourth chapter, into three parts. 
The first from the 12th to the 17th verse. Our Lord was in 
Jerusalem. The report reaches Him there that the forertun- 
ner, John, was de‘ivered up, cast into prison and his minis- 
try is ended. This foretold His rejection, and on account 
of the imprisonment of John, He departed into Galilee. Here 
we see Him first in His own city, in Nazareth. But we 
have here only the bare mention that He was in Nazareth 
and that He left Nazareth to dwell in Capernaum (verse 
12). What happened in Nazareth we have recorded in the 
Gospel of Luke. In the fourth chapter of that Gospel we 
read that our Lord, after the temptations, returned in the 
power of the Spirit into Galilee. The whole surrounding 
country was stirred up on account of Him, and He entered 
their synagogues, being glorified of all. In the synagogue 
of Navzareth the scroll of Isaiah was handed to Him, from 
which He read the opening verse of the lxi chapter, stop- 
ping in the middle of a sentence, and began to say to them, 
“To-day this scripture is fulfilled in your ears.” And there 
in the city where He was brought up they said, “Is not this 
the son of Joseph?’* But the starting point of the Gali- 
lean ministry and its career is not Nazareth, but the place 
called Capernaum, that is, ‘“‘village of comfort,” and there 


*In a little pamphlet. “The Messiah and His People,” we have 


described the event in Nazareth in connection with the chapter from 
Isaiah. 


99 


He did some of His mighty works. But leaving Nazareth 
and dwelling in Capernaum was done by Him in the literal 
fulfillment of a prophecy, standing in a very significant 
part of Isaiah. We find the words here quoted in the ninth 
chapter of Isaiah. It is in the midst of prophecies which 
are all Messianic that we read in the beginning of the oth 
chapter that the great light (the Messiah) was to be seen 
in the Galilee of the nations. The most oppressed, the dark- 
est and the most corrupt province was to receive the light 
first. Here we see this word fulfilled. We notice a two- 
fold description of Galilee, namely, as the land of Zebulon 
and Nephtali and as the Galilee of the nations. Read Gene- 
sis xlix :13, “Zebulon shall dwell at the haven of the sea, and 
he shall be for an haven of ships and his border shall be 
upon Zidon.” Jacob’s prophecy outlines the history of the 
sons of Jacob, that is, the whole nation, and Zebulon signi- 
fies the time of their rejection, when they become merchant- 
men. Here in Matthew we see Zebulon dwelling by the sea. 
So that we have the fulfillment of two prophecies before us 
—the prophecy in the forty-ninth chapter in Genesis and 
the one in Isaiah. The same is true of Nephtali. This 
means struggler. ‘“Nephtali is a hind let loose” (Gen. xlix: 
21). In Jacob’s prophecy Nephtali stands for the coming 
struggling and victorious Jewish remnant. Here, then, in 
the land of Zebulon and Nephtali the great light shines 
first. Grace comes down to the most miserable, the strug- 
gling ones. But here we see likewise something which has 
a connection with His second coming. The great light will 
shine once more. The glory of the Lord will cover the 


100 


heavens, the Sun of Righteousness will rise with healing 
in His wings, and when this great event comes, the light 
will shine indeed upon a remnant of Israel sitting in dark- 
ness and the shadow of death. The term Galilee of the 
nations has another significance. The province was called 
by this name, because the most ignorant class of Jews lived 
there and they had become mixed up with the Gentiles, who 
were very numerous in that borderland. The aristocratic 
classes of Judea, the learned in the law, the refined and 
ecclesiastical leaders, yes, all the different sects in Jerusalem, 
despised Galilee. An inhabitant of Galilee was looked upon 
as an Am-Hoaretg (an ignorant countryman). What good 
thing can come from Nazareth?—But here, where the peo- 
ple had sunk the lowest, the Lord appears first. That this 
is again an indication that the Gentiles, the outcasts and 
despised, were to come first, as we saw in the second chapter, 
need hardly be mentioned. 

From the lips of the King Himself comes now the procla- 
mation, “Repent, for the Kingdom of the heavens has drawn 
nigh” (verse 17). He announces that the Kingdom has 
drawn nigh in that He, the King, is standing in their midst 
to establish that Kingdom. He never said nor taught of a 
Kingdom within them. All spiritualizing on these lines 
of a Kingdom within, which our Lord is made to teach here 
in Matthew, is wrong. It is the Kingdom John had an- 
nounced which He now preaches. He prolongs the message 
of the forerunner for a short time and soon His lips were 
closed, too. We preach not the Gospel of the Kingdom, 
but the Glad Tidings of Grace. A day is coming when 


IoI 


heralds will announce once more the Kingdom to be at hand, 
and when it will come in the person of the Son of Man com- 
ing from heaven with angels of His power in flaming fire 
(2Thess,.1 ). 

The second part of the portion here before us extends 
from verses 18-22. It describes the call of four disciples, 
Peter and Andrew and the two sons of Zebedee, James and 
John, They were not from the class of wise men, learned 
in the written and oral law, but they were fishers. He calls 
them away from their nets to be fishers of men. This illus- 
trates what the Holy Spirit later declared through the 
Apostle of the Gentiles: “For consider your calling, breth- 
ren, that there are not many wise according to flesh, not 
many powerful, not many high-born. But God has chosen 
the foolish things of the world, that He may put to shame 
the strong things, so that no flesh should boast before God” 
(1 Cor. i:26). To bea fisher of men, to preach the Gospel, 
does not demand a classical education, nor the ordination 
parchments of man. It is the Lord who calls to service. 
It is not the first acquaintance these four men had with the 
Lord. They knew Him before. Here it is the definite call 
which comes to them to be fishers of men. If we want to 
learn how these men came to the Lord Jesus Christ we 
must read the first chapter in the Gospel of John. The 
events there transpired before the Lord departed into Galilee. 
We see in the first of John that the forerunner was still 
witnessing; he was not yet in prison. The “Follow Me” 
here does not mean, as often erroneously put, the call of the 
Gospel. Gospel preaching never asks to follow the Lord, 


102 


but to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ. It is the “Follow 
Me” for service. And how simple and refreshing the whole 
scene is! Their obedience is prompt. There is no excuse 
and no delay, for the King’s business requires haste. They 
had come to Him, to Whom John had pointed as the Lamb 
of God, who taketh away the sin of the world, and trusted 
Him for salvation, eternal life, and now they put themselves, 
their time, their all completely into His hands. “The first call 
in John came to them, as the call from Him as Saviour, 
and here it is the call of Him as Lord, and they were to be 
His servants. “And they, having left their trawl nets, im- 
mediately followed Him” (verse 20). How many questions 
might have been asked by them? “What about our 
nets?” “What about our support?” “What about food 
and raiment?” “And here is our old father. Does not our 
law say, Honor thy father and thy mother? Is it right to 
leave our father to toil alone by the sea?”—They left it all 
immediately and trusted Him for all. And so the true ser- 
vant of the Lord is obedient to His call and looks to Him, 
who has called him to service and who has promised from 
the glory through His Spirit to supply all need. How sad 
we are made when we look away from this refreshing pic- 
ture to the modern evils of Christendom. Surely a salaried 
Gospel ministry is unscriptural. And then to think of all the 
evil, dishonor to the Lord and ‘reproach upon His Name 
which is sometimes associated with it. 

In the third section we see our Lord making the whole 
round of Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, preaching 
the glad tidings of the Kingdom and healing every disease 


103 


and every bodily weakness among the people. The work 
done was threefold—teaching, which was exclusively done 
in their synagogues, and that was expounding the scriptures, 
the law and the prophets. The meeting in the synagogue 
in Nazareth referred to above was repeated in many other 
synagogues. Preaching the glad tidings of the Kingdom, 
which may have been done mostly to the large crowds of 
people who flocked around Him in public places, in the 
streets and at the side of the mountains. Closely connected 
with the preaching of the Gospel of the Kingdom was the 
healing of every disease not spiritual, but every bodily dis- 
ease and weakness. The healing of disease is always con- 
nected with the preaching of the Gospel of the Kingdom. 
The healings were signs that the King is the Jehovah and that 
the Kingdom had drawn nigh. These signs of healing 
every disease are the powers of the world to come. Later in 
our exegesis of the eighth chapter we hope to consider the 
question of healing more fully in all its far-reaching im- 
portance. Here we point out simply the fact, that it is not 
the Gospel of Grace which is preached, but that of the 
Kingdom. The Gospel of Grace needs no sign outwardly 
by healing of disease to demonstrate that it is God-given. 
Nowhere in the Epistles have we the promise that Gospel 
preaching is to be connected with healing of every 
bodily weakness and disease. However, it is very significant 
that the question of healing of every disease by supernatural 
power is made so prominent in our days. It is but an indi- 
cation of the nearness of the coming dispensation, when 
the earth shall be delivered with its groaning creation. 


104 


His fame then went forth into the whole of Syria. And 
now they flock to Him. What a multitude it must have 
been! Satan had his mighty power resting upon that land. 
He knew that Christ had come to make an end of his power, 
hence he troubled his poor slaves with terrible diseases and 
by his demons took possession of his victims. There were 
various pains and diseases, those possessed by demons, and 
lunatics, and paralytics; and He healed them... Once more 
the prince of this world will attempt to have the world in 
his control. An evil day is coming for this world. Even 
now there is an increase of crimes and forms of insanity 
which indicate demoniacal possession. China and other 
countries are full of it. In our own land there are unques- 
tionably those who have familiar spirits, known under the 
name of spiritualistic mediums. But He will come again. 
He comes when Satan with his demons are in the earth, 
and in his great but short wrath, torments the inhabiters of 
the earth during the tribulation. Christ’s coming means 
an end of that awful enemy. Then the Sun of Righteous- 
ness will bring healing, and what we see at the end of the 
fourth of Matthew is but a faint outline of what will be 
when the Kingdom will have come in the person of the 
returning King. May that day be hastened! 


105 


CHAPTER V. 


In the closing of the last chapter we saw our Lord Jesus 
Christ surrounded by a great multitude of people, which fol- 
lowed Him and who were attracted by the King’s presence, 
before whom the various diseases had to flee. If we turn 
to the eighth chapter we find the continuation of these scenes 
we had in the last half of the fourth chapter. Between these 
two chapters are three very important ones, which are 
as such found only in this Gospel. The contents of the 
fifth, sixth and seventh chapters are in the form of a con- 
tinued discourse of our Lord, commonly called “the ser- 
mon on the mount,” an expression which the reader knows 
is nowhere ,found in the Gospels. If we look through 
Mark, Luke and John we do not find any such report there 
of a lengthy discourse; indeed, except a number of frag- 
ments in the Gospel of Luke, we find nothing whatever in 
them about these sayings. When we turn to the Gospel of 
Luke, we find that the portions of this discourse reported 
there are in an entirely different setting. We point to that 
which is generally called “the Lord’s prayer.” In Luke we 
read (chapter xi) that as He was praying in a certain place, 
when He ceased, one of His disciples said unto Him, Lord, 
teach us to pray, even as John also taught his disciples. 
And he said unto them, When ye pray, say, Our Father, 
etc. Now in Matthew there is no such incident, but the dis- 


106 


ciples hear it in a continual flow of speech. We also call 
attention to the fact that the call of Matthew is reported in 
the ninth chapter, the call of the twelve disciples in the tenth, 
here his discourse is placed before these historical events. 
The Holy Spirit, to carry through the wonderful scope of 
the first Gospel, has put the words of our Lord together 
into one continued address to His disciples, in the very 
midst of the most positive evidences that the King has 
come and Jehovah is in the midst of His people. When the 
King is manifest He utters His proclamation. Such is 
the discourse before us here in Matthew, the proclamation 
of the Lord Jesus Christ as King. And if the King pro- 
claims, makes known His proclamation, it must be concern- 
ing the Kingdom which He came to bring, preached and 
offered to the people. Let this, then, be the starting-point — 
of our analysis of this discourse. The so-called sermon on 
the mount is a proclamation concerning the Kingdom, the 
magna charta of the Kingdom of heavens. 

In the next place let us consider three false applications 
which are being made of the discourse of our Lord before 
us. 

1. The application to the unsaved, unbelieving mass of 
Christendom and others, as if in the sermon on the mount 
the way to righteousness is revealed and human nature’s de- 
velopment (as they say) were here shown, for which every 
man should strive. This, of course, is the grossest error 
possible. The discourse speaks of the characteristics of per- 
sons who are saved, who have redemption. There is no- 
where found:in it the word redemption, nor is salvation men- 


107 


tioned and pointed out; in other words, the way a sinner is 
saved is not revealed here, but, as the greater part of the 
discourse was addressed exclusively to disciples, the Lord 
is speaking about such who are saved and not sinners. Yet 
how little this is understood. 

In our days more than ever before we notice an astonish- 
ing misuse of the sermon on the mount. The saddest of 
all is that many preachers of various evangelical denomina- 
tions fall back upon it as the most important document of 
Christendom ; for them it seems to become more and more 
the Gospel, and the consequences are that we hear in our 
times more ethical preaching, more about becoming better, 
doing good, improving your better self, etc., than ever be- 
fore. It would require much time and a great deal of space 
to show up all the errors which are springing from this ap- 
plication. It is the Gospel of works and of evolution. And 
as this is done there is less preaching of the utter corruption 
of man, his lost condition and utter helplessness to be right- 
eous (that which the discourse makes very clear), and 
the salvation of God in our Lord Jesus Christ, the ab- 
solute necessity of being born again, the reception of eternal 
life, the new nature. As the teachings of the Epistle to the 
Romans have been and are being abandoned in Christen- 
dom, the false application of the discourse here in 
Matthew has been taken up. There is therefore a con- 
tinual increase of teaching about lifting man out of 
his lost place into a better sphere by means of ethical 
teachings taken from the sermon on the mount. This 
is done also under the garb of a social Christianity, 


108 


union of worshippers (?), the Fatherhood of God and 
the brotherhood of mar. Not long ago we were told 
of a reformed rabbi who read in his synagogue on Saturday 
portions of the sermon on the mount and preached on it to 
his hearers. This was hailed as a favorable sign of the 
progress made toward the lifting up of humanity. Surely, if 
evangelical preachers (in creed at least) continue to progress 
in this awful direction by substituting ethical teachings for 
salvation by the precious blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, 
and declare, as not a few have done, “the sermon on 
the mount is a large enough Bible for us,” a general apostasy 
from the faith will soon be reached. There is a lifting up of 
the sinner from his miserable place into sonship and making 
him the heir of God, but that is never by the sermon on the 
mount, by striving to obtain the heavenly righteousness re- 
vealed here. 

2. There are others who give the discourse in Matthew 
v-vii an exclusively Christian application. 

This is the second false application. We cannot put into 
the discourse exclusively church teachings and say that all 
found here is to be applied to the church, and that it is the 
guide for the church, as some have said. If the Lord had 
had the church in her heavenly calling and character 
in mind, the place given to the discourse would be all 
wrong.. The Lord mentions the church the first time in the 
sixteenth chapter, and if following the sixteenth chapter He 
had spoken these words we might say that we should find in 
it the church. He said something to His disciples after He 
had declared that He would build His church, which applies 


109 


to the church. A good deal in the sermon on the mount 
appears mostly in connection with the earth. Thesaneek are 
to inherit the earth. The church, however, is “heavenly. 
Not here, but in the Epistles, written after the death, resur- 
rection and ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ and after the 
Holy Spirit had come down from heaven, do we find all 
about the church. The magna charta of the church is in the 
Epistles of Paul, to whom the full revelation of the church 
was given. Out of this misconception has sprung a good 
deal of error. People attempt to make the sermon on the 
mount the standard of their lives; they apply it to them- 
selves in the least details and get into legal bondage. The 
flesh given so much to legality likes this only too well. 
Here the greatest mischief comes in, that believers do not 
see clearly what grace has done, and that their heavenly 
walk does not spring from a contemplation of a series of 
descriptions of the character and actions of regenerated per- 
sons, but by the fact that we look upon ourselves as lifted in- 
to the highest heaven once and for all in the person of our 
perfect High Priest. A heavenly walk is the outcome of a 
heavenly contemplation. But this not being seen, professing 
Christendom, amongst it many true believers, stumble around 
in the sermon on the mount. In this way it has come about 
that the “Our Father” (the name next to “Lord’s prayer” 
given to the prayer, our Lord taught His disciples) has be- 
come the ritualisic prayer of Christendom, repeated at numer- 
ous occasions, 

3. The last false interpretation is that one, which makes 
the sermon on the mount exclusively Jewish. 


IIo 


There are not a few who refuse to consider the three chap- 
ters in Matthew as having any reference to Christian be- 
lievers @@all and as if there is no application to be made in 
this direction and the believer could afford to pass them by 
entirely and not be concerned about it. This is the other ex- 
treme and equally wrong. 

In our exegesis of the three chapters, (which of necessity 
we have to condense considerably) we shall always in every 
part look upon the sermon on the mount as the proclamation 
of the King concerning the Kingdom. That Kingdom is 
not the church, nor is the state of the earth in righteous- 
ness, governed and possessed by the meek, brought about 
by the agency of the church. It is the millennial earth and 
_ the Kingdom to come, in which Jerusalem will be the city 
of a great King. We read in the Old Testament that 
when the Kingdom comes, for which these Jewish dis- 
ciples of our Lord were taught to pray, the, law 
will go forth out of Zion and the Word of the Lord 
from Jerusalem. While we have in the Old Testament the 
outward manifestations of the Kingdom of the heavens as 
it will be set up in the earth in a future day, we have here 
the inner manifestation, the principles of it. Yet this never 
excludes application to us who are His heavenly people, 
members of His body, who will share the heavenly throne 
in the heavenly Jerusalem with Him.  Israel’s calling ~is 
earthly; theirs is an earthly kingdom, ours is altogether 
heavenly. “In the sermon on the mount we have, then, the 
principles of the Kingdom of heaven, with very plain refer- 
ences to the millennial earth * * * Yet let it not be thought 


II! 


that this takes from us the application to ourselves which 
Christians seek in it. The fuller revelation only completes 
the partial one; the higher blessing but transcends the lower. 
Through all dispensations God is the same God, and we are 
‘blessed with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in 
Christ Jesus.’ Of many things we can only argue, indeed a 
more perfect (or at least a fuller application) to ourselves 
than to them. To take from Israel what is hers is only to 
diminish her and not enrich ourselves. Nay, what has been 
called in this way the spiritualizing of the promises has led 
most surely and emphatically to the carnalizing of the 
church.”* 

The Kingdom has, then, a heavenly and an earthly side. 
Both are seen in the discourse, but the earthly is predomi- 
nant. In itself the discourse is most perfect. The seven- 
fold division is well known. We mention them here, and 
will take up each for a very brief consideration. 

1. The characteristics of the Heirs of the Kingdom (chap- 
ter v. I-16). 

2. The Law goes forth from Zion. It is confirmed and 
expounded by the King (verses 17-48). 

3. The better righteousness (chapter vi:1-18). 

4. Kept in the world. Single-eyed, trusting in God 
(verses 19-34). . 

5. The judgment of righteousness (chapter vii:1-14). 

6. Warning against false prophets (verses 15-20). 

7. Warning against false professors (21-29). 


ee 
*F. W. Grant on Matthew, page 70. 


112 


Most of these sections may again be divided into seven 
parts. The number seven is the perfect number, and as He 
is the divine King, the perfect King, all that proceeds out 
of His mouth is perfection. We have seven expansions of 
the law, seven parts of the better righteousness, and seven 
petitions in the prayer our Lord taught His disciples. 

The first section in the fifth chapter from the first verse 
to the sixteenth is before us. Seeing the crowds.He went up 
into the mountain, and having sat down, His disciples came 
to Him; having opened His mouth He taught them. Moses 
the mediator of the old covenant went up into the mountain 
where he received the law; but here is a greater one than 
Moses, the Mediator of a better covenant and the King at 
the same time. He begins with blessings, the blessings of 
grace. 

The blessings in themselves are most wonderful in their 
scope and inexhaustible in their meaning. We can but call 
the attention to a few thoughts in connection with them. 

We notice seven beatitudes which show forth the char- 
acter of those who are the heirs of the kingdom. These are: 

Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of 
the heavens. 

Blessed they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. 

Blessed the meek, for they shall inherit the earth. 

Blessed they who hunger and thirst after righteousness, 
for they shall be filled. 

Blessed the merciful, for they shall find mercy. 

Blessed the pure in heart for they shall see God. 


113 


Blessed the peacemakers, for they shall be called the sons 
of God. 

These seven blessings must be divided into two parts. The 
division is into four and three. Four is the earthly number 
and three the heavenly. In the first four we see the char- 
acteristics of the heirs of the kingdom in their position in 
the earth, waiting for the kingdom of the heavens and the 
inheritance of the earth, and in the last three the inner char- 
acteristics as the heirs of the kingdom have them by having 
become the partakers of the divine nature. Let us remind 
ourselves once more that the Lord does not speak to un- 
saved persons, but to His disciples. The blessings do not 
speak of what a person should be, or strive to be, but what 
they are. Allhere is contrary to the natural man, everything 
is strange to his disposition. It is only the Grace of God in 
Christ Jesus which can produce this. The gift of God is 
eternal life in our Lord Jesus Christ. He Himself is the 
true God and the eternal life, which has been manifested — 
and which is communicated to every one who believes and 
thus hath the Son. Believing in Him we receive life and 
are partakers of the divine nature. Here we have the des- 
cription of one who is in possession of this new nature and 
as it manifests itself. (The first Epistle of John shows 
the same characteristics). One has said very pointedly: 
“At the beginning of His career, Christ draws the picture 
of the person who is to be the result of His work. This is 
the ideal man whom the Saviour is to make actual by sav- 
ing him from sin.”* How great then the blindness of those 


*Weston on Matthew. 


114 


teachers in Christendom who make the sermon on the mount, 
the beatitudes, the Gospel, and who attempt to reform the 
world by it. 

In the first place let us consider that in the seven blessings 
we have the Lord Jesus Christ Himself. He is the fullest 
expression of all. He is the highest illustration of these 
characteristics. It is a most blessed study to see how the 
Word speaks of Him as the one who was poor and needy, 
who became poor for our sake. He took that place for us. 
He could say, “I am poor and sorrowful” (Ps. Ixix:29). 
and, “Bow down thine ear, O Jehovah, for I am poor and 
needy” (Ps. Ixxxvi:1), and again, “For I am poor and 
needy, and my heart is wounded within me” (Ps. cix:22). 
And He who humbled Himself receives the kingdom. He 
was while on earth the man of sorrows and acquainted with 
griefs. He Himself took our infirmities and bare our dis- 
eases. Jesus wept at the grave of Lazarus and over Jerusa- 
lem, and in that night of deepest gloom He offered both sup- 
plications and entreaties to Him who was able to save Him 
out of death with strong crying and tears (Heb. v:7). He 
was the great mourner and He was comforted; heard be- 
cause of His piety and raised from the dead. We know 
Him as the One who was meek and lowly in heart. He did 
not cry, nor lift up, nor cause His voice to be heard in the 
street (Isaiah xli:2). And now the earth is surely the Lord’s 
and the fulness thereof ; the world and they that dwell there- 
in (Ps. xxiv). Thou madest Him to have dominion over the 
works of thy hands; thou hast put all things under His feet 
(Ps. viii.). As the hungering and thirsting One, He was 


115 


here, too, hating iniquity and loving righteousness, His meat 
and drink to do the will of Him who sent Him. And sure- 
ly He sees and shall see the travail of His soul and shall be 
satisfied. Mercy and Purity and Peace were embodied in 
Him. — 

Every one then who is born of God has by grace these 
characteristics. Poor in spirit is the very first characteristic. 
The unsaved sinner knows nothing of it. It is altogether 
the work of the Holy Spirit. It means to take the right 
place before God, which is in the dust in absolute helpless- 
ness. It is the continued attitude of a saved person in the 
earth, poverty in spirit and entire dependence upon the 
Lord. The mourning which comes next should not be made 
to mean grieving on account of personal sin. It is rather 
over the results of sin, the present conditions of things in 
the earth. Thus our Lord grieved and mourned. The com- 
fort is that coming redemption from the presence of sin and 
entrance into that heavenly inheritance which belongs to us 
~ in Christ Jesus. But having taken the true place before God, 
and knowing the evil and mourning on account of it, what 
is to be our path on the earth? Blessed are the meek! Blessed 
are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness! This 
is the way of the heirs of the kingdom, waiting for the mani- 
festation of it. 

When we come to the next three blessings, we find the 
divine origin of the children of God brought out. It would 
be very helpful to compare these last three beatitudes with 
the first Epistle of John. God is righteous, God is light and 
God is love. Everyone who is born of God is righteous, he 


116 


is in the light and he loves. The love of God which comes 
down from heaven is perfected in Him. Merciful would 
stand for Righteousness, purity in heart for Light and peace- 
maker for Love. These are then called the sons of God and 
shall see God. 

But while all this is a true application or rather a faint 
outline of that which is so richly told out here, we must not 
forget that there is also a direct application to the believing 
remnant of Israel. This remnant of Israel will pass through 
the great tribulation through which the Church (which of 
course can never be put into the first part of Matthew) will 
never pass. They will then be waiting in the midst of great 
tribulations, persecutions and sufferings for the kingdom to 
come. When the kingdom at last comes, in the return of the 
king, the Son of man, they will enter in. Let us look at the 
first four beatitudes from this standpoint. This people will 
be poor in spirit. The remnant is described in Zephaniah iii., 
12, “I will leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor 
people, and they shall trust in the name of Jehovah. The 
remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor speak lies, neither 
shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth, for they 
shall feed and lie down and none shall make them afraid.” 
In Isaiah Ixvi:2: “To this man will I look, even to him that 
is poor and of a contrite spirit and that trembleth at my 
Word.” This elect remnant will mourn in the earth in the 
evil day. Here is a prophetic description of the mourning 
of this remnant: “Woe is me! for I am as when they have 
gathered the summer fruits, as the grape gleanings of the 
vintage ; there is no cluster to eat; my soul desireth the first 


I17- 


ripe fig. The godly man is perished out of the earth and 
there is none upright among men; they all lie in wait for 
blood, they hunt every man his brother with a net. Their 
hands are upon that which is evil to do it diligently. * * * 
The son dishonoreth the father, the daughter riseth up 
against her mother, the daughter-in-law against her mother- 
in-law, a man’s enemies are the men of his own house. (Com- 
pare with Matthew xxiv:1o and x:21-23). But as for me, 
I will look unto the Lord; I will wait for the God of my 
salvation; my God will hear me” (Micah vii:1-7). They 
shall then be comforted. Their comfort, however, will not 
be in the heavenlies, but they shall be comforted in Jeru- 
salem, for He shall come and deliver them from all their en- 
emies and restore the kingdom to Israel. They will be as 
the meek of the earth and inherit the earth when the king 
comes. Inheriting the earth is Israel’s promise; ours is to 
rule and reign with Him in the heavenlies over the earth. 
The thirty-seventh Psalm forms a perfect commentary to 
this beatitude “Blessed are the meek.” There we find what 
meekness includes, both in ourselves as believers and the fu- 
ture believing remnant. “Fret not thyself”—‘Neither be 
thou envious’—“Trust in the Lord”—“Delight thyself in 
the Lord”—“Commit thy way unto the Lord”—“Rest in the 
Lord.” The meek waiting for the Lord are thus de- 
scribed. But it is of the believing remnant we read 
in that Psalm. Some day it shall be as it is written there: 
“Ryvildoers shall be cut off. But those that wait upon the 
Lord they shall inherit the land. For yet a little while and the 
wicked shall not be, but the meek shall inherit the land, and 


118 


shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace” (Psalm 
xxxvii:g-11). They will also be hungering and thirsting 
for righteousness and shall be filled in the day of His mani- 
festation, 

The seven beatitudes are followed by two others which 
describe the heirs of the kingdom as sufferers and perse- 
cuted in the earth. Therefore, because we are children of 
God, the world knoweth us not, for it knew Him not. Do 
not wonder, brethren, if the world hate you. Our Lord here, 
too, is the great exemplar. “For to this have ye been called, 
for Christ also has suffered for you, leaving you a model 
that you should follow His steps: who did no sin, neither 
was guile found in His mouth; who, when reviled, reviled 
not again; when suffering threatened not” (1 Pet. ii:2r). 
The first blessing is for the persecuted for righteousness’ 
sake, but in the second we read, “Blessed are ye when they 
reproach and persecute you, and say every wicked thing 
against you, lying, for my sake. Rejoice and exult, for your 
reward is great in the heavens, for thus have they persecuted 
the prophets who were before you.”’ This second beatitude 
stands in connection with the last three blessings. In the 
first the Lord says “They” and that “theirs is the kingdom 
of heaven,” but in the second He says, “Ye.” In the first it 
is the kingdom of heaven, in the second it is the great re- 
ward in heaven. The latter is more than the earthly glory of 
that coming kingdom. This finds unquestionably its fulfill- 
ment during that time of Jacob’s trouble. There will be 
the suffering for righteousness’ sake during the tribu- 
lation as never before and many will be slain of these 


119 


faithful Jewish witnesses for His sake. The latter will re- 
ceive great reward (read Revel. xx:4). It will be the com- 
fort for His earthly people in the coming day of trouble. The 
suffering of the church, outside of the camp bearing His 
reproach is revealed in the Epistles. 

From the 13th-16th verse we hear what the heirs of the 
kingdom are in the earth. “Ye are the salt of the earth; but 
if the salt has become insipid, wherewith shall it be salted? 
It is no longer fit for anything but to be cast out and to be 
trodden under foot by men.” 

This is in reference to the first beatitudes. Salt preserves 
from corruption. Thus is the heir of the kingdom to be in 
the midst of all that which is corruption. But what when 
the salt becomes insipid? It becomes absolutely worthless 
and is trodden under foot. It was so with Jerusalem, it has 
become worthless ; it has been trodden down by the Gentiles 
and Christendom will be that, nay is, in the age of Laodicea. 
Ye are the Light of the world. This is in reference to the 
last three beatitudes. This is followed by the exhortation: 
“Let your light thus shine before men so that they may see 
your upright works, and glorify your Father who is in the 
heavens.” But what light is it which is to shine? Surely this 
can mean only the reflection of Him who is the Light. “He 
does not say let your good works shine, but let your light 
shine; that is, let Christ shine in your life; not that ye may 
see your good works, but that men see them; not to your 
glory, but to the glory of your Father.” 

Because it is the God who spoke that out of darkness 
light should shine who has shone in our hearts, for the shin- 


120 


ing forth of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face 
of Jesus Christ (2 Cor. iv:6). Salt and Light, to pre- 
serve and to shine—this is then our responsibility and our 
testimony we have. But the salt, the preserving, hindering 
power will at last be taken away from the earth, and the 
light will shine no longer. What will be left, but unspeak- 
able corruption and the gross darkness which will cover the 
earth? 

The second section of the great proclamation of the King 
contains the confirmation of the law and its expansion. We 
can but give a very brief outline and exposition and will be 
obliged to guard against digressions, which might be made 
at almost every verse. 

We now see our Lord speaking as the one who is greater 
than Moses (Hebrews iii:12). Sitting upon the mount, 
He speaks with greater authority than Moses or any one be- 
fore Him, because He has greater authority. He who speaks 
concerning the law and the prophets, confirming and ex- 
panding, is the one who gave it to Moses, whose fingers 
wrote upon the tables of stone, whose Spirit revealed the 
visions to the prophets and testified in them and through 
them beforehand, concerning the suffering and the glory 
that should follow. The question which comes to the Jew- 
ish mind after reading the opening of the discourse, the de- 
scription of the characteristics of the heirs of the kingdom 
is the question concerning the law and the prophets; that 
is, the whole Old Testament. Did He then come to set 
them aside? Did He come to make the law and the proph- 
ets void? He states at once that He came not to make void 


I2I 


the law and the prophets, but to fulfill, and adds, “For verily 
I say unto you until the heaven and earth pass away, one 
iota or one tittle shall in nowise pass from the law until all 
come to pass.” | 

A good deal of wrong teaching has been taken from these 
words ; the most erroneous is the one which puts a Christian 
believer still under the law and teaches from this passage 
that inasmuch as Christ came not to make void the law sO, 
every believer is obliged to fulfill the law. This is a favored 
argument with Seventh Day people and others. It springs 
from forgetting the fact that here we have no teaching con- 
cerning the Church or the individual believer as it was made 
known subsequently in the Epistles. The Epistles make 
very clear the relation to the law which the true believer sus- 
tains, who has eternal life and is in Christ. “So that, my 
brethern, we also have been made dead to the law by the 
body of Christ, to be another who has been raised up from * 
among the dead in order that we might bear fruit to God” 
(Romans vii:4). We are dead to the law, yet the law in 
itself is not dead; it is as much alive as ever, and holy, 
just and good. However, the new nature which we have is 
the perfect law of liberty; it is something altogether new; 
yet the old law still exists and has its power, but never for 
him who is a new creation in Christ Jesus. “The law has 
been our tutor up to Christ, that we might be justified on 
the principle of faith, but faith having come we are no long- 
er under a tutor, for ye are all God’s sons by faith in Christ 
Jesus” (Gal. iii:24, 25). The law could make nothing per- 
fect, but Christ came, and perfection is in Him and through 


122 


Him. What is the meaning of “to fulfill’? It means to 
give the fullness, to make full, to fill out the law and the 
prophets. The wrong interpretation comes generally from 
having only the ten Commandments in view, but there is 
more than that and more than the Lord’s full obedience to 
the law and fulfilling Himself all that which the law and the 
prophets had spoken concerning Him. In the true sense 
of the word the meaning is, that He came to make good 
the whole scope of the law and prophets. He is come to 
reveal the completeness of that which the law and the 
prophets had but pointed out. All that which the law and 
the prophets teach and predict, the fullness, is of Him and 
will be fulfilled in Him who came and who will come 
again. The eighteenth verse makes ‘this clear. Even the 
smallest letter, the Hebrew “jod,” shall come to pass; not 
even the least letter can be set aside, but all will be accom- 
plished. Here we have one of the strongest words for the 
verbal inspiration and infallibility of the Bible. Even the 
“jod” is of Him, and “until the heavens and the earth pass 
away one iota or one tittle shall in nowise pass from the 
law till all come to pass.” All then is divine, infallible and 
will come to pass. What a solemn declaration of the great 
King this is! This is in full harmony with the entire testi- 
mony of the Word. “Forever, O Lord, Thy Word is set- 
tled in the heavens” (Psalm cix:89). “Thou hast magni- 
fied Thy Word above all Thy name” (Psalm cxxx:2). “The 
law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul; the testi- 
mony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple; the 
statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart; the com- 


123 


mandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes; the 
fear of the Lord is clean, enduring forever; the judgments 
of the Lord are true and righteous altogether. More to be 
desired are they than gold, yea, than much fine gold, sweeter 
also than honey and the honeycomb. Morever, by them is 
thy servant warned, and in keeping of them is great reward” 
(Psalm xix). In the cxix Psalm the perfection and excel- 
lency of the Word is told out in each of the 176 verses, with 
the exception of two, and the declaration is made, “Thy 
Word is true from the beginning.” What an awful sin, 
what a heinous thing, the rejection of the inspiration 
of the Word of God is! : 

In the nineteenth and twentieth verses the King speaks 
of the doing and teaching of the commandments. Here we 
are, of course, altogether on Jewish ground. Then there is 
to be a surpassing righteousness, or better righteousness for 
the one who is to enter into the kingdom of the heavens. 
Their righteousness was their own and insufficient for the 
entering into the kingdom of the heavens. But does our 
Lord here teach that a person is by a better righteousness 
of his own to enter into the kingdom of the heavens and 
that he is by his own efforts to produce this righteousness? 
Certainly not. Still the false application, the ethical teach- 
ings in Christendom substituting now so universally the 
preaching of the glad tidings of our salvation, teaches that 
man is to lift himself up into heaven by his own righteous- 
ness. Our Lord speaks not to sinners here, but to such who 
are saved, and the saved sinner has a better righteousness 
than the scribes and the Pharisees, who were only natural 


124 


men. In possession of his righteousness we do rejoice. 
“But now without the law the righteousness of God is mani- 
_fested, borne witness to by the law and the prophets; right- 
eousness of God by faith of Jesus Christ towards all, and 
upon all those who believe, for there is no difference, for all 
have sinned and come short of the glory of God; being jus- 
tified freely by His grace through the redemption which is 
in Christ Jesus, whom God hath set forth a mercy seat 
through faith in His blood for the showing forth of His 
righteousness ; in respect of the passing by the sins that had 
taken place before, through the forbearance of God; for the 
showing forth of His righteousness in the present time, so 
that He should be just and justify him that is of the faith of 
Jesus” (Romans ili:21-26). “For what the law could not 
do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God, having sent 
His own Son in the likeness of flesh of sin, and for sin, has 
condemned sin in the flesh, in order that the righteous re- 
quirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not 
walk according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit” 
(Romans viii:3, 4). And the outflow of the righteousness 
of God we are in Him, is His righteousness. But these 
words stand also in relation to Israel, converted at last and 
entering into the kingdom (Ezek. xxxvi:25, etc). 

And now after He had confirmed the law and made 
known its immutability, He begins to teach that surpassing 
righteousness which He demands. . He teaches the law in 
its fullest and deepest spiritual meaning. Here we see all 
the majesty of the King and the lawgiver. Six times He 
says “I say unto you.” It is divine “I” of Jehovah, who 


125 


speaks. And as He speaks here and sends forth the expan- 
sions of the law, so will He speak again. Out of Zion shall 
go forth the law and the Word of the law from Jerusalem 
(Isaiah 11:3). And when that time comes, then surely 
righteousness and peace will kiss each other, and Israel, 
new-born, having the laws in their inmost parts and written 
in their hearts and the Spirit upon them, will walk in His 
statutes, and nations will be converted. 

Not alone does He show in these expansions of the law, 
in declaring the true righteousness, His divine authority, 
but He uncovers the human heart and shows its deep cor- 
ruption and the hopelessness that the natural man could 
ever attain to such a righteousness. It condemns every 
human being. As mentioned before, thousands of unsaved 
person, Jews and Gentiles have made this first discourse 
of our Lord in the Gospel of Matthew the standard for what 
they call “their religion.” It is a sad statement which is 
now heard from all sides: “The sermon on the mount is my 
creed,” or “Our preacher preaches only from the Gospels 
and the sermon on the mount, and never touches the Old 
Testament or the Epistles” (this was told us), etc. Are 
these people really honest, and do they know the cutting 
words of our Lord, words like a two-edged sword, pene- 
trating to the division of soul and spirit, a discerner of the 
thoughts and intents of the heart? If they read and are sin- 
cere they find themselves all uncovered and naked before 
Him whose eyes are like flames of fire, before whom indeed 
all things are naked and laid bare. The words show the 


126 


sinner his ruin and his corruption. Condemnation comes 
from every word to the natural man. 

Let us look but briefly to the different teachings our Lord 
giveth, both to show the true righteousness He demands 
and to uncover the corruption of the heart. 

He takes some of the commandments which He wrote 
_on the second table of stone and begins with the command- 
ment: “Thou shalt not kill”? Murder was the first awful 
fruit after the fall, sprung as it was from envy in the heart. 
The penalty of murder is the judgment. This, then, is the 
letter of the law. It dealt with the outward deed, but the 
heart itself it did not touch. Now He speaks. “J say unto 
you, that every one that is lightly* angry with his brother 
shall be subject to the judgment.” It shall be as if he had 
committed the deed “thou shalt not kill.’ Every one that 
hates his brother is a murderer (1 John ili:15). “Whoso- 
ever shall say to his brother, Raca (a word embodying hatred 
and contempt) shall be called before the Sanhedrim; but 
whosoever shall say, Fool, shall be subject to the penalty of 
the hell fire.” It will be so, no doubt, when the kingdom 
_ will be come into the earth; swift judgment will overtake 
the offender. But the words lay bare the heart and show 
the impossibility of man to stand before God, who judges 
the heart, in their own righteousness. The believer being 
the partaker of the divine nature, is righteous and loves his 
brother. Only the reception of eternal life, which is Christ 


*The word “lightly” belongs in here. It was dropped in some 
manuscripts, but stands in the oldest. It is not angry alone out- 
wardly, but even the remotest feeling of displeasure is meant. 


127 


Himself, can produce righteousness and love. “Whosoever 
has been begotten of God does not practice sin, because His 
seed abides in him and he cannot sin, because he has been 
begotten of God. In this are manifest the children of God 
and the children of the devil. Whoever does not practice 
righteousness is not of God, and he who does not love his 
brother” (1 John iii:9-11). The believer walking in the 
Spirit will in no way fulfill flesh’s lust. 

The 23d and 24th verses refer primarily to Israel; in prin- 
ciple they are applicable during this Christian age. 

The words which follow are: “Make friends with thine 
adverse party quickly, while thou-art in the way with him; 
lest some time the adverse party deliver thee to the judge 
and the judge deliver thee to the officer and thou be cast 
into prison. Verily I say to thee, Thou shalt in nowise come 
out thence till thou hast paid the last farthing.” The words 
contain an allegorical exhortation to Israel. It is a short 
outline of their history the Lord here introduces. Fol- 
lowing the expansion of the law concerning murder and 
hatred, that which they were about to do with their own 
Brother, it is significant. Israel were the adversaries of 
Him who had come, and treated the royal Person in their 
midst as an adversary. They did not agree with Him and 
have been put into the prison (nationally) under punishment 
till the last farthing is paid. The lord will perform .His 
whole work (punitive) upon Mount Zion and on Jerusa- 
lem ({saiah x:12), and then it will be “that her warfare is 
ended” or, as the marginal reading gives it (Isaiah xl:2), 
“her punishment is accepted,” and “her iniquity is par- 


128 


doned and she hath received of the Lord’s hand double (in 
blessing) for all her sins.” Thus explained these words fit 
in the whole. 

The next.two expansions of the law are concerning purity 
and divorce. Not alone the deed itself, which was punish- 
able by a severe penalty, is sin, but every one who looks upon 
a woman to lust after her has already committed adultery 
with her in his heart. Out of the heart the transgression 
comes, and the heart is evil. And this is what so many 
persons in Christendom say is their creed and standard for 
“religion”! It is the word which condemns them altogether. 

The plucking out of the right eye and the sacrificing of 
the right hand is, of course, never to be understood in the 
literal sense, but stands for the inner exercise of the be- 
liever, who in self-judgment puts that away which is a snare 
or a stumbling block. But what sinner can do it or will do 
it? Let him try it. And while there is in our day an in- 
creased boasting in a better morality, a higher standard, 
and a “social Christianity” is attempted and built upon 
certain words of our Lord in this discourse, it becomes 
more and more evident that the lust of the eye and the lust 
of the flesh are honeycombing all classes ot the professing 
church and are practiced as never before. So it is with 
divorce. What dreadful things might be mentioned here! 
Among the Jews the greatest laxity prevailed in this direc- 
tion. Even now through talmudical laws the marriage re- 
lations may be dissolved on a mere pretext. Our Lord Says 
with the voice of authority, binding ever: “Whosoever shall 
put away his wife except for cause of fornication makes her 


129 


commit adultery,-and whosoever marries one that is put 
away commits adultery.” 

In the fourth place He speaks against swearing, not 
against oaths such as are demanded by iaw, but in a profane 
way. Heaven, earth and Jerusalem are mentioned because 
_ these were mostly used in profane swearing. Significant 
here is the description of Jerusalem as the city of the great 
King. This will be during the millennial reion. When the 
kingdom has come praise will be heard in the heavens, in the 
earth and in Jerusalem. Now the earth is full of swearing 
and wicked words, but in that coming day the offences will 
be gathered out of the kingdom. 

The law of retaliation comes next (verse 38). He teaches 
not to resist evil. This is again a great principle for His 
disciples. The author of the Numerical Bible says: “There 
is no supposition of the abrogation of law or of its penal- 
ties. The government of the world is not in question, but 
the path of the disciple in it. Where they are bound by the 
law, they are bound and have no privileges. They are bound, 
too, to sustain it in its general working, as ordained of God 
as good. Within these limits there is still abundant room 
for such practice as is here enjoined. We may still turn 
the left cheek to him that smites the right, or let the man 
that sues us have the cloak as well as the coat which he has 
fraudulently gained, for that is clearly within our rights. If 
the cause were that of another, we should have no right of 
this kind, nor to aid men generally in escape from justice 
or slighting it. The Lord could never lay down a general 
rule that His people should allow lawlessness or identify 


130 


themselves with indifference to the rights of others, He 
speaks only of what is personal to one’s self—smite thee, 
compel thee and sue thee.” 

The last expansion brings forth love. “Ye have heard 
that it has been said, Thou shalt love they neighbor and hate 
thine enemy. But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless 
those who curse you, do good to those that hate you and 
pray for those who insult you and persecute you,” etc. 
(verses 43-48), ending with “Be ye therefore perfect, as 
your heavenly Father is perfect.” It is the same exhorta- 
tion as in Eph. v:1: “Be imitators of God as dear children.” 
The standard for the heirs of the kingdom is then His own 
moral perfection. 

The day will come when such righteousness and love and 
perfection as the King here describes will dwell amidst His 
earthly people and will be manifested in the earth. It will 
be in the day when the kingdom has come and His will be 
done in earth as it is in heaven. But every child of God born 
anew has put before him the highest standard, which in- 
cludes all that which the King here expounds and that is in 
possession of Himself, who is the true God and the eternal 
life, “to walk even as He walked.” “Be ye therefore per- 
fect as your heavenly Father is perfect.” 


131 


CHAPTER VI. 


Our Lord said: “For I say unto you, that unless your 
righteousness surpass that of the scribes and Pharisees, ye 
shall in! nowise enter into the kingdom of the heavens” 
(chap. v:20). This righteousness He had taught in His 
confirmation and expansion of the law, but now He speaks 
of something higher still. He makes known the motive of 
this true righteousness, which the heir of the kingdom is not 
-alone to possess but also to practice. The motive is in all 
to act in the presence of the Father. The first eighteen 
verses of the sixth chapter shows this in a threefold relation. 
First, in relation to man (verse 1-4), then in relation to God 
(verse 5-15) and lastly in relation to self (verse 16-18). 
The word Father is found ten times in these first eighteen 
verses of the sixth chapter. The Father sees, the Father 
knows; therefore all is to be done before Him, the Seeing 
and Knowing One. Here, then, relationship is acknowl- 
edged and made prominent, such a relationship which was 
unknown. in the Old Testament. How we are brought into 
this relationship to God as Father, and to know Him as our 
Father, so as to act continually as in His presence, is not 
taught in the Gospel of Matthew. The Gospel of John 
makes this fully known. There we read all about eternal life, 
the reception of this life, being born anew, born into the 
family of God, etc. “As many received Him (Christ, the 
true God and eternal life), to them gave He the right to be 


132 : 
children of God, to these that believe on His name; who 
have been born, not of blood nor of flesh’s will nor of man’s 
will, but of God” (John i:12, 13). This is all anticipated 
in Matthew, and the Father here is not that “All-Father,” 
as the modern twentieth-century teachers of a Fatherhood 
of God and brotherhood of men teach, but He is the God 
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who, according to His 
great mercy, has begotten us again to a living hope through 
the resurrection of Jesus Christ from among the dead (1 
Peter i:3-5). Only such as are begotten again, born into 
the family of God are children and though they are little 
children, yet do they know God as their Father. “T write 
to you, little children, because ye have known the Father” 
(1 John ii:13). Only such who are children and partakers 
of the divine nature can act as in the presence of the Father ; 
with all others this is an impossibility ; for how can they act 
and walk before One and do all out of love for One and to 
please that One, whom they do not know? This is another 
proof how impossible it is for the unregenerated, who have 
taken the sermon on the mount as a so-called rule for con- 
duct, to do that which is taught. 

Our Lord begins with alms. In the first verse the word 
alms is best translated (as several old manuscripts read) by 
“righteousness.” “Take heed-not to do your righteousness 
before men to be seen of them, otherwise ye have no reward 
with your Father who is in the heavens.” 

ims are good deeds towards others, charitable actions, 
bestowing upon the poor, needy and afflicted. Such deeds 
of mercy and kindness are generally designated by Jews as 


133 


righteousness. In their prayers on New Year’s day they 
profess that repentance, prayer and Zodoko—righteousness 
will influence God and change the evil to come upon them 
for their sins, into good. Under righteousness every ortho- 
dox Jew understands alms. It must have been so during 
the days of our Lord in the midst of His earthly people. How 
was it done? We believe that the description our Lord gives 
here was a literal performance by the self-righteous re- 
ligionists: Alms were given so as to be seen by men, a 
trumpet was sounded before them and the sums they gave 
to the poor were heralded through the streets. And is it not 
so now even in the midst of Christendom? How much 
almsgiving and charities would there be if it were not for a 
big display? Such almsgiving, such deeds of mercy are not 
pleasing to God. Such a righteousness, and done by such a 
motive, are but filthy rags which give no covering and de- 
file. But so it is among Jews and professing Christians, 
almsgiving, charities without end, good works to appear be- 
fore men as religious, and no knowledge of the Father. 
“Verily, I say unto you, they have their reward. But 
when thou doest alms, let not thy left hand know what thy 
right hand does; so that thine alms may be in secret and thy 
Father who sees in secret will render it to thee” (verse 4). 
The lesson here for every true believer is that all our good 
works are to be done as to our Father and as before Him 
alone; when we have done all things that are commanded, 
we are to say, we are unprofitable servants (Luke xvii:10). 
Prayer is the next which follows. Prayer is that which 
telates to God. How much might be said on that most 


134 


precious duty and privilese—prayer! But we cannot digress 


here. “And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the 
hyprocrites ; for they love to pray standing in the synagogues 
and in the corners of the street, so that they should appear 
to men.” What glaring contradiction to pray in words 
which are addressed to God, and in motive they are but ut- 
tered so as to be heard by men! What our Lord describes 
any one can witness still, on any Saturday morning on the 
lower East Side of New York City. In synagogues and pri- 
vate dwellings many a Jew can be seen marching up and 
down, or standing still, or swaying his head and reading 
his prayers. He is attired with the philacteries (prayer- 
straps), a purely rabbinical invention, and his shoulders are 
enshrouded by a prayer-mantle. His whole behavior as he 
takes a prominent stand in the synagogue or before an open 
window, shows but too well that it is done so as to appear 
before men. “Hypocrites” is the word with which our 
Lord designates such men. Yet, is it any better in Christen- 
dom? The modern “church prayer meeting” shows only too 
often the same spirit. We have known men and seen them 
standing in public places to lead in prayer, and before them 
a very carefully worded prayer written beforehand, which 
was read with much pathos. Some observer of religious 
movements spoke of a leading New York preacher a 
short time ago as making “beautiful and very flowery 
public prayers.’ Alas! without sitting in judgment upon 
any one, the flowery prayers, human eloquence in prayer, 
are only too often a form of address to God but only uttered 


to be seen of men. None is excepted of this danger which 


135 


‘comes with public prayer. It should be with much godly 
fear and earnest looking to the Lord when a brother rises to 
lead in prayer. It is to be done as before God and not before 
men. 

Next our Lord tells us that prayer, like alms, is to be 
done, in secret, as unto the Father and not unto men. “But 
thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy chamber, and having 
shut thy door, pray to the Father who is in secret, and 
thy Father who sees in secret will render it to thee.” No 
one would conclude from these words that our Lord forbids 
public or united prayer. It is seen only that He speaks 
against the mode and manner of public prayer. A believer 
praying in public should be as before the Father in secret. 
Later our Lord says, anticipating the church, “Again I say 
to you, that if two of you shall agree on the earth concerning 
any matter, whatsoever it may be that they shall ask, it shall 
come to them from my Father in heaven” (chapter xviii: 
19). United prayer of the assembly and that not in secret 
alone but in public, yet as before the Father, is a great 
privilege and attended by untold blessings. “They gave 
themselves all with one accord to continual prayer” (Acts i: 
14). “And they persevered in the teaching and fellowship 
of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers” (Acts 11: 
42). “But we will give ourselves up to prayer and minis- 
try of the Word” (vi:4). Unceasing prayer was made by 
the assembly to God concerning him (Acts xii:5). Such was 
the practice in the apostolic age, and the exhortations given 
to believers in the New Testament are in harmony with it. 
“As regard prayer, persevering” (Rom. xii:12). “Perse- 


136 


vere in prayer, watching in it with thanksgiving, praying at 
the same time for us also, that God may open to us a door 
of the Word to speak the mystery of Christ” (Col. iv :4). 
“Tn everything by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiv- 
ing, let your requests be made known to God” (Phil. iv:6). 
Secret prayer is here mentioned by our Lord, and surely the 
true believer is doing this as he looks to the Father only. 
What joy, comfort and strength it does afford to be alone 
before God. Here it cannot be done as unto men. The 
hyprocite does not know nor practice secret prayer, and the 
professing Christian often makes an attempt at it in a legal 
way so as to satisfy his conscience. “The Father who seeth 
in secret shall recompense thee.” Some manuscripts have 
“openly.” The day will be when all the secret prayers, that 
precious ministry of prayer given to the saints who are holy 
priests, will be made known. What revelations there will 


be and what reward to the saints for such faithful and per- 


severing ministry in secret!* “But when ye pray, use not 


vain repetitions, as those who are of the nations: for they 
think they shall be heard through their much speaking. Be 


*No sooner had Saul of Tarsus passed from death unto life, than 
the Lord says of him “Behold he prayeth!” Doubtless he had zs 
a “Pharisee of the Pharisees” said many long prayers, but not until 
he “saw that Just One and heard the voice of His mouth” could it 
he said of him, Behold he prayeth (Acts xxii:14). Saying prayers 
and praying are two totally different things. A self-righteous 
Pharisee may excel in the former; none but a converted soul can 
€njoy the latter. The spirit of prayer is the spirit of the new man; 
the language of prayer is the distinct utterance of the new life. The 
moment a spiritual babe is born into the new creation it sends up a 
cry of helpless dependence toward the source of its birth—C. H. M. 


137 

not ye therefore like them, for your Father knows of what 
things ye have need before ye beg anything of Him.” 
Martin Luther says on this: “Here He censures the abuse 
of prayer, when they that are praying make use of many 
words and babblings; He calls this a heathenish practice, a 
loose, idle and useless talk, of such who think they would 
otherwise not be heard. The spirit of the worshiper prays, 
and because he knows that God will hear him, he dares not 
use such endless, idle talk—the fewer the words, the better 
the prayer.” The Pharisees had their long prayers with 
many vain repetitions. One only needs to take up an ortho- 
dox Jewish “prayer book” to see the numerous vain repeti- 
tions, repeating phrases over and over again. That our . 
Lord had this first of all before Him seems clear. Yet what 
else is Christendom but, as-one has said, “an unauthor- 
ized revival of a departed shade” ?* . It is an aping after 
that which no longer exists. The rituals of Christendom 
with their liberal use of the Psalms in responsive readings, 
set forms of prayer for all occasions, their chant and rapid 
delivery, are but the daughters of the old mother—Pharisee- 
ism. Here we mention especially rituals which are used at 
the Lord’s supper, generally called by that unscriptural word 
“sacrament.” There are used repeatedly phrases like “Lamb 
of God, have mercy on us,” “Almighty God, have mercy on 
us,” “O Lord, save us.” These indeed are vain repetitions, 
and at the Lord’s table when they are used by a believer 
(who only has a right to the Lord’s table) they are worse 


+Luther’s notes on the Gospels. 
*Adolph Saphir on Hebrews. 


138 


than vain. Vain repetitions, however, may also be used by 
such who use no formal prayers, ritual and prayer book. 
This is often done when the name of God and the Lord is 
falsely used in public prayer as well as other oft-repeated 
phrases. Others have gone into an extreme and have de- 
clared that the Lord teaches here that a petition should be 
made only once, and that if we have asked in faith for some- 
thing once, to'ask again is only proof of our unbelief. The 
Lord teaches no such thing. Our Lord Himself in Gethse- 
mane made the same petition three times, and Paul with his 
thorn in the flesh had besought the Lord thrice that it might 
depart from him (2 Cor. xii:7). 

This is followed by a model for prayer which the King 
now gives. This prayer is generally called throughout Chris- 
tendom “the Lord’s prayer.” Where is the authority in 
Scripture to call it by this name? If any prayer can be called 
the Lord’s prayer it certainly is the one contained in John 
xvii. It is not the Lord’s prayer, but the disciples’ prayer 
This model for prayer has become the formal prayer, the 
ritualistic prayer of every sect in Christendom. That which 
our Lord forbids, vain repetitions, is practiced with this 
divine model by those who call themselves Christians. In 
the Roman and Greek Churches, so-called, it becomes a 
good work to repeat so many “Our Fathers,” and the poor 
deceived souls expect blessing in this world and in eternity 
from the mechanical repetition of so many prayers. This 
of course is very little different from the prayer machines of 
Thibet, upon which a certain number of prayers written on 
paper are placed and unwound before some god or goddess, 


139 


@ 


In “evangelical” denominations it is not much better. We 
remember well in childhood, being strictly brought up in 
the Lutheran denomination, how constantly this prayer was 
used. In sickness, in pain, in danger, at mealtime, in the 
morning and at night, in severe storms, etc., it was ever re- 
peated as if a miraculous power indwelt these words suffi- . 
cient to dispel sickness, detiver from danger and bring bless- 
ing which otherwise would not come. It is one of the rags 
which Luther brought away from the old Roman sepulchre. 
Yet it is the same in other denominations. In one of 
the strongest it is used at the burial of the dead, sprinkling 
of infants, Lord’s supper, “ordination” of deacons and elders, 
“consecration” of bishops, and it is repeated in public by the 
congregation. All this practice, the use of this model for 
prayer, as the Lord’s prayer given to the Church, to be used 
by the Church, is wrong, decidedly unchristian, nor can it be 
proven from the New Testament that it is intended for 
the Church. In the Acts of the Apostles we read of the 
breaking of bread, the gifts of the Spirit, the assembly of 
believers, the baptism of believers, but do we read anywhere 
in the divinely inspired record of the beginning of the 
Church that the so-called Lord’s prayer was used by the 
apostles or by the primitive church? Is there a hint any- 
where in the New Testament that the prayer is to be re- 
peated in public and used by believers? Not even the 
faintest hint that this should be so, but many strong proofs 
and arguments that it should not be so. Centuries passed 
before it became a settled custom to make the prayer the 
King gave to His Jewish disciples the prayer for Christians 


140 


and to use it in the form and in the way it is used now. An 
unknown hand then added something to the last petition, 
“Deliver us from the evil one.” The words, “for thine is 
the kingdom and the power and the glory forever and ever 
—Amen,” are an interpolation. They do not belong into 
_ your Bibles, for the Lord never uttered them. The revised 
version (though so imperfect in many of its revisions) has 
done well in omitting them altogether. When it was decided 
to use this model for prayer as a prayer, this ending was 
written by some one and added to it and thus making it a 
prayer with the “Amen” attached to it. No such “amen” 
belongs there. 

This perfect model of prayer was given by our Lord to 
His disciples to be used by them individually and previously 
to the gift of the Holy Spirit. It was then all on Jewish 
ground; they were Jewish believers and as such they 
received this model prayer and used it in the transition state. 
There came a day when our Lord said another word to these 
very disciples who had come to Him with the request, “Lord, 
teach us to pray, even as John also taught his disciples.” 
It was in the upper room where He spoke all the precious 
words concerning the Comforter, all that which was so 
new, altogether new, that which would take them upon a 
new ground. He said, Hitherto ye have asked nothing in 
My name; ask and ye shall receive, that your joy may be 
Full. * * * In that day ye shall ask in My name” (John - 
xvii:24-27). This message alone ought to give perfect 
light and understanding to any of our. readers who are in 
doubt about this matter. “Hitherto ye have asked nothing 


pes 14t 


in My name.” This shows two things: (1) They asked of 
God, and (2) They asked not in His name. They had then 
used the prayer He had taught them, and it was a prayer 
not in His name. Now He tells them that they were-to ask 
in His name. This, then, is Christian prayer to ask God, 
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ and our Father in the 
name of our Lord Jesus Christ. When He says “in that 
day” He means the day which began when the Holy Spirit 
came down from heaven, and this day is still present.* The 
Christian believer, knowing his perfect standing in Christ - 
Jesus, prays in His name, and that is prayer in the Holy 
Spirit, who now joins His help to our weakness; for we do 
not know what we should pray for as is fitting, but the 
Spirit Himself makes intercession with groanings which can- 


*When the Holy Spirit was given, and the child was able to draw 
near to the Father in the name of Christ, you have something dif- 
ferent. The Lord’s prayer so-called does not clothe the believer with 
the name of Christ. What is meant by asking the Father in that 
name? Can it be merely saying “in His name” at the end of a 
prayer? When Christ died and rose again, He gave the believer 
His own standing before God, and then to ask the Father in the 
name of Christ is to ask in the consciousness that my Father loves 
me as He loves Christ; that my Father has given me the acceptance 
of Christ Himself before Him, having completely blotted: out all 
my evil, so as to be made the righteousness of God in Him. To 
pray in the value of this is asking in His name. Is there a soul using 
the Lord’s prayer as a form that has a real understanding of what 
it is to ask the Father in the name of Christ? I believe they have 
never entered into that great truth—wWotes on Matthew by W. Kelly. 

The latter is, alas! too true; “they have never entered into that 
great truth.” How sad to see the great mass of professing Christians 
without a knowledge of what grace has done, without assurance of 
salvation, constantly “unchristianizing” themselves, cumbered with 
much service, running to and fro—A. C. G. 


142 f 


not be uttered (Rom. viii :26). We glance but briefly at a 
few of the petitions to show how a Christian believer could 
not use this model of prayer as a form. However, we 
desire to state once more the perfection of the prayer. 
Every word here is as divine as He who spoke ite Ler 
could be no imperfection about anything He uttered. Many 
volumes have been written on it and many more might be 
written to show the perfection of every petition. 

As believers we know that our, Lord gave the promise 
and has fulfilled it by the gift of the Holy Spirit, “That if 
any love Me, he will keep My word and My Father will love 
him, and we will come to him and make our abode with 
him.” We are brought nigh by His blood, and in the per- 
son of an adorable Lord we are in heaven seated with Him 
in the heavenlies. The “Our Father who art in heaven” 
does not give expression to this nor could it be before the 
death, resurrection and ascension of our Lord. “Hallowed 
be thy name” is Jewish. Indeed, the Jewish ritual uses the 
phrase very often. The believer exalts “the God and Father 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and Him whom God has exalted 
and made head over all things.” 

“Thy kingdom come.” This petition is for the com- 
ing of the kingdom, the kingdom of the heavens, the Mes- 
sianic Kingdom, which is followed by the doing of the will 
of God on earth as it is done in heaven. Here Christendom 
is the most confused, expecting a kingdom now: a spiritual 
kingdom without a king. What our Lord taught His Jew- 
ish disciples to pray for is the kingdom of the heavens to 
come, that which John the Baptist preached, and also the 


143 


Lord up to the time of His rejection. As believers we do 
not wait for the coming of the King and the establishment 
of the kingdom in the earth, but we wait for the coming of 
the Lord to take us out of the earth. The prayer of the 
Church is, “Even so, come, Lord Jesus.” And the Spirit 
and the Bride say, “Come.” Without enlarging on the 
other petitions or attempting a full exposition of them in 
their full and perfect meaning we wish only to say that this 
prayer will be heard once more in the earth and will then 
be used as it was once used by the Jewish disciples when 
they were sent forth by our Lord. When the Church is 
taken from the earth a believing Jewish remnant will give 
the witness and preach the Gospel of the Kingdom once 
more. They will undoubtedly use this prayer during the 
ereat tribulation through which they will pass, the tribula- 
tion in which the evil one is in the earth and famine and 
many temptations will abound. Then can they truthfully 
ask, “Give us this day our daily bread—lead us not into 
temptations—deliver us from the evil one,” which is the per- 
sonal Antichrist. “Thy kingdom come.” This prayer will 
be answered, deliverance will come for them from heaven 
in the coming of the King.* 

Then our Lord speaks in connection with prayer of the 
spirit of forgiveness which every one who is in relationship 
with God as Father should exercise. If such a spirit of love 
and patience towards those who have done evil against us 


*We pass over the petition, “And forgive use our debts as. we for- 
give’our debtors.” This is a legal, an Old Testament petition. 
Our forgiveness does not depend upon our relation to each other. 


144 


is not practiced, it means that we cannot enjoy full com- 
munion with Him. Therefore, “let all bitterness, and heat 
of passion, and wrath, and clamor and injurious language 
be removed from you, with all malice; and be to one another 
kind, compassionate, forgiving one another, so as God 
also in Christ has forgiven you” (Eph. iv :32). That which 
relates to ourself follows next: “And when ye fast be not 
as the hypocrites, downcast in countenance, for they dis- 
figure their faces so that they may appear fasting to men; 
verily I say to you, they have their reward. But thou when 
fasting anoint thy head and wash thy face, so that thou 
mayest not appear fasting unto men, but to thy Father, who 
sees in secret; and thy Father who sees in secret shall ren- 
der it to thee.” Here once more we have the wrong motive 
and the true. It was done by the hypocrites in just the way 
spoken of here. It was an attitude of humiliation of the 
body, denying self, but only as to be seen of men. What 
else has been and is all the fasting and asceticism as it has 
been fostered in Christendom? If one does fast, let the fast- 
ing be done in secret as unto the Father and not to appear 
before men. 

In the second half of the sixth chapter we are taken upon 
another ground. The heirs of the kingdom are seen in this 
section as in the world, subject to the cares and temptations 
of the wilderness. We must not lose sight here of its Jewish 
application. When our Lord sent forth His disciples in the 
tenth chapter to preach the Gospel of the Kingdom He gave 
them instructions how they should go about, depending in 
all things upon their Father in heaven. The disciples thus 


145 


sent forth with the preaching of the Kingdom Gospel are the 
types of another Jewish remnant which is to’ preach once 
more in a future day the same Gospel, “The Kingdom of 
the heavens has drawn nigh.’ To this remnant going 
through the tribulation the exhortations have a special ap- 
plication. However, we pass this by and apply it to our- 
selves as believers, for all which our Lord speaks in this 
section is for every member of the body of the Lord Jesus 
Christ, as such, who are in the earth, pilgrims and strangers, 
waiting for the coming of the Lord. We are in the world 
though not of the world, hated by the world as the world ' 
hated Him, but in this world we are exposed to all the temp- 
tations and the cares and sorrows connected with an earthly 
life which are ever coming upon the believer. Our Lord tells 
us now how to behave in the midst of these scenes, passing 
through the wilderness, what our privileges and comforts 
are.—“Lay not up for yourself treasures upon the earth, 
where moth and rust spoils, and where thieves dig through 
and steal; but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven. 
where neither moth nor rust spoils, and where thieves do 
not dig through and steal; for where thy treasure is, there 
will be also thy heart.”—The natural man lives for the 
earthly things and strives for the things which are seen. 
His delight is in treasures which are here below, and con- 
nected with this life is care, worry, anxiety and at last the 
loss of that which was cherished and loved. As believers 
born again we have a new nature and belong no longer to 
the earth, but we belong to heaven. “If therefore ye have 
been raised with the Christ, seek the things which are above, 


146 


where the Christ is sitting at the right hand of God: have 
your mind on the things which are above, not on the things 
that are on the earth” (Cor. iii:2, 3). “We look not at the 
things that are seen, but at the things that are not seen; for 
the things which are seen are for a time, but those that are 
not seen are eternal” (2 Cor. iv:18). While, then, this is 
our calling it is neverthless true that the heirs of the king- 
dom are constantly in danger in this present evil age to for- 
get that they are but pilgrims and strangers here. Alas! 
only too many are like Lot, pitching first the tent towards 
Sodom and getting there altogether after a while. In these 
days especially the danger is exceedingly great and the 
heavenly calling, the laying up of treasures in heaven is often 
put into a secondary place. The exhortations in the Epistles 
are but a continuation by the Holy Spirit of this word of 
our Lord. “Those who desire to be rich fall into temptation 
and a snare, and many unwise and hurtful lusts, which 
plunge men into destruction and ruin. For the love of 
money is the root of every evil; which some having aspired 
after, have wandered from the faith and pierced themselves 
with many sorrows” (1 Tim. vi:o-11).  “Enjoin on those 
rich in the present age not to be high-minded, nor to trust 
in the uncertainty of riches; but in God who affords us all 
things richly for our enjoyment; to do good, to be rich in 
good works, to be liberal in distributing, disposed to com- 
municate of their substance” (1 Tim. vi:17, 18). “Let your 
conversation be without the love of money, satisfied with 
your present circumstances” (Heb. xxiii:5). How great 
the danger of looking back to Egypt! But as we follow the 


147 

exhortation and lay up for ourselves treasures in heaven 
and that in view of the judgment seat of Christ, where we 
shall receive the rewards, our heart will surely be there. 
Thus having our treasures there and laying them up there 
they are not alone secure, but our heart will constantly be 
drawn there and in this way kept from the earthly things. 
And where do our thoughts mostly rest—on earthly or 
heavenly things? If our thoughts are here surely our treas- 
ure cannot be in heaven. 

Our Lord continues: “The lamp of the body is the eye; 
if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole body will be light; 
but if thine eye be wicked, thy whole body will be dark: 
If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great 
the darkness.” 

These are most solemn words. The believer has a spiritual 
nature, a heart in which he sees, ‘“‘being enlightened in the 
eyes of your heart” (Ephes. i:18). The Word of God is 
the light and the entrance of His Word bringeth light. The 
eye, the heart single—that is looking only above to the 
heavenlies, the whole body will be light, there will be not 
only a realization of a heavenly calling but also a walk 
worthy of this high calling, a heavenly walk. But light 
rejected becomes darkness, and how great the darkness! 
Truth given, light flashed forth from the Word and not 
used and acted upon, leads into the grossest darkness.* 

Therefore a double service is impossible. We cannot 
serve two masters. It is impossible that the eye could look 


*This is the deplorable state of thousands of believers. 


148 


at the same time to the earth and to heaven. Friendship 
with the world is enmity with God (James iv:4). Is it 
then a hard path which we have in the wilderness with no 
comfort? No, for the very next words of our Lord bring 
to our hearts that sweet and precious comfort which only 
he can enjoy who with the single eye looks to things above 
and walks in separation from the world. 

These words (25-34 verses) tell us that we have a 
Father who careth, a Father who knows and who loves. 
He who feedeth the birds of heaven provides surely more 
abundantly for those who are much better than they, and all 
He asks is trust in Him: “Be not careful’—oh, how blessed- 
ly it sounds—oh, how full and rich it comes to the believer’s 
heart. And again it is written “Be careful about nothing; 
but in everything, by prayer and supplication with thanks- 
giving, let your requests be made known to God” (Phil. 
iv:6). Be not careful for your life, what ye shall eat. 
* * * Be careful for nothing, * _*  * Yet how slow 
we are to learn it. Anxiety and care, hurry and worry, these 
God-dishonoring works of the flesh are ever coming up 
again. How true George Mueller used to say: 


“Where anxiety begins faith ends, 
Where faith begins anxiety ends.” 


The lesson can only be learned in constant dependence 
upon Him in seeking the things which are above. 

And what does anxiety and care accomplish after all? 
“But which of you by being careful can add to his growth 


149 


one cubit? And why are you careful about clothing?” etc. 
(Verses 27-33). We are then utterly helpless in ourselves. 
Alas! how often we look in our anxiety, in sickness and in 
health to something in ourselves and to men and man’s 
help and not to Him in whose hands we are so securely 
and leave it ail with Him, committing our way unto the 
Lord. And all this is applicable to even the smallest matters 
of the daily life. Seeking then first of all the kingdom of 
God and His righteousness—that is, the things which are 
above—the promise is given, all things shall be added unto 
you. ; 

And there is another characteristic about anxiety. It 
looks unbelievingly ahead. Unbelief draws dark pictures of 
despair and occupies the mind with a day which may never 
come. How different it ought to be and will be if we but 
follow His word, ‘Be not careful then as to the morrow, 
for the morrow will be careful for itself: sufficient for the 


day is its own evil.” 


150 


CHAPTER VII. 


The chapter which follows contains the last words of the 
great discourse of our Lord. The contents of this chapter 
are very instructive and form a most fitting end of the 
declaration of the King. The first few verses contain a 
warning against judging. We have in the beginning of the 
chapter something which is altogether different from the 
last section of the sixth chapter. There we saw the heir 
of the Kingdom in the midst of the world, how he is to trust 
in and dependent on the Father and seek first the kingdom 
of God and his righteousness, his walk undivided and de- 
pending. When our Lord begins with “Judge not, that ye 
be not judged” He directs the attention to the conduct of the 
disciple towards his fellow disciple. The conduct towards 
those who are enemies, who despitefully use and persecute 
the heirs of the Kingdom was mentioned by our Lord before. 
It is the relation they were to show one towards the other 
He touches upon now. The principle of this relation is love. 
In Matthew of course it could not be mentioned in full. In 
the Gospel of John our Lord leads His disciples into the 
fullness of it, which here is but indicated, and in the First 
Epistle of John these precious things are still more unfolded. 
After He had, as the Lord and Teacher, washed the disciples’ 
feet, He told them that they ought to wash one another’s 
feet. This is the opposite from that against which He warns 


151 


here, sitting upon judgment against the other and exposing 
one another’s faults. 

But we ask, what does our Lord mean, when He says: 
“Judge not, that ye be not judged ; for with what judgment 
ye judge, ye shall be judged; and with what measure ye 
mete, it shall be measured to you”? Does He in these words , 
forbid the judging of outward actions or the present evil? 
Some have taken it in this sense and gone into that looseness 
against which the Lord warns later (verse 6). The Lord 
dees not forbid here the judging of actions and evil. If He 
did, His words would clash with numerous statements in the 
Epistles. For instance, we read in Corinthians: “For what 
have [ to do with judging those outside also? Yea, do not 
ye judge them that are within? But those without God 
judges. Remove the wicked persons from among your- 
selves” (1 Cor. v:12, 13). It is evident from these words, 
as well as from the order our Lord has laid down, to proceed 
with a brother who has sinned (Matthew xviii:15-18), that 
the individual believer as well as the assembly has a right 
to judge evil actions. Furthermore, in this very chapter 
our Lord declares, “By their fruits ye shall know them;” 
how, then, could we know them if it were not by ourselves 
judging the persons on account of their evil actions? Cer- 
tainly judging of things which surround us, as well as per- 
sons, when it is our plain duty to do so, is nowhere forbidden, 
Contending earnestly for the faith once and for all delivered 
to the saints, to which we are exhorted in these days of fall- 
ing away, carries with it the necessity of judging that which, 
in man-made systems as well as in persons, is offensive to 


152 


God and dishonoring to our Lord. The words which de- 
mand the separation from that which is evil presupposes 
judging likewise. This solemn duty we have as believers, 
in the midst of a perverse generation, standing as we do, 
at the close of this dispensation. It is to be exercised as 
in the fear of the Lord and with the single eye to His 
glory and the honor of His name. Easily and quickly made 
is the step from the judging, which is duty, to that censori- 
ousness, fault-finding and all that follows, against which our 
Lord warns and which is sinful. 

But what is the meaning of the words “Judge not”? Our 
Lord forbids the judging of motives, the spring from which 
actions result. I have no right to judge that which is not 
manifested to mine eyes. Motives are concealed and known 
to God alone. He who in censoriousness continually judges 
his brother’s motives and in a fault-finding spirit sits in 
judgment upon him, assumes the place of the judge, which 
does not belong to him, but to the Lord only. Two passages, 
perhaps, from Romans and Corinthians explain the judging 
which our Lord condemns: “One man is assured that he 
may eat all things; but the weak eats herbs. Let not him 
that eats make little of him that eats not; and let not him 
that eats not judge him that eats: for God has received him. 
Who art thou that judgest the servant of another? to his 
own master he stands and falls. * * * But thou, why 
judgest thou thy brother? or again, thou, why does thou 
make little of thy brother? for we shall all be placed before 
the judgment seat of God. * * * Let us no longer 
therefore judge one another; but judge ye this rather, not 


153 


to put a stumbling-block or a fall-trap before his brother” 
(Romans xiv:3-13). “So that do not judge anything be- 
fore the time, until the Lord shall come, who shall also both 
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and shall make 
manifest the counsels of hearts; and then shall each have 
his praise from God” (1 Corin. iv:5). 

And how true it is what our Lord says: “For with what 
judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged ; and with what meas- 
ure ye mete, it shall be measured to you.” This is a law, 
from which the believer cannot escape. A law like that other 
one in Galatians, “Be not deceived: God is not mocked; for 
whatever a man shall sow, that shall he reap.”” Many a one 
has found out the swift working of this law, “With what 
measure you mete, it shall be measured to you.” Many will 
have yet to learn by sad experiences and much heartache 
that the execution of this law is never slow. The word was 
quickly spoken which censured a brother’s motives, which 
belittled him (to lift up.the self of the accuser), but it will 
not take very long, and some one will step up with the same 
measure and the same judgment and do the same to us.” 
Nothing is so detrimental to spirituality than a habitual cen- 
soriousness, 

And why, then, do men see the little mote in their brother’s 
eye? Because they do not see the great beam in their own. 

If the saint but judges himself he will surely not be for- 
ever occupied with seeing the mote in the brother’s eye. 
He will be patient, loving and not surmise always evil. 
“Tove does not impute evil * * * beareth all things, 


154 


believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things” 
(Cor? xin), 

In the sixth verse our Lord warns against the other ex- 
treme, which is looseness, the abuse of His grace: “Give 
not that which is holy to the dogs, nor cast your pearls be- 
fore swine, lest they trample them with their feet and turn 
round and rend you.’* A person misunderstanding the 
‘Sudge not” may allow evil to go unjudged, and therefore 
that which is holy and the pearls become defiled and are 
trampled under feet by dogs and swine—unconverted per- 
sons, though perhaps outward professors (see 2 Peter ii:22). 
To apply the passage to the preaching of the Gospel to the 
unsaved and to those sunk the deepest in vice would be incor- 
rect. It has no reference to the preaching of the Gospel. 
We should, however, always guard against any irreverent 
use of the word of God and the blessed things made known 
in it. 

In verses 7-11 we have the familiar words of our Lord 
telling us to ask of Him, with the assurance that every one 
that asketh receiveth. The connection is obvious. In look- 
ing at the injunctions our Lord gives not to judge and not 
to abuse, what He has given, one feels the need of wisdom, 
Intercourse with God in prayer supplies this need. “If any 
of you lack wisdom, let him ask God that giveth to all 
liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him” 
(James i:5). 


*That incorrect paraphrase called “the Twentieth Century New 
Testament” has seen fit to put part of this verse in a more refined 
(? !) language. They translate, “Do not give what is sacred to 
dogs; nor yet throw your pearls before pigs.” How ridiculous! 


155 


And what an invitation is here put before us! How sim- 
ple and definite the language! How plain it all is with no 
“if” or “but” added to it. Happy he who takes all these 
words in their simple meaning and ever uses the royal offer 
in faith. Of course we would not look in Matthew for the 
fullest teaching on prayer in His name nor could the words 
here, “Ask and it shall be given you; seek and ye shall find; 
knock and it shall be opened to you,” be applied to anyone 
else but believers. This is clear from the words: “If ye 
then, who are evil, know how to give good gifts unto your 
children, how much more shall your Father who is in heaven 
give good things to those that ask Him.” In Luke xi we 
read the same word, but there it says, “give the Holy Spirit 
to them that ask Him.’’ The prayer for the gift of the Holy 
Spirit, however, is no longer in order, for the Comforter 
has come, and no believer has a right now to ask upon this 
promise for the Spirit. 

The 12th verse in this chapter is one of the most misap- 
plied in the whole discourse of our Lord. “All things, there- 
fore, whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, 
thus do ye also to them: for this is the law and the prophets.” 
This, many professing Christians and others, who make no 
profession at all, call the golden rule. How many, Jews and 
Gentiles, have told us that this is the religion they believe in. 
It is even claimed that in the “sacred” books of the East, 
the religious products of Buddhism and Brahmanism, some- 
thing similar is found.* 


*Jews claim the same for the Talmud because Hillel taught 
“What thou wouldst not wish for thyself, do not unto thy neighbor, 
This is the whole law.”—Talmud, Sabb. 31. 


150 


Yet with all this boast in a rule which they do not under- 
stand, no one keeps it nor would think of keeping it. The 
Lord gives this practical word to the true disciple. He 
who is born again is born of God. He has the nature of 
God and that is love. “He that loveth another hath fulfilled 
the law. * * * Love worketh no ill to his neighbor; 
therefore love is the fulfilling of the law” (Rom. xili:8 and 
10). “For this is the message that ye heard from the begin- 
ning, that we should love one another” (1 John iti:11). 
“We love, because He first loved us” (1 John iv:19). We 
see then that the terse saying our Lord puts in the chapter is 
not out of keeping with the whole. The outcome of inter- 
course with God spoken of in verses 7-11 will be, acting in 
love. 

This is followed by an exhortation such as He who is 
from above alone could give and with it the first half of the 
seventh chapter closes. “Enter ye in through the narrow 
gate: for wide is the gate and broad is the way that leadeth 
unto destruction, and many there are that enter through it; 
because narrow is the gate and straitened is the way that 
leadeth unto life, and few there are that find it.” It is the 
well-known Gospel text, though not always correctly applied. 
The gate (door) and the way is Christ Himself. “I am the 
door of the sheep; by me if any man enter in, he shall be 
saved” (John x). “Iam the way * * * no man cometh 
unto the Father but by me” (John xiv). And why then is 
the gate narrow? Not because certain conditions and hard 
terms are to be fulfilled, but because man does not want to 
give up his own righteousness and clinging still to his mis- 


157 


erable, filthy rags, he refuses God’s way and God’s door of 
salvation, which is Christ and Christ alone. Ah, the devices 
of Satan ever multiplying to keep men away from entering 
in through the narrow gate! The broad way that leads to 
destruction was never so thronged in the history of Christen- 
dom with such masses of professing, self-righteous, moral, 
educated, but Christ and the blood rejecting “Christians” as 
in these days, and still the word is true of the narrow gate 
and the straitened way that “few there are that find it.” 

In His closing words our Lord gives a most solemn warn- 
ing against false prophets, and makes a contrast between the 
false professor and the true possessor. “Beware of false 
prophets, such as come to you in sheep’s clothing, but 
within are ravening wolves!” (verse 15). Let us notice 
first of all that this warning has a special significance for 
the closing of the age, that is, the ending of this dispensa- 
tion, the seven years of tribulation and sorrow in the earth. 
We only need to turn to the Olivet discourse (Matt. xxiv) 
in which our Lord answers the question of His disciples 
concerning the consummation of the age. | When they 
asked about this ending of the age they surely meant noth- 
ing else but the Jewish age, for of a Christian age they 
knew nothing. In answer our Lord gives, describing 
the events which fall into the seventieth week of Daniel, 
He says: “And many false prophets shall arise.” These 
false prophets will make their appearance during the great 
tribulation, no doubt under the leadership of the false 
prophet, the Beast, so prominent in the book of Revelation. 
That there have been throughout this dispensation false 


158 


prophets in sheep’s clothing and that they are more numerous 
now: than they have ever been before we need hardly 
mention, yet strictly speaking, the warning against false 
prophets concerns the Jewish remnant in the earth during 
the time of Jacob’s trouble. Nowhere are we as believers 
warned against false prophets; we are warned against false 
spirits and false teachers, which of course, like the false 
prophets come in sheep’s clothing. False prophets then, 
after the church is taken, to lead many astray; false teachers 
and false spirits now while the Church is still on the earth. 
The false prophets, who will undoubtedly work many mir- 
acles and be leaders of the strong delusions, are the visible 
manifestation of the false spirits which are now at work. 
When Paul said farewell to the Elders of Ephesus he said: 
“For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous 
wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Also of 
your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to 
draw away disciples after them” (Acts xx:29, 30). How 
soon this prophecy was fulfilled! Let us remind ourselves of 
some of the solemn warnings which are for the Church. “Be- 
ware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain 
deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the 
world and not after Christ” (Col. ii:8). “O Timothy, keep 
that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding profane and 
vain babblings and oppositions of science, falsely so-called, 
which some professing have erred concerning the faith” (1 
Tim. vi:20). The very errors and false teachings so prevalent 
in these days are marked out here. “Now the Spirit speak- 
eth expressly that in the latter times some shall depart from 


159 


the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of 
demons” (1 Tim. iv:1). And how great the increase of 
these seducing spirits in our day! “But there were false 
prophets also among the people, even as there shall be 
false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damna- 
ble heresies, even denying the Lord who bought them, and 
bring upon themselves swift destruction” (2 Pet. ii:1). 
The so-called “Higher Critics,’ who sit in wicked judg- 
ment upon the infallible Word of God and dishonor Christ, 
the living Word, are meant here. And where are these 
men not found throughout Christendom? See also the 
warnings against false spirits in the first Epistle of John. 
(eyoun ty 31-472 4Cor i0:173°2 Cor. x1313-15; Titus 1:10; 
11, and other passages). 

But whether they are false prophets coming in the future 
or the false spirits and teachers at the present time, they 
come in sheep’s clothing. Anti-Christ himself will first 
speak like a lamb and have a flattering tongue, and all the 
prophets under his control will follow him, backing their 
assertions by signs and lying miracles. The story of Moses 
and Aaron sent by Jehovah, and Jannes and Jambres sent by 
Satan and endued by him with power, will then be acted 
out again (Exodus vii:11). In this way many will be led 
astray. In our age Satan transforms himself into an angel 
of light, and the false spirits and teachers appear like meek 
sheep of the Great Shepherd. In the subtle infidelity which 
denies the inspiration of the Bible, Satan has surely trans- 
formed himself thus. There is much talk from their side 
of “Bible research,” and that their work will help in bring- 


160 


ing out the truth, and many declarations that they are sin- 
cere and earnest Christian workers in spite of their infidelity 
in the divinity of the Scriptures, but all this is but the sheep’s 
dress in which they make their appearance. We think of 
other false teachers who deny the eternal Deity of our 
Lord, the physical resurrection of Him and the revealed 
facts concerning the dead in Christ and those who died 
unsaved.* All these soul destroying false teachings come 
in the garb of truth and light. 

Our Lord continues: “By their fruits ye shall know 
them: do men gather grapes from thorns or figs from 
thistles? So every good tree bringeth forth good fruit, 
but the corrupt tree bringeth forth bad fruit. A good tree 
cannot bear bad fruit, nor can a corrupt tree bring forth 
good fruit. Every tree that bringeth forth not good fruit 
is cut down and cast into the fire. By their fruits then shall 
ye know them’’ (verses 16-20). 

What does our Lord mean by fruit? Does He mean 
downright wickedness? There is no question that immor- 
ality and evil deeds are included under the term fruit. 
Many a false teacher began in teaching error in such a way 
that the error could hardly be distinguished from the truth, 
but continuing in error he ended with many of his follow- 
ers in the flesh. Often behind the most subtle errors the 
flesh is nourished and an outbreak in gross immorality may 


*We have reference to the “Millennial Dawn Series”” Thou- 


sands have been led astray by these books which appear indeed 


in sheep’s clothing, but. within is the ravening wolf who wishe 
to harm the flock of Christ. ; 


161 
follow. Yet, if our Lord meant nothing but evil deeds and 
wickedness, it would be hard indeed to detect these false 
ones. Satan is not so blind as to peddle his lies around by 
wicked people whose lives bear the stamp of immorality 
and open wickedness. He does it in quite another way. 
We were often told of people who hold the most abominable 
doctrines and deny the Deity of our Lord as well as the 
atonement, “But look at the beautiful lives they live! How 
meek and lovely they are! How much good they do! 
Do not their lives prove that their doctrine is right and the 
fruit show that the tree is not bad?” This outward moral 
appearance and a “sweet” temper belongs only too often 
to the sheep’s clothing and is one of the devices of Satan 
with which he tries to lead many away from the truth 
and into error—the fruit by which we shall know them 
may be wickedness in the grossest form, but it means 
more than that. The word “Do men gather grapes from 
thorns and figs from thistles?” is the key. Grapes and figs 
speak of true fruit. Thorns bear fruit which may resemble 
grapes, but never can they be grapes from which comes the 
wine which makes glad the heart of God and man. The 
soul looking deeper (and we remember the warning is for 
believers) than outward appearances finds soon that the 
false teacher or spirit is not in the truth. He tests it by 
the Word, and finds the fruit, the glory of Christ and glory- 
ing in Him, lacking. It is a most subtle substitute for the 
true fruit—a counterfeit—and leaves the soul empty. <A 
believer, not much taught in the Scriptures, sent us a few 
weeks ago a question about a certain publication which was 


162 


sent to him with the promise of leading him into a better 
knowledge of the Bible inasmuch as it was devoted to Bible 
study. We wrote him at once exposing the true character of 
the paper. He answered, that while he had but little knowl- 
edge yet of the Word, and while much seemed to be in 
favor of the paper which had been placed into his hands, 
yet while reading he experienced a feeling of emptiness, 
there was no response from his heart and a lack of joy and 
peace. This, perhaps, will be helpful to see how a true 
believer will know them by their fruit. 

But in the words of our Lord we have also the most 
definite teaching of that doctrine, which may be termed 
the A B C of the Gospel, the total depravity of man, the 
utter ruin of man, and, therefore, the necessity of the im- 
partation of a new nature. Both, as we well know, are 
denied by some of the leading preachers and teachers of all 
the great evangelical denominations. To deny these truths 
is equal to the denial that Christ is our Saviour. Man is, 
according to the new theology, his own Saviour. The tree 
is corrupt, the fruit is bad. That which is born of the flesh 


is flesh. The tree is good and the fruit is good. That 
which is born of the Spirit is Spirit. 


In the three verses our Lord mentions His own coming 
day, when He will appear as the One into whose hands the 
Father has given all things. The whole ending of the 
discourse brings us into that time. This in itself makes it 
that great dispensational discourse concerning the king- 
dom, as we have pointed out in our exposition. 


163 


“Not every one who saith unto Me, Lord, Lord, shall 
enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that doeth the 
will of My Father, who is in heaven. Many will say to 
Me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in Thy 
name, and in Thy name have cast out demons, and. in Thy 
name have done many wonderful works? And then I will 
profess unto them, I never knew you; depart from Me, ye 
who work lawlessness!” 

That this has no reference to the Church is evident. 
The Church meets the Lord in the air, and every believer 
has in Christ’s day to appear before the judgment seat of 
Christ. But at that judgment seat no mere professors of 
Christ’s name will appear, and no “Depart from Me,” will 
be heard from the lips of the Lord, the Head of the Body. 
Nor does this word here in Matthew refer us to the great 
white throne. When our Lord says “in that day,” He 
means the day when the kingdom of the heavens is come by 
His return to the earth, Then many will be found but 
empty professors, who in spite of their works and using 
His name were none of His. From this dispensational 
aspect, we may well look to our times. The name of 
Christ is upon many lips, and there are many who speak in 
His name, and do works of power in His name, yet they 
are not saved and know Him not. Christian Science, falsely 
so-called, may be mentioned here as well as others. Not 
outward profession brings into the kingdom and makes one 
an heir of it, but doing the will of the Father. This is 
continued in the last paragraph. “Therefore, whosoever 
heareth these words of mine and doeth them, is likened unto 


164 


a prudent man, who built his house upon the rock, and the 
rain and the floods came, and the winds blew and beat upon 
that house, and it fell not, for it was founded upon the 
rock. And every one that heareth these words of Mine, 
and doeth them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man 
who built his house upon the sand. And the rain and the 
floods came, and the winds blew and beat upon that house, 
and it fell, and great was the fall of it” (verses 24-27). 

How sublime and yet simple is this illustration of our 
Lord! Hearing first and doing is the way. The rock 
upon which he who heareth (believeth), builds, is Christ. 
Other foundation can no man lay. Being in Him we are 
safe and secure in time and in eternity. The storm will 
come, and is even now advancing, yet we have a refuge and 
a shelter in Him, and as He abides, the Rock, so shall we 
abide. How true, oh! how true it is: 


On Christ, the solid rock, I stand, 


All other ground is sinking sand. 


All which is not Christ is sinking sand. Reader! where 
do you stand, upon Christ and Christ alone, or upon some- 
thing else—no matter what—the sinking sand? 

Such teaching, such unfoldings of the purposes of God 
were never heard before. The Pharisees and scribes dis- 
puted together, and expressed their human opinions, but 
here One spake with authority, so that the multitudes were 
astonished. 


165 


CHAPTER VIII. 


With the eighth chapter we enter into a new section of 
the Gospel. This section extends to the end of the twelfth 
chapter. The King had declared the principles and rule of 
the kingdom, and now He comes down from the mountain 
followed by great multitudes. First of all He is to manifest 
Himself as the divine King, the Jehovah of the Old Testa- 
ment Scriptures, who is truly come to His own. To them 
He offers and through His disciples likewise, the kingdom. 
But soon it becomes evident that His own receive Him 
not. They reject Him and recognize Him not as their 
King, and accuse Him, before whom the demons cried in 
terror, that His miracles were done by Beelzebub, the prince 
of demons. He then breaks off the relationship with His 
own, which we find at the end of the xii chapter. These 
five chapters, from the eighth to the twelfth, contain there- 
fore the full manifestation of Jehovah-Jesus among His 
people and the rejection of the King. 

And how completely He manifested Himself as the King 
with divine power! Here we have a number of miracles, 
one following the other, as we hope to show, put in perfect 
order by the One who is perfect in knowledge, the Holy 
Spirit. Yet with these wonderful manifestations, the leper 
cleansed, the demons driven out, the blind made to see, the 
dead raised, the people deliberately reject Him, and fall 


166 


not at His feet to worship Him. This shows the utter ruin 
and full character of the flesh, enmity against God. It 
is so still and never can be anything else. Even if now 
(as it is sometimes said it should be) signs and miracles 
would be done, the flesh would not be changed by them, 
but would still reject Him and turn away from the Lora. 
The antichrist, the false king, Satan’s masterpiece and 
counterfeit, will make his appearance in the closing days 
with all power and signs and lying wonders. He will mimic 
all the signs and miracles done by our Lord. The flesh 
will surely accept that false one with his strong delusions. 
But let us briefly point out the signs our Lord does in these 
chapters : 


1. The cleansing of the leper, vili:1-4. He touches the 
leper. 

2. The healing of the Centurion’s servant, vili:5-13. He 
heals by His word. Faith touches Him. 

3. Reter’s wife’s mother healed of fever, 14, 15. Healing 
by His touch. 

4. The healing of All, 16, 17. His presence among the 
suffering. 

5. He rebukes the winds and the sea, 23, 27. His divine 
power Over nature. 

6. The two possessed by demons delivered, 28-34. De- 
mons confess Him Son of God. 

7. Aman sick of palsy completely restored, ix:1-8. Full 
restoration of soul and body. “The lame man shall leap as 
an hart” (Is. xxxv:6). 


fab 


167 


8. A woman with an issue of blood healed, ix:20-22. 
She touches Him. 

g. The daughter of the ruler raised up, 23-26. Resur- 
rection. | 

10. Two blind men receive their sight, 27-31. “He 
openeth the eyes of the blind” (Is. xxxv:5). 

11. A dumb man with a demon healed, 32, 33. “The 
tongue of the dumb shall sing” (Is. xxxv:6). 

12. Preaching the Gospel of the kingdom and healing 
every sickness and every disease, 35 (Is. lxi:1). 

13. The man with the withered hand healed (xii :10-13). 

14. One possessed by a demon, blind and dumb, restored, 
22. His last sign of this section (Is. xxxv:5, 6). 


In these miracles we have before us the manifestation of 
the King. Jehovah alone could manifest Himself thus in 
mercy, healing and restoring. Satan may have great power 
to work signs, yet never could such a manifestation come 
from him. “If Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against 
himself ; how shall then his kingdom stand?” (xii:26). With 
these words our Lord silenced the Satanic accusations of the 
Pharisees. What He did, furthermore, is seen in the Old 
Testament in connection with the kingdom. The signs 
manifest the King as well as the Kingdom. In Isaiah xxxv 
we have a description of the kingdom as the King is to set 
it up. He came, and that He is the King and His Kingdom 
at hand, is proven by Him in doing the signs enumerated in 
the thirty-fifth chapter of Isaiah. The King and Kingdom 
is rejected, the Kingdom postponed, and Israel and the 


168 


nations wait with a groaning creation for the glorious ful- 
filment of this chapter in Isaiah, The fulfilment will come, 
when the King comes back to the earth, then “the ransomed 
of Jehovah shall return and come to Zion with songs and 
everlasting joy upon their heads; they shall obtain joy and 
gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.” 

And how full is the manifestation of His divine power! 
Leprosy, the awful disease and defilement, altogether gone. 
Winds and sea calmed. Demons banished and sent to the 
place where they belong. Forgiveness of sins followed by 
the healing of the body. The blind see, the dumb speak, the 
dead rise! Every sickness and every disease healed. These 
miracles our Lord did here to show Himself as the King are 
certainly also typical of the spiritual cleansing, the opening 
of the eyes of the blind, the sinner, the speaking in praise 
and worship of those who never spoke to God or of God, the 
raising of the dead, the power and dominion of Satan broken. 
The application on these lines is evident. We see in them 
also a foreshadowing of the redemption of the body of the 
believer in resurrection, as well as the blessings for Israel 
and the nations, in the coming age. All these features, we 
hope to point out as we look to the different signs, separately. 

Before taking up the first part of the eighth chapter we 
must call the attention of our readers to another fact. If 
‘one looks for these miracles in the Gospels of Mark and 
Luke, and traces our Lord’s movements in them, he will be 
astonished to find that they are put in these Gospels in an 
entirely different setting. We will not go into details here. 
In Matthew all has its peculiar arrangement, and every- 


169 

thing is taken out of its chronological order. This is no- 
where so evident, as in the section before us. The reason is 
obvious. The Holy Spirit has manifested in it His divine 
wisdom. Infidels have ever sneered (and do even more so 
every day) at a verbal inspiration of the Scriptures. The 
utterances of some well-known “evangelical’’ teachers, 
that the New Testament contains numerous discrepancies, is 
generally backed up by arguments about the miracles re- 
corded in Matthew, as happening after the sermon on the 
mount, when in another Gospel they are given as having oc- 
curred before the discourse of our Lord. Now that which 
moves the infidel and the preacher tainted with higher criti- 
cism to ridicule the divinity and infallibility of the written 
Word, moves the believer and diligent searcher of the Scrip- 
tures to praise, for the very argument which the denier of a 
verbal inspiration uses to build his infidel fabric on, is to the 
believer the most positive evidence of the divinity of the Bible 
and its verbal inspiration. It is not alone so here but all 
through the Word. The Holy Spirit as the writer of the first 
Gospel has taken certain events in the life of our Lord and 
grouped them together in such a way that they not only 
show us how the King proved Himself King and how He 
was rejected, but to show in the grouping of these miracles 
the purposes of God, and bring out some very rich yet sim- 
ple dispensational teachings. The Gospel of Matthew as the 
Jewish Gospel is the proper place for it. 

We look now at the first seventeen verses of the eighth 
chapter. Here we have four different signs. 

The first is the cleansing of the leper, followed at once 


170 


by the healing of the centurion’s servant, after which our 
Lord enters Peter’s house, and his mother-in-law being 
sick, He touches her hand and the fever leaves her. The last 
is the healing of all. Now in these four miracles, following 
one the other as they do here, we have by the Holy 
Spirit dispensational teachings concerning the Jews and the 
Gentiles. The first, the cleansing of the leper, stands for 
Jehovah among His people Israel. The second, where He 
is absent, and heals not by His touch but by His Word; 
this represents the Gentile dispensation which is still run- 
ning. After this dispensation is passed He will enter the 
house again, restoring His relations with Israel, and healing 
the sick daughter of Zion, represented by the healing touch 
and raising of Peter’s mother-in-law. After this is accom- 
plished the millennial blessings come to ail in the earth when 


the curse of sin will be removed. We look at each but 
briefly. 


I. The cleansing of the leper. Israel represented by the 
leper. Jehovah-rophe (Ex. xv.) among His people. Lep- 
rosy is the most loathsome disease known. There was no 
remedy for it in the Old Testament, nor is there a remedy 
for it in our times, and we may say there will never be any 
found. The Spirit of God has made leprosy a type of sin, 
and inasmuch as there is no remedy from the human side 
for sin, so there is none and will be none from man’s side 
for leprosy. Jehovah alone could heal the awful disease 
(Numbers xii:13; 2 Kings v:1-15, etc.). This man meet- 
ing our Lord as He comes from the mountain was according 


171 


to Luke (and he was a physician), “A man full of leprosy” 
(Luke v:12). The application of leprosy as to every sin- 
ner is so well known that we pass it over. The leper here 
does not alone represent the sinner, but he represents Is- 
rael. Long before the Spirit of God had made known the 
leprous condition of the people in the following words: 
“The whole head is sick, and the whole heart is faint. From 
the sole of the foot even unto the head, there is no sound- 
ness in it; but wounds and bruises and putrifying sores. 
They have not been closed, neither bound up, neither molli- 
fied with ointment” (Is. i:5, 6). This is a most perfect de- 
scription of the leper with his wounds, bruises and sores as 
he wanders an outcast toward still greater sufferings. Here 
then Israel’s Messiah, Jehovah-Jesus, the same who spoke in 
Exodus, “I am Jehovah, thy Healer,” meets His poor, un- 
clean people, represented by the leper. The attitude of the 
leper as he fell before Him, doing Him homage, should have 
been Israel’s attitude, his prayer, “Lord, if Thou wilt, Thou 
att able to cleanse me,” Israel’s prayer. Jehovah-Jesus 
stretches out His hand and touches him. He speaks as 
Jehovah in all His omnipotent power and mercy, “I will—be 
cleansed.”’ And immediately his leprosy was cleansed. Thus 
Jehovah could and would cleanse Israel. He had then mani- 
fested Himself as the “Jehovah, thy Healer,” among His 
people. The Lord sends the cleansed leper to the priest and 
asks him to offer the gift which Moses ordained. This was 
all proper before the death and resurrection of our Lord. 
Some have taken this as an evidence that the law should still 
be kept, but they forget that by the death and resurrection 


172 


of our Lord we are delivered from the law. However, the 
issue here is not the continuation of the Mosaic institutions. 
The Lord sends the cleansed leper to the priest for a different 
purpose. The priest was the proper person to pronounce 
the cleansed one clean. How then had he become clean? 
Had he used any remedy? No. Had he seen some cele- 
brated physician? No. Jesus had spoken, “I will!” He, 
who in prophecy, in the law (Deuteronomy), in Ezekiel and 
Isaiah, saith again and again, “I will,’ had touched him. 
Who was this Jesus? There could be only one answer, He 
is Jehovah manifested in the flesh.~ The priest should have 
broken forth in song and praise: “Blessed be the Lord, the 
God of Israel, because He hath visited and wrought re- 
demption for His people!’ He should have run from the 
sanctuary in search of Him, and having found Him adores 
Him as Jehovah. But the event closes abruptly. The priest 
alone heard the story, for the man was told not to tell it to 
others. The priest is silent; we hear nothing of-him. He 
failed to recognize Jehovah in the midst of His people, and 
does not respond by coming forth to meet the divine King. 
The priest is the type of unbelieving Israel. The day, how- 
ever, will come when the King will come again, and when 
in mercy, He will speak again to the remnant of His people, 
“T will.’ The Sun of righteousness will rise with healing 
beneath His wings. 

II. The Centurion’s servant healed by His Word. Grace 
shown to the Gentile. Not even in Israel have I found so 
great faith. Israel having failed to accept the King, and 


173 ’ 


not recognizing Jehovah in their midst, the Gentile is in- 
troduced. Grace was to come to the Gentile. The Centu- 
rion’s servant was a paralytic—the type of the helpless and 
~ hopeless condition of the Gentiles. The Centurion steps up 
with a simple, childlike faith. How different from the 
ritualistic priest who had no answer to Jehovah-Jesus. Jesus 
declared Himself willing to come and heal him. He, the 
One. who knows the heart of man, well knew that 
this would bring out the faith of the Gentile. And the 
Centurion answered and said, “Lord, I am not fit that 
Thou shouldest enter under my roof: but only speak a word 
and my servant shall be healed.” In this simple faith 
there is the fullest confession that Jesus is God and able to 
heal by His Word, though absent from the sufferer. What 
a grand foreshadowing of the dispensation in which we 
live and of the mercy shown to the Gentiles! It is the 
character of the dispensation. Jesus is absent, yet in 
childlike faith we know Him, and by His Word He mani- 
fests His power. It is not healing by touch, but by His 
Word. Upon the manifestation of “so great faith,” our 
Lord reveals the coming in of the Gentiles and the setting 
aside of Israel, “the sons of the kingdom.” “But I say 
unto you that many shall come from the rising and setting 
sun, and shall lie down at table with Abraham, Isaac and 
Jacob in the kingdom of the heavens; but the sons of the 
kingdom shall be cast out into the outer darkness: there 
shall be the weeping and gnashine of teeth.” There is 
another feature here we must not forget. In the eighteenth 
chapter of Genesis we read how Abraham refreshed the 


174 


Lord. Here after the failure of Abraham’s seed the Gen- 
tile refreshes the heart of the Lord. What joy and com- 
fort the blessed One had in looking upon this Gentile and 
“so great faith,’ and then look towards the cross and be- 
yond it; the travail of His soul must have come before 
Him, the blessed fruit of His death and resurrection in the 
coming of them afar off. And are you refreshing and com- 
forting His heart, Him who is unseen now? . And surely 


it is by simple faith in Himself and in His power we refresh 
Him. 


III. Coming to the house. The suffering woman healed 
of fever, raised up and serving Him. Typical of Israel’s 
healing and raising up. In the healing of Peter’s mother- 
in-law, we see a type of what will take place after the full- 
ness of the Gentiles has come in. The sick woman is typical 
of Israel. In some of the Prophets we have the comparison 
of Israel to a woman, a widow, one forsaken, but the prom- 
ises speak of her healing and that she is to become the min- 
ister of the Lord as Peter’s mother-in-law served the Lord. 
We also see that He heals her by touch. So will He come 
again in relationship with His people and heal them. 


IV. The demons cast out. All healed who were sick. The 
fulfilment of Isaiah lit:4. Millennial blessings. “And 
when the evening was come, they brought to Him many 
possessed by demons, and He cast out the spirits with a 
word and healed all that were ill; so that that should be 
fulfilled which was spoken through Esaias the prophet, 


\ 


175 


saying, Himself took our infirmities and bore our diseases.” 
Later the demons cried out, saying, What have we to do 
with Thee, Son of God? Hast Thou come here before the 
time to torment us?” (Verse 29.) The day is coming, the 
set time, when Satan will be cast out and bound. This will 
be in connection with our Lord’s return and Israel’s restor- 
ation. Then all demons will be cast out. Now not all are 
healed, but then the sad results of sin will be removed. 
“And the inhabitant shall not say, I am sick” (Is. xxxiii: 
24). 

We come now to the second half of the chapter. It will 
not be necessary to call again attention to the arrangement 
of the incidents recorded, differing from the Gospel of 
Luke, where the scene is laid after the transfiguration. We 
have learned before that the Holy Spirit does not report 
these events chronologically, but puts all together in His 
own perfect, divine way. First, we meet with a scribe 
who desires to follow Jesus, and then a disciple is seen, 
who wishes to go first to bury his father before following 
Him. After this He and the disciples are on the stormy 
sea and He rebukes the winds and the sea. On the other 
side the two possessed of demons are delivered. We can 
touch upon but a little of the manifold application which can 
be made of these events. 

“And a scribe came up and said to Him, Teacher, I will 
follow thee whithersoever thou mayest go.”’ And Jesus says 
- to him, “The foxes have holes, and the birds of the heavens 
roosting places, but the Son of Man has not where to lay 
His head” (verse 19, 20). 


176 


This man was a self-seeking scribe, one whose mind was 
filled with idle dreams of a Kingdom to be established and, 
having seen the manifestation of the divine power, he de- 
sires selfishly to follow Jesus. No doubt his expectations 
were earthly gain, riches and glory. In this respect he 
may well be taken as a type of the nation itself. The Lord 
- then gives the answer, which showed the scribe how per- 
fectly He understood his heart and read his thoughts. 
Nothing is heard of the scribe afterward. It was sufficient 
to discourage him completely. The Messiah had nothing 
to offer him, and if he would follow Him, it meant that 
which the flesh can never do. But all brings out the fact 
of the coming rejection of the King. None of the multi- 
tude come to fall down before Jesus and worship Him as 
Jehovah, only this man comes. Our Lord was on His way 
to the other side, when the scribe approaches Him with his 
carnal request. The answer which Jesus gives is also sig- 
nificant. It is the first indication coming from His own 
lips of His rejection, and for the first time in this Gospel 
He speaks of Himself as “Son of Man.” This title belongs 
to Him both in His rejection and in His exaltation. Of 
course, here it refers to His rejection. The words, “The 
foxes have holes and the birds of the heaven roosting places, 
but the Son of Man has not’where He may lay His head,” 
are generally taken to refer to His extreme earthly poverty. 
This is certainly correct. He who was rich became poor, 
that we might by His poverty become rich. He who is the 
creator of all things came into the earth and made a little 
lower than the angels, which He had created, took the place 


177 


of dependence in lowliness. The Book of Psalms, which 
so fully reveals Him, the Son of Man, in His rejection as 
well as in His glory, records His voice as He would speak 
and as He did speak in the earth. There we read that He 
says: JI am weak, I am weary from groaning, I am poor 
and needy, I am a worm and no man, I am poured out like 
water, I am poor and sorrowful, I am like a pelican of the 
wilderness, I am a sparrow alone, etc. But this word of 
our Lord speaks also of His death, though it is in the xvi. 
chapter, after Peter’s confession, He reveals to His disci-— 
ples fully the fact of His rejection, suffering, death, resur- 
rection and coming again as Son of Man. The foxes 
have places where they find shelter when the hunters 
seek their lives, so have the birds roosting places where 
they are safe, but for the Son of Man there was to be no 
refuge; He came to die the death on the cross. 

Many there are still who speak of “following Jesus.” 
What has not the flesh attempted in this direction! Some 
went into poverty to be as poor as He was and others tried 
to follow Him in His life and walk as Jesus of Nazareth, 
ever speaking of His earthly life as an example and of 
“character building” (a phrase so prominent in modern 
preaching), as if the flesh could ever be anything but flesh. 
The true “follow me” and the connection of him who has 
believed with the Lord in death and resurrection, is but 
little known and understood. 

Then comes one who is a disciple. In Luke we read that 

the Lord spoke to him first. He called him as His disciple. 


178 


Here we read, “But another of His disciples said to Him, 
Lord, suffer me first to go away and bury my father. But 
Jesus said to him, Follow me, and leave the dead to bury 
their own dead.” The Lord who calls asks absolute obedi- 
ence. He is the first and all earthly connections are to cease. 
How reluctant to follow the call; how often the disciple, 
the believer, who is the Lord’s when there is the call to 
service from the Lord, says, “Suffer me first.” Some earthly 
thing, a certain occupation, an earthly relationship intrudes 
itself between the calling Lord and His disciple. Oh, for 
more and greater devotedness to Him, whose we are and 
who is our Saviour and Lord. May we be loosed from 
all earthly bondage and “‘let the dead bury their dead.” 

“And He went on board ship and His disciples followed 
Him; and behold, the water became very agitated on the sea, 
so that the ship was covered by the waves; but He slept. 
And the disciples came and awoke Him, saying, Lord, save: 
we perish. And He says to them, Why are ye fearful, O ye 
of little faith? Then having arisen, He rebuked the winds 
and the sea, and there was a great calm. But the men were 
astonished saying, What sort of man is this, that even the 
winds and the sea obey Him” (verse 23-28). 

“He maketh the storm a calm, so that the waves there- 
of are still” (Ps. cvii:28). The “He,” who created the sea 
was in that ship upon the stormy sea and rose in His power 
and rebuked (what a word!) the winds and the sea. How 
suggestive it all is. He had asked devotedness and obedience 
of His disciples and now He shows them that He is with 


179 


them and in the midst of storm and waves they are secure 
and are kept and saved by His power. He slept. What calm 
and rest was His in the midst of the turbulent element 
when the disciples were threatened with disaster and 
death. And such rest is the rest of faith. How slow we 
are to learn it, the simple lesson “Be anxious for nothing.” 
t is impossible ior the flesh. Though the Lord may have 
sent deliverance a thousand times, whenever a new trial of 
faith comes, whenever a new storm arises and tribulation is 
before us, the flesh will always fear and tremble in unbelief. 
But how blessed tne assurance that in the midst of all the 
waves and roaring, in all the attacks of Satan and the 
world, in all trials and adversities, we are secure, eternally se- 
cure. We can never perish. “All things work together for 
good to those who love God, who are called according to pur- 


b) 


pose; and therefore “we glory in tribulations.” And the 
disciples with their unbelieving appeals and cries, how often 
we have been like them! Instead of looking to Him, who is 
Lord and our Lord, we looked to circumstances and cried 
for help where faith should have looked in rest and silence to 
Him, who doeth all things well. But where could we stop 
with the lessons and different applications of this scene! 
The world and the age, this present evil age, is represented 
by the sea and His own are upon it, so fearful and of little 
faith. As He arose then, so will He rise again and will 
rebuke in His majesty as Son of Man the winds and the sea. 
We speak not only of the blessed fact that in our own lives 
and experiences He does now often rebuke the winds and 


180 


the sea, but of His coming again. Then and only then will 
be ‘“‘a great calm.” 

Coming to the other side He is met in the country of the 
Gergesenes by two possessed by demons, coming out of the 
tombs, the place of death, exceedingly dangerous, so that no 
one was able to pass by that way. They could not be bound, 
not even with chains and they cut themselves with stones 
(Mark v:1-7). Not one demon, but many demons had 
entered into them; their name in one of them was Legion 
(Luke viii:30). What awful witnesses, these naked, bleed- 
ing, raving and tearing demoniacs were of the body and 
soul destroying power of the enemy. When our Lord ap- 
peared in the land the evil one had by the demons taken 
possession of large numbers of people and was driving them 
on to perdition. It will even be worse before His return. 
Satan and his angels will be cast out into the earth and his 
angels with him. This will be during the great tribulation. 
And even now those possessed by demons are continually 
_ increasing. The ever changing, as well as new forms, of 
insanity, many of them at least, if not all, must be connected 
with the influence of these evil spirits. The so-called 
“mediums” of Spiritism and adepts in occult “sciences” are 
undoubtedly demon-possessed. Surely our days, the days 
long ago predicted, are the latter times in which some 
apostatize from the faith, giving their mind (it is the mind 
where these evil workings begin). to deceiving spirits and 
teachings of demons (1 Tim. iv:1). And opening the soul 
to the deceiving spirits and teachings of demons means their 


- [81 


dreadful entering in and taking full possession. We cannot 
follow here this dark theme, much as it is needed in our 
days. And, He, the Son of God has come to destroy the 
works of the Devil, and through death annul him, who has 
the might of death, that is, the Devil. And here the demons 
confess Him, that He is Son of God. “And behold they 
cried out, saying, What have we to do with thee, Son of 
God?* Hast thou come here before the time to torment us?” 
It is the first confession of Him as Son of God we have in 
the Gospel. They give Him His right title. The demons 
believe and tremble (James ii:19). They see and know 
Him as their future Judge, but they argue that the right 
moment for the punishment is not yet. The knowledge of 
the demons according to this is threefold: They know Him 
as Son of God, as their Judge and that the judgment will 
_ take place at a certain time. But Satan with his lies drives 
his countless victims on in unbelief to deny every one of 
these facts that Christ is Son of God and the Judge, and the 
most striking thing is that the father of lies succeeds 
to put himself down as a myth. 

He shows Himself next as the one who has power over 
-these demons and that they may well fear Him. They cried 
out and then asked, “If thou cast us out send us away 
into the herd of swine.” He said: “Go!” What power over 
these legions is His! Can they ever touch Him or harm 
Him? No, never! And Son of God, declared by resurrec- 
tion from the dead as all power in heaven and in earth 
and the day will be when all things shall be subjected under 


182 


His feet. Then “at the name of Jesus every knee will bow, of 
heavenly and earthly and infernal beings.” And we are linked 
with Him, His victory is ours, we too can triumph over 
these evil beings. Thanks be to God who gives us the vic- 
tory through our Lord Jesus Christ. “For the rest brethren, 
be strong in the Lord, in the might of His strength. Put on 
the panoply of God, that ye may be able to stand against the 
artifices of the Devil; because our struggle is not against 
blood and flesh, but against principalities, against authori- 
ties, against the universal lords of this darkness, against 
spiritual power of wickedness in the heavenlies” (Eph. vi: 
TO-13))i. 

“And they, going out, departed into the herd of swine; 
and lo, the whole herd of swine rushed down the steep 
slope into the sea, and died in the waters.” This has 
‘puzzled not a few readers of the Word. We may explain 
it from the dispensational side. The deliverance of the two 
possessed typifies the deliverance of the Jewish remnant, the 
apostate part of the Jewish nations is foreshadowed in the 
swine and they will rush on into the waters, representing 
judgment. 

The account in Mark and Luke goes into details, showing 
each one of the delivered victims in their right mind. In 
the end of the chapter we hear that the whole city went out 
to meet Jesus, and when they met Him, they begged Him 
to go away out of their coasts. They feared perhaps the 
loss of other possessions, and rather have the earthly things 
and the swine, than the Lord. What Satanic blindness! He 


. Rey 183 


the evil one, is seen here in the manifestation of His power 
in another form. Strange that they should be afraid of 
Him who is the deliverer! But Satan had completely blinded 
them. And as we look back over what we were, we can 
praise our God for such deliverance from such an enemy, 
for we were dead in offences and sins in which we once 
walked according to the age of this world, according to the 
ruler of the authority of the air, the spirit who works now 
in the sons of obedience (Eph. ii). 


184 ; 


CHAPTER -IX. 


After our Lord was requested by the Gergesenes to go 
away out of their coasts, He passed over the lake and came 
to His own city, that is, Capernaum. Here the Lord did 
His greatest miracles, yet they rejected Him there, so that 
later He said: “And thou, Capernaum, who has been raised 
up to heaven, shall be brought down even to Hades. For if 
the works of power which have taken place in thee had 
taken place in Sodom, it had remained until this day. But 
I say to you, that it shall be more tolerable for the land of 
Sodom in judgment day than for thee” (Matt. xi:23-24). 

One of the mighty miracles He did in Capernaum is re- 
lated by the Holy Spirit in the beginning of the chapter 
which we have reached. He is manifested in this miracle 
like in the others, as Jehovah. A paralytic is brought to 
Him by loving hands, and when He saw their faith He 
said to the helpless one, “Be of good courage, child; thy 
sins are forgiven.” And now for the first time in the Gos- 
pel do we read that the scribes said, “This man blasphemes.” 
They did not speak it out, but He saw their thoughts, for 
He is the One of whom David says: “Thou knowest my 
downsitting and mine uprising; thou understandeth my 
thoughts from afar off” (Ps. cxxxix:2). 

He then asks them: “Which is easier: to say, Thy sins 
are forgiven; or to say, Rise up and walk? But that ye 


SS eee 185 

may know that the Son of God has power on earth to for- 
give sins (then He says to the paralytic), Rise up, take thy 
bed and go to thy house. And he rose up and went to his 
house” (verses 2-8). 

Divine power is here fully manifested. In Luke the 
Scribes and Pharisees say, “Who is able to forgive sins but 
God alone?” (Luke v:21). Indeed, if He who spoke the 
word of comfort and gave the paralytic the assurance of 
forgiveness is not Jehovah, anything less than He, the 
accusations of the scribes would have been well founded. 
He then shows that He has the power to forgive sins by 
healing the body of the paralytic, who rises up and carries 
away the bed upon which he was brought.. The paralytic 
is a type of the sinner in his helpless condition. In the Old 
Testament we have a beautiful type of this in Mephibo- 
sheth, who was lame on both of his feet and who ‘had to be 
brought to King David. So this one is brought. But why 
did they bring him? No question, healing of the body 
was all which they desired for their helpless friend and 
what he himself expected. But our Lord goes deeper to 
that which is the fountain of all disease and pain—sin. He 
knew the guilt of sins resting upon the paralytic, and before 
he could rise and walk, before he could be delivered out of 
his helpless condition, the sins had first to be forgiven. The 
conscience, burdened more than the crippled, paralyzed body 
was by disease, had first to be relieved. The lessons here 
are clear. It foreshadows that which He, who gave Him- 
self for us and who was raised on account of our justifica- 
tion, gives to every one who believes in Him. He has re- 


186 


moved completely the guilt of sin and we have the assurance 
of the forgiveness of sins: the blessedness of the man 
“whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered” is 
ours through and in Christ. He also has given us a new 
life. He has delivered us from the power of sin and spoken 
the word “Rise up and walk.” All this is so familiar that we 
will not enlarge upon it. We should not forget that the 
spiritual application of “Rise up” is not the first meaning. 
The paralytic received healing for his body and the miser- 
able body was delivered from the paralysis which held it 
down. So the body of the believer has been redeemed and 
there will be a “rising up” from the grave and from the 
earth, changed in the twinkling of an eye. We have also 
to say that the teaching of remission of sins and what is 
connected with it is not to be taken from the ninth chapter 
in Matthew. To teach from this chapter the doctrine of 
forgiveness, as it has been done so much, would be an error. 
He shows His authority as Son of Man to forgive sins on 
earth, and because He has this power and proves it, He 
manifests Himself by it as God. He is now no longer Son 
of Man on earth, but He will come again as Son of Man, 
and then once more will show His authority to forgive sins 
on earth and speak the Word of Life to those who are help- 
less. To this the miracle refers us in type. 

The paralytic is the type of Israel. We have a number 
of such types in the Word. In the fifth chapter of the Gos- 
pel of John we read of an infirm man who was lying help- 
less in the five porches (typifying the law) and Jesus came 
and healed him, telling him, “rise, take up thy couch and 


187.) 


walk.” He is the type of Israel. In the third chapter of 
Acts another helpless one, lame from his mother’s womb, 
was lying at the beautiful gate of the Temple. He is raised 
up and leaps and praises God. The name of Jesus Christ 
the Nazarene had raised him up. He also is a type of Israel. 
Aeneas in Acts 1x :32-35, who had been lying for eight years 
upon a couch, paralyzed, and to whom Peter said, “Jesus 
the Christ heals thee,” is not different in the typical applica- 
tion fromthe others. 

It is Israel we have to see here represented in type. What 
He, the Son of Man, when He comes in glory, will do for 
His earthly people is seen in the healing of the paralytic. 
First, He will come and turn away ungodliness from Jacob. 
He will forgive their sins and remember them no more. 
And His people, the remnant of Israel, will break forth 
and sing, “Who is a God like unto Thee, that pardoneth 
iniquity and passeth by the transgression of the remnant of 
His heritage? He retaineth not His anger forever, because 
He delighteth in mercy” (Micah vii:18). He will then say 
to His people, “I, even I, am He that blotteth out thy trans- 
gressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy 
sins” (Is, xliii:25). , 

After this He will heal them. His own, poor, blinded, 
paralyzed and miserable people Israel will be the first of 
the nations of the earth to receive complete healing for soul 
and body. They will leap and shout for joy like the lame 
man in the third chapter of Acts. Therefore it says in 
Malachi iv, where it speaks of the Son of Righteousness with 
healing beneath His wings, “Ye shall go forth and leap for 


188 


joy (correct translation) as calves of the stall.” “And the 
inhabitant shall not say, I am sick: the people that dwell 
therein shall be forgiven their iniquity” (Is. xxxiii:24). The 
ciii Psalm illustrates most beautifully Israel’s coming praise. 
It is not only “who forgiveth all thine iniquities,” but also 
“who healeth all thy diseases.” The diseases in this psalm 
are generally spiritualized, but that is incorrect. They are 
bodily diseases. The healing of the paralytic has been put 
by the Holy Spirit in a special place to be in harmony with 
the whole scope of the Gospel of Matthew. What the Son 
of Man did in humiliation to one paralytic, the Son of Man 
in exaltation, coming again, will do to the whole nation and 
others in the earth in that coming age of millennial glory. 

The healed one went to his house. “But the crowds see- 
ing it were in fear, and glorified God, who gave such power 
to men” (verse 8). This was all they saw and did. They 
did not acknowledge Him as Jehovah, but simply in their 
formal way glorified God, which was but the service of the 
lips. 

Besides the record of the healing of the paralytic we 
have nine other events put together once more in a peculiar 
order, far from being chronological, but in fullest harmony 
with the scope of this first book. These are: The call of 
Matthew, Jesus entering the house and sitting down with 
the publicans and sinriers, the question of John’s disciples, 
the ruler whose daughter had died and the Lord going to 
raise her up, the woman with an issue of blood who touches 
Him and is healed, the raising from the dead of the ruler’s 
daughter, the healing of the two blind men, the healing of 


189 


the dumb man as well as others and the Lord’s compassion 
for the multitudes. 

The call of Matthew, the same who was chosen by the 
Holy Spirit as the instrument for the writing of this Gospel, 
is related in a few words only: “And Jesus passing on 
thence saw a man sitting at the tax office called Matthew, 
and says to him, Follow Me. And he rose up and followed 
Him” (verse 9). Had Matthew written this book by him- 
self and not by inspiration he would have followed the 
custom of other writers in making himself more promi- 
nent. He might have begun the book with an elaborate ac- 
count of himself, his earthly circumstances and spoken, 
perhaps, at length of the scene which is but rapidly sketched 
in one verse. The Holy Spirit, however, guided his pen, 
and in the right place in the right words he records the story 
of his own call. The place given to it is significant. After 
the Lord had shown Himself in His power to be Jehovah 
He now manifests Himself in His grace to the lost and out- 
cast sinner. What a scene it is which the one little verse 
puts before us! There he sits gathering in the tax, no 
thought of Him, no knowledge of Him. As a tax-gatherer 
he was, with his colleagues, despised by the leaders of the 
Jews, the Pharisees, the Sadducees and the Scribes, as well 
as by the mass of the people. Tax-gatherers (Publicans) 
were known as thieves, who enriched themselves by extor- 
tions. Another one said later, after the Lord had entered 
into his house: “If I have taken anything from any man 
by false accusation, I return him fourfold.” However, this 
was not the cause why the people hated him. They looked 


190 


upon them as miserable hirelings of the Roman govern- 
ment, who had put themselves under the control of the 
Gentile rule and helped in the subduing of the land and the 
people, their own land and their own brethren. The tax- 
gatherers were, therefore, considered apostates. And such 
a one is called not alone to follow Jesus, but called and 
chosen as an instrument to write the kingly Gospel. Mar- 
velous Grace! “Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen 
you” (John xv :16). This is perfectly illustrated in Mat- 
thew’s case as well as in everyone who is saved by Grace. 
Well may we adoringly cry out: “Oh, the Grace that sought 
me!” With no thought of Him or for Him, busied in earthly 
things for the meat that perisheth, Matthew was called to fol- 
low Him. Matthew follows. He leaves the table, there is 
no bargaining on his side, no request to think it over, no 
desire to go first to do something else, but the first thing 
done was obedience to the voice which had spoken. Yet 
there is no claim of merit from his side in doing this. May 
we who are His own ever be ready in obedience to His call. 

And Matthew invites Him to his house and makes Him 
a feast. It does not say in this Gospel that it was Matthew’s 
house ; in another Gospel the Holy Spirit has made a record 
of it (Mark ii :14-17.) Here a company of tax-gatherers 
and sinners are come together, and He, the Holy One, the 
One who had come to seek and to save that which is lost, 
reclines with them at table and eats with them. Again we 
say, what a scene of grace! He who created the heavens 
and the earth in the creature’s place in living touch with 
those who rebelled against Him! And there they stand, 


191 


the poor, miserable, self-righteous Pharisees. They would 
in their religiousness, with their broad phylacteries, keeping 
the outside clean, not even touch a tax-gatherer, much less 
speak to him. To sit down and eat with them would have 
been in their eyes an almost unpardonable crime. And 
here they find Him whose words of divine authority they 
had heard, whose deeds of omnipotent power they had seen, 
. who had manifested Himself as Jehovah, and He eats with 
tax-gatherers and sinners. Not the poor, wicked, self-con- 
fessed thieves, the tax-gatherers and harlots appear in this 
scene and throughout the Gospel as Satan’s masterpiece, 
but the proud, religious, self-righteous Pharisee. John 
the Baptist with his divine message came, and the Phari- 
sees were rightly called by him the generation of vipers, 
but never the tax-gatherers and the harlots, who gladly 
came and confessed their sins and owned their lost condi- 
tion. “John came to you in the way of righteousness, and 
ye believed him not; but the tax-gatherers and harlots be- 
lieved him; but ye, when ye saw it, repented not yourselves 
afterwards to believe him” (Matt. xxi :32). So here we 
see them, without any faith in Jesus and no knowledge 
of the God of mercy, wrapped up in the filthy rags, their 
own righteousness. What else then could they do but speak 
against the Lord’s gracious way? “Why eateth your Mas- 
ter with tax-gatherers and sinners?’ And the self-righteous 
Pharisees of ritualistic Christendom are not different from 
these, their forefathers, the Pharisees. No heart for Christ, 
no understanding of grace and no knowledge of God. In 
the answer our Lord gives He shows that what He does 


192 


is in fullest harmony with His having come down into 
the earth. God would have mercy and He had come to 
show it. “They that are strong have not need of a physi- 
cian, but those that are ill. But go and learn what that is— 
I will have mercy and not sacrifice; for I have not come 
to call righteous men, butt sinners.” 

Then the disciples of John came to Him with a question. 
“Why do we and the Pharisees often fast, but Thy disciples © 
fast not?” John’s disciples were having a difficulty. Their 
master had made much of fasting and had enjoined it upon 
themselves, but the disciples of Jesus were not fasting. 
Were they not with Him in the tax-gatherer’s house, eating 
and drinking? It is a straightforward question they bring. 
They come not as faultfinders or murmurers, like the Phar- 
isees, but as intelligent inquirers, who were seeking light. 
So the Lord meets them and solves their difficulty by a gra- 
cious answer. -He is still the same, ever ready to teach and 
instruct the saint who sits at His feet. The only difficulty 
is we are often so unlike these disciples of John, though 
our knowledge and our position is higher than theirs. In- 
stead of taking the straight course in coming to Him first 
of all, we seek first the solution of our difficulties somewhere 
else. Perhaps the disciples of John who came here are the 
same who came.and told Jesus, after they buried the headless 
body of their master. 

“Can the sons of the bridechamber mourn so long as the 
bridegroom is with them? But days will come when the 
bridegroom will have been taken away from them, and then 
they will fast.” He Himself is the bridegroom and He had 


193 


come and while He was with them, mourning could have no 
place; His rejection was to come and then they would fast. 
But our Lord not merely answers the question and shows 
Himself greater than John, who was but the friend of the 
bridegroom (John iii :29), while Jesus is the bridegroom. 
He adds something which is of great importance. He 
speaks of a complete change of the order of things. “But 
no one puts a patch of new cloth on an old garment, or its 
filling up takes from the garment and a worse rent takes 
place. Nor do men put new wine into old skins, otherwise 
the skins burst and the wine is poured out, and the skins 
will be destroyed; but they put new wine into new skins 
and both are preserved together.” The old garment is 
Judaism with its legal righteousness. It is no good and had 
proven itself as such. No value in it at all, only to be cast 
aside, utterly put aside. A new garment, a better righteous- 
ness was about to be given. He whose name is “Jehovah 
our righteousness” had come and a change of dispensations 
was to take place. And now as it has come the old is gone, 
it is no longer in existence. Yet that which the Lord here 
but faintly indicates, the impossibility of patching up that 
which is hopeless and worthless, has been done in Christen- 
dom, nay, is the almost universal state of Christendom. It 
is mixing law and grace together. The rent has become 
worse. A Judaistic Christianity which, with a profession 
of Grace and the Gospel, attempts to keep the law and fos. 
ters legal righteousness, is a greater abomination in the 
eyes of God, than professing Israel in the past, worshipping 
idols, 


194 


The new wine is the Gospel of Grace. The old skins* are 
the law, the Levitical institutions and all connected with it. 
New wine belongs into new skins. If the new wine is put 
into old skins, the skins will burst and then there is no 
wine left and the skins are also made useless. The two 
belong no longer together. So Gospel and Judaism, Law 
and Grace do not belong together. The Gospel of Grace 
enclosed in ceremonial Judaism will result in the loss of the 
new wine, and ceremonial Judaism, the old skins, will be 
gone as well. And such is ritualistic Christendom; it is 
neither Christian nor Jewish. It has not Judaism and has 
lost the new wine. “They say, they are Jews and are not” 
(Revl. iiig). If men hold only the form of godliness and 
deny the power thereof, it will always mean outward re- 
ligiousness, legality, self-righteousness and turning away 
from Grace and the Lord Himself. 

The ruler whose daughter had died appears next on the 
scene. He is unlike the Centurion in the eighth chapter 
who had the greater faith and wanted the Lord to speak 
but a word. The ruler of the Jews wants the Lord to come 
in person to his house and touch the one, without life. His 
personal presence is demanded to raise the daughter from 
death to life. That we have here once more dispensational 
truths before us is seen at the first glance. Israel is often 
spoken of in the Old Testament Scriptures as a daughter, 
the daughter of Zion. In the short book of Lamentations 


*Bottles in the authorized version. Skins were used and are be- 
ing used in the Orient for the preservation of wine. 


Hence skins 
is the correct translation. 


195 : 


alone we find the word, daughter, as meaning Israel, eigh- 
teen times. The daughter who has died is then likewise a 
type of the people. To bring life to Israel can be only 
through the presence of Him, who is the life. When He 
came the first time, they would not come to Him that they 
might have life. But He is coming again to raise up His 
people, to touch tie daughter of Zion. 

And while our Lord goes forward to fulfill the request 
of the ruler, another incident comes in by the way. An 
unclean woman touches Him and is healed. “And behold 
a woman who had an issue of blood for twelve years came 
behind and touched the hem of His garment; for she said 
within herself, if I should only touch His garment I shall 
be healed. But Jesus, turning and seeing her, said, ‘Be of 
good courage, daughter, thy faith hath healed thee.’ And 
tLe woman was healed from that hour” (verses 20-23). 
She represents the Gentiles and the grace which comes to 
them by faith, while the resurrection of Israel is still un- 
accomplished, but drawing nigh. Faith touches Him now 
and receives of Him salvation with its precious assistance. 
‘But the touching of Him is parenthetical, just as the present 
age with salvation come to the Gentiles is a parenthesis. 
Jesus comes to the house of the ruler. It has the meaning 
of relationship. So will He come to raise up the daughter 
of Israel. “And when Jesus was come to the house of the 
ruler, and saw the flute players and the crowd making a 
tumult, He said, Withdraw, for the damsel is not dead, but 
sleeps. And they derided Him. But when the crowd had 
een put out, He went in and took her hand; and the damsel 


” 


196 


rose up. And the fame of it went out into all that land.” 
May not the crowd of unbelievers and mockers represent 
nominal Christendom? Surely the same is in Christendom 
which we see here. The Lord has declared in His Word, 
eternally settled in the heavens, His loving purposes con- 
cerning Israel. It can well be said of His earthly people, 
as He said of the ruler’s daughter, “The damsel is not dead, 
but sleeps.” The Scriptures are full of promises to Israel 
and the day of their resurrection and restoration, yet Chris- 
tendom treats all this with unbelief and ridicule. There is 
no understanding of God’s purposes, the plan of the ages, 
and hence no heart and no love for the people, who are still 
beloved for the Father’s sake and whose are the promises. 
Our Lord said to that crowd, “Withdraw,” and they were 
put out of the scene, when He came and touched the damsel 
to raise her up. And may we not see in this also the end 
of the motley throng in Christendom, which will be put off 
“the scene when He comes to do the miracle of His mercy 
and His power on Israel ? 3 

And when He does this to His people then surely the 
blind will see and the dumb speak. 

In the healing of the two blind men, which comes imme- 
diately after the raising of the maid, we see again a dis- 
pensational foreshadowing of Israel’s present condition and 
future healing. It is true the miracle of the two blind men 
who cry to Him is often spiritualized, and we do not at all 
deny that he has an application in that direction. First of 
all, however, we must not overlook the original meaning it 
has in this Jewish Gospel, and as we do this we shall yet 


197 
more and more grasp the divine scope of the Gospel of 
Matthew. “Two blind men followed Him crying and say- 
ing, Have mercy on us, Son of David.” The two blind 
men picture Israel’s condition as the leper did in the be- 
ginning of the eighth chapter. They were blind, when He | 
came and dwelt among them. His own knew Him not and 
received Him not. But how much greater has their blind- 
ness become since they not only have cast Him out, but re- 
jected the offer of His mercy after His resurrection and 
ascension? Now it is, Let their eyes be darkened, Blind- 
ness in part has happened to Israel. When the Apostle 
to the Gentiles, Paul, had come to Rome, and in his burning 
‘love for his brethren, his kinsmen, had sent for them 
and in disagreement they began to leave, he addressed 
to them the Word, so true throughout this age: ‘Well 
spake the Holy Spirit through Isaiah the prophet to 
our fathers, saying, Go to this people, and say, Hearing 
ye shall hear and not understand, and seeing ye shall see 
and not perceive. For the heart of this people has become 
fat, and they hear heavily with their ears, and they have 
closed their eyes; lest they should see with their eyes, and 
hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and 
be converted and I should heal them” (Acts xxviii:25-28). 
But this is not Israel’s final condition. Like these two 
blind men, so Israel will cry out of the deepest darkness, 
out of the terrible night of Jacob’s trouble, “Have mercy 
on us, Son of David.” Son of David is His title as He 
stands in relation to His earthly people, and in this passage 
we have Him called by this name for the first time in the 


198 


Gospel. The cry these two men utter is specifically Jewish, 
and surely no Gentile will cry to Him as Son of David. 
Later in the Gospel a Gentile woman cried after Him, 
“Have mercy on me, Lord, Son of David; my daughter 
is miserably possessed by a demon. But He did not answer 
her a word” (Matt. xv:23). When she called again, she 
said, “Lord, help me,’ and after she had taken her place 
with the dogs the Lord acknowledged her faith. And when 
thus Israel cries for mercy and waits for the coming of the 
Son of Man and the Son of David, He will arise and have 
mercy upon Zion and “in wrath He will remember mercy.” 
“He will return again, He will have compassion upon us; 
He will subdue our iniquities; and thou wilt cast all their 
sins into the depths of the sea” (Micah vii:19). 

He did not pass by the two blind men. “When He was 
come to the house (which always stands for relationship), 
the blind men came to Him, and Jesus says to them, Do 
ye believe that I am able to do this? They say to Him, 
Yea, Lord. Then He touched their eyes, saying, According 
to your faith, be it unto you. And their eyes were opened.” 
So He healed them by coming in touch with them not ab- 
sent and unseen, but present and touching them. He is 
absent from the earth now unseen‘to the eyes of men, yet 
we believe in Him and through Him on God; we believe, 
too, that He is able, that all power is given to Him in 
heaven and on earth and it is also now “according to your 
faith.” But He who is absent will come back to earth 
again, back into definite relationship with His earthly peo- 
ple, and then and not before will Israel’s blindness be ended. 


199 


And what these two healed men did, spreading His name 
abroad in all that land, believing and seeing Israel will do 
in that day. 

Next comes a dumb man possessed by a demon, and the 
demon having been cast out, the dumb spake. This, too, 
refers to Israel still under the control of Satan’s power. 
Instead of praising their King, Israel was dumb and is 
dumb now; but the demon will.be cast out, and then Israel 
_will speak His praises and sing the new song unto the 
Lord. What a day it will be, when dumb Israel is at last 
the people “formed to show forth His praise!’ “And the 
crowds were astonished, saying, It has never been seen thus 
in Israel.”” And in that day when Israel is healed it will be 
said, “What God has wrought,” and all the nations will 
know that He is Jehovah. We learn therefore in the three 
miracles—the raising of the maid from the dead, the open- 
ing of the eyes of the blind and the casting out of the de- 
mon from the dumb man—the blessed story of Israel’s com- 
ing redemption. Israel raised from the dead will see and 
behold the King, the Son of David, and speak and praise 
His name. It is not less the way of divine grace with each 
sinner who believes in the Lord Jesus Christ. We are dead 
in trespasses and sins. He said: “Verily, verily, I say 
unto you, that an hour is coming and now is (and the hour 
is not yet passed), when the dead shall hear the voice of 
the Son of God and they that have heard shall live” (John 
v:24), and those He raises from the dead to them He gives 
eternal life, which is He Himself, and gives them the light 
of life, His Spirit, to enlighten them and guide them. Out’ 


200 


of the abundance of the heart the mouth will speak to His 
praise who loveth us and has redeemed us by His blood 
and delivered us from the power of darkness. Oh, how 
blessedly rich and full in His Word! 

But now the dark side. While the crowds were aston- 
ished, the Pharisees said, He casts out the demons through 
the prince of demons. Here for the first time in the Gospel 
do we find the awful blasphemy of the religious leaders of 
the people. The power of Jehovah had been manifested 
before their very eyes. The leper had been cleansed and 
gone to the priest, who knew Jehovah’s power had done it; 
the tempest had been stilled, the demons cast out, the para- 
lytic healed, the dead maid raised up, the blind saw and 
the dumb spake; but instead of bowing in the august pres- 
ence of the King and acknowledging the power, which 
manifested itself in such a manner, as divine, they attributed 
it to Satan, the prince of demons. They accused the Lord 
from heaven of being the instrument of Satan! Awful 
blasphemy! It is here but the first muttering of the coming 
storm. The storm breaks fully in the twelfth chapter. 
There they stand in all their Satanic boldness and charge 
Him with casting out demons by Beelzebub. They com- 
mitted there and then the sin against the Spirit. We must 
reserve the closer investigation of this matter till we read 
the chapter in which our Lord speaks of that sin. Here we 
notice especially that the rejection of our Lord began with 
the blind leaders of the people, the religious, self-righteous 


Pharisees. It is not different in Christendom with the fall- 
ing away from the faith. cs 


201 


Our Lord continued in His ministry in Galilee. “And 
Jesus went round all the cities and the villages, teaching in 
their synagogues, and preaching the glad tidings of the 
kingdom and healing every disease and every bodily weak- 
ness’’ (verse 35). What an activity this must have been! 
He walked up and down through Galilee, and certainly not 
one of the numerous villages was forgotten by Him. Let 
us notice again that it is the Gospel of the kingdom He 
preached, therefore Kingdom signs were present. When He, 
the King, comes again, and the Kingdom of the heavens is 
established and the heavens rule, then disease and all that 
offends will be put away. 

But what scenes met His eye as He passed thus minister- 
ing among the crowds of people? He beheld them as worn 
out, harassed and cast away as sheep not having a shepherd. 
His loving heart was moved with compassion for them. In 
this ‘loving sympathy He reveals Himself as the Shepherd 
of Israel. Long before His Spirit in the prophets had 
spoken of the scene we behold here. ( “Son of Man, prophesy 
against the shepherds of Israel; prophesy, and say unto 
them, Thus saith the Lord God unto the shepherds: Woe 
be to the shepherds of Israel that do not feed themselves! 
Should not the shepherds feed the flock? * * * And 
they were scattered, because there is no shepherd; and they 
- became meat to all the beasts of the field, where they were 
scattered. My sheep wandered through all the mountains, 
and upon every high hill; yea, My flock was scattered upon 
all the face of the earth and none did search and seek after 


them” (Ezek. xxxiv)) In the same chapter we read what 


202 


Jehovah the Shepherd of Israel says: “J will both search 
My sheep and find them out. * * * J will seek out My 
sheep. * * * J will bring them out from the peopie and 
gather them from the countries. * * * J will feed them 
ina good pasture. * * * J will feed My flock and J will 
cause them to lie down. * * * J will seek that which was 
lost. * * * J will make with them a covenant of peace,’ 
* %* > ete, He came thus to His own as-the Shepherd, 
but they did not want Him. As the good Shepherd He laid 
down His life for the sheep, becoming the great Shepherd 
in resurrection and the chief Shepherd in glory. But He is 
also the Shepherd of Israel, and thinks still of His earthly 
people and loves them. That thirty-fourth chapter of Eze- 
kiel will yet be literally fulfilled through the returning Son 
of Man, and then His poor flock will know Him and sing 
in the earth what the believer’s heart sings now: “The 
Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not. want.” ‘Then saith He 
to His disciples, The harvest is great and the workmen few; 
supplicate therefore the Lord of the harvest, that He send 
forth workmen unto His harvest.” He Himself is the Lord 
of the harvest. He sends forth the workmen and He equips 
them for the service. But there is a great difference between 
the sending forth of the workmen to preach the gospel of the 
kingdom, and to heal the sick, and the gifts, the Lord in 
glory, as the Head of His body, has given to the church. 
The sending forth of the laborers into the harvest will be 
before us in the next chapter, 


203 


CHAPTER AX, 


We learn now how our Lord, who is truly the Lord of 
the Harvest, sends forth the laborers. He does it as the 
King, who came to offer the Kingdom to Israel. He sends 
forth the laborers into the harvest as messengers of Himself 
to announce the same message, which He announced, “The 
Kingdom of the heavens has drawn nigh,” and confers to 
them the authority and the power to heal the infirm, raise 
the dead, and cast out demons. This sending forth, as we 
shall see, was altogether in connection with the Kingdom ; 
it was therefore only temporary and ended with the complete 
rejection of the Kingdom by Israel. However, there is a 
time coming when a Jewish remnant will again go forth to 
preach the Gospel of the Kingdom. This will be during the | 
great tribulation. 

It is strange that Christian believers should go to the 
tenth chapter of Matthew and look upon what is written 
here as meaning the sending forth of the laborers, mission- 
aries, preachers and teachers to proclaim the Gospel of 
Grace, when there was first of all no Gospel of Grace and 
when the words of our Lord so clearly show that it could 
not refer to anything outside of Israel and Israel’s land. 
Yet this wrong application is constantly made. It is claimed 
by some on the authority of this chapter that missionary 
efforts should consist in not preaching alone, but healing of 


204 


the sick. They send out, therefore, missionaries who are 
physicians, and supply them with drugs and surgical instru- 
ments, as if our Lord did anything of the kind. Others 
again claim that the healing of the sick, besides the preach- 
ing of what they term, the Kingdom of the heavens, is still 
in order, and they act according to this belief; however, 
the raising of the dead they do not include in their powers. 
The Mormons with their abominable and blasphemous teach- 
ings likewise go to this chapter, going forth two by two 
and trying to follow the other commands given. All 
this confusion is at once ended, when we look upon the send- 
ing forth of the laborers here, as the sending forth of mes- 
sengers to announce the Kingdom; after the Kingdom had 
been postponed this special mission of the twelve ended. 
The first verse in the chapter tells us that He called His | 
twelve disciples and that He gave them power over unclean 
spirits, so that they should cast them out, and heal every 
disease and every bodily weakness. The twelve messen- 
gers, whose names are given in the second, third and fourth 
verses, stand as such always in relation to Israel. He 
tells them later, “Ye shall also sit on twelve thrones, judging 
the twelve tribes of Israel” (chapter xix:28). Even in the 
New Jerusalem there will be this distinction. “Her shining 
was like a most precious stone, as a crystal like jasper stone; 
having a great, high wall; having twelve gates, and at the 
gates twelve angels, and names inscribed, which are those 
of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel. *° * * And 
the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and on them 
twelve names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb” (Rev. 


205 


xxi :12-14). The twelve apostles thus stand in prominent 
and definite relation to Israel. Here among the twelve, who 
are sent forth, is also the name of Judas the Iscariot, who 
delivered Him up. After his awful end another was rightly 
and divinely chosen in his place, that is Matthias. It is 
astonishing to hear able teachers of the Word talk and write 
of the mistake which the eleven made in the first chapter 
in the book of Acts in casting the lot and choosing Matthias. 
We have heard all kinds of criticism upon their action. 
They were, however, guided aright, and did not make a mis- 
take, for they acted upon the Word of God in the Psalms, 
and in the casting of the lot they were fully authorized by 
the Old Testament Scriptures, and besides this, they did it 
in dependence on the Lord. It is also said by these breth- 
ren who see in the choosing of Matthias an error, that the 
Lord wanted Paul to be the one who belongs to the twelve. 
This is the worst blunder of all. The Holy Spirit fully 
endorses the action of the eleven before Pentecost through 
Paul himself. In 1 Corinthians xv :5 we read that the risen 
Lord was seen by the twelve. In the eighth verse Paul says: 
“And last of all, as to an abortion, He appeared to me also.” 
It is clear from this passage that Paul does not belong to 
the twelve. Paul, as apostle to the Gentiles, is an apostle 
not from men nor through man (Gal. i :1) ; he received his 
apostleship from the risen and glorified Lord. It is through 
Paul as the one who has no earthly connections, but has it 
all from above, that the Gospel of Grace as well as the mys- 
tery hid in former ages is made known. 

In the Epistles given through Paul we read, therefore, 


206 


all concerning the Gospel of Grace, the church and the min- 
istry, which is for this age, an age in which our Lord Jesus 
Christ is not King, but Lord in Glory. It is from the Glory 
as Head of the Body He gives gifts. “He that descended 
is the same who also ascended up above all the heavens, that 
He might fill all things; and He has given some apostles, 
and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some shep- 
herds and teachers, for the perfecting of the saints’? (Ephes. 
iv :10-12). He ministers then through the instruments He 
chooses from above, and nowhere in the Epistles do we 
read anything like that which is contained in the tenth chap- 
ter of Matthew. Let us divide the Word of truth rightly 
and not put the church and the ministry of the church in the 
chapter before us. All this will become clearer to us as we 
turn to the different verses. 

For instance, in the sixth verse we read: “Go not oft 
into the way of the Gentiles, and into a city of Samaritans 
enter ye not; but go rather to the lost sheep of the house 
of Israel.” This is a limited sphere. They had nothing to 
do and could have nothing to do with the Gentiles nor with 
Samaritans. After the death and resurrection of our Lord’ 
the Gospel was to be preached, beginning in Jerusalem, in 
Samaria, to the uttermost parts of the earth. The lost sheep 
of the house of Israel, that much “spiritualized” phrase, 
were not Gentiles, nor were they the church, for a church 
was not and could not be then. Their preaching was only 
this text: “The Kingdom of the heavens has drawn nigh.” 
What does it mean? It meant that the promised Kingdom 
for Israel, and through Israel to the nations, the Kingdom 


207 


with all its earthly blessings, was about to come. It was 
heralding the fact of the presence of the King to set up the 
Kingdom, if His own would have it. Such a preaching of 
the Kingdom of the heavens is not given now. After the 
church age closes by the removal of the church from the 
earth into heaven, as foreshadowed by the vessel which 
Peter saw coming out of heaven and again received into 
heaven, then the kingdom will again draw nigh in the per 
son of the returning King and Lord with His saints. 

He tells them: “Ye have received gratuitously, give 
gratuitously.* Do not provide yourselves with gold, or sil- 
ver, or brass, for your belts, nor scrip for the way, nor two 
body coats, nor sandals, nor a staff, for the workman is wor- 
thy of his nourishment.’’ Some well-meaning persons have 
tried to follow out these commandments to the very letter, 
but it was never meant for the servants of Christ to be fol: 
lowed literally during this age. However, two principles 
are in these words before us, which find their application in 
this age. They had received the message and power gra- 
tuitously and thus they were to give it. The Gospel is to 
be free, without price and without money. This principle 
holds good at this time. How great the failure in Christen- 
dom, with its salaried ministry, pew rents, fairs and enter- 
tainments to make money for the building of churches and 
other things! 

They were to go forth with no provision made. This 


*Christian Science also claims to follow this chapter by 
healing the sick. But “freely give” is not practiced by this 
wicked cult. It costs to be healed. 


203 
made them altogether dependent upon the Lord who had 
sent them. Trust in the Lord, who sends out the laborer, 
is another principle, which belongs to this age as well. All 
disappointment and discouragement for the servant of Christ 
comes in when he looks not to the Lord ‘but to man. The 
Lord never disappoints. “And He said to them, When I 
sent you without purse and scrip and sandals, did ye lack 
anything? And they said, Nothing” (Luke xxii:35). The 
Lord who calls His servants and sends them forth always 
keeps them when they walk in simple dependence upon Him- 
self. 

From verses 11 to 18 we read other instructions for this 
special mission.: In city and village they were to inquire for 
them who are worthy. The worthiness consisted undoubt- 
edly in a desire to know Messiah, “waiting for the conso- 
lation of Israel.” The Gospel of Grace, which is preached 
now, is preached without any such distinction. Its message 
is: “Whosoever,” even the most unworthy. At the end of 
this paragraph (verse 15) there is the threatening of judg- 
ment when their message is not accepted. 

In the next four verses (16-20) we read of how their 
ministry would be accepted. “Behold I send you as sheep 
- in the midst of wolves; be therefore prudent as the serpents 
and guileless as doves. But beware of men; for they will 
deliver you up to sanhedrims and scourge you in their syn- 
agogues.” And so they did reject the Lord and the ser- 
vants He sent. But it was not alone confined to the Jews— 
sanhedrim and synagogue—but the Gentiles would. treat 
them in the same way. “And ye shall be brought before 


209 


rulers and kings for my sake, for a testimony to them and 
to the nations.” Part of the fulfillment of all this is found 
in the book of Acts. We see here also a deeper meaning 
and refer to these words again when we come to another 
verse. 

“But when they deliver you up, be not careful how or 
what ye shall speak; for it shall be given to you in that hour 
what ye shall speak. For ye are not the speakers, but the 
Spirit of your Father which speaks in you.” We can point 
to Stephen in Acts vii as an illustration how fully this 
promise has been fulfilled. 

The most bitter persecution is now promised them by our | 
Lord: “But brother shall deliver up brother to death, and 
father child; and children shall rise up against parents and 
shall put them to death; and ye shall be hated of all on ac- 
count of my name. But he that has endured to the end shall 
be saved. But when they persecute you in this city, flee to 
the other, for verily I say to you, Ye shall not have com- 
pleted the cities of Israel until the Son of Man be come.” 
These words are perhaps the most important in the whole 
chapter. They are a kind of key to the entire chapter. 

The coming of the Son of Man which is mentioned is His 
second coming. The giving of the testimony by Jewish dis- 
ciples concerning the Kingdom of the heavens is according 
to the words of our Lord to continue till He comes again. 
How are we to understand this? The testimony which was 
begun by the apostles up to the time when Israel rejected 
once more the offers of mercy from the risen Lord, when 
He was still waiting for their repentance as a nation, is an 


210 


unfinished testimony. After that offer was again rejected 
the great parenthesis, the church age, began, and during 
this age (which is not reckoned in the Old Testament) 
there is no more Jewish testimony of the kingdom of the 
heavens. Israel nationally is set aside, blindness in part is 
theirs till the fulness of the Gentiles is come in. When 
the church is complete and the rapture of the Saints 
has taken place, then the Lord begins to deal with His pev- 
ple Israel again. There is the seventieth week of Daniel ix 
yet to come, and this week of seven years forms the end of 
this dispensation. In this coming last week of seven years 
the church testimony is finished and Jewish believers will 
take up the unfinished testimony to the nation and proclaim 
once more “The Kingdom of the heavens is at hand.” The 
xxiv chapter in this Gospel is a continuation of the x chap- 
ter, inasmuch as Matthew xxiv shows us the unfinished tes- 
timony of the x chapter, finished and completed. (Read Matt. 
Xxiv:5-32.) In Matt. xxiv we read of the great tribulation, 
so likewise here in the tenth chapter. In Micah vii we 
read of a dark picture and there the Spirit of Christ reveals 
a tribulation, which His lips on the earth proclaim to His 
disciples. Then during the tribulation (never now) it will 
mean enduring to the end and salvation will come then by 
the visible return of the Son of Man from heaven. What our 
Lord said in verses 17 and 18 about persecutions from Jews 
and Gentiles for these witnesses will find its final great fulfil- 
ment in that great tribulation, when not alone the unbeliev- 
ing nation will persecute the believing and witnessing Jew- 
ish remnant, but nations as well. 


2iI 


From the twenty-fourth verse to the end of the chapter 
our Lord continues to speak to the twelve, who were about 
to go forth. His words are now words of encouragement, 
not to fear; they were safe in the hands of His Father. 
While all these words had a special significance for the 
Jewish disciples our Lord sent forth, they also contain pre- 
cious comfort.and instruction for every true believer living 
in this day. It would be extremely one sided to pass over 
these words of our Lord and treat them as not containing 
truth for us. Every word which our God and Father has 
been pleased to give us has a meaning for us. 

First of all our Lord speaks of the position of the dis- 
ciple. “The disciple is not above his teacher, nor the bond- 
man above his Lord. It is sufficient for the disciple that 
be should become as his teacher, and the bondman as his 
lord. Jf they have called the master of the house Beelze- 
bub,* how much more those of his household?” (verses 24- 
26). The position of the disciple is then according to these 
words identification of the closest kind with His Lord. 
However, to learn fully of this identification with Him, who 
is our Saviour and Lord, we do not go to this first Gospel. 
The Gospel of Matthew was not written with this purpose. 
In the Gospel of John, the Gosepl of Life and Resurrection, 
and the First Epistle of John as well as the Epistles given 
by the Holy Spirit through Paul, we learn of the blessed 
identification which exists by Grace between the Lord and 
His own... How preciously it is revealed by Himself in that 


*Beelzebub means “Lord of the house,” that is, Satan as the 
possessor of the house, 


212 : Z 


Holy of Holies in the Gospel of John, the seventeenth chap- 
tet. And this chapter itself is but the germ out of which 
the Holy Spirit develops in the Pauline Epistles, the Gospel 
of Grace and the truth concerning the Church as the Body 
of Christ. In that marvelous chapter our Lord intercedes 
before His Father for the very disciples (as well as our- 
selves) whom He sent forth in the beginning of His 
earthly ministry. Altogether one with Him, is the golden 
thread which goes through His prayer. And He said: 
“The world has hated them, because they are not of the 
world, as I am not of the world. I do not demand that 
thou shouldest take them out of the world, but that thou 
shouldest keep them out of evil.” In the First Epistle of 
John the Holy Spirit says: “Do not wonder, brethren, if 
the world hate you,” and in the upper room He said to 
His own: “If the world hate you, ye know that it hated Me 
before you” (John xv:18). It is therefore an identification 
of the closest nature in which we stand with our Lord. And 
do we ever stop and think on these things? How little we 
do, how little all this is real to us? It is true little of the — 
reproach of Christ is seen in these days; but little hatred 
from the side of the world, nor any names of rejection. 
We ask why? The answer is soon given. The professing 
church has turned her back upon her heavenly calling and 
with that upon the Lord. She has committed adultery in 
loving the world and has. returned to the beggarly 
elements of this world. But let the true believer leave 
this camp and go outside of that which professes His 
name and soon enough the reproach will have to be borne. 


as | = 213. 


Christendom and the world has little use for one who walks 
in true separation. Still how precious is that place. If it is 
reproach it is His reproach; hatred, it is the same with which 
He was hated. Reproach, hatred and persecution is the seal 
of identification and fellowship with Him. 

But with this our Lord does not leave it. He comforts 
those He sent forth. And now He speaks the word which 
is to calm their fears: “Fear not.” What meaning it has 
coming from such lips! Angels spoke the word ‘Fear 
not” in olden times. They are but creatures sent with 
a message from the Throne. But He who-speaks here is 
the Creator Himself made a little lower than the angels He 
had created; the Omnipotent One, our Lord speaks, ‘Fear 
not!” “Fear them not therefore; for there is nothing cov- 
ered which shall not be revealed, and secret which shall not 
be known. What I say to you in darkness speak in the light, 
and what ye hear in the ear preach upon the houses.” In 
other words, He tells them of the day when all is to be 
uncovered, and the secret things to be made known. This 

fact is ever to be before them. It is to be daily before us. 
Oh, brethren, let us learn to look at all things in the light of 

the Judgment seat! “Do not judge anything before the 
time, until the Lord shall come, who shall also bring to light 
the hidden things of darkness, and shall make manifest the, 
counsels of hearts; and then shall each have his praise from 
God” (1 Corinth, iv:5). In view of this revelation of the 
secret things our Lord tells us to be bold and to declare the 
whole counsel of God. 

Then what harm*can men do to him anyway, who is 


214 


Christ’s (and Christ is God’s). We belong to God, we are 
His own. No man can do us any harm with his persecu- 
tion or hatred. Therefore He says now: “And be not afraid 
of those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul.” What 
if they should even go so far as to kill the body, as they 
often did and will yet do, especially to the Jewish Saints 
in the great tribulation.* If they kill the body they cannot 
kill the soul and the killing of the body and faithful tes- 
timony given through martyrdom will enrich the Lord as 
well as the disciple. We may not be called upon to sur- 
render thus our bodies, yet the principle of it is ours; fear 
nothing outward, nothing temporal, whatever it may be. 
“But fear rather Him who is able to destroy both soul and 
body in hell.”+ And He who is able to do that and will do 
it at the great white Throne to the unsaved, is God. He 
then is to be feared alone. Of course all this is not to be 
read as referring to the believer. He who has believed is 
passed from death unto life, he does not come into judg- 
ment. Once saved means always saved. We must, however, 
not overlook the fact that among the twelve there was one 
who was not saved. It was the first warning coming to 
Judas. He looked to outward things and was a thief. 
Words of comfort come next. “Are not two sparrows 
sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not fall to the 


*We mention again that all these words have a future meaning 
and fulfillment during that time of Jacob’s trouble, after the remov- 
al of the church. The Jewish believers will know the comfort of 
these words, as Saints during this age know them. 


tHere Gehenna and not Hades. Gehenna is correctly translated 
hell, ‘ 


215 


ground without your Father; but of you even the hairs of 
the head are all numbered. Fear not therefore; ye are better 
than many sparrows.” And where is the child of God who 
does not rejoice in such a statement? He knows the spar- 
rows upon the housetops as He knew the fish in the sea 
and the piece of money, which laid on the bottom of the 
sea. He knows every hair of His own. He speaks of a 
special providence which watches over every child of God. 
Happy are we if we walk in the simplicity of a child before 
our Father and our Lord and ever know by day and by 
night “He careth for you.” We are all in.His hands. 

The words of responsibility follow: “Everyone therefore 
who shall confess me before men, I also will confess before 
my Father who is in the Heavens. But whosoever shall 
deny Me before men, him will I also deny before my Father 
who is in the Heavens,” 

He who believes in the name of the Lord Jesus is saved; 
confession with the mouth follows (Rom. x:8-12). 

Every one who believes in the Lord Jesus Christ and 
confesses with the mouth that Jesus is Lord, such confesses - 
Him before men. This confession of Him is ever to 
increase not only with the lips but in the conduct and 
the life. Thus every true believer is a confessor of Jesus 
as Lord and the Lord in His day will confess him before His 
Father. Individual faithfulness will of course bring a cor- 
responding reward. The unsaved denies Him before men. 
He may have the name of Jesus upon his lips but he trusts 
not in Him and this is the denial and he who has not be- 


216 


lieved will not be confessed before the Father, because the 
unsaved is none of His. 

In the few verses which follow (34-36 verses) our Lord 
describes the characteristics of this age, the age in which 
we live and which is so rapidly ending up. “Do not think 
that I have come to send peace upon the earth, I have not 
come to send peace, but a sword.” Many puzzled Jews 
have come to us with this word and asked what Jesus of 
Nazareth meant. How could He be our Messiah when 
instead “of peace He sends the sword?” “Is not Messiah 
the Prince of Peace to speak peace to the nations?” How- 
ever we learn that the words He speaks here, foretelling 
the history of this age, are blessed evidences of His divinity. 
This age is not the age of world wide peace. “Peace on 
Earth” is not yet reached in the divine program for the 
earth. The King and His kingdom rejected, He Himself 
absent, strife, confusion and wars, the sword reigns. But 
the King is coming back. Before His return as King out 
of the opened heavens the sword will be unsheathed and 
peace be taken from the earth. The nations may boast of 
peace among themselves at this time, but it will not last 
very long and soon the rider upon the red horse will gal- © 
lop over the earth (Revel. vi). Peace like a river will surely 
flow after the King has come and all swords have become 
_ plowshares. The Lord hasten the day. 

And what place and position has the true disciple with 
Christ in this age? Christ is rejected and scorned. He 
Himself is to be owned and full devotedness shown to Him, 
and that means—suffering, 


217 


“He who loves father or mother above me is not worthy 
of me; and he who loves son or daughter above me is not 
worthy of me. And he who does not take up his cross and 
follow me is not worthy of me. He that finds his life shall 
lose it; he who has lost his life for my sake shall find it.” 

But there is another side. Not alone the suffering but 
the glory which is to follow. The recompense is as sure 
as the suffering and the recompense will be greater than the 
sufferings. 

“He that receives you, receives me, and he that receives 
me, receives Him who has sent me. He that receives a 
prophet in a prophet’s name shall receive a prophet’s re- 
ward; he that receives a righteous man in a righteous man’s 
name shall receive a righteous man’s reward. And whoso- 
ever shall give to drink to one of these little ones a cup of 
cold water only, in the name of a disciple, verily he shall 
in no wise lose his reward.” The one who receives a prophet 
shall have the blessing of a prophet—he who receives the 
Son of God becomes the Son of God, Heir of God and joint 
heir with Jesus Christ, and anything done, which has love 
for its motive, will not be forgotten. 


218 


CHAPTER XI. 


The first verse of this chapter belongs to the sending forth 
of the twelve, and should be put to the previous chapter. 
“And it came to pass when Jesus had finished commanding 
His twelve disciples, He departed thence to teach and 
preach in their cities.’ He took the work upon Himself 
once more, and with the disciples He had sent forth He 
preached the Kingdom of the Heavens to be at hand. The 
Lord of the harvest, who had sent forth the laborers, enters 
the harvestfield Himself. His rejection is now to be made 
more and more manifest. He came to His own and His 
own received Him not. Gradually in this Gospel we have 
seen how Israel had no heart, no desire for Him; they were 
indeed blinded. The rejection of Him who had so fully 
shown Himself to be Jehovah manifested in the flesh, is 
now rapidly approaching. Soon He will leave the house 
and take His place at the seashore (chapter xiii:1) to teach 
the mysteries of the Kingdom of the Heavens, that which 
is to pass, while He, the King, and with Him the Kingdom 
is rejected. The eleventh chapter is the beginning of the 
crisis, and the twelfth chapter is the great turning point. 

First of all we have the record of John the Baptist in 
prison sending to our Lord, and the message our Lord 
sends to him. “But John, having heard in the prison the 
works of the Christ, sent by His disciples and said to Him, 


p 219 


Art Thou the Coming One? or are we to wait for another? 
And Jesus answering said to them, Go, report to John what 
you hear and see. Blind men see and lame walk; lepers 
are cleansed and deaf hear; and dead are raised and poor 
‘have glad tidings preached to them; and blessed is whoso- 
ever shall not be offended in Me.” 

The incident has been differently interpreted. From the 
fourth chapter we learned that when Jesus heard that John 
was cast into prison He departed into Galilee (iv:12). The 
fourteenth chapter in this Gospel gives the story of John’s 
imprisonment and his death. In this arrangement the divine 
hand which guided Matthew’s hand is seen again. 

John the Baptist spent therefore some time in prison be- 
fore he sent his disciples to our Lord. It is generally as- 
sumed that John, the preacher of repentance and the com- 
ing Kingdom, had finally expected that Jesus would soon 
establish the Kingdom, and that he, as the voice in the 
wilderness, the forerunner, would have a share in its glories. 
Instead of this expected glory he is cast into a dungeon. He 
had faithfully discharged his duties. Not like a miserable 
hireling had he acted, but fearlessly he had denounced evil, 
and for all his faithfulness nothing but suffering, rejection 
“and death staring him in the face. It is, therefore, said by 
many that he doubted that Jesus was truly the promised 
Messiah, and asked for evidences of His Messiahship. How- 
ever, this interpretation can hardly be right. If we turn to 
the Gospel of John and read his utterances there, we find 
that he had a complete insight into the work which Christ 
as the Lamb of God was to do, and he knew Jesus was the 


220 


Christ. It is also reasonable to assume that his own disciples 
who had come to our Lord with the question, “Why do we 
and the Pharisees fast but Thy disciples fast not?” had 
come to him and given him the answer, that the bridegroom, 
the Messiah, was to be taken away from them, and then 
there would be fasting. 

Others have looked upon this incident in another light. 
They attempt to shield John the Baptist altogether, and de- 
fend his absolute faith and confidence in Jesus as the Christ. 
According to many John was perfect so that no doubt could 
assail his mind. But why should he send from his prison 
and ask of the Lord such information? The difficulty 1s, 
according to these, solved, in that John desired the answer 
not for any confirmation of his faith, but that he sent his 
disciples because they were staggered in their belief. Martin 
Luther says on this passage: “It is certain that John sent to 
inquire on account of his disciples; for they did not yet 
regard Christ as the One for Whom He was to be regarded. 
They waited for one who would move along pompously, 
highly learned, as a mighty King. John treats them tender- 
ly, endures their weak faith till they become strong; does , 
not reject them because they do not yet believe in Him so 
firmly.” This solution of the difficulty, however, lacks 
_ scriptural support. It is a fanciful theory that John should 
have sent to Christ for the sake of his disciples. We need 
_ not claim perfection and infallibility for John the Baptist, — 
for he had neither. Only one on the earth was perfect and 
infallible, sinless and spotless, who was never assailed by 
doubt, and that one is our Lord Jesus Christ. John, like 


221 

Elijah, was “a man of like passions as we are.” Elijah’s 
ministry was marked with individual failure. His life was 
threatened by Jezebel: “And when he saw that, he arose and 
went for his life, and came to Beer-sheba, which belongeth 
to Judah, and left his servant there. But he himself went a 
day’s journey into the wilderness, and came and sat down 
under a juniper tree: and he requested for himself that he 
might die; and said, It is enough; now, O Lord, take away 
my life; for I am not better than my fathers” (1 Kings xix: — 
3, 4). What a failure this was! Surely there is nothing - 
good in man, and even in the most privileged servants of 
the Lord there is the flesh and the failure of the flesh. John 
in prison passes through the experience of Elijah in whose 
spirit and power he had come. It would be incorrect to say _ 
that John doubted the Messiahship of Jesus. He knew Him 
as the Christ. Yet in prison his patience is severely tested, 
and duubt troubles him. In this test he looks to Him, whom 
he always honored as his Lord, for succor. He sent directly 
to the Lord, and certainly He knew the weak and doubting 
one, as well as his faith, which looked to Him for strength 
and a word of cheer. 

And is this not an incident with lessons for us? It teach- 
eth us to confess our weakness before Him, and look to the 
Lord for the strength and comfort He alone can give. 

We may also meditate in connection with John in prison 
and his doubt with another servant of the Lord in prison. 
There in Rome he sat and wrote, “I, Paul, prisoner of the 
Lord.” And out of that prison came forth the strains of 
praise and joy. How many “ifs’ and “hows” and “whys” 


222 


he might have asked? How many murmurings and bitter 
complaints might have flown from His lips? He sends out 
a letter from the dungeon which has not the slightest hint 
of failure in it, where sin and flesh is not seen and not men- 
tioned. But what is the secret of the rejoicing prisoner of 
the Lord? What is the secret which underlies the triumph- 
ant language of joy in the Epistle to the Philippians? It is 
one word, “Christ.” The life of Christ in him, and Christ 
the center, Christ the pattern and object before the apostle, 
and Christ his strength, enabled by Him to do all things, is 
the secret of all; and that John the Baptist, the greatest of 
the Old Testament did not know, nor could he be in pos- 
session of it. It is our full inheritance as believers on the 
other side of the cross. Oh, may we live in enjoyment of it, 
up to the mark of our position and possession in Christ. 
But we return to our chapter. The Lord gives the mes- 
sage for John. If his disciples had any doubt, the words of 
the Lord must have dispersed these. And when John heard 
the answer it must have brought him strength and cheer. 
The Lord speaks of the signs of the Kingdom which He did 
in fulfillment of Old Testament predictions. We have shown 
before how in the miracles our Lord performed Is. xxxv:s 
and 6 was fulfilled. The dead also were raised and the glad 
tidings preached. The spiritual significance of the latter 
two is of course fully seen in the Gospel of John. The 
words, “And blessed is whosoever shall not be offended in 
Me,” are words of exhortation to John the Baptist. How 
like the Lord to put them at the end of the message. The 
Holy Spirit has repeated this in the Epistles where the ad- 


223 


monitions are always coming in at the end or after words of 
love and commendation were given first. The admonition 
was certainly understood by John, and how deeply it must 
have exercised him. It led to humiliation, heartsearching, 
and in the end it was a beatitude, a “blessed.” May it ever 
be so with us. 

And all this was not unknown to the crowds. They stood 
there and heard what passed between the Lord and John’s 
disciples. They heard the question they asked and the 
answer our Lord sent to John. John the Baptist was known 
by these crowds and they believed in him as a great prophet. 
His testimony and his personality might then be discredited 
_ by them. The Lord addresses himself to the crowds in what 
may be termed a defense of John. He shields him now be- 
fore any criticism, and maintains his testimony and divinely 
given mission. 

“But as they went away Jesus began to say tothe crowds 
concerning. John, What went ye out in the wilderness to 
see? A reed moved about by the wind? But what went ye 
out to see? A man clothed in delicate raiment? Behold 
those who wear delicate things are in the houses of kings. 
But what went ye out to see? A prophet? Yea, I say to 
you, and more than a prophet; this is he of whom it is — 
written, Behold, I send My messenger before Thy face, who 
shall prepare Thy way before Thee. Verily I say to you, 
that there is not risen among the born of women a greater 
than John the Baptist. But he who is a little one in the 
Kingdom of the Heavens is greater than he.” 

We confine our remarks to the end sentence. What is 


224 


the meaning of it? Its common application is generally 
the thought that our Lord speaks here of the church age, 
and that the least in this present dispensation is greater 
than John in the old dispensation, to which he fully be- 
longed. That such is the case no one doubts. We as Chris- 
tian believers are higher in our standing than the Old Tes- 
tament saints. However, the primary meaning of the pas- 
sage is a different one. The question would be first of all, 
“What does our Lord mean here by Kingdom. of the Hea- 
vens?”’ Up to the thirteenth chapter in the Gospel of 
Matthew the phrase, “Kingdom of the Heavens,” has only 
one meaning, viz., the Kingdom to be established in the 
earth, as predicted by the Old Testament prophets. In 
the thirteenth chapter it is the Kingdom of the Heavens in 
the hands of man in its development during the absence of 
the King. We cannot think, therefore, that in the eleventh 
chapter, where it is still the offer of the Kingdom of the 
Heavens, our Lord would introduce the present age. This 
would be all out of keeping with the scope of Matthew. 
Now as our Lord means the Kingdom of the Heavens 
actually set up in the earth, the meaning of His words be- 
comes clear. The little one who is in that Kingdom of the 
Heavens, when it has come at last, will be greater than John, 
who but announced the Kingdom to come. It foreshadows 
the glories of the coming Kingdom age, when the little one 
will be greater than John ever could be in the earth. 

But our Lord adds: “From the days of John the Baptist 
until now, the Kingdom of the Heavens is taken by violence, 
and the violent seize on it. For all the prophets and the law 


ee een ee ae 


225 
f 
_ have prophesied unto John. And if ye will receive it (him), 
this is Elias, who is to come. He that has ears to hear let 
him hear.” 

These words are again very simple and to our mind pre- 
sent no difficulty at all, if they are taken in their literal mean-_ 
ing. It is strange that the words of our Lord should be 
made to mean the Gospel, eternal life, conversion and the 
sinner’s own efforts to take possession of it. Yet such is the 
case. Many preachers and evangelists have no other light 
on this passage and preach and exhort from it what is in 
direct opposition to the blessed Gospel. According to these 
preachers, the violent, who take the Kingdom by force or 
press into it (Luke xvi:1@), are unsaved sinners. The devil, 
the flesh and the world stand in the sinner’s way of salvation, 
so they teach, and he must use force, great violence, to enter 
into the Kingdom. After due exercise, strenuous effort 
and violence he will be able to take it by force. This is the 
general interpretation of the passage. It is as erroneous 
as the interpretation of the parable of the treasure hid in 
the field and the pearl of great price, which makes the sinner 
give his all (though he has nothing to give) to buy salvation. 

No, the violent who take the Kingdom by violence are 
not unsaved sinners, who seek salvation and that salvation 
must be taken by force. Salvation is by grace, it is God’s 
free gift, and the sinner is not saved through and in his 
violent efforts, but im believing in the Lord Jesus Christ. 

The Pharisees and scribes who stand here before our Lord 
are the violent who take the Kingdom of the Heavens 
(never the Gospel) by force and seize on it. Our Lord says: 


226 


‘From the days of John uutil now.” The forerunner, John, 
was violently rejected by the Pharisees. This foreshadowed 
the rejection of the King, the rejection of the preaching of 
the Kingdom and the Kingdom itself. In this seizing upon 
the Kingdom, rejecting it, the Kingdom of the Heavens 
suffered violence. It was rejected by force and now is post- 
poned till He comes again. If they had received John the 
Baptist he would have been Elias. But he was rejected, 
they would not have it so. They did violence to what the 
King had come to bring. Another Elias will come once 
more, and then no violence can keep back the coming of the 
Kingdom of the Heavens. 

Let us notice that John’s ministry was exclusively to ae 
own people. Elijah’s ministry is still future and falls in the 
period of the great tribulation. His ministry and testimony 
will be confined to the land of Israel_and to the remnant of 
Israel. Any one who claims to be Elijah incarnate at this 
time is either a downright fraud, unbalanced in his mind, or 
so grossly ignorant of the Word of God and His revealed 
purposes, that the proud imaginations of his heart lead him 
astray into such a ridiculous claim. 

The words which follow are a true description of the 
generation which was privileged to see the King, Jehovah, 
manifested in the earth. “But to whom shall I liken this 
generation? It is like children calling to their companions, 
saying, We have piped to you, and ye have not danced; we 
have mourned to you, and ye have not wailed. For John 
has come, neither eating nor drinking, and they say, He has 
a demon. The son of man has come eating and drinking, 


227 


and they say, Behold a man that is eating and wine drinking, 
a friend of tax-gatherers, and of sinners ;—and wisdom has 
been justified by her children” (verses 15-19). In other 
words, the generation was a foolish lot of people who 
could not be suited by anything. They were like chil- 
dren. It is a wonderful declaration of our Lord of the con- 
dition of the people, His own to whom He came, and who 
received Him not. The illustration is taken from children 
playing with the real things of life, with joy and sorrow, 
and idling their time away. John appeared among them 
and they were dissatisfied with him. He-was too strict, too 
severe ; they cared not for him, and because he would not sit 
down and eat and drink with them they said, he has a demon. 
Then the Lord came. Truth and mercy were revealed 
through Him. He sat down with the tax-gatherers and sin- 
ners and mingled with them, eating and drinking. Divine 
mercy towards the fallen and outcast was most blessedly 
shown—the spotless One in touch with the defiled and lost, 
calling sinners to repentance. But they had no understand- 
ing for this, no heart for that wonderful grace. He was in 
their eyes but a man, for they said: “Behold a man—eating 
and drinking.” They put Him on the same level with the 
wine drinking company. Neither mourning nor rejoicing 
suited them. Behind it stands the evil heart, the natural 
man, never pleased with God’s way, always finding fault. 
“The carnal mind is enmity against God; for it is not sub- 
ject to the law of God, neither indeed can be” (Rom. viii:7). 
The words “wisdom has been justified by her children” has 
found many different interpretations. Its meaning is very 


228 


simple. While the large mass of people were thus rejecting 
John and Christ, and had no understanding for God’s love 
and mercy made known, there were others, a few indeed, 
and these accepted the teaching of John and believed in the 
Lord. “Wisdom” is an Old Testament name of our Lord. 
The whole book of Proverbs abounds with the word Wisdom 
and the speech Wisdom utters. The eighth chapter tells us 
that Wisdom is a person and that person is our Lord. Those 
who believed in Him are the children of Wisdom and they 
had no fault to find, neither with John’s burning call to 
repentance, nor with the mercy of Christ in eating and drink- 
ing with the tax-gatherers and sinners. In this way Wisdom 
was justified by her children. 

And is the present generation of nominal Christian bet- 
ter than the generation of professing Israelites in the day 
of Christ? We think not. They are to-day the same as 
the Christ rejecting Jews were then. The Christ of God, 
God’s way of Righteousness and Grace does not suit the 
natural heart at any time. 

Solemn are the words which follow now. The Judge 
speaks. He who speaks here will take His place upon the 

throne and preside in that judgment day of which He speaks, 
“Then began He to reproach the cities in which most 
of His works of power had taken place, because they had not 
repented. Woe to thee, Chorazin! Woe to thee, Bethsaida! 
for if the works of power which have taken place in you, had 
taken place in Tyre and Sidon, they had long ago repented 
in sackcloth and ashes. But I say to you, that it shall be 
- more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in judgment day than for 


12 


229 


-you. And thou, Capernaum, who hast been raised up to 
heaven, shall be brought down even to Hades. For if the 
works of power which have taken place in thee, had taken 
place in Sodom, it had remained until this day. But I say 
to you, that it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom 
in judgment day: than for thee.” His divine patience is now 
seen as almost exhausted and for the first time in this Gospel 
He speaks the “Woe,” which He repeats later a number 
of times. And oh! the word “woe” coming from such 
lips! Chorazin and Bethsaida had been greatly privileged. 
Works of power, works which manifested Jehovah’s pres- 
ence had been shown in their midst, yet they repented not. 
Tyre and Sidon never witnessed such manifestations. The 
_responsibility of Chorazin and Bethsaida is therefore greater 
than the responsibility of Tyre and Sidon. There will be in 
that day different degrees of punishment. Capernaum, His 
own city, had come nearest to heaven and still there was no 
response. Sodom with all their awful fruits of the flesh 
will fare better in judgment day than Capernaum. The 
measure of relationship is always the measure of responsi- 
bility. Tyre, Sidon and Sodom had no such privileges and 
stood in no such relationship to the Lord as the cities which 
our Lord mentions here. It is so with Christendom to-day. 
It shall be more tolerable in that day to the nations of dark- 
est Africa than to the so-called “Christian nations,” with 
light and privileges offered and wilfully rejected. 

‘And what a scene follows! “At that time,’ when in the 
midst of the outburst of His righteous words of condemna- 
tion, He speaks the words so precious still. What words 


230 


could picture Him as He stood there and that face, soon to 
be marred and spit upon, turned upward to heaven? And 
now He said, “I praise thee, Father, Lord of the heaven and 
the earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and 
prudent and hast revealed them to babes. Yea, Father, for 
thus has it been well pleasing in Thy sight.’ All things have 
been delivered to me by my Father, and no one knows the 
Son but the Father, nor does anyone know the Father but 
the Son, and he to whom the Son may be’pleased to reveal 
Him.” 

The Lord stands on the earth and looks to the Father in 
heaven. Both are Lord. It was so at the destruction of 
Sodom. “Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Go- 
morrah brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven.” 
(Genes. xix :24). The Lord who had then been in the earth 
and communed with Abraham His friend, stood once more 
on the earth. He came in the form of a servant, having 
emptied Himself of His outward glory, and here as the 
obedient One praises Him, to whom He had said coming into 
the world, “Lo, I come to do Thy will” (Heb. x:4-7). The 
Lord of the heaven and of the earth is His Father, but He 
who looks now to Him is not less the Lord of the heaven 
and of the earth. “Father,” He said. He was then the only 
One who could thus look to heaven. It is, blessed be His 
name! different now. The Spirit of Sonship has been given 
whereby we cry, “Abba, Father.” 

From the wise and the prudent, the self-sufficient religion- 
ists, the Pharisees and speculating Sadducees these things 
were hid, but revealed unto babes. They had refused Him, 


231 


the wisdom of God; being wise ‘in their own  conceits 
and blindness was the dreadful result. Babes instead received 
the revelation of Himself. We often wonder why the wise 
and prudent of our day do not see certain truths, the blessed 
Gospel of the Glory of God, the truth concerning the church, 
the coming of our Lord, while others, poor and weak 
though they are, are in full possession of these revelations 
and ever receive more out of his fullness. The reason is 
soon found. Only He who owns his nothingness, who takes 
his place in weakness at His feet, and is like a babe, can 
receive these things. Never does the Lord entrust His se- 
crets and his councils to the wise and prudent. Would we 
know more of Him, of His Word, His purposes and His 
thoughts? There is only one way—be a babe, own yourself 
as such and as a babe walk and live before the Lord of 
heaven and earth. 

“All things,’ our Lord said, “have been delivered unto 
me by my Father.” The people were soon ready to reject 
Him as their Messiah and King, but He knew His. inheri- 
tance, an inheritance in which the babe in Him has a glori- 
ous share. 

Furthermore, “the Father knoweth the Son.” How softly 
we should tread whenever we speak of the person of our 
Lord, for the full knowledge is only with the Father. “No 
one knoweth the Father but the Son and he to whomsoever 
the Son may be pleased to reveal Him.’’ No one cometh to 
the Father but by me. Whoever denies the Son has not 
the Father either. Revealing the Father is what our Lord 
did and still is doing. In resurrection He is Son of God 


232 


with power, and all who receive Him are brought to Cod 
and become children of God, to know the Father. 

Upon this divine statement of His own person, His one- 
ness with the Father, He utters that word which is so well 
known and which has been a word of blessing to uncount- 
able souls. 

“Come to Me all ye who labor and are burdened and I 
will give you rest.’ This is the first part of the gracious 
invitation, Significantly it comes in right after the rejec- 
tion by His own becomes manifest and after He spoke of 
the rejection of the favored Galilean cities. It is typical of 
that full, free and blessed Gospel of Grace, which was made 
known after His death and resurrection, and which is still 
being preached. 

It is an invitation to all, Jew and Gentile. The invitation 
is to those who labor and are burdened; it is to come to 
Him and He promises rest. How full it is! How inex- 
haustible in its meaning! The second part of His invitation 
brings us further. “Take My yoke upon you and learn 
from Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall 
find rest for your souls; for My yoke is easy and My burden 
light.” 

The one who has come to Him and found rest is to take 
now His yoke upon him and to learn of Him. It means to 
follow Him, to be under Him as Lord. The yoke is not the 
law, but His own yoke, His loving restraint ; and two belong 
into the yoke; we are yoked together with Him. And hav- 
ing Him, the One meek and lowly in heart, ever before the 


ie 
= teal esata 


233 
soul, rest for the soul is the blessed fruit. It is the whole 
Epistle to the Philippians in a nutshell. “Let this mind be 
in you which was in Christ Jesus.” Coming to Him we have 
rest—living in Him we find rest for our souls. May the 


reader meditate upon these words of our Lord till they be- 
come sweeter than honey and honeycomb. 


234 ie 


CHAPTER XII. 


The twelfth chapter brings before us the full manifestation 
of the enmity of Israel against our Lord and His rejection 
by His own. 

It is the great turning point in this Gospel and with it the 
offer of our Lord to Israel as their King, as well as the offer 
of the Kingdom ceases. We have followed the story of our ~ 
Lord manifesting Himself as Jehovah the King. Every- 
thing in the first part of this royal Gospel proves Him to 
be the promised One. Speaking not like the Pharisees and 
the Scribes, but with authority, He had declared the princi- 
ples of the Kingdom He came to bring. 

Going through the cities of Galilee, He and His disciples 
had preached the Kingdom of the Heavens to be at hand. 
Multitudes had heard the glad and solenin announcement. 

These glad tidings were backed up by the most startling 
signs. The blind saw, the lepers were cleansed, demons 
were driven out and the dead were raised. There could be 
only one explanation for these miracles. 
attvery one of them proved conclusively that Jehovah had 
visited His people; He whose name is “Immanuel” had ap- 
peared in their midst. Old Testament predictions of the 
coming of the Messiah, the manner of His coming and His 
works were being fulfilled before the eyes of that generation 
yet they did not and would not recognize Him. 


235 


They remained cold and indifferent. They had no heart 
for Jehovah-Jesus. This in itself was a fulfillment of 
prophecy. And so we learn in the eighth chapter that a Gen- 
tile showed greater faith than the Lord had found in Israel 
and our Lord indicates the immediate future of the children 
of the Kingdom. They were to be cast out and others from 
the East and the West were to come and sit down in the 
Kingdom of the Heavens with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. 
The murmuring of the Pharisees, first heard when he healed 
the paralytic and forgave him his sins, was the first outbrea’: 
against Him. And now the storm we saw in its threatening 
is to break. The awful blasphemy is uttered and the King 
declares in His sovereign power the relationship between 
Him the King and the Kingdom people broken. It is now 
clear that the Kingdom of the Heavens, so fully revealed 
in the Old Testament, is to be postponed till the Son of Man 
comes again. After this rejection of the King and His turn- 
ing away from His own, He revealed the Kingdom of the 
Heavens in mysteries. He shows, as the Revealer of Se- 
crets, the history of what He brings and makes known, 
the Kingdom in the hands of men and the development 
of it during His absence from the earth. And so we read 
immediately following the xii chapter, “And that same day 
Jesus went out from the house and sat down by the sea.” 
He left the house; breaking off His relationship and taking 
His place by the sea—(a type of the Gentiles). 

And now we are ready to look a little closer at the sad 
events before us in the important twelfth chapter. 

The first paragraph, contained in eight verses, shows us 


236 


our Lord manifesting Himself as Lord of the Sabbath and 
answering the charge of the Pharisees, who accused them 
of Sabbath breaking. “At that time Jesus went on the Sab- 
bath through the cornfields; and his disciples were hungry 
and began to pluck the ears and to eat. But the Pharisees, 
seeing it, said to Him, Behold, Thy disciples are doing what 
is not lawful to do on the Sabbath.” It was “at that time,” 
at the time of that loving call to come unto Him, which 
stands at the close of the eleventh chapter. When divine 
love was full of solicitude for the burdened and the poor, 
the evil hearts of the enemies were ready to attack Him. 
The Sabbath, the seventh day, is something essentially 
Jewish, the peculiar day for the peculiar people. Its keep- 
ing is embodied in the ten commandments. The seventh day 
was, and is to the present day, a matter of great importance 
with the Jew. He prides himself with it and boasts in the 
strict keeping of it. Not satisfied with the plain fourth 
commandment in the decalogue, the Jewish elders added 
their injunctions forbidding even the smallest matters and 
entering into details which are ridiculous. These human 
traditions were in the days of our Lord strictly followed. 
The religious Pharisee saw to its enforcement and they put 
these burdens upon the people and tried to establish their 
own righteousness. To take ears of corn and eat them on 
the Sabbath is nowhere forbidden in the law given through 
Moses. Among many other injunctions the leaders of tra- 
ditions had added this to the Word of God and made it a 
sin should anyone pluck an ear of corn on the seventh day. 
Before we continue with the story of this chapter we 


237 


desire to add here a few words, which may prove helpful 
- to some of our readers. Not a few Christian believers have 
been annoyed, as well as disturbed, by a class of professing 
Christians who have added to their denominational names, 
as a special distinction, the term “Seventh day.” Thus we 
find about us “Seventh Day Baptists” and “Seventh Day 
Adventists,” as well as others whose chief endeavor seems 
to be to preach the keeping of the Jewish Sabbath. These 
sects, who defend the seventh day as a Christian institution, 
are nearly all infested with other serious evil doctrines, such © 
as soul sleep, second probation, universalism and _ others. 
The root of this error of Sabbath keeping is the ignorance 
of these people of the fact that the believer in Christ has not 
the law, the ten commandments, for his rule, but the believer 
in Christ is dead to the law, and as a new creation is complete- 
ly severed from that which is old, as well as from all earthly 
connections. The believer in Christ is above the law. He is 
complete and perfect in Christ. The rule for his walk is 
Christ Himself, by whom he is indwelt. The Sabbath, the 
seventh day, is connected with the earth and with Israel, 
but the believer is not Israel, nor does he belong to the earth, 
but Grace has lifted him into heaven. It is.quite true there 
is a Sabbath day and this day is the seventh day of the week. 
But there is no Sabbath keeping now as regards Israel and 
the earth. The great and true Sabbath is still coming. 

The question might then be asked, “Has the Christian be- 
liever no Sabbath day to keep?” The answer is, No. If we 
speak of a Sabbath day then surely it must mean the seventh 
day, and if we desire to keep the Sabbath day holy we must 


238 


keep not the first day of the week but the seventh day. But 
some will say, “the Sabbath has been changed from the 
last day of the week to the first day.” This is often said; 
but there’s no scriptural authority for it. Neither Christ 
nor His apostles declared such a change. It is, therefore, 
wrong to call the first day of the week, known by the name 
“Sunday,” the Sabbath or “Christian Sabbath.” The first 
day of the week is the Lord’s day, the day of resurrection, 
the day of the new creation. This day was kept in the very 
beginning of the Christian age as a precious memorial of 
Him who-was dead and was raised from the dead, who is 
seated in the Highest Heaven and who is coming again. 
It was with the early Christians, and should be so still, a 
day of worship, when they came together to break bread 
and partake of the blessed cup, to show the Lord’s death, 
till He come again. Some one has expressed it in the fol- 
lowing short sentences: “Israel was commanded to observe 
the Sabbath day; the church is privileged to enjoy the first 
day of the week. The former was the test of Israel’s moral 
condition; the latter is the significant proof of the Church’s 
eternal acceptance. The Sabbath day manifested what Israel 
could do for God; the Lord’s day perfectly declares what 
God has done for us.” 

There is no law about this blessed first day of the week. 
The Christian believer is in perfect liberty, with no yoke 
and bondage upon him. “For ye have been called to liberty, 
brethren; only do not turn liberty into an opportunity to 
the flesh, but by love serve one another” (Gal. v:15). The 
child of God will know how to use this liberty in the right 


239 


way and will certainly have the first day “of the week as a 
day of rejoicing in the Lord and fellowship with Him. 

A strange sight indeed it is to see the nominal church at- 
tempting by political influences, legislation, police activities, 
to force the world to keep the Sabbath day on the first day 
of the week. As if it were the calling of the church to en- 
force Jaws and as if the world could be made to keep the Sab- 
bath. What a deplorable mixture! What an awful confu- 
sion! 

And now after this disgression we come back to our chap- 
ter. The human way of answering the objections of the 
Pharisees would have been to tell them that there was no 
law forbidding the deed done by the disciples. In a few words 
He might have informed them not alone of the invalidity of 
their traditions, but also of the sin they had committed by 
adding to the Word of God. However, this is not the way 
divine wisdom chooses to silence their accusations. Perhaps 
they expected in their Satanic device some such answer, 
which they would have used against Him. The answer they 
hear from His lips, the lips of the Lawgiver Himself, is a 
different one they expected. It reveals His divinity, Him 
the perfect one in knowledge, as does every other answer 
He gave to His enemies in this Gospel, silencing their 
temptings at every instance. When He met Satan, as we 
learned from the fourth chapter, He used as weapon the 
Word of God, His own Word. Now He meets the offspring 
of vipers, the children of the enemy, and the weapon He uses 
is the same. He wields once more the Sword of the Spirit 


and answers their unscriptural objections by His scriptural 


240 


assertions. May we learn from it, and at all times, whether 
it is the Devil or his offspring which tempt us, use the Word 
in our defense. And thus He spake: “Have ye not read 
what David did when he was hungry, and they that were 
hungry? How he entered into the house of God, and 
ate the shewbread, which it was not lawful for him to eat, 
nor for those with him, but for the priests only? Or have 
ye not read in the law that on the Sabbath the priests in the 
temple profane the Sabbath and are blameless? But I say . 
unto you, that there is here what is greater than the temple. 
But if ye had known what is: I will have mercy and not 
sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the guiltless. For 
the Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath.” 

The incident quoted by our Lord from David's life we 
find recorded in 1 Sam. xxi: How then is this incident to 
be applied? David was forced, as the rejected one, though 
- God’s anointed king, to enter the house of God and do what 
was not lawful for him to do. David’s hunger and the hun- 
ger of those who were with him is but a type of the greater 
One than David and His disciples passing through the corn- 
field hungry and obliged to pluck ears of corn to eat. The 
sad scene on that Sabbath day was evidence enough that the 
people did not care for the little group headed by the King. 
When David was rejected and a fugitive, “the holy things 
connected with the ceremonials given to Israel by God ceased 
to be holy. The sin was David’s rejection, and this made 
the consecrated shewbread common, as David said to the 
High Priest, “the bread is, as it were common, yea, though 
it were sanctified this day in the vessel” (1 Sam. xxi:5). 


241 


The rejection of God’s anointed had profaned all. This is 
the thought our Lord expressed to the Pharisees. They had 
rejected Him. They had no love for Him nor cared for Him. 
How ridiculous for these hyprocrites to speak of Sabbath- 
keeping when they were rejecting the Lord of the Sabbath! 
They were straining at a gnat and swallowing a camel. 
How much of this pharisaical, hypocritical spirit we have 
about us in Christendom. The divinity of the Bible, as well 
as the Lord and His redemption work, is denied by many 
professing Christians, who hold still outward forms, rituals, 
keeping of holidays and ceremonials. But even the priests 
profaned the Sabbath and were blameless. What did our 
Lord mean by this? The priests had to bring sacrifices on 
the Sabbath day. “And on the Sabbath day two lambs of 
the first year without spot, and two-tenth deals of flour for 
a meat offering, mingled with oil, and the drink offering 
thereof’—thus the law commanded (Num. xxviii:g). 
This demanded work, and according to the law and their in- 
terpretation of it, it was forbidden on the Sabbath, yet the 
priests, though they profaned the Sabbath, were held blame- 
less. Grace was fully typified in these sacrifices and Grace 
working is above the law and does away with the legal cov- 
enant.. Our Lord surely indicates here the time when laws 
and ceremonials were to find their end in Him who is 
“oreater than the temple.” He had come as the true priest 
and the true sacrifice to do that which the blood of bulls and 
goats could never do; that is, to take away sin and bring the 
Sabbath, the rest. He is the Lord of the Sabbath and that 


242 


as Son of Man, in His humiliation and in His exaltation. 
‘But alas! they would not understand Him nor know what 
it meant, “I will have mercy and not sacrifice.” There was 
no answer from the Pharisees. The declaration of Himself 
as the Lord of the Sabbath, the One who is above the Sab- 
bath, must have inflamed the hatred in their hearts still more. 
And so we see Him going away from thence. However, He 
did not turn His back upon them. It is a lingering, patient 
love we learn of Him here. He turns His blessed feet 
towards their synagogue. How reluctant to leave them in 
their dreadful condition of enmity against Him! 

A man is present with a withered hand. They desire now 
to find some new ground of accusation again Him. Their 
first attempt had failed. He had read their evil thoughts, and 
by His answer He had shown that He anticipated the question 
they now put to Him, “Ts it lawful to heal on the Sabbath?” 
Awful motive, which stands alongside of the question, show- 
ing the depths of Satan “that they might accuse Him.” , The 
question also discloses the fact that they believed in His 
healing power. We may well imagine the scene in that 
synagogue. The Lord in His divine calmness, the unfortu- 
nate man with the withered hand, the malicious, accusing 
Pharisees with their Satanic desire. And now the stillness 
broken by His voice, ““What man shall there be of you who 
has one sheep, and if this fall into a pit on the Sabbath, will 
not lay hold of it and raise it up?” There was no answer; 
of course none could stand up and declare he would not de- 
liver his one sheep out of the pit. “How much better then 


isa manthana sheep! So that it is lawful to do well on the 


243 


Sabbath.” What a divine logic! How unanswerable this 
statement ! 

But it is not His Word alone. He has divine power to 
heal him who has heard His words. His glory as Jehovah, 
the King Immanuel, is to shine forth once more. He says to 
the man, “Stretch out thy hand!” Faith answers to His 
Word, and he stretcheth it out, and it was restored sound as 
the other. It was faith to stretch out a withered hand in 
answer to His Word and precious are the lessons we may 
learn from it for the life by faith to which we are called, 
ever living and acting in obedience to His Word. Yet we 
ypass over that which is so plainly seen on the surface and 
add but a few words of what this miracle stands for in this 
dispensational Gospel. The man with the withered hand is 
a type of poor, withered Israel, withered spiritually and na- 
tionally. He had come to restore, but, unlike the man, Israel 
had no faith. Yet the day is coming when Israel will an- 
swer in faith and healing will follow. 

The Pharisees beaten by His words and deed go out of 
the synagogue. In their dark councils for the first time 
they came together to find a way how to destroy Him. 

How great the blindness which began to settle upon them! 
How could they destroy Him, who had raised the dead? 
How could they take His life, who is the true God and the 
eternal life? And even if there and then, in their dark coun- 
sels, they had found a way, according to their conception, 
to destroy Him, they could never have touched His life, for 
our Lord’s body was not subject to.mortality, His body in 
His humiliation was immortal, for He knew no sin. And 


244 


while they kept their blind endeavors to themselves, He was 
not ignorant of it. “But Jesus, knowing it, withdrew thence, » 
and great crowds followed Him and He healed them all and 
charged them strictly that they should not make Him pub- 
licly known” (verses 15, 16). The withdrawal of Himself 
from the scene and the presence of the Pharisees indicated 
His withdrawal from the nation itself, the result of His 
rejection. 

This is made clear by the quotation from the Scriptures 
which follows: “That that might be fulfilled which was 
spoken through Esaias the prophet, saying: “Behold my 
servant, whom I have chosen, my beloved, in whom my soul 
has found its delight. I will put my Spirit upon Him, and 
He shall show forth judgment to the nations. He shall not 
strive or cry out, nor shall anyone hear His voice in the 
streets; a bruised reed shall He not break, and smoking flax 
shall He not quench, until He bringeth forth judgment unto 
victory; and.in His name shall the nations hope” (verses 
17-21). These verses are found in Isaiah xlii:1-4. He who 
knew the Scriptures and who had come to fulfill the prophe- 
cies relating to His sufferings, whose constant desire was to 
do the will of Him who sent Him, that the Scripture might 
be fulfilled—what comfort and encouragement must have 
come to Him through these words, which His own Spirit 
had revealed to Isaiah. The rejection of Him by His own 
was imminent. They were turning away from Him and 
accusing Him, but He knew Himself as the chosen One, the 
Beloved, His Father’s love and delight upon Him. Thus 
in the midst of the enemies with their wicked accusations 


245 
and persecutions He could he calm, His perfect trust in Him, 
wnose Beloved He was, well pleasing to Hin. 

Our way, as His own, should not be different from this. 
In the midst of tribulations and adversities, surrounded by 
the enemy, we can be calm, and more than that, rejoice. 

He, as the servant of Jehovah, did not strive. Why 
should He strive as the One who put His trust in Jehovah? 
nd thus it is written of the servant, His follower, “the 
servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle to all.” 
(2 Tim. 11:24.) Gentleness as foretold was to be found in 
Him. How gentle and loving He must have been? Can we 
ever think too much of His patience and gentleness? The 
bruised reed He did not break. The weakest thing He took 
tenderly in His hands. The smoking flax was not quenched 
by Him. In the Epistle of our practical walk in Christ 
we are exhorted, “let your gentleness be known of all men.” 
(Phil. iv:5). He in us will reproduce the very same charac- 
teristic in our lives here on the earth. 

But the force of the quotation lies in the fact that the 
Gentiles, the nations are mentioned. The fulfillment in its 
completeness will take place, no doubt, at the time of His 
second Coming, but here the Holy. Spirit uses it in still 
another way. Israel had begun to reject Him and now the 
Gentiles shall-hear of God’s gift and grace. The passage is 
introduced by the Spirit of God in a way as He only could 
do it. 

Another one possessed by a demon is brought before Him. 
Most likely He had returned from the withdrawal recorded 
above, and once more the Pharisees are present. The pos- 


246 


sessed one is blind and dumb. Was he not a perfect picture 
of the nation Israel? Blind and dumb was their condition. 
Again He manifests Himself as Lord and He healed the 
demon possessed man, so that the dumb spoke and saw. 
No wonder that all the crowds were amazed and said, “Is 
this the Son of David?” They must have meant by this 
cry the Messiah, for they expected Him under the title of 
the Son of David. Still the question also implies doubt. 
And here they stand again, these dark and cunning Phari- 
sees. They have heard it. Perhaps the cry, “Is this the Son 
of David?” reached their ear. Moved with jealousy, anger, 
malice and Satanic hatred against Him whose omnipotent 
power was once more manifested, they said: “This man does 
not cast out demons but by Beelzebub, prince of demons.” 
The accusation had been made before by them (ix :34) 
when it was passed over by the Lord, but now, after the re- 
peated manifestations of His power, after their hatred cul- 
minated in seeking His life, the awful blasphemy is to be re- 
buked by Him. Cowards they were, as it is seen that they 
did not dare to bring the accusation to His face. How could 
they dare to stand before Him? So He reads again their very 
thoughts, a miracle in itself, which should have startled 
them. His answer to their Satanic thoughts consists in two 
very logical arguments. “Every kingdom divided against 
itself is brought to desolation, and every city or house divi- 
ded against itself will not subsist. And if Satan casts out 
Satan, he is divided against himself, how then shall his king- 
dom subsist?” (verses 25-26). This is very clear. Satan 
casting out Satan would mean a division in his awful domain, 


247 


which would mean its complete ruin and overthrow. It is, 
therefore, inconceivable that the Devil could furnish the pow- 
er to destroy his own kingdom which he controls. The pas- 
sage is full of meaning aside from the argument it contains. 
He who knoweth all things in perfect knowledge tells us 
that Satan is a person and a king, for he has a kingdom over 
which he rules. The demons* are in his kingdom, one with _ 
the head in thought and purpose. How little we know of 
his awful power, of his kingdom and the agencies at his 
command to destroy body and soul. We need not know it all, 
it is sufficient to know that he is an enemy overcome, his 
kingdom is spoiled by the victor, by Him who has annulled 
him, who has the power of death, that is the Devil. Higher 
Criticism claims that our Lord acquiesced in the legendary 
belief of the Jews, a belief they had picked up in Babylon, 
that there existed a personal Devil and demons under him. 
This foolish, infidel theory, which is nowadays held by so 
many preachers and theological professors, is almost as blas- 
phemous as the accusation of the Pharisees. If our Lord 
knew better than what the Jews held, and He did not correct 
their views, and if He did not know that their belief was in- 
correct, then in neither case could He be divine. This 
is Higher Criticism, the denial of the infallibility and 
divinity of the living and the written Word. The second ar- 
gument against their evil thoughts is the following: 

“And if I cast out demons, by Beelzebub, your sons bv 


2 
*The translation “devils” is not correct. There is one devil, but 
the fallen angels are demons. 


248 


whom do they cast them out? For this reason they shall be 
your judges” (verse 27). 

Among the Jews there were and are still such who pro- 
fess to be exorcists, men who claim to have power to cast 
out demons. We cannot follow certain traditional teach- 
ings of the Jews concerning exorcism at this time. Some of 
them were wandering exorcists, going from place to place 
professing to cast out demons. Such are they who are men- 
tioned in Acts xix:13: “And certain of the Jewish exorcicts 
also, who went about, took in hand to call upon those who 
had wicked spirits the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, I 
adjure you by Jesus, whom Paul preaches.’’ Perhaps those 
who are mentioned elsewhere, who drove out demons using 
the name of the Lord and did not follow Him, were exorcists. 
Certain it is the Lord did not mean His own disciples upon 
whom He had conferred the power to cast out demons in 
His name; He meant the school of Pharisees, who practiced, 
or claimed to practice, exorcism. The question put to them 
by our Lord demanded an answer which they cared not to 
give, for it would have been to their own condemnation. 

And so He continues with His perfect argumentation, 
driving it home to their hearts, as only He could do it. “But 
if I by the Spirit of God cast out demons, then indeed the 
Kingdom of God is come upon you.” It is impossible that 
Satan could cast out Satan. There remains, then, only one 
other alternative; the Spirit of God casts out the demons. 
Then, indeed, the Kingdom is come upon you in the person 
of the King who manifests this power. Alas! they knew it, 
but they would not have Him and the Kingdom He preached. 


i aS: 


249 


And still His voice is heard: “Or else, can anyone enter 
into the house of the strong man and plunder his goods, un- 
less he first bind the strong man? And then he will plunder 
his house.” 

The strong man is Satan, but the Lord, stronger than 
Satan, had bound him and has the power to enter his domain 
and take away his prey. Who then is He who bound the en- 
emy? Perhaps His voice rested here. Perhaps He waited 
for an answer. “Thou art Christ the Son of the living God” 
would have been in order here. - 

And stronger still He speaks. “He that is not with me is 
against me, and he that gathers not with me scatters.” . He 
demands decision. Half-heartedness does not satisfy Him 
and in face of such open-faced accusations and blasphemies 
would be impossible. It was an appeal to decide. In our 
day in which we live, out and out decision is not less demand- 
ed. Phariseeism and Sadduceeism, the leaven is working 
about us and to be undecided is paramount with dishonoring 
His own glorious person. 

“For this reason I say unto you, every sin and injurious 
speaking shall be forgiven to men but speaking injuriously 
of the Spirit shall not be forgiven to men. And whosoever 
shall have spoken a word against the Son of man, it shall 
be forgiven him, but whosoever shall speak against the Holy 
Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this age nor 
in the coming one.” 

Much has been said and written on this passage and on 
the question of the unpardonable sin. Many who had lived 
in open sin and worldly lusts, having been arrested by the 


250 


grace of God, almost despaired for they feared they had com- 
mitted that sin and now in spite of their repentance forgive- 
ness was an impossibility for them. This wrong conclusion 
is often preached in’ so called “revival meetings” to bring 
sinners to accept Christ. Believers who fell in sin likewise 
have thought that after sinning with open eyes, wilfully, 
they had been guilty of the unpardonable sin. How many 
poor, ignorant souls have grieved for weeks and months 
thinking the Holy Spirit had now left them for good. But 
the Holy Spirit once given to the believer in believing on 
Christ has come as the abiding Comforter. He has come to 
stay and never, no never, to leave that which He has sealed. 
The Spirit may be grieved, He may be quenched, but never 
can He be driven away so that the true believer would fall 
back and be lost. ; 

This widespread doctrine of falling from grace in the 
sense of the believer’s possibility to be lost dishonors Christ 
and His work for us. But some one says: “Did not David 
pray: And take not the Holy Spirit from me?” Certainly he 
did, and it was in order for him to pray thus for the Holy 
Spirit might have left him, for He was not then in the earth 
with believers as the abiding comforter. The believer in the 
New Testament is never exhorted to pray to the Spirit to 
remain with him. He is to be filled with the Spirit 
and continually guard against grieving the Spirit or not to 
quench Him, but never to doubt His presence. All these 
wrong conceptions spring from a deplorable ignorance of 
the fundamentals of the blessed Gospel of the Grace of God. 

And now what is this sin of which our Lord speaks here? 


251 
In His coming to His own people, the Father, the Son and the 
Holy Spirit were manifested. The Holy Spirit in.-His power 
was manifested through the Son, our Lord, upon whom He 
was in His fullness. The signs He did were not alone done’ 
in His Own omnipotent power as Jehovah, they were the 
manifestation of the Holy Spirit likewise. And these Phari- 
sees had sinned against this Holy Spirit by accusing Christ, 
that He drove out the demons by Satanic power. They had 
blasphemed the Spirit, spoken injuriously about Him, in 
saying that Beelzebub, the prince of demons, was present 
with Christ and not the Holy Spirit. This they did mali- 
ciously. And this and nothing else is the sin of which our 
Lord here speaks. The sin is to charge the Lord with 
doing His miracles through Satanic power and not through 
‘the Holy Spirit. We do believe, therefore, that this sin 
could only be committed as long as our Lord Jesus Christ 
was in the earth and that it was committed by the Pharisees 
with their blasphemies. This is the sin which would not be 
forgiven neither in this age nor in the coming one. In 1 
John v:16-17, we read, “If any one see his brother sinning, a 
sin not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life, 
for those that do not sin unto death. There is a sin to 
death. I do not say of that that he should make a request.” 
This is to be explained in the following way. The brother 
is a believer. On account of sinning he is chastised. God 
permits sickness to come upon him and the sinning not hav- 
ing been unto death (physical death only) he is raised up. _ 
However, a believer may go on wilfully sinning and remain 
there dishonoring Christ. He is to be taken away out of the 


252 


land of the living, cut off by death. No request could be 
made for such a one. Thequestion of death is not eternal 
condemnation but only physical death. ag 

From the fact of the sin these Pharisees were doing, the 
blasphemy against the Holy Spirit, the Lord now turns to 
the cause of this, the spring from which the evil comes. 
“Either make the tree good, and its fruit good; or make 
the tree corrupt, and its fruit corrupt. For from the fruit 
the tree is known. Offspring of vipers! how can ye speak 
good things, being wicked?” (verse 33-34). The Searcher 
of hearts, He who understandeth the thoughts afar off, un- 
covers the real condition of these men and the condition of 
man in general. The tree is bad, the fruit must be bad. 
The tree must be made good, and that denotes a change, 
and the fruit will be good. “The heart is deceitful above 
all, and desperately wicked; who can know it? JI, the 
Lord, search the heart’? (Jerm. xvii:9, 10). He does it 
here and speaks of them as John, the forerunner did, as 
“offspring of vipers,” with wicked hearts and impossible to 
bring forth anything good. And, later, once more He 
spoke of the condition of the heart of man, “For out of 
the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, forni- 
cations, thefts, false witness, blasphemies” (Matth. xv :IQ). 
How little those Pharisees, and Sadducees as well, believed 
in this and how unwilling they were to accept the sentence 
and verdict of Him, who knoweth all things. They were 
given to their ceremonial, ritualistic observances, very scru- 
‘ pulous about their phylacteries and fringes of their garments, 
making long prayers, keeping the outside of the cup and 


253 


the platter clean, but never acknowledging the condition of 
the heart before the Searcher of Hearts. Self-righteous, 
moral, religious and, with it all, “offspring of vipers.” All 
their religious observances and outward morality did not and 
could not effect a change. And so they stood before Him 
whose finger had written the law, boasting in the keeping 
of the law and rejecting the Lord, blaspheming against the 
Holy Spirit. 

The leaven of the Pharisees is still at work. This leaven 
has leavened, indeed, the whole lump. Ritualistic, religious, 
moral Christendom, professing, and not possessing, is the 
direct descendant of the Pharisee. of old and as such the 
offspring of vipers as much as they were. How little the 
radical, complete corruption of man is believed in Christen- 
dom, how little it is taught. Man with the good spark in 
him (as they claim), developing it by religiousness and the 
use of his own will, becomes and is his own Saviour. The 
Lord is looked upon not as Lord, but as Jesus of Nazareth, 
whose life is an example, while the atonement, the blood, is 
set aside and rejected. The wicked heart cannot bring forth 
good things. Fine and polished, sweet and harmonious, 
may be the language of the cultured, religious, unsaved 
man, but proceeding from an evil heart it can never please 
God. “For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth 
speaks. The good man out of the good treasure brings 
forth good things and the wicked man out of the wicked 
treasure brings forth wicked things. But I say unto you 
that every idle word which men shall say, they shall render 
an account of it in judgment day; for by thy words thou 


Sf, 254 


shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned” 
(Verse 35-37). 

These words have been misunderstood and much mis- 
applied and all this by wresting these words out of their 
connection. They are mostly applied in connection with 
that unscriptural phrase and doctrine, “universal judgment.” 
According to this, even the words will be weighed and 
judged, and only then in that hour of judgment, will it be 
known, according to this teaching, who will be saved and 
who is lost. Our Lord did not teach this here nor is 
it taught anywhere else. These Pharisees were proud of 
their works and were se!f-righteous. If they relied on their 
works as a means of their justification and salvation they 
have to expect a judgment accordingly; every idle word is 
to be judged, which means utter, absolute condemnation. 
Their words could not be good because they were wicked. 
May the self-righteous, religious man remember this. Ab- 
solute condemnation awaits him. Salvation is by grace, and 
by that salvation man receives a good treasure and brings 
forth good things. Out of the abundance of the heart the 
mouth then speaks. Futhermore, the word “idle” means 
useless, barren. All that which man speaks out of himself 
is barren and useless. The believer, however, living after 
the Spirit, will not utter useless words, but that which is in 
honor of the Son of God. As believers, we should bear 
constantly in mind that we must all appear before the 
judgment seat of Christ, not for a decision of eternal sal- 


vation, this was settled when the believer trusted in Christ, 


255 


but for rewards. Surely then our deeds, our works and 
our words will be either approved or disapproved. 

“By thy words thou shalt be justified and by thy words 
thou shalt be condemned.” This has also a reference to the 
familiar passage in Romans x: “If thou shalt confess with 
thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart 
that God hath raised Him from the dead, thou shalt be 
saved.” And wherever there is not this confession springing 
from the belief of the heart there is condemnation. 

The scene is now drawing to its close. The hard-heart- 
edness of the Pharisees. is seen by some of them coming 
after such words, saying, Teacher, we desire to see a sign 
from Thee. Whatever evil design they had in asking him 
thus we do not know. He had done sign upon sign and they 
had ample proofs of His divinity. Upon such an evil, un- 
believing request He can only utter His righteous indigna- 
tion. So He calls them a wicked and adulterous generation. 
“A wicked and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, and 
a sign shall not be given to it save the sign of Jonas the 
prophet. For, even as Jonas was in the great fish three days 
and three nights, thus shall the Son of Man be in the heart 
of the earth three days and three nights. Ninevites shall 
stand up in the judgment with this generation, and shall 
condemn it; for they repented at the preaching of Jonas; 
and behold more than Jonas is here” (verse 38-41). This 
is a most significant passage. How far the Pharisees be- 
lieved the story of Jonas we do not know. The Sadducees no 
doubt rejected the book of Jonah, for they were the ration- 
alists and critics of their day. It is significant for us in our 


256 


day when the judgment to fall upon apostate Christendom 
is so near, nothing is more ridiculed than the book of Jonah 
and its sublime teachings. The Sadducees of the present 
day, the higher critics, assume to know more than the Lord, 
and by rejecting the book of Jonah as uninspired they reject 
the infallible Lord Himself. But why does our Lord men- 
tion Jonah here? Because Jonah is a type of the death and 
resurrection of our Lord. Jonah is the only prophet who 
was sent away from Israel’s land far unto the Gentiles, to 
the great and ungodly city of Nineveh. However, before 
he went there, he passed through a death experience and out 
of that grave in which he was brought he was taken again, 
a type of resurrection. Through it God brought salvation to 
the Gentiles, for Jonah, after his death and resurrection 
experience proclaimed the message of God. So the Lord 
was going away from Israel. He was soon to leave them, 
and the grace of God was to go out towards the Gentile 
world. Yet before that could be He had to go into the jaws 
of death, and, like Jonah, was three days and three nights 
in the belly of the great fish, so was He to be the same 
length of time in the grave, but also to come forth in resur- 
rection. He was preached, after His resurrection, to the 
Jew first; but while Nineveh repented after the message of 
Jonah, that wicked and adulterous generation did not re- 
pent of their course, after the preaching through Him, who 
is greater than Jonah. Therefore the Ninevites will rise up 
and condemn that generation. Jonah is likewise a type of 
the whole nation, which, however, is not before us in this 


257 


chapter.* The Queen of Sheba also will condemn that gen- 
eration, she came to hear the wisdom of Solomon and here 
stands He who as the Wisdom and they reject Him, who 
imparted to the wise King the wisdom he had. 

And this is followed by a prediction by our Lord which 
concerns the future of that generation. “But when the 
unclean spirit has gone out of the man, he goes through 
dry places, seeking rest, and does not find it. Then he 
says, I will return to my house whence I came out; and 
having come he finds it unoccupied, swept and adorned. 
Then he goes and takes with himself seven other spirits 
worse than himself, and entering in, they dwell there; and 
the last condition of that man becomes worse than the first. 
Thus it shall be to this wicked generation also” (verse 
43-45). All kinds of interpretations and applications have 
been made of this prediction. It is, however, clear that 
there is but one application, and that is in respect to the 
unbelieving generation. “Thus shall it be to this wicked 
generation also”—settles the point of application. Gener- 
ation is certainly to be understood in the sense of race. 
The unclean spirit is idolatry. It had left the nation, and 
even now the nation is swept from that evil spirit and unoc- 
cupied, and boasts of reform. It will not be so forever. 
The unclean spirit will return and bring seven others with 
him and take possession of that house again, and the last 
condition, the end, becomes worse than the beginning. The 


*See our tract on “Jonah and the Whale,” where the dispensa- 
tional side is expounded. 


258 


return of the unclean spirit with its seven companions will 
take place during the great tribulation. 

The end of the rejection of our Lord by His own has 
come. He has outlined their dreadful end, and to which 
Israel’s unbelief is rapidly leading on, and now follows a 
pathetic ending of this great crisis. “But while He was 
yet speaking to the crowds, behold His mother and His 
brethren stood without, seeking to speak to.Him. Then 
one said to Him, Behold Thy mother and Thy brethren 
are standing without, seeking to speak fo Thee: = But"“He 
answered and said to him who had spoken to Him, Who 
is My mother and who are My brethren? And stretching 
out His hand to His disciples, He said, Behold My mother 
and My brethren; for whosoever shall do the will of My 
Father who is in the heavens, he is My brother and sister 
and mother.” From Mark’s Gospel we learn the possible 
reason of His relatives coming to Him. “And His relatives 
having heard of it went out to lay hold of Him, for they 
said, He is out of His mind” (Mark iii:2r). 

He refuses to see them. Behind this refusal stands the 
fact of a broken relationship. He no longer recognizes 
His own, and speaks of a new relationship, founded upon 
obedience to the will of His Father in the heavens. 


259. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


We have now reached one of the most important chapters 
in this Gospel. It demands, therefore, our closest at- 
tention, and this more so because the revelation which our 
Lord gives here, the unfolding of the mysteries of the king- 
dom of the heavens, has been and still is grossly misunder- 
stood and falsely interpreted. Precisely that which our 
Lord did not mean has been read into this chapter. The 
whole chapter has been, so to speak, turned upside down 
by most of the learned commentators of Christendom, For 
any believer to turn to these for light and instruction will 
only result in getting thoroughly confused. We have often 
said if this one chapter would be rightly understood by 
the professing church, the consequences would be the most 
far-reaching. But one almost despairs of seeing the true 
meaning of the mystery of the kingdom in Matthew xiii 
believed in Christendom. The professing mass continues, 
and will continue, with the majority of those who are not 
merely outward professors, to build upon the misinterpre- 
tation of our Lord’s parables the optimistic dreams of the 
enlargement of the church, the foreshadowing of the 
universal extension of the church and the continued 
good work of.the leaven in the three meastires of meal, etc. 
We have found in our experience, that it is hard to get the 
individual believer, brought up in these wrong conceptions, 


260 


to see the true meaning; and often the testimony given is 
rejected. Let us then carefully and prayerfully look into 
the chapter before us, and may our Lord give His blessing ; 
and while the many may reject what we teach from these 
parables it may be a few receive light through the entrance 
of His Word, and may all believers in these truths be 
strengthened. 

Let us notice, first of all, two verses in this chapter; 
“Because to you it is given to know the mysteries of the 
kingdom of the heavens, but to them it is not given” (verse 
_ 1); “All these things Jesus spoke to the crowds in par- 
ables, and without a parable He did not speak to them, so 
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through the 
prophets saying, I will open my mouth in parables; I will 
utter things hidden from the world’s foundation” (verses 
34-35). These verses then tell us what our Lord makes 
known in this chapter, namely “the mysteries of the kingdom 
of the heavens”—“Things uttered, which were hidden from 
the world’s foundation.” 

In Genesis we read of one who is called “Zaphnath- 
paaneah” which, according to rabbinical interpretation, 
means “Revealer of secrets.” He is Joseph, the Hebrew 
lad rejected by his brethren, that most perfect type of our 
Lord. After his rejection by his brethren, Joseph becomes 
the revealer of the secrets, and that through the wisdom of 
God. 

Here in this chapter Christ appears as the rejected one, 
and now after the offer of the kingdom is rejected by the 
people of the kingdom, and He as king, is likewise rejected, 


261 


He becomes the revealer of the secrets, to show what will 
take place after the Kingdom has been rejected by Israel, 
and postponed. 

That He is the rejected one and the far-reaching witness 
He gives now is evident in the very opening verses. “And 
that same day Jesus went out from the house and sat down 
by the sea.” Leaving the house means He severed His 
relation with His people as we saw at the close of the twelfth 
chapter. Taking His .place by the sea, the sea typify- 
ing nations, shows that His testimony to be given now, 
the mysteries to be revealed have a wider sphere; they 
are relative to the nations. “And great crowds were 
gathered together to Him, so that going on‘ board ship 
He sat down, and the whole crowd stood on the 
shore.” He separated Himself from the multitude, while 
in the first part of this Gospel He moves in the midst of 
the multitudes, here He takes His place alone. What a 
scene it must have been! There on the seashore the multi- 
tude, and He alone some ways from the shore—He cannot 
be reached by touch now. All is significant.- Then when 
all eyes hang upon His lips, He began to speak. 

What He says is in parables, and without parables He 
did not speak to them. He utters seven parables. In no 
other Gospel do we find them grouped together as 
here. Why is this? This is the great dispensa- 
tional Gospel. Here God’s plan of the ages is re- 
vealed as in no other Gospel. We have seen before that 
the Holy Spirit in giving us this Gospel, the Genesis of the 
New Testament, is not tied down to chronological order, 


262 


but He arranges everything to suit His sublime purpose. 
After the kingdom was offered and rejected, the Lord 
makes known what is to be after this rejection, and during 
the time of His absence. Therefore these parables, seven 
in number, denoting completeness, are put right in here. 

Now the important question is when the Lord says six 
times in these parables, “The kingdom of the heavens is 
like” what does He mean by the term “Kingdom of the 
heavens?” That it can no longer mean the kingdom as it is 
revealed in the Old Testament, as it is promised to Israel, 
and as He offered it to the people, is evident. For in the 
first place, the offer was made and rejected. The preaching 
of Him and the messengers He sent out was, ‘““The kingdom 
of the heavens it at hand, repent.” Not a word do we hear 
of this in the thirteenth chapter, nor after this chapter. 
And in the second place, if our Lord had had the Old Testa- 
ment kingdom promised to Israel in view, when He says 
here “The Kingdom of the heavens is like,” He could not 
have said that He uttered things hidden from the world’s 
foundation, for the kingdom, in the Old Testament is not 
a mystery, but clearly revealed. 

Some say, and indeed the popular and almost universally 
accepted interpretation is—it is the church. The Lord 
begins now to teach about the church. So that if He says: 
“The kingdom of the heavens is like leaven, which a woman 
took and hid in three measures of meal,” etc., it is de- 
clared the church is meant, and the Gospel. The 
church is nowhere called the kingdom of the heavens. 


Oh, the great confusion which exists on this topic. The 


263 

Lord mentions. the word church only once in the 
Gospel, and that is in Matthew xvi., where He says 
that He will build His church. The church did 
not exist in the Old Testament, it was not known there 
at all; it was not in existence while the Lord walked in 
the earth, and nowhere does He refer to the church as the 
kingdom of the heavens, neither does the Holy Spirit speak 
of the church as the kingdom. He speaks of the church 
as the habitation of God, a house, a temple, the body of 
Christ and the Bride of Christ, but we repeat it, never as 
the kingdom of the heavens. All this modern application 
of kingdom of the heavens to the church is foreign to the 
Word of God. It is the unscriptural theory of man. 

But what does our Lord mean when He says “‘the kin - 
dom of the heavens?’ The answer is a very simple one. 
The kingdom on the one hand was rejected by Israel, but 
on the other hand, God gives His Word to the Gentiles, a 
fact indicated in the Old Testament prophetic Word. 

The mercy and grace offered to Israel is to go forth to 
the Gentiles, the nations, while the King Himself is absent. 
This is indicated in the first parable where _ the 
sower went out, which stands for the fact of His going 
forth into the field, which is,the world. So that which is 
extended to the Gentiles and that in which the name of 
Christ is confessed is now the kingdom of the heavens, and 
of this development of what He the.Lord from heaven 
brought and left in the earth, our Lord speaks in these 
parables. In one word “the kingdom of the heavens” in 
Matthew is equivalent with “Christendom.” It includes 


264 


the whole sphere of Christian profession saved and un- 
saved, so-called Romanists and Protestants, all who are 
naming the name of Christ. Therefore the church is not 
the kingdom of the heavens, though the church is in the 
kingdom of the heavens. 

The Lord teaches in the seven parables how matters will 
go in the earth while He is not here, and what men will do 
with that which He brought from heaven and left in the 
hands of men. 

Before we take up the parables separately we must con- 
sider their general character. The seven parables are first 
divided into four and three. The first four He speaks 
before the multitudes. Then after He dismissed the crowds, 
He went into the house and in the presence of the disciples 
He utters the three last parables. These three last ones, 
the treasure hid in the field, the pearl of great price and the 
dragnet, have a deeper spiritual meaning than the first. The 
first two parables our Lord explains Himself to His dis- 
ciples ; the other five He leaves unexplained. 

They may also be divided in the following way by twos: 

1. The sower who went out to sow. 

2. The enemy sowing tares, the spurious seed. 


These refer in part to the beginning of the kingdom of 
the heavens in the hands of men, however the conditions 
pictured here last to the end, the time of the harvest. 

3. The parable of the mustard seed. 

4. The parable of the leaven. 


These fortell the external and internal development of 


265 


the kingdom of the heavens, the progress is described and 
it is an unnatural and evil progress. 

5. The parable of the treasure hid in the field. 

6. The parable of the one pearl. 


These stand for the two mysteries of the kingdom, God’s 
earthly people hid in the field, the church the one pearl for 
which He has given all. First the pearl is taken, then the 
treasure is lifted in the field. 


7. The parable of the dragnet. 


It stands isolated, and refers to the end of the kingdom 
of the heavens in its mystery form. 

Still another way of looking at them would be to com- 
pare them with the seven church messages in Rev. ii and iii. 
Here the Lord speaks again, and this speaking is from the 
glory. In the seven messages we learn the beginning, the 
progress and the end of this present Christian age. It is 
the history of Christendom, the kingdom of the heavens, 

1. The parable of the sower—Ephesus. The apostolic 
age. The beginning with failure—leaving the first love. 

2. The parable of the evil seed—Smyrna, meaning bit- 
terness. The enemy revea‘ed. 

3. The parable of the mustard seed—Pergamos—meaning 
high tower and twice married. The professing church be- © 
comes big, a state institution under Constantine the Great. 
The big tree and the unclean birds (nations) find shelter 
there. 

4. The parable of the leaven—Thyatira—the one who 
sacrifices. Rome and her abomination. The woman Jeze- 


266 


bel, the harlot, corresponds to the woman in the parable of 
the leaven. 

5. The parable of the treasure hid—Sardis—the refor- 
mation age—having a name to live, but being dead and a 
remnant there. Israel, dead but belonging to Him who has 
purchased the field. 

6. The parable of the Pearl—Philadelphia. The church, 
the one pearl. The one body of Christ and the-removal of 
the church to be with Him. 

7. The parable of the dragnet—Laodicea—Judgment. 
I will spue thee out of my mouth. 


We do not claim to teach all this exhaustively. That 
would take many months, but we give these that each reader 
may have hints in what way to search. 

We add but one more fact to these introductory remarks 
to the study of the different parables. The key for their 
right interpretation is in themselves as well as in the scrip- 
tures. The sower in the first parable and in the second is 
the Son of Man. What He sows is the wheat, that which 
stands throughout the scriptures for purity, for Christ him- 
self. The Word He is Himself and the corn of wheat; 
the good seed are the sons of the kingdom. The field is 
the world. The enemy is the Devil. The man in the sixth 
parable who buys the field (the world) is the same Son of 
Man and the merchantman who sells all He has to pur- 
chase the one pearl He desires is the same person as the 
Sower. It is nonsense to make out of the merchantman 
and out of the man who buys the field the sinner. That 


207 


would mean that the sinner has something to give. He has 
not. And the field, meaning the world, it would mean the 
sinner is to buy the world. 

The three measures of meal of course come from the 
wheat, they always stand for that which is good. Leaven, 
however, never means anything good, but it always stands 
for evil. The closer study of these parables, which we now 
take up will bring out all this more fully. 

After having studied this important chapter in a general 
way, we shall now look at the seven parables separately and 
to learn from them the development of the Kingdom of the 
Heavens in its mystery form. Throughout our study the 
dispensational aspect of the parables is to be kept strongly 
in the foreground, for it is dispensational truth which is 
taught here. 

The first parable is the well-known one of the sower. 
“And he spoke to them many things in parables, saying, 
Behold the sower went out to sow.” Two: thing attract 
our attention in this opening sentence of the parable. We 
- notice first that our Lord speaks of the sower, not of a 
sower, and when He expounds the parable later to His dis- 
ciples He does not tell them who this sower is, but He only 
speaks of what happened to the seed He sowed. The second 
thing we mention is that the sower went out. 

The personality of the sower is not difficult to clear up, 
for in explaining the second parable our Lord says: “He 
that soweth the good seed is the Son of Man.” Our Lord 
Himself is the Sower. He came with the precious seed, the 
fine wheat, and of course He himself is the corn of wheat. 


~08 


The seed He sows can only bring forth as it falls upon 
good ground, and in the ground it dies, and out of death 
comes the fruit. All this is indicated here. We would, 
however, take this parable in the first sense to apply to the 
days of our Lord in the earth. In a wider sense it must be 
taken as typical of the entire age, in which He is absent 
from the earth and the Kingdom is in the hands of men. 
The sowing He began continues sttll, and the result of sow- 
ing is likewise the same. 

And what is the significance that it is written that the 
sower went out to sow? It shows the beginning of some- 
thing new; a new work which the Lord now takes up. 
Israel had failed to yield fruit. Israel was the vineyard of 
Isaiah v. ‘He fenced it in, and gathered out the stones 
thereof, and planted it with the choicest vines, and built a 
tower in the midst of it, and also made a wine press therein ; 
and He looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it 
brought forth wild grapes . . . and now go to;I will 
tell you what I will do to my vineyard: I will take away the 
hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; and break down the 
wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down.” (Is. v:2-7.) 
- Israel is the fig tree of the parable; the Lord came and 
found no fruit. The vineyard is laid waste and the fig tree 
stands barren. It is true, it will not be always so. The vine 
and the fig tree will bring fruit at last, but in the meantime, 
while Israel is unfruitful, the sower has gone out to sow. 
Where has he gone? Where does the sower generally de- 
posit the seed? In the field. What is the field? The di- 
vine interpreter gives us the answer. “The field is the 


269 


world.” So we have here the fact established that after 
Israel failed the Word is to go forth into the wide world, 
“beginning in Jerusalem unto Samaria and the uttermost 
parts of the earth.” 

The question comes at once, what will be the result? 
Will all the world receive it and every part of the entire 
field be cultivated? Will the whole field be reached by the 
seed and the seed spring up and bear an abundant harvest? 
Will not a single grain be lost? The parable has this very 
thought as its centre, What becomes of the seed? 

What we learn from the parable is far from teaching us 
the optimistic dream of Christendom of world conversion, 
so often founded upon a wrong application of these par- 
ables. The parable proves that it will not be a universal 
acceptance of the Word which we can look for in this age; 
only the fourth part of the seed sown brings forth fruit, 
and there is again a marked difference in the quantity of 
fruit in that fourth part. Our Lord then impresses here in 
this simple parable the fact, which later the Holy Spirit re- 
peats, the agein which He is absent and in which His | 
Word is preached and His grace is offered, that Word will 
be in greater part rejected, and only a fourth part yields 
the fruit; the rest is failure. 

It is very significant that we meet this important dispen- 
sational fact at the very threshold of Matthew xiii. Alas! 
it has not been believed by the great mass of professing 
Christians. To speak of failure in this age and deny a 
soon coming world conversion is frowned upon as a miser- 
able, unbelieving pessimism. One is sometimes even ac- 


270 


cused of disbelieving the power of the Holy Spirit to con- 
vert the whole world, as if the Holy Spirit had been sent 
down from heaven for world conversion. 

But we shall now read what came from the lips of our 
Lord in this parable. 

“Behold the sower went out to sow; and as he sowed, 
some grains fell along the way, and the birds came and de- 
voured them; and others fell upon the rocky places where 
they had not much earth, and immediately they sprang up 
out of the ground, because of not having any depths of earth, 
but when the sun rose they were burned up, and because of 
not having any root were dried up; and others fell upon the 
thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked them; and others 
fell upon the good ground, and produced fruit, one a hun- 
dred, one sixty, and one thirty. He that has ears let him 
hear” (verses 5-9). We need not to guess the meaning of 
this parable for the Lord Himself tells His disciples what 
He meant by the birds and the rocky place and the thorns. 
And so we shall take His own explanation with such com- 
ments which may be helpful for a fuller understanding. 

“The disciples came up to Him and said, Why speakest 
thou to them in parables?” This question came at once 
after He had finished this first parable. They had never 
heard a parable from His lips. What He had spoken be- 
fore to the people and their leaders had been in simple 
words, easily to be understood by every one, and now for 
the first time He spoke something which they could not 
comprehend. It was veiled. The answer which our Lord 


271 


gives is of great solemnity, as it announces the judgment 
upon Israel. 

“And He answering said to them, Because to you it is 
given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of the Heav- 
ens, but to them it is not given.” The disciples, repre- 
senting believers, were to understand the mysteries coming 
in now while the nation who had refused the light would 
be in darkness. “For whosoever has, to him shall be given, 
and he shall be caused to be in abundance. But he who has 
not, even what he has shall be taken away from him.” The 
disciples had received the Lord and He gave them more, 
while Israel had not, they rejected Christ and so what they 
had still as His earthly people was to be taken away from 
them. But this two-edged sword cuts in another way. The 
principle our Lord here utters is still active. The true be- 
lievers composing the church have, and by and by we shall 
be caused to be in abundance, while an apostate Christen- 
dom which has not shall lose even what it boasts to have. 

“For this cause,’ our Lord continues, “I speak to them 
in parables, because seeing they do not see, and hearing 
they do not hear nor understand; and in them is filled up 
the prophecy of Esaias, which says, Hearing ye shall hear 
and shall not understand, and beholding ye shall behold 
and not see; for the heart of this people has grown fat, and 
they have heard heavily with their ears, and they have 
closed their eyes as asleep, lest they should see with the 
eyes, and hear with the ears, and understand with the heart, 
and should be converted, and I should heal them.” This 
passage is a quotation from Isaiah vi:9-10. Isaiah saw ina 


272 


vision Jehovah sitting upon a throne, and He spoke these 
words to the prophet. If we turn to the xii. chapter in the 
Gospel of John we find these words quoted again, and there 
is the significant addition, “These things said Esaias, when 
he saw His glory, and spoke of Him” (John xii:4o). The 
Jehovah Isaiah saw upon His throne was our Lord Jesus 
Christ. Once more do we read the same words brought to 
remembrance by the Holy Spirit. In the last chapter of 
Acts, when Israel’s apostasy and unbelief is fully estab- 
lished, Paul speaks them to the assembled Jews and adds, 
“Be it known therefore unto you that the salvation of God 
is sent unto the Gentiles and they will hear.” 

And now after our Lord declares them blessed on account 
of what they see and hear, He explains the parable Himself. 

“Ye, therefore, hear the parable of the sower. From 
every one who hears the word of the Kingdom and does not 
understand it, the wicked one comes and catches away 
what was sown in his heart; this is he that is sown at the 
wayside” (v. 18-19). 

How easy is it then understood. The wayside is hard 
and trodden down by feet, there the seed fell and birds 
were ready to snatch it up and devour it. 

A hearer or a class of hearers is given here who do not 
understand the Word. But is it the question of mental ca- 
pacity of an intellectual understanding? Certainly not. The 
Lord says the word was “sown in the heart;” it had di- 
rected itself to the conscience and could either be accepted 
or rejected. But the heart would not have it and turned 
against it; “and does not understand it,” means “he 


273 


would not understand or receive it.”” No sooner is this the 
case and the seed has fallen upon such a ground, a hard 
heart like the wayside, then the birds come and devour the 
seed. The birds represent the wicked one. He is present 
with his agencies and busy to take up whatever was 
given and rejected. Once more do we read in this chapter 
of birds; it is in the third parable, that of the mustard 
seed. The birds there mean nothing good but that which 
is evil, like in the first parable. 

“But he that is sown on the rocky places—this is he 
_ that hears the Word and immediately receives it with joy, 
but has no root in himself, but is for a time only; and 
when tribulation happens on account of the Word, he is 
immediately offended” (vv. 20-21). 

The rocky ground is lightly covered with earth. There 
is a sudden springing up, an enthusiastic reception one 
might say, which pushes itself along. But the sun rises 
higher, the heat is felt, and there is no resistance, no 
life to combat these conditions; the delicate thing drops 
over and is burned up. It had no roots. This little earth 
on top of the rock may well represent the natural heart of 
man as the way trodden by men represents it. Only here 
is the brightest side of the flesh, if one can speak of it in 
such a way. But behind that little earth is the solid rock, 
which no plow has broken and where no life is present. 
How large is this class? It is the great class of professing 
Christians. They are covering over this old, desperately 
wicked heart with a little earth. They put on the form of 
Godliness, while they know nothing of its power. There 


274 


is also a great deal of enthusiasm, a springing up of the seed ; 
it looks almost as if there is to be a great result—but alas! : 
there is only the name to live, but death is behind it. 

“When the sun rose they were burned up.” May we 
not apply this word also dispensationally ? The rocky ground 
sowers will flourish, and they flourish and increase now 
with their empty profession and their enthusiastic show at 
religiousness and world improvement. But the sun will 
rise, tribulation will come. The great tribulation and the 
judgments, which precede the rising of the Sun of Right- 
eousness will burn them up and sweep them away. 

“And he that is sown among the thorns, this is he who 
hears the Word, and the anxious care of this life and the 
deceit of riches choke the Word and he becomes unfruit- 
ful” (verse 22). 

This is so plain that it needs hardly any comment at all. 
“The deceit of riches” hinder the growth of the Word. It 
becomes choked and there is no fruit. How true this is of 
the present day we all know. The world, the pleasures of 
the earth, cares and anxiety in getting as much as possible 
of these phantom things seems to control more and 
more the outwardly professing masses. All that is of God 
becomes choked. 

Thus we see in these three classes, in which the seed 
perishes and brings no fruit, the Devil, the Flesh and the 
World represented. The Devil snatches up and devours, 
the Flesh attempts and fails, the World surrounds and 
chokes. And yet how much else might be said in connec- 
tion with these three classes! No human being could have 


275 


spoken such a simple parable with such a deep and far- 
reaching meaning. The Revealer of Secrets speaks, who 
knows the hidden things. 

“But he that is sown upon the good ground, this is he 
who hears and understands the Word, who bears fruit also 
and produces one a hundred, one sixty, and one thirty” 
(verse 23). Hearing, understanding, which is in faith 
.and through faith, fruitbearing and producing, this is the 
process of the seed in the good ground, a receptive heart 
prepared by the Grace of God. 

We come now to the second parable, in which we find 
the Kingdom of the heavens mentioned. It was not men- 
tioned in connection with the first parable of the sower. 
“Another parable set He before them, saying, The King- 
dom of the heavens has become like a man sowing good 
seed in his field; but while men slept his enemy came and 
sowed darnel amongst the wheat and went away. But 
when the blade shot up and produced fruit then appeared 
the darnel also. And the bondmen of the householder 
came up and said to him, Sir, hast thou not sown good seed 
in thy field? Whence then has it darnel? And he said to 
them, A man that is an enemy has done this. And the 
bondmen said to him, Wilt thou then that we go and 
gather it up? But he said, No; lest in the gathering the 
darnel ye should root up the wheat with it. Suffer both to 
grow together unto the harvest, and in time of the harvest 
I will say to the harvestmen, Gather first the darnel, and 
bind it into bundles to burn it; but the wheat bring to- 
gether into my granary” (verses 24-30). Again we are 


276 


not left to seek for an interpretation. After he had spoken 
two other parables we read that our Lord in answer to His 
disciples’ question tells them what He meant by the parable. 
To this perfect interpretation by the divine speaker we 
have to turn to find the correct and far reaching meaning 
of this second parable. “Then, having dismissed the 
crowds, He went into the house; and His disciples came to 
Him, saying, Expound to us the parable of.the darnel of 
the field. But He answering said, He that sows the good 
seed is the Son of Man, and the field is the world and the 
good seed are the Sons of the Kingdom, but the darnel are 
the sons of the evil one; and the enemy who has sowed it 
is the devil, and the harvest is the completion of the age, 
and the harvestmen are angels” (verses 36-39). 

The connection with the first parable is clear. The same 
sower is in the beginning of the parable before us, and the 
seed is deposited in the field, which is the world. But our 
Lord says, “the good seed, these are the Sons of the King- 
dom.” This can mean only one thing, namely, that the 
good seed sown and fallen into a good ground, as we saw 
in the first parable, brings forth fruit, and the Word of the 
Kingdom produces the Sons of the Kingdom. Like begets 
like; the fruit is according to the seed. However, the 
leading thought in this parable is the enemy and his evil 
work. It is a work of spite, as it is yet quite often practiced 
in oriental countries. The enemy watches till his hated 
neighbor has deposited his seed into the field, then he goes 
to work and during the night, while men sleep, and begins to 
sow the bad seed of some weed. Not till the seed springs 


er 
ee ee 


277 


up and grows does the unsuspecting victim see the work of 
the enemy. The enemy, our Lord says, is the devil. As 
from the Word of the Kingdom the Sons of the Kingdom 
spring forth, so from the evil seed sown by the devil come 
the sons of the evil one, 

It is important to notice the time when the enemy did 
this and the manner in which he attempts to counteract the 
work of the Sower, the Son of Man. 

In regard to the time, we have two facts to consider. 
The first is: It was immediately after the Sower had de- 
posited the good seed; and the second fact: It was “while 
men slept.” No sooner had our Lord brought the truth, 
and the Holy Spirit had been given, than the enemy began 
its work. In the days of the Apostle Paul the work which 
the enemy had done became manifest, and the evil seed,’ 
which at the end of this age is full grown, is easily seen 
springing up in the beginning of the age. The mystery of 
iniquity began its work then, and continues throughout the 
age till the end is reached, when it is fully developed. 

It was while men slept that the enemy did it. Not the — 
Sower slept, He neither sleeps nor slumbers, but the men 
slept. Such an unwatchful condition soon developed in 
the beginning of the age. The first love was soon given 
up, and then the enemy did his work. 

The manner was by putting a counterfeit seed in the 
field. The darnel looks in its seed like the wheat. When 
it springs up it cannot be distinguished from the wheat, yet 
it is a poisonous weed. The darnel represents the lie 
as it is put into the field by the devil. It is evil doctrine, 


278 


a counterfeit of the faith once and for all delivered unto the 
saints, The denial of the Deity of our Lord, the denial of 
the resurrection and the inspiration of the Bible belong to 
this darnel seed, which makes itself felt in the very begin- 
ning of this Christian age. 

In a certain sense this process still continues. Whenever 
the truth is proclaimed and the Word taught, it does not 
take long before the enemy comes and brings.the counter- 
feit when “men sleep.” Another strong lesson we learn 
from this parable is the character of this entire age. It is 
evil. Satan is the god of this age till the end of the age 
comes. The mixed condition of good seed and darnel 
seed, Sons of the Kingdom and sons of the evil one, prevails 
to the very end. The servants of the bondmen were will- 
ing to root out the darnel but were not permitted to do so. 
It is an idle dream, which many hope to realize, to reform 
the world, to gather out obnoxious evils, to banish drunk- 
enness and immorality, to purify the state and politics. 
Such efforts are nowhere taught in the Word of God. 
Men, under Christian profession, take such work upon 
themselves, and they little know how they sin and dishonor 
Christ with it. No, error and its fruits will continue to 
grow alongside the good seed and its precious fruit till the 
time of the harvest. Before we follow the thought of the 
harvest we turn our attention to still another matter in 
connection with the first part of this parable. 

A vital error has been committed in regard to the place 
where the wheat and the darnel grow together. It has 
been said to us “we cannot have a pure church. or 


279 


assembly, for the Lord Himself has said that the evil will 
always be with us and that we are not to put them out who 
are the sons of the evil one.” This was said and is said 
on the supposition that our Lord speaks of the Church. 
However, this is not the case. The church, the assembly, 
is not before Him at all. As we have said before the King- 
dom of the heavens is not the Church. When it comes to 
the revelation concerning the Church we hear our Lord 
say that evil is not to be tolerated in the assembly. “If 
thy brother sin against thee go, reprove him between thee, 
and him alone. If he hear thee, thou hast gained thy 
brother. But if he do not hear, take with thee one or two 
besides that every matter may stand upon the word of two 
witnesses or of three. But if he will not listen to them, 
tell it to the assembly and if also he will not listen to the 
assembly, let him be to thee as one of the nations and a 
taxgatherer” (Chap. xviii:15-17). This is the way evil 
is to be treated in the assembly, or, as we generally say, 
Church. In the epistles we find numerous exhortations 
that evil doctrine and an evil walk contrary to the Gospel 
is not to be tolerated in an assembly. The assembly is to 
judge evil. It is not said of the Church “let them grow 
together.” 

The field is not the Church, but the world, and it is in 
the world that this takes place; in that part of the field 
where the good seed has been sown, in the entire sphere of 
professing Christendom. 

The harvest is the completion of the age. Our author- 
ized version has it “world.” This has misled many 


280 : 


readers of the Word. The end of this world is 2 good ways 
off yet. The end of the age in which we live is drawing 
rapidly to a close. What will take place then? Our Lord 
says, “As then the darnel is gathered and is burned in the 
fire, thus it shall be in the completion of the age. The 
Son of Man shall send His angels and they shall gather out 
of His Kingdom all offences, and those that practice law- 
lessness, and they shall cast them into the furnace of fire; 
there shall be the weeping and gnashing of teeth. Then 
the righteous shall shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom 
of their father. He that hath ears let him hear” (verses 40- 
43). Before in the parable our Lord said: “I will say to 
the harvestmen, Gather first the darnel, and bind it into 
bundles to burn it; but the wheat bring together into my 
granary.” 

The completion of the age is the same as in Matthew 
xxiv, when the disciples asked for the signs of His coming 
and the completion of the age. The ending of the age will 
be Jewish; Jewish history resumed in the events which fall 
into the last week of Daniel, the seventieth week. Of 
this ending the Lord speaks. The angels will then be the 
harvestmen. It corresponds to what we read in Rev. xiv: 
14-20, “And I looked and behold a white cloud, and 
upon the cloud one sat like unto the Son of Man, having 
upon His head a golden crown, and in His hand a sharp 
sickle. And another angel came out of the temple, crying 
with a loud voice to him that sat on the cloud, Thrust in 
thy sickle and reap; for the time is come for thee to reap 
for the harvest of the earth is ripe.” 


= 281 


Some who teach the unscriptural theory, that the church 
will remain in the earth to the very end of the age and 
pass through the great tribulation, have used this parable 
- to support their views. We repeat the parable has nothing 
to do with the Church. When our Lord speaks of the 
bundling up of the darnel and the gathering of the wheat 
into the granary, He did not teach that the wheat is the 
Church or represents the Church, and that the gathering in 
of the Church is to be His last act in this age. The wheat, 
_ of course, is the good seed, the good seed are the Sons of 
the Kingdom. That all true believers are the good seed 
and as such Sons of the Kingdom none would doubt. Yet, 
after the Church is removed from the earth, before the 
completion of the age, as foretold in prophecy, begins, 
there will still be wheat in the earth. There will still be 
sowing. Indeed it will then be “the Word of the King- 
dom” which is preached. . The Gospel of the Kingdom 
will be proclaimed during that end and the seed will spring 
up. A great multitude will come out of that great tribula-_ 
tion having washed their robes in the blood of the Lamb. 
This multitude will be gathered in the time when the 
darnel are bundled up, preparatory to the burning. 
The wheat, these Sons of the Kingdom, will be gathered into 
His granary, kept and preserved for the Kingdom to be 
established in the earth. “Then the righteous shall shine 
forth as the sun-in the Kingdom of their Father.” This 
reminds us very strongly of the language of Matthew xxv: 
34. ‘Come ye blessed of My Father, inherit the Kingdom 
prepared for you from the foundation of the Worldy 


282 


These words are not addressed to the church,-but to that 
multitude come out of all nations (Rev. vii) and the King- 
dom is not the heavenly glory but the earthly Kingdom. 
The Church, her heavenly calling and destination, we 
repeat again, is not in view at all in this second parable. 

Let us hold fast the three great facts the parable teaches. 
These are, as we have seen, the following: 

1. The enemy, the devil, began his work in the begin- 
ning of the age. 

2. The age is mixed, good and evil grow together. 
This condition cannot be changed throughout the age. 

3. The mixed condition will cease with the completion of 
the age. The Sons of the Kingdom will inherit the King- 
dom. The darnel after being bundled up are burned with 
fire. 

The next two parables our Lord spake to reveal still more 
of the mysteries of the kingdom of the heavens are the 
parables of the mustard seed and of the leaven.. They belong 
together. We shall learn in the exposition of these two 
parables, how the popular interpretation of them through 
the leading commentators of Christendom has turned 
everything upside down. The fact is, precisely the oppo- 
site our Lord meant is being taught by teachers in evan- 
gelical Christendom. The fault of this erroneous interpre- 
tation springs from the great fundamental error that the 
Lord has the church in view when He speaks of the king- 
dom of the heavens, and that the church is that kingdom. 
Therefore it is taken for granted by this exposition 
that when the Lord now speaks of a grain of mustard seed, 


283 


which becomes a great tree and which gives shelter to the 
birds, that this is a prophecy relating to the expansion of 
the church. The leaven is therefore made to mean the gos- 
pel with its leavening power. All this is radically wrong. 
We turn to the parable of the grain of mustard seed first. 

“Another parable set He before them, saying, The king- 
dom of the heavens is like a grain of mustard seed which 
a man took and sowed in his field, which is less indeed 
than all seeds, but when it is grown is greater than herbs, 
and becomes a tree, so that the birds of heaven come and 
roost in its branches” (verses 31-32). 

Here we have the outward development of the kingdom 
of the heavens as it grows and expands, in an unnatural 
way, and becomes the roosting place of the birds of heaven. 
As indicated above, the almost universal comment on this 
mustard seed and its miraculous growth, as it is termed, 
is that it fully declares the expansion of the church, and 
the birds of heaven are interpreted as meaning peoples and 
nations, who find shelter in the church. Growing and still 
growing, the mustard tree reaches over the entire earth, 
its branches spread out wider and wider, and soon (so they 
tell us) the tree will have covered the earth as the waters 
cover the deep. It is also a common occurrence that some 
denominational leader—a bishop or an elder—claims the 
parable for his denomination and illustrates with it the 
phenomenal growth of the sect to which he belongs, or 
claims a great future of success. Again, the history of 
the “church” is resorted to for the sake of showing the 
fulfillment of this parable and the statistics of Christen- 


284 


dom, so many millions of Protestants (including all the in- 
fidels, unsaved masses of Germany, England, and every 
other “evangelical” country) so many more now than 
fifty years ago. etc. 

If the Lord had meant His church ‘by this mustard 
seed, which becomes a tree and the roosting place of birds, 
if it is really the church, which is His body, then this 
parable would be in flagrant contradiction with what He 
and the Holy Spirit teach elsewhere concerning the church 
in the earth, the mission and the future of the church. 
The greatest clash of teaching would be the result. 

For instance, in His prayer our Lord says concerning 
His own, those who are one as the Father and Son are one: 
“They are not of the world, as I am not of the world” 
(John xvii:14). The church then, composed of all true 
believers, is not of the world as He “is not of the 
world. The church is from above, as every believer has a 
‘life which is from above; but for a little while the church 
is in the world, and in a little while the church will be 
above, where He is the glorified Head of His body. The 
mustard seed springing up in the field (do not forget the 
field is the world), rooting deeper and deeper in the earth 
and expanding in this unnatural way affording room for 
birds, is the picture of something entirely different. It 
shows us a system which is rooted in the earth and which 
aims a greatness in the world, expansion over the earth. 
The Lord never meant His church to be rooted and 
grounded in the field, the world. He never called the 
church to assume such proportions and become an abnor- 


285 

mal growth in the earth. Whatever is spoken of Christ is 
spoken of the church. Suffering and glory, after lowli- 
ness, followed by exaltation, is the way Christ went; it is 
the way ordained for the church. She is to be lowly, now 
suffering with Him, rejected and disowned by the world as 
He was, never to reign and rule now, but patiently waiting 
with Him for the moment when He is manifested and then 
to share His Throne and His Glory. The calling and des- 
tiny of the church is heavenly. Her mission is to shine 
out Himself and testify of His grace, but never to control 
and overspread the world. The epistles addressed to the 
church make this sufficiently clear. 

But if the mustard seed and its growth does not mean 
the church, what does it mean? It means the Kingdom of 
the heavens, and this is, as we have seen before, professing 
Christendom. At once the parable becomes illuminated 
with light. Looked upon in this light, in full harmony 
with all the Lord teaches in this chapter, all is easily un- 
derstood. The little mustard seed, which was not destined 
to be a tree but only a shrub, easily taken out of the garden 
where it had been planted, develops against its nature into 
a tree. That which came from Him, the Son of Man, the 
Sower, develops, committed into the hands of men, into an 
unnatural thing—one might say, a monstrosity—for such 
3 mustard free is. This unnatural thing, this monstrosity, 
is professing Christendom as a system of the world, profes- 
sing Christ, without possessing Him and His Spirit. 

Here we have to call attention to the third message to the 
churches in Revelation, the second chapter. That is the mes- 


286 


sage to Pergamos, typifying the age of the history of Chris- 
tendom, beginning with Constantine the Great in the fourth 
century. The suffering church was made a state church. 
The mustard seed suddenly became the tree, and ever since 
the professing church has delighted in looking upon herself 
as a big expanding tree. But notice the perfect agreement— 
the third parable and the third church message. 

The birds which roost in that tree would mean, 
if the parable applies to the church, converted sinners. Do 
birds ever represent clean persons? We need not go out- 
side of the chapter to answer this. The birds which fell 
upon the seed which had fallen by the wayside were instru- 
ments of Satan. Birds of heaven, or fowls, never mean 
anything good in Scripture. Abraham stood in the midst 
of the pieces of the sacrifices and drove away the fowls 
which were ready to fall upon the pieces (Gen. xv.). The 
animals divided there represent Christ and the fowls noth- 
ing good. Birds in this parable mean unsaved, uncon- 
verted people and nations who flock for selfish motives to 
the tree, the outward form of Christendom, and find shelter 
there. But they defile the tree. 

At last the tree will be full grown. Of the full grown 
tree it is said, “Great Babylon has become the habitation 
(roosting place) of demons, and a hold of every unclean 
spirit, and a hold of every unclean and hated bird” (Rev. 
XViii:2). 

But let us not forget there is a tree which is to grow up 
and spread its branches, taking sap out of the root, over 


303 


the one pearl is taken up the end of the age begins. This 
parable falls into the completion of the age. The dragnet 
is let into the sea, which, as we have seen before, repre- 
sents the nations. The parable refers to the preaching of 
the everlasting Gospel as it will take place during the great 
tribulation (Rev. xiv:6, 7). The separating of the good 
and the bad is done by angels. All this cannot refer to 
the present time nor to the church, but to the time when 
the kingdom is about to be set up. Then angels will be 
used, as it is so clearly seen in the book of Revelation. 
The wicked will be cast into the furnace of fire and the 
righteous will remain in the earth for the millennial king- 
dom. To follow all this in detail would take us into the 
history of the seventieth week of Daniel. It is the same 
“end of the age” which is described in Matthew xxiv. 

We have learned from these seven parables the myster- 
ies of the kingdom of the heavens, beginning with the 
apostolic age and showing us the conditions which prevail 
up to its end. It is significant that the last three parables— 
containing, as we have seen, the mystery of Israel, the 
mystery of the church, and the mystery of the ending of 
the age—were spoken in the house to the disciples. The 
great multitude did not hear them, as they contain 
truths for His own, to whom alone it is given through the 
Spirit of God to know the mysteries of the kingdom. 
And so we read: “Jesus says unto them, Have ye under- 
stood all these things? They say to Him, Yea, Lord. And 
He said to them, For this reason every scribe discipled to 
the kingdom of the heavens is like a man that is a house- 
holder who brings out of his treasure things new and old” 


+304 


(verses 51, 52). The things old are the things revealed in 
the Old Testament and the new things those of the new dis- 
pensation, which are given in these parables in a nut-shell, 

Upon this declaration there follows a symbolical action 
of our Lord. “And it came to pass when Jesus had 
finished these parables, He withdrew thence.” The re- 
vealer of the secrets has given His revelation and now He 
disappears from the scene. Jt stands in type for His bodily 
absence from the earth during this age. 

The end of the chapter is in full accord with the beginning 
and the teaching of the entire chapter. “And having 
come into His own country, He taught them in their syn- 
agogues, so that they were astonished, and said, Whence 
has this man this wisdom and these works of power? Is 
not this the son of a carpenter? Is not His mother called 
Mary, and His brethren James and Joseph, and Simeon 
and Juda? And His sisters, are they not all with us? 
_ Whence then has this man all these things? And they 
were offended in Him. And Jesus said to them, A prophet 
is not without honor, unless in His country and in his house, 
And he did not there many works of power, because of 
their unbelief” (verses 54-58). . 

What else is all this but evidence of His full rejection. 
His own knew Him not. They speak of His earthly rela- 
tions. For them He is “this man.” His Father they 
knew not. They call Him “the son of the carpenter.” 
And thus He is rejected still by His earthly people; and 
alas! many of those who call themselves by His name dur- 
ing this age treat Him no better. With the next chapter 
we shall follow the story of His rejection. 


eee | a a oe 


THE 


GOSPEL OF MATTHEW 
AN EXPOSITION 


BY 


-A. C. GAEBELEIN 
Editor of “Our Hoje.” 


VOLUME II. 


PUBLICATION OFFICE, OUR HOPE 
456 Fourth Avenue 
NEw Yorx«k City 


A ‘ “ 


Copyright 1910 by A.C. Gaebelein 


CHAPTER XIV. 


The fourteenth chapter contains the record of events 
put together so as to harmonize with the purpose of this 
Gospel. The Lord had revealed the mysteries of the king- 
dom of the heavens, mysteries, as we have seen, repeated 
by the Lord in His seven messages to the churches in 
Revelation ii and iii. At the end of the previous chapter 
we learned once more of His rejection. ‘They were of- 
fended at Him.” In the chapter before us He appears as 
the rejected One. The right key to understand the events 
described here, is to look upon all dispensationally. We 
have in them a‘description of what takes place while the 
King is absent and rejected by His own people. At the 
end of this chapter He comes in the fourth watch, and 
‘with His coming brings the calm for the troubled sea and 
His troubled disciples. 

The first incident we find is the martrydom of John the 
Baptist. Herod stands with his kingdom and abomina- 
tion for the world, the prince of this age, and his persecu- 
tions. The record is put in here to show that during the 
absence of the King, the world will hate and persecute 
those who are of the Truth, but it carries us on to the end 
likewise, when a false king will rule once more—the Anti- 
christ; typified by Herod. 

The second incident is the miraculous feeding of the five 
thousand men, besides women and children. He had gone 
to a desert place, but the crowds followed Him, and He 
supplies their need in His own miraculous way. The keep- 
ing of His people is here demonstrated, while on the other 


: 
hand, we find spiritual lessons, which lead us deeper, es- ; 
pecially if we compare this section with the record in the 
Gospel of John, ° 

The third incident is the storm on the sea, lasting a 
whole night, during which the Lord is absent. He went 
into the mountain apart to pray, which is a picture of His 
presence with the Father during this age. This section is 
especially rich in dispensational lessons. We learn from 
this short outline of the fourteenth chapter, that it forms 
a kind of birdseye view of the age, which follows the rejec- 
tion of our Lord. 

“At that time Herod, the tetrarch, heard of the fame of 
Jesus,and said to his servants, This is John the Baptist, 
he is risen from the dead, and because of this, these works 
of power display their force in him” (verses I, 2). 

The Herod mentioned here is not the Herod in the 
second chapter of the Gospel. The Herod under which the 
children of Bethlehem were slain was Herod the Great, 
an Idumean who had been proclaimed king of the Jews by 
Rome and exercised his evil reign under the protection of 
Rome. After his death Archelaus became tetrarch of Judea, 
Samaria and Idumea, Philip of Trachonitis and Herod 
Antipas of Galilee and Peraea, who also had the title of 
tetrarch. It is this Herod who is before us in this chapter 
He was married to a daughter of King Aretas of Arabia. 
He lived, however, in open adultery with Herodias, the wife 
of his brother Philip. Like his father, Herod the Great, 
he was a wicked man, the murderer of John the Baptist. 
He was followed by Herod Agrippa, under whose regime 
the persecution of the Christians broke out in Jerusalem. 

The dreadful end of this wicked king is described in 
Acts xii. He was smitten by an angel of God and eaten 
‘y worms, His son, named likewise Herod Agrippa, took 
his place. 


7 


These Herods—who ruled under Rome over Immanuel’s 
land and were such bloody men, false kings upon a throne, 
which was not theirs—are all types of Antichrist, that false 
king, who comes in his own name and will be received by 
the Jews. 

During this entire age “the mystery of iniquity already 
works,” and in the end of it that wicked one will be re- 
vealed. Satan rules over the world now, and by and by, 
his power will have full sway for a little while, and then 
through the revived Roman Empire, the beast out of the 
sea, a false king, the great final Herod, will rule and reign, 
as well as the beast out of the earth. 

These dispensational facts make it clear why the story of 
John’s martrydom is introduced now in this Gospel. It is 
brought forth here to show that alongside of the kingdom 
of the heavens in its mysteries, there is the kingdom of the 
world culminating in a wicked leader, the man of sin and 
son of perdition. 

The incident itself comes in at the time when our Lord 
sent out His disciples. In the fourth chapter we heard 
that John was delivered up (iv:12). In the eleventh he 
sent his disciples from the prison to the Lord, and now 
his fate is made known after the Lord had revealed the 
secret things. : 

On account of the report concerning Jesus, Herod is 
troubled, like his father before him was troubled, when 
the wise men from the east came to Jerusalem. Conscience 
speaks with a loud voice, and though Herod was neither a 
Pharisee nor a Sadducee, he is superstitious and looks upon 
Jesus as John the Baptist risen from the dead. It is still 
so; where there is no faith, superstitions hold sway. And 
why was he troubled and uneasy? Why did his conscience 
speak? “For Herod had seized John,sand had bound him 
and put him in prison on account of Herodias, the wife of 


8 


his brother Philip. For John had said to him, It is not 
lawful for thee to have her. And while desiring to kill 
him, he feared the crowd, because they held him for a 
prophet.’ But when Herod’s birthday was celebrated, the 
daughter of Herodias danced before them, and pleased 
Herod; whereupon he promised with oath to give her what- 
soever she should ask. But she, being set on by her mother, 
says, Give me here upon a dish the head of John the Bap- 
tist. And the king was grieved; but on account of the 
oaths, and those lying at table with him, he commanded it 
to be given. And he sent and beheaded John in the prison; 
and his head was brought upon a dish, and was given to 
the damsel, and she carried it to her mother. And his 
disciples came and took the body and buried it and came 
and told Jesus. And Jesus having heard it, went away 
thence by ship to a desert place apart’”’ (verses 3-13). 

What a scene of wickedness and crime, lust and blood: 
shed is here revealed! It is the trtie picture of the world, 
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes and the pride of 
life. And this world, this age is unchanged. It is not 
improved and gradually subdued. This evil world is not 
getting better. It is not giving up its lust and pride, its: 
hatred and persecution under “the civilizing influence of 
Christendom” as it is claimed. The things manifested here 
by the Spirit of God, as they transpired at the merry feast 
of Herod are the same to-day. The hatred of the Truth 
and the servant of the Lord is the same. The lust of the 
flesh and the eyes and the pride of life have not changed a 
particle. All is present with all its disgusting features in 
the midst of the boasted “civilizing influences of Christen- 
dom.” 

John had been faithful in discharging his God-given 
ministry. Openly he had confronted the despot with his 
evil doing and a dungeon becomes his lot. How often it 


o- 

has been repeated throughout the age. How many faithful 
servants have been hated and persecuted thus. The world 
receives not the truth, but hates it. Having rejected the 
Lord and hated Him, the world rejects and hates Him who 
is of the truth. How sad to look upon that which pro-. 
fesses to be the church, that which professes to be Christian 
and to see it in friendship with the world! At last pro- 
fessing and apostate Christendom will form that great 
world centre, and centre of abomination and wickedness, - 
“Babylon the Great,” and in her will be found the blood 
of prophets and saints, and of all the slain upon the earth | 
(Rev. xviii:24). 

Ohy let us herald it forth, separation from the world! 
“Adulteresses, know ye not that friendship with the world 
is enmity with God? Whoever, therefore, is minded to 
be the friend of the world is the constituted enemy of God” 
(James iv:4). May it reach our conscience that we may 
live indeed as such who are im the world but not of the 
world, not conformed to this world, but transformed by the 
renewing of our mind. Like John the Baptist, let us be 
faithful in our testimony, no matter what the consequences 
may be. 

John represents here also him who is one of the two 
witnesses. Elijah will come once more, not now, but at 
the Jewish end of the age; not in this country, but in 
Israel’s land. As a witness, with his companion, he will 
witness against the beast, and will be slain by it, as John 
was slain by Herod. 

We pass over the details of that libertine feast, the dance, 
unquestionably indecent, the beastly mother, with her 
awful request. Of Herod we read, he was grieved on ac- 
count of the request. He feared the crowd on the one 
hand, and on the other he feared those who lay at table 
with him, He wanted to appear religious, If he made an 


= 


ne) 


oath and it was heard by those with him, and he did not 
keep it, they would surely tell it abroad. If his religious- 
ness led him to commit a murder it is a small matter. 
How often it has been repeated! Under the garb of relig- 
iousness crimes upon crimes have been committed, and the 
end is not yet. 

What a moment it must have been when the messenger 
entered the dungeon of John and his life is taken. “And 
he sent and beheaded John in prison.” This is all the Spirit 
of God tells us of it. No doubt John met the messenger in 
the triumph of faith. 

John’s disciples came and took the headless body and 
buried it and then they came and told Jesus. 

There they found the comfort and the hope of resurrec- 
tion and life. What words of cheer Ile may have given 
to them we do not read here, but we are sure they came 
not in vain to Him. And shall we come in vain to Him 
with our cares and griefs, trials and losses? Go and tell 
Jesus Christ your Lord! 

Such then is the world in its hatred and such what the 
servants of Christ may expect from the world. 

Our Lord having heard the report went away to a desert 
place apart. He knew that it was only a little while longer 
and He would be rejected, condemned and crucified. But 
His time had not yet come. He would not hasten matters, 
however, even if then Herod would have attempted to do 
anything to him he would have not succeeded. How the 
Spotless and Holy One must have felt in that. hour, whe 
wickedness had reached such a climax! Yet He is silent, 
No word comes from His lips. No word of disapproval 
no word of judgment or wrath. Thus He is silent through: 
out this present evil age until that day comes, His own 
day, when He will keep silent no longer. — 

And now as He goes away by ship into a desert place 


II 


apart, truly as the Rejected One. The multitudes hearing 

of it follow Him on foot from the cities. They seek Him 7 
in the wilderness, in the place of rejection. In the Gospel 
of John, chapter vi, we have the full record of what fol- 
lows and likewise the condition of the people. Here we 
have only a brief description. “And going out He saw a 
great multitude, and was moved with compassion about 
them, and healed their infirm” (verse 14). A few words 
only, but how His grace shines in them. Though He knew 
their hearts, which were far from seeking Him, yet was 
He moved with compassion. ‘This is the second time we 
read of His compassion for the people. Not alone did He 
oity them but He healed their infirm. It must have kept 
Him busy as He moved among them, touching the sick 
and healing their diseases. “But when even was come, His 
disciples came to Him saying: The place is desert and 
much of the daytime already gone by; dismiss the crowds 
that they may go in the villages and buy food for them- 
selves” (verse 15). What a contrast between the com- 
passionate Lord ari His disciples! How little they had 
learned of Him and of His gracious ways. Most likely 
while He was still occupied with the people and still stretch- 
ing forth His hands with healing power, they interrupted 
Him in His blessed work, reminding Him of the physical 
needs of the multitudes. As if He knew not Himself 
what they needed, as if He cared not for them and’ their. 
welfare! It was unbelief which manifested itself thus. 
They even ask the Lord to dismiss the multitudes, to send 
them away. Heartless, they would have let them find their 
way back to their villages to satisfy their wants. Instead 
of looking to the Lord they looked to circumstances, to the 
numbers of the people. They did not reckon with Him 
and His power, who fed Israel for forty years in the wilder- 
ness, who sent the ravens to Elijah. Such is unbelief. 


12 


How calm and sublime is the Lord’s answer. No word 
of reproof falls from His blessed lips. “But Jesus said to 
them, They have no need to go; give ye them to eat.” There 
was surely no need to go away empty from Him, no need 
to go elsewhere and seek what He so plentifully can give 
and does give to all who trust Him. They have no need 
to go. In this word He reveals Himself once more as 
the omnipotent Lord. A desert place, and He declares a 
crowd of five thousand men, besides women and children, 
have no need to go, to leave Him, -to find bread to satisfy 
their hunger. But still more, He tells His disciples, “give 
ye them to eat.” This they could not understand. They 
had very little to minister to the great needs of such a 
company. That the Lord could feed them they had not 
considered, and that they, in giving them to eat, could 
count on His power to minister to their need was far from 
their thoughts. Yet this is the lesson which the Lord 
wanted to teach them and us likewise. He is the All- 
sufficient One. He has all power, and there is no need for 
anyone to go away empty from Him. He wishes to minis- 
ter to the needs of ,His people, through His own. “Give 
ye them to eat” is still His loving word, and He backs it 
up with all His grace and riches in. glory. We mean, of 
course, all this of a ministry in spiritual things, 

Let us think of this as we minister the things of God, 
whether it be the Gospel or the ministry of His Word, for 
the edification of believers. All is entrusted to us by the 
Head of the Body. He Himself will minister through our 
ministry if the heart rests believingly in Him and faith 
looks away from circumstances and difficulties to a rich and 
gracious Lord in Glory. He knows the needs of all. He 
is still the compassionate One, and as Lord in glory tells 
His servants: “Give ye them to eat.” Oh for faith to 
count on Him and His gracious power. 


13 


And now they speak, “But they say to Him, We have 
not here save five loaves and two fishes” (verse 17). 


From the Gospel of John we learn that the Lord said ‘to iz 


Philip, “Whence shall we buy loaves that these may eat? 
But this He said trying him, for He knew what He was 
going to do. Philip answered Him, Loaves for two hun- 
dred denarii are not sufficient for them, that each may 
have some little portion. One of His disciples, Andrew, 
Simon Peter’s brother, says to Him, There is a little boy 
here who has five barley loaves and two small fishes; but 
this, what is it for so many?” (John vi:5-9). They even 
had not the small supply themselves, but it was in the 
hands of a little boy. How suggestive! It was little, very 
little they possessed, and it was in the hands of a little boy, 
one who was weak. It is so with ourselves and the little 
we have. Blessed are we indeed if we do know how little 
it is which is in our hands and how much is lacking. But 
let it not be in unbelief, thinking it is such a little bit, which 
cannot be used. Nothing is too small, nothing too little, 
if it is brought to Him; yea, He has chosen the weak 
things. “Bring them here to Me” is His command. Whut 
condescension, He does not despise the little we have, He 
does not set it aside in manifesting His power. How easy 
it would have been for Him to speak only a word in. that 
desert place and bread would have fallen again upon the 
ground, for the crowds to gather and take with them, He 
wishes to use the little, the weak things, to show forth His 
power. It is the way He works throughout this age, in 
which He is the Rejected One. 

_ “Bring them here to Me,” and do we bring what we 
have to Him always? Is every service first brought to Him 
for blessing? Is the little put into His hands first for 
blessing? Are all our undertakings really brought to Him; 
our little, our all, put at His disposal? If we bring it to 


14 


Him He will bless it and with His blessing we can go forth 
to minister to others. There can be and will be no lack 
_ in such ministry in dependence upon Him. 

This is true ministry. How far Christendom has drifted 
away from it, and how short we come of it, with our un- 
believing hearts. We ever reckon with circumstances and 
difficulties and not with the loving, gracious and all suff- 
cient Lord in glory! May we learn and profit by His 
Word. 

/“And having commanded the multitudes to recline upon 
the grass, having taken the five loaves and two fishes, He 
looked up to heaven and blessed; and having broken the 
loaves He gave them to the disciples, and the disciples gave 
them to the multitudes” (verses 18, 19). He blessed and 
broke the bread, and the broken bread is first put into the 
hands of the disciples, and after they received they gave it 
to the people. This is the divine order of ministry. The 
little handed over to Him, He blesses and we receive first 
of Him, and what we receive from His hands we can pass 
on to others.* 

What a scene it must have been! Five thousand men 
besides women and children crowding about Him, and at 
His loving command they lay down upon the grass and 
after they found rest He feeds them with His bread. In 
looking upon that blessed picture we think of Him as 
Jehovah-Rot, the Lord, my Shepherd. “The Lord is my 
Shepherd; I shall not want. He maketh me to lie down in 
green pastures.” It is fulfilled here. Jehovah, the Shep- 
herd, is present with His people. Jehovah, the Shepherd, 
gives them rest and then in the green pastures He refreshes 


*In the Gospel of John He Himself feeds with His own hands the 
crowds. The ministry of the disciples is not mentioned there, be- 
cause in John He 1s described as the Divine One. 


15 eae 

them. Thus He acts still. Rest and food in Him and 
through Him are still His precious gifts to ail who put 
their trust in Him. He Himself is our Rest and our Bread. 
He satisfies the poor with bread. It is prophetic. He will | 
yet be the great Shepherd of Israel and gather His people, 
His scattered sheep, and supply their wants. We read of it 
in that restoration Psalm, the one hundred and thirty- 
second: “For the Lord hath chosen Zion; He hath de- 
sired it for His habitation. This is my rest forever; here 
will I dwell; for I have desired it. I will abundantly bless 
her provision; I will satisfy her poor with bread.” 

“And all ate and were filled, and they took up what was 
over and above of fragments twelve hand baskets full. 
But those that had eaten were about five thousand men be- 
sides women and children” (verses 20-21). Here is the 
miracle. The little was not only sufficient for all, but 
more was left over at the end than they had in the begin- 
ning. His blessing was not only upon the little for all, 
but He blessed it in such a manner that from it came an 
abundant increase. It is not different now in the ministry 
of spiritual things. The more we give out, having re- 
ceived from Him, the greater the increase and possession 
for us in the end, 

In the Gospel of John the definite teachings of our Lord 
concerning life through Him and in. Him the true bread 
come down from heaven, and the sustenance of that life, 
are connected with this episode. John’s Gospel is the place 
for that. In the feeding of the people as recorded wn. 
Matthew and the applications we have made of it, we have 
brought out the character of the age, the age in which 
Israel has rejected her King. Let us notice that the feed- 
ing of the multitude closes abruptly. In John vi:15 we 
read they would make Him king. But the attempt was 
carnal. No faith in Him, no devotion to His person was 


16 


behind it, and the Searcher of hearts had to declare unto 
them when the crowds sought Him again: “Verily, verily 
I say unto you, ye seek Me, not because ye saw the miracles, 
_ but because ye did eat of the loaves and were filled” 
(John vi:20). In Matthew’s Gospel the whole scene closes 
without any record about the behaviour of the multitudes. 
Significantly we read at once: “And immediately He com- 
pelled the disciples to go on board the ship, and to go 
before Him to the other side until He should have dis- 
missed the multitudes. And having dismissed the multi- 
tudes, He went up into the mountain apart to pray.” 

Every word here is pregnant with meaning. He com- 
pelled the disciples to go on board ship. A change is to 
take place by His own arrangement and the people are dis- 
missed by Himself. All this indicates the setting aside of 
Israel, their rejection, though never complete nor final. 
He Himself goes up into the mountain apart to pray. The 
whole night is spent by Him there in the presence of the 
Father. He is absent, both from the crowds and from His 
disciples, and while the multitudes He had fed scatter, His 
disciples ‘are tossed upon the sea. In the prophet Hosea 
we read that Jehovah saith “I will go and return to My 
place” (Hosea v:15). His going upon the mountain speaks 
of His withdrawal and the-place which He occupies in the 
presence of the Father, as intercessor and advocate. The 
third incident recorded, the stormy night, the storm-tossed 
disciples, the coming Lord in the fourth watch, Peter’s sepa- 
ration to meet him, the morning which brings peace and 
the renewed healing by the returned Lord, all is full of 
meaning and rich in typical application. 

The night is a picture of the time during which He is 
absent, this present evil age in which we live. His re- 
turn from the mountain in the morning foreshadows His 
second coming and the beginning of a new age. 


aA. 


303 


the one pearl is taken up the end of the age begins. This 
parable falls into the completion of the age. The dragnet 
is let into the sea, which, as we have seen before, repre- 
sents the nations. The parable refers to the preaching of 
the everlasting Gospel as it will take place during the great 
tribulation (Rev. xiv:6, 7). The separating of the good 
and the bad is done by angels. All this cannot refer to. 
the present time nor to the church, but to the time when 
the kingdom is about to be set up. Then angels will be 
used, as it is so clearly seen in the book of Revelation. 
The wicked will be cast into the furnace of fire and the 
righteous will remain in the earth for the millennial king- 
dom. To follow all this in detail would take us into the 
history of the seventieth week of Daniel. It is the same 
“end of the age” which is described in Matthew xxiv. 

We have learned from these seven parables the myster- 
ies of the kingdom of the heavens, beginning with the 
apostolic age and showing us the conditions which prevail 
up to its end. It is significant that the last three parables— 
containing, as we have seen, the mystery of Israel, the 
mystery of the church, and the mystery of the ending of 
the age—were spoken in the house to the disciples. The 
great multitude did not hear them, as they contain 
truths for His own, to whom alone it is given through the 
Spirit of God to know the mysteries of the kingdom. 
And ‘so we read: “Jesus says unto them, Have ye under- 
stood all these things? They say to Him, Yea, Lord. And 
He said to them, For this reason every scribe discipled to 
the kingdom of the heavens is like a man that is a house- 
holder who brings out of his treasure things new and old” 


304 


(verses 51, 52). The things old are the things revealed in 
the Old Testament and the new things those of the new dis- 
pensation, which are given in these parables in a nut-shell. 

Upon this declaration there follows a symbolical action 
of our Lord. “And it came to pass when Jesus had 
finished these parables, He withdrew thence.” The re- 
vealer of the secrets has given His revelation and now He 
disappears from the scene. Jt stands in type for His bodily 
absence from the earth during this age. 

The end of the chapter is in full accord with the beginning 
and the teaching of the entire chapter. “And having 
come into His own country, Hé taught them in their syn- 
agogues, so that they were astonished, and said, Whence 
has this man this wisdom and these works of power? Is 
not this the son of a carpenter? Is not His mother called 
Mary, and His brethren James and Joseph, and Simeon 
and Juda? And His sisters, are they not all with us? 
Whence then has this man all these things? And they 
were offended in Him. And Jesus said to them, A prophet’ 
is not without honor, unless in His country and in his house. 
And he did not there many works of power, because of 
their unbelief” (verses 54-58). 

What else is all this but evidence of His full rejection. 
His own knew Him not. They speak of His earthly rela- 
tions. For them He is “this man.” His Father they 
knew not. They call Him “the son of the carpenter.” 
And thus He is rejected still by His earthly people; and 
alas! many of those who call themselves by His name dur- 
ing this age treat Him no better. With the next chapter 
we shall follow the story of His rejection. 


PLE: 


GOSPEL OF MATTHEW | 
AN EXPOSITION 


BY 


A. C. GAEBELEIN 
Editor of “Our Hope.” 


VOLUME II. 


PUBLICATION OFFICE, OUR HOPE 
456 Fourth Avenue 
New YorK CITY 


1910 by A. C. Gaebelein 


es y 


CHAPTER XIV. 


The fourteenth chapter contains the record of events 
put together so as to harmonize with the purpose of this 
Gospel. The Lord had revealed the mysteries of the king- 
dom of the heavens, mysteries, as we have seen, repeated 
by the Lord in His seven messages to the churches in 
Revelation ii and iii. At the end of the previous chapter 
we learned once more of His rejection. “They were of-. 
.fended at Him.” In the chapter before us He appears as 
the rejected One. The right key to understand the events 
described here, is to look upon all dispensationally. We 
have in them a description of what takes place while the 
King is absent and rejected by His own people. At the 
end of this chapter He comes in the fourth watch, and 
with His coming brings the calm for the troubled sea and 
His troubled disciples. 

The first incident we find is the martrydom of John the 
Baptist. Herod stands with his kingdom and abomina- 
tion for the world, the prince of this age, and his persecu- 
tions. The record is put in here to show that during the 
absence of the King, the world will hate and persecute 
thosé who are of the Truth, but it carries us on to the end 
likewise, when a false king will rule once more—the Anti- 
christ ; typified by Herod. | 

The second incident is the miraculous feeding of the five 
thousand men, besides women and children. He had gone 
to a desert place, but the crowds followed Him, and He 
supplies their need in His own miraculous way. The keep- 
ing of His people is here demonstrated, while on the other 


6 


hand, we find spiritual lessons, which lead us deeper, es- 
pecially if we compare this section with the record in the 
Gospel of John, 

The third incident is the storm on the sea, lasting a 
whole night, during which the Lord is absent. He went 
into the mountain apart to pray, which is a picture of His 
presence with the Father during this age. This section is 
especially rich in dispensational lessons. We learn from 
this short outline of the fourteenth chapter, that it forms 
a kind of birdseye view of the age, which follows the rejec- 
tion of our Lord. 

“At that time Herod, the tetrarch, heard of the fame of 
eJesus, and said to his servants, This is John the Baptist; 
he is risen from the dead, and because of this, these works 
of power display their force in him” (verses I, 2). 

The Herod mentioned here is not the Herod in the 
second chapter of the Gospel. The Herod under which the 
children of Bethlehem were slain was Herod the Great, 
an Idumean who had been proclaimed, king of the Jews by 
Rome and exercised his evil reign under the protection of 
Rome. After his death Archelaus became tetrarch of Judea, 
Samaria and Idumea, Philip of Trachonitis and Herod 
Antipas of Galilee and Peraea, who also had the title of 
tetrarch. It is this Herod who is before us in this chapter 
He was married to a daughter of King Aretas of Arabia. 
He lived, however, in open adultery with Herodias, the wife 
of his brother Philip. Like his father, Herod the Great, 
he was a wicked man, the murderer of John the Baptist. 
He was followed by Herod Agrippa, under whose regime 
the persecution of the Christians broke out in Jerusalem. 

The dreadful end of this wicked king is described in 
Acts xii. He was smitten by an angel of God and eaten 
by worms. His son, named likewise Herod Agrippa, took 
his place. 


7 


These Herods—who ruled under Rome over Immanuel’s 
land and were such bloody men, false kings upon a throne, 
which was not theirs—are all types of Antichrist, that false 
king, who comes in his own name and will be received by 
the Jews. 

During this entire age “the mystery of iniquity already 
works,” and in the end of it that wicked one will be re- 
vealed. Satan rules over the world now, and by and by,. 
his power will have full sway for a little while, and then 
through the revived Roman Empire, the beast out of the 
sea, a false king, the great final Herod, will rule and reign, 
as well as the beast out of the earth. . 

These dispensational facts make it clear why the story of 
John’s martrydom is introduced now in this Gospel. It is 
brought forth here to show that alongside of the kingdom 
of the heavens in its mysteries, there is the kingdom of the 
world culminating in a wicked leader, the man of sin and 
son of perdition. 

The incident itself comes in at the time when our Lord 
sent out His disciples. In the fourth chapter we heard 
that John was delivered up (iv:12). In the eleventh he 
sent his disciples from the prison to the Lord, and now 
his fate is made known after the Lord had revealed the 
secret things. 

On account of the report concerning Jesus, Herod is 
troubled, like his father before him was troubled, when 
the wise men from the east came to Jerusalem. Conscience 
speaks with a loud voice, and though Herod was neither a 
Pharisee nor a Sadducee, he is superstitious and looks upon 
Jesus as John the Baptist risen from the dead. It is still 
so; where there is no faith, superstitions hold sway. And 
why was he troubled and uneasy? Why did his conscience 
speak? “For Herod had seized John, and had bound him 
and put him in prison on account of Herodias, the wife of 


8 


his brother Philip. For John had said to him, It is not 
lawful for thee to have her. And while desiring to kill 
him, he feared the crowd, because they held him for a 
prophet. But when Herod’s birthday was celebrated, the 
daughter of Herodias danced before them, and pleased 
Herod; whereupon he promised with oath to give her what- 
soever she should ask. But she,’being set on by her mother, 
says, Give me here upon a dish the head of John the Bap- 
tist. . And the king was grieved; but on account of the 
oaths, and those lying at table with him, he commanded it 
to be given. And he sent and beheaded John in the prison; 
and his head was brought upon a dish, and was given to 
the damsel, and she carried it to her mother. And his 
disciples came and took the body and buried it and came 
and told Jesus. And Jesus having heard it, went away 
thence by ship to a desert place apart” (verses 3-13). 

What a scene of wickedness and crime, lust and blood: 
shed is here revealed! It is the true picture of the world, 
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes and the pride of 
life. And this world, this age is unchanged. It is not 
improved and gradually subdued. This evil world is not 
getting better. It is not giving up its lust and pride, its 
hatred and persecution under “the civilizing influence of 
Christendom” as it is claimed. The things manifested here 
by the Spirit of God, as they transpired at the merry feast 
of Herod are the same to-day. The hatred of the Truth 
and the servant of the Lord is the same. The lust of the 
flesh and the eyes and the pride of life have not changed a 
particle. All is present with all its disgusting features in 
the midst of the boasted “civilizing influences of Christen- 
dom.” 

John had been faithful in discharging his God-given 
ministry. Openly he had confronted the despot with his 
evil doing and a dungeon becomes his lot. How often it 


2 


has been repeated throughout the age. How many faithful 
servants have been hated and persecuted thus. The world 
receives not the truth, but hates it. Having rejected the 
Lord and hated Him, the world rejects and hates Him who 
is of the truth. How sad to look upon that which pro- 
fesses to be the church, that which professes to be Christian 
and to see it in friendship with the world! At last pro- 
fessing and apostate Christendom will form that great 
world centre, and centre of abomination and wickedness, 
“Babylon the Great,” and in her will be found the blood 
of prophets and saints, and of all the slain upon the earth — 
(Rev. xviii:24). 

Oh, let us herald it forth, separation from the world! 
“Adulteresses, know ye not that friendship with the world 
is enmity with God? Whoever, therefore, is minded to 
be the friend of the world is the constituted enemy of God” 
(James iv:4). May it reach our conscience that we may 
live indeed as such who are im the world but not of the 
world, not conformed to this world, but transformed by the 
renewing of our mind. Like John the Baptist, let us be 
faithful in our testimony, no matter what the consequences 
may be. 

John represents here also him who is one of the two 
witnesses. Elijah will come once more, not now, but at 
the Jewish end of the age; not in this country, but in 
Israel’s land. As a witness, with his companion, he will 
- witness against the beast, and will be slain by it, as John 
was: slain by Herod. 

We pass over the details of that libertine feast, the dance, 
unquestionably indecent, the beastly mother, with her 
awful request. Of Herod we read, he was grieved on ac- 
count of the request. He feared the crowd on the one 
hand, and on the other he feared those who lay at table 
with him. He wanted to appear religious. If he made an 


IO 


oath and it was heard by those with him, and he did not 
keep it, they would surely tell it abroad. If his religious- 
ness led him to commit a murder it is a small matter. 
How often it has been repeated! Under the garb of relig- 
iousness crimes upon crimes have been committed, and the 
end is not yet. 

What a moment it must have been when the messenger 
entered the dungeon of John and his life is taken. “And 
he sent and beheaded John in prison.” This is all the Spirit 
of God tells us of it. No doubt John met the messenger in 
the triumph of faith. 

John’s disciples. came and took the headless body and 
buried it and then they came and told Jesus. 

There they found the comfort and the hope of resurrec- 
tion and life. What words of cheer Ile may have given 
to them we do not read here, but we are sure they came 
not in vain to Him. And shall we come in vain to Him 
with our cares and griefs, trials and losses? Go and tell 
Jesus Christ your Lord! 

Such then is the world in its hatred and such what the 
servants of Christ may expect from the world. 

Our Lord having heard the report went away to a desert 
place apart. He knew that it was only a little while longer 
and He would be rejected, condemned and crucified. But 
His time had not yet come. He would not hasten matters, 
however, even if then Herod would have attempted to do 
anything to him he would have not succeeded. How the 
Spotless and Holy One must have felt in that hour, whe1 
wickedness had reached such a climax! Yet He is silent. 
No word comes from His lips. No word of disapproval 
no word of judgment or wrath. Thus He is silent through: 
out this present evil age until that day comes, His own 
day, when He will keep silent no longer. 

And now as He goes away by ship into a desert place 


II . 


apart, truly as the Rejected One. The multitudes hearing 
of it follow Him on foot from the cities. They seek Him 
in the wilderness, in the place of rejection. In the Gospel 
of John, chapter vi, we have the full record of what fol-. 
lows and likewise the condition of the people. Here we 
have only a brief description. “And going out He saw.a 
great multitude, and was moved with compassion about 
them, and healed their infirm” (verse 14). A few words 

only, but how His grace shines in them. Though He knew — 
their hearts, which were far from seeking Him, yet was 
He moved with compassion. This is the second time we 
read of His compassion for the people. Not alone did He 
vity them but He healed their infirm. It must have kept 
Him busy as He moved among them, touching the sick 
and healing their diseases. “But when even was come, His 
disciples came to’ Him saying: The place is desert and 
much of the daytime already gone by; dismiss the crowds 
that they may go in the villages and buy food for them- 
selves” (verse 15). What a contrast between the com- 
passionate Lord ari His disciples! How little they had 
learned of Him and of His gracious ways. Most likely 
while He was still occupied with the people and still stretch- 
ing forth His hands with healing power, they interrupted 
Him in His blessed work, reminding Him of the physical 
needs of the multitudes. As if He knew not Himself 
what they needed, as if He cared not for them and their 
welfare! It was unbelief which manifested itself thus. 
They even ask the Lord to dismiss the multitudes, to send 
them away. Heartless, they would have let them find their 
way back to their villages to satisfy their wants. Instead 
of looking to the Lord they looked to circumstances, -to the 
numbers of the people. They did not reckon with Him 
and His power, who fed Israel for forty years in the wilder- 
ness, who sent the ravens to Elijah. Such is unbelief. 


I2 


How calm and sublime is the Lord’s answer. No word 
of reproof falls from His blessed lips. “But Jesus said to 
them, They have no need to go; give ye them to eat.” There 
was surely no need to go away empty from Him, no need 
to go elsewhere and seek what He so plentifully can give 
and does give to all who trust Him. They have no need 
to go. In this word He reveals Himself once more 4s 
the omnipotent Lord. A desert place, and He declares a 
crowd of five thousand men, besides women and children, 
have no need to go, to leave Him, to find bread to satisfy 
their hunger. But still more, He tells His disciples, “give 
ye them-to eat.” This they could not understand. They 
had very little to minister to the great needs of such a 
company. That the Lord could feed them they had not 
considered, and thac they, in giving them to eat, could 
count on His power to minister to their need was far from 
their thoughts. Yet this is the lesson which the Lord 
wanted to teach them and us likewise. He is the All- 
sufficient One. He has all power, and there is no need for 
anyone to go away empty from Him. He wishes to minis- 
ter to the needs of His people, through His own. “Give 
ye them to eat’ is still His loving word, and He backs it 
up with all His grace and riches in glory. We mean, of 
course, all this of a ministry in spiritual things. 

Let us think of this as we minister the things of God, 
whether it be the Gospel or the ministry of His Word, for 
the edification of believers. All is entrusted to us by the 
Head of the Body. He Himself will minister through our 
ministry if the heart rests believingly in Him and faith 
looks away from circumstances and difficulties to a rich and 
gracious Lord in Glory. He knows the needs of all. He 
is still the compassionate One, and as Lord in glory tells 
His servants: “Give ye them to eat.” Oh for faith to 
count on Him and His gracious power. 


13 


And now they speak, “But they say to Him, We have 
not here save five loaves and two fishes” (verse 17). 
From the Gospel of John we learn that the Lord said to 
Philip, “Whence shall we buy loaves that these may eat? 
But this He said trying him, for He knew what He was 
going to do. Philip answered Him, Loaves for two hun- 
dred denarii are not sufficient for them, that each may 
have some little portion. One of His disciples, Andrew, 
Simon Peter’s brother, says to Him, There is a little boy 
here who has five barley loaves and two small fishes; but 
this, what is it for so many?” (John vi:5-9). They even 
had not the small supply themselves, but it was in the 
hands of a little boy. How suggestive! It was little, very 
little they possessed, and it was in the hands of a little boy, 
one who was weak. It is so with ourselves and the little 
we have. Blessed are we indeed if we do know how little 
it is which is in our hands and how much is lacking. But 
iet it not be in unbelief, thinking it is such a little bit, which 
cannot be used. Nothing is too small, nothing too little, 
if it is brought to Him; yea, He has chosen the weak 
things. “Bring them here to Me’ is His command. What 
condescension,-He does not despise the little we have, He 
does not set it aside in manifesting His power. How easy 
it would have been for Him to speak only a word in that 
desert place and bread would have fallen again upon the 
ground, for the crowds to gather and take with them. He 
wishes to use the little, the weak things, to show forth His 
power. It is the way He works throughout this age, in 
which He is the Rejected One. 

“Bring them here to Me,” and do we bring what we 
have to Him always? Is every service first brought to Him 
for blessing? Is the little put into His hands first for 
blessing? Are all our undertakings really brought to Him; 
our little, our all, put at His disposal? If we bring it to 


14 


Him He will bless it and with His blessing we can go forth 
to minister to others. There can be and will be no lack 
in such ministry in dependence upon Him. 

This is true ministry. How far Christendom has drifted 
away from it, and how short we come of it, with our un- 
believing hearts. We ever reckon with circumstances and 
difficulties and not with the loving, gracious and all suffi- 
cient Lord in glory! May we learn and profit by His 
Word. 

“And having commanded the multitudes to recline upon 
the grass, having taken the five loaves and two fishes, He 
looked up to heaven and blessed; and having broken the 
loaves He gave them to the disciples, and the disciples gave 
them to the multitudes” (verses 18, 19). He blessed and 
broke the bread} and the broken bread is first put into the 
hands of the disciples, and after they received they gave it 
to the people. This is the divine order of ministry. The 
little handed over to Him, He blesses and we receive first 
of Him, and what we receive from His hands we can pass 
on to others.* 

What a scene it must have been! Five thousand men 
besides women and children crowding about Him, and at 
His loving command they lay down upon the grass and 
after they found rest He feeds them with His bread. In 
looking upon that blessed picture we think of Him as 
Jehovah-Rot, the Lord, my Shepherd. “The Lord is my 
Shepherd; I shall not want. He maketh me to lie down in 
green pastures.” It is fulfilled here. Jehovah, the Shep- 
herd, is present with His people. Jehovah, the Shepherd, 
gives them rest and then in the green pastures He refreshes 


*In the Gospel of John He Himself feeds with His own hands the 
crowds. The ministry of the disciples is not mentioned there, be- 
cause in John He is described as the Divine One. 


15 


them. Thus He acts still. Rest and food in Him and 
through Him are still His precious gifts to ail who put 
their trust in Him. He Himself is our Rest and our Bread. 
He satisfies the poor with bread: It is prophetic. He will 
yet be the great Shepherd of Israel and gather His people, 
His scattered sheep, and supply their wants. We read of it 
in that restoration Psalm, the one hundred and thirty- 
second: “For the Lord hath chosen Zion; He hath de- 
sired it for His habitation. This is my rest forever; here | 
will I dwell; for I have desired it. I will abundantly bless 
her provision; I will satisfy her poor with bread.” : 

“And all ate and were filled, and they took up what was 
over and above of fragments twelve hand baskets full. 
But those that had eaten were about five thousand men be- 
sides women and children” (verses 20-21). Here is the 
miracle. The little was not only sufficient for all, but 
more was left over at the end than they had in the begin- 
ning. His blessing was not only upon the little for all, 
but He blessed it in such a manner that from it came an 
abundant increase. It is not different now in the ministry 
of spiritual things. The more we give out, having re- 
ceived from Him, the greater the increase and possession 
for us in the end, 

In the Gospel of John the definite teachings of our Lord 
concerning life through Him and in Him the true bread 
come down from heaven, and the sustenance of that life, 
are connected with this episode. John’s Gospel is the place 
for that. In the feeding of the people as recorded m 
Matthew and the applications we have made of it, we have 
‘brought out the character of the age, the age in which 
Israel has rejected her King. Let us notice that the feed- 
ing of the multitude closes abruptly. In John vi:15 we 
read they would make Him king. But the attempt was 
carnal. No faith in Him, no devotion to His person was 


16 


behind it, and. the Searcher of hearts had to declare unto 
them when the crowds sought Him again: “Verily, verily 
I say unto you, ye seek Me, not because ye saw the miracles, 
but because ye did eat of the loaves and were filled” 
(John vi:20). In Matthew’s Gospel the whole scene closes 
without any record about the behaviour of the multitudes. 
Significantly we read at once: “And immediately He com- 
pelled the disciples to go on board the ship, and to go 
before Him to the other side until He should have dis- 
missed the multitudes. And having dismissed the multi- 
tudes, He went up into the mountain apart to pray.” 

Every word here is pregnant with meaning. He com- 
pelled the disciples to go on board ship. A change is to 
take place by His own arrangement and the people are dis- 
missed by Himself. All this indicates the setting aside of 
Israel, their rejection, though never complete nor final. 
He Himself goes up into the mountain apart to pray. The 
whole night is spent by Him there in the presence of the 
Father. He is absent, both from the crowds and from His 
disciples, and while the multitudes He had fed scatter, His 
disciples are tossed upon the sea. In the prophet Hosea 
we read that Jehovah saith “I will go and return to My 
place” (Hosea v:15). His going upon the mountain speaks 
of His withdrawal and the place which He occupies in the 
presence of the Fathér, as intercessor and advocate. The 
third incident recorded, the stormy night, the storm-tossed 
disciples, the coming Lord in the fourth watch, Peter’s sepa- 
ration to meet him, the morning which brings peace and 
the renewed healing by the returned Lord, all is full of 
meaning and rich in typical application. 

The night is a picture of the time during which He is 
absent, this present evil age in which we live. His re- 
turn from the mountain in the morning foreshadows His 
second coming and the beginning of a new age. 


a7, 


_ And now we read what happens in that night during 
His absence. “But the ship was now in the midst of the 
sea, distressed by the waves for the wind was contrary” 
(verse 24). While He is away night and storm reign and 
His own are in distress, the wind is contrary. Could we 
find a better description of the present age than a stormy 
sea, a contrary wind and a dark night? Surely the age is 
perfectly portrayed by these. It is an age of storm, peril 
and night. How strange that with the most emphatic as 
well as plain statements of holy writ concerning the charac- 
teristics of this age, the’ greater part of the professing 
church can teach precisely the opposite and speak of it as 
an age of peace, light and progress. Surely Scripture is 
very definite that Satan is the god of this age, and night 
increases under his rule; peace is impossible. We find in 
the very short description of that night in which the Lord 
was absent, a description of the age. It is true still and 
the one who believes otherwise and expects peace and calm 
now will be sadly disappointed. 

But if the night, the rising waves, the contrary wind, 
are pictures of the age, what can the little ship mean, which 
sails across the storm sea? The applications which are 
made of the ship are manifold. A favored one is to use 
it as a type of the church and speak of the disciples as 
believers who are in the church and who have their fears 
and doubts, who tremble in view of the towering waves 
and the contrary wind. But such an application cannot 
be made to correspond with the teaching of the Word con- 
cerning the true church. The true church is above the 
waters, above the storms, in union with Himself who is in 
the presence of God. The frightened disciples, full of fears 
and expecting every moment the deep to swallow them up, 
could hardly be taken as types of the true believer, who 
knows his position in Christ. He, too, is above the storm, 


18 


and though he may be storm-tossed, as much as this little 
ship upon the sea, though Satan’s power may ever play 
about him and the wind be contrary, yet through it all 
does he not fear, but sings the song, which is heard above 
the howling wind, “For I am persuaded, that neither death, 
nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor 
things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, 
nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from 
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.” 

What does the ship mean? It may be taken in a general 
way to be a type of the Jewish people. The Lord absent 
from those who are in a sense His own to whom He came, 
and who rejected Him, who refused Him, are upon the 
sea. . The sea represents the nations; the waves and the 
wind, the persecutions and the distress which come upon 
them. It is an excellent portrayal of the history of God’s 
ancient people from the time they refused their King until 
He returns to be received by them. This ship with flutter- 
ing sails, broken masts, tossed like a ball from wave to 
wave, blown hither and thither, uncontrollable and yet con- 
trolled, ever in danger and never in danger of going down 
—this ship is the type of the Jewish ship, the Jewish nation. 
It is still upon the sea. It is still the same old storm-tossed 
vessel. The winds more than ever contrary. It seeks an 
harbor now, trying to cast anchor on the shore of their 
own land, but a boisterous wind is coming and while the 
ship is miraculously kept, there will be no haven, no peace, 
till He comes again who is their King, the Son of David. 

But this application, correct as it is, is too general. We — 
have spoken of the ship and not of the disciples. The 
disciples must be taken as the type of the Jewish remnant. 
We saw from the tenth chapter that the disciples sent forth 
then were representing the Jewish remnant. When the 
Lord Jesus Christ left the earth and went to the Father’s 


Ly) 


house to prepare 2 place, He did not leave a church behind. 
There was no church on the earth when our Lord ascended 
upon high, and when He comes back to earth again He will 
not find the church on the earth, but He will come back to 
be received by*the reninant of His earthly people. It is in 
this light the incident has to be interpreted, which however 
does not forbid applications in other directions. 

“And in the fourth watch of the night He went toward 
them, walking upon the sea. But when the disciples saw 
Him walking upon the sea, they were troubled, saying, It 
is an apparition ; and they cried out for fear” (verses 25, 26). 

He had left His place on the mountain and returned. 
His return was in the fourth watch of the night, right be- 
fore the dawning of the morning. And as He left that 
place on the mountain when He was here in the earth, so 
will He arise and leave the place on His Father’s throne 
and come back to earth, to the very land where He was 
once rejected. First, He will leave His place and descend 
from heaven with a shout and come into the air, where we 
shall meet Him. The fourth watch is the time when He 
leaves His place and comes. The fourth watch is now. 
The gradual approaching of the Lord, His person seen 
dimly in the distance, the fear of the disciples who cry out 
for terror, instead of shouting for joy that He is coming, 
all finds its proper application. How many there are in 
Christendom, for whom the coming of the Lord and the 
events connected with it have no joy, but bring fear and 
terror to the heart. And these days, the days of the fourth 
watch, are filled with signs which herald His coming. The 
true believer, however, knows no fear in the fourth watch, 
for he waits and watches for His coming, and if it were 
possible to get a glimpse of the Coming One leaving His 
Father’s throne, descending into the air, the believing heart 
would rejoice. We love His appearing, and the fact that 


20 


He is coming but intensifies the longing of the heart to 
see Him as He is. The believer knows no such fear as 
the Jewish disciples had, when they saw Him walking on 
the water. Had they known, it is the Lord, and that He 
comes to bring peace and safety, we doubt not their cries 
would have ceased. All has a meaning for the Jewish rem- 
nant, which will be on the scene when our glorious hope 
has been realized. 

“But immediately Jesus spake unto them saying, Be of 
good courage: it is 1; be not afraid” (verse 27). These 
precious, comforting words were heard above the roaring of 
the hurricane and the noise of many waters. May we hear 
them continually in the midst of increasing difficulties, in 
the hour of test and trial, in affliction, in the dark valley 
of suffering and in the experiences we call “disappoint- 
ments.” Blessed are we if we do. The darkest place, 
even if it is the dungeon, will become illuminated and re- 
sound with joyous praise. Surely Paul in Rome must have 
heard these precious words, “Be of good courage—it is I— 
be not afraid!” May we take all from His hands by be- 
lieving we are in His hands and thus face every trial, every 
tempest, with the assurance that there is nothing to be 
feared. 

But in the ship, in that company is one who recognizes 
the voice, one who recognizes Him through the mist of the 
storm and the vanishing shadows of the night. And Peter 
answered and said: “Lord, if it be Thou, bid me to come 
to Thee upon the waters. And He said, Come. And 
Peter having descended from the ship, walked on the 
waters to go to Jesus.’’ Here another significant type is 
before us. We shall soon learn from this Gospel that the 
Lord announces the building of His church. In the six- 
teenth chapter we find the words, “Upon this rock I will 
build My church.” We learn that it was Peter who said, 


Pega 


“Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God,” and upon 
this rock, Christ in resurrection, the Lord announces His 
church will be built. To Peter also the keys of the kingdom 
were committed, and how he could use them we find in the 
book of Acts. Now church means “out-calling,” not only 
an outcalling from the nations, but an outcalling from that 
which is passed, the Jewish things. Peter, so prominent in 
this incident, in his act of faith in leaving the ship, turning 
his back upon his frightened kinsmen, stepping on the waters, 
going to Jesus to meet Him, stands as a type for the church. 
It is true all the truth concerning the church was revealed 
through Paul, the Apostle to the Gentiles. It is true, 
through Paul the company was led forth out of the ship 
to go forth to meet the Coming One, but Peter also stands 
-in his action typically for these truths, which we have later 
so fully revealed in the Pauline epistles. — 

It is separation, and this separation was an act of faith 
which we sec here. It is the true position of the church, 
as well as the individual believer. The old Jewish ship is to 
be left behind. The path for the church is the path of faith. 
The object before the church is the coming Lord. The 
word from Him is; Come. The walk to be like His walk. 
He has triumphed over sin and death, the world and Satan; 
the waves and storms cannot harm nor hinder Him. And 
we are associated with Him. He wants us to walk on the 
water. This is the calling of the church. Separation first 
unto Him. Obedience to His Word and then walking on 
the water to meet Him. 

Alas! where is it now, this church separated, gone out 
to meet the Bridegroom? That which calls itself church is 
a miserable ship, worse than the Jewish ship after which 
the modern “church” is only too often modeled.- As indi- 
vidual believers, however, separation is possible. You, dear 
reader, in the midst of all the confusion and failure. in this 


22 


fourth watch, you may hear His voice, “Come.” He is 
coming. He wants you to take the path of faith, the path 
He walked Himself. “Behold the Bridegroom! Go ye out 
to meet Him!” Have you gone out to meet Him? 

“Bui seeing the wind boisterous, He was afraid; and 
beginning to sink he cried out, saying, Lord save me. And 
immediately Jesus stretched out His hand and took hold of 
him, and said unto him, O thou of little faith, wherefore 
didst thou doubt?” 

All is again pregnant with meaning. 

What made Peter sink after he stepped out so boldly 
and walked on the stormy waves to meet his Lord? It was 
a boisterous wind; and Peter, instead of looking to Jesus 
only, was frightened by that boisterous wind and began to 
sink. Has this not been repeated in our own experience? 
We heard His voice, we separated ourselves, we followed 
Him, and then the enemy raised some boisterous wind. 
He always does when we desire to follow the Lord in ail 
things. Oh, how often we made the same mistake which 
reter made! Looking away from the Coming One, the One 
who is able to save to the uttermost, our feet began to sink 
and to slip back. But could Peter ever have sunk down? 
Never! Nor can the believer ever perish. But Jesus 
lifted Peter up, and he stood again on the waves, triumph- 
ing now through His power over the boisterous wind, and 
then he walked not towards Jesus, but he walked with 
Jesus. Even so He deals with us in His g cat mercy, 
never leaving nor forsaking us, saving us out of the tem- 
pestuous sea. 

How beautifully this fits into the dispensational picture 
we have already given. There is a time coming when 
Satan will bring on a very boisterous wind. It is called the 
“hour of temptation” in Revelation. That old serpent is 
even now getting ready for it. But the Lord will never let 


23 


His own sink. Jesus stretched forth His hand and caught 
Peter. He takes him by the hand, and both go now to the 
ship. So will He catch up His waiting church, and will re- 
turn with His saints to bring peace. 

And as they came into the ship the wind ceased. Satan’s 
power was at an end as soon as Jesus was in the ship. 
When He comes back to earth again there will-be peace, and 
not before. The great need of the world is to have the 
King back. What a glorious picture that must have been— 
Jesus and Peter coming to the ship! The sun was now 
shedding the first rays over the sea, the dark night was 
over, the anxiety of the little flock was turned into joy 
and laughter, while the raging sea became as calm and 
smooth as if there had never been a storm. How much 
grander it will be when the Lord comes back with His 
saints, and the sun of righteousness will rise with healing 
in his wings! ; . 

“Then they that were in the ship came and worshipped 
Him, saying: Truly, Thou art the Son of God.” 

It seems they had never believed this. The great stum- 
bling block with the Jew is yet, “He made Himself God.” 
Again and again we are being asked by them, “Can God 
have a Son?” Many of the Jews acknowledge Jesus to-day 
as a reformer and a good man, but never as Son of God. 
They will know Him when He comes, and the nation will 
fall at His pierced feet and worship Him as the King and 
Son of the Living God. 

The closing verses of the fourteenth chapter of Matthew 
speak of Jesus going to the opposite shore, where He healed 
the diseased. ‘And when they had crossed over, they came 
to the land of Gennesaret. And when the men of that place 
had recognized Him, they sent in all that region round 
about, and they brought unto Him all that were sick. And 
they besought Him that they might only touch the hem of 


24 


His garment; and as many as touched were made perfectly 
whole.” It happened in the place where they had rejected 
Him. This may be taken as a true type of the blessed work 
of redemption, salvation and restoration which will take 
place during the millennium. 


25 ° 


CHAPTER XV. 


This chapter introduces us more fully into the events 
which follow the rejection of the King by His people and 
which manifest the enmity, the satanic hatred against the 
Lord. He has now set His face like a flint to go up to 
jerusalem and soon He will reveal His sufferings; His 
death, His resurrection and His return to earth. While 
going on steadily towards the cross, which was ever before 
Him, that departure He should accomplish in Jerusalem, 
the enemies swarm around Him, they test Him and bring 
their questions, but He silences them all. The wisdom of 
Him who-ts wisdom Himself is gloriously manifested. At 
last the tempting and accusing scribes and Pharisees have 
spent their last arrow upon Him. He asks them a question 
which they could not answer (chapter xxii). He then re- 
veals their wickedness and hatred of Him and pronounces 
His “woes” upon them followed by His last word to Jeru- 


salem (chapter xxiii). But while these evil men with their | — 


evil hearts, under the leadership of Satan, approach the 
Lord from time to time, He also teaches His disciples and 
utters parables all in harmony with the scope of the entire 
gospel. We shall fully show this as we continue in our 
exposition. 

“Then the scribes and Pharisees from Jerusalem come up 
to Jesus, saying, Why do thy disciples transgress what has 
been dejivered by the ancients, for they do not wash their 
hands when they eat bread?” (v. I, 2). 

We can easily learn from this that behind this deputation 
from the religious Jerusalem stood the whole company of 
Pharisees and scribes, and that it was a cunningly devised 


26 


and concerted attempt to ensnare Him. The Lord 
in. answer asks them another question and lays bare 
their wicked hypocrisies, after which He addresses the 
people and answers Peter’s question. Before we follow 
these events a more detailed explanation of the ee of 
the Pharisees and scribes is in order. 

We are aware that the two questions, the one by the 
Pharisees and the other, the Lord’s counter question in the 
beginning of the fifteenth chapter, are not fully grasped 
by many readers of the Word. The Jews believed and 
still believe (at least, the orthodox) in a written law and 
in an.oral law. This they founded upon Exodus xxxiv:27 
and taught that while Moses wrote down a law another 
oral law was given to him and that this oral law was 
handed down from generation to generation. It is believed 
by them that Moses received both the written and the oral 
law on Mount Sinai. They placed the oral law above the 
written law.* Circumstances, however, forced them to 
commit the oral law to writing, which was done in the 
Talmud (meaning doctrine), from which we can learn all 
the ridiculous paraphrases and wicked additions to the law 
the ancients had made under the plea that it was given 
by God. To illustrate what interpretation they put upon 
certain statements of the law we select Exodus xxxiv:26: 
“Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother’s milk.” The 
oral law has expounded this to mean that it is a sin to eat 
meat and drink milk at the same time, and the elders have 
gone so far as to declare, if a pot of milk boils over and 
some of the milk drops into a pot of meat, the meat }s 
unclean and must be thrown away. Butter, coming from 
milk, is likewise not to be eaten with meat, etc. 


*The words of the scribes are lovely above the words of the law; 
for the words of the law are light and weighty, but the words of the 
scribes are all weighty.—Beracoth. 


27 


Such a question these tempting scribes and Pharisees 
brought to the Lord. It is the question about the washing 
of the hands. It will interest the reader to learn a little 
more about this unscriptural act and what emphasis the 
Pharisees and the present day talmudical Jews lay upon 
the washing of hands. 

Nothing whatever is said about such washing of hands 
in the Old Testament scriptures, but the oral law has pre- 
cept upon precept upon this ceremony, which, if neglected, 
is looked upon as a great sin, worthy of exccmmunication. 
One even was permitted to eat unclean meats, forbidden in 
the law, and drink unclean drinks, as long as he fulfilled the 
traditions of the elders and washed his hands before he 
broke the law. The Pharisaical righteousness consisted in 
this: “Whosoever hath his place in the land of Israel, and 
eateth his common food in cleanness, and speaks the holy 
language, and recites his prayers morning and evening, let 
him be confident that he obtains the life of the world to 
come.” Volumes were written and are in existence which 
enlarge in the most critical and minutest way upon the 
washing of hands. Dissertations we find here on the sim- 
ple washing and the plunging into water, on the manner of 
the washing, what hand is to be washed first, the time 
when it is to be done, the quantity of water to be used, 
and many other rules. Besides this we find the grossest 
superstitions. We read some years ago in a jargon book, 
published in Poland, that evil spirits light upon the hands 
over night and if the hands are not washed as prescribed 
by the oral law these evil spirits find their way into the 
mouth and stomach of the transgressor and defile him.* 


*This is undoubtedly founded upon the following talmudical state- 
ment: “Shibta is an evil spirit which sits upon man’s hands at night. 
If any touch his food with unwashed hands, that spirit sits upon 
that food, and there is danger from it.” 


28 


But enough of this. Such were and are the traditions 
of the elders. The Lord might have easily dismissed the 
question of the Jerusalem deputation by telling them that 
their oral law is invalid, but He aims at something higher. 
He aims at their conscience and uncovers their true con- 
dition. With His divine wisdom He has the answer ready 
which will completely shut their mouths. 

“But He answering said to them, Why do ye also trans- 
gress the commandment of God on account of your tradi- 
tional teaching?” For God commanded saying: “Honor 
father and mother; and he that speaks ill of father and 
mother, let him die the death. But ye say, Whosoever shall 
say to his father or mother, It is a gift (corban) whatso- 
ever it be by which received from me thou wouldst be 
profited; and he shall in no wise honor his father or his 
mother; and ye have made void the commandment of God 
on account of your traditional teaching’’ (v. 3-6). 

The great lesson from this is the fact which our Lord 
makes so prominent, that traditional teachings lead to the 
transgressing of God’s commandment and make it void. 
This is true in every case. If we look upon religious Chris- 
tendom with its traditions and man made rules and institu- 
tions, we find ample proof of it and could illustrate it in 
many ways. The one who follows the traditions of Christen- 
dom most, finds himself soon in Rome and then in out and 
out opposition to God’s revealed will and purpose, and he 
who has nothing at all to do with traditional teachings and 
rejects them altogether is in submission to the Word of God 
and looks to it as his only authority. 

Surely ritualistic Christendom, the so-called religious 
world, is the direct offspring of Phariseeism. Its traditions, 
lent, holidays, man made ministry and many invented cere- 
monies, have superseded the Word of God and made it of 
non-effect. We could easily digress here and enlarge upon 


as a a 


29 


this thought. We leave it to the reader to make the applica- 
tion. But think of the awful sin, dear reader, that men can 
dare to set aside with their own inventions and traditional 
teachings the very Word of God, eternally settled in the 
heavens! This has been done, and God will judge Christen- 
dom for it in His own time. The Pharisees had no room for 
the Christ of God; they hated Him. Modern Phariseeism 
may talk of a Christ and use His name; it rejects the 
Christ, His person and His work. 

The Lord, to uncover the hypocrisy of the Pharisees with 
their traditions, refers to the commandment which demands 
the child to honor father and mother. To this Jevrish tradi- 
tion had added, “A son is bound to provide his father meat 
and drink, to clothe him, to cover him, to lead him in and 
out, to wash his face, hands and feet.. A son is bound to 
nourish his father, yea, to beg for him.”* But with all this 
strictness tradition had found a way how to avoid this obli- 
gation. A person had only to say “corban’”—a gift, some- 
thing dedicated to the temple or a vow of personal obliga- 
tion, and the son was completely released from any duty 
towards his father and mother. 

“And so stringent was the ordinance that it is expressly 
stated that such a vow was binding, even if what was voiced 
involved a breach of the law. It cannot be denied that such 
vows in regard to parents would be binding, and were ac- 
tually made. Indeed, the question is discussed in the 
Mishnah, in so many words, whether “honor of father and 
mother’ constituted a ground for invalidating a vow, and 
decided on the negative against a solitary dissenting voice. 
And if doubt should still exist, a case is related in the 
Mishnah, in which a father was thus shut out by the vow of 


*Kiddushim. 


30 


his son from anything by which he might be profited by 
him,”* 

And now follows the righteous word of condemnation 
by Him who searches the hearts of men. “Hypocrites! well 
has Esaias prophesied about you, saying, This people honor 
Me with the lips, but their heart is far away from Me; but 
in vain do they worship Me, teaching as teachings command- 
ments of men” (v. 8, 9). 

The same verdict He pronounces upon the religious world, 
modern Phariseeism. There is much talk of worship and 
approaching God—the Lord has only one word for the 
whole thing, “Hypocrites”! May we through the rich grace 
of God be delivered from Phariseeism in any shape or form 
and keep delivered. It will need great heart-searching and 
self-judgment. 

“And having called to Him the crowd, He said to them, 
Hear and understand. . Not what enters into the mouth 
defiles the man, but what goes forth out of the mouth, this 
defiles the man” (v. 10, 11). Without fear, which He never 
knew, He declares publicly the evil teachings of the sayings 
of the elders. Simple truth, indeed, and yet how many who 
are professing Christians have not hold of the very first 
principle, that the evil is within which defiles the man. 

Of course the Pharisees were offended. It lowered their 
dignity with the common people. They looked upon them- 
selves as the leaders of the people and here, after so strongly 
proving the contrary teachings of traditions, He corrects in 
a few simple words the errors of the Pharisees. 

“Then His disciples coming up said to Him, Dost thou 
know that the Pharisees, having heard this word, have been 
offended? But He answering said, Every plant which my 
heavenly Father has not planted shall be rooted up. Leave 


*See Edersheim, “Life and Times of Jesus, the Messiah.” 


31 

them alone; they are blind leaders of the blind; but if blind 
lead blind, both will fall into a ditch” (v. 12-14). These 
words not alone show the doom of the Jewish Pharisees, 
but they speak also of the doom of that which His heavenly 
Father has not planted—Christendom. It will be rooted up 
and then cast out with its boasted leaders, who are but 
leaders of the blind. 

But even the disciples did not understand His plain and 
simple language. Peter calls that which was plain teaching 
‘auparabie,” 

“And Peter answering to Him said, Expound to us this 
parable. But He said, Are ye also without intelligence? Do 
ye not apprehend that everything that enters into the mouth 
finds its way into the belly, and is cast forth into the 
draught? but the things which go forth out of the mouth 
come out of the heart and these defile men. For out of the 
heart come forth evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornica- 
tions, thefts, false witnessings, blasphemies; these are the 
things which defile man, but the eating with unwashed hands 
does not defile man” (v. 15-20). How slow they were to un- 
derstand the full meaning of what He wanted to convey to 
their hearts. Our Lord shows the true source of all defile- 
ment. It is within. The Pharisees did not believe in the ut- 
ter corruption of the heart. “I the Lord search the heart” 
(Jer. xvii:t0). And this searcher of hearts is present here 
on the scese and throws His own light upon the source of 
evil, of which He had said through Jeremiah, “The heart is 
deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked.’ Blessed 
is he who bows before this verdict. 

The incident which follows is in closest connection and 
fullest harmony with all this inasmuch as it reveals deliver- 
ance from the evil which is within. 

The first part showed us how. the Lord tore down the 
mask from ‘the Pharisees and uncovered the human heart. 


32 


“All things are naked and open unto the eyes of Him with 
whom we have to do.’”’ The One who uncovers here and 
knoweth the heart, desperately wicked, the Heart-searcher, 
is the same who called in Eden, “Adam, where art thou?” 
What else are the religious observances, the traditions of 
men, than miserable fig leaves to conceal the nakedness of 
the sinner! But He stripped off these fig leaves, He re- 
moved the covering and aimed at the conscience. His divine 
light revealed the darkness and defilement within. Blessed 
is the man who puts himself in that light and lets that light 
uncover and undo him! 

- The Holy Spirit now connects with the manifestation of 
Christ as the One who uncovers the heart another incident. 
It is the Syrophcenician woman and the healing of her 
daughter. If we have in the first part of this chapter the 
manifestation of Jehovah, who reveals, we find in the second 
part Jehovah revealed, who covers and delivers His poor, 
naked and needy creature. The blessed story before us is 
the full revelation of the loving heart of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. 

“And Jesus going forth from thence, went away into 
parts of Tyre and Sidon.” He left the religious Pharisees 
with their hypocrisies and deceitful dealings. He turns 
His back upon all, and chooses for His path a country 
where religious observances were unknown, where sin and 
misery held sway. How significant once more! A fore- 
shadowing again of what should happen soon: the Gospel 
to be sent to the Gentiles. And now we read of her who 
is the object of His divine compassion, and through her 
the Lord manifests His rich grace and power to deliver 
from evil. 

“And lo, a Canaanitish woman, coming out from those 
borders, cried to Him, saying, Have pity on me, Lord, Son 
of David! My daughter is miserably possessed by a demon. 
But He did not answer her a word.” 


| 33 


Assuredly He knew her and her need, her struggles and 
her faith, and as He went through Samaria on account of 
that one soul who came to the well, so here He enters 
these parts to meet the needy one and deliver her. His 
heart is all for her, and His divine love and desire is toward 
her. But who is this miserable, crying woman, with her. 
face marred by suffering, lifting her imploring eyes to Him 
in whom she recognized her Deliverer? She is a Canaanitish 
woman, or, as she is also called on account of her living 
in that country, a Syrophcenician. She belongs to a race 
which is cursed. The Caananite was to perish. Israel was 
called to carry out the divine sentence. She directs her 
prayer for help to Him as Son of David. Perhaps she had 
heard of Him by that name, and how He, the Son of David, 
drove out demons, healed the sick and raised the dead. 
Faith she possesses, and faith casts itself upon Him, trusting 
in His power and willingness to help. But had she a claim 
upon Him, the Son of David? Had she a promise anywhere 
that the Son of David would come and deliver and heal a 
Canaanitish woman? No, not one. For the Canaanite is 
no hope held out in connection with Israel’s Messiah. When 
at last the Son of David has taken His place upon the 
throne of His father David, the Canaanite will have been 
driven out of the land (Joel iti:17; Zech. xiv:21). For 
this reason He did not answer her a word. If He had 
opened His lips it could have only been to speak with the 
authority of the Son of David, and that would have meant 
her doom. But nevertheless is His heart full of grace and 
sympathy for her. He who read the hearts of the proud 
Pharisees reads her heart too, knows her state and that 
faith will triumph. So He answered her not a word. In that 
silence was hidden all His rich Grace towards her. It told 
her: You have no claim on Me as Son of David; you have 
no promise to claim Me as David’s Son. In calling Him 


34 


“Son of David” she claimed what was not hers. He wants 
her to know that she is to come with no claim, as one 
stripped of all. This is the gracious object before Him in 
being silent to her pitiful cries. 

We next hear the voice of the disciples. “And His dis- 
ciples came to Him and asked Him, saying, Dismiss her, for 
she cries after us.” They did not suggest that her request 
should be granted. Perhaps they meant it by their expressed 
desire, “Dismiss her.” Had they not seen multitudes 
healed? Did they not see the blind, the deaf and dumb, 
the fever-stricken and the infirm press around Him, and He 
had healed them all? The centurion with his sick servant, 
too, was a Gentile, and now they ask Him to dismiss her. 
How little they. knew of His ways. He could not dismiss 
her without the blessing she craved. He could not give 
her the blessing she wanted as long as she appealed to Him 
as Son of David, laying claim to that to which she had no 
right. 

“But He answering said, I have not been sent save to 
the lost sheep of the house of Israel.” 

His answer was not only meant for the imploring dis- 
ciples but it was meant for her. He speaks, of course, as 
Son of David. And oh! how wonderful is this word, though 
it has often been declared as harsh. He puts her, so to 
speak, in the right path to receive the blessing. It is one 
little word around which all is centered.- The little word is 
“lost.” He gave her thus to understand He had come for 
the lost sheep of the house of Israel; and if they were lost 
and needed a Saviour, how much more she, a Canaanitish 
woman? And it is this word, lost, which faith lays hold 
upon, and through which she is enabled to draw near and 
ask His help simply as a needy one. “But she came and 
worshipped Him, saying, Lord help me.” She has under- 
stood; her heart grasped the meaning. She fully realized 


35 


her place outside of the commonwealth of Israel, and be- 
cause she knows it she drops His title, Son of David. With 
this she declared, “I have no claim upon His mercy.” But 
she came, Yes, she came into his divine presence, and wor- 
shipping she falls at his feet with a cry of need, “Lord help 
me.” She has taken her place before Him, and casts her- 
self upon Him with all her need. “Lord help me’—what a 
blessed prayer it is! 

And that she had taken the true place in which He, the 
Son of God, could bless her, is soon to be brought out. 
Her faith is to be tested—to pass through the fire. He 
knew her; He knew the answer she would give, and in 
testing her He points out the way to Himself and to the 
blessing once more. Oh! how gracious and tender He is! 
And still He deals with the soul in the same tender and 
loving way. 

“But He answering said, It is not well to take the bread 
of the children and cast it to the dogs.” What would she 
say to this? A dog—a Gentile—the bread for the children! 
Is her faith truly paired with humility (and true faith 
always 1s) to stand this word? Does she really know her- 
self as such an unworthy outcast? Before we read her 
answer let us glance at the word “dogs.” The word used 
by our Lord is a diminutive; it really means “little dogs.” 
It denotes the dogs which enter the house to find some- 
thing to eat there and not the homeless animals which 
roam through Oriental villages. In the use of this word 
she understands once more His readiness and willingness 
to bless her. And so He led her down, deeper and deeper, 
and as He leads her down her hope becomes brighter and 
brighter. Thus He deals with the soul which seeks His 
help. 

But now faith bursts forth in all its fragrance. Crushed 
she lays before Him, the Lord. Tenderly His eyes must 


36 


have rested upon His poor creature. Her appeal to the Son 
of David was hushed, her need and help, her expectation 
from Him alone, and now the word which had crushed her 
still more and yet which holds out to her the brightest 
promise. 

Listen to her answer as it comes from her trembling 
heart and lips, “Yea, Lord, for even the dogs eat of the 
crumbs which fall from the table of their master.” She 
admits it all. She has nothing to answer’ back. She as- 
sents to it: “Yea, Lord.” Thou art right! But faith rises 
higher. She takes His word in her lips, “the dogs”—the 
little dogs—‘‘eat of the crumbs which fall from the table 
of their master.’ The little dogs are cared for and in the 
confession of being one of these little dogs she claims from 
Mercy’s hands-a few crumbs. She has conquered. Once 
more greater faith is found than in Israel. And now He 
speaks the Word which must have filled her with praise: 
“OQ, woman, great is thy faith; be it to thee as thou de- 
sirest. And her daughter was healed from that very hour.” 
But how it all must have refreshed His heart—the heart of 
the rejected One—moving on towards the cross! 

However, while we learn the way of grace and spiritual 
lessons from these events, let us not forget the dispensa- 
tional phase of it. The first part of this chapter (verses 
I-20) stands for the apostasy of Israel and Israel set aside. 
The incident of the Canaanitish woman stands typically for 
the call of the Gentiles and Salvation going forth to them. 
The third part of the chapter reveals the dispensation to 
come: the Kingdom age. ; 

“And Jesus going away from thence came towards the - 
sea of Galilee, and He went up into the mountain and sat 
down there. And great crowds came to Him, having with 
them lame, blind, dumb, crippled and many others, and 
they cast them at His feet, and He healed them; so that 


37 

the crowds wondered, seeing dumb speaking, crippled sound, 
lame walking, and blind seeing; and they glorified the God 
of Israel. But Jesus having called His disciples to Him 
said, I have compassion on the crowd, because they have 
stayed with Me already three days and they have not any- 
thing that they can eat, and I would not send them away 
fasting lest they should faint on the way. And His disciples 
say to Him, Whence should we have so many loaves in 
the wilderness as to satisfy so great a crowd? And Jesus 
says to them, How many loaves have ye? But they said, 
Seven and a few small fishes. And He commanded the 
crowds to lie down on the ground; and having taken the 
seven loaves and the fishes, and having given thanks, He 
broke them and gave them to His disciples and His disciples 
to the crowd. And all ate and were filled; and they took 
up what was over and above of the fragments’seven baskets 
full; but they that ate were four thousand men, besides 
women and children. And having dismissed the crowds, 
He went on board ship and came to the borders of Maga- 
dan.” 

_ Here, then, we have once more a foreshadowing of the 
coming age. The God of Israel is glorified, which will 
not come to pass in the earth until the King comes back 
and establishes His kingdom. Then it shall be, “Glory to 
God in the highest and peace on earth.” The feeding of 
the second crowd of people has the same meaning. Three 
days they were with Him and on the third day He fed them 
miraculously. As we have shown elsewhere, the third day 
stands always for resurrection and the completion. The 
seven loaves and seven baskets of fragments teach us the 
same lessons, 


38 


CHAPTER xX vas 


After the wonderful manifestation of Jehovah among His 
people, in the healing of the great multitudes and the feed- 
ing of the four thousand men, besides women and children, 
the Pharisees appear again upon the scene, and this time 
with the Sadducees to tempt Him. 

“And the Pharisees and Sadducees came and asked Him, 
tempting Him, to shew them a sign out of heaven” (verse 
1). The Pharisees were the strictest sect among the Jews. 
They were the religious class, the Ritualists who not alone 
held to the letter of the law, but who enforced the tradi- 
tional teachings. They were hypocrites, and fully exposed 
as such by our Lord in the previous chapter. There He 
uncovered the hypocrisies and the wickedness of their hearts. 
Once before the Pharisees and the scribes had come to Him 
with their subtle cunning and asked to see a sign from Him 
(chapter xi1:38). The scribes were in fullest sympathy 
with the Pharisees, being as religious and ritualistic as they 
were. These scribes had the care of the written law 
and studied it. They made the transcripts, expounded the 
law, explained difficulties, kept the records and were also 
called lawyers. 

The Sadducees were the very opposite from the Pharisees 
and the scribes. The Pharisees hated the Sadducees, and 
the Sadducees were the sworn enemies of the Pharisees. 
Sadduceeism was the reaction of Phariseeism. It was a 
reform movement, and as such (like all reform) a big 
failure. The Sadducees were Freethinkers, Rationalists. 
They denied the supernatural. Up to this chapter they are 


39 

mentioned only once before. In the third chapter we read 
that the Pharisees and the Sadducees came to the Baptism 
of John. We can well! imagine how the Pharisee, when he 
saw a Sadducee on the road out to the wilderness, would 
gather his long, flowing robe around himself for fear that 
the hem of his garment would become defiled by brushing 
up against that unrighteous Sadducee, while the Sadducee 
had nothing but looks of scorn and hatred for his 
brother. John greeted them with the title which belongs 
to them both, “Offspring of vipers!” 

Now, here in the beginning of the sixteenth chapter, this 
event happens, the Pharisees and Sadducees agree together 
_ to tempt the Lord. Both make a common cause in opposing 

the Lord. Most likely they came together in Conference. 
Well could they meet together, though outwardly separated, 
yet inwardly possessed by the same satanic hatred against 
Him, whose words had so completely unmasked Phariseeism 
and whose deeds and mightly miracles had so perfectly 
exposed the fallacy of Sadduceeism. While they could not 
agree in doctrine and practice in one thing they could agree 
and were perfectly harmonious, and this was, the hatred 
and rejection of the Lord Jesus Christ. And, as before 
indicated in our exposition of this Gospel, these Pharisees 
and Sadducees, these sects among the professing earthly 
people of God in the past, are perfectly reproduced in the 
professing sphere of Christendom. The modern “Christian” 
Phariseeism is the religious, ritualistic part of Christendom, 
having a name to live but being dead, the form of godliness, 
but denying its power. Sadduceeism in its “Christian” as- 
pect is the liberal current so strong in our day, the new 
theology which puts supernaturalism out of the way, the 
higher critics who deny the inspiration of the Bible, begin- 
ning with the denial of the written Word and rapidly ending 
with the denial of the living Word. And these two great 


40 


parts of Christendom, modern. Phariseeism and Sadduceeism 
are opposing the Person and the Work of the Lord Jesus ~ 
Christ. The day is not far off when there will be a great 
union of Christendom, a union which will take in the most 
ritualistic and the most liberal, a .union which will also in- 
clude the reform Jew and which will aim at a universal 
religion founded upon that anti-Christian doctrine of “a 
Fatherhood of God and Brotherhood of men.” All this is 
seen approaching by the modern drift of things throughout 
Christendom. This union to come will be upon the ground 
of opposing the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and the 
atonement He made on the Cross. That coming union will 
be “the devil’s millennium.’ When the Lord Jesus Christ | 
comes the second time He will find that monstrosity fully 
developed in the earth. 

And thus they came asking a sign out of Heaven. Before 
it was only “asking a sign of Him.” But now it was to be 
a sign out of Heaven. Perhaps the Sadducees had asked 
this and the Pharisees were well satisfied. He had done 
many signs among them and He Himself, God manifested 
in the flesh, was the Sign, and now they desire a sign. 
Would they have believed if He had given them a sign? 
Supposing He had with His omnipotent power opened the 
Heavens and shown out of Heaven with the rays of glory; 
what would have been the effect upon their unbelieving 
hearts? Would they have bowed in worship before Him? 
We believe not. The Sadducees, with a sneer, would have 
explained it as a phenomenon of nature. They do it so now. 
During a visit to California a brother told us how the lead- 
ing preacher of a certain city, a “Congregationalist,” had 
told his hearers that it was a stroke of lightning which fell 
upon the sacrifice of Elijah on Mt. Carmel. And the Phari- 
sees would have only blasphemed the more. They would 


4I 


have repeated their previous blasphemy in saying that the 
sign was given through Beelzebub’s power. Indeed, the 
ritualistic, Jewish fanatic believes to this day that our Lord 
did His miracles through the mysterious and unlawful use 
of the Holy Name. A sign out of Heaven! Infidelity still 
demands it occasionally through its disciples. “If some one 
came back from the ‘other world’ we would believe,” persons 
have often told us. But would they believe? “If they hear 
not Moses and the prophets, not even if one rise from the 
dead will they be persuaded” (Luke xvi:31). That awful 
delusion “Spiritualism” with its satanic abominations has 
for a bait that ridiculous assertion, “the evidence of a future 
life, the demonstration and sign of a hereafter,” and many 
have been ensnared by these demon doctrines. No signs 
any more; the Sign of all signs has come, Christ Himself, 
But a sign will yet come, the sign of the Son of Man fol- 
lowed by the Manifestation of Himself out of Heaven. Of 
this we shall hear more in the closing verses of this chapter. 

“But He answering said to them, When evening is come, 
ye say, Fine weather, for the sky is red; and in the morning, 
A storm to-day, for the sky is red and lowering; ye know 
how to discern the face of the sky, but ye cannot the signs 
of the times. A wicked and adulterous generation seeks 
after a sign, and a sign shall not be given to it, save the 
sign of Jonas. And He left them and went away” (v. 2-4). 

They understood the signs of nature, the warnings of the 
coming storm and the harbingers of a beautiful day. The 
Jews in general closely observed the seasons and signs in 
_nature.* All the changes in nature they observed, but the 


*“Tn the going out of the last day of the feast of Tabernacles, all 
observed the rising of the smoke. If the smoke bended northward, 
the poor rejoiced, but the rich were troubled; because there would 
be much rain the following year and the fruits would be corrupted; 


42 


signs of the times they did not discern. They were blinded 
to these. If their eyes had been open they would surely 
have known that a great change of seasons in another realm 
than nature had come. They could have seen the evidences 
of a fast approaching judgment upon the apostate nation and 
likewise the blessed evidences of the visitation from on High, 
by the Presence of the Lord, which had taken place. 

And is professing Christendom less blind? Alas; almost 
everything is discerned and studied, the records of the past, 
the history of Christendom, everything else except the signs 
of the times. This strange, unscriptural optumism, by which 
Christendom closes wilfully the eyes, so as not to see the 
signs of an approaching crisis, this false cry of “Peace and 
Safety,” is indeed blindness as great, perhaps greater, than 
the blindness of those who asked a sign of the Lord. 

But thanks be to God, not all are blinded, but many do 
discern the signs of the times and know “the morning com- 
eth, but also the night.” 

They were “a wicked and adulterous generation;” this 
solved the whole problem why they could not discern the 
signs of the times. The sign of the Prophet Jonas was to 
be the only sign they were to receive and that refers us to 
the death and resurrection of our Lord. 

“He left them and departed.” Significant words. as well 
as a symbolical action once more. 

“And when His disciples were come to the other side, 
they had forgotten to take bread. And Jesus said to them. 
See and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Saddu- 
cees. And they reasoned among themselves, saying, Because 


if it bended southward, the poor grieved and the rich rejoiced, for 
there would be fewer rains that year, and the fruit would be sound; 
if eastward, all rejoiced; if westward, all were troubled.” From 
Talmud, Bal. Ioma.—Horae Hebraeicae. 


43 


we have taken no bread. And Jesus knowing said, Why 
reason ye among yourselves, O ye of little faith, because ye 
have taken no bread? Do ye not yet understand nor re- 
member the five loaves of the five thousand, and how many 
hand baskets ye took up? nor the seven loaves of the four 
thousand, and how many baskets ye took up? How do ye 
not understand that it was not concerning bread I said to 
you, Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees? 
Then they comprehended that He did not speak to them to 
beware of the leaven of bread but of the doctrine of the 
Pharisees and Sadducees” (verses 5-12). Here the slow- 
ness Of heart and the unbelief of the disciples stands ex- 
posed. The Lord turns to His own, right after He had 
turned His back upon these enemies, and He warns now ,that 
even His disciples, believers, are to beware of the terrible 
leaven of Ritualism and Rationalism. How significant that 
after He left the offspring of vipers and before He unfolds 
the truths concerning the church which was to be built, 
He warns to beware of the leaven and its pernicious work 
and effect. At no time perhaps is this warning to be 
heeded so much as in the times we live. : 

But they understood Him not. They thought of th 
bread which perishes and even then unbelief was mixed 
with it. Instead of being occupied with Christ Himself 
and spiritual things they minded earthly things and so He 
had to tell them in plain words that He did not speak of 
the leaven of bread, but of that which leaven typifies, the 
doctrine of the Pharisees and Sadducees. 

What follows now after the warning words of our Lord 
is one of the most important sections of this Gospel. Around 
the contents of the second half of the sixteenth chapter 
cluster indeed the most vital and solemn doctrines. We 
approach, therefore, the exposition of this part with much 
prayer, that His Word may be made very plain to every 


44 


reader and all may learn the lessons which are put before us. 

We find the Lord and His disciples in Czesarea-Philippi, 
and there He asks His disciples what men say concerning 
Himself. After the disciples had answered He turns to 
them with the same question and Simon Peter gives that 
wonderful answer upon which the Lord announces the fact 
of the future building of His church, as well as His com- 
ing suffering, death and resurrection. Before we begin the 
study of these events in detail we wish to say that only in 
Matthew do we find the full answer to Peter’s confession 
and the fact brought out that the Lord is to have a church. 
The other Gospel records do not mention these words at all. 
The Holy Spirit put them here in this dispensational Gos- 
pel because there it is where they belong. He, as the writer 
of this Gospel, is like a goldsmith who has numerous 
precious stones and pearls, each a costly gem in itself, and 
forms them in a perfect chain. He arranges all in His 
divine order, in perfect beauty, to work out and show forth 
the perfection and worth of the Lord. And so He put 
the events before us into the very heart of the Gospel of 
the King. 

“But when Jesus was come into the parts of Cesarea-Phil- 
ippi, He demanded of His disciples, saying, Who do men 
say that I, the Son of man, am? And they said, Some, 
John the Baptist; and others Elias; and others, again, Jere- 
mias, or one of the prophets” (verses 14, 15). 

It is significant that this takes place in Casarea-Philippi. 
It is on Gentile ground, so to speak, where it happens. and 
where on the one hand it is demonstrated once more that 
His own had not received Him; and on the other, He is 
truly confessed and His revelation concerning the church is 
made known. 

In putting the question to His disciples, “Who do men 
say that I, the Son of man, am?” He knew, of course, per- 


45 


fectly well what men said of Him, for He knows all things. 
Nor does He include in this question those proud and evil 
Pharisees with their blasphemies, but He means the multi- 
tudes who had followed Him, the men who had listéned to 
His words and who had seen His miracles. The answer 
they give Him, the echo of the different voices in Israel, 
proves only too well that they knew Him not. John the 
Baptist, Elias, Jeremias, or one of the prophets, these were 
the estimates of Him who is God manifested in the flesh. 
And is not this yet the burning and important question, 
“Who is He? What think ye of Christ?” It is still so, and 
the attacks of the enemy are ever aimed at the person of 
the Lord. The answer is a manifestation of the unbelief 
of His earthly people Israel, and this unbelief which became 
more and more evident indicated the setting aside of Israel. 
So it is likewise at the end of this Christian age. The 
ever increasing denial of the Deity of Christ and of His 
Glory, as it is going on in that which claims His name, 
Christendom, is the forerunner of judgment. (2 Pet. ii.) 

But now the Lord turns to His own. “He says to them, 
But ye, who do ye say that I am? And Simon Peter an- 
swering, said to Him, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the 
living God.” The question was addressed to the disciples, 
but Peter answers as the representative of the disciples, 
and is also the mouthpiece of the Father, whose revela- 
tion has come to his heart. But what does this confession 
mean and what does it all include? It includes more than 
the prophetic statements contained in the Old Testament 
Scriptures concerning the Deity of the Messiah, that He 
is the Mighty God, Immanuel. It is more than the expres- 
sion of faith in the prophecies and the fulfilment of them 
in the person of Him who was standing in their midst. The 
confession is personal faith in the Christ, the Son of the 
living God, and as such He had been revealed unto Peter 


46 


by the Father, and Peter, knowing Him as the eternal life, 
realizing Him as the one who hath life and who imparts 
life, gives utterance to it. The confession goes beyond the 
cross and the grave and shows forth Christ the Son of God 
in resurrection, though Peter had not the full grasp of this 
when he spoke. It includes all that, realized in personal 
faith, of which the Lord speaks of in the Gospel of John. “For 
even as the Father has life in Himself, so He has given to 
the Son also to have life in Himself,” * * * and that 
which precedes this statement in John v, “Verily, verily I | 
say unto you, that an hour is coming, and now is, when the 
dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that 
have heard shall live.” But all is, of course, in anticipation 
of His resurrection from the dead, as we read in the Epistle 
to the Romans, “marked out Son of God in power, according 
to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead, Jesus 
Christ our Lord” (Rom. 1:4). 

And thus Peter’s confession includes all upon which per- 
sonal faith in the Son of God rests. The first Epistle Peter 
wrote by the Spirit of God shows forth the word “living” 
in connection with the resurrection of Christ. There we 
read of “a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus 
Christ from among the dead,” and “the living and abiding 
Word of God,” and the Lord is termed ‘a living Stone,” 
while believers ate “living stones.” The confession of Him 
by Peter, through the Father’s revelation, is then something 
altogether new. It denotes a new departure and is the very 
opposite from Israel’s unbelief. How it must have delighted 
His heart, when for the first time the full truth concerning 
Himself comes forth from human lips as the result of divine 
revelation! And now He is ready and free to give as the 
Son of the living God a new revelation. He is now giving a 
glimpse of what is going to be and He speaks of that mystery 


hidden in former ages, the church or assembly, which He 
calls “My church.” 


47 


“And Jesus answering said to him, Blessed art thou, 
Simon Barjona, for flesh and blood has not revealed it to 
thee, but my Father who is in the heavens. And I, also, I 
say unto thee that thou art Peter, and on this rock I will 
build my church (assembly), and hades’ gates shall not 
prevail against it’? (verses 17, 18). 

The blessedness of Peter is announced first, -a blessedness 
which is equally upon each sinner who believes in the 
Christ, the Son of the living God. “Bar Jona,’ as the Lord 
calls Simon, means “‘son of a dove,” and the dove is the 
emblem and type of the Holy Spirit. Flesh and blood could 
not produce such a revelation and such faith, it was the work 
of the Father; and upon this He, the Son, speaks, “J also, J 
say unto thee * * * ” So in the event before us we 
have the Father mentioned as well as the Son and the Holy 
Spirit. 

With His own divine authority the Lord now speaks to 
Simon. Simon Bar Jona receives a new name. Thou art 
Peter. The Greek word Petros means ‘‘a stone;’’ and then 
the Lord gives the declaration of the building of His as- 
sembly upon this rock. The new revelation is concerning 
His church. The word “ecclesia” is found here for the 
first time in the Bible. It means literally “to call out,” and 
denotes an assembly of persons. It would be much better 
if the word assembly could be substituted. for the word 
“church,” as that term is so much misused. By speaking 
of “my church” the Lord indicates what he is going to do 
with those who, like Peter, with a God-given faith, confess 
Him as the Son of the living God. They are to form His 
church, one great assembly. 

This passage containing the word “church” for the first 
time, and the Lord intimating that it is still a thing of the 
future, should be sufficient in itself to clear up all the un- 
scriptural views held and taught throughout Christendom 
about the “church.” 


48 


The Lord’s speaking of the church as to be built upon 
this rock makes it clear that there was no church in exist- 
ence up to that time. It is therefore all wrong to speak, 
as it is done so often, of the Old Testament church. 
There was no such institution in Old Testament times. It 
is altogether unkrown on the pages of the Old Testament 
prophetic Word. There are, of course, types which 
indicate that a church was to be called into existence and 
which we now understand after God’s hidden secret has 
been made known. We remember some years ago, after 
giving an address on the church, how a number of brethren 
took exception to our statement that there was no church in 
the Old Testament. The argument they brought was from 
Stephen’s address in Acts vii, where it speaks of “the church 
in the wilderness,” and because this referred to Israel these 
brethren took it for granted that Israel was the church of 
Christ in the wilderness. What havoc and confusion such 
a view produces and leads to! All the sad conditions about 
us in Christendom originate from the prevailing ignorance 
of what the church is. The miserable method of applying 
promises made to God’s earthly people Israel to the church, 
and forcing the fulfilment of them into this present age, 
has its starting point from the same misconception. 

Now if the term “church in the wilderness” is mentioned 
in the Book of Acts, it simply means “a congregation, an 
assembly of people in the wilderness,” and such was Isracl. 
The word “ecclesia” church is likewise used in Acts xix :32. 
The mob there is called “ecclesia,” but, unlike Acts vii:38, 
the translators used the word assembly instead of “church.” 

However, the emphasis here is upon the word “my.” He 
is going to have an assembly of people, a church; this out- 
called people is for Himself. The formation of His assem- 
bly could only begin after the work of redemption had been 
accomplished. He had first to suffer and die, to be raised 


49 


from the dead and by it become Lord and Christ, to be re- 
ceived up into Glory and the Holy Spirit sent down, ere the 
building of His assembly could begin. Therefore He says 
here, “I will build my church ;” not I am building it now, or 
it has been building since Adam’s day, but “I will build.” 
Get this clearly settled in your mind and the fuller revela- 
tion about the church, the body and bride of Christ, her 
heavenly calling, heavenly relationship, heavenly hope and 
heavenly destiny, will soon be understood. And the gates 
of hades, death, cannot prevail against it because He whose 
is the church and who builds it has prevailed over death 
and has annulled him, who has the power of death, that 1s 
the devil. 

This fuller revelation we do not find here. This is not 
the place for it. Nor do we find the full truth concerning 
the church revealed on the day of Pentecost. If Peter were 
the rock, a statement we shall follow closely, the rock upon 
which the church is built, we could surely expect that on 
that wonderful day, when the Spirit was-poured out, Peter 
in his preaching would refer to himself and to the church. 
But he uses the word “church” nots once in his address. — 
When at last all is to be brought out and that mystery 
hidden in former ages is to be made known, the Lord does 
not commit these truths at all to Peter, but he chooses an- 
other instrument to whom He intrusts His secrets, Paul, 
the Apostle of the Gentiles. Through Paul the full revela- 
tion of the assembly, the one body, is given. 

As it is so well known, Roman Catholicism founds upon 
the Lord’s words to Peter the assertion of Peter’s suprem- 
acy, and as an outflow from this the Papacy. Peter, accord- 
ing to the poor Romanist, is the stone upon which the 
church is‘ built, and the infallibility of the church is claimed 
from the words “hades’ gate shall not prevail against it.” 

What then does the Lord mean when He says, “Thou art 


50 


Peter and upon this rock will I build my assembly?” He 
did not mean Peter or He would have said “upon thee will 
I build my church.” The word Peter—petros—means a 
part of a rock, that is a stone. When the Lord says upon 
what He is going to build His church, He no longer speaks 
of petros, a stone, but he uses the word petra, which means 
a rock, out of which the petros, the stone, is hewn. The 
word petra, rock, He uses for the first time in Matt. 
vii:24, 25. The house there is built upon a petra, a rock, 
and cannot fall, and this rock is He Himself... “This rock” 
upon which the assembly is built is “Christ, the Son of the 
living God” as confessed by Peter. 

But why this peculiar use of petros and petra—a part of 
a rock and the rock? Ah, it brings out the most precious 
truth that Peter and every true believer in possession of 
eternal life, this life imparted, is associated with Him, is a 
part of Him, for He is the Eternal Life. 

Let Peter answer from the God-breathed words of his 
first Epistle, “To whom (Christ) coming, a living stone, 
cast away indeed as worthless by men, but with God chosen, 
precious, yourselves also, as living stones, are built up a 
spiritual house, a holy priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices 
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ” (1 Pet. ii:4-6). “ Here 
is the same relation of stone and stones, and Peter himself 
settles the question of who the stone is—not he, but Christ— 
and Peter, like every other true believer, is but a living stone | 
built upon Himself. It would take us too far to look to the 
Messianic prophecy in Isaiah xxviii:16, the basis of Peter’s 
words. 

But the Lord has more to say to Peter.. “And I will give 
to thee the keys of the kingdom of the heavens; and what- 
soever thou mayest bind upon the earth shall be bound in the 
heavens; and whatsoever thou mayest loose on the earth, 
shall be loosed in the heavens” (verse 19). 


51 


These words have been very grossly misapplied and the 
mcst abominable doctrines have been built upon it. It is 
indeed strange that but few Christian believers are clear 
about their meaning. From these words to Peter the very 
ridiculous, Christ and the Gospel dishonoring picture is 
drawn, which represents Peter with keys in his hands guard- 
ing the entrance of heaven, and that it is left to him, who 
shall be admitted and who rejected. The Lord did not say 
the keys to heaven were given to him, nor did he say that 
the keys to the church were in his hands and with the loosing 
in the earth and loosing in heaven the Lord never meant 
that the eternal destiny of one single soul was left in Peter’s 
hands. 

Let us see that the keys of the Kingdom of the heavens 
were given to him. The Kingdom of the heavens is not 
heaven nor is it the church, and upon this fact rests the true 
neaning of the words before us. Notice the place Peter has 
in the church, not different from the place every believer | 
holds in. the assembly through the Grace of God, is given 
first and when the Lord speaks of giving him keys of the 
Kingdom of the heavens, He confers upon him authority 
for actions not in the church, but in the Kingdom of the 
heavens. It is therefore wrong to say that the Lord gave 
the keys of the church to Peter, except one assumes (which 
is so often done) that the church and the Kingdom are 
identical. 

We have learned before (Matt. xiii) what we have to 
understand by the Kingdom of the heavens in its present 
form. It embraces the entire sphere of Christian profession, 
all Christendom. Every one who confesses the name of 
Christ is in the Kingdom of the heavens, though that one 
may not at all be a true believer. This Kingdom of the 
heavens is in existence in the earth during the absence of 


52 


the King; it is committed into the hands of men, and it is to 
be administered by men. Now, if the Lord tells Peter that 
He will give to him the keys of the Kingdom of the heavens, 
He puts the administration of the Kingdom into his hands. 
The question arises next, Did the Lord assign to Peter a 
special place distinct from the other disciples? Are the keys 
peculiar to Peter and only to Peter? Was Peter to have 
these keys exclusively? These are important questions. 

It is easily proven that the Lord did not mean to single 
out Peter and give to him a work distinct from the other 
disciples, nor did he give him a peculiar place or one of 
supremacy. 

The Lord adds immediately after the declaration that He 
will give to him the keys of the Kingdom of the heavens— 
“and whatsoever thou mayest bind on earth shall be bound 
in heaven, etc.” Now, if we turn to the eighteenth chapter 
of this Gospel (verse 18) we find that the Lord repeats this 
very commission and He addresses it no longer to Peter but 
to the whole company of disciples. Peter must be looked 
upon in the whole passage as the representative of the disci- 
ples and as such of all true believers.- If the Lord calls 
him “a stone,’ He certainly did not mean him alone, but 

every one who believes is a living stone, and so when He 
' speaks of the keys and the binding and loosing He com- 
mits this authority not upon Peter exclusively, but upon 
every disciple, and as true believers form His assembly, 
upon the assembly as such. 

It is generally taught that Peter used the keys on the day 
of Pentecost, and when he preached to Cornelius and his 
household (Acts x). It is assumed that the Lord gave this 
commission to him exclusively and that the words of the 
Lord were fulfilled at these occasions. However, this can- 
not be proven from the Scriptures, nor does Peter refer to 


53 


any special authority in preaching on the day of Pentecost 
- or in the house of Cornelius.* 

But what are the keys? The answer is, Knowledge 
(teaching and preaching) and Baptizing. “Go ye therefore 
and teach (disciple) all nations, baptizing them in the name 
_of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost” 
(Matt. xxvili:12). These are the doors of entering into 
the professing sphere of Christendom, that is the Kingdom 
of the heavens, These keys are still used. The binding 
and loosing refers only to discipline on the earth. It has 
nothing whatever to do with remission of sins or eternal 
salvation. We pass this over at present, but shall enter 
‘into it more fully when we reach the eighteenth chapter, 
where we find these words in connection with the statement, 
“where two or three are gathered together unto My Name, 
there am I in the midst of them.” 


*After all that Rome and ritualism and even more evangelical 
systems have found in these keys it may be hard to credit such a 
view as this; and with many it has been customary to point to Peter’s 
eminent place on the day of Pentecost in opening the kingdom to 
the Jews, as afterwards in the person of Cornelius to the Gentiles. 
But an eminent place may be fully allowed him in this way, while 
- yet we deny him an exclusive place; and, in fact, we cannot exclude 
others on the day of Pentecost; nor even at Caesarea allow that this 
was the sole use of the key in relation to the Gentiles, any more than 
the use of another key than that which before had opened the king- 
dom to the Jews. One act did surely not exhaust the service of the 
_key, nor to open the door twice require two keys. Can it be thought 
that the door once opened simply remained open, and needed no 
more opening? On the contrary, I believe it can be conclusively 
shown that the administration of the kingdom, which these keys 
stand for, is not yet over, is not at all come to an end in one initial 
authoritative act. Men still receive and are received in; and if the 
power ‘of the keys speaks of admission into the kingdom, and the 
kingdom be the sphere of discipleship, then the key is in fact but au- 
thority to disciple—Nwumerical Bible. 


54 


“Then He enjoined on His disciples that they should say 
to no man that He was the Christ” (verse 20). As the 
promised Messiah His people had rejected Him; He is now 
to go on towards Jerusalem to be delivered up and then 
raised from the dead to be announced as Lord and Christ. 
Therefore He enjoined His disciples not to publish Him as 
the Christ. 

And now after the Lord had made known for the first 
time, upon Peter’s confession, the future building of His 
assembly, He speaks likewise for the first time in this Gospel 
of His rejection, death and resurrection. “From that time 
Jesus began to shew to His disciples that He must go away 
to Jerusalem, and suffer many things from the elders and 
chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and the third day be 
raised” (verse 21). 

In the beginning of this chapter the fact was brought out 
that Israel had no heart for Him and His own knew Him 
not nor would they receive Him. What they would do to 
Him He now reveals. It was more than mere rejection of 
His Person and His words. He would have to suffer many 
things from the hands of the leaders of the nation and be 
killed ; after death His resurrection. And when this solemn 
announcement came from His blessed lips He knew the 
full meaning of what was included in “the suffering of « 
many things and he killed.” He knew before He entered 
into the world what work He was to do. “Wherefore com- 
ing into the world He says, Sacrifice and offering thou 
willest not; but thou hast prepared me a body. Thou took- 
est no pleasure in burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin. 
Then I said, Lo, I come, in the roll of the book it is written 
of me to do, O God, thy will” (Heb. x:5-7). He knew the 
suffering, for His own Spirit was in the prophets of old, 
testifying before of the sufferings which belong to Christ 
(1 Pet. i:11). He began then to speak of these sufferings 


> 


55 


to His disciples, but He alone knew what it all meant. He 
had entered into the world for this very purpose to give 
His life and as the Lamb of God to take away the sin of 
the world. We must also lay emphasis upon the words 
“from that time began Jesus.” The building of His as- 
sembly and His suffering, death and resurrection are closely 
connected. The beginning of the assembly, the building of 
the same, could only be possible after the redemptive work 
of the Lord Jesus Christ was finished. We read in Genesis — 
ii:22 how the helpmeet of the first Adam was made. » She 
was taken from Adam’s side while he slept. She was built 
out of his side. It is that well known and blessed type of 
the last Adam and His assembly, Christ and the church. 
No sooner had the last word of the announcement of His 
passion fallen from the lips of the Lord than the enemy is 
manifested, attempting to keep Him from going to the 
cross. It is Peter who interrupts Him. “And Peter taking 
Him began to rebuke Him, saying, God be favorable to 
thee, Lord; this shall in no wise be unto thee” (verse 22). 
The same Peter who had uttered that glorious confession, 
the revelation of the Father, becomes all at once the mouth- 
piece of the adversary. He had not been asked by the Lord 
what he thought of His statement; he speaks in the im- 
pulsiveness of the flesh, as a natural man. Perhaps the con- 
ception of Messiah’s kingdom, His glory as an earthly King 
in which He as a Jew with his fellow disciples so strongly 
believed, was in part responsible for this hasty word, and 
explains why he became so readily an instrument of Satan, 
May be the words addressed to Peter by the Lord, the giving 
of a new name and the commission, lifted up Peter and gave 
him a spiritual pride, which brought on his hasty action. 
The way he acts seems to indicate this. He acts in an as- 
tonishing forwardness. He takes his Lord aside and then 
began to rebuke Him, The Lord, who rebuked the winds 


56 


and the sea, rebuked by His creature! What ignorance of 
the person of the Lord and what failure this action of Peter 
reveals. And what does he say to the Lord? He desires 
that God should be favorable unto Him by keeping Him 
from such a fate. But only through His sacrifical death 
could God’s favor flow forth to lost men, and-so Peter gives 
expression to the very endeavor of Satan, who would have 
kept the Lord Jesus Christ from going up to Jerusalem to 
die on that cross of shame. 

And now turning round to Peter, the Lord speaks: “Get 
away behind Me, Satan; thou art an offence to Me, for thy 
mind-is not on the things that are of God, but on the things 
that are- of ‘men’ (verse :23).- The* Lord -récognizes 
the enemy behind Peter’s words and He addresses that un- 
seen one in almost the identical words He had used upon 
yonder mountain, from which Satan had showed Him the 
kingdoms of the world, offering the same to Him. We 
learned from the fourth chapter in the Gospel, from the 
temptations of our Lord by Satan, what the aim of the 
enemy was with every one of these temptations. He at- 
tempted to keep the Lord from going that path of humilia- 
tion, of obedience unto death, unto the death of the cross. 
Satan knew all his dreadful power, the power of death, 
would be broken and his complete defeat wrought on the 
cross, and to keep Him from going there was his aim. Here 
is a blunt attempt of Satan through Peter to hinder the 
Lord in His path. 

And there is still another lesson which we cannot pass by. 
We read in the Epistle of James concerning the tongue, 
“Does the fountain, out of the same opening, pour forth 
sweet and bitter? Can, my brethren, a fig produce olives, 
or a vine figs?” Alas! it may be so with any believer, as it 
was with Peter, going on from the sweet revelation of the 
Father to the bitter things of the enemy and giving expres- 


57 

sion to them; and he was not conscious of it. “Thy mind 
is not on the things that are of God.” What a word this. 
is for our consideration! As soon as the mind ceases to be 
- occupied with the things that are of God, and we turn to the 
things that are of men, we are stepping on the territory of 
the adversary. “For the rest, brethren, whatsoever things 
are noble, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things 
are pure, whatsoever things are arniable, whatsoever things 
are of good report; if there be any virtue and if any praise, 
think on these things” (Phil. iv :8, 9). 

“Then Jesus said to His disciples, If any one desires to 
come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross - 
and follow me. For whosoever shall desire to save his life 
shall lose it; but whosoever shall lose his life for my sake 
shall find it” (verses 24, 25). 

These words are addressed to the disciples and not to un- 
believers. It is therefore not a question of salvation. We 
are not asked to deny self and take up the cross in order 
to be saved. These words tell us that the way the Lord 
went is the way of all His true disciples. He states in a few 
words all the great truths of the association of the believer 
with the Lord, which the Holy Spirit brings out so fully 
‘in the Epistles. We read of the same association in the Gos- 
pel of John, “Verily, verily, I say unto you, except a corn 
of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abides alone; but 
if it die, it bears much fruit. He that loves his life shall 
lose it, and he that hates his life in this world shall keep it 
to life eternal. If any one serve me, let him follow me; 
and where I am there also shall be my servant’ (John 
xii:24-26). Of course there is an immeasurable difference 
between Him and the believer. He alone could drink the 
cup, and yet the path He went is our path. In the third 
chapter of Joshua we read of the passage of God’s people 
over Jordan. The ark of the covenant led the way and all 
the people followed. Between the ark and the people, hows 


58 


ever, was maintained the space of two thousand cubits. 
And yet they all followed after. It is the type for us. He 
has made the way and we follow Him. “For to this have ye 
been called; for Christ also has suffered for you, leaving 
you a model that ye should follow in His steps” (1 Pet. 
ii:21). But how little of the denial of self and the losing 
of the life is known in these days. Many are, no doubt, 
believers in the Lord Jesus Christ; but do they follow Him? 
Is His path ours, too? It is not only possible to believe in 
the Lord and not follow Him, but it is the most common 
thing we see to-day about us. If we are loyal to Him in a 
world which has rejected Him and which is unchanged, we 
shall share His rejection. We may not be called upon in 
these days to lay down our lives for His sake, but we should 
be willing for it, should it become again a test of following 
Him. Surely as we desire to follow Him and He is before 
us, we shall find abundant occasion to deny ourselves and 
take up our cross. In the degree we look upon Him, our 
adorable Lord, and He is the object of our affection, in that 
degree shall we be obedient to Him, deny self and take up 
the little cross. It will be a pleasure, a joy and a blessing 
then. As the martyrs went to the stake with singing or 
faced the wild animals with holy laughter and praises on 
their lips, so shall we praise Him for the little suffering with 
Him in these evil days.* 

“For what does a man profit if he should gain the whole 
world and suffer the loss of his soul? or what shall a man 
give in exchange for his soul?” (verse 26). What solemn 


*“Take up his cross. These words are not to be understood as 
meaning that we should choose a cross. Begin only with self-denial 
and then the cross will come of itself. He says ‘his cross’; for 
He does not teach that we should bear the identical cross which He 
bore. Everyone’s cross has been prepared according to the measure 
of each one’s strength” (1 Cor. x:13).—Martin Luther on the Gos- 
pels. 


8) 


questions these are! And who could answer them? Surely 
if anything is taught in them it is the immense, immeasur- 
able value of the soul. The soul is immortal; if it were not 
‘these questions would be unreasonable. 

The denial of the immortality of the soul and with it the 
teaching of man dying like the beast, if he dies without 
Christ, is one of Satan’s lies which has gained ground 
throughout Christendom in these last days. 

The last verse of this chapter contains another revelation. 
“For the Son of Man is about to come in the Glory of His 
‘Father with His angels, and then He will render to each 
according to his doings. Verily, I say unto you, There are 
some of those standing here that shall not taste of death at 
all until they shall have seen the Son of Man coming in His 
Kingdom” (verses 27, 28). 

These words refer to His second coming, His coming in 
power and in glory. They have puzzled not a few readers, 
and all kinds of spiritual meaning have been read into them. 
They are, however, very clear if we read at once the first 
part of the seventeenth chapter, where we find six days 
after the Lord and three of His disciples on the Mount of 
Transfiguration. What the disciples beheld there was the 
type of His glorious second coming as Son of Man in His 
Kingdom. Our exposition of the next chapter will lead us 
deeper into this fact. 

The sixteenth chapter has brought before us seven reve- 
lations : 

t. The Rejection of the Lord. 

2. The Confession of the Lord as the Christ the Son of 
the Living God. 

3. The Building of His Assembly. 

4. The Authority of His Assembly. 

5. ‘The Death and Resurrection of the Lord. 

6. The Path of the Disciple. 

7. The Return of the Lord. 


CHAPTER XVII. 


The first part of this chapter gives us the record of the 
transfiguration of our Lord Jesus Christ. The portion before 
us is one of the richest in the entire book of Matthew; so 
full of precious teachings and suggestions that. one almost 
shrinks from attempting an exposition, for it seems impos- 
sible to touch on all the phases and lessons coming from this 
great event. 

Let us remember that the Holy Spirit has given us three 
accounts of the transfiguration. Besides the one here we 
have one in Mark and in Luke. In each, special points of 
the great event are made prominent in full accord with the 
meaning and scope of the three Gospels. We find no record 
of the transfiguration in the fourth Gospel. It would ‘be 
out of place in that Gospel, for John is the instrument to 
reveal Christ as the Son of God and the eternal Life. In 
Luke we find that something is said which is not found in 
the other two accounts. We read there: “And as He 
prayed the fashion of His countenance became different and 
His raiment white and effulgent.” The Gospel of Luke pre- 
~ sents our Lord as Son of Man and we read there often that 
He prayed, and thus the information given to us in Luke is 
in full accord with that Gospel. In Matthew we learn some- 
thing which is only reported there, namely, that His face 
shone as the sun. The importance of this fact we shall dis- 
cover in the course of the exposition. In Mark and Luke 
the voice out of the cloud says, “This is my beloved Son; 
hear Him”; but in Matthew alone we read, “This is my be- 
loved Son, in whom I have found my delight; hear Him.” 


ae 
Ree ee 


61 


_ These and other differences are the mark of divine inspira- 
tion; the Holy Spirit, being the narrator of the 
event, reports the occurrence in harmony with the 
purpose of each one of these Gospels. 

And now as we turn to the divine record of the transfig- 
uration in the Gospel of Matthew we desire first of all to 
quote the inspired words of the man who stands out so 
prominently in the sixteenth chapter and who is likewise 
one of the witnesses of the transfiguration; that is Peter. 
In his last Epistle we read: “For we have not made known 
unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
following cleverly imagined fables, but having been eye- 
witnesses of His majesty. For He received from the Father 
honor and glory, such a voice being uttered to Him by the 
excellent glory: This is my beloved Son, in whom I found 
my delight ;* and this voice we heard uttered from heaven, 
being with Him in the holy mountain. And we have the 
prophetic Word made surer, to which ye do well taking 
heed as to a lamp shining in an obscure place until the day 
dawn and the morning star arise in your hearts” (2 Pet. 
i:16-20). 

That Peter refers in these words once more to the scene of 
glory on that mountain top which his eyes beheld long ago 
needs no further proof. He does so “knowing that the put- 
ting off of my tabernacle is speedily to take place” (verse 
14). ; 

We learn therefore that the transfiguration as interpreted 
not by men but by the Holy Spirit, is the pattern of the 
power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. That wonder- 
ful scene on the holy mountain of which Peter had been 
eye-witness was a pattern of the return of the Lord, 
visibly and gloriously to the earth surrounded by His saints. 


*The “Hear Him” is here omitted. 


62 


The entire Old Testament prophetic word speaks of this 
great event, and for this reason the transfiguration of the 
Lord is a confirmation of these prophetic predictions, and 
more than that, the earnest of their final and complete ful- 
filment. We have the prophetic word made surer in the 
scene on the holy mountain, for in the transfiguration we be- 
hold that which prophet after prophet had declared. 

What we have just stated is a most important key to the 
right understanding ofthe passage before. Let us call to 
mind again, the Holy Spirit tells us that the transfiguration 
is the pattern of the coming of the Lord. 

Now this should silence once and for all the strange inter- 
pretations which are made of the last verse of the preceding 
chapter, which is, by the unfortunate division of these chap- 
ters, wrested from its true place. Some, the Lord had said, 
were standing with Him there who should not taste death at 
all until they should see the Son of Man coming in His king- 
dom. The favorite expositions are that the Lord meant “the 
destruction of Jerusalem,” and others tell us “they were to 
see the Lord coming in the triumphs of the Gospel,” etc. 

All these opinions are the opinions of men. Some of 
those standing there did not taste death until they saw Him 
coming, for after six days Peter, James and John beheld 
Him in His power and Glory, a pattern of the Son of Man 
coming in His kingdom. 

“After six days.’—Even the number six is full of mean- 
ing as the number “eight” has a similar meaning in Luke 
where it says, “After these words, about eight days.” The 
number eight is the number of resurrection, and as the Son 
of Man in resurrection He appears in Luke; while “six” is 
man’s number, the number signifying the days of work— 
after six days—after work and man’s day is run out, the day 
of the Lord, the kingdom. And with Him He takes Peter, 
and James, and John his brother, and brings them into a 


63 


high mountain apart. The mountain may have been Her- 
mon, which is not far from Cesarea Philippi. The men 
who were later‘ with Him in the garden in that awful night 
scene, when they slept, while He prayed and His sweat be- 
came as great drops of blood, falling down upon the earth, 
are here on the mountain with Him to witness His Glory. - 
But here, too, while He prayed they were oppressed with 
sleep (Luke ix:32). How this manifests what man is and 
how it brings out the perfection of Himself! The fact that 
the disciples were oppressed with sleep makes it evident that 
the transfiguration must have been at night. The Lord so 
often spent His nights in prayer and came down in the 
morning. Blessed type of His presence with the Father now 
as our intercessor and advocate and His coming again. 

“And He was transfigured before them. And His face 
shone as the sun and His garments became white as the 
light” (verse 2). What a transformation it must have been! 
How the garment of light and glory is put upon Him and 
rays of glory shot forth from His person, the One whom 
Pharisees a little while ago had blasphemed and who had 
said, ‘““The foxes have holes and the birds have nests, but the 
Son of Man has not where to lay His head.” The One who 
had hidden His glory beneath the form of a servant bursts 
forth in glory, and it was His glory. The word used here 
in the original for “transfigured” is used only twice besides 
in this passage. We find it in Romans xii:2 and 2 Cor. 
iii:18. His Grace transforms us now, and by and bye in 
resurrection we shall be transformed according to the same 
image—‘conformed to the image of His Son, so that He 
should be the first born among many brethren.” We shall 
be like Him for we shall see Him as He is. Thus may we, 
as children of God, look upon His glory here and 
know it is our Glory. Beloved! look upon Him and rejoice, 
for “when the Christ is manifested, who is our life, then shall 
ye also be manifested with Him in glory.” 


64 a oA? 

And His face shone like the sun. He is the Sun, the Sun 
of righteousness, and as we have in Matthew the dispensa- 
tional side, it is once more the wisdom of the Holy Spirit to 
put this description here and omit it in the other Gospels. 
The sun is the great light which rules the day, and when 
the sun is absent night rules. He does not shine now as 
Stn of Righteousness, the moon only—the type of the 
church—gives her faint light; it is night. But day will come 
and the Sun of Righteousness rises with healing in 
His wings. Then He the Sun cometh forth“‘as a bride- 
groom of His chamber, and rejoiceth as a strong man to 
run arace. His going forth is from the end of the heaven, 
and His circuit unto the ends of it, and there is nothing 
hid from the heat thereof” (Ps. xix:5, 6). Thus shall He 
come again, and the Sun He created will pale before Him 
in His wonderful Glory. : 

“And lo, Moses and Elias appeared to them talking with 
Him.” Two departed saints come into view first 
of all. Moses, the representative of the law, one who had 
passed through death, and Elias, standing for the prophets, 
the one who had never seen death, but had been removed in 
a fiery chariot, appear alongside the Lord. We may well 
think of Him as standing in the middle. He is the center of 
the Heavens and of heavenly beings, In the Gospel of Luke 
we read that Moses and Elias, appearing in glory, spoke of 
His departure which He was about to accomplish in Jeru- 
salem. Both Law and Prophets speak of His suffering and 
of His Glory as well. He the one in the middle is the ful- 
filment of the Law and the Prophets. 

Looked upon from the standpoint of a pattern of His 
coming into His kingdom, Moses is the type of those saints. 
who died in Christ, who were put to sleep through Jesus, 
and whom the Lord will bring with Him when He comes. 
Elias, the one who did not see death, who was caught up 
from the earth, is the type of those believers who shall not 


65 


sleep but be changed in the twinkling of an eye—caught up 
to meet the Lord in the air. So we have even here the pre- 
cious revelation in 1 Thess. iv:13-18 “made surer.” When 
He comes He will bring us all with Him. 

And of course Moses and Elias were known. Their in- 
- dividuality was not swallowed up by death or removal from 
the earth without death. ‘This should answer definitely the 
oft made inquiry, shall we know each other in resurrection 
glory? Of course we will. As Moses and Elias were easily 
‘recognized by the disciples, so shall every saint be recog- 
nized. What joy it will be then to see uIM first of all and 
to be with Him, whom we have never seen and whom we 
shall see as HEIs, the Man in Glory. What joy to look upon 
‘a Paul, John, Peter and all the beloved of God! Yes we 
shall know each other, though all human, earthly relation- 
ship ceases forever in resurrection. 

The three disciples who gazed upon this glorious scene 
typify here the remnant of Israel, those who in the night 
look up and see Him coming in the clouds of heaven. Thus 
the kingdom scene is complete. 

And Peter answering said to Jesus, “Lord, it is good we 
should be here. If thou wilt, let us make here three taber- 
nacles; for thee one, and for Moses one, and one for Elias” 
(verse 4). 

Poor Peter! What a failure he makes of it again. Once 
more he acts as spokesman for his fellow disciples and in- 
trudes himself upon the scene of glory. He had absolutely 
no conception of what all this meant.. He had of course 
later by the Holy Spirit come down from heaven and open- 
ing the eyes of his heart.* But what was the harm in making 


*How often in prayer meetings one hears requests that feelings of 
joy and blessing may come upon the meeting, that they might say 
“it is good for us to be here—let us make here three tabernacles.” 
This is a much used phrase.and indicates how little the vision’ is 


understood by Christian people. ’ 


66 


the suggestion? It was simply the flesh speaking and Peter 
uttered still words as he did previously, which flowed from 
a mind which is not on the things which are of God, but that - 
are of men. In the sixteenth chapter he rebuked His Lord 
and tried to keep Him back from going to the cross and 
was an instrument of the enemy, and here once more his 
words show the subtle cunning of the same enemy, whose 
tool Peter so readily became even on that holy mountain. 

He lowers the dignity and person of his Lord by putting 
Him on the same level with Moses and Elias.» And behind 
it lurked another thought, the very same attempt to keep 
the Lord from being obedient unto the death of the cross, 
which was made in the temptations in the wilderness, which 
was hid in Peter’s “God be favorable unto Thee,” is made 
here once more. Peter would have a Christ in Glory and the 
state of the kingdom there without the cross, and he is even 
willing with his two associates to work for it, for he says, 
“Let us make here three tabernacles.” 

All this foreshadows what would be done with the 
Lord of glory. The corrupt forms of Christianity have put 
the Lord Jesus Christ alongside of holy men (holy in their 
estimation), or alongside of great men of the world, and 
thus robbed Him of His Glory. Not for.a moment could 
this be tolerated. Peter is still babbling—while he was still 
speaking something happens. It is God the Father Himself 
who interferes and who bears witness that this Jesus, this 
Son of Man, is His Son, is God. “While he was still speak- 
ing, behold a bright cloud overshadowed them, and lo a 
voice out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son, in 
whom I have found my delight, hear Him” (verse 5). 

Wonderful heavenly answer. “And the disciples hearing 
it, fell upon their faces and were greatly terrified”’ The 
heavens opened and the Glory of the Lord in that bright 
cloud is manifested. These three men well knew what that 


67 


cloud meant. It was the cloud which spoke of Jehovah’s 
presence. That cloud which had been withdrawn from 
Israel for centuries had all at once appeared again. Then Je- 
hovah had returned and condescended to be with His people 
once more. They knew they stood in His presence as Isaiah 
knew it when he saw the glorious vision. Therefore, they 
were terrified, for they knew as sinful men they stood in the 
Holy of Holiest and they had no sacrifice. And now 
the voice out of the cloud. The Father speaks and He 
speaks of the Son. He bears witness to the eternal relation- 
ship of Himself with Him, who was ever with Him and ever 
His delight. He calls them away from occupation with 
Moses and Elias; neither law nor prophets can help you and 
make you acceptable. Here He is—my beloved Son, in 
whom I am well pleased; hear Him! He has pleased the 
Father and in Him the Father and the Father’s heart is re- 
vealed. Men are to hear Him, and refusing Him means 
refusing God. In Him we are brought to God. Of course 
the work of the cross is here anticipated. And thus in Him 
the Father speaks, to Him the Father directs us, through 
Him we are brought to the Father, and by Him the heavens 
are opened. And all the precious thoughts which here 
crowd to the heart and the mind we must leave untouched. 
Oh, may we find our delight in Him in whom God finds 
His delight! Never can we make too much of Him. As 
then the cloud appeared and there was an open manifestation 
of the Glory and Jehovah’s presence, so in the coming day 
of His return all will be repeated. Then He must be heard. 

“And Jesus coming to them touched them, and said, Rise 
up and be not terrified. And lifting up their eyes, they saw 
no one but Jesus alone” (verse 8). 

He touched them as He will touch His poor frightened 
people, the remnant of Israel, in that day. But they saw 
Jesus alone. Blessed are we if we see Him and Him alone. 


68 


We have learned then from the transfiguration that we 
have in it a perfect picture of the kingdom to come. Christ 
in Glory, His face like the Sun, in the center. Resurrected 
saints and those who were caught up are with Him. His 
Glory covers Him and them. Living men are in His pres- 
ence terrified. The heavens are opened and mercy and peace 
flow forth. 

“And as they descended from the mountain, Jesus charged 
them, saying, Tell the vision to no one until the Son of Man 
be risen up from among the dead” (verse 9). 

The sounding forth of His Kingdom glory was no longer 
in order, for the Kingdom had been rejected; after His 
resurrection this vision was to be made known and fully 
understood, but not before. The disciples, the witnesses 
of the transfiguration, had indeed little knowledge of its 
meaning. From the Gospel of Mark we learn that they 
kept this saying and questioned themselves what rising from 
the dead was (Mark ix:10). How all this became changed 
after the Lord had risen, ascended on high, and the Holy 
Spirit had come down from heaven! 

The appearance of Elijah in that glorious vision on the 
holy mountain leads to a question which the disciples bring 
to their Master. The coming of Elijah as the forerunner 
of King Messiah was firmly believed by every Jew, and it is 
still held by all orthodox Jews. Elijah is first to come, and 
when he is come then the Messiah is about to come and with 
His coming begins the olam habo (the world or age to 
come), this is a strong article of talmudical Judaism. The 
disciples bring their question, ‘“Why then say the scribes that 
Elias must first have come? And He answering said to 
them, Elias indeed comes first and will restore all things. 
But I say unto you that Elias has already come, and they 
have not known him, but have done unto him whatever they 
would. Thus also the Son of Man is about to suffer from 


Z 69 


them. Then the disciples understood that He spoke to them 


of John the Baptist” (verses 10-13). The difficulty which 
the disciples had about Elias was about the prophecy con- 
tained in the last prophetic book of the Old Testament: 
“Behold, I wili send you Elijah the prophet before the com- 
ing of the great and dreadful day of the Lord. And he 
shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children and the 
heart of the children to the fathers lest I come and smite 
the earth with a curse” (Mal. iv:5, 6). They had seen 
Elias in glory. In the land and among the people ‘all was 
dark; no restoration, no turning of the heart of the fathers 
to the children and the children to their fathers was notice- 
able. On the contrary, they had witnessed how He in whom 
they believed as the promised Messiah, the King of Israel, 
was being rejected and the nation knew Him not. And still 
they hoped for the kingdom and that age of blessing for 
Jerusalem. What then about Elias? Would he yet appear 
and restore all things? The Lord answers their difficulty, 
as He always does when His own turn to Him and put their 
difficulties before Him. He does not deny the fact that 
Elias comes first and will restore all things. Furthermore, 
He told them that he had come and they had not received 
him, but rejected him and his testimony. As he was re- 
jected, so He the Son of Man was now about to suffer from 
them, is His third statement. All at once they understood 
that He meant John the Baptist. They were right. John 
the Baptist had come in the power and spirit of Elijah. He 
was the voice in the wilderness, the way preparer, the one 
in whom the last prophecy in Malachi might have been ful- 
filled, but they did not know Him. His rejection was the 
prelude to the rejection of the Lord as we have seen before 
(chapter xi). John surely was the Elias for that time. 

But this does not fulfill Malachi’s prophecy. That proph- 
ecy is yet to see its fulfilment. Before the Lord returns to 


7° 


earth in power and glory another forerunner, an Elijah, will 
come and his testimony will not be rejected then; he will 
indeed be Elijah who restores all things and he will be fol- 
lowed by the coming of the King’ to set up His kingdom. 
This brings before us the questions, when will the Elijah 
who restores all things appear? where will he appear, ‘and 
what will his work be? These questions are important in 
view of men who have of late arisen claiming that they are 
Elijah, one especially calling himself Elijah the Restorer, 
and boldly and boastingly declares that his. mission is to 
establish a Zion in the earth and restore things before the 
Lord comes. When will Elijah appear? He will come upon 
the scene at the time of the end. This prophetic time of 
the end is specified in the entire prophetic Word; it is 
Jewish history resumed. As long as the church is in the 
earth that end time does not begin. The removal of the 
church will be followed by the last stage of the ending of 
the age. During that time, the great tribulation, Elijah ap- 
pears. Any believer who holds the scriptural doctrine of 
the coming of the Lord for His saints before the great 
tribulation is in no danger to follow deceivers who claim 
to be something, for he knows he shall see not Elijah nor 
the Antichrist. 

Where will Elijah appear? Certainly not in America, 
Australia or Europe, but in Israel’s land, where Elijah of 
old witnessed and John the Baptist, as herald of the King, 
stood. His ministry is confined to the land of Israel. What 
will his work be? It will not be a work to restore Christen- 
dom or to restore the church, or to purify the politics of this 
world and rid society of certain evils, but his work is ex- 
clusively among the people who are the kingdom people. 
His witness is to the remnant of Israel. Like John’s call to 
repentance, he will preach repentance and his testimony will 
be received; he will accomplish the mission of Malachi 


iv:5, 6. 


71 


The appearance of Elijah, therefore, does not come 
as long as the church is present; he appears in Israel’s land 
and his work is not among Gentiles, but among the remnant 
of Israel. This stamps every man who arises at this time 
with the assertion that he is Elijah as one who is deceived 
or a deceiver, perhaps, both, deceived and a deceiver. It 
is not at all strange that such men find listening ears among 
Christians, 

And now the Lord and His disciples are down in the 
valley again. They had descended from the holy moun- 
tain and once more they are among the multitude, who 
perhaps had waited through the night for Him. At the 

dawn of the morning He appears. 
“And when they came to the multitude, a man came to 
Him, falling on his knees before Him, and saying, Lord, 
have mercy on my son, for he is lunatic and suffers sorely; 
for often he falls into the fire and often into the water. And 
I brought him to the disciples and they were not able to 
heal him. And Jesus answering said, O, unbelieving and 
perverted generation, how long shall I be with you? How 
long shall I bear with you? Bring him here to me. And 
Jesus rebuked him, and the demon went out from him and 
the boy was healed from that hour. Then the disciples, 
coming to Jesus apart, said to Him, Why were we not able 
to cast him out? And He says to them, Because of your 
unbelief; for verily I say unto you, If ye have faith as a 
grain of mustard seed, ye shall say to this mountain, Be 
transported hence to yonder place, and it shall transport 
itself ; and nothing shall be impossible to you. But this kind 
does not go out but by prayer and fasting’’* (verses 14-21). 


*It is interesting to know that the twenty-first verse is not found 
in the two oldest manuscripts dating back to the fourth century, 
the Codex Sinaiticus and Vaticanus. 


72 


This is another very suggestive passage. It has many 
dispensational and spiritual lessons. The coming down of 
“the Lord, the one who has been transfigured, from the 
mountain in the morning is clearly typical of His coming 
again in Glory. And what does He find when 
He comes? He finds Satan exercising his soul and body- 
destroying power. The boy possessed by a demon suffering 
sorely is the type of Satan’s dominion when the Son of 
Man comes again. Multitudes wait for His return, and 
when He comes He finds misery, suffering-and unbelief. 
The disciples had the power conferred upon them to cast 
out demons, but they »were helpless; they could not do it, 
and unbelief was plainly at the root of their inability. We 
must, however, be cautious to apply this in the right way. 
It would be incorrect to make these disciples the church. 
We have seen before that they represent the Jewish remnant 
(chapter x). Such a remnant of Jewish believers will be in 
existence after fhe body of Christ, the church, is complete 
and come into the presence of the Lord. This future Jew- 
ish remnant will preach the Gospel of the kingdom and they 
will go once more through the cities of Israel manifesting 
the powers of the kingdom. And yet they will not be able 
to cast out the demon which holds dominion. The coming 
Lord can do this and does it with His manifestation. 

However, the principles underlying the incident have a 
deeper spiritual application. Here is a company of believers, 
for such were the disciples, and the Lord had put power 
into their hands, yet they were not able to use it. Perhaps, 
as over and over again they attempted to drive out the demon 
and failure followed, the multitude jeered at them, and the 
effect upon the child must have been awful. Their failure 
made the case worse. Thus we are as believers in the midst 
of an evil world, which is under the sway of its god, the 
devil, and his demons, Complete victory and power over 


ee 73 
the world and its god is given to us by, in and through our 
Lord Jesus Christ, and yet here are many of God’s people 
as helpless and powerless as were these disciples at the foot 
of the mountain. Weakness and failure is seen everywhere, 
and instead of exercising full control and having full power 


over that which is evil, the evil has full control. And why? 


Oh, let us put the words prominently before the eyes of our 
hearts, “Because of your unbelief.” Unbelief is the only 
reason for this failure. Unbelief gives the world and 
Satan all their power. Faith lays him low and the walls of 
Jericho (the world) must crumble to dust without even a 
single hand lifted up against them. Nothing is impossible 
for him who believes. Faith can remove and does remove 
mountains, which mean obstacles and difficulties in our way. 
How little such faith is exercised among believers. And 
we may go still further and ask what is the reason of lack 
of faith? A severed communion with the Lord and occu- 
pation with self. If the Lord is ever before our hearts and 
self is out of sight, faith can readily be exercised. There- 
fore the Lord gives the remedy, “Prayer and Fasting.” 
Prayer means communion with the Lord and dependence 
on Him. Fasting (the /east meaning of it, abstinence from 
food), the losing sight of self; self-denial. 

The healing of the lunatic is followed by a second an- 
nouncement of His suffering, death and resurrection. “And 
while they abode in Galilee, Jesus said to them, The Son of 


- Man is about to be delivered up into the hands of men, and 


they shall kill him; and the third day He shall be raised up. 
And they were greatly grieved” (verses 22, 23). This new 
declaration of His passion, following the transfiguration 
scene and the manifestation of His power over the devil, is 
a reminder that through the cross alone the glory 
could be accomplished. In the sixteenth chapter the 
announcement of the fact that He would build His 


74 


church is followed by the first statement of His suffering, 
and there the elders, chief priests and scribes are mentioned, 
and His glory as the Son of Man is manifested. He 
speaks again of His death, and the chief priests and elders 
are not mentioned, but He speaks of being about to be de- 
livered into the hands of men. This head of the body, His 
church, and head of the new creation as Second Man He was 
to become by death and resurrection. And His disciples, 
in hearing these words, were greatly grieved. All these say- 
ings of the Lord were mysterious unto them,. They knew 
not that all the hope of glory and the kingdom could only be 
realized by His death and triumphant resurrection, or they 
would not have been grieved. 

The closing paragraph of the seventeenth chapter contains 
a most precious incident, which we shall find again full of 
most suggestive and blessed teachings. The scene is at 
Capernaum, meaning village of comfort. Let us read the 
text first. “And when they came to Capernaum, those who 
received the didrachmas came to Peter and said, Does your 
teacher not pay the didrachmas? He says, Yes. And when 
he came to the house, Jesus anticipated him, saying, What 
dost thou think, Simon? the kings of the earth, from whom 
do they receive custom or tribute? from their own sons or 
from strangers? Peter says to Him, From strangers. Jesus 
said to him, Then are the sons free. But that we may not 
be an offence to them, go to the sea and cast a hook, and 
take the first fish which comes up, and when thou hast 
opened its mouth thou wilt find a stater; take that and give 
it to them for me and thee” (verses 24-27). 

One is at a loss how to give out a little of the wonderful 
riches of grace and glory which are manifested in this little 
incident there by the sea of Galilee. And even if we would 
bring out every point and lesson the Holy Spirit has put here 
for us, it would all be but imperfect stammering. The grace 


75 
and glory of Himself is here most wonderfully brought 
forth. He manifests Himself as the omnipotent Lord; His 
divine majesty and power is shown forth in the miracle of 
the fish, and in wonderful condescension this Lord is servant, 
to make us sons with Himself, and as such, free. But let 
us point out the details. 

The temple-tribute is here meant, which, according to 
Jewish custom, was collected at the end of the month Adar 
(March). That it was not the ransom money for the soul, 
spoken of in Exodus xxx:11-16, is obvious. The amount 
of tribute was in our money about sixty cents. The col- 
lector came to Peter, perhaps for the reason that the Lord 
was not present. And Peter acts once more in his hasty 
manner. Without thinking he answers with a ready “yes.” 
But, Peter, hast thou forgotten thy wonderful confession, 
“Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God?” Is the 
vision from the holy mountain so quickly gone that thou 
canst put again thy Lord down on the level with every other 
Jew who is obliged to pay temple-tribute? Alas! even so 
it was. The dignity and glory of His Lord was quite for- 
gotten and out of sight. 

We see Peter after his hasty reply in the house surprised 
by the Lord. He knew his heart and the question which 
had been asked, as well as the answer which Peter had 
given. Jesus anticipated him, and addressing him as Simon, 
He asks, “the kings of the earth, from whom do they re- 
ceive tribute? from their own sons or from strangers?” 
What a strong proof this is once more of the Divinity of the 
humble Jesus. He knew the thoughts of His disciple; this 
Jesus is the omniscient God, God manifested in the flesh. 
Peter now gives the correct answer, “From strangers ;’” to 
which Jesus replies, “Then are the sons free.” In this 
declaration all His glory is once more revealed. He is the 
Son, He is Jehovah, whose glory had appeared in the tem- 


76 


ple; how could He then pay tribute to that which is His 
own? As Son He was free, no such obligation was upon 
Him. Oh, how the dignity of His Person stands before us 
in these sirnple words. He shows His place as Son, and as 
such He is exempt from the tribute. But while thus He 
shows His divine right, He does not insist upon it. “But 
that we may not be an offence to them, go to the sea and 
cast a hook, and take the first fish that comes up; and when 
thou hast opened its mouth, thou wilt find a stater; take 
that and give it to them for me and thee.” 

And here still greater grace and glory is revealed for our 
hearts to enjoy. First notice that the Lord speaks not of 
Himself alone, but also of Peter. He had not said that He 
_as the Son is free, but the “sons are free.” In speaking of 
giving offence He says “we,’ and when the money is 
miraculously provided it was to be “for me and thee,” for 
the Lord and for Peter. What precious thoughts these facts 
bring to us! The Lord, the Son of God, who is free, identi- 
fies Himself with His disciple, with Peter, who, as we have 
seen before, is the representative of the disciples. In this 
gracious identification of the Lord with His own, every 
believer is included. He is Son and we are sons with Him; 
He is free and He has made us free. “If therefore the Son 
shall set you free ye shall be really free’—He has identified 
Himself with us and we are sharers of His grace, His 
humiliation and His glory. But what an example it is 
which He in His gracious action puts here before us for 
our consideration and “to go and do likewise.” He sur- 
renders His personal right for the sake of “not giving 
offence.” Surely “He has left us an example that we should 
follow in His steps.” It behooves us now, though we are 
sons of God and sons of glory, to walk in humility, without 
asserting our right, willing in all things which concern 
ourselves to suffer. Alas! how little it is done—how great 


77 


_ the offence given again and again, by the self-assertion, the 
ungracious and worldly behavior of those who through the 
grace of God are not of the world as He is not of it. May 
we learn of Him in this sweet lesson. He could say, “I am 
meek and lowly of heart,” and His humility shines forth in 
His action. Like He the Son becoming a servant may we 
as sons be servants too. And then, think of it, He provided 
for all which was needed. Just the amount which was 
needed “for me and for thee” was at His command; it was 
ready and prepared. Allis His and unto the riches of Him- 
self He has taken us. “For me and thee” speaks of individ- 
uality and intimacy. Faith is to take hold of it,and realize 
even better-and more fully that all need is supplied by Him- 
self and that from Him all comes to us. And by what a 
mighty miracle He provides the need. Once more His glory 
flashes forth. Again we learn that this Jesus who speaks 
here is God, God the Creator; as such He manifests Him- 
self. It is a practical illustration of Col. i:16 and Hebrews 
i:3. He knows the deep sea, for-He made the sea. He 
knows the mysteries of the deep, nothing is hid from Him. 
He knows the piece of money in the bottom of the ‘sea, for 
the silver and the gold are His. As He spoke before to 
the restless sea and wind and waves obeyed Him, so here, 
the deep obeys His voice. A creature of His is there, a 
fish, and He commands the fish to take up a piece of money. 
Then He brings the fish to Peter’s hook. Omniscience 
and omnipotence is here which belong to God and God is 
present. And this Jesus is the same, yesterday, to-day and 
forever. He who knew the fish and commanded that fish 
to take the stater and guided it to Peter’s hook, is our 
Lord, with power in heaven and on earth. In view of such 
gracious and wonderful demonstration of His power the 
heart cries olt—Oh why do we not trust Him fully at all 
times and circumstances! Why do we not even hasten to 


78 


such a Lord whose grace and. power is all for us, and ever 
trust Him for all we want? 

Perhaps here is also the thought, of death in type and 
that through death our need is provided... Out of the water 
the fish was taken, and out of the deep provision was made. 


79 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


So closely is this chapter connected with the events of 
the previous one that it should not be divided into a sepa- 
rate chapter at all. It was “in that hour” the disciples came 
to Him with their question. When the Lord had just ut- 
tered the great truth “the sons are free’ and added His 
gracious Word “that we may not be an offence to them” 
and the disciples asked their question about being greatest 
in the kingdom, the great Teacher continues His teachings. 

“Who then is greatest in the kingdom of the heavens? 
And Jesus having called a little child to Him, set it in their 
midst, and said, Verily I say to you, unless ye are converted 
and become as little children, ye will not at all enter into 
the kingdom of the heavens. Whoever therefore shall hum- 
ble himself as this little child, he is the greatest in the 
kingdom of the heavens” (verses 1-5). In the Gospel of 
Luke (chapter ix:46) we read that they were reasoning - 
amongst themselves who should be the greatest. Perhaps 
the Lord’s words to Peter about the keys of the kingdom 
produced this strife among the disciples. While the Lord 
had set His face like a flint to go up to Jerusalem and spoke 
of His coming suffering and death, they had these selfish 
thoughts and reasonings. And so they approach the Lord, 
in the hour when He, who had become poor, had manifested 
His divine power in bringing the fish with a piece of money 
from the bottom of the sea to Peter’s hook. And how gra- 
ciously He teaches them. He knew their hearts and read 
their thoughts. He knew the depths of their natures and 
that one of their numbers was not His own. What love 
that He so patiently instructs them. 


80 


The disciples meant of course the kingdom of the heavens, 
as they understood it, that kingdom which was and is to be 
established in the earth, and their selfish ambition was reach- 
ing out for a great earthly position in that kingdom. They 
‘thought of the time when service, self-deniai and suffering 
would be rewarded by the King; who then would be 
greatest? And the Lord takes a little child and sets the 
little one in their midst and through this object lesson 
teaches them who will be the greatest in the kingdom. 
What the Lord tells His disciples here is practically the same 
which Nicodemus heard from His lips in that night visit. 
The kingdom must be entered in and that means con- 
version, to turn about in a different direction, and become 
as a little child, in other words, a new life is given, a new 
existence begins, the believer is born again and enters the 
kingdom as a little child, as he entered by the natural birth 
into the world. He gives therefore the great characteristics 
of those who have entered the kingdom and the great prin- 
ciples which are to govern them. It is lowliness, littleness 
and dependence. These are the characteristics of a little 
child. “Whoever therefore shall humble himself as this 
child, he is the greatest in the kingdom of the heavens.” 
Having entered into the kingdom by being born again, we 
are to act practically according to these principles and he 
who does so is the greatest. The new life will grow and 
develop, but in regard of these characteristics the believer 
is ever to remain a child in simplicity, dependence on the 
Lord and in lowliness of mind as well as self-forgetfulness. . 
It is by the constant following of these principles that growth 
in Grace is attained. Nothing is more detrimental to the 
development of spiritual life than self-consciousness, self- 
confidence and pride. How often the Lord has to do with 
His children what the earthly father has to do with his 
children when they are wilful. He has to discipline them, 


81 


and that means to show them their true place as a little 
child. “Moreover, we have had the fathers of our flesh as 
chasteners, and we reverenced them; shall we not much 
rather be in subjection to the Father of spirits, and live? 
For they indeed chastened for a few days, .as seemed good 
to them; but He for profit, in order to the partaking of His 
holiness” (Heb. xii:9, 10). Lowliness of mind, that self- 
forgetfulness and dependence on God, was the path of the 
Lord Jesus Christ in the days of His humiliation. Let this 
mind, therefore, be in you which was in Christ Jesus. 

“And whosoever shall receive one such little child in my 
name receives me. But whosoever shall offend one of these 
little ones who believe in me, it were profitable for him that 
a great millstone had been hanged upon his neck and he be 
sunk into the depths of the sea. Woe to the world because 
of offences! For it must needs be that offences come; yet 
woe to that man by whom the offence comes! And if thy 
hand or thy foot offend thee, cut it off and ‘cast it from thee; 
it is good for thee to enter into life lame or maimed, rather 
than have two hands or two feet to be cast into eternal 
fire. And jf thine eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it 
from thee; it is good for thee to enter into life one-eyed, 
rather than having two eyes to be cast into the hell of fire” 
(verses 5-9). 

The great thought put here before us is the identification 
of the Lord with every little one, each who has become a 
little child, that is born again. He is their Father and their 
Lord, closely identified with them. It reminds us of that 
beautiful word “He that toucheth you toucheth the apple of 
His eye” (Zech. ii:8). It is spoken of Israel, it finds a still 
higher application in us. We also may think of that other 
statement: “In all their affliction, He was afflicted” (Is. 
Ixiii:¢). And so honor done to one of the little ones is done 
unto Him, injury done to one of them is injury done to 


82 = 


Him. What glory of the believer this reveals! How this 
fact should teach us how to behave one towards the other 
and not despise any one who is Christ’s. How apt we are to 
do this. This one or that one is so little taught in the Word, 
he is so ungracious—and with all our criticism we forget he 
is after all one of Christ’s own. 

Care, however, must be taken in interpreting the passage 
concerning those who offend, the casting into the sea with 
a millstone* and into eternal fire. That this cannot mean 
‘the true believer, who gives offence is obvious. The true 
believer may give offence, as alas! he often does, but the 
fate-“eternal fire” or “hell of fire” is not for him, But in 
the kingdom, the kingdom of the heavens as it is now, there 
are not alone those who are truly born again, but also many 
who are mere professors without possessing life. These 
are of course indifferent and careless about grieving Him. 
The “eternal fire” is surely for those who though professing, 
continue deliberately in sin and unbelief. And yet the exhor- 
tation has a most solemn meaning for every true believer. 
Whatever is in your way, whatever is a stumbling block it is 
to be removed. If it is the hand by which we serve and act, 
or by the foot, the walk, or by the eye, the very best we have, 
put it away so as not to give an offence. 

And our Lord continues: “See that ye do not despise 
one of these little ones; for I say unto you that their angels 
in the heavens continually behold the face of my Father 
who is in the heavens” (verse 10). It would take many 
pages to follow or state all the different interpretations of 


*Christ here speaks of a kind of death, perhaps nowhere, certainly 
never used among the Jews; He does it either to aggravate the 
thing, or in allusion to drowning in the Dead Sea, in which one 
cannot be drowned without something hung to him, and in which 
to drown anything by a common manner of speed implied rejection 
and execration.—Horae Hebraeicae. 


83 


these words and the various theories and doctrines which 
have been built upon it. That there are difficulties here 
none would deny. 

Much has been made of this passage in teaching that there 
is a “guardian angel” for every believer. That angels have 
ministries which we cannot fully grasp now, cannot be de- 
nied. 

“Are they not all ministering spirits sent out for service 
on account of those who shall inherit salvation?” (Heb. 
1:14). Faith can enjoy it, child-like faith, without going 
into speculation. However the passage does not teach that 
every believer has an angel who guards and protects him 
and who sees the Father. : 

The question is, does the Lord still speak of believers or 
does He now refer to actual little ones? We believe the 
latter is the case. With the tenth verse ends properly the 
exhortation of the Lord in answer to the question of the 
disciples. The little child He had put in their midst was 
most likely still there, and it is now concerning little 
ones, little children, He speaks, that they should not be de- 
spised. Children are subjects in the kingdom of the 
heavens. How little the disciples understood their Lord 
and how they needed the very exhortation not to despise one 
of these little ones is seen in the next chapter, when they 
~ brought little children to the Lord and the disciples rebuked 
them. The Lord then declared: “Suffer little children, and 
do not hinder them from coming to me; for the kingdom of 
heaven is of such” (chapter xix:13, 14). And when the 
Lord now speaks of “their angels in the heavens continually 
behold the face of my Father,” what does He mean by it? 

All of course depends on the interpretation of “angel.” 
At the first glance it would seem as if these little ones have 
angels in heaven. There is a passage in Acts xii which is 
the key to solve the difficulty here. When Peter, rescued 


84 


by an angel, led forth miraculously from the prison house, 
knocked at the door of the praying assembly and 
Rhoda maintained that Peter stood outside, they said “It is 
his angel.” They believed that Peter had suffered death 
and that his angel stood outside. What does “angel’’ mean 
in this passage? It must mean the departed spirit of Peter. 
This fact throws light on the passage before us. If these 
little ones, who belong to the kingdom of the heavens, de- 
part, their disembodied spirits behold the Father’s face in 
heaven; in other words, they are saved. Surely heaven 1s 
peopled by these little ones. What a company of them is in 
the presence of the Lord! The little ones perish not. The 
work of the Lord Jesus Christ was for them. The verses 
which follow and which have been said to be an interpola- 
tion, belong rightly here; indeed, they fit in most wonder- 
fully, though in the Gospel of Luke we have the substance 
of these words enlarged. “For the Son of Man has come 
to save* that which is lost.” “What think ye? Ifa certain 
man should have a hundred sheep, and one of them be 
gone astray, does he not leave the ninety and nine on the 
mountains, go and seek the one which has gone astray? 
And if it should come to pass that he find it, verily I say 
unto you, he rejoices more because of it than because of the 
ninety and nine not gone astray. So it is not the will of your 
Father who is in the heavens that one of these little ones 
should perish” (verse I1-14). 

The words of our Lord, which follow His gracious dec- 
laration, that it is- not the Father’s will that one of these 
little ones should perish, are very important. Here for the 


*The omission of “to seek” is significant. They (little children) 
are lost ones needing a Saviour, but secking implies a condition of 
active wandering from God such as in their case is hardly begun yet. 
—Num. Bible. 


85 


second time in this gospel and the last time, the Lord uses 
the word “church,” or as we translate it “assembly.” We 
must have therefore additional teachings given by our Lor 
concerning His church, which He had announced in the 
sixteenth chapter He is going to build. We have learned 
before that the building of the church was future, that 
when He gave that statement there was no church in’ ex- 
istence. And so the words He spoke to His disciples in 
the passage before us are in anticipation of the gathering 
out of the assembly or church. 

Some have taught that the word “church” means a syna- 
gogue. Church and synagogue, however, are totally dif- 
ferent terms.* Others have failed to see the close connection 
which exists between the first part of the chapter and the 
continued teachings of our Lord going now on about the au- 
thority of the church. That all is vitally connected in this 
chapter may not be discovered at the first glance, but it is 
so nevertheless. He had answered their question about the 
greatest in the kingdom of the heavens and true believers 
were described by Him as little children, born of God and 
in possession of the characteristics of a little child. No 
offence should be given to any of these little ones. He then 
spoke of His own mission, that He came to save that which 
is lost and of His Grace in seeking the sheep which has 
gone astray till He finds it and rejoices over it. And now 
He speaks of a brother who has sinned. How is he to be 
treated? The connection then is clear. If He sought us 
and saved us when we were lost in our sins, so we, in pos- 
session of His life, in the spirit of a little child in dependence 


*Of late this argument has been pressed in certain quarters that 
the word church means synagogue. However if the Lord had 
meant synagogue the Holy Spirit surely would have used the Greek 
word “synagoge” instead of “ecclesia.” 


86 


upon Him and in meekness, are to seek our brother who 
has sinned. The instructions He gives, however, soon refer 
us to the church and her executive power on the earth dur- 
ing the absence of the Head, the Lord Jesus Christ. But 
we have to examine these words in detail. 

“But if thy brother sin against thee, go reprove him be- 
tween thee and him alone. If he hear thee, thou hast gained 
a brother” (verse 15). The question is how sin in a brother 
is to be treated. What kind of a sin is meant, whether a 
sin against a person or sin in a wider sense of the word, we 
shall not attempt to discuss. He is a brother who has sinned 
and the first thing to be done is that the one who knows 
about it is to go to him personally and reprove him, that is, 
show him his fault. The object of his reprover is not per- 
haps to defend himself, if a personal matter, a false ac- 
cusation, is the sin, but it is to restore and gain the brother. 
But to go to the brother who has sinned needs great cau- 
tion, earnest prayer, meekness and self judgment. If the 
reproving is attempted in a wrong spirit it will work untold 
harm. The Holy Spirit has given us in Galatians the 
description of the brother who should go and reprove him 
who has sinned and the manner in which he is to do it. 
“Brethren, if even a man be taken in some fault, ye who are 
spiritual restore such a one in a spirit of meekness, con- 
sidering thyself lest thou also be tempted” (Gal. vi:r). 
Alas! how little this is done. Instead of going at once to the 
brother who sinned, after earnest prayer and with the love 
and grace.of God in the heart, the sin of the brother is 
often spread about and by this un-Christlike behavior magni- 
fied. Bitter feelings are stirred up, resulting in. greater 
evils, slanders, backbiting, lying and other sins. If at last 
some one makes an attempt to see the brother, he finds the 
case perhaps beyond hope. How simply our gracious 
Lord has pointed out the way for us, what the first step is 


87 


to be if the brother has sinned. It is to be treated as a per- 
sonal matter and the sinning brother should not needlessly 
be exposed. Such grace manifested is able to gain the 
brother. 

But in case he does not hear, what is to be the second 
step? “But if he do not hear thee, take with thee one or 
two besides, that every matter may stand upon the word of 
two witnesses or three” (verse 16). Of course the two, 
which are to be taken along in this second step to restore a 
brother, must have the same spiritual characteristics as the 
brother who came to him first. It is to bring still greater 
lave to bear upon him, but at the same time to show the 
brother that unconfessed sin, sin not put away, cannot be 
tolerated in a brother. Should he stubbornly refuse to see 
his fault, his case would appear hopeless and the last step to 
be done would hardly reach him, for from the very outset 
he has been hardening his heart against love and grace, 
the love of Christ, which sought to restore him. 

And so the Lord gives the last injunction, “But if he will 
not listen to them tell it to the assembly.” The sin is now 
to be made public, the whole assembly is to hear of it and 
of course from the side of the assembly or church there is 
to be renewed seeking to gain the brother in love. Hasty 
judging is to be avoided and in all these steps impatient 
haste, the fruit of the flesh, is to be avoided. 

_ The assembly is mentioned, we repeat, in anticipation of 
its building in the future. The injunction given here could 
not have been kept at the time when the Lord gave it, nor 
before the day of Pentecost.* First of all the church had 


*It is very interesting though to find that the Elders and Rabbis 
of old had many sayings about reproving a brother which remind 
one strongly of the words here. It was also customary among the 
Jews to note those that were obstinate and after public admonition 


88 
to be called in existence. That the church is a gathering of 
persons unto the name of the Lord Jesus Christ we find 
later. This assembly then, the church, is to act as a body 
in the case of the brother who has sinned. Of course it means 
a local church gathered unto the name of the Lord of which 
the offender is a part. 

“And if also he will not listen to the assembly; let him 
be to thee as one of the nations and a taxgatherer. Verily 
I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on the earth shall 
be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on the 
earth shall be loosed in heaven.’ These are solemn and 
important words, as they not alone give us light on what 
is to be done with an impenitent brother, but also show us 
the responsibility and authority of the church on earth. 
He is, after refusing to hear the church, to be considered 
as one outside, one who has forfeited his place. This how- 
ever does not mean that further attempts should not be 
made to restore him. The action of the assembly is to 
prove that holiness is to be maintained. 

And now the “verily” of the Lord. Whatever has been 
read into these words of binding and loosing by the as- 
sembly we pass by. The words simply tell us that the Lord 
conferred authority to act on the earth for Himself, and the 
authority is absolute. But to whom does He give this au- 
thority? To the disciples, apostles to be conferred by them 
upon others? Never! That is the unscriptural, man-made 
doctrine which has displaced the person and the work of 
Christ, one of Satan’s most powerful inventions. The au- 


in the synagogue to set a mark of disgrace upon them. The words 
by our Lord, “Where ‘two or three are gathered together unto my 
Name there I am in the midst of them,” is also found in the talmud- 
ical writings. The old Rabbis say, “Two or three sitting in judg- 
ment, the Shekinah is in the midst of them.” NHowever all this 
does not authorize to say the synagogue is meant here. 


—-—: 


89 


thority is given to the church. He gives the church execu- 
tive power. She is to act according to His rules laid down 
and in acting in fullest harmony with the absent Lord and 
obedient to His Word as well as guided by His Spirit, the 
action of the assembly is valid in heaven. The Lord sanc- 
tions it in heaven, whether it is binding or loosing. If, there- 
fore, anything is done which deviates from His Word and 
is not according to His mind, He cannot sanction it. The 
case must be a very plain one. If there is disagreement, 
diversity of opinion, taking of different sides, it is evidence 
that the Lord cannot sanction what is done. 

Alas! how little these injunctions have been followed! 
How little the church has understood the way of grace as 
well as her heaven-given, solemn authority. That which 
professes to be the church has made attempts to follow these 
injunctions, but being disobedient to the Word, has failed 
long ago and is powerless to carry out these words. Much 
of that which calls itself church is simply a human man-made 
institution, having adopted a set of rules, a form of govern- 
ment much like a club. Saved and unsaved are taken in 
and as for discipline that is all out of question. 

And those who returned to the first principles how great 
their failure! The flesh has come in and worked havoc; 
things are done often in a sectarian spirit, a spirit which the © 
Lord can never sanction. Yet all failure is mo proof that 
what is spoken here by the Lord is impossible to carry out. 
It is possible and ever will be possible as long as our Lord 
is gathering out a people for His name. And while failure 
is everywhere failure may be avoided from our side if we 
are obedient to Him and to His Word. 

He then continues with the words of comfort just on ac- 
count of the difficulty: “Again I say to you, that if two 
shall agree on the earth concerning any matter, whatsoever 
it rnay be that they shall ask, it shall come to them from 


go 


my Father who is in the heavens. For where two or three 
are gathered together unto my ‘name, there am I in the 
midst of them” (verses 19-20). 

The Lord knew the difficulty of such a path and the re- 
sponsibility which rests upon believers as an assembly with 
such an authority put upon them, and therefore He gives 
this exceeding great and precious promise. It is a promise 
which tells us that He and His strength and wisdom is on 
our side and that He is willing to supply that which we 
lack. The promise stands first of all in connection with the 
restoring of a brother who sinned. United prayer is first 
of all needed. Yet the promise is not limited to this. We 
are told to ask touching anything and the assurance is given 
that it shall be done for us by the heavenly Father. 
Prayer in secret is blessed and made in His Name has the 
assurance likewise of an answer, but united prayer, even if 
only by two who are agreed, who know their place, their 
responsibility, is what the Lord here emphasizes. And there 
is much need'in these days of believers being agreed and 
casting themselves upon this promise, in confession of 
their weakness and with their responsibility resting upon 
them, making their requests known unto God. What mighty 
works have been accomplished in this way! It would take 
' pages to record some of the victories gained, doors opened, * 
barriers broken down, hundreds and thousands of souls 
saved, all accomplished through united prayer. He is still 
the same ; the promise still holds good. And how graciously 
He puts the number the lowest; not a hundred, not fifty, not 
twenty-five—but if two shall agree. 

The words “Where two or three are gathered together 
unto my name,* there am I in the midst of them” gives us 
the center to which the assembly is gathered. Not the name 


*Not in My Name. This is a wrong translation. It is unto My 
Name. 


: IF Ot 

of a man, but unto the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, the 
exalted Head of His body. The promised presence of the 
Lord is for those who acknowledge the Lord Jesus Christ as 
the One to whom they are gathered. Alas! that the very 
passage should have been used to foster-the same sectarian- 
ism which has been the snare of the professing church! 
And still it is true where two or three are gathered unto the 
Name, which is above every name, rejecting all other names, 
there is an assembly and there is the Lord in the midst of 
them. 

Peter now comes once more to the foreground. He is 
again the spokesman of the disciples. The mention of the 
word “church” most likely revived in him the memory of 
the words the Lord had uttered after Peter’s confession of 
Him as the Christ, the Son of the living God. Peter had, of 
course, then no knowledge of the full meaning of that which 
came from the lips of the Lord Jesus. Then Peter came 
to Him and said, “Lord, how often shall my brother sin 
against me and I forgive him? Until seven times? Jesus 
says to him, I say not to thee until seven times, but until 
seventy times seven” (verses 21, 22). The question is 
in closest connection with what the Lord had said. But 
He had not said a word about forgiving a brother. The 
word “forgive” was riot used once by our Lord; He had 
spoken of gaining a brother who had sinned. Did Peter 
perhaps mean how often he should forgive his brother be- 
fore the case should be taken up in the order as indicated by 
our Lord? We think it is now specifically the question of 
‘personal grievances we may have against a brother. Peter 
thinks and speaks of self. The Rabbis had given the follow- 
ing rule: “Pardon a man once, that sins against another ; 
secondly pardon him; thirdly pardon him; fourthly do not 
pardon him,” etc.* 


*Bab. Joma. 


92 


Peter, quite well acquainted with the traditions of the 
elders, most likely thought of this and he desired to show 
his appreciation of the gracious words he had heard by de- 
clearing his readiness to forgive his brother not three times, 
but twice three times and a little over. Until seven times? 
he asks. Surely, he must have thought the Lord will be 
pleased with such generosity and brotherly love. Ah, how 
little he knew the Grace of Him whom he had followed. The 
answer of the Lord must have been a revelation to Peter, 
“until seventy times seven.”” This is unlimited forgiveness. 
This God in Christ has forgiven us and forgives us, and the 
same Grace, unlimited Grace is to be shown towards the 
brother who sins against me, It is the same blessed word 
God the Holy Spirit gives us in the Epistles, “forbearing one 
another, if any should have a complaint against any ; even as 
the Christ has forgiven you, so also do ye” (Col. iii:13). 
“And be to one another kind, compassionate, forgiving one 
another, so as God also in Christ has forgiven you” (Ephes. 
1v232)). 

This human question of Peter brought out the fullness 
of divine Grace. 

And now the heavenly Teacher utters in connection with 
this a parable. “For this cause the kingdom of the heavens 
has become like a King who would reckon with his bond- 
men. And having begun to reckon, one debtor of ten thou- 
sand talents was brought to him. But he not having any- 
thing to pay, his lord commanded him to be sold, and his 
wife and his children, and everything that he had; and that 
payment should be made. The bondman, therefore, falling 
down did him homage, saying, ‘Lord have patience with me 
and I will pay thee all.’ And the lord of that bondman, 
being moved with compassion, loosed him and forgave him 
the loan. But that bondman having gone out, found one of 
his fellow bondmen who owed him a hundred denarii. And 


» Le 


793 

having seized him, he throttled him, saying, Pay me if thou 
owest anything. His fellow bondman therefore, having 
fallen down at his feet, besought him, saying, Have patience 
with me and I will pay thee. But he would not, but went 
away and cast him into prison until he should pay what was 
owing. But his fellow bondmen having seen what had 
taken place, were greatly grieved, and went and recounted 
to the lord all that had taken place. Then his lord having 
called him, says to him, Wicked bondman! I forgave thee 
all that debt because thou besoughtest me; shouldst not 
thou also have had compassion on thy fellow bondman, as I 
also had compassion on thee? And his lord being angry de- 
livered him to the tormentors till he paid all that was owing 
to him. Thus also my heavenly Father shall do to you if 
ye forgive not from your hearts every one his brother” 
(verses 23-35). 

In looking closer at this parable we must first of all be 
clear on the fact that it is a parable of the kingdom of 
heaven, and as such does not present to us the conditions as 
they prevail under the Gospel of Grace and in the church, 

It is not the assembly which is before the Lord, but 
the Kingdom of the heavens, therefore the parable describes 
conditions as prevailing in the Kingdom. The parable illus- 
trates an important principle. Here we have a picture of 
the sinner in the servant who owes the king ten thousand 
talents, about twelve million dollars. He is unable to pay 
this immense debt, as the sinner is unable to pay his debt. 
The servant is threatened with complete loss of all he has 
and possesses; and then appeals to the king, asking his pa- 
tience for his willingness to pay all. But what does the 
king do? He ignores the plea; he knows the impossibility 
that this penniless servant could ever pay the debt he owes, 
and then in marvelous compassion he sets the bound ser- 
vant free and forgives him. All this illustrates the hopeless- 


94 


ness of the sinner and the Mercy of God without bringing 
out the blessed facts of the Gospel. This would be beyond 
the scope of the parable. But what happens? The liberated 
and forgiven one finds a fellow servant who owes him a hun- 
dred denarii, which is about seventeen dollars. Fresh from 
his terrible experience, his narrow escape and the great 
mercy shown to him, he flies at the poor fellow’s throat, a 
thing the king had not done, demands his pay, and without 
taking his plea at all into consideration casts him into prison. 
The mercy shown to him had not touched his heart; and with 
all that rich mercy extended to him, he is a wicked man 
and addressed thus by the king, who gives him over to tor- 
mentors, to suffer till he should pay all that was due. Thus 
a mere professor of the Gospel may act; his profession out- 
wardly is that he is a sinner, that he owes God much and 
he professes to believe in the compassion and forgiveness of 
God. His heart, however, knows nothing of the Mercy 
and Grace of God. He goes on acting wickedly, and his evil 
heart is manifested by the way he treats his fellow servant. 
Where Mercy is given, Mercy must be shown. If the heart 
has really apprehended the Grace of God and realizes what 
God has done for us in His wonderful Grace, it will ever 
be gracious and forgive; if we do not act according to this 
principle we must expect to be dealt with by a righteous and 


holy God. 


‘ 
bi) ea 
a oe ee ve MRD 


95 


CHAPLIER, XIX, 


In the first part of the nineteenth chapter we find a con- 
tinuation of teachings concerning the kingdom. This, we 
repeat, is not the same kingdom promised to Israel, as it 
was preached by the Lord and His disciples, in the first 
part of this Gospel, but it is the kingdom in its condition 
during the absence of the King, that condition which we 
saw revealed in the thirteenth chapter. The teachings 
given now by the Lord concern the institution, which the 
Creator in His infinite wisdom had established in the be- 
ginning. Are the relationships of nature to be given up 
in the kingdom? Is there to be a change from that which 
God originally instituted? We shall learn that the Lord 
teaches that these natural relationships are not to be dis- 
solved or set aside in the kingdom. We shall find, however, 
that we have here not the fullest teaching concerning these 
earthly relations. In the Epistles are given the exhortations 
to husbands, wives and children; and always after the Chris- 
tian believer’s position and standing has been clearly de- 
fined. To be in the kingdom does, therefore, not free from 
natural relationship, Indeed, it is just in these that the life 
of Christ in love, patience, meekness and forbearance is to 
be manifested. The exhortations in Ephesians, Romans, 
Colossians, Titus and other Epistles teach this most posi- 
tively. 

“And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished these words, 
He withdrew from Galilee, and came to the coasts of Judea 
beyond the Jordan; and a great multitude followed Him, 
and He healed them there. And the Pharisees came to 


96 


Him, and saying, Is it lawful for a man to put away his 
wife for any cause?” (verses 1-3). Galilee is left now be- 
hind and He nears Judea and Jerusalem; and again He 
is followed by a multitude and many are healed by His 
loving hands and His divine power. 

The subject of the earthly relationship instituted by God 
before the fall, called marriage, is brought into the fore- 
ground by tempting Pharisees. We have heard nothing of 
these enemies of the Lord since the beginning of the fif- 
teenth chapter. These traditionalists and strong ritualists 
are now coming upon the scene again. Once more it is a 
question about their oral law, their man-made rules. He 
had silenced them about the Sabbath day and declared that 
He, the Son of Man, is Lord even of the Sabbath. When 
they came with the ridiculous tradition of the elders about 
the washing of hands, He had boldly declared, “Ye hypo- 
crites!” and that they teach as doctrines the commandment 
of men. And now they are going to tempt Him once more. 
How awful this attempt appears when we consider the dig- 
nity of the person whom they try to tempt! He is the Wis- 
dom, the Lord, who created all things; the one who insti- 
tuted marriage and whose fingers wrote upon the tables of 
stone. Instead of worshipping Him and taking their place 
at His feet, to be taught by Him, they try in their blindness 
to ensnare Him. But why do they bring this special ques- 
tion about putting away a wife for any cause? Most 
likely the utterance of the Lord in the fifth chapter was 
reported to these men. There the Lawgiver Himself had 
declared: “It has been said, Whosoever shall put away his 
wife, let him give her a letter of divorce. But I say unto 
you, that whosoever shall put away his wife except for 
cause of fornication makes her commit adultery, and who- 
soever marries one that is put away commits adultery” 
(v:31, 32). This word must have been a very hard saying 


97 
for those men, for it flatly contradicted the rabbinical say- 
ings. And now they think they have a fine case against 
Him. If He but commits Himself on some of these fine 
rabbinical distinctions about the cause for divorce (later 
collected in the talmudical tract Gittin) they would have 
an accusation against Him. 

Two great opinions divided then the Pharisees about 
divorce. Some held to the views of Hillel and others to the 
views of Shammai. Hillel had taught that indeed for al- 
most every cause a wife may be put away. We care not to 
fill our space with a record of all the different causes for 
divorce and the rules, which the elders had laid down and 
which, at least among the extremely orthodox Jews, are 
still conscientiously followed.* The school of Hillel de- 
clared openly, and practised this, that if the wife cooks her 
husband’s food badly, by over salting or over roasting it, 
she is to be put away. The school of Shammai, to which 
other Pharisees held, permitted not divorces except in the 
case of adultery. This will shed more light on the tempta- 
tion of these Pharisees. 

And now the Lord speaks in answer to their question: 
“But He, answering, said unto them, Have ye not read that 
He who made them from the beginning, made them male 
and female, and said, On account of this a man shall leave 
father and mother, and shall be united to his wife, and the 
two shall be one flesh, so that they are no longer two, but 
one flesh? What, therefore, God hath joined together, let 


*It has often been our experience to talk with some poor Jewish 
woman, left by her husband, who got a divorce from the rabbi. We 
-remember one case where a man got a “Gett’—a bill of divorce- 
ment from his wife for an insignificant cause and came to this 
country to marry again. His divorced wife followed him here. 
These conditions have been quite a problem in New York courts. 


98 


not man separate” (verses 4-7). The Lord passes over all 
their scholastic reasonings; He ignores all their different 
opinions and has not a word to say about the law as given 
through Moses. He goes to the very beginning and shows 
marriage to be a divinely instituted relationship. And mar- 
riage, as instituted by the Creator, is an argument against 
both polygamy and divorce. Blessed institution indeed, and 
blessed fact, two shall be one flesh. In the new creation the 
relationship of marriage has a still deeper significance. The 
second half of Ephesians v acquaints us with what the be- 
lieving husband and wife represent. Christ and the church 
and. the love of Christ, the obedience of the church, the 
oneness which exists between Christ and the church, all 
practically to be seen in the relationship of husband and, 
wife. “For no one has ever hated his own flesh, but nour- 
ishes and cherishes it, even as also the Christ, the church; 
for we are members of His body; of His flesh and of His 
bones. Because of this a man shall leave his father and 
mother, and shall be united to his wife, and the two shall 
be one flesh. This mystery is great, but I speak as to Christ 
and as to the church” (Eph. v:29-32). But the Pharisees 
have an answer ready. “They say to Him, Why then did 
Moses command to give a letter of divorce and to send her 
away?’ But even in this they were erring. It was not a 
“command,” but something which Moses allowed. The 
law had much to say about the suspicion of adultery, in 
which case the wife had to undergo a trial by the bitter 
waters (Num. v). Actual adultery was punishable by 
death. And so the Lord has His answer for their objec- 
tion. “He says, Moses, in view of your hardheartedness, 
allowed you to put away your wives; but from the beginning 
it was not thus. But I say unto you, that whosoever shall 
put away his wife, not for fornication, and shall marry 


99 


another, commits adultery; and he who marries one put 
away commits adultery” (verses 8, 9). 

Moses but allowed them divorce (Deut. xxiv:1). Adul- 
tery, however, such was the divine law, meant death. The 
Lord, now in His divine authority as the great “I am,” 
gives a law about divorce, which is binding. Divorce, put- 
ting away a wife is wrong, except in case of unfaithfulness, 
adultery. All divorce for other causes is sin, and who- 
soever marries such a wrongly divorced person commits 
adultery. Many questions which arise here, difficulties in 
individual cases, complications of different nature, we must 
pass by. And yet we cannot conclude our meditation on 
these verses, without calling to mind the condition, which 
prevails about us, in professing Christendom, on these very 
things. The sacred institution of marriage has never been 
so misused as in these days. Society, so called, is corrupt 
in morals. Divorces and scandals are becoming almost 
fashionable. The frightful increase of unlawful divorces 
and prostitution is alarming to the moralist and reformer. 
We know, however, that it will be so in the last days, for 
He said, “As it was in the days of Lot, so shall it be when 
the Son of Man cometh.” 

“His disciples say to Him, If the case of the man be so 
with his wife, it is not good to marry. And He said to 
them, All cannot receive this word, but those to whom it 
has been given; for there are eunuchs, which have been 
born thus from their mother’s womb; and there are eunuchs 
who have been made eunuchs of men; and there are eunuchs 
who have been made eunuchs of themselves for the sake of 
the kingdom of the heavens.” He that is able to receive it, 
let him receive it (verses 10-12). 

The disciples, with their question, lay bare their own 
hearts. If such was the case, they think, that the best thing 
is not to marry at all. He speaks then of what incapaci- 


100 


tates for marriage. Some are unfitted for this divinely 
instituted relation by nature, others have been made so by 
wicked men, a custom still largely prevailing in the Orient. 
There is a third class who are exempt, and these are those 
who have made themselves eunuchs for the sake of the 
kingdom of the heavens. This does not mean mutilation. 
It means, no doubt, living in an unmarried state for the 
sake of the kingdom. It is not a law, not an obligation, 
nor a “sacrament.” Celibacy is a man-made and wicked 
doctrine, contrary to Scripture. ‘He that is able to receive 
it, let him receive it.” It is then something to be received, 
a gift from above. The grace and power of God is able 
to lift some to whom it is given, above the natural things 
of life. Paul undoubtedly was such a one to whom it was 
given. “For I would that all men were even as myself, 
But every man hath his proper gift of God, one after this 
manner, and another after that. . . . But and if thou 
marry, thou hast not sinned; and if a virgin marry she hath 
not sinned. Nevertheless such shall have trouble in the 
flesh; but I spare you. But this I say, brethren, the time 
is short, it remaineth, that both they that have wives be as 
though they had none. . . . But I would have you with- 
out carefulness. He that is unmarried careth for the things 
that belong to the Lord, how he may please the Lord” 
(1 Cor. viie7,.28-32)., 

And now the scene changes once more. The Pharisees 
with their temptation had been silenced by the Lord and 
their question resulted in -definite teachings from the lips 
of the great Teacher concerning the institution of marriage 
in the kingdom. Another question is now to be answered by 
Him, the question of the relation of children to the king- 
dom. In the eighteenth chapter the Lord had put a littie 
child in their midst and had said “Unless ye are converted 
and become as little children, ye will not at all enter into 


PU: 


off 
Je phe eel 


IOI 

the kingdom of heaven;” but here little children are brought 
to Him. 

“Then there were brought to Him little children, that He 
might lay His hands on them and pray; but the disciples 
rebuked them” (verse 13). It was an old custom among 
the Jews to bring children to an acknowledged teacher 
and pious man, that he might pronounce a blessing upon 
them. The laying on of hands was done to symbolize the 
fulfilment of the blessing upon the head of the little one. 
These little ones were, therefore, not brought to Him for 
healing of any bodily disease, but they were brought to be 
blest by Him, Whose children they were is not stated. — 
However, it is very improbable that they were the children 
of unbelieving Jews; these were rejecting the Lord and 
would hardly bring their little ones to Him. They must 
have been children of such, who believed in the Lord, and 
bringing these little ones to Him they manifested their faith 
that He would be willing to bless them and occupy Himself 
with them.» Most likely the act of the Lord in putting the 
child in the midst of the disciples, and his previous teach- 
ing about the little ones, was an incentive to bring boldly 
the children to the Lord for a blessing. How strange once 
more the behavior of the disciples!| The disciples rebuked 
them. They had listened to His gracious declarations about 
the little ones and how He told them, that he who humbles 
himself as a little child is the greatest in the kingdom, and 
yet they understood Him not. Did they want to keep an 
annoyance from the Lord? Was it a selfish motive which 
prompted them to act in this spirit? Perhaps they thought 
these little ones. too insignificant, too unworthy for Him to 
bless. What could He do with these little ones? 

This event brings out a very important and alas! too often 
forgotten declaration from our Lord. The declaration is 
that the little ones are recognized as the subjects of His 


162) 


kingdom, the kingdom of the heavens. There is a place 
for little children in the kingdom; they are a part of it is © 
the emphatic teaching of the passage before us. 

“But Jesus said, Suffer little children and do not hinder 
them from coming to me, for the kingdom of the heavens 
is of such; and having laid His hands upon them, He de- 
parted thence.”’ With such a definite word it seems next to 
impossible that anyone could doubt the love of God for the 
little ones. Still it has been done; there is an interpreta- 
tion of the gracious words of our Lord, which makes the 
little children types of believers, and that only such who 
have believed are meant. In Mark and in Luke (Mark 
xx :13; Luke xviii:15) the Lord adds, “Verily, I say unto 
you, whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a 
little child, he shall in no wise enter therein,’ but here no 
such addition is given by the Holy Spirit, because it con- 
cerns the relation of actual little ones to the kingdom. The 
Lord takes up these little ones and approves of the faith, 
which had presented them to Him for a blessing. He puts 
His. hands upon them and declares that these little ones are 
a part of the kingdom. How much like Him who loves to 
take up that which is weak and lowly! The passage is 
sufficient to teach believers that the Lord Jesus Christ has 
a loving interest in the little ones, looks upon them as be- 
longing to His kingdom and is ready to bless them. But 
where is the faith from the side of believing parents, fully 
entering into His thoughts and looking upon the little ones 
as in the kingdom presenting these to Himself? Alas! 
how great the failure! He tells us of His willingness to 
receive them, that they are subjects of His kingdom and 
faith should act upon this and put them into His loving 
hands. “Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt 
be saved and thy house” (Acts xvi:31). Faith should take 
hold of this gracious family promise and claim it. Of 


103 


course, this does not say that personal faith is unnecessary 
from the side of children. 

In the epistles we find children mentioned. In the epistle, 
which contains God’s highest revelation, Ephesians, chil- 
dren are treated as belonging to the Lord in the believing 
family. “Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this 
is just. Honor thy father and thy mother, which is the 
first commandment which has a promise, that it may be 
well with thee, and that thou mayest be long-lived on. the 
earth. And ye fathers, do not provoke your children to 
anger, but bring them up in the discipline and admonition 
of the Lord” (Eph. vi:1-4). The last means to instruct 
them in the things of the Lord. We have come occasionally 
in touch with good Christian people, who declared it wrong 
to teach a child to pray and who refused to tell little ones 
to pray to God. As far as certain forms of prayers are 
concerned we are, of course, fully agreed that a parrot- 
like repetition of prayers is to be avoided and harmful. But 
to teach the child prayer, the expression of weakness and 
dependence on God, as well as confidence in Him, is the 
first lesson to be taught. We think it a wrong, where this 
is not done. No day should pass in the home of believers, 
where the Word is not read and the knees of all bow before 
Him, who is the Head over all, the Lord Jesus Christ. And 
if through the grace of God the sweet instructions of 
Ephesians v:22-32 are carried out in the Christian family, 
the home will become a place of fragrance, influence and 
blessing. 

But now we behold another one appearing, one who 
had been a little one, a young man, and he is asking the 
way to eternal life. “And lo, one coming up said to Him, 
Teacher, what good thing shall I do that I may have life 
eternal? And He said to him, What askest thou me con- 
cerning goodness? One is good. . But if thou wouldst enter 


104 


into life, keep the commandments. He says to Him, Which? 
And Jesus said, Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not commit 
adultery, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false 
witness, Honor thy father and thy mother and Thou shalt 
love thy neighbor as thyself. The young man says. to 
Him, All these have I kept; what lack I yet? Jesus, said 
to him, If thou wouldst be perfect, go, sell what thou hast 
and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven, 
and come, follow me. But the young man, having heard 
the word, went away grieved, for he had large possessions” 
(verses 16-23). : 

This is a most instructive incident. It is a striking por- 
trayal of many who are in the professing sphere, in Christen- 
dom, their natural and moral condition; and the teaching 
of the incident is, that salvation is not of man, not depend- 
ing on the deeds of man, but salvation is of God. 

The young man is a typical religious, moral and natural 
man. In the Gospel of Mark we read, that he came running 
and kneeled down and that the Lord loved him; and in 
Luke we find that he was a young ruler, holding an ecclesi- 
astical position. The question is the all important one for 
the religious man, the question of how to obtain eternal 
life. He is in ignorance about eternal life. In spite of all 
his religious observations, his position, his good moral quali- 
ties, he had no certainty, no assurance of life eternal; though 
a member of the professing people of God, he gropes in 
the dark. And is this not the case of the so-called Christian 
masses of our day? He furthermore expects eternal life 
from God as the reward of having done some good thing. 


He wants to earn eternal life, “do and live,” as the law - 


demands. He is ignorant of the great fundamental fact, 
that he is with all his religiousness and good moral, quali- 


ties a guilty and lost sinner. He does not know (the blind- 
ness of the natural man) that he never did a good thing, 


Royse 
Mime cei 


= 


TOS 


which pleased God and that he can never do any good 
thing from himself. And this is equally true of a large 
number of subjects in the kingdom of heaven, who are 
mere professors of Christianity and who are unsaved and 
strangers to the grace of God. And now the Lord’s deal- 
ing with him. He gives him, first of all, to understand 
that only One is good and that One is, of course, God. 
“Good master,” said he, according to the other record. 
He looked upon the Lord as a good man merely, and this 
He at once repudiates. God alone is good, and the One 
the young man addressed is “God manifested in the flesh.” - 
He was ignorant of His person. The Lord then meets 
him on his own ground. The ground upon which he stands 
is the law, and with the law the Lord answers his ques- 
tion. How else could He treat him? The first need for 
him was to know himself a Jost and helpless sinner. If 
the Lord had spoken of His grace, of eternal life as a 
free gift, he would not have understood Him at all. The 
law was needed to make known to him his desperate con- 
dition and to lay bare his heart. And the Lord who 
searches the hearts does this for him. With a few sentences’ 
he uncovers the true state of the young man, who leaves | 
Him grieved, full of sorrow; he had many possessions and 
he would not part with them. He had declared that he 
loved his neighbor as himself; had he done so he would 
have readily sold his possessions, given them to the poor 
and followed the Lord. As a natural man, he could not 
and would not do it. : 

In type this young, religious man “touching the right- 
‘eousness which is in the law blameless,” stands for the self- 
righteous Jewish people, turned away from the Lord with 
sorrow and yet loved by Him. 

“And Jesus said to His disciples, Verily, I say unto you, 
a rich man shall with difficulty enter into the kingdom of 


106 


the heavens, and again I say unto you, It is easier for a 
camel to enter a needle’s eye than a rich man into the king- 
dom of God” (verses 23, 24). The verse tells us that the 
natural man, like the rich ruler, burdened by his possessions 
and under the control of the world and the god of this age, 
cannot enter into the kingdom of God. The illustration of 
the camel and the needle’s eye was a well-known Jewish 
phrase in the days of our Lord. It is an impossible thing 
that a camel laden down with goods could pass through the 
eye of a needle; just as impossible is it for the natural rich 
man to enter the kingdom of God. In astonishment the 
disciples_now turn to the Lord with the question, a ques- 
tion perfectly in order after such a solemn declaration. 
“And when the disciples heard it they were exceedingly 
astonished, saying, Who, then, can be saved? But Jesus, 
looking on them, said, With men this is impossible; but 
with God all things are possible” (verses 25, 26). Here is 
a bright and glorious flashing forth of the grace of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. His words are a blessed indication 
of what His loving heart knew so well, that salvation is of 
God. With men salvation is impossible, to get into the 
kingdom of God an impossibility, but God, in His marvelous 
grace in Christ Jesus has made it possible. The gift of 
God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord. 

And now the last paragraph of this most interesting 
chapter. 

It is Peter once more who steps into the foreground as 
mouthpiece of the disciples. Again he acts and speaks in 
the flesh. Indeed, all through this Gospel Peter shows 
himself self-centered and self-seeking and intruding in that 
spirit into the things of the Lord. Only once was this not 
the case, and that was when the Father in heaven had given 
to him the revelation concerning His Son (Matt. xvi). 
With what selfconsciousness and feeling of superiority Peter 


107 


must have looked upen the young ruler as he sneaked 
away with hanging head. And then, instead of bowing in 
_ silence and wonder after the Lord had flashed forth His 
grace and truth, he thinks of himself. “Then, Peter answer- 
ing said to Him, Behold we have left all things and have 
followed Thee; what then shall happen to us?” Self is 
here prominently before us. But the Lord in His gracious- 
ness is far from rebuking Peter; He makes the self-gratify- 
ing question the basis of still further teaching by speaking 
of the future rewards of His own who follow Him and 
share His rejection. 

“And Jesus said to them, Verily, I say unto you, That ye 
who have followed me, in the regeneration when the Son 
of Man shall sit down upon His throne of glory, ye also 
shall sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of 
Israel. And every one who has left houses, or brethren, or 
sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, 
for my name’s sake, shall receive a hundredfold, and shall 
inherit eternal life. But many first shall be last, and last 
first” (verses 28-30). Here is the declaration of an im- 
portant principle, the principle of rewards in glory. What- 
ever a disciple, a follower of the Lord Jesus Christ has done 
or suffered for His sake will not be forgotten. This, how- 
ever, does not mean that we can earn a position in glory; 
it is grace and grace alone, which has brought us there. 
Service and self-denial of a believer are the results of grace, 
and so the rewards are mercies, nothing else. But it is 
glorious to think, He remembers all, yea even the cup of 
cold water given in His name and for all we shall find in 
His presence a recompense. 

Besides the principle of rewards we have here dispensa- 
tional teachings. The Lord speaks of the time of regenera- 
tion. There is a time of regeneration coming, when all 
things will be made over, when groaning creation is de- 


108 
livered and the reign of Satan and of sin ends. It is the 
millennial age. Throughout the Old Testament the prophets 
declare this great regeneration, in the promises, which are 
so universally spiritualized in our day. This regeneration 
is not yet; and it cannot come as long as the Son of Man 
does not occupy the throne of His glory. He will not 
occupy that throne as long as His fellow heirs are not 
with Him. Everything then in its order. The completion 
of the church, as to numbers, the removal of the church 
to meet Him in the air, His coming with His saints in 
glory, His own throne, which He will occupy and then, 
and not before, the regeneration. 

The promise here to the disciples is a specific one for 
them, and does not mean other believers. In the kingdom, 
the reign of Christ over the earth, the disciples will hold a 
glorious position in connection with the government of the 
earth through Israel and occupy twelve thrones. The saints 
will judge the world. As He received of His Father, 
so shall the overcomer receive from His hands. (Rev. 
ii :26-28. ) 

We have gone through a most blessed chapter in which 
all is connected by the Holy Spirit. The teaching is con- 
tinued in the next, and the last sentence of the nineteenth 
chapter belongs to the twentieth chapter. “But many first 
shall be last, and last first,” its meaning is explained by the 
Lord in a parable. 


109 


CHAPTER XX. 


The Lord had spoken about the rewards to be given at the _ 
time when the kingdom is to be established on the earth 
in power and glory, the time of regeneration. His last 
word in the nineteenth chapter was the statement, “many 
that are first shall be last; and the last shall be first.” If 
we turn to our chapter we find the same words again. “So 
the last shall be first, and the first last; for many are called 
ones, but few are chosen ones’ (verse 16). It is evident 
by the word “so” that the Lord gives us the interpretation 
of this sentence in the first part of the twentieth chapter, 
and, as already indicated, the last verse of the nineteenth ~ 
chapter belongs properly to the beginning of the chapter 
which follows. <A parable it is by which the Lord con- 
tinues to teach about the rewards of the kingdom. “But 
many first shall be last, and last first. For the kingdom of 
the heavens is like a householder who went out with the 
early morning to hire workmen for his vineyard. And hav- 
ing agreed with the workmen for a denarius a day, he sent 
them into his vineyard. And having gone out about the 
third hour, he saw others standing in the market place idle; 
and to them he said: Go also ye into the vineyard, and 
whatsoever may be just I will give you. And they went 
their way. Again, having gone out about the sixth and ninth | 
hour, he did likewise. But about the eleventh hour, having 
‘gone out, he found others standing, and says to them, Why 
stand ye here all day idle? They say to him, because no 
~ man has hired us. He says to them, Go also ye into the vine- 
yard and whatsoever may be just ye shall receive. But when 


110 

the evening was come the Lord of the vineyard says to his 
steward, Call the workmen and pay them their wages, be- 
ginning from the last even to the first. And when they who 
came to work about the eleventh hour came, they received 
each a denarius. And when the first came they supposed 
that they would receive more, and they received also them- 
* selves each a denarius. And on receiving it they murmured 
against the master of the house, saying, these last have 
worked one hour, and thou hast made them equal to us, who 
have borne the burden of the day and the heat. But he, 
answering, said to one of them, My friend, I do not wrong 
thee. ~Didst thou not agree with me for a denarius? Take 
what is thine and go. But it is my will to give to this last 
even as to thee, is it not lawful for me to do what I will in 
my own affairs? Is thine eye evil because I am good? So 
shall the last be first and the first last; for many are called 
ones, but few chosen ones.” 

This parable has difficulties to many readers of the Bible, 
and all kinds of interpretations have been attempted. Some 
of these are altogether wrong and contradict Scripture. 
Among them we mention the exposition of the denarius or 
penny to mean eternal life and salvation. Thus Luther 
states on this parable, and after him many other com- 
mentators, “the penny which each receives, whether he has 
labored much or little, is His Son Jesus, the forgiveness 
of sins, deliverance from death, His Holy Spirit, and finally 
He gives eternal life.’ That this is wrong needs hardly 
to be mentioned. The salvation of the sinner is here not 
at all in view. If it were true that the penny, which all 
receive alike, means salvation, then salvation would have 


to be worked for and earned by man as a laborer. This 


strikes at grace and the work of the Lord Jesus Christ 
on the cross. No, the question of the parable is not the 
question of salvation. 


= 


III 


Again, others, recognizing that it is about rewards in the 
kingdom of which the Lord speaks, have claimed that the 
teaching is that there will be no diversities or degrees of 
rewards in the kingdom, but all will receive alike from the 
hands of the Lord. This, too, is wrong, for it is in opposi- 
tion to the teachings of the Scriptures. The difficulty of 
this parable will easily be overcome, if we take into con- 
sideration that a parable is an allegorical representation by 
which a principle is demonstrated or a moral is drawn for 
instruction. It is, therefore, not at all correct to think that 
everything in a parable must have a specific meaning and 
must be spiritually applied. As soon as we enter into the 
details of this parable and attempt a detailed exposition and 
try to make an application of these, we shall miss the true 
lesson, and; perhaps, in the attempt, teach exactly the oppo- 
site from what the Lord teaches. We do not think that 
the penny, or, as it is correctly translated, denarius, has a 
special spiritual meaning at all. It simply stands for some- 
thing received. Men have tried to ascertain the time when 
the laborers were hired, what is meant by the morning, by 
the third hour, the sixth hour, the ninth hour and the 
eleventh. Some have fixed these different hours and declare 
that the early morning laborers were the apostles, the early 
Christians, and the eleventh hour workers, the laborers liv- 
ing in our days. Now, if we are authorized to seek a mean- 
ing in all these terms and give it such an interpretation, 
then we must do so with every statement found here. Ac- 
cording to this the early morning workers would murmur in 
the presence of the Lord of the vineyard, then there would 
’ be murmuring in the day when the rewards are distributed. 

We have to pass over the details and look for the great 
lesson which our teacher desires to bring to our hearts in 
this parable. 

We have already shown how closely the parable is con- 


I1I2 


nected with the events recorded at the close of the previous 
chapter. There one, who was rich in himself and knew not 
his trué condition, and rich in possessions, had gone away 
sorrowful from the Lord; and the Lord had declared, while 
salvation is impossible with men, all things are possible with 
God. Salvation is of God. It is grace which has saved us. 
“For ye are saved by grace, through faith” (Eph. ii:8). 
That grace has brought salvation, what all is included in 


this we cannot follow here. But then one, a saved one, 
Peter, spoke and though it was self which uttered these: 


words, the Lord gave Peter and the disciples a gracious 
answer. He assured them that there was a time coming 
when they should receive a reward and that He would not 
forget the service, self-denial and sacrifice of His own. 

But with this declaration, so comforting to the hearts of 
the disciples, there is a great danger connected. The dan- 
ger is that the believer may forget that he is a debtor to 
grace and to grace alone, that all he has, he is and he ever 
will be in all eternity is the result of grace. He may be- 
come occupied with his service, his sacrifice and expecting 
rewards, lose sight of grace and become thoroughly self- 
righteous. God does not want us to get our hearts away 
from His riches of grace in Christ Jesus. He is delighted 
with His children when they magnify that wonderful grace, 
when they cast themselves upon it; never can we make too 
much of grace. To keep the disciple from a spirit of self- 
righteousness as well as occupation with service and re- 
wards, the Lord brings in this parable. The great principle 
which He teaches is, that God will give the rewards in His 
own sovereignty, as it seems best to Him, never out of har- 
mony with His wonderful justice. “Should not the judge 
of the whole earth do right?’ (Gen. xviii:25.) “The prin- 
ciple is this, that while God owns every service and loss-for 


the sake of Christ, yet He maintains His own title to do as 
He will.” 


ee Hi 
SA a lk 


II3 


While we labor, our labor is not to be for the sake of 
reward, as one who is hired for a certain sum of money. 
We are to be laborers with no trace of legality about us. 
The servant, the laborer who has the thought before the 
soul to earn something by his service and sacrifice, lives but 
to himself, and would be only a hired servant, which the 
believer is not. Such a one, though he has stood the heat 
and burden of the day, would find the Lord acting on the 
principle expounded here by Himself. He will hear from 
Him: “Take what is thine and go. But if it is my will to give 
to this last even as to thee; is it not lawful for me to do 
what I will in my own affairs?” The Lord wants us to 
trust grace and trust the rewards, the recompense to Him 
and His own will to give as it pleases Him, and not think 
anything of our service. Thus the parable appears as a re- 
buke to Peter, who was occupied with what he had given up. 

“The first shall be last;” thus the parable began, and it 
indicates the human failure. At the end of the parable the 
order is reversed, the last shall be first; the Lord, in His 
sovereign grace will lift up those who trusted in His grace. 
“Many are called, but few are chosen ones,” which has 
nothing to do with salvation, but is in connection with re- 
wards. 

And now we are told that the Lord went up to Jerusalem, 
and as He directs His steps there He announces once more 
the fact of His coming passion, death and resurrection. 
“And Jesus, going up to Jerusalem, took the twelve disciples 
with Him apart in the way, and said to them, Behold we 
go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be delivered 
up to the chief priests and scribes, and they will condemn 
Him to death; and they will deliver Him up to the nations 
to mock and to scourge and to crucify, and the third day 
He shall rise again” (verses 17-19). And as He uttered 
these solemn words, His soul knew all what it meant for 


114 


Him and the bitter cup He was to drink to the very last 
drop. Some have taught and teach that it dawned upon 
Him gradually and that He was not conscious of all which 
was before Him. But He knew everything which would 
happen to Him in Jerusalem, for His own Spirit had re- 
vealed these sufferings in the prophets (1 Pet. 1:11). What 
awe and silence must have rested upon the disciples as He 
acquainted them with the path He was to go! In Mark 
we read that they were amazed, and as they followed they 
were afraid (Mark x:32). In the Gospel of Luke the Holy 
Spirit gives additional information: “And they understood 
none of these things, and this saying was hid from them; 
neither knew they the things which were spoken” (Luke 
-Xviii:34). He alone knew the meaning of all before Him, 
and as the hour draweth near, for which He had come into 
the world, when He was to be delivered up and to die, we 
see Him setting His face like a flint to go to Jerusalem. 

But now we hear the silence broken. It is a woman who 
approaches Him. ‘Then came to Him the mother of Zebe- 
dee’s children with her sons, doing homage and asking 
something of Him. And He said to her, What wilt thou? 
She says to Him, Speak the Word that these, my two sons, 
may sit, one on thy right hand and one on thy left in thy 
kingdom” (verses 20, 21). Self-seeking, the ambition of 
the flesh, is here again in evidence. Most likely the words 
of our Lord in answer to Peter’s words in chapter xix 
prompted this desire. He had spoken of those that followed 
Him, that, in the regeneration, they should occupy twelve 
thrones and judge the twelve tribes of Israel. This word 
impressed itself, no doubt, upon the mother of the sons of 
Zebedee, as well as upon the sons themselves, John and 
James. It was a custom of Oriental kings to have a person 
sit at their right hand and one on the left; and so the wish 
is uttered for places of honor in His Kingdom. The mother 


vey 


115 


of Zebedee’s sons here leads; from the Gospel of Mark we 
learn that John and James made the request. ‘This is no 
discrepancy, as often called by unbelievers in the verbal 
inspiration of the Bible. Both mother and sons came to- 
gether, having both the same wish. The mother’s desire 
and request was the desire and request of the sons. In 
Mark’s Gospel the sons are in the foreground, and in Mat- 
thew the mother. This is seen by the fact that the Lord 
does not answer the mother at all. And the ten were in- 
dignant about the two brothers. The parable the Lord 
had just given concerning the workmen in the vineyard 
was not understood by them all. The request is the mani- 
festation of self. Peter had been uncovered in the presence 
of the Lord, and now we find that in the beloved disciple, 
in John and in James, the same evil thing is present. But 
all brings out His own perfection and His glory; the im- 
perfection and selfishness of His disciples reveals His per- 
fection. 

“And Jesus, answering, said, Ye know not what ye ask. 
Can ye drink the cup which I am about to drink? They 
say to Him, We are able; He says to them, Ye shall drink 
indeed my cup, and to sit on my right hand and on my left 
is not mine to give, but to those for whom it is prepared 
by my Father” (verses 22-24).* How lovingly and with 
what patience He reproves her. There is no harshness 
about it, but it is all tenderness and grace. They did, in- 
deed, know not what they asked. He asks them if they 
could drink the cup He was about to drink. A cup was to 
be drunk by Him, and this cup stands for all the agony He 
was about to suffer. They knew nothing of that 


*The words “and to be baptized with the baptism that I am bap- 
tized with,” are left out, also the same words in the 23d verse. They 
are an interpolation in Matthew. 


116 


cup He was about to drink; nothing of the suffering and 
the cross which was before Him. It was their own selfish- 
ness and a presumption that they answered in the affirma- 
tive. They think they are’ able without knowing what the 
cup was. 

He tells them that they should indeed drink His cup. 
They were to be partakers of His sufferings and have fel- 
lowship with it. That this does not mean the sufferings 
our Lord had to undergo from the side of God is evident. 
He alone could suffer thus, and no human being could fol- 
low Him there. They would drink His cup, which not 
alone. contained the suffering from God, but sufferings 
from men, rejection, reproach, and much else besides. In 
His rejection and sufferings from men they had to enter 
in. And to this we are also called. “For even hereunto 
were ye called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving 
us an example, that ye should follow in His steps” (1 Pet. 
ii:21). Paul speaks of the sufferings of Christ. “I now 
rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is 
behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for His body’s 
sake, which is the church” (Col. 1:24). “That I may know 
Him, and the power of His resurrection, and the fellowship 
of His sufferings, being made conformable unto His death” 
(Phil. iii:10). 

And now we see the place the Lord Jesus Christ takes 
in His humiliation. He came not to do His own will, but 
the will of Him that sent Him. To say that He did. not 
know to whom the places of honor in the kingdom belonged, 
or that He has no right to give these places and bestow 
these honors, would be dishonoring to His person. He both 
knew it, and had a right to place in the seats of honor 
whomsoever He chooses. He had humbled Himself and 
had come to exalt the Father, and here He shows forth 
His place He had taken. He declares in that perfect humilia- 


Ir? 


tion that it is not for Him to give these places, but for the 
Father. Here i$ a marvelous depth of precious truth. The 
One equal with the Father in all eternity, One with the 
Father, truly God in all eternity, without any beginning, 
came and humbled Himself, made of Himself no reputation. 
He-came to do the will of the Father to the Glory and 
Praise of His name. He put Himself in the place of humilia- 
tion, under the Father, though ever Jehovah while in the 
earth. Raised from the dead, highly exalted, seated on the 
right hand of God, though absolutely and eternally one with 
God, the Father, He yet, as glorified Man, does the Father’s 
will, subject to the Father. When every knee at last bows 
and every tongue confesses that Jesus Christ is Lord, it 
will be to the glory of God the Father. It is the glory of 
the Father which is His aim. In this light 1 Cor. xv:27, 28 
are correctly understood: “For He (the Father) hath put 
all things under His feet. But when He saith all things 
are put under Him, it is manifest that He is exempted, which 
did put all things under Him.” The Father is meant and 
the Son of God incarnate, as glorified Man is under Him, 
though as God the Son absolutely One with the Father. 
But still more: ‘And when all things shall be subdued unto 
Him, then shall the Son also Himself be subject unto Him, 
that put all things under Him, that God may be all in all.” 
Such passages have ever been used by the subtlety of the 
enemy to rob the Lord Jesus Christ of His absolute Deity. 
So has the word in our chapter been construed to mean that 
the Lord is inferior to the Father. 

“And the ten, having heard of it, were indignant about 
the two brothers” (verse 24). This is a verse which tells 
us much. One could easily draw a picture of the ten Jews, 
how they gesticulated and showed their indignation by 
looks and words. What kind of an indignation was it? 
Did perhaps Peter say, “too bad for John and James to 


1i8 


intrude thus upon the Lord, and after He made such an 
announcement to disturb Him; and then the mother came 
also; what do they mean anyway by such a selfish desire?” — 
“did he speak thus? We think not. Most likely Peter was 
very much occupied with his own case, and the words, 
“keys of kingdom,” were ringing in his edrs. The pride 
in these two they most likely recognized, as well as the 
forwardness of the mother. It was, however, their own 
pride which moved them to indignation. And thus it is 
repeated over and over again. The fault-finding spirit is 
rarely anything less than the manifestation of the same evil. 
What often a brother accuses his brother of is just that 
what he himself does. 

This indignation of the disciples brings out another gra- 
cious instruction from the Lord. Once more he teaches in 
perfect patience His poor erring ones. And oh! Praise to 
His name! He is ever the same. We are all His dull and 
weak disciples, and the graciousness and patience He mani- 
fests here He has manifested towards us a thousand times. 
And still He teaches; He bears us and treats us with such 
loving tenderness. Why do we not learn from Him how to 
deal with a weak and erring brother? 

“But Jesus, having called them to Him, said, Ye know 
that the rulers of the nations exercise lordship over them, 
and the great exercise authority over them. It shall not 
be thus amongst you, but whosoever will be great among 
you shall be your servant ; and whosoever will be first among 
you, let him be your bondman; as, indeed, the Son of Man 
did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give His 
life a ransom for many” (verses 25-28). 

The mistake the disputing disciples had made was to think 
of His Kingdom, like the kingdoms of the nations. He dis- 
pels this conception; it would be the very opposite from 
what it is in the kingdoms of the nations. The greatest 


119 

in. His Kingdom are those who are servants and 
the bondman is the first. He Himself, the Son of Man, 
came to serve. Blessed words are these indeed, lowering 
all that is of self, dethroning pride and ambition, teaching 
us to let this mind be in us which was in Christ Jesus. 

The closing scene of this chapter is the healing of the 
two blind men. The Lord is departing with His disciples 
from Jericho, followed by a great multitude, going up to 
Jerusalem to fulfil all that which was written concerning 
Him. The incident before us is the beginning of the end 
and one of the last miracles of healing recorded in this 
Gospel. 

“And as they went out from Jericho a great multitude, 
followed Him. And lo, two blind men, sitting by the way- 
side, having heard that Jesus was passing by, cried out, 
saying, Have mercy on us, Lord, Son of David. But the 
multitude rebuked them, that they might be silent. But 
they cried out the more, saying, Have mercy on us, Lord, 
Son of David. And Jesus, having stopped, called them 
and said, What will ye that I shall do to you? They say to 
Him, Lord, that our eyes may be opened. And Jesus, 
moved with compassion, touched their eyes, and immediately 
their eyes had sight restored to them, and they followed 
Him” (verses 29-34). 

We had before a similar miracle in this Gospel. In the 
ninth chapter, when Jesus departed, two blind men fol- 
lowed Him, and they, too, cried to Him as Son of David, 
and He touched and healed them (chapter ix:27-31). The 
miracle there preceded the sending out of the twelve to 
preach that the kingdom of the heavens is at hand. Here 
the healing of the two blind men stands at the close of the 
Galilean ministry and precedes His triumphant entry into 
Jerusalem. 

It has significance in different directions. These two men 


120 


were witnesses to Him. They cried to Him as Lord and 
Son of David. When in Czsarea Philippi He had asked 
His disciples what men say of Him. The answer showed 
then that His own knew Him not. None said that He is 
the Son of David, His messianic title. Before a Gentile, 
the Canaanitish woman, had called to Him as Lord, Son 
of David, and He had not answered till she had dropped 
“Son of David.” There was no confession from the side 
of the multitudes of Him as Son of David, no appeal to 
Him as such. This fully shows the condition of the people, 
the great multitude who had seen Him, beheld His miracles 
and~heard His words. They did not believe on Him as 
the promised One, the Son of David, the King and Re- 
deemer of Israel. Quite true we read in the next chapter 
that the multitudes who went before Him and who followed 
cried, saying: “Hosanna to the Son of David!’ But this 
never came from the heart., It was the temporary enthu- 
siasm of a great multitude of excitable Jews. Soon their 
cry changes and they say: “This is Jesus the prophet, 
who is from Nazareth of Galilee!’ 

While then the great mass of people presses around Him, 
following Him from Jericho, there comes the voice of the 
two blind men, moved, no doubt, by the Holy Spirit, and 
they confess Him as Son of David. Had they cried to 
Him as Jesus of Nazareth or simply as “Lord” their witness 
would have not fitted into the scene at all. But as Son of 
David and Heir to the Throne of David, He was to be 
presented to Jerusalem, and ere this takes place He has the 
witness of two witnesses that He is the Son of David. 
According to the law the testimony of two witnesses was 
necessary. The Holy Spirit here supplies these in the cry 
of the two blind men at the wayside. This is the reason 
why two blind men are mentioned exclusively in the first 
Gospel, the Jewish Gospel, while Luke and Mark speak of 
only the one. And so while the Lord is on His way to 


PT 
Jerusalem and no voice from the multitude is heard de- 
claring Him and confessing Him as Son of David, and 
therefore as the King, a confession from these two sitting 
in darkness is heard. 

That these men had heard of Him is evident, that their 
chief desire was to be healed is equally certain; and they 
had faith in Him, that He could do it, but it was the Holy 
Spirit who put that confession-and cry in their hearts and _ 
lips: “Have mercy on us, Lord, Son of David.” And 
the multitude rebuked them that they might be silent. Surely 
this is proof enough of the unbelief and condition of this 
great company of people following Him. Why should they 
have rebuked these men, commanding them to be silent, if 
they had shared the faith of these two? The confession 
of this Jesus as “Son of David” was obnoxious to the mul- 
titude. But they could not be silenced. The Holy Spirit 
had moved them, and as they are rebuked they cry the 
more with their solemn witness, “Son of David.” 

And full of compassion He touched them, and their sight 
was restored. We have learned before the typical meaning 
of healing by touch in this Gospel. Whenever the Lord 
heals by touch it has reference, dispensationally, to His 
personal presence on the earth and His merciful dealing 
with Israel. When He heals by His Word, absent in person, 
as it is in the case of the Centurian’s servant, and the 
Canaanitish woman, or if He is touched in faith, it refers to 
the time when He is absent from the earth, and Gentiles ap- 
proaching Him in faith are healed by Him. 

Now here we have a dispensational foreshadowing, the 
importance of which should not be overlooked. These two / 
blind men sitting at the wayside, groping in the dark, cry- 
ing to the Son of David for deliverance, are types of the 
poor and feeble remnant of Israel in the end of this age, 
after the testimony of the church for Christ the Son of God 
by resurrection from the dead, has been finished and the 


122 


church is no longer upon this scene. That remnant of 
Israel will cry to Him as Son of David and call upon Him 
for deliverance. The entrance of Jerusalem, which follows 
in the next chapter, foreshadows also that coming of the _ 
Son of David to Jerusalem, when He comes as King crowned 
with honor and glory. And as the two blind ones called-upon 
Him when He was on the way to Jerusalem, and He heard 
and delivered them, so wall that remnant of His earthly 
people seek Him, and in that darkness which precedes His 
return to Jerusalem cry to the Son of David, without seeing 
Him in person, though they believe on Him, that He is the 
promised One. And as the cry of the blind men was the 
work of the Holy Spirit, so will the seeking, the longing, 
the prayer of that future remnant be produced by the Spirit 
of God. 

The multitudes which rebuked the two at the wayside and 
tried to silence them foreshadows that part of the people of 
Israel, which in that great tribulation remains in unbelief 
and which hates their own brethren, who are expecting the 
Coming of the Messiah and cry to him for deliverance. In 
Isaiah lxvi we read of this: “Hear the Word of the Lord, 
ye that tremble at-His Word. Your brethren that hated 
you, that cast you out for my name’s sake, said, Let Jehovah . 
be glorified, and let us see your joy! But they shall be 
ashamed” (Isa. Ixvi:5). Those in Israel, who at the end 
time tremble at His Word are the godly remnant. They 
are hated by their own brethren and are cast out. They 
also mock at them and their expectation; but they shall be 
ashamed. ; 

The two blind men were healed and followed Him. Their 
eyes were suddenly opened. So shall the remnant behold 
Him, and as, no doubt, these two were witnesses of His 
triumphant entry into Jerusalem and shouted out the Praise 
and Glory of His name, so will the delivered remnant of 
Israel sing forth His Praises. 


123 


CHAPTER XXI. 


We are now reaching the beginning of the end. The 
King with His disciples draws near to Jerusalem to hold 
his triumphant royal entry into the city, and to be pre- 
sented as King to the same. What scenes have passed be- 
fore our eyes in the study of the Gospel. We have fol- 
lowed the mighty events connected with the manifestation 
of the King in the midst of His people, the miracles of mes- 
sianic power, which demonstrated before the eyes of Israel 
that He is Jehovah. We learned how the kingdom was 
preached and rejected; how His own to whom He came 
received Him not. In all these events and miracles the 
most complete dispensational facts were seen foreshadowed, 
_ while we learned the same facts from the Words and para- 
bles of the King. We are in the last stage now, one in- 
tensely interesting, of great importance and solemn mean- 
ing. May He Himself through His Spirit open this Gospel 
still more to our understanding and give us much light and 
- great blessing through the meditation on His Word. 

His entry into Jerusalem, which is before us first of all, 
was witnessed by immense multitudes of people, as we shall 
learn from the text. Criticism has given a strange motive 
for the Lord’s entrance into Jerusalem. It has been said 
that He was carried away by enthusiasm and expected that © 
the people would now surely receive Him as the Messiah- 
King; while other critics explained His entry to the city 
as a kind of a concession to the messianic expectations of 
His disciples. How dishonoring to Him are all such foolish 
speculation. The simple fact is that He is the King and as 


£24 
such He had to come to Jerusalem and fulfill that which 
had been predicted by Zechariah, the prophet. 

“And when they drew near to Jerusalem and came to 
Bethphage, at the mount of Olives, then Jesus sent two 
disciples, saying to them, Go into the village over against 
you, and immediately ye will find an ass tied, and a colt with 
it; loose them and lead them to me. And if anyone say any- 
thing to you, ye shall say, The Lord has need of them, and 
straightway he will send them. But all this came to pass, 
that that might be fulfilled which was spoken through the 
prophet, saying, Say to the daughters of Zion, Behold they 
King cometh to Thee, meek and riding upon an ass, and 
upon a colt the foal of an ass.” (Verses I-5.) 

“Bethphage” means “house of unripe figs,” surely signifi- 
cant if we consider the typical meaning of the fig tree, and 
the cursing of the fig tree, which is recorded in the chapter. 
From this place He sends forth His two disciples to bring 
the colt and the ass to Him. This act of the Lord flashes 
forth once more His Glory and that the King-Messiah is 
Jehovah. He knew that yonder was an ass tied with a colt 
as He knew the fish and the piece of silver in the sea, and as 
He commanded the fish with the stater to go to Peter’s hook 
so here He demands the use of the ass and colt; He has a 
right to them for He is the Creator and He can say as He 
has said: “For every beast of the forest is mine, and the 
cattle upon a thousand hills. I know all the fowls of the 
mountains, and the wild beasts of the field are mine’’ (Ps. 
1:10, 11). In Mark’s Gospel we read, “And they found the 
colt bound to the door without at the crossway and they 
loose him. And some of those standing there said to them, 
What are you doing loosing the colt? And they said to 
them as Jesus had commanded them. And they let them do 
it” (Mark xi:4-7). No doubt the majestic “The Lord has 
need of them” made such a deep impression upon the hearts 


125 


of these men who either owned the colt or had charge of it, 
that they were ready at once to let them go. It was His 
Word which demanded obedience and which was obeyed. 

But the whole scene had been predicted in the Old Tes- 
tament and here in the Gospel of the King this prophecy is 
put into the foreground. The quotation refers us to Zech- 
ariah ix. We shall quote the whole prophecy: 


“Rejoice greatly, daughter of Zion, 
Shout aloud daughter of Jerusalem, 
Behold thy King cometh to thee, 
Just and having salvation, 

Meek and riding upon an ass, 
Even upon a colt, the she-ass’s foal.” 


This prophecy stands in contrast to the Grecian con- 
queror, mentioned in the first part of the ninth chapter of 
Zechariah. The Jews acknowledged that the words are a 
messianic prophecy. One of the leading Jewish commen- 
tators* says, “It is impossible to interpret it of any other 
than King Messiah.” 

The Jews have also an interesting legend, though foolish, 
which claims that the ass upon which King Messiah rides is 
the same which Abraham saddled when he went on the way 
to offer up Isaac and that is the same animal which Moses 
used. This shows how firmly the Jews believe in Zechariah 
(ix :9-10) as a messianic prediction. But we noticed that only 
part of the original prophecy is quoted in Matthew. The 
Holy Spirit leaves out “Just and having salvation.” In these 
omissions the critics as well as other unbelievers in the in- 
spiration of the Bible scent discrepancies and errors. But 
recently a professor made the statement that the writers of 
the New Testament had a limited and imperfect knowledge 


*Solomon Ben Jarchi commonly known as Rashi. 


126 


of the Old Testament Scriptures and he tried to prove his 
assertion by the quotations found in the New Testament. 
But Matthew, Mark, John, Peter or Paul did not. write 
themselves, but it is the Holy Spirit who used them as an 
instrument. It is not Matthew or Paul quoting the Old 
Testament, but the same Spirit of God who gave the Old 
Testament Scriptures through the prophets, quotes in the 
New His own utterances. And while these critics see noth- 
ing but imperfection in these quotations the true believer 
sees nothing but perfection in them and finds here a strong 
argument for verbal inspiration. It is so in the passage 
before us. Man would have quoted every word from Zech- 
ariah’s prophecy, but the Spirit of God leaves out “just and 
having salvation” because this was not to come to Jerusalem 
then, for Jerusalem would not have the King. The King is 
coming again to Jerusalem and then when He comes riding 
the white horse (Rev. xix) all that which is not yet fulfilled 
in Zechariah’s prophecy will be fulfilled. Then it shall be 
as we read in the context: 

“And I will cut off the chariot from Ephraim, and the 
horse from Jerusalem, and the battle bow shall be cut off, 
and He shall speak peace to the nations and His dominion 
shall be from sea to sea, and from the river to the ends of 
the earth.” 

The Talmudists have labored to overcome the difficulty 
which they have concerning the coming of the Messiah, 
when they consider (Daniel vii:13) that He comes in the 
clouds of Heaven, and in Zechariah that He comes riding 
upon anass. “If the Israelites are good then He shall come 
in the clouds of heaven, but if not good, then riding upon 
an ass.”* We return to the account before us. 

“But the disciples having gone and done as Jesus had 


*Sanhedrin Tract. 


127 


ordered them, brought the ass and the colt and put their 
garments upon them and sat on them. But a very great 
multitude strewed their own garments on the way, and 
others kept cutting down branches from the trees and strew- 
ing them on the way. And the multitudes who went before 
Him, and who followed cried, saying, Hosanna to the Son 
of David; blessed be He, who comes in the name of the 
Lord; Hosanna in the Highest. And so He entered into 
Jerusalem, the whole city was moved saying, Who is this? 
And the multitudes said, This is the Prophet, who is from 
Nazareth of Galilee.” : 

What a sight this must have been to behold! How eager 
the disciples were to act their parts. No doubt enthusiastic 
Peter was here in the lead, only too ready to put His Lord 
_ into the place of authority. The multitude was very great. 
Large numbers had followed Him from Jericho, while 
equally large numbers came forth from the City. Large 
numbers of pilgrims had come to Jerusalem for the feast, 
among them many, no doubt, who had seen Jesus and had 
witnessed His mighty miracles in Galilee. The news of the 
resurrection of Lazarus, which is not reported in our Gos- 
pel, because it belongs properly only in the fourth Gospel. 
record, had spread throughout Jerusalem and when the 
news reached there that He was coming near the city, 
ready to hold his entry, thousands went forth to meet Him. 
The garments were spread in the way; it was an Oriental 
custom to put before the feet of kings costly rugs and the 
multitudes followed this custom by putting their garments 
down. What a sight it must have been—the thousands com- 
ing to meet Him with Palm branches in their hands, waving 
them over their heads, while the multitudes which followed 
did the same. And then they broke out in the glad shouts, 
quoting partly from the cxviii Psalm “Hosanna to the Son 
of David! Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the 


128 


Lord! Hosanna in the Highest.” Hosanna means “save 
now.” The phrase “Hosanna” is used by the Jews at the 
feast of tabernacles and the waving of the palms reminds 
one also of that feast, which has such a prophetic signi- 
ficance. It will be kept throughout the Millennium and the 
nations will go up to Jerusalem to worship the Lord of 
hosts. According to Jewish tradition the cxviii Psalm was 
also chanted when the people came forth from Jerusalem to 
meet the pilgrims. And this foreshadows also His second 
coming. But how different the scene will be then. He 
comes forth out of the opened heavens, riding upon a white 
horse; Jerusalem will be besieged and in great distress; a 
great multitude will accompany Him from above, His many 
sons, the Saints as well as angels; the remnant of Israel 
will cry out “Hosanna to the Son of David. Blessed is He 
that cometh in the name of the Lord.” 

When that wonderful entry took place, the King riding 
upon the colt, and the whole city was moved as by a mighty 
earthquake, His enemies declared amongst themselves, “Be- 
hold, the world is gone after Him” (John xii:19). What 
a triumph it was! The King entering Jerusalem. And in 
all He is undisturbed. Others might have been swept away 
by this enthusiasm; but He is calm in all His kingly maj- 
esty. Luke’s gospel tells us that He wept. “And when 
He was come near, He beheld the city, and wept over it.” 
And what kind of weeping was this? He wept at the grave 
of Lazarus and that was a still, a silent weeping. But before 
Jerusalem He broke out in loud and deep lamentations. 
This is clearly proven by the different words used in the 
original. 

The King knew what was soon to be, and on yonder 
hill He saw looming up thé cross. True, they were crying, 
“Son of David, save now!” But the question, “Who is 
this?” is answered in the terms of rejection. Instead of 


129 


“the King, Jehovah-Jesus, the Messiah,” the multitude an- 
swers “Jesus, the Prophet of Nazareth of Galilee.” 

The first errand of the King in His city is the temple. 
“And Jesus entered into the temple of God, and cast out all 
that sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables 
of the money-changers and the seats of those that sold the 
doves. And He says to them, It is written, My house shall 
be called a house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of 
robbers” (verses 12-13). This is the second time that the 
Lord acted in cleansing the temple. The first is recorded in 
the Gospel of John (11:13, 17), and it took place at the be- 
ginning of His ministry. There it is the zeal for God’s 
house, but here He acts in all His Kingly authority. How 
great and awful must have been the defilement of God’s 
temple in those days. Money changers were undoubtedly in 
the foreground, for money played then in the days of the 
Jewish apostasy as important a role as it does in the apostasy 
we witness about us. “We can picture to ourselves the 
scene around the table of an eastern money changer—the 
weighing of the coins, deductions for loss of weight, ar- 
guing, disputing, bargaining, and we realize the terrible 
truthfulness of our Lord’s charge that they had made the 
Father’s house a mart and a place of traffic.”* And besides 
the money changers were those who bought and sold. All 
that which was required for the meat and drink offering 
was for sale by the Temple authorities. With the sale much 
speculation was connected; covetousness, as Jewish talmu- 
dical writings prove, was the ruling passion in this blas- 
phemous traffic. And the most awful fact was that the 
priesthood, especially the High-priestly family earned riches 
from it. The Bazaars and the Temple markets were con- 
trolled and owned by the sons of Annas. 


*Edersheim: Life of Christ, Vol. I., 360. 


130 


Into this scene of desecration He enters. No whip of 
cords is in His hands; the King does not need it. The tabies 
are turned over in wild confusion; the coins roll over the 
pavement, while the sacrificial animals and birds are driven 
out, perhaps in a wild stampede, followed by their owners 
and the officials of the temple. And what He use; is His 
own Word. “It is written my house shall be cilled an 
house of prayer; but ye have made it a den of robbers.” 
It was His house, as well as His Father’s. Of old in the 
first house His own Glory appeared and dwelt there. The 
words “mine house shall be called an house of prayer” are 
found in Isaiah lvi:7. “For all people” which is in Isaiah, 
the Lord does not quote. That temple was not meant to be 
a house “for all people ;” the temple in Is. lvi:7 is the millen- 
nial temple, and that future temple will be the house to 
which the nations of the earth will come during the coming 
age, to worship the Lord of Hosts. 

And so the Lord came suddenly to His temple to cleanse 
it (Mal. iti:1-3). But this again is only a shadow of an- 
other coming and the final fulfilment of the prophecy con- 
tained in the third chapter of Malachi. Another temple will 
stand in Jerusalem during the great tribulation and there 
will be even greater defilement. In that temple one will 
sit who is clearly pictured in the Word. “That man of sin, 
the son of perdition; who opposeth and exalteth himself 
above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that 
he as God sitteth in the temple of God, showing Himself 
that He is God” (2 Thess. ii:3, 4). Him the Lord will 
destroy with the brightness of His coming. 

But a more refreshing scene follows, The temple is 
cleansed. The noise and confusion is at an end. Nothing 
is said of the return of these evil occupants. But instead of 
them, there came the blind and the lame to Him in the 
temple and He healed them. The vacancy was filled by the 


131 


crowd of poor, stricken, suffering ones, who were delivered 
of their pains and diseases. Blessed and glorious foreshad- 
owing of what will be when He comes again and when by 
His life-giving, healing touch, He will cure “all diseases” 
and make perfectly whole. And still another thing happens.” 
“And when the chief priests and the scribes saw the won- 
ders which He wrought, and the children crying in the tem- 
ple and saying ‘Hosanna to the Son of David’ they were 
indignant, and said to Him, Hearest thou what these say? 
And Jesus says to them, Yes; have ye never read, Out of 
the mouth of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected 
praise?” (Verses 15, 16.) The children sang their Hosanna 
to Him, the Son of David, and our Lord refers the murmur- 
ing, accusing chief priests and scribes to the eighth Psalm. 
The meaning of that Psalm is clearly established by the 
second chapter of Hebrews. It is Jesus, the Son of Man, 
who is here seen in His dominion over the earth. When at 
last He has all things under His feet, there will be a silen- 
cing of the enemy by perfect praise. The praise of the 
children foreshadows the praise He will receive when He 
comes again. 

Beautifully Edersheim in his excellent work describes this 
scene. “It was truly spring time in that temple, and the 
boys had gathered about their fathers and looked from 
their faces of wrapt wonderment and enthusiasm to the 
Godlike face of the Christ, and then on those healed suffer- 
ers, took up the echoes of the welcome at His entrance into 
Jerusalem—in their simplicity and understanding applying 
them better, as they burst into, Hosanna to the Son of 
David! It rang through the courts and porches of the 
temple, this children’s Hosanna. They heard it, whom the 
wonders He had spoken and done, had only filled with in- 
dignation. Once more in their impotent anger, they sought, 
as the Pharisees had done, by a hypocritical appeal to His 


132 


reverence for God, not only to mislead, and so to use His 
very love of the truth against the truth, but to betray Him 
into silencing those children’s voices.” 

No answer comes from the lips of those hypocrites to the 
Word of God, the Sword, He used once more. The very 
next act of His is one of deep solemnity. ‘And leaving 
them He went forth out of the City to Bethany, and there 
He passed the night’? (verse 17). There they stood in the 
darkening porches of the temple, the pictures of hate and 
despair. The night came on rapidly for them. They knew 
Him and had rejected Him and now He leaves them. 

“But early in the morning, as He came back into the City, 
He hungered. And seeing a fig tree in the way, He came 
to it and found on it nothing but leaves only. And He 
says to it, Let there be never more fruit of thee forever. 
And the fig tree was immediately dried up” (verses 18, 19). 
Early in the morning the blessed One is up to return to the 
City. What a story the two words tell us “He hungered.” 
The King was hungry. He who was rich, had indeed be- 
come poor. There by the wayside is a fig tree bearing many 
leaves; there He looked for some of the old fruit, or per- 
haps some of the unripe figs. He finds nothing and a curse 
follows, which withers the tree. It is well known that the 
fig tree is the type of Israel. The cursing of the fig tree 
stands for the national rejection of the people. Israel 
yielded no fruit, therefore the barren tree was cut off and 
cast into the fire, while the root remains (Luke xiii). 

“And when the disciples saw it, they wondered, saying, 
How immediately is the fig tree dried up! And Jesus an- 
swering said unto them, Verily I say unto you, If ye have 
faith and do not doubt not only shal ye do what is done to 
the fig tree, but even, if ye should say to this mountain, Be 
thou taken away and be cast into the sea, it shall come to 
pass. And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, be- 
lieving, ye shall receive” (verses 20-22) 


> 


133 


They wondered at the power which made the fig tree 
wither, and He calls their attention that the power of God is 
ready to answer their faith. The connection is obvious. 
Israel had no faith in God, hence their bareness. If they 
have faith, it shall be far different ; the power of God is then 
at their disposal. The mountain is the type of an obstacle. 
Every obstacle can be and will be removed out of the way 
in answer to prayer. That there is a reference to Israel in 
these words is no doubt true. The nation was a mountain 
and by its disobedience and rejection of the Lord, the nation 
was an obstacle in the path of the Gospel. But on account 
of faith this mountain was indeed cast into the sea, the type 
of the nations. Precious to faith has ever been and ever 
will be the Word, the author and finisher of the faith 
speaks here. “And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in 
prayer, believing, ye shall receive.” Let us not limit them, 
nor say as some have said, it is not for us. They are for 
the children of God and there is no limit to them. All 
things—whatsoever ; surely there is no limit here; and then 
the three steps—asking in prayer, believing and receiving. 
He, the King, who has all power spake these words; and 
what a meaning they should have for us! May we cast 
ourselves upon them in childlike faith. 

Again we see our Lord in the temple. He is teaching the 
people. Perhaps it was a great multitude which had gath- 
ered. Soon the enemies came also to’oppose Him. These 
men, the rulers of the people, are now gathering force and 
getting ready for the great final rejection of the King. But 
ere this comes He silences all their objections and accusa- 
tions and shows them in their evil and hateful character. 

“And when He came into the temple, the chief priests 
and the elders of the people came to Him as He was teach- 
ing, saying, By what authority doest Thou these things? 
And who gave thee this authority?’ (Verse 23.) What 


134 


troubled them most was no doubt the scene of the preceding 
day, the cleansing of the temple. He is face to face with the 
mighty ecclesiastical rulers of the people, those who con- 
stitute the Sanhedrim. How will He deal with them? How 
will He answer their question? Divine wisdom is manifested 
in the way He deals with them. It is so in the chapters 
which follow, in these conflicts with the men who were so 
soon to be His accusers, to deliver Him into the hands of 
the Gentiles. “And Jesus answering said to them, I also 
will ask you one thing, which if ye tell me,-I also will tell 
you by what authority I do these things: The baptism of 
John, whence was it? of heaven? or of men?” (Verses 24, 
25.) Here was the question for them to answer. And in 
this way He not only silenced them but He also answered 
the question.. John the Baptist to whom He appealed had 
borne witness of Him. John himself, the forerunner of the 
Christ to whom He so faithfully pointed, was believed to 
have been a prophet. If they said, Yes, the Baptism of John 
was of heaven, as they should have said, they would have 
both endorsed John’s statement concerning Jesus and this 
would have condemned them, their unbelief and satanic 
hatred. They dared not to say.that John’s Baptism was not 
of heaven. What could they do? There they stand with 
their dark faces, talking over this serious matter. “And 
they reasoned among themselves, saying, If we should say, 
Of heaven, He will say to us, Why then have ye not believed 
him? But if we should say, Of men, we fear the people, 
for all hold John for a prophet. And answering Jesus they 
said, We do not know” (verses 25, 26). Miserable, self- 
condemned, dishonest men they were! Alas! how much of 
the same spirit and worse is found to-day among the self- 
- appointed ecclesiastical rulers of the people, who reject the 
Christ of God. The Lord refuses to discuss with them this 
question. “Neither do I tell you by what authority I do 


135 


these things.” The question they had asked was answered., 
He is the King, the Christ, the Son of God and as such He 
was about His Father’s business and that was His author-- 
ity for cleansing the temple, His Father’s house and His 
own. 

And now a parable. “A man had two children, and com- 
ing to the first he said, Child, go to-day, work in my vine- 
yard. And He answering said, I will not; but afterwards 
repenting Himself He went. And coming to the second 
he said likewise ; and he answering said, I go, sir, and went 
not. Which of the two did the will of the father? They 
say to Him, the first. Jesus says to them, Verily I say unto ~ 
you that the tax gatherers and the harlots go into the king- | 
dom of God before you. For John came to you in the way 
of righteousness, and ye believed him not; but the tax gath- 
erers and harlots believed Him; but ye when ye saw it re- 
pented not yourselves afterwards to believe him’ (verses 
28-32). 

The parable needs but little comment. They despised 
the tax gatherers and harlots, but the Lord proves that these 
polished, cultured, educated, religious priests and elders 
were far worse, far more obnoxious. The tax gatherers 
and harlots are meant by the son who said he would not go 
and repented and went. The second who said, I go, and 
does not go, nor does he repent, is the proud religious Phari- 
see, the high priests and elders. Thus the righteous Judge 
lays them bare with His mighty sword. Self-righteous they 
repented not. Convicted and condemned the Sanhedrim 
stands in the presence of the King. 

The chief priests and elders have no answer to the parable 
the Lord had spoken, and now after, perhaps, a brief silence 
He gives them a second parable. This one is a parable which 
reviews the history of their nation and predicts the soon 
coming calamity. Again He makes His enemies to bear 


136 


witness themselves, and we shall learn later that these men 
understood of what the King spake. 

“Hear another parable. There was a man, a householder, 
who planted a vineyard, and put a hedge round it, and dug 
a winepress in it, and built a tower, and let it-out to hus- 
bandmen, and went abroad. But when the time of the fruit 
came nigh, he sent his servants to the husbandmen, to re- 
ceive the fruits of it. And the husbandmen took his ser- 
vants, and beat one, and killed another and stoned another. 
Again he sent other servants, more than the first, and they 
did to them likewise. And afterwards he sent to them his 
- son, saying, They will respect my son. But when the hus- 
bandmen saw the son, they said among themselves, This is 
the heir, come, let us kill him, and lay hold of his inheri- 
tance. And they took him and cast him out of the vineyard 
and slew him. When, therefore, the Lord of the vineyard 
cometh, what will he do to these husbandmen?” (Verses 33- 
40.) When the Lord spoke of the vineyard, with the hedge 
and the winepress, the tower and the husbandmen, as well 
as of the fruit the vineyard was to yield, they must have 
recognized at once that this referred to Israel. He meant 
by it the nation to whom He had come to offer the King- 
dom. Israel, a vineyard, is an Old Testament picture. The 
King, no doubt, had Isaiah’s prophecy in mind, when He 
uttered this parable. It is founded upon Isaiah, chapter v: 
1-7. Jeremiah ii:21; Psalm 1xxx:8, and other passages 
speak of the same fact. The Lord through His Spirit had 
spoken all these words by the Prophets and now He Himself 
had come to flash the truth of God’s mercy to Israel, their 
shameful past and the still greater, impending sin before the 
hearts of these national leaders. The vineyard so well kept 
and provided for had not yielded fruit. The servants who 
came to the vineyard are the prophets whom God sent, and 
they had rejected and maltreated them. At last the Son 


137 


came, sent by the Father. This is the full dealing of God 
with Israel. Prophet after prophet came and spake in Je- 
hovah’s name and then God sent forth His Son. What a 
moment it must have been when the Lord Jesus Christ ut- 
tered these words. The Son the Father had sent stood in 
their midst and they could not but realize that He is the Son. 
What will they do with the Son? Will they receive His 
message? Will they bow to His authority? No. He saith 
that they took the heir, “cast him out of the vineyard and 
slew him.” Awful prediction of the coming events. And 
He knew all what it meant for Himself to be taken outside 
and be slain there. The climax of sin is here revealed. But 
let us not pass by the significant word, “let us kill him and 
lay hold of his inheritance.” Even so by the death of the 
Son of God we receive, believing on Him, His inheritance. 

The question had been asked by the King, “what will the 
Lord do to those husbandmen?” It is for them to answer 
and their answer must be their own verdict. Will they 
dare and give Him an answer? So blinded were they that 
they did indeed. “They said unto Him, He will miserably 
destroy those wicked men, and will let out his vineyard to 
other husbandmen, who will render to him the fruits in 
their season.’ Well said! And what they had spoken to 
their own condemnation came upon these wicked husband- 
men. 

And now the Lord continues quoting from the Book of 
Psalms: “Jesus saith unto them, Did ye never read in the 
Scriptures, The stone which the builders rejected, the same 
is become thé head of the corner; this is the Lord’s doing 
and it is marvellous in our eyes” (verse 42). The quota- 
tion is from Psalm cxviii. This psalm is much used in the 
ritual of Judaism. The rejected stone is the Messiah, and 
in His rejection He becomes the head of the corner. The 
same truth is witnessed to by the Holy Spirit in Acts iv:11; 


138 


Eph. ii:20, and 1 Pet. ii:7. The leaders of the people are 
the builders. What foreshadowings of events to come! 

But the Lord now pronounces His verdict upon them. He 
had heard the words spoken by His enemies in their self- 
condemnation; He speaks next and tells them that their 
judgment was right. “Wherefore I say unto you, that the 
kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given unto a 
nation bringing forth the fruits thereof”’ (verse 43). 

They had refused not alone that kingdom but the King; 
the Son they would soon cast out and therefore the Kingdom 
was to be taken from them. -These men who stood there, 
the generation which had share and part in the rejection of 
the Kingdom and the King, will never see the Kingdom. 
It is a sad blindness when men can teach in these days a 
restitutionism which includes these scribes, elders and chief 
priests, that they are to be raised from the dead at the time 
of the coming of the Lord and receive a share in the King- 
dom, The Word of the Lord is emphatic and absolute; 
there is no hope for them. The nation to whom the Lord 
promises the Kingdom is not the Church. The Church is 
called the Body of Christ, the Bride of Christ, the Habita- 
tion of God by the Spirit, the Lamb’s Wife, but never a 
nation. The nation is Israel still, but that believing remnant 
of the nation, living when the Lord comes. 

He adds another word in connection with speaking of 
Himself as the Stone, that Old Testament type of King 
Messiah.’ “And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be 
broken ; but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to 
powder” (verse 44). This is a very significant utterance. 
The Lord in these few words predicts the coming judgment 
of the Jews and the Gentiles. The one sentence has been 
carried out and the other is still to be executed. The Jews 
have fallen on this stone and they have been broken. How 
it has become true! The stone is yet to fall and strike the 


139 


world-powers, the Gentiles, and grind them to powder. Our 
space does not permit to follow this thought, but we advise 
our readers to turn in their Bibles to Daniel ii and read 
Nebuchadnezzar’s dream and the divinely given interpreta- 
tion. The stone cut out without hands, falling out of 
heaven, smiting the great image at its feet, is the Lord Jesus 
Christ in His Second Coming. The Lord refers to this 
here. As truly as He broke the Jews who fell on Him, so 
will He pulverize Gentile world power and dominion, when 
He is revealed from heaven. The nations are ripe for their 
judgment. ; 

“And when the chief priests and Pharisees heard his 
parables, they knew that He spake of them. But when 
they sought to lay hands on Him, they feared the multitudes, 
because they held Him for a prophet.” 

Thus ends this remarkable chapter. They knew Him; 
they knew what He meant. They wanted to take Him then, 
so great was their ‘hatred, yet they were cowards fearing 
men, not God. The people held Him for a prophet only and 
not for the Messiah. 


140 


CHAPTER *XXIL 


A third parable follows immediately. They would have 
laid their hands upon Him, after that searching second par- 
able had been uttered by the Lord, but His hour was not 
yet. Once more He flashes forth His truth and reveals 
events to come. 

“And Jesus answering spoke to them again in parables, 
and said, The Kingdom of the heavens has become like a 
king, who made a wedding feast for his son, and sent his 
bondmen to call the persons invited to the wedding feast, 
and they would not come. Again he sent other bondmen, 
, saying, Say to the persons invited, Behold, I have prepared 
my dinner; my oxen and my fatted beasts are killed, and 
all things are ready; come to the wedding feast. But they 
made light of it, and went, one to his own land, and another 
to his merchandise. And the rest laying hold of his bond- 
men, ill-treated and slew them. And when the King heard 
of it he was wroth, and having sent his forces, destroyed 
those murderers and burned their city. Then he says to his 
bondmen, The wedding feast is ready, but those invited 
were not worthy; go therefore into the thoroughfares of the 
highways, and as many as ye shall find invite to the wedding 
feast. And those bondmen went out into the highways and 
brought together all as many as they found, both evil and 
good; and the wedding feast was furnished with guests. 
And the King having gone in to see the guests, beheld there 
a man not clothed with a wedding garment. And he says 
to him, Friend, how camest thou in here not having a wed- 
ding garment? But he was speechless. Then said the King 


14! 


to the servants, Bind him feet and hands and take him 
away, and cast him out into the outer darkness; there shall 
be the weeping and gnashing of teeth. For many are called 
ones, but few chosen ones” (verses I-14). 

The dispensational character of this parable is very 
marked. It is ushered in with the familiar words found 
alone in this Gospel. ‘The Kingdom of the heavens is 
like,” or as it ought to be, “has become like.” No doubt it is 
the same parable as in Luke, chapter xiv:16-24; only here 
the Holy Spirit makes prominent the dispensational features, 
which are not mentioned in the Gospel of Luke, because they 
do not belong there. The marriage feast which the King 
makes for his son and to which he invites guests typifies the 
gracious offer of God to give joy, comfort and blessings to 
those whom he wishes to partake of it. It is for the Son, in 
honor of the Son, that the feast is made. Of the Bride, who 
of course belongs also to the marriage feast, nothing is said. 
This parable foreshadows a great deal more than the other 
two parables in the previous chapter. It goes beyond the 
cross, for the offer is made not only to Israel but also to the 
Gentiles. The Kingdom was offered to the nation; had the 
Jews repented, there would have been a marriage feast for 
them, a feast of fat things, as promised by the prophets. 
God’s mercy would have been manifested upon them. The 
invitation contained in the third verse was given in the 
preaching of the Kingdom before the death and resurrection 
of the Lord Jesus Christ. Between the third and fourth 
verses these great events, as well as the ascension of the 
Lord Jesus Christ, must be placed. The preaching of the 

‘Kingdom with its gracious blessings stopped, as we learned 
in the study of this Gospel, with the twelfth chapter. In the 
thirteenth chapter the Lord teaches the mysteries of the 
Kingdom, that which takes place during this present dis- 
pensation. Now, in the fourth verse we read of a second 


142 


invitation. When was this second invitation given to the 
invited guests, that is to Israel? Not before the Cross, but 
immediately after, with the Holy Spirit come down from 
Heaven. These servants were to tell them which were 
bidden, that all things are ready. The work of redemption 
accomplished, God in His infinite mercy gives another call 
and now He can say that indeed all is ready, even for the 
people who had rejected the Son of His love and had cruci- 
fied Him. The opening chapters of the Book of Acts give 
us the history of this invitation. There we find the record of 
the second call to Israel. 

The preaching of the Kingdom is resumed for a brief 
period and with this preaching is the promise of forgiveness 
of sins and the times of refreshing and restitution. The 
invitation, which went forth after the Lord had taken His 
place at the right hand of the Majesty on high, is clearly 
stated by Peter in the third chapter of Acts. “Repent, 
therefore, and be converted, for the blotting out of your sins, 
so that times of refreshing may come from the presence of 
the Lord, and He may send Jesus Christ, who was foreor- 
dained for you, whom heaven indeed must receive till the 
times of restoration of all things, of which God has spoken 
by the mouth of His holy propligte since time began’ (Acts 
iii :19-21). 

No Gentile heard this message, nor was it meant for a 
Gentile; it was exclusively addressed to Jerusalem. It is a 
mistake to teach otherwise. The times of restoration or 
restitution of all things, refer us to that which is promised 
to Israel when converted, with the Kingdom restored. To 
use this passage, as it is done so often, as an argument for 
that wicked doctrine, the restitution of all things, including 
the unsaved, is fundamentally wrong. Most of the soul- 
destroying errors taught in these last days spring from a 
wrong division of the Word of Truth. If this new invita- 


143 

tion had been accepted by the Jews, then the Lord would 
have returned and the restoration of all things, spoken by 
the prophets and promised to His earthly people, would have 
come to pass. But the call was not heeded; the restoration 
of all things, promised to Israel, has been postponed. 

Of this refusal to accept this gracious invitation to come 
to the marriage feast we read in this parable in the fifth and 
sixth verses. They made light of it, they ignored the offer 
and occupied themselves with earthly things, such as mer- 
chandise. They did the same, what Judah had done after he 
had with his brethren sold Joseph, he turned a merchant 
(Gen. xxxviii). But simple rejection of the gracious offer 
is not all, “the rest (the leaders of the people) laying hold 
of his bondmen, ill-treated and slew them.” The Book of 
Acts show how literally these words of the Lord were ful- 
filled. The climax was the stoning of Stephen. 

And after this rejected second offer to the bidden guests, 
the Jews, comes the punishment sent upon them by God. 
Their city is destroyed, burned by fire, and these evil men, 
who are now called murderers, suffer the judgment as well. 
The Roman army came against Jerusalem, the city is 
burned ; that awful judgment the Lord had predicted when 
He beheld the city, fell upon Jerusalem and the nation was 
dispersed. Again we say, what a literal fulfilment! This 
ends God’s dealing with Israel as a nation for the present 
age. He will deal with them again ere long; but nationally 
they are set aside during this age, which, however, does not 
mean that the individual Jew could not hear and accept the 
offer of Grace. 

Now follows something new. It corresponds to that of 
which we read in the parable of the sower in Matthew xiii, 
“the sower went out to sow.” It is now outside of Israel 
“nationally that the Grace of God is offered and the invita- 
tion to the wedding feast is given. The servants go out 


144 


into the highways and give the invitation and bring together 
all as many as they found, both evil and good, so that the 
wedding feast was furnished. 

It is clear that this going forth of the servants stands for 
the Gospel call going out to the Gentiles, “By their fall 
salvation is come to the Gentiles” as the Holy Spirit later 
testifies through Paul, is taught by the Lord Himself in this 
parable. 

Something follows, which is often misapplied. All the 
confusion about the wedding garment springs from the 
wrong conception of the parable, in giving it a church appli- 
cation and putting the scene into Heaven. However, the 
church is here not at all in view. It is, as in Matthew xiii, 
the Kingdom of the heavens, the professing sphere of Chris- 
tendom. The Lord shows that this sphere where His 
Name is professed and His gracious Gospel invitation is 
heard, is in a mixed condition. It is composed of profes- 
sors and possessors. The call goes forth, many hear and 
follow the call, but not all believe with the heart unto salva- 
tion. The man without the wedding garment is the repre- 
sentative of this class and a large class it is. This is evident 
from the words with which our Lord closes the parable, 
“For many are called, but few chosen.” The many which 
are called are all those who heard the call and made an out- 
ward profession, without having accepted the Lord Jesus 
Christ. The wedding garment is the same as the “best 
robe” which by the Father was put upon the prodigal. The 
Lord Jesus Christ Himself is the wedding garment and all 
who are mere professors of Christ, without having put on 
the Lord Jesus Christ, will share the fate of this man in the 
parable. They will be cast into the outer darkness. Awful 
fate for every one who has not Christ to cover him in the 
presence of a holy and righteous God. However man may 
cover himself, however moral and cultured he may be, or 


145 


religious and philanthropic, if he has not put on Christ he is 
naked and his. place will be where there is weeping and 
gnashing of teeth forever. We only wish to add that the 
scene of viewing the guests must not be put in heaven. None 
but those who are Christ’s, saved and in possession of eter- 
nal life, will be in heaven, and none of those can nor ever 
will be cast out. It refers to the same time as Matthew 
xi1i:40-43. Nor does the Lord teach the last things here, 
how judgment is to take place, where and in what order. 
In a general way He teaches this as a warning that 
though His invitation goes forth and many hear, yet not all 
will be chosen and that simply because they refuse to accept 
the gift of God—the wedding garment, which alone fits us 
to be in the presence of the King. 

The wonderful parable had been uttered; the fearful doom 
of Jerusalem and its evil leaders predicted; once more the 
Pharisees are silent in the presence of the King. Their 
hearts and moral condition had been uncovered, but deter- 
mined to refuse the light which shone upon them, their 
darkness became greater than before. We see them with- 
drawing from His presence. They had nothing to say to 
Him; no answer to give; no confession to make. Led by 
their evil hearts, under the control of Satan they turned 
their backs upon the Lord. Light refused becomes darkness. 
“Tf therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how 
great is that darkness.” This is a solemn word, especially 
in our day. Light received, truth revealed and not acted 
upon and followed, results in darkness in our days. 

We see now the Pharisees in desperate council against 
the Lord. “Then went the Pharisees and held council how 
they might ensnare Him in speaking” (verse 15). This was 
their only weapon now. They tried to find a way to en- 
snare Him, and having defeated Him, they intended to pub- 
lish their victory abroad and find cause to accuse Him and 


146 


reject Him. The second half of this chapter is occupied with 
the record of these attempts. The three great factions, 
Pharisees, Herodians and Sadducees combine in this. Rit- 
ualists, Worldlings and Rationalists make common cause to 
defeat the Lord. Though so essentially different, they unite 
in this one thing, the rejection of the Lord. It is not better 
in our day. First came the Pharisees and sent their dis- 
ciples with the Herodians to Him. After He had answered 
their very subtle question the Sadducees appeared ; they also 
have to return completely silenced. Then comes a great 
lawyer of the Pharisees and he tempts and once more the 
Lord. wins the victory. Three times the Devil tempted the 
Lord and three times the Lord is tempted by the leaders of 
the people. No doubt the Pharisees, Herodians and Sad- 
ducees were but the instruments of that evil being. Then 
the Lord turns questioner. He only needs to put one ques- 
tion. They cannot answer Him. Not a word could they 
say nor did any one dare from that day to ask Him another 
question. After this the King takes the place of the Judge 
and pronounces judgment upon the corrupt ecclesiastical 
leaders. 

But let us look briefly at the account of the temptings. 

“And they sent out to Him their disciples with the Herod- 
ians, saying, Teacher, we know that thou art true and teach- 
est the way of God in truth, and carest not for any one, for 
Thou regardest not men’s persons; tell us therefore what 
Thou thinkest: Is it lawful to give tribute to Cesar or not? 
But Jesus, knowing their wickedness, said, Why tempt ye 
me, hypocrites? Show me the money of the tribute. And 
they presented unto Him a denarius. And He says to them, 
Whose is this image and superscription? They say to Him, 
Cesar’s. Then He says to them: Pay then what is Czsar’s 
to Cesar and what is God’s to God. And when they heard 
Him they wondered and left Him and went away” (verses 
16-22). : 


147 


With what cunning -and flattery they had approached 
Him. For once they spoke the truth when they had de- 
clared, “Thou art’ true and teachest the way of God in 
truth.” But He knew them, He read their thoughts and 
sinister purpose. 

The temptation was a very subtle one. The Pharisees — 
had no doubt planned it all amongst themselves and had 
brought the Herodians along as witnesses to take down His 
answer. The Herodians were mean, low Jews, who favored 
the political rule and Roman authority and that, no doubt, 
for selfish reasons. Had the Lord answered the question in 
the negative and had He forbidden to give tribute to Cesar, 
these Herodians with the Pharisees (whom the Herodians 
must have hated) would certainly have accused the Lord as 
being a conspirator against the Roman government. Had 
the Lord answered the question in the affirmative and de- 
manded that Czsar should receive tribute, the Pharisees 
would have claimed that He could not be the Messiah of 
Israel, inasmuch as He taught subjection under a Gentile 
King. “There was a strong party in the land, with which, 
not only politically but religiously, many of the noblest 
spirits would sympathize, which maintained, that to pay the 
tribute money to Cesar was virtually to own his royal au- 
thority, and so to disown that of Jehovah, who alone was 
Israel’s King.’ They argued that all the miseries of the land 
and the people were due to this national unfaithfulness.”* 

To the Pharisees it must have seemed as if for the Lord 
there could be no escape. Their astonishment when He 
answered the question, in His heavenly wisdom, shows that’ 
they had not anticipated any defeat at all. 

They had to show Him the tribute money and on it ap- 
peared the image and superscription of Cesar. They had 


*Edersheim. 


148 


to make the declaration whose image it was. And in His 
answer He tells them plainly that not only should that be 
given to Cesar which is Cesar’s, but unto God that which 
is God’s. How was it that the people had to give at all 
tribute to Cesar? Did God mean that His people should 
be under Gentile rule and power? . What had put them 
there? If they had given to God that which is God’s they 
would never have had to pay tribute to Cesar. Now that 
they had put themselves by their sin and apostasy in that 
condition they were to render that to Cesar which belongs 
to him and to God what is His. This surely was a divine 
answer such as only the Lord Himself could give. They 
could give no answer. They wondered and went away. 

The Sadducees appear next upon the scene. These de- 
niers of the resurrection come with a temptation of their 
own. “On the same day there came unto Him Sadducees, 
who say there is no resurrection, and they asked Him say- 
ing, Teacher, Moses said, if a man die, not having children, 
that his brother should marry his wife, and raise up seed 
unto his brother. Now there were with us seven brothers, 
and the first having married died, and not having seed left 
his wife to his brother. In like manner also the second and 
the third, unto the seventh. And last of all the woman also 
died. In the resurrection therefore of which of the seven 
shall she be wife, for all had her 2” 

This attempt is as blunt as the other was subtle. The 
_ Sadducees denied both the resurrection and the existence of 
angels; it was not at all believed by them what they had 
asked. There was also a sneer at the Pharisees in their 
words. The question is based on the divine law as given 
through Moses in the book of Deuteronomy (chapter xxv:5, 
etc.). However, the law in this respect was far from being 
practiced in those days, and the interpreters of this law had 
put all kinds of limitations upon it. There may, of course, 


149 


be a case possible like the one recited by the Sadducees, but 
it is unlikely that it was a real case they laid before Him; it 
was no doubt gotten up for the occasion. Ignorance, un- 
belief and sarcasm prompted this question. And what did 
He answer? He lays bare both their ignorance of the 
Scripture and the power of God. “And Jesus answering 
said to them, Ye err not knowing the Scriptures nor the 
power of God” (verse 29). They did not believe in the 
Scriptures as the God breathed Word; they were the 
“Higher Critics” of their day. But the Lord does not try 
to prove to them the validity of the Scriptures, but tells 
them that they are ignorant. Then He continues, “For in 
the resurrection they neither marry nor are given in mar- 
riage, but are as anyels of God in heaven.” In a few words 
the Lord affirms the truth of resurrection, the existence of 
angels, which they denied, and shows that their carnal im- 
aginations were but the result of their carnal hearts. The 
body of humiliation will not be continued in resurrection and 
earthly relations such as marrying and giving in marriage 
will cease there. The Lord of course does not teach about 
resurrection itself in this passage. His purpose is to answer 
the Sadducees with their foolish question. What He had 
stated about the state of resurrection was generally believed 
by the Jews living at that time. The rabbis declared, 
as learned from talmudical literature, “that in the world to 
come there would be neither eating nor drinking, fruitful- 
ness nor increase, business nor envy, hatred nor strife, but 
that the righteous would sit with crowns on their heads 
and feast on the splendor of the Shekinah.” 

He has still an additional word to say about resurrection, 
which is convincing proof that there will be a resurrection. 
“But concerning the resurrection of the dead, have ye not 
read what was spoken to you by God, saying, I am the God 
of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? 


150 


God is not God of the dead, but of the living. And when 
the multitude heard it they were astonished at His doctrine” 
(verses 30-32). God calls Himself by the name of these 
three men (Exodus iii), and as He is not the God of the 
dead, but the God of the living, therefore a resurrection 
must take place. There was nothing left for the Sadducees 
then but to withdraw. 

Once more the Pharisees appear. “But the Pharisees, 
having heard that He had put the Sadducees to silence, 
were gathered together. And one of them; a lawyer, de- 
manded, tempting Him, and saying, Teacher, which is the 
great commandment in the law, And He said to him, Thou 
shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all 
thy soul, and with all thy understanding. This is the great 
and first commandment. And the second is like it, Thou 
shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. On these two command- 
ments the whole law and the prophets hang” (verses 34-40). 
There were various disputations among the Jewish scribes, 
the lawyers, about the greatest commandment, but the Lord 
does not enter into these at all. Once more His answer 
manifests perfect wisdom and according to the record given 
in the Gospel of Mark the lawyer was greatly moved by 
this answer. The Lord told him, “Thou art not far from 
the kingdom of God” (Mark xii:34). However, the ques- 
tioner did not realize that He who stood before him in that 
hour was Jehovah Himself, the giver of the law. 

After this the hopelessness of their case is apparent. They 
gathered together in a group, but none can suggest a new 
question, another temptation. All their attempts had proven 
futile. The Lord now approaches them. He has a question 
for them. The question of the Messiah, His personality, 
was never touched upon by the Pharisees and it was after 
all the most important. The Lord has a question for them 
about Himself, and, unlike the Pharisees, he uses the Scrip- 


Pst 


ture, quoting from His own Word. “And the Pharisees 
being gathered together, Jesus demanded of them, saying, 
What think ye concerning the Christ? Whose Son is He? 
They say to Him, David’s. He says to them, How, then, 
does David in Spirit call Him Lord, saying, The Lord said 
to my Lord, Sit on my right hand until I put thine enemies 
under thy feet? If, therefore, David call Him Lord, How 
is He His son? And no one was able to answer Him a. 
woftd, nor did any one dare from that day to question Him 
any more” (verses 41-46). 

It is from the cx Psalm the Lord draws His question. 
This Psalm is one of the great messianic prophecies in 
the Old Testament. It is very prominent in the Epistle to 
the Hebrews, where-it is quoted a number of times as being 
fulfilled in Him, who is now the man of glory, seated at the 
right hand of the majesty on high, waiting till His enemies 
are made His footstool. This will be done when He comes 
again. In sending Him, the First begotten, into the world, 
God will put down all his enemies. It is almost impossible 
to believe that, with the evidences from Scripture, such’ as 
the word of our Lord and the testimony of the Holy Spirit 
in the Epistle to the Hebrews, certain men who call them- 
selves “scholars” and assume the place of “critics” can deny 
the cx Psalm was composed by David and that the Psalm 
has any messianic reference at all. This surely is wicked 
unbelief, as pronounced, perhaps more so, than the unbelief 
of the Pharisees. 

Well, the Pharisees here answer that Messiah is to be the 
Son of David. They were professed teachers of Israel and 
still they did not understand the Scriptures. The question 
the Lord now puts to them, David calling Him who is to be 
a son of his, Lord, that is Jehovah, they could not, perhaps 
would not, answer. The passage teaches clearly who Mes- 
siah is. He is Jehovah incarnate, the Son of David and 


152 


David’s Lord. And the interrogator is He. His Davidic 
descent could not be denied; that He has a legal title to the 
throne of David is clearly proven by the genealogy. In His 
ministry throughout these years, He had manifested Himself 
in His mighty works as Jehovah. They could give Him no 
answer. Solemn moment it was. No answer! No repent- 
ance! They are silenced, and when they open their lips 
again it is to cry “Crucify Him!’ The end is now coming 
on rapidly. In the next chapter He speaks as Judge pro- 
nouncing His judgment upon the leaders of the nation, 


153 


CHAPTER XXITI. 


For the last time we have seen the Pharisees in the pres- 
ence of the Lord in the previous chapter. What an im- 
portant part these ecclesiastical leaders of the professing 
people of God play in this Gospel. They rejected Him; 
hated Him without a cause, and after they found they could 
not ensnare Him they resorted to that which Satan had put 
into their wicked hearts “that they might kill Him.” That 
which the Lord had foretold in His parable of the vineyard 
is now soon to take place. They made their plans and are 
ready to take their King and deliver Him into the hands 
of the Gentiles to be crucified. He is now soon to be taken, 
delivered into man’s hand, going to the cross, where He, 
who knew no sin, was to be made sin for us. How solemn 
His words when He stood before Pilate and declared, ‘““Thou 
hadst no authority whatever against me if it were not given 
to thee from above. On this account he that has delivered 
me up to thee has greater sin.” But before we reach the 
story of the passion of the King, so wonderfully told in this 
Gospel, we find the King first of all passing judgment upon 
these evil leaders of the people. In the next place we have 
recorded, as nowhere else in the Gospel records, the great 
Olivet discourse, in which the King reveals the future. 
Here we find prophecy concerning the Jews and Jerusalem, 
the church and the Gentiles. 

The chapter which is before us contains the “Woes” of 
the King upon the Pharisees. It is one of the most solemn 
ones in Matthew. Pharisaism is still in the earth; Ritual- 
ism, Traditionalism and with it the rejection of the authority 


154. 


of the Lord and His written Word, is Pharisaism, that evil 
leaven against which the Lord warns. This Christian Phar- 
isaism is far worse than the old Jewish system. And where 
in Christendom is a little of that leaven lacking? Only the 
Grace of God, an unbroken fellowship with the Father and 
His Son in the power of the Holy Spirit, can keep the 
individual believer from manifesting a Pharisaical spirit. 
“Then Jesus spoke to the multitude and to His disciples, 
saying: The scribes and the Pharisees have set themselves 
down in Moses’ seat; all things therefore, whatever they 
may tell you, do not keep. But do not after their works, 
for they say and do not, but bind burdens heavy and hard 
to bear, and lay them on the shoulders of men, but will not 
move them with their finger. And all their works they do to 
be seen of men: for they make broad their phylacteries and 
enlarge the borders, of their garments, and love the chief 
place in feasts, and the first seats in the synagogue, and 
salutations in the market places, and to be called of men, 
Rabbi, Rabbi. But ye, be ye not called Rabbi; for one is 
your instructor, and all ye are brethren. And call not any 
one your father upon earth; for one is your Father, He 
who is in the heavens. Neither be called leaders, for one is 
your leader, the Christ. But the greatest of you shall be 
your servant. And whoever shall exalt himself shall be 
humbled, and whoever shall humble himself shall be ex- 
alted” (verses I-12). These are indeed cutting words. Out 
of His mouth goes a two-edged sword. Well may these 
words be placed in connection with the church message to 
Pergamos, in which the glorified Christ saith, “These things 
says He that has the sharp two-edged sword.” Pergamos 
shows prophetically that period of the church when Ritual- 
ism, Nicolaitanism (Clericalism) came in like a flood and a 
certain class of men assumed the place of authority in the 
church, as leaders, priests, and began to dictate and teach 


\ ’ 
155 

the traditions of men. And ever since that time and through 
that into which Pergamos developed, Thyatira (Roman- 
Catholicism), the leaven of the Pharisees, has worked on in 
Christendom and is still working. The Lord speaks first of 
all of the place which the scribes and Pharisees had chosen. 
They had placed themselves in Moses’ seat. This no doubt 
He spoke in reference to legislation and not in regard to 
doctrine. . 

They had occupied the legislative seat, and when their 
* sect started it was with a zeal for the law, which God had 
given through Moses. Soon, however, they became corrupt. 
In that part of the Talmud which is called the Mishnah* 
it is stated that they were to be regarded as if put into 
that place by Moses himself, taking their places in his seat, 
and were to be obeyed, so far as outward observations were. 
concerned. 

As far as the God given law was concerned and its 
observances, they were to do and to keep what the Pharisees 
said. What a wise exhortation this is! He, the King, 
fully recognized the position they had taken; if He had 
spoken otherwise, they might have accused Him of inciting 
the multitudes to riot against their authority. Romans 
xiii:I-7 contains a similar wise exhortation by the Spirit 
of God for this present age. Against which the Lord warns 
is their works. There were two great schools among these 
Pharisees as we stated before; the school of Hillel 
and the school of Shammai. These were occupied 
with interpretations of the law. What strange inter- 
pretations were given, what tedious burdens were 
bound upon the people, which God never meant, could 


*The Talmud is composed of two parts, the Gemara and the 
Mishna. Mishna means “repetition,” and was a repetition of the 
written law. 


156 


easily be illustrated and demonstrated by quotations from 
that tremendous literary work, the Talmud. “The burdens 
became intolerable. The blame rested equally on both the 
great rabbinic schools. For although the school of Hillel 
was supposed in general to make the yoke lighter, and that 
of Shammai heavier, yet not only did they agree on many 
points, but the school of Hillel was not unfrequently even 
more strict than that of his rival. In truth their differences 
seem too often only prompted by a spirit of opposition, so 
that the serious business of religion became in their hands 
one of rival authority and mere wrangling” (Edersheim). 
But while they put these burdens upon the people and domi- 
neered over them they neither kept them nor did they move 
a finger to remove them. In connection with this external 
show of religion, for which the Pharisees stood, the Phylac- 
teries are mentioned. The general Christian reader has 
little information about the meaning of this word. The 
word “phylacteries” means “observatories” to keep the re- 
membrance of the Law alive. In different parts of the 
Pentateuch we read these words, “And thou shalt bind 
these words for a sign on thy hand, and they shall be for 
frontlets between thine eyes. And thou shalt write them 
upon the posts of thy house, and upon thy gates” (Exod. 
x1i1:9-16;, Deut. visg, etc.). The last named injunction, 
“Write them upon the posts of thy house,” is literally prac- 
tised by orthodox Jews, by writing these words upon a piece 
of parchment, inclosing them in a tin box, and this box is 
nailed cn the door posts. From the same words the phylac- 
teries, or tephillin, were instituted. These are two strips of 
leather to each of which is attached a small box; in these 
boxes there are likewise pieces of parchment upon which the 
Hebrew text of Deut. vi:4-8 is written. The one leather 
strip with this box is wound around the forehead, the box 
resting in the middle of the forehead, while the second strip 


157 


is wound around the arm, the left arm, which is nearest to 
the heart. The ends of this one is made to form the Hebrew 
letter “shin,” which stands for Shaddai, the Almighty. 
Strange and curious laws are connected with the preparation 
of the phylacteries, the wearing of them; the rabbinical 
writings contain much on the phylacteries which is super- 
stitious. Thus the talmudical tract Berachoth declares, “It 
is necessary to wear the phylacteries nights in the home as 
they drive away the demons.” Orthodox Jews use them as 
their fathers did, and there is no doubt that the wearing of 
phylacteries in the twentieth century by strictly orthodox 
Jews and their belief in them is the same as in the days when 
our Lord spake these words. It is seen that the phylacteries 
sprung from a literal interpretation of the above passages 
in the Pentateuch, an outward religious observance for 
which there was no foundation whatever in the law. The 
Lord, however, does not attack this, we believe, ancient 
custom, but He attacks the habits of the Pharisees to wear 
the phylacteries and the enlarged borders of their garments 
(Num. xv:38), so as to be seen of men. They did it all for 
show ; selfishness controlled them and they had no heart for 
the things of God. They loved the first places, the honor 
and praise of men; flatterers, they enjoyed and loved to re- 
ceive honoring salutations from the side of men in market 
places. “Rabbi, Rabbi,” which means teacher or instructor, 
they loved to be addressed as well as “Abba,” which is 
“father.” All these titles simply sprang from their self- 
seeking. The Lord now gives teaching, telling his hearers 
that which concerns of course disciples alone, that they are 
brethren and that they have but one teacher, the Christ Him- 
self; that they should not call man father, but one is their 
Father, God Himself. The greatest of His own is the One, 
who is a servant of all. This reaches over into the new 
dispensation. The instructor, the guide, is the Lord and the 


158 


Holy Spirit. Alas! how the enemy has succeeded in pro- 
ducing and fostering this distinctive mark of Pharisaism in 
Christendom, with its man-made institutions, titles, honors, 
offices and leaderships. It was not so in the beginning, but 
corruption has entered in and we find at the end of the age a 
Pharisaism far worse than that which the Lord here con- 
demns. And there is a judgment coming upon that boasting, 
proud, Pharisaical, ritualistic Christendom. The judgment 
broke over the heads of the Pharisees, their religious sys- 
tem, and so will it break over Christendom. Then those who 
exalted themselves will be humbled and those who humbled 
themselves will be exalted. What an encouragement for 
every true servant of the Lord Jesus Christ to follow 
strictly these words of our Lord, to go on under Him as 
Lord and under the guidance of His Spirit, to have no 
name among men, but to be known of God. In this there is 
rest and joy and the power of God rests upon the testimony 
of such who serve in this spirit. 

And there is a deeper meaning still to verses 8-10. We 
quote from one who has expressed it in simple as well as 
beautiful language. “It is a declaration of the essential 
relations of man to God. Three things constitute a Chris- 
tian: What He is, what he believes, what he does; doctrine, 
experience, practice. Man needs for his spiritual being 
three things: Life, instruction, guidance; just what our 
Lord declares in the ten words of the Gospel, ‘I am the way, 
and the truth and the life. The Roman Catholic ‘church’ 

has caught these three things with its usual insight 
and avows its ability to supply them. The office of the 
Roman Catholic ‘church’ is claimed to be threefold: the 
priestly office imparting and sustaining life by means of the 
sacraments; the teaching office endowed with infallibility ; 
the guiding office by spiritual confessors. These three things 
are just what our Lord forbids in the passage under con- 


zy 
ah ee it et ad 


159° 
sideration. Acknowledge no man as Father; for no man 
can impart or sustain spiritual life; install no man as an 
infallible teacher; allow no one to assume the office of 
spiritual director; your relation to God and to Christ is as 
close as that of any other person.’’* 

And now the Lord takes up His “Woes.” It is a fearful 
uncovering of the hearts of the Pharisees and their corrup- 
tion. And thus He lays bare the hidden things. He will do 
so again. There are eight woes given in this chapter, though 
it seems the fourteenth verse does not belong to this chap- 
ter. It is, however, found in both the Gospels of Mark and 
Luke, so that it is evident the Lord also uttered these words. 
In different respects there is a correspondency between the 
first discourse of our Lord in this Gospel, the sermon on the 
mountain and the last one addressed to the multitudes and to 
His disciples. The Olivet discourse is addressed exclusively 
to the disciples, who have asked Him. The Sermon on the 
Mount, as generally the great discourse in the fifth, sixth 
and seventh chapters of this Gospel is called, was addressed 
to the multitudes and the disciples. What this great dis- 
course stands for, the proclamation of the King, we learned 
in our exposition. He sat there as the great One greater 
than Moses, expounding and expanding the Law. Here He 
is upon the seat of judgment; the King is the Judge. In the 
sermon on the Mount He utters His Blessings, Beatitudes, 
but here as judge He pronounces His Woes. 

We shall not follow these woes in a detailed exposition, 
but mention the leading thoughts in them. 

“But woe unto you scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for 
ye shut up the kingdom of the heavens before men; for ye 
do not enter, nor do ye suffer those that are entering to go 
in” (verse 13). The Kingdom has been preached unto 


: *Weston: The Genesis of the New Testament. 


160 


them, but they shut willfully their eyes and turned away from 
the light, which had burst upon them. They did not enter 
in and kept others away from it. And this is an awful 
“woe” which falls likewise upon the modern Pharisees, 
though in a different sense. How many of the man-made 
“priests”? and “teachers,” following the traditions of men, 
usurping the place of the Lord Jesus Christ, are themselves 
unsaved and keep others from knowing the truth. 

Omitting that which is given as the next verse, we read 
the second Woe. “Woe to you scribes and Pharisees, 
hypocrites, for ye compass the sea and the dry land to make 
one proselyte, and when he is become such, ye make him 
twofold more the son of hell than yourselves” (verse 15). 
Coming from such lips, what. a condemnation they contain! 
They were sectarians, and sectarianism is the fruit of 
the flesh, as clearly taught in the Epistles. They did every- 
thing to make proselytes, and that too for selfish motives. 
Proselytism was condemned by the rabbinical schools. One 
of the talmudical sayings is, “Proselytes are as a scab to 
Israel.” It was for selfish reasons they made proselytes to 
their sect. Is it any different in the proselyting Christen- 
dom, down to the smallest party? And after they had at- 
tracted some to themselves they made them worse than they 
were. An awful indictment indeed. 

Woe unto you, blind guides, who say, Whosoever shall 
swear by the temple, it is nothing; but whosoever shall 
swear by the gold of the temple he is a debtor. Fools and 
blind, for which is greater, the gold, or the temple which 
sanctifieth the gold? And, whosoever shall swear by the 
altar, it is nothing; but whosoever shall swear by the gift 
that is upon it is a debtor. Fools and blind ones, for which 
is greater, the gift, or the altar which sanctifieth the gift? 
He therefore that sweareth by the altar swears by it and by 
all things that are upon it. And he that sweareth by the 


161 


temple swears by it and by Him that dwells in it” (verses 
16-22.) Without following this woe in every word, it is 
evident that these leaders loved the gold of the temple more 
than the temple and the gift which was upon the altar more 
than the altar. Fools and blind guides they were. 

“Woe to you scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye pay 
tithes of mint and anise and cummin, and ye have left aside 
the weightier matters of the law, judgment and mercy and 
faith; these ye ought to have done and not have left those 
aside. Blind guides who strain out the gnat, but drink down 
the camel” (verses 23-24). 

Their self-righteousness and piety consisted in being very 
scrupulous about minor things, while the important matters 
were completely ignored by them. They strained at a gnat 
and swallowed a camel. It is not different to-day. The 
little unessential things in religious practices are unduly 
magnified, while the important matters are ignored. “Woe 
to you scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye make clean 
the outside of the cup and of the dish, but within they are 
full of rapine and intemperance. Blind Pharisees, make 
clean first the inside of the cup and of the dish, that their 
outside also may become clean. Woe to you scribes and 
Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye are like whited sepulchres 
which appear beautiful outwardly, but within are full of 
dead men’s bones and all uncleanness. Thus also ye, out- 
wardly ye appear righteous to men, but within are full of 
hypocrisies and lawlessness. Woe to you, scribes and Phari- 
sees, hypocrites, for ye build the sepulchres of the prophets 
and adorn the tombs of the just, and ye say, If we had been 
in the days of our fathers we would not have been par- 
takers with them in the blood of the prophets.. So that you 
bear witness of yourselves that ye are sons of those who 
slew the prophets; and ye, fill up the measure of your 
fathers. Serpents, offspring of vipers, how should ye es- 
cape the judgment of hell?” (verses 25-33). 


162 


These are the concluding woes. They need not much 
comment. Pharisiaism keeps the outside clean, while inside 
there is corruption and death. There is a self-righteous, 
religious boasting of being more advanced than the fathers 
and more tolerant than they were. But the omniscient One 
reads their hearts and declares that they fill up the measure 
of the fathers. They were unsaved men, not the offspring 
ot God, but of vipers; their father, the devil; and they were 
facing judgment of Gehenna. 

Other words were uttered by the King. These are found 
in the three verses which follow. He would send them 


prophets and wise men and scribes, and they were to kill. 


them, crucify them, persecute them, and all the righteous 
blood shed upon the earth should come upon them. This 
was to come upon that generation. What they hear from 
His lips another witness filled with the Holy Spirit, Stephen, 
tells them; with the stoning of Stephen the measure was 
filed up and judgment came. 

And now the sublime, mournful ending. The last word 
of the King to Jerusalem. “Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the city 
that kills the prophets and stones those that are sent to her, 
how often would I have gathered thy children as a hen 
gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not! 
Behold your house is left unto you desolate; for I say unto 
you, Ye shall in no wise see me henceforth until ye say, 
Blessed be He that comes in the name of the Lord.” 

What a loving, sublime lamentation this is! The King 
is a King of Love and His heart yearns over His city Jeru- 
salem. How He did long for them! The illustration He 
uses is one they fully understood, not alone by its simplicity, 
a hen gathering her chickens, but also because their elders 
had mentioned this very fact. The Rabbis spoke of Messiah 


under the name of the Shekinah and declared that Israel 


would be gathered under the wings of the Shekinah, where 


163 aan , 


Fo they would find rest and blessing. And now the Shekinah 


was with them. The promised One has come and they 
would not have Him. They turned away from Jehovah, 
their King. Their house—no longer “the Father’s house”— 
is to be left desolate. They wouid see Him in no wise 
henceforth. That this has a national significance, the re- 
jection of them is evident. And no sooner were the words 
spoken than He left the temple and went away. 

But the discourse which has nothing but Woes ends with 
a “Blessed,” and here comes in the bright ray of hope for 
Israel. “Ye shall in no wise see me henceforth until ye 
say, Blessed be He that comes in the name of the Lord.” 
This is the promise of His second Coming, and when He 
comes He will find a believing remnant of that very people, 
welcoming Him with the messianic greeting of the cxviii 
Psalm. Then the Shekinah-Glory will spread over Jeru- 
salem and Israel’s land, and He that scattered Isracl will 
gather them from the four corners of the earth. It is a 
strange and evil doctrine which maintains that inasmuch as 
the woes were spoken upon these Pharisees, that they are 
also to see Him again. It is claimed that these wicked 
Pharisees, the offspring of vipers, who could not escape the 
judgment of hell, are all to be raised from the dead when 
Christ comes again and have “a second chance” to see Him, 
and that then they will receive Him. Such Jewish univer- 
salism has no Scripture foundation whatever. It is a rem- 
nant which will behold the King coming out of the opened 
heavens in the day of His manifestation. 


° 164 


CHAPTER XXIV. 


In the two chapters, which follow, we have the great 
Olivet discourse of our Lord. 

Next to the thirteenth of Matthew, the seven parables, 
these two chapters are the most misunderstood. We shall 
have occasion to point out the erroneous interpretations 
which spring mostly from a false conception of the char- 
acterisitics of the age in which we live. 

First of all we shall look at the twenty-fourth and 
twenty-fifth chapters in a general way. We mention 
them together for they should never be separated. The 
Olivet discourse, was spoken in answer to the questions 
the disciples had asked of the Lord Jesus. In Mark and 
Luke the Spirit of God has recorded parts of this dis- 
course, but only in the first Gospel, the Gospel of Mat- 
thew, do we find a full report. This is in fullest harmony 
with the scope of the Gospel. 

“T will raise them up a prophet from among their 
brethren, like unto thee.” Thus God had spoken to Moses 
(Deut. xviii:18). We know from the Book of Acts that 
this was a prophecy to be fulfilled in the person of the 
Lord Jesus Christ (Acts iii:22 and vii:37). But the Lord 
is greater than Moses (Hebrews iii:5-6). In the first 
great discourse in this Gospel, the sermon on the mount, 
He expounded the law and spoke with greater authority 
than Moses ever could speak; “I say unto you.” He ful- 
filled the law. But Moses was also a prophet. Before 
he left his people, he uttered a great prophecy. This is 
found in Deuteronomy xxxii. It is in the form of a song, 


165 


a wonderful inspired unfolding of the history of Israel. 
God’s dealings with them in the past is reviewed and 
then follows a forecast of their future to the very end, 
which up to the present time has not yet been reached. 
This is followed by the Blessing of Moses, likewise a 
prophecy. 

And now He, who is greater than Moses, the prophet 
like unto Moses utters a great prophecy, more complete 
and far-reaching than that of Moses. He, Jehovah, had 
come in the midst of His people As king He had of- 
fered the promised kingdom; He and the offer of the 
kingdom had been rejected by His own, and now before 
He goes to the cross to fulfil all that was written con- 
cerning His sufferings in the law and the prophets, He 
predicts events connected with the end of the age and 
His future glorious manifestation, which will usher in 
that new age of blessing and glory, of which His own 
Spirit testified in all the prophets. 

The Olivet discourse is a great prophecy, the King’s 
last, great utterance. It was spoken, as we shall see later, 
in answer to the question of the disciples. He had just 
predicted the destruction of the magnificent temple build- 
ings, and while He sat upon the Mount of Olives, where 
in the future His glorious feet shall stand in the hour 
of His manifestation, they asked Him: “Tell us when 
-shall these things be? And what shall be the sign of Thy 
coming, and of the end of the Age?” We shall find later 
that here in Matthew, the Spirit of God in giving us the | 
discourse does not give us the words which relate to the 
destruction of the temple, which was then standing. He 
omits here certain words, which, however, are given in 
the Gospel of Luke. All this and much else our exposi- 
tion will bring out. 


166 


The discourse itself is divided into three great parts 
clearly marked. The answer of the Lord to the question 
asked begins with the fourth verse. Up to the forty- 
fourth verse we have the first part of His predictions. 
Beginning with the forty-fifth verse, He changes His 
mode of speaking. No longer direct predictions, but He 
speaks again in parables. These are three: 1. The para- 
ble of the faithful and evil servant, 2. The parable of the 
five wise and five foolish virgins 3. The parable of the 
man traveling into a far country and delivering unto his 
servants his goods. In one of these parables we find 
again the phrase so peculiar to the Gospel of Matthew 
“the kingdom of the heavens.” These parables end with 
the thirtieth verse. In the verses which follow the Lord 
no longer speaks in parables. It is true Matthew xxv :31 
to 46 is often called a parable, but it is not. It is a reve- 
lation the King gives concerning His own glorious ap- 
pearing and the judgment He will execute in that day. 
We have therefore a three-fold division of the Olivet dis- 
course. 

First division: Chapter xxiv:4-44. Second division: 
Chapter xxiv:45 to chapter. xxv:30, Third division: 
Chapter xxv :31-46. 

We shall look at these divisions first of all to find out 
to what season or time they refer and after we have 
cleared away some of the false interpretations and mis- 
conceptions, we hope to study each division in detail. 

In reading over the first part of the discourse of our 
Lord we find that it relates to disciples, which of neces- 
sity must be Jewish. In this part the Lord speaks of the 
ending of the age, the time of distress which is to come, 
the great tribulation and a climax is reached in this di- 
vision, when the Lord speaks of His coming again in the 
clouds of heaven with power and great glory. This is 


©3167 


to take place immediately after the days of that tribula- 
tion, 

’ The most widespread interpretation of this part of the 
discourse is that it all was fulfilled in the past. The great 
tribulation is a thing of the past and the Lord Jesus 
Christ came again in the destruction of Jerusalem. This 
is the foolish, spiritualizing method, which does such 
violence to the Word of God. These interpreters are 
given to the wildest and most fanciful imaginations to 
prove their assertions. Quite often they make use of the 
writings of Josephus instead of God’s Word. According 
to them the year 70 was the year in which “the Son of 
Man came in the clouds of heaven with great power and 
glory.”’ Ina recent volume published in defense of this 
theory, which is unknown in primitive Christianity, the 
writer tries to get over the difficulties by saying the fol- 
lowing: “But who can say what other sights appeared 
_ at the final moment of the catastrophe? (The destruction 
of Jerusalem by Titus.) The ‘Coming’ was like a light- 
ning flash, not abiding for days like the glory on Sinai. 
The sight of the Glory of Jehovah was like devouring fire 
on the top of the mountains to the eyes of the sons of 
Israel; and that glory was a real presence, a veritable — 
parousia, for Jehovah came down upon Mount Sinai. 
And yet.in that Sinaitic parousia the Israelites saw no 
form or shape of the divine person. Whether those who 
saw the sign of the Son of Man which appeared in heaven 
immediately after the tribulation of those days saw the 
person and form of the Son of Man Himself, or only some 
symbol of His presence, must remain a mystery.” This 
interpretation, which looks upon verses 4-44 fulfilled in 
the past at the time when Titus besieged Jerusalem, has 
its origin in a deplorable ignorance of God’s dispen- 
sational dealings with the Jews and the Gentiles. It 


168 


leaves nothing for the Jewish nation in the future. It 
would take us too long to show the impossibility that the 
Lord meant by these predictions the events which tran- 
spired between the time of His resurrection and the de- 
struction of Jerusalem in the year 70. But had the Lord 
nothing to say in this discourse about the great judg- 
ment, which befell Jerusalem. He certainly gave'a reve- 
lation concerning it as well as warnings. But the record 
of this prediction of the fall of Jerusalem under Titus is 
not at all given in Matthew twenty-four, but we find that 
the Spirit of God has put that in the Gospel of Luke. 
In Luke xxi:20-23 we have the words which predict the 
siege and fall of Jerusalem in the year 70. The predic- 
tion is, that after that catastrophe has taken place and 
they have fallen by the edge of the sword and are led 
away captives, that Jerusalem shall be trodden down by 
the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled. 
This happened after the destruction of the City and Jerusa- 
lem is still trodden down, because the times of the Gen- 
tiles have not yet run out. But now turning to the words 
in Matthew we find an entirely different result from the 
manifestation of the Son of Man in Glory and in the 
clouds of heaven (that which postmillennialism claims to 
be identical with the destruction of Jerusalem). There 
is not a word mentioned of their being scattered among 
the nations, but the very opposite is said “they shall 
gather together his elect from the four winds from one 
end of heaven to the other.” The predictions in Mat- 
thew xxiv :4-44 have nothing whatever to do with the 4o 
years which preceded the destruction of Jerusalem, nor 
with that event in the year 70. That they refer to Judea 
and Jerusalem, that the predictions concern Jewish dis- 
ciples and that they describe scenes of distress and tribu- 
lation to be enacted in the land of Israel is quite true. 


169 


Another mode of explaining these first predictions of 
the Olivet discourse is, to apply them to this Christian 
age in which we live. This is generally done by those 
who have the correct Scriptural belief in the second com- 
ing of the Lord Jesus Christ. They reject the spiritualiz- 
ing teaching of postmillennialism and hold that there will 
be a future great tribulation, which will close with the 
visible and glorious manifestation of the Son of Man out 
of heaven. They tell us that the Lord describes this en- 
tire Christian age and especially the closing of it, the end. 
Then they maintain that the church is to remain on the 
earth in this end of the age and to pass through the great 
tribulation, and therefore the exhortations contained in 
this chapter are meant for Christian believers living in 
the end of the age. This wrong interpretation has con- 
fused not a few of God’s people. Let one get clear on 
two important teachings of the word and deliverance 
from this false ‘interpretation of this part of our Lord’s 
discourse will speedily follow. , We mean the teaching 
of the Scriptures of what the church is, her calling and 
her destiny. And in the second place the teaching of the 
prophetic word, that the Lord will call a believing Jewish 
remnant, which will suffer and witness at the end of the 
age. Ifa person, be he a teacher or not, is ignorant of 
either one of these, he must be confused in his concep- 
tion of the first part of Matthew xxiv. 

Furthermore it is to be said that the disciples knew 
absolutely nothing of a Christian age. Such an age could 
not even begin, when they asked the question about the 
end of the age. They did not mean a Christian age, but 
their Jewish age. All through these forty verses every- 
thing is of Jewish character. The warning is against 
false Christs and false prophets; the warning given to 
church is against false spirits. The condition of salvation 


170 


that one must endure to the end is nowhere given to the 
Christian believer, who is saved and safe in the Lord 
Jesus Christ. It has an entirely different meaning here. 
Again the prayer that the flight should not take place 
on the Sabbath day is Jewish, for the Christian believer 
has no Sabbath day, but the Lord’s day. The reference 
to Daniel and the great tribulation, which never concerns 
the church, but Israel, shows us that we are not on Chris- 
tian, but Jewish ground. The preaching which is men- 
tioned is that of the Gospel of the Kingdom, but that 
Gospel is not now preached, for we preach the Gospel 
of Grace. When we turn to the different verses we shall 
go carefully over this theory again and disprove it by 
what is written, 

There remains the third way of interpreting these 
words of our Lord, it is to look upon these predictions 
about the end of the Jewish age as being still future. 
This is the right and only key to understand these verses. 
The first part of the Olivet discourse of our Lord is a 
prediction of how the Jewish age will end. The dis- 
ciples only knew of a Jewish age. This Jewish age has 
not yet ended; it has been interrupted. A careful study 
of the great prophecy in Daniel ix:24-27 reveals the fact 
that one year-week, the seventieth, has not yet been ful- 
filled. The Christian age, in which God visits the Gen- 
tiles and takes out a people for His name, the church, is 
the great parenthesis, which has come in between the 
sixty-ninth week and the seventieth week of Daniel. As 
soon as the purpose of God is fulfilled, the church com- 
plete, the Lord will resume His dealing with Israel and 
the seventieth week (seven years) will end the Jewish 
age. Before that end, the seventieth week can come, the 
church must be complete and be removed from these 
earthly scenes, according to the divinely revealed destin, 


171 


of the church. The church complete and taken up, the 
end of the age will follow and that will be Jewish and as 
far as the so-called “christian world” is concerned one 
of complete apostasy. Then the 144,000 of whom we 
read in Rev. vii will be sealed and bear their witness. 
This is the Jewish remnant and the exhortations here 
concern them. No doubt when the time comes they will 
find. great comfort here in the words of our Lord. They 
will preach the Gospel of the kingdom and the unfinished 
testimony, of which we read in Matthew x, will be fin- 
ished by them, Thus the disciples the Lord addressed 
were typical of similar Jewish disciples living after the 
church has ceased her testimony. A striking fact is that 
this interpretation can be verified by many Scripture 
passages from the Old Testament. The teaching of a 
future remnant of Jewish believers, suffering and witnes- 
sing for God during the great tribulation, is very pro- 
nounced in the Old Testament, We shall have occasion 
to turn to some of these Scripture references when we 
come to the different verses. The Old Testament pre- 
dicts a siege of Jerusalem which has not yet been. The 
reader in turning to Zechariah xiv will find a full descrip- 
tion of what awaits Jerusalem and a faithful remnant in 
the end time. Though Jerusalem has had so many sieges 
in the past there is not one which could be said to be a 
fulfilment of Zechariah xiv. The Lord Himself appears, 
for the deliverance of His people, His feet standing on 
the Mount of Olives. Matthew xxiv:4-44 refers to this, 
and His coming and all His saints with Him in Zech- 
ariah corresponds to “the coming of the Son of Man in 
the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.” 

In the second part of this discourse, chapter xxiv :45- 
xxv 730, we find that the Lord speaks in an entirely dif- 
ferent way. He mentions no longer the tribulation, nor 


172 


the Sabbath or Judea. He speaks again in parables. 
These parables, each one having for its central thought, 
His coming again, relate not to the Christian church as 
some have expressed it, but rather to the Christian pro- 
fession. We notice the true and the false throughout. 
A faithful servant and an evil servant; wise virgins and 
foolish virgins; servants who use their talents and one 
who does not. Here, then, we have the revelation of the 
judgement between the true and the false. 

The third part, chapter xxv :31-40, is not-a revelation 
concerning the universal judgment; no such judgment is 
ever-mentioned in the Bible. The Lord describes the 
judgment of nations which takes place when he sits upon 
the throne of His glory. 

The first part of the Olivet Discourse, verses 4-44, is 
now before us. At the close of the previous chapter we 
learn that the King after His loving outburst over Jerusa- 
lem had made the declaration, “Behold your house is left 
unto you desolate.’ This prophecy is fulfilled through- 
out this present age. In the beginning of the twenty- 
fourth chapter we read that the Lord left the temple. 
“And Jesus went out, and departed from the temple; 
and His disciples came to show Him the buildings of the 
temple.” There is a strongly marked correspondency 
between the end of the twelfth chapter and the beginning 
of the thirteenth and the close of the twenty-third and 
the beginning of the twenty-fourth. At the close of the 
twelfth chapter the Lord by His symbolical action in re- 
fusing to see His mother and brethren, declared His re- 
jationship with His own to whom He had come, and who 
received Him not, broken; at the close of the twenty- 
third there is a fuller break with the nation, the nation for 
whom He came to die. In Matthew xiii it is recorded 
that on the same day Jesus went out of the house, and 


173 

sat by the seaside, giving there His parables concerning 
the kingdom of the heavens. In the twenty-fourth He 
also goes out and departs, to give soon after the great 
Olivet discourse. While His parables, the mysteries of 
the kingdom, relate to this present age and the end of 
the age, in a general way, in the first part of the Olivet 
discourse, He makes known the details of that ending 
of the age, of which He spoke repeatedly in the thirteenth 
of Matthew. 

In leaving the temple and going towards the Mount of 
Olives, the Lord had to cross over the brook Cedron, 
and in ascending the mountain, they must have had a 
magnificent view of the temple buildings. These buila- 
ings were of the most massive construction, some of 
them still in process of erection. An enormous wall en- 
circled the whole temple area; some of the stones used 
in that wall were 23 and 24 feet in length. It must have 
been a wonderful sight for human eyes to behold, Not 
a word had come from the disciples’ lips during the 
events recorded in the twenty-second and twenty-third 
chapters. They had heard His answers to the tempting 
Pharisees, and the pronunciation upon them. They 
listened to His loving outburst over Jerusalem and heard 
His prediction of the desolation of their house But now 
they call His attention to the buildings of the temple, to 
the great sight before them. “And Jesus said unto them, 
see ye not all these things? Verily I say unto you, There 
shall not be left here one stone upon another, that shall 
not be thrown down.” What a solemn prediction this 
was! How it must have impressed these Jewish men, 
His disciples, whose hearts clung to the temple and its 
wonderful buildings. These mighty stones, so solidly 
put together, were to be rent asunder, not one remain- 
ing upon the other. Only the Lord could make such a 


174 Bee, 


prediction. Here then is a prediction which refers to the 
destruction of the temple in the great catastrophe which 
came upon Jerusalem in the year 70. It is, as stated be- 
fore, fully given by our Lord in. Luke xxi:20-24: What 
should happen to the rebellious city, to the murderers, 
the Lord had revealed in the parable of the marriage 
feast, when He said: “But when the king heard it he 
was wroth; and he sent forth his armies, and destroyed 
those murderers, and burned their city.” 

“And as He was sitting upon the Mount of Olives the 
disciples came to Him privately, saying, Tell us, when 
shall these things be, and what is the sign of Thy Com- 
ing and the completion of the age?” 

The question asked by the disciples is threefold. When 
shall these things be? The sign of Thy Coming? The 
completion or consummation of the age? It is of great 
importance to see that the record of the discourse, as 
given by the Holy Spirit, passes over the answer to the 
first question, “When shall these things be?” This is 
evident by the fact that the Lord says not a word in the 
discourse of Jerusalem or the destruction of the temple, 
and as stated in our introduction to this chapter, while 
in Luke we hear that Jerusalem is to be besieged by 
armies, and the inhabitants are seen falling by the edge 
of the sword and led away captive into all the nations 
and Jerusalem trodden down by the Gentiles; in Matthew 
xxiv we do not find a word of all this at all. Indeed we 
read of great distress, which is to be in Judea, but noth- 
ing whatever of them being led away captive, or Jerusa- 
lem to be trodden down by the Gentiles. Instead of a 
scattering of the elect people at the close of the great 
tribulation, we have a gathering of the elect. The word 
in the passage (xxiv :31), that is the word “elect” refers 
to the literal Israel. 


175 


__ Turning to the next two questions, “What is the sign 
of Thy coming and the completion of the age?” it is to 
be said that undoubtedly in the minds of the disciples 
this question was one. He had repeatedly spoken about 
His return. As true Jews they expected, and that with 
perfect right, the establishment of the messianic kingdom 
by the Messiah, They had seen how He, in whom they 
had believed, and the kingdom He offered, had been re- 
jected. All, of necessity, must have been very misty 
before their view; but they take heart and ask Him 
about the sign of His coming, the coming He had men- 
tioned before. It is evident that the coming is His com- 
ing in power and glory for the establishment of the king- 
dom promised to Israel in the Old Testament. This com- 
ing is His visible and glorious return to the earth “in 
like manner as He went up into heaven’; it takes place 
in the land and His feet will stand on the mount of Olives. 
The synoptic Gospels know of no other coming of the 
Lord than His visible return. to Jerusalem; connected 
with this return we find always besides blessings, judg- 
ment. Entirely different is His coming for His Saints 
who compose the Church. This coming is revealed 
through the Apostle Paul in I Thessalonians, the fourth 
chapter. There we read that the Lord will descend into 
the air, not to the earth. The dead in Christ will be 
raised and the living saints be caught up, together with 
them, in clouds to meet the Lord in the air and to be for- 
ever with the Lord. In John xiv the Lord gives a little 

. word which may be taken to indicate that coming for 
His own, though the manner is not made known. It is 
that word of comfort to His own. “I will come again and 
receive you unto myself.” It is strange that believers in 
the return of the Lord Jesus Christ can fail to see the 
strongly marked difference between His visible and glori- 


176 


ous return, His coming in power and great Glory, taking 
place in the land of Israel and His coming for His Church, 
as revealed exclusively through the great Apostle. It is 
not strange that where this distinction is given up con- 
fusion and error result. 

Then they asked about the completion or consumma- 
tion of the age The authorized version simply has it 
“the end of the world.” That is a translation which is 
responsible for much wrong teaching. The end of the 
world as generally understood in Christendom is not at 
all in view here. It is the consummation, the winding 
up-of the age, the aion. As we have shown this age could 
not be the “Christian age,” but it is the ending of the 
Jewish age, which is still future. Such an age ending 
predicts the entire Old Testament prophetic World. 

There we find numerous predictions of a great coming 
day, the day of the Lord, in which Jehovah is visibly seen 
in His Glory and majesty, coming forth to deliver His 
persecuted and downtrodden earthly people, who wait 
for Him and to judge the nations likewise. According 
to Old Testament prophecy this day of the Lord’s visible 
and glorious manifestation is preceded by a time of great 
trouble and distress. The center of the tribulation is 
Jerusalem, and when the height of the tribulation is 
reached, the heavens and the earth are shaken and Jeho- 
vah appears. Furthermore it is seen that there is a be- 
lieving and suffering remnant of Jews passing through 
that time of trouble, who are faithful in the midst of 
universal apostasy, wickedness and worship of the false 
king, who is likewise described in the Prophets. Their 
prayers and calls upon God are prophetically recorded 
by the Spirit of God as well as their deliverance by the 
manifestation of Jehovah. Now all this has never been 
fulfilled) That great day so often spoken ‘of by the 


177 


Prophets, the day of the Lord, has not yet come; it is 
still future. So is the time of distress, which is called 
“the time of Jacob’s trouble,” and therefore the suffering 
of a Jewish remnant, which is not identified with the 
church is likewise future. When the Lord speaks in 
Matthew xxiv about the consummation of the age and 
the signs of His coming, He gives altogether that which 
is revealed in the Old Testament and which has not been 
fulfilled up to the present time. The purpose of God in 
this present Christian age is to take out from among the 
Gentiles a people for His Name. This taken out people 
is the Church. As long as this calling out through the 
preaching of the Gospel continues and new members are 
added to the Body of the Lord Jesus Christ (the church), 
the predicted end of the age does not come. Besides 
having a description of the end of the age, of which our 
Lord speaks here, in the Old Testament we have also one 
in the Book of Revelation. From the sixth chapter on 
to the nineteenth we find another record of the future 
age-ending. In studying the account our Lord gives here 
in Matthew we must compare Old Testament prophecy 
and the visions of the Book of Revelation, with what the 
Lord saith in His discourse. If our interpretation is the 
right one there must be perfect harmony between these 
three: Old Testament Prophecy: Matthew xxiv :4-44, and 
Revelation vi-xix. ; 

And now we turn to the text and give the first section 
of the discourse. “And Jesus answering said to them, 
See that no one mislead you. For many shall come in 
my name, saying, I am the Christ, and they shall mislead 
many, But ye will hear of wars and rumors of wars. 
See that ye be not disturbed; for all these things must 
take place, but it is not yet the end. For nation shall 
rise up against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, 


178 


and there shall be famines and pestilences, and earth- 
quakes in divers places. But all these are the beginning 
of the throes. Then shall they deliver you up to tribula- 
tion, and shall kill you and ye will be hated of ali the 
nations for my name’s sake. And then will many be of- 
fended, and will deliver one another up, and hate one 
another; and many false prophets shall arise and shall 
mislead many; and because lawlessness shall prevail, the 
love of the most shall grow cold; but he that endureth 
to the end, he shall be saved. And these glad tidings of the 
kingdom shall be preached in the whole habitable earth 
for a witness to all the nations, and then shall the end 
come” (verses 4-14). . 

These are the opening words of the Lord, which de- 
scribe the age ending. . In a secondary and general way 
they likewise describe, no doubt, the characteristics of 
the times during which the Lord is not on the earth. 
Looked upon in this light what an argument they form 
against the modern optimistic dreams of the professing 
church! Neither the Lord, nor the Spirit in giving the 
Epistles of the New Testament have a single word to 
say that this present age and the world is to be getting 
better and that the end will be righteousness and peace. 
The testimony of the Scriptures is wholly.on the other 
side. Wars there have been all along as well as rumors 
of wars. amines, pestilences and earthquakes have 
again and again swept over this globe, as well as the - 
persecution of such who are the Lord’s. All this is true 
in a general way. But the Lord describes not the age 
as such, but shows what will be in the end. The words 
we have before us refer us to the beginning of that end, 
while in the last verse quoted, the fourteenth, the Lord 
saith “then shall come the end,” What follows the four- 
teenth verse then refers directly to the end. The last 


5 179 
week of Daniel, the seventieth, is marked off in two 
halves, each having three and a half years, The words 
here before us up to the fourteenth verse refer to the 
first half of the last week, while the fifteenth verse and 
the verses which follow bring us to the middle of that 
week. 

Verses 4-14 then contain the prophecy of our Lord 
relating to the beginning of the end of the Jewish age, 
while with the 15th verse the end itself in its fearful great 
tribulation and “the abomination of desolation” is de- 
scribed. ‘The whole period is the last week of Daniel’s 
great prophecy, a prophetic week, consisting of seven 
years, which cannot begin as long as the church is on 
the earth. The first part of it is now before us. The 
Lord saith in His answer to the question concerning the 
sign of His coming and the end of the age, that these 
things He mentions first are “the beginning of throes” 
(verse 8). 

And now let us look at the predictions. We find them 
in the following order: 

1. Many coming, saying, I am the Christ and succeed- 
ing in misleading many. 

2. Wars, rumors of wars. Nation lifting up sword 
against nation. Kingdom against kingdom. 

3, Famines and pestilences and earthquakes. 

4. Many witnesses to be killed and hated by all na- 
tions. False prophets and lawlessness prevailing. 

5. The preaching of the Gospel of the kingdom before 
the end is reached. 

These are the startling prophecies of our Lord, soon 
to be followed by other predictions of what shall be be- 
fore He returns in the clouds of heaven, immediately 
after the tribulation of those days. The disciples, all 
Jews, no doubt well versed in the Old Testament Scrip- 


180 


tures, must have had considerable knowledge of such 
awful events as described by the Lord, for Old Testa- 
ment prophecy predicts precisely such troubles preceding 
the visible manifestation of Jehovah out of the opened 
heavens, the beginning of the restoration of His earthly 
people and the blessings of the coming age. The follow- 
ing passages are but a few of those which might be 
quoted: Joel ii:1-17; Hosea v:14; Jer. xxx:4-9; Ezekiel 
xxt:27; Daniel xiii; Micah viii1-7; Hab: 117165 1t\1s 
also true that Jewish tradition maintained in fullest 
harmony with these teachings that the days preceding 
the glorious coming of the Messiah are to be days of woe 
and sorrow. One of these ancient traditions is so strik- 
ing that we quote it. 

Rabbi Jochunan says: “Seven years of trouble come 
before Messiah comes. The first year before the Son 
of David comes the prophecy of Amos (chap. iv:7) will 
be fulfilled. In the second year of tribulation there will 
be six months of famine. In the third year there will be 
great famine. Many men, women and children will die 
and the pious will be few. The law and the prophets 
will be forgotten by Israel. .The last years will bring 
signs in heaven and wars and at the end of the seventh 
year the Son of David will come.” Similar statements 
could be easily quoted from the Talmudical writings. 

All that which the above Old Testament passages pre- 
dict, a time of trouble, before an age of blessing begins 
and nations learn war no more, is still a matter of the 
future, and so are the predictions our Lord makes here. 
The disciples to whom He gives these words and warn- 
ings are typical representatives of disciples, who will 
live when that end comes; they will be Jewish disciples. 
When on the Mount of Olives, before His ascension, 
they asked Him their last question: ‘Lord, is it at this 


181 


time that Thou restorest the Kingdom to Israel?” He 
answered: “It is not yours to know times or seasons, 
which the Father has placed in His own authority” (Acts 
1:6-7). The kingdom will be restored with the coming 
of the King. It was not revealed when it was to be; all 
was to be postponed. They passed off the scene When 
the end at last will come other Jewish disciples, waiting 
for the kingdom to be restored to Israel, will witness and 
suffer, and they will turn to these words of our Lord and 
find comfort and instruction in them, 

And now there is something still more significant. Not 
alone does Old Testament prophecy predict distress for 
the ending of the Jewish age, but we have an additional 
description of these great coming events in the last book 
of the Bible, the only book of prophecy in the New Testa- 
ment, that glorious book, “The Revelation of Jesus 
Christ.” 

The book is divinely divided into three parts (chapter 
i:9): I. The things seen; Christ walking in the midst 
of the candlesticks (chapter i). Il. The things which 
are. The present church age; a wonderful prophecy con- 
cerning the history of the church (chapters ii and iii) 
III. The things which shall be after these (chapter iv 
to xxii). Here follows all which will take place after the 
church has completed her history. The removal of the 
true church from earth to heaven is promised in the third 
chapter of Revelation and is indicated in the opening 
verses of the fourth chapter. In the fourth and fifth 
chapters the church is seen symbolically in the twenty- 
four elders, seated, clothed and crowned in the presence 
of the throne. Then the Lamb takes the book to break 
its seals. That which is revealed, beginning with the 
sixth chapter, the breaking of the seals, the sounding of 
the seven trumpets and the outpouring of the seven vials 


‘ 


182 


together with the great events described from that chap- 
ter to the nineteenth, is nothing else but a more detailed 
history of the last week of Daniel It is here in the last 
book of the Bible fully revealed what judgment will be 
executed upon the earth during that period of distress 
and what great tribulation will be for those who dwell 
upon the earth, Jews and Gentiles (never the true 
church). It is an intensely interesting fact that this part 
of Revelation (chapters vi-xix) ever points us back to 
Old Testament prophecy. Hundreds of passages from 
all the prophets can easily be put alongside of the visions 
of judgment, tribulation and wrath in the Apocalypse. 

The point which we wish to make is the following: 
lf this is the correct interpretation, if Matthew xxiv :4-14 
refers to the beginning of that coming end of the age and 
if Revelation vi refers to the same beginning of the end 
and that which follows the sixth chapter leads us on into 
the great tribulation, then there must be a perfect har- 
mony between that part of the Olivet discourse contained 
in Matthew xxiv and the part of Revelation beginning 
with the sixth chapter. And such is indeed the case. 

We turn briefly to the sixth chapter of Revelation. 
The Lamb opens one of the seals, after that great wor- 
ship scene in heaven had taken place. Then we read: 
“And I saw; and behold a white horse, and he that sat 
upon it having a bow; and a crown was given to him, 
and he went forth conquering and that he might con- 
quer.” It is strange that so many expositors have ex- 
pounded this to be the Lord Himself. The Lord indeed 
is described in this book as coming riding a white horse; 
but this description is found at the close of the Revela- 
tion in the nineteenth chapter. The rider upon the white 
horse under the first seal is a counterfeit. 


He is a false 
Christ, who goes forth to conquer. 


His conquest is a 


183 


bloodless one, as he has only a bow. He wiil bring about 
a false peace among the nations, which for a time may 
have been alarmed by the supernatural removal of the 
church. The second rider “takes peace from the earth,” 
from which we would conclude that the first rider upon 
the white horse (white the emblem of peace) had es- 
tablished peace. 

And as we turn to Matthew xxiv we find that the first 
thing our Lord saith, is about the deceivers who will 
come with the beginning of the age ending saying: “TI 
am Christ,” and succeeding to lead away many, It is 
true throughout this age impostors came among the Jews 
claiming to be the Messiah. It is true even now men 
rise up saying they are some great one, Elijah, prophets 
or even Christ. 

All these are but faint shadows of what will take place in 
that soon coming end. Indeed the increasing delusions 
and the claims of, as we believe, demon-possessed men and 
women, are strong indications that the end is very near. 
Then deceivers, led by Satan, possessed by his demons, 
will arise and among them there will be a mighty leader 
going forth to conquer, saying, “Peace, peace,” when 
there is no peace. 

The rider upon the red horse, as already stated, takes 
peace from the earth. The second seal shows him com- 
ing forth with a great sword, “that they should slay one 
and another.” . 

And the very next thing which the Lord saith in Mat- 
thew xxiv is, “But ye will hear of wars. and rumors of 
wars * * * Nation shall lift up sword against nation 
and kingdom against kingdom’’ (verse 7). Wars there 
have been in the past; this earth is saturated with blood. 
But there will be a time, and it is soon coming, when 
literally.nation will lift up sword against nation and 


184 


kingdom against kingdom, when they will slay each 
ether. Any one who follows present-day history will see 
how everything is ripening for just such a universal war- 
fare. And yet secure, sleeping Christendom is dreaming 
of peace, world wide peace and times of prosperity! 

The third the Lord mentions is “there shall be fam- 
ines.” And the third seal reveals a rider upon a black 
horse and he has a balance in his hand and what he saith 
indicates clearly that he brings famines .(Rev. vi:5-6). 
The fourth rider of the fourth seal is upon a pale horse. 
His name is “Death.” He takes the fourth part of the 
earth away. This corresponds to the Lord’s announce- 
ment that there will be “pestilences and earthquakes in 
divers places.” Fearful have been the famines, pesti- 
lences, and earthquakes of the last twenty-five years.* 
But these are insignificant in comparison with those to 
which our Lord refers here, the mighty events which tell 
all the earth that the day of wrath is rapidly approaching. 
Blessed be His name, who delivereth us from that wrath 
to come that “His Beloved,” “His Dove,” “His Bride,” 
the church, will be safe within when these awful things 
come to pass. 

And now under the fifth seal we do not behold another 
rider, but instead of it we hear the souls underneath the 
altar, that had been slain for the Word of God, and for 
the testimony which they gave, crying out with a loud 
voice, saying, How long? (Rev. vi:g-11.) Who are 
these? Not saints of the church. These are all raised 
up when the Lord comes into the air (1 Thess. iv:17) 


*Especially great has been the loss of life and property from earth- 
quakes and volcanic disturbances since 1900. The last, the destruc- 
tion of San Francisco, has been one of the most terrible of the recent 
catastrophes. A harbinger findeed of the nearness of the far greater 
earthquakes to come. 


I85 


and are caught up with the living saints. They are such 
of the remnant of Jews who began to give their witness 
for the Word of God after the church had departed and 
they suffered martyrdom in consequence of their faithful 
testimony. It is exactly that of which our Lord speaks 
next in His discourse. “Then shall they deliver you up 
to tribulation and shall kill you; ye will be hated of all 
the nations for my name’s sake.” As we shall show later 
this faithful Jewish remnant will go throughout the 
world proclaiming the coming of the kingdom and calling 
to repentance. 

We see then how striking the agreement is between 
the beginning of Matthew xxiv and the book of Revela- 
tion, the seal judgments. The interpretation we have 
undertaken to give is therefore proven to be correct. 

We point out but a few more of the facts mentioned 
by our Lord, False prophets shall arise misleading 
many. The Jewish age has false prophets; the Christian 
age has false teachers. “But there were false prophets 
also among the people, as there shall be also among you 
false teachers, who shall bring in by the bye destructive 
heresies, etc.” (2 Pet. ii:1). These false prophets who 
come in the end of the Jewish age will be possessed by 
evil spirits. Such was the case during the great apostasy 
of Israel under the reign of Ahab. The Lord permitted 
then a lying spirit to take possession of the false prophets 
as revealed by the prophet Micaiah (2 Chronicles xviii:- 
18-22). 

“Lawlessness shall prevail,’ that is, complete anarchy 
will hold sway. This too is clearly seen in the breaking 
of the sixth seal (Rev. vi:12-17). The earthquake, the 
darkened sun, the blood-red moon, the falling stars, the 
rolled up heavens and the removal of mountains and is- 
lands are all great symbols of startling political events, 


186 


which will take place in the first three and one-half 
years. Government and authority is swept away; civil 
and ecclesiastical powers are shaken; mountains (the 
type of kingdoms) are moved out of their places and 
as a consequence of this awful upheaval, the reign of 
terror and anarchy, worse than that of the French revo- 
lution and the Russian revolution of to-day, all classes 
of men, the kings, the wealthy, the rich and the poor, 
the bondman and the free, will be seized with terror. 
Well has a recent writer said: “The scene here de- 
scribed is an awful and sublime one. The symbols em- 
ployed to set it forth are the powers of nature convulsed. 
The whole fabric of civil and governmental power on 
earth breaks up. Disorder reigns supreme. It is not 
simply the collapse of this or that government, but the 
total subversion of all governing authority—both su- 
preme and dependent. The general idea which the met- 
aphors present is a universal overthrow of all existing 
authority ; a revolutionary crisis of such magnitude and 
character that kings and slaves are in equal terror. The 
coming crash will involve in one general catastrophe 
everything on earth deemed secure and strong. A vast 
civil and political chaos will be created. What an aw- 
ful scene to contemplate! a world without a magistrate! 
without even the semblance of power! without govern- 
ment! without the authority of repression!” 

This is the sixth seal, and it is precisely what the 
Lord saith: “Lawlessness shall prevail.” And later the 
lawless One will take the lead. He comes into full dis- 
play in the middle of the week.. How near, how very 
near all these events are, even at our doors, is seen by 
the increasing unrest of all nations, the manifestation 
of the spirit of anarchy among all people. Yet there 
is One who hindereth (2 Thess. ii). The Holy Spirit 


187 


is the One who keeps it back and He has His abode in 
the body of Christ, the church, Only after the church 
is taken into glory can that lawless One be revealed. 
But even in those awful days the mercy of God lingers 
and one more great testimony goes forth; the Gospel 
of the kingdom will yet be preached in a very short time 
to all the nations, then the end comes. 

“And these glad tidings of the Kingdom shall be 
preached in the whole habitable earth for a witness to 
all nations, and then shall come the end” (verse 14). 
This verse relates exclusively to the end of the age, that 
is the Jewish age. And here we have to speak of all of © 
the wrong application of this word of our Lord. 

It is generally looked upon as a condition to be ful- 
filled before the Lord can come. Post-millennialism, be- 
lieving as it does, without any authority from the Word 
of God, in the conversion of the world before the’ Com- 
ing of the Lord, makes use of this verse to uphold its 
unscriptual theory. Then there are others who believe 
in the premillennial coming of Christ who misapply this 
statement of our Lord. They ever speak of preaching 
the Gospel to all the nations as a necessary condition 
before the Lord can come for the church. It is often 
pressed in this way in missionary meetings, conven- 
tions as an incentive to giving, that unless thé Gospel 
is preached to all nations, the Lord cannot come. Now 
such an application of this verse is certainly wrong. 

It is true that the Gospel is to be preached in the 
regions beyond and that by this preaching a people is 
called out from the Gentiles, a people for His name, the 
church; but it would be incorrect to say that in order 
that the Lord may come for His Church, all the individ- 
uals of all the nations must hear the Gospel. Believers 
in the blessed Hope of the Coming of the Lord have a 


188 


deep interest in foreign missions, unless they are given 
to extreme, fanciful or unscriptural notions. This is 
clearly established by a number of foreign missionary 
enterprises of the last twenty-five years, which have 
been inaugurated by men who believe in the premillen- 
nial Coming of the Lord and also by the large number 
of missionaries in all lands, who are out and out premil- 
lennialists. The accusation that believing in the im- 
minent Coming of the Lord paralyzes missionary efforts 
is unjust and unfair. It stimulates missionary activity. 
The believer in the Coming of the Lord desires the Gos- 
pel to be preached in the great, wide field of the nations, 
that the church may be completed as to numbers. How 
soon this may be none can tell. 

If the verse before us contained a necessary condi- 
tion before the Lord can come to receive His fellow 
heirs, the church, in Glory, then the end must be indefi- 
nitely postponed. Other difficulties arise if this were 
the case. 

But let us look at this preaching of this Gospel as in 
the future and all will become clear. In the first place 
must we remind ourselves that it is at the end of the 
age that the glad tidings of the Kingdom are to be her- 
alded through the earth. The end of whicn the Lord 
speaks, the termination of that Jewish age, as we shall 
see later in this chapter, will be the visable manifesta- 
tion of the Son of Man in power and in glory out of the 
opened heavens. The glorified church, the Lamb’s wife, 
. comes forth with Him in that visible manifestation. 

Let us then have this fixed first of all, the preaching 
of which the Lord speaks is a future witness to all the 
nations, and that witness must be given before His vis- 
ible manifestation will take place. 


In the next place we have to ascertain what witness 


189 


will be given. It will be the proclamation of ‘the glad 
tidings, or Gospel, of the Kingdom. What does. this 
mean? Superficial readers of the Word of God make 
no difference between the Gospel of the Kingdom and 
the Gospel of Grace. Many speak of the preaching of 
John the Baptist and the Lord and His disciples in the 
first part of Matthew, when they announced “Repent, 
for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand,” as if it were 
the same thing as the Gospel of Grace, which is so freely 
offered after the death, resurrection and ascension of the 
Lord Jesus Christ. There is a difference between the 
Gospel of the Kingdom and the Gospel of Grace. 

What then is the Gospel of the Kingdom? As we 
learn in the beginning of the Gospel of Matthew, the 
Gospel of the Kingdom is the good news that the prom- 
ised Kingdom* of the Old Testament was about to be 
established with the manifestation of the King. But 
the nation rejected Him and rejected the offered King- 
dom. Some time after the day of Pentecost this Gos- 
pel of the Kingdom was preached to the nation. It was 
to Jews that Peter preached on the day of Pentecost. 
It is the Gospel of the Kingdom when Peter declared 
unto them after the healing of the lame man, he being 
a type of the nation (Acts iii:1), “Repent ye, therefore, 
and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, 
when the times of refreshing shall come from the pres- 
ence of the Lord; and He shall send Jesus Christ, which 
before was preached to you; whom the heavens must 
receive, until the times of restitution of all things, which 
God hath spoken by the mouth of all His holy prophets 
since the world began” (Acts iii:19-20). This was the 


*Our lecture on the Kingdom in the Old Testament, published in 
tract form, will give more complete information about the Kingdom. 


190 
good news of the Kingdom. If the nation had then re- 
pented and accepted the renewed offer, the Lord would 
have come again and with His coming the restitution 
of all things as foretold by all the prophets. This resti- 
tution, of course, does mot consist in the resurrection and 
restoration of the wicked dead, as an unscriptural resti- 
tutionism claims, but in the glorious things of the earthly 
Kingdom and the promised blessings to Israel. Soon 
the nation rejected the last offer in the stoning of Ste- 
phen. The measure was full. In the Old Testament 
Jehovah had offered Himself to them as their King and 
they had rejected Him. Then He came manifested in 
the flesh and they rejected Him, God the Son. Then 
the Holy Spirit in Stephen’s testimony was likewise re-. 
jected. 

With that event the preaching of the Gospel of the 
Kingdom ceased. Another Gospel was preached. The 
Lord gave it to the great Apostle, whom He called Him- 
self, Paul. And Paul calls this Gospel ‘my Gospel.” 
It is the Gospel of God’s free Grace to all who believe, the 
Gospel of the Glory of God, the Gospel of a risen and 
glorified Lord. The mystery of the chuch is made 
known to Paul, and it is part of that blessed Gospel 
that every believing sinner, Jew or Gentile, is baptized 
by the one Spirit into the one body, This Baptism took 
place on the day of Pentecost. The Gospel of Grace de- 
clares that all who believe on the Lord Jesus Christ are 
quickened together with Him, raised up and seated with 
Him in the Heavenly, that they are Sons of God and 
Heirs of God and joint heirs with the Lord Jesus Christ. 
This then is the Gospel of Grace. This wonderful offer 
goes out now to the nations of the earth that the Bride 
of the Lord Jesus Christ may be gathered. It had a - 
definite beginning, it will have a definite end. When 


| I9r 7 
that body, the church, is complete, the church will be 
removed from the earth in the manner as revealed in 


1 Thess. iv:16-17, and with this the preaching of the Gos- — 


pel of Grace will come to an end, because the purpose 
for which God had this Gospel proclaimed is accom- 
plished. hag 

Now during the time that the Kingdom was preached 
to be at hand the Gospel of Grace was not heard, and 
during the time the Gospel of Grace is preached the 
Gospel of the Kingdom is not preached. But as soon 
as the Gospel of Grace has fulfilled its mission and is 
no longer heard, the glad tidings of the kingdom will 
be preached again. 3 

As soon then as the church leaves this earthly scene 
and the end of the age begins, the Gospel of Grace will 
no more be heard, but in place of it, the Gospel of the 
Kingdom will be sounded forth once more to all the 
nations, before the heavens, silent for'so many, many 
centuries, will be opened again to reveal the King, who 
comes to execute judgment and to rule the earth in right- 
eousness, Under the solemn signs of the ending Jewish 
age it will be proclaimed world wide, “Fear God and 
give Glory to Him, for the hour of His judgment is come 
and worship Him that made heaven and the earth and 
the sea and the fountains of waters.” The Kingdom is 
at hand; repent! t 

And who will be the preachers of this last witness, the 
missionaries who reach all nations with this final mes- 
sage before the King appears in judgment? They are a 
believing Israelitish remnant. God in His wonderful 
grace will begin a work among His earthly people Israel. 
The Holy Spirit, who has His abode, as long as the 
church is forming, in the church, will have accomplished 
His mission in the completed body and will no longer 


192 


be present on the earth as He is now; but He will still 
be working and that in the same way as He did in the 
Old Testament, He will come upon a remnant of believ- 
ers from the long blinded nation Israel. These will take 
up the work of preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom to 
all the nations, and no doubt special power will rest upon 
them for that service. How well this people is fitted to 
do this, needs little comment. They are now scattered 
among all the nations. They understand the languages 
of the nations, they are at home in every climate. When 
the church is no longer here, God in His mercy will turn 
to His own people again and the blindness of a company 
of them will be removed and the Spirit of God will come 
upon them. We believe this remnant will most likely 
consist of such Hebrews who are at this time still hold- 
ing to the Messianic hope of a coming deliverer, who 
hold fast the law and the testimony, who firmly believe 
in the prophecies of their own Scriptures. Alas! hun- 
dreds of thousands have broken with the faith in God’s 
Word and God’s promises. 

Such a remnant according to the election of Grace 
(Romans xi) will be called, and this remnant will be 
used as the great herald to announce to all the nations 
the great coming events. What preachers they will be! 

And now before we look at the purpose of this preaching 
and to whom they will go and what their sucess will be, we 
have to follow the argument laid down in the beginning 
of the exposition of this chapter, We remind the reader 
that we claimed that inasmuch as these predictions of 
our Lord refer to the end of the Jewish age, that we 
must be able to find all what is spoken of here both in 
the Old Testament and in that part of the book of Revel- 
ation, which treats of the things to come, after the his- 
.tory of the church is finished on earth (chapters vi-xix). 


193 


We have found already the remarkable correspondency 
which exists between the predictions of the Old Testa- 
ment concerning the time of distress of the end of the 
age, the predictions of our Lord and the seal judgments 
of Revelation. Is there a similar agreement about a wit- 
nessing remnant of God’s earthly people? Has the Old 
Testament anything to say about this? Do we find any- 
thing mentioned about such a remnant in the book of 
Revelation? Both Old Testament prophecy and the 
book of Revelation give us most interesting light on this 
remnant, the testimony they will bear, the suffering and 
the persecution they will have to stand, and their final 
deliverance. 

The Old Testament is full of predictions and descrip- 
tions of this remnant. Indeed it is next to impossible 
to understand prophecy relating to the things to come if 
one does not reckon with that remnant, which is so prom- 
inent in the pre-written history of the end of the age. 
Especially rich is the book of Psalms. The great pray- 
ers, cries to God for deliverance, calls to God to destroy 
the enemies, are all prophetic descriptions of how a 
faithful remnant of God’s earthly people will go through 
that time of great trouble and be delivered out of it. In 
these great prayers and calls upon God for interference, 
the ungodly part of the nation as well as the Gentiles 
are mentioned. Showing how they are in the midst of 
them giving their faithful testimony. It would be im- 
possible to show all the passages which speak of this 
future remnant in the Old Testament. Almost through- 
out every one of the prophets do we find this remnant 
and the words which God speaks to encourage and com- 
fort them. 

Turning to the book of Revelation we find a very 
striking confirmation of this fact. We found that un- 


194 


der the sixth seal a great upheaval took place. Anarchy 
is let lose and all the mighty governments of the earth 
are shaken, rebellion spreads worldwide. Before the 
seventh seal is broken by the Lord we read of some- 
thing else. The seventh chapter of Revelation is a par- 
enthesis. The first part of it tells us that then in the 
beginning of these fearful events, a company of 144,000 
will be sealed. Who is this company? It is a most 
fanciful, worse than that, evil interpretation, which 
makes of the 144,000 a company of Christian believers. 
The theory of a “first-fruit” rapture has no scriptural 
foundation whatever and it aims in a most subtle way at 
God’s Grace, giving man a share, by his attainments, 
experience, suffering and other things, to become 
worthy to enter into the presence of the Lord. We have 
listened to such teaching repeatedly that the 144,000 
of Revelation vii are a company of “sanctified” Chris- 
tians (as if there were sanctified and unsanctified be- 
lievers). Companies of people all over this country 
claim to be part of “the elect Bride,” a part of the 144,- 
000, and not a few of these hold extremely fanatical 
views. The Word of God makes it so clear that it 1s almost 
impossible to believe that any intelligent person could 
fail to see who these 144,000 are The Spirit of God 
tells us that they are “of all the tribes of the children of 
Israel.” Christian believers do not belong to the twelve 
tribes of the children of Israel; furthermore, if these 144,000 
were parts of the church, a first-fruit, the previous part of 
Revelation, especially chapters ii-v, would be most difficult 
to explain, and the divinely given division of the book would 
be wiped out. The 144,000 then are literal Israelites and 
these constitute the remnant of God’s earthly people, 


the preachers of the Kingdom Gospel during the great 
tribulation. 


195 

In the second part of Revelation vii we read of a 
countless multitude-out of all nations, who have come 
out of the great tribulation and who stand before the 
throne of God. This multitude is not the church, be- 
cause the church does not come “out of the great trib- 
ulation,” nor do the church saints stand before the 
throne, but they are seated upon thrones in the presence 
of the throne of God (Rev. iv). This great multitude 
are those who heard God’s last witness during the end 
of the age, the preaching of the Kingdom Gospel and 
who believed the message and were yet saved and we 
see these in the presence of the throne of God, their mil- 
lennial position and blessing in the earth. The multi- 
tude is the blessed result of the preaching of the rem- 
nant of Israel. 

It is, however, to be- stated that those who had the 
Gospel of Grace presented unto them and who rejected 
God’s gracious offer, who went on in apostasy will not 
have another chance to accept “the Gospel of the King- 
dom.” Second Thess. ii:10-12 reveals the fate of all the 
Christ and Gospel rejecting professing “Christian” 
‘masses. But the nations in Africa, China, India, the 
isles of the sea will hear and accept the Gospel of the 
Kingdom and gladly receive these messengers whom 
later the Lord calls “these my brethren” (Matthew 
xxv :31, etc). Thus during the very end, God’s Grace 
will still be manifested ere that great and terrible day 
of the Lord comes. 

The next verse brings us into the middle of the week, 
the great tribulation, and we shall have to turn to the 
prophet Daniel and the thirteenth chapter of Revelation 
to establish still clearer the fact that our Lord has in 
these predictions exclusive reference to the end of the 
Jewish age. 


196 : 

We have learned then that the events predicted by 
our Lord up to the fourteenth verse fall into the begin- 
ning of the ending of the Jewish age, the seven prophet- 
ic years; with the fifteenth verse we reach the middle 
of this period, three years and a half are passed and the 
second half with its mighty events culminating in the 
personal and visible manifestation of the Son of Man 
out of heaven is now described. With the second half 
of these seven years, the last 1,260 days, the great trib- 
ulation, the time of Jacob’s trouble, is fully developed. 
We shall find as we advance that not alone the interpre- 
tation we have laid down for this chapter is the right 
one, but that no other one is possible; all expositions, 
which claim a fulfilment of these words of our Lord in 
the past, or which apply these events to the church per- 
iod, must be rejected as incorrect. Let us read the 
words of our Lord beginning at the fifteenth verse. 

“When therefore ye shall see the abomination of des- 
olation, which is spoken of through Daniel the prophet, 
standing in what is a holy place (he that reads let him 
understand); then let those who are in Judea flee to 
the mountains; let not him that is on the house come 
down to take the things out of his house; and let not 
him that is in the field turn back to take his garment. 
But woe to those that are with child, and those that give 
suck in those days. But pray that your flight may not 
be in winter time nor on Sabbath; for then shall there 
be great tribulation such as has not been from the be- 
ginning of the world until now nor ever shall be; and if 
those days had not been cut short no flesh had been 
saved; but on account of the elect those days shall be 
cut short” (verses 15-22). 

Our Lord gives us a most important hint on what He 
means by these words, by mentioning the Prophet Dan- 


197 

iel. Then furthermore, the Holy Spirit adds through 
Matthew a word of exhortation, which calls special at- 
tention to the Lord’s reference to Daniel, the prophet. 
The Holy Spirit saith, “He that reads let him under- 
stand”; or, as it might be put, “Consider so as to under- 
stand.” It will, therefore, not do for us to hurry over 
this word of our Lord, to which the Holy Spirit calls 
our special attention, which He the great interpreter 
of the Word of God wants us to consider and to under- 
stand fully. 

We must, therefore, turn first of all to the Prophet 
Daniel. Does he mention anything in his great prophe- 
cies about a future abomination and where do we find 
these passages? He does in three places. 

“And he shall confirm a covenant with the many for 
one week, and in the midst of the week he shall cause 
the sacrifice and the oblation to cease, and because of 
the protection of the abominations there shall be a des- 
olator, even until that the consumption and what is de- 
termined shall be poured out upon the desolate” (Dan- 
elastin 27): 

“And forces shall stand on his part, and they shall 
profane the sanctuary, the fortress, and shall take away 
the continual sacrifice, and they shall place the abomina- 
tion that maketh desolate” (xi:31). 

“And from the time that the continual sacrifice is 
taken away, and the abomination that maketh desolate 
set up, there shall be a thousand two hundred and 
ninety days” (xii:11). 

There can be no doubt that the Lord refers to these 
three passages in Daniel, and it is of that abomination 
mentioned in these passages of which He speaks. These 
three verses in Daniel refer all to the same period of 
time; this period is three years and a half. The same 
space of time is mentioned in Daniel vii:25. “And he 


198 


shall speak great words against the Most High, and 
shall wear out the saints of the Most High, and think 
to change times and laws, and they shall be given into 
his hands, until a time and times and the dividing of 
time” (which makes three and a half). Then in Dan- 
iel x:7 we have it mentioned again. * * * “It shall 
be for a time, times and a half, and when he shall have 
accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people, 
all these things shall be finished.” When later in the 
course of this exposition we come to the book of Revel- 
-ation we shall discover the same period of time there. 

‘It. is not our purpose to enter fully into Daniel’s great 
prophecies. To do this would lead us too far and pro- 
long our exposition. The most important passage of 
the three we have quoted, is the one from the ninth 
chapter; as the others treat of the same period, we shall 
not consider these (Dan. xi: 31 and xii:11) at all. The 
ninth chapter in that prophetic book contains the pray- 
er of Daniel and the wonderful answer he received. He 
was meditating on the Word of the Lord as it came to 
Jeremiah the prophet, when he turned to the Lord in 
prayer. This seems to us is the true and perfect way of 
turning to God in prayer, First communion with God 
through the written Word, His revelation, and then 
to seek His face. He was occupied in his prayer with 
the years of captivity. The man Gabriel appears, he 
came flying swiftly to assure him that he was greatly 
beloved and to give him the answer to his prayer. The 
answer is a revelation relating to seventy-year weeks, 
that is seven times seventy; a period of time which was 
to come. : 

We take it for granted that our readers are delivered 
from the old, superficial and erroneous interpretation, 
which looks upon Daniel ix:24-27 as having been com- 


199 
pletely fulfilled with the death of the Messiah and the 
destruction of Jerusalem under Titus. It is strange that 
the clear division of these seventy weeks has been so 
much ignored.* The 24th verse in Daniel ix is the pro- 
phecy stated in a general way. ‘Seventy weeks are ap- 
portioned out upon thy people and upon thy holy city, 
to close the transgression, and to make an end of sins, 
and to make expiation for iniquity, and to bring in the 
righteousness of ages, and to seal the vision and the pro- 
phet, and to anoint the Holy of Holies.” Seventy sev- 
ens, as it is in the Hebrew, make 490. This space of 
time is, so Gabriel declared, apportioned out, for the 
people of Israel and Jerusalem, and at the close of it 
the full blessing of Israel will come to pass; the right- 
eousness of ages, undoubtedly refers to the kingdom 
age, the millennium. So in a general way the whole pro- 
phecy of seventy-year weeks is given and what shall 
be accomplished in them and at the close of them for 
the people Israel and for Jerusalem. But now as we 
read on we find a division of these seventy weeks. 
First: Seven weeks; secondly: Sixty-two weeks; thirdly: 
One week. What does this division mean? We are not 
left to speculation, for the Word makes it plain. “Know, 
therefore, and understand: From the going forth of the 
word to restore and to build Jerusalem unto Messiah 
the Prince, are seven weeks and sixty-two weeks. The 
street and the moat shall be built again, even in trouble- 
some times. And after sixty-two weeks shall Messiah 
be cut off, and shall have nothing; and the people of the 


*To our readers who are unsettled on the interpretation of this 
most important prophecy, or who desire a real good work on 
Daniel ix, we recommend Sir R. Anderson’s most excellent work, 
“The Coming Prince.” It is most helpful, clearly written and 
sound. It may be ordered from us. 


200 


prince that shall come shall destroy the city and the 
sanctuary; and the end thereof shall be with an over- 
flow, and unto the end war, the desolation determined 
(verses 25-26).” The first seven weeks, that is 49 years, 
is the period of time which elapsed from the giving of 
the command to rebuild Jerusalem and its walls till this 
was accomplished. The commission to restore and 
build Jerusalem was given to Nehemiah by Artaxerxes 
in his twentieth year. The sixty-two weeks is the per- 
iod of time from the complete restoration of the city and 
the walls till Messiah is cut off, that is the death of 
Christ, and there is nothing for Him. His own people 
reject Him-and then in consequence of that rejection, 
the city and the sanctuary is to be destroyed by the 
people of the prince, that shall come. Wars and desola- 
tions, persecutions and troubles, bloodshed and suffer- 
ings, was to be the lot of the Jewish people after the 
rejection of the Messiah, a prophecy stated not only here 
but throughout the prophetic Word and so solemnly 
come true for well nigh two thousand years. The peo- 
ple who destroyed the city and the sanctuary were Ro- 
mans. But now we have one week left. Of this last 
week we read in the last verse of Daniel ix, the verse 
in which the abomination is mentioned, to which our 
Lord and the Holy Spirit calls attention. This week, 
or seven years, is the end It is a week, a period of time . 
still future. With the 69th week Messiah was cut off, 
He had nothing; His people had rejected Him and the 
offered kingdom; an indefinite period follows, during 
which the Jews are outcasts, scattered into the corners 
of the earth, Jerusalem trodden down by the Gentiles. 
It is the present age in which we live, in which God’s 
gracious offer of free and full salvation for the gather- 
ing out of a people for His Name (the church) is 


201 


preached. How soon this may end no one knows. It 
will end at some time and then Jewish history from a 
prophetic standpoint will be resumed, the Jewish age 
will close to be followed by the kingdom or millennial 
age, when the righteousness of the ages will come in. 

And what then is to take place in that last week, in 
the coming seven years, that very time which was in- 
dicated in the question of the disciples when they asked 
about “the end of the age” and which the Lord de- 
scribes in this part of His discourse? We say again 
it seems strange that so many learned men should be 
so superficial in expounding the Word of God. How 
true it is, many of these things are hid from the wise 
and the prudent; and they are revealed unto babes. 
Thus many have not alone made no distinction of the 
division of the weeks as given in the text, but 
they have not dstinguished between the. two princes 
mentioned in these verses. The one Prince is Mes- 
siah, the other prince is a counterfeit, the false 
prince. It is claimed by this incorrect interpretation 
that the prince who confirms the covenant with the 
many for one week is Christ. But the one of whom the 
27th verse speaks is not Messiah the Prince, but “the 
prince who shall come.” It is that wicked head of the 
Roman empire in its last revived form of whom we read 
in different parts in prophecy. The Roman power had 
come upon the land and destroyed Jerusalem and burned 
the temple. This was prophetically stated in verse 26; 
but it does not say that “the prince shall come to destroy 
the city,” but the people of the prince “that shall come,’ 
in other words, the Roman power destroyed the city 
and from that power a prince is to emanate in the future. 
Up to now this prince has not yet appeared; when he 
comes he will be the leader of the confederacy of the 


202. 


nations, who inhabit the territory of the Roman empire, 
a mighty man who is under the control and inspiration 
of Satan. Perhaps Napoleon I is the nearest photograph 
the world has seen of that prince who shall come. It 
would be most interesting to follow all this in detail, but 
we are not writing on Daniel or the false king and the 
anti-Christ, but on Matthew xxiv, and so we can only give 
the most simple facts so as to make the chapter as clear 
as possible. Now when this prince, the head of the re- 
vived Roman empire, appears, he will make a covenant 
with the Jews. His covenant will be for one week, that 
is for seven years. It is interesting to notice that the 
covenant will be made with “the many,” not with all, for 
the believing Jewish remnant will know the true person- 
ality of the wicked prince and refusé to enter into that 
covenant. What this covenant will be we do not follow 
now. Suffice it to say that it will be undoubtedly of a 
political nature and connected with the resettlement of 
the Jews in Palestine, the rebuilding of the temple and 
the institution of their worship by sacrifices. Zionism, 
the great restoration movement of the Jews in unbelief, 
sheds a flood of light on these coming events. Hf Zion- 
ists were ready to herald the Sultan as their deliverer, 
should he allow them the practical carrying out of their 
programme, how much more will they will be willing to 
accept an agreement with that mighty prince, who is to 
come. This covenant will be effected in the beginning of 
the week (seven years) and all will run smoothly for a 
while. But in the middle of the week he will unmask 
himself and in conjunction with that other wicked one, 
the man of sin, the son of perdition, the personal anti- 
Christ, he will break the covenant and cause the sacrifice 
and the oblation to cease. In its place he will set up the 
abomination (Dan. xi:31). What then is this abomina- 


203 


tion? It will be idolatrous worship. The xiii chapter in 
the book of Revelation gives us more light on this abom- 
ination of the last three years and a half of the Jewish 
age ending. We shall turn to this chapter at once. How- 
ever, before we do so we wish to say that to our mind 
the argument is complete. The seventy weeks have to 
do exclusively with the Jewish people. The first seven 
weeks, the sixty-two weeks and the last, the seventieth. 
It is impossible to find a place for the church in this 
prophecy. Her place is in the unreckoned period between 
the sixty-ninth and seventieth week. She does not be- 
long, nor a part of the church, into the last week. 

And now we shall briefly examine the book of Revela- 
tion on this subject. We have laid this down in the be- 
ginning of our exposition, if the words of our Lord refer 
to the future events of the definitely marked end of the 
age then these three, Old Testament prophecy on this 
theme, the Words of the Lord, and the book of Revela- 
tion must be a complete harmony. We have seen how 
perfectly this has been the case up to the fifteenth verse 
and now we have still more striking proof. 

The thirteenth chapter of Revelation corresponds in 
part to the middle of the week; the last half of the seven 
years and the events transpiring on Jewish ground, in 
Jerusalem, are described here. Here we find the 1,260 
days, the 3% years. In the twelfth chapter Satan is seen 
cast out of heaven, cast down upon the earth and the 
heavens pronounce a woe upon the inhabiters of the earth, 
for he is come down and has great wrath, for he has but 
little time. When the’church is received into glory, the 
casting out of Satan will take place. He comes down and 
finds the church gone from this earthly scene and then in 
his great wrath he begins his awful work. 

The thirteenth chapter of Revelation is the perfect 


204 


counterpart of Daniel’s prophecies; even a beginner in 
the study of prophecy can see that. Two beasts are seen 
in this chapter. The first rises out of the sea typifying 
the nations. The second comes out of the earth and has 
two horns like a lamb, but speaks as a dragon. The first 
is “the prince that shall come,” the wicked leader of the 
revived Roman empire; the second one is the false Mes- 
siah, the anti-Christ, who mimics the true Christ. What 
will then take place is clearly stated in Rev. xili:12-18. 
There we read of an image. “And he had power to give 
life unto the image of the beast, that the image of the 
beast should both speak, and cause that as many as 
would not worship the image of the beast should be 
killed.” This, no doubt, will be the abomination, an 
image worshipped; as well as the second beast, “who 
opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called 
God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God sitteth in 
the temple of God (not in Rome, but in Jerusalem), show- 
ing himself that he is God” (2 Thess. 11:4). This then 
is the abomination which falls in the last half of the 
seventieth week. The result of this abomination, the 
revelation of Satan’s power upon the earth, will be the 
great tribulation. This is fully borne out by the thir- 
teenth chapter in Revelation. Of this our Lord speaks, 
when he said, “for then shall there be great tribulation 
such as has not been from the beginning of the world, 
until now, nor ever shall be.” And in Daniel we likewise 
read of this tribulation. “And there shall be a time of 
trouble, such as never was since there was a nation” 
(xii:1). The context shows that it will be at this very 
time of which the Lord speaks, immediately before His 
personal, visible and glorious Coming. 

The words which the Lord utters concerning those 
who will be then on the earth show clearly that they 


205 


are not church saints. They are in Judea and are asked 
to flee to the mountains; a foreshadowing of this was 
seen at the destruction of Jerusalem under Titus. They 
are asked to pray that their flight should not take place 
on the Sabbath; they are called the “elect,” a term which 
in this chapter as well as throughout the Gospels always 
means His earthly people; in the Epistles the word 
“elect” always means the church. 

The next words of the Lord in His discourse contain 
warnings. “Then if any one say to you, Behold here is 
the Christ, or here, believe is not. For there shall arise 
false Christs and false prophets, and shall give great 
signs and wonders so as to mislead, if possible, even the 
elect. Behold I have told you beforehand. If, therefore, 
they say to you, Behold, he is in the desert, go not forth; 
behold he is in the inner chambers, do not believe it. For 
as the lightning goes forth from the east and. shines to 
the west, so shall be the coming of the Son of Man” 
(verses 23-27). Deceivers have appeared from time to 
time throughout this age, claiming, like Simon Magus, 
“to be some great one.” No question that many of these 
evil, fanatical leaders were and are energized by Satan. 
Not a few of such deluded persons we see to-day; the 
evil power likewise manifests its signs and lying wonders 
to a certain degree, while another system claims that the 
Lord Jesus Christ came in a secret manner in 1874 (Mil- 
lennial Dawnism). But all this is not a fulfilment of the 
words spoken by the Lord. The fulfilment comes in the 
great tribulation. Of the second beast, who imitates the 
lamb, but speaks as a dragon, it is written, “He doeth 
great wonders so that he maketh fire to come down from 
heaven on the earth in the sight of men. And he de- 
ceiveth them that dwell on the earth by the means of 
these miracles which he had power to do in the sight of 


206 


the beast” (Rev. xiii:13-14). This corresponds with that 
passage in 2 Thess. ii from which we quoted above; the 
false Christ will deceive by his signs and lying wonders 
and the strong delusion, all those who believed not the 
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. Not alone 
will the apostate part of the Jewish people be deceived 
by these lying wonders, but also the apostate part of 
Christendom, left behind after the rapture of the church 
has taken place, will be deceived and swept away in the 
great judgments of that coming day. These warnings 
will be of great importance and value to the Jewish be- 
lieving remnant, living in those days. The Lord tells 
them that His coming will not be in a secret way but 
openly, seen by all like the flash of lightning. It will be 
a sudden, a startling coming; as the lightning flashes 
over the dark sky and strikes down upon the earth, so 
will He the Son of Man make his appearance. It is not 
necessary to say that this lightning-like Coming is wholly 
distinct from His coming for His own. Then the Lord 
adds a significant word, “For wherever the carcase is, 
there will be gathered the eagles” (verse 28). The inter- 
pretation which makes the eagles the church, or a certain 
class of “advanced believers” is so weak and fanciful that 
we do not think it necessary to speak of it here. The 
carcase is the type of corruption and it represents here 
the unbelieving part of the Jewish people, that part which 
followed the beast. The eagles stand for the judgments. 
In the next verses the Coming of the Son of Man in 
Power and Glory is revealed by Himself, the coming One. 
Once more we shall have to turn back to the Old Testa- 
ment and to the book of Revelation to find another per- 
fect harmony. 

“But immediately after the tribulation of those days 
the sun shall be darkened, and the moon not give her 


207 


light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers 
of the heavens shall be shaken. And then shall appear 
the sign of the Son of Man in heaven; then shall all the 
tribes of the land mourn, and they shall see the Son of 
Man coming on the clouds of heaven with power and 
great glory. And He shall send His angels with a great 
sound of trumpet, and they shall gather together His 
elect from the four winds from the one extremity of the 
heavens to the other extremity of them” (verses 29-31). 
It is unnecessary to call attention to the misinterpreta- 
tion of this passage, which by the spiritualizing method 
claims a fulfillment of these words at the time of thé 
destruction of Jerusalem. What we have learned in the 
exposition of this part of the Olivet discourse makes such 
an application and interpretation an impossibility. It is 
ridiculous to say that the Lord spoke these words about 
His visible manifestation, but did not really mean a literal 
return; but what He meant is the destruction of Jerusa- 
lem. The context proves that the event could not have 
taken place at the time of the destruction of the city. 
_ What is before us in these words of the Lord is the 
great climax of the end, the visible appearing of the Son 
of Man. It is to be immediately after the days of tribula- 
tion; that tribulation we have seen is still future and has 
for its center Jerusalem, though all the earth will share 
in it. And now we have to turn once more to the Old 
Testament Word of Prophecy. Do we find there any- 
thing promised, which corresponds to this predicted visi- 
ble and glorious coming of the Son of Man? And if we 
find in the Old Testament prophecies which correspond 
to these words, in what connection do we find them? 
We find indeed in the Old Testament numerous pre- 
dictions of just such an event of which the Lord speaks 
here and a careful investigation will show that these pre- 


208 


dictions of the Old Testament and the prediction of our 
Lord here fully harmonize. 

The first passage we desire to mention is a prophecy 
in the last chapter of Joel. “The'sun and the moon shall 
be darkened, and the stars shall withdraw their shining” 
(Joel iii:15). Joel is one of the earliest prohpets. While 
he announces and speaks of a great locust judgment 
which came upon the people Israel and upon the land, 
his prophecy points to the great future fulfillment in the 
“Yom Jehovah,’ the Day of the Lord. The third chapter 
contains one of the great prophecies of that future day 
and the events connected with that day. The verse we 
quoted gives the physical signs and the verses which 
follow show that the Lord will be manifested in His 
Glory in the midst of these wonders in the heavens. The 
prophets which prophesy after Joel have nearly all visions 
of that day. ; 

We give a few other Scriptures to show this. “And 
when I shall put thee out, I will cover the heaven, and 
make the stars thereof dark; I will cover the sun with a 
cloud, and the moon shall not give her light. All the 
bright light will I make dark over thee, and set darkness 
upon thy land saith the Lord God” (Ezek. xxxii:7-8). 
Here it is the proclamation of the day as it is to come 
upon Egypt and the nations. Another prophecy of the 
day of the Lord’s manifestation is found in Isaiah xiii:- 
g-10. “Behold the day of the Lord cometh, cruel both 
with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the land desolate, and 
he shall destroy the sinners thereof out of it. For the 
stars of heaven, and the constellations thereof shall not 
give their light; the sun shall be darkened in his going 
forth, and the moon shall not cause her light to shine.” 
We do not need to quote other prophecies from the 
prophetic books and the Psalms The day of the Lord 


209 
is announced in many passages. It is always seen in 
connection with great troubles on the earth, tribulation 
for His earthly people, culminating in these startling 
physical signs, darkened heavens, shaking earth and the 
- manifestation of the Glory of the Lord. And this is the 
event of which our Lord speaks in Matthew xxiv:29. 

But there will be not only physical signs, but some- 
thing else will occur. The sign of the Son of Man will 
appear in the heaven. This will be followed by the 
mourning of the tribes and then the Son of Man will 
come on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory. 

What is the sign of the Son of Man? We believe it 
will be the Shekinah cloud. It was a cloud which en- 
shrouded His form when He tarried with Israel of old. 
A cloud it was which received Him out of the sight of 
His disciples; a cloud must bring Him back. At the bit- 
ter end of the great tribulation, when His faithful rem- 
_ nant is hard pressed on all sides, when they cry to God 
for the heavens to open and to come down, there will be 
seen, we believe, in the heavens a bright and shining 
cloud, a cloud from which fire shines out. Well may 
the believing Jewish remnant then cry out, “Lo, this is 
our God, we have waited for Him, this is the Lord, He 
will save us.” His elect earthly people, those which have 
not been swept away during the great tribulation, the 
“all Israel” of Romans xi:26 will know what that cloud 
means. Jehovah is coming to be manifested. What 
their prophets saw and predicted is at last to come true. 
The Day of Jehovah is about to dawn, the Lord their 
King is coming. 

The consequence will be a national mourning. It is 
not to be thought for a moment that all the tribes must 
be in the land. The sign of the Son of Man will appear 
in the heavens and will be seen from all continents. “All 


210 © 


the tribes of the land” simply means that the persons 
who mourn belong to all the tribes of Israel. This again 
is predicted in the OldTestament, “They shall look upon 
me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for 
Him as one mourneth for his only son, and shall be in 
bitterness for Him, as one that is in bitterness for his 
first born” (Zech. xii:10). But that sign of the Son of 
Man will not tarry long in the heavens. He Himself 
comes on the clouds of heaven in great power and glory. 
The promise given by the two men at the time of the 
Lord’s ascension is now to be fulfilled. “This same Jesus 
which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come 
in like manner, as ye see Him go into heaven,” He as- 
cended upon high; He predicted this event in uttering 
these words in the Olivet discourse. 

And this too is found in the Old Testament prophetic 
Word. “I saw in the night visions and behold, one, like 
the Son of Man came with the clouds of heaven * * *” 
(Daniel vii:14). This takes place after the ten-horned 
beast with the little horn, with the eyes like the eyes of 
man, and a mouth speaking great things, had come forth. ~ 
All this refers to the end of the Jewish age. The little 
horn is the same evil person seen elsewhere in prophecy. 
It is then and not before, when the little horn is in ex- 
istence, that Daniel sees the Ancient of Days and the 
coming of the Son of Man in the clouds of heaven to 
receive the Kingdom. What a wonderful and divine unity 
the Scriptures are! 

If we turn briefly to the Book of Revelation, we shall 
find once more a minute confirmation of these revealed 
events. It is the Book which in its greater part is taken 
up with the description of the tribulation, judgments and 
other events of the last week of Daniel; the seven years 
with which the age closes. Therefore in the very be- 


a ae 211 
ginning of the Book do we find a solemn annotncement 
which fully harmonizes with the words before us here. 
“Behold He cometh with clouds, and every eye shall see 
Him, and they also which pierced Him; and all the tribes 
of the land shall wail because of Him. Even so. Amen” 
(Rev. i:7). It needs no further comment to show how 
fully these words confirm both the Old Testament pre- 
dictions and the predictions of our Lord. This striking 
harmony should not appear to us as so very wonderful, 
for He who speaks the words on the Mount of Olives is 
the same who spoke through the prophets and the last 
Book is “the Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave 
unto Him.” 

For a fuller description of His Coming the reader will 
turn to Rev. xix:11-16, 

Let us now turn to the next words. “And He shall 
send Hts angels with a great sound of trumpet, and they 
shall gather together His elect from the four winds, from 
the one extremity of the heavens to the other extremity 
of them.” Angels appear now once more upon the scene. 
Throughout this present dispensation angels as the minis- 
tering spirits are not seen; that they do minister is cer- 
tainly.a fact. But as soon as He comes again, He who 
was made a little lower than the angels, and who is above 
the angels in Glory, they will be sent forth again. When 
he was born in Bethlehem they appeared with their heav- 
enly song of praise; when He comes again the holy angels 
will accompany the Christ and His church and the angels 
will worship Him (Heb. i:16). It is also written “the 
Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with His migh- 
ty angels, in flaming fire taking vengeance on them that 
know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord 
Jesus Christ” (2 Thess. 1:7-8). In Matthew xiii we like- 
wise find that angels are mentioned in connection with 


212 


the end of the age, the same end as here. “The Son of 
Man shall send forth His angels, and He shall gather out 
of His Kingdom all things that offend and them which 
do iniquity” (xiii:41). ‘So shall it be at the end of the 
age; the angels shall come forth and sever the wicked 
from among the just” (xiii:49). In our passage the angels — 
sound a trumpet and they go out to gather His elect 
from the four winds. We say once more that this has 
nothing to do with the church. The removal of the 
church takes place before the last week of Daniel’s proph- 
ecy begins and when the Lord comes immediately after 
the days of tribulation, the church is with Him and in 
His Glory the church is manifested, He comes and brings 
His saints with Him. The revelation concerning His 
coming for the church is recorded in 1 Thess. iv:15-18. 
To make the elect in Matthew xxiv:30 the church, as it 
is done so often, is bewildering and a wrong interpre- 
tation. This part of the Olivet discourse, as we have 
shown, has nothing whatever to do with the church 
The “Elect” in this chapter always means His elect earth- 
ly people, as stated befove. 

The angels will gather them back to the land and bring 
them in, for the people in greater part are still scattered 
in the corners of the earth, when the Son of Man, the 
King of Israel, returns. Of this the Old Testament bears 
witness. “And it shall come to pass in that day, that the 
great trumpet shall be blown, and they shall come, which 
were ready to perish in the land of Assyria, and the out- 
casts in the land of Egypt, and shall worship the Lord in 
the holy mount of Jerusalem” (Isaiah xxvii:13). “And 
it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set 
His hand again the second time to recover the remnant 
of His people, which shall be left from Assyria, and from 
Egypt, and from, Pathros and from Cush, and from Shi- 


213 


nar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea. 
And He shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall 
assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the 
dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth” 
(Isaiah xi:11, 12), “Therefore, behold, the days come, 
saith the Lord, that it shall no more be said, The Lord 
liveth, that brought up the children of Israel out of the 
land of Egypt. But the Lord liveth, that brought up the 
children of Israel from the land of the north, and from 
all the lands whither He had driven them; and I will 
bring them again into their land that I gave unto their 
fathers. Behold, [I will send for many fishers, saith the 
Lord, and they shall find them; and after will I send for 
many hunters, and they shall hunt from every mountain, 
and from every hill, and out of the holes of the rocks” 
(Jer. xvi:4-16). This regathering of the remnant of 
Israel, the people left after the great tribulation, takes 
place after the Lord has been manifested out of the heav- 
ens. Then the “lost tribes” will be discovered, and dur- 
ing the age of the Kingdom, God will fulfil in His re- 
gathered people, the nation Israel, all the precious prom- 
ises His prophets spoke and which a false theory called 
“Anglo-Israelism” attempts to have realized in this 
present Christian age. 

What follows now are exhortations and solemn warn- 
ings given by the Lord, amd these form a sublime con- 
clusion of this first part of the Olivet discourse, referring, 
as we have learned, to the end of the Jewish Age We 
shall look briefly at each verse. 

“But learn the parable from the figtree: When al- 
ready its branch becomes tender and produces leaves, ye 
know that the summer is nigh. Thus also ye, when ye 
see all these things, know that it is near, at the doors” 
(verses 32, 33). The figtree is the picture of Israel. The 


214 


= 


parable of the figtree in Luke xiii is well known, and its 
application is Israel, to whom the Lord came, looking 
for fruit, and did not find it. Luke xxi, the record there 
of this discourse, mentions likewise the figtree and all 
the trees; these are the Gentiles, the nations. In Mat- 
thew xxi, we see in the withered figtree a type of Israel’s 
spiritual and national death. But that withered tree is 
to be vitalized. The figtree will bud again. However, 
the characteristic of the figtree is that fruit and leaves 
are there together. As soon as the branch becomes tender 
the fruit is found. It isa rapid development. This is the 
lesson here. Israel’s blessing, new life, fruit and glory 
will quickly be realized in those end days) When in these 
last seven years, and especially the last 1,260 days, all 
these things come to pass, they will know that all which 
is promised to Israel will beat hand. The other applica- 
tion, that now we behold Israel like a budding figtree, 
signs of new national life and in this a sign of the times, 
is certainly not wrong. It tells us of the nearness of the 
end. 

“Verily I say unto you, This generation will not have 
passed away until all these things shall have taken place. 
The heavens and the earth shall pass away, but my 
Words shall in no wise pass away” (verses 34, 35). 

The wrong interpretation of the word “generation” is 
responsible for the erroneous conception so prevalent in 
our days. It is said that “this generation’? must mean 
the very generation, the people who lived then upon the 
earth, when the Lord spoke these words. It is easily 
seen how, if this is the meaning of “this generation,” the 
events predicted by our Lord must have been fulfilled 
within the life-time of the people living then. What 
other event could be meant than the destruction of Jerusa- 
lem in the year 70? Thus the wrong interpretation of 


ween 


215 


these two words, “this generation,” has led the large 
numbers of Bible teachers and readers ofthis discourse 
astray. But let us get the right meaning of “generation,” 
and all will be clear. The word genea means not neces- 
sarily the same persons living, but it has also the meaning © 
of race. The English word “generation” has.this mean- 
ing of “family or a race of a certain class of people.” 
And so has the Greek. It is used in that sense in Luke 
xvi:8 “This generation” is the race sprung from Abra- 
ham, God’s chosen earthly people. Well have they been 
called “the everlasting nation ;” better still we could call 
them “the nation of destiny.” God has kept this race, 
and is keeping them for the fulfilment of His own great, 
revealed purpose. The verse, however, has also the 
meaning that the people living, when the end of the 
Jewish age sets in, will behold its termination; it will 
all be accomplished in a small space of time. Yea heaven 
and earth may pass away but His Words will not pass away. 
How solemn this is! Here we read still the same great and 
mighty Words, which were hated by thousands of God’s 
enemies in the past; words which have been attacked and de- 
nied. And still the old enemy of the written Word is at it, 
and through his chosen instruments (alas! many of them in 
the midst of the professing church) attacks and belittles 
these Words, They stand! They are as eternal and 
divine, as infallible and true, as He, the eternal Son of 
God, is from whose lips they came. 

“But of that day and hour no one knows, not even the 
angels of the heavens, but my Father alone” (verse 37). 

This makes the matter still more solemn. That day 
and hour, which will usher in these mighty events, of 
which the Lord speaks in His discourse, culminating in 
His own personal and glorious manifestation, is un- 
known. In the Gospel of Mark the Holy Spirit adds, 


210 


“nor the Son.” This addition is made in Mark because 


“there our Lord is viewed as God’s servant, and a servant 
“does not know what his master. doeth.” The Father 
knows the day and the hour, when all this is to come to 
pass The beginning of it is liable to occur at any time. 
How foolish, then, to speculate on the possible time of 
our Lord’s return—and the setting of years and days. It 
dishonors the Word and brings reproach upon Prophecy. 

“But as the days of Noe, so shall be the coming of the 
Son of Man. For as they were in the days which were 
before the flood, eating and drinking, marrying and giv- 
ing in marriage, until the day on which Noe entered into 
the ark, and they knew not till the flood came and took 
all away; thus shall be the coming of the Son of Man. 
Then two shall be in the field, one is taken and one is 
left; two women grinding at the mill, one is taken and 
one is left. Watch therefore, for ye know not in what 
hour your Lord comes” (verses 37-42). 

The introduction here of Noah and the flood is in ful- 
lest accord with the entire chapter. Noah lived at the 
close of an age, and was saved with his house through 
a great judgment, and then became the beginning of a 
new age. That this is typical of the remnant of Israel 
living at the close of the Jewish age is well known. As 
Noahcic age closed with the deluge, so will the Jewish 
age close with judgment. The judgment came suddenly 
upon the ungodly generation of Noah’s day; thus will it 
be when the Son of Man cometh. Two classes were 
living in Noah’s day. The one who were unbelieving 
and these were swept away by the divine judgment. The 
other class was Noah and his house, and he and his own 
were left and not destroyed by the judgment It will be 
so again in the coming of the Son of Man. “The unbe- 
lievers will be taken away in the day of judgment and 


217 


\ 


wrath ; the others will be Jeft on the earth to receive and 
- enjoy the blessings of the coming age and enter into the 
kingdom, which will then be established. It is the op- 
posite meaning of “taken” and “left” when the Lord 
comes as the “Bridegroom” for His church. Then, too, 
some will be taken and others left. The true believers 
will be taken into glory, caught up in clouds to meet Him 
in the air; the unbelievers and mere professors will be 
left. Some deny thet the word “taken” in our passage 
means a judicial taking away. The context, however, 
shows (the reference to Noah and the flood) that this 
must be the meaning. Surely those who were taken by 
the flood were not “received into glory.” 

And now once more His warning voice is heard. 

“But know this, that if the master of the house had 
known in what watch the thief was coming, he would 
have watched and not have suffered his house to be dug 
through. Wherefore ye also, be ye ready, for in that 
hour ye think not the Son of Man comes” (verses 43, 44). 

With these worhs of warning and exhortation to watch, 
our Lord closes the predictions relating to the end of the 
Jewish age. This warning will be understood and heeded 
by the Jewish remnant, to which it is addressed They 
are to watch for the Son of Man; the church is to wait 
for her Lord. 

With the next verse, the beginning of the first of three 
parables relating to His coming, a new part of the Olivet 
discourse begins. We will find this very clearly marked 
and shall prove next that this part, from chapter xxiv :45 
to chapter xxv:30 refers no longer to the events which 
transpire on the earth during the end of the Jewish age, 
but to something altogether different. 

The second part of the Olivet discourse ne with 
the 45th verse of this great chapter and extends to chap- 


218 


ter xxv:30. The contents of this division are entirely 
different from the preceding one. Up to the forty-fourth 
verse we learned that the Lord gives predictions relating 
to the end of the Jewish age, an end still to come. We 
traced all these predictions in the Old Testament and in 
the great book of prophecy in the New Testament, the 
Revelation. We found the closest correspondency be- 
tween Matthew xxiv :3-44, certain parts of the Old Testa- 
ment and the Book of Revelation, because all three deal 
with the same period of time. But now another series 
of predictions are before us which have no connection 
with Old Testament prophecy nor with Revelation vi:xix. 

In the first part of this discourse we hear of wars, pesti- 
lence, famine, great tribulation, false Christs, the abomi- 
nation of desolation, Judea, the Sabbath day and the vis- 
ible and glorious coming of the Son of Man. The exhor- 
tations were to flee to the mountains, to pray that the 
flight take not place on the Sabbath day, to endure unto 
the end for salvation, etc. Of all this we do not read @ 
word in the second section of our Lord’s utterances. Here 
again he speaks in parables as He did in His second dis- 
course in this Gospel, contained in chapter xiii. The 
three parables which make up this part of the Olivet dis- 
course picture the condition of things during the absence 
of the King and how in the professing church, in Chris- 
tendom, there will be the true and the false, possessors 
and professors, saved and unsaved, such who have life 
and such who have a name to live but are dead. These 
three parables then may be justly put alongside of the 
seven parables in chapter xiii dealing with the, kingdom 
of heaven; the phrase the Lord uses again in giving the 
second parable. The great parables in the thirteenth 
chapter give the beginning, the external and internal de- 
velopment of Christendom, in a general way; the three 


219 


parables in the Olivet discourse give the moral aspect of 
those who are in the professing church, and each is linked 
with the fact of His coming again. His coming discerns 
the true and the false and brings the separation of the 
good from the bad. 

Let us, however, understand clearly that we have in 
these parables not the full revelation of what is the bles- 
sed Hope for the Church. The Church is, as we have 
seen from our exposition, mentioned in this first Gospel 
and spoken of as being an institution of the future. 

Not in the Gospels do we find full revelation about the 
church, her relationships, her calling, her heavenly hope 
and glorious destiny. All this is made known elsewhere 
in the New Testament. The parables concern the Chris- 
tian profession in a general way. If we hold this fast in 
our minds we shall find-no difficulties at all. This Chris- 
tian age is a mixed age and will be so to the end and the 
Coming One will find the faithful and prudent servant 
and the evil servant; tl.e wise virgins and the foolish; the 
faithful servants using their talents and the wicked and 
slothful servant. The Coming One will mete out the 
judgment. The faithful servant is called “Blessed,” the 
evil servant is cut in two and cast out. The wise virgins 
go in with the bridegroom and the foolish face a shut 
door. The servants who used the talents are set over 
many things and the slothful servant is cast out into the 
outer darkness. That the Lord will first descend into the 
air (1 Thess. iv:15-18) and that the true believers, resur- 
rected saints and living saints will be caught up in clouds 
to meet the Lord in the air to appear then before the 
judgment seat of Christ ; that the unsaved, nominal Chris- 
tians will go into apostasy and after the great tribulation 
receive judgment when the Lord comes out of heaven 


220 


and all His saints with Him—all this is not revealed in 
these parables. 

And now we turn to the first parable. 

“Who then is the faithful and prudent bondman whom 
his lord has set over his household, to give them food in 
season? Blessed is that bondman whom his lord on com- 
ing shall find doing thus. Verily, I say unto you, that 
he will set him over all his substance. But if that evil 
bondman should say in his heart, My lord delays to come, 
and begin to beat his fellow bondmen, andeat and drink 
with the drunken, the lord of that bondman shall come 
in-a day when he does not expect it and in an hour he 
knows not of, and shall cut him in two and appoint his 
portion with the hypocrites; there shall be the weeping 
and gnashing of teeth’ (verses 45-51). 

The Lord still speaks to His disciples, but let us under- 
stand now while they are viewed in the first part as Jew- 
ish disciples and typical of the remnant of Israel in the 
end of the Jewish age, here the Lord looks upon them 
as soon to be in connection with something new, that is, 
Christianity. The parable itself is the simplest of all 
three; yet it has very significant and far-reaching lessons. 
The thought in this parakle is service over the house- 
hold; the household are those who are Christ’s. This 
household is to receive food in season and the bondman 
or servant, faithful and prudent, is to supply the house- 
hold with that food. He does it faithfully and at the 
coming of the Lord, this faithful and prudent bondman 
is set over all the substance of his lord. This is an ex- 
tremely beautiful and blessed parable. It takes us at 
once upon an entirely new ground. Judaism knows noth- 
ing of that kind of ministry which is spoken of here; it 
is essentially Christian. The Lord, the great shepherd of 
His sheep, for whom He died, whom He loves so much, 


221 


appointed His own as bondmen of Himself, to feed His 
flock, to give them to eat. This is what pleases the Lord, 
snd it is only another proof of how dear and beloved His 
own people are to Him. Faithfulness to Him and to His 
own, His household, is the teaching of these words. The 
true servant (and every true believer has a service) is 
faithful and prudent and attends to that, to which his 
Lord has called him. And what keeps in such service? 
What is it that makes it ever fresh and refreshing, sweet 
and precious? It is the Hope of His Coming, yea, His 
imminent coming. The next paragraph, the description 
of the evil servant with his evil watchword, will bring 
this more prominently to our view. The reward of the 
faithful and prudent servant is a higher service, a service 
over all the substance of His Lord. Service does not 
terminate with this earthly life; there is a service up 
yonder, for “His servants shall serve Him.” Faithful 
service here fits for that higher service in His presence. 
According to our faithfulness in service here we shall 
find service there to the praise and glory of His Name. 

But now the other side comes up. The Lord pictures 
an evil servant and he saith in his heart, “My lord delays 
his coming.” He acts outrageously, smites his fellow 
servants and eats and drinks with the drunken; suddenly 
his lord comes and gives him his portion with the hypo- 
crites. 

The-interpretation is easily made. Here is the spuri- 
ous, that which has taken the name of Christ and claims 
to be a servant likewise. "The person described is a hypo- 
crite; he professes outwardly to be a servant under his 
lord, but in his heart he saith, “My lord delays his com- 
ing.” Then he usurps the place of authority, instead of 
serving in meekness, feeding Christ’s own, he domineers 
over fellow servants and associates with the drunken. 

The faithful and prudent servant is a picture of how 


222 


it ought to be in the house, the church, and the evil ser- 
vant in his hypocrisy and evil work is a picture of Chris- 
tendom in corruption, The starting point of this corrup- 
tion, this domineering over fellow servants and associa- 
tion with the drunken, the world, began with saying “my 
Lord delayeth his coming.” It began in the heart. He 
gave up first in his heart that Hope, which was so pro- 
nounced in the early church. The belief given up that 
the Lord would come back, the departure from the doc- 
trine of the imminency of the coming of the Lord, soon 
brought out the evils which the parable pictures. If the 
return of the Lord at any time had been the heart faith 
of the professing church, all the abominations of which 
the parable speaks would have been well nigh an im- 
possibility. Gradually the belief in the coming of the 
Lord was given up; and as it was abandoned in the pro- 
fessing church, “the domineers of the people,” the Nico- 
laitans sprung up; an earthly priesthood was inaugurated, 
fashioned after a priesthood, which was the shadow of 
the better things, fulfilled in Christ. This false priest- 
hood took the place of authority and domineers over the 
others, the servants of Christ. The separation was like- 
wise given up and the church became identified with the 
world. It is another glimpse of the mustard seed in 
chapter xiii becoming a great tree with the birds flocking 
into its branches. The evil servant and his deeds are 
more fully pictured in the church message to Pergamos 
in the book of Revelation. But let us pass lightly over the 
fact that the evil servant began by saying in his heart, “my 
lord delayeth his coming.” He may not have been that 
evil servant all at once; but as soon as he said in his heart 
that the lord delays he had taken the first step towards be- 
coming corrupt in doctrine and in practice. The enemy had 
put that foolish thought into his heart and then led him on 
into the wickedness he practiced. 


223 

And has this no meaning for us? Indeed it has. God’s 
own Spirit through the Word has but a few years ago led 
back to the blessed Hope and the midnight cry has been © 
heard, “Behold the bridegroom; go ye forth to meet Him.” 
There has been a most powerful revival of the study of 
prophecy and the imminency of the coming of the Lord has 
been taught and believed with apostolic simplicity. It has’ 
led out and on into true service for Christ. One who be- 
lieves in the imminent coming of the Lord cannot help 
himself from looking to that Lord of being responsible to 
Him for service and wait on Him for service. This has 
been the case. Of the large numbers of servants who have 
been used in preaching the Gospel and shepherding the 
flock of Christ, the great majority have been and are such 
“who wait for His Son from heaven.” There is a remnant 
of faithful ones who expect Him to come, who. wait for 
Him; this expectation leads to faithful and happy service. 
One can be very happy indeed in serving the Lord with 
the childlike but scriptural Hope “He may come to-day.” 

The enemy, however, is not satisfied with having God’s 
people waiting for the Lord. He is the author of that 
evil cry, “my Lord delayeth his coming.’”’ And he has suc- 
ceeded in producing it in these days of revival of the study 
of Prophecy. We know some who taught and believed the 
imminency of the coming of the Lord. All at once their 
voices were silent as to the blessed Hope. Why? In ‘some 
way they became ensnared in teachings which put off the 
glorious event till after the great tribulation, the manifes- 
tation of the Antichrist, etc., and this unscriptural view 
silenced their testimony completely. It is sad to see this, 
and we fear, if our Lord tarries, some of these men (as it 
has been already the case) will act the part of the evil 
servant in a still more pronounced way. 

Let us beware of any teaching which has even the faintest 
insinuation in it of the Lord delaying his coming. It is 


224 


not of God, Let us rather begin each day with the blessed 
expectation that He may come to-day and then go forth to 
serve and be faithful to Him. But be assured the enemy 
will not rest, but find some new’ and subtle way to take 
away the blessed Hope and the blessed expectation, and to 
try and bring us into conformity with the world. Only the 
power of God can keep us in these evil days in this simple 
path and that will rest upon us as we cling to Him, the © 
Lord who comes.* 


*We take the following from a recent volume by W. Kelly: 

“Only let the children of God get clear of those clouds of noxious 
and-unwholesome vapors that constantly rise up between the Lord 
and them. Let them cherish in their souls the hope He gave them. 
If you bring in a millennium first, it is hard to see Christ’s coming 
clearly; it must act as a veil, which dulls the hope of that day. It 
may not destroy the hope; yet one cannot but look for His coming 
in an imperfect manner. If you bring in a great tribulation first, 
this also lowers the outlook and enfeebles the hope greatly; it 
occupies one with evils as they rise, produces a depressing effect, and 
fills the heart with that judicial trouble and its shade of desolation. 
They are mistakes of theorists. The one puts a wrong expectation 
between you and the coming of the Lord, kindling meanwhile a 
dreamy excitement in waiting for that day. The other case produces 
a sort of spiritual nightmare, an oppressive feeling in the thought 
that the church must go through so dreadful a crisis. 

“Be assured, my brethren, that the Scriptures deliver us from both 
the dream and the nightmare. They entitle the believer to wait for 
Christ as simply as a child, being perfectly certain that God’s word 
is as true as our hope is blessed. There is to be God’s glorious 
kingdom; but the Lord Jesus will bring it in at His coming. With- 
out doubt the great tribulation shall come, but not for the Christian. 
When it is a question about the Jew, you can undersand it well; 
for why does the greatest tribulation come upon him? Because of 
idolatry; yea, of the Beast and the Antichrist worshipped. It is for 
him a moral retribution, with which the Christian has nothing 
directly to do. The predicted trouble falls on the apostate nations 
and the Jews. Those that ought to be witnesses of Jehovah and His 
Christ will at last fall into the dreadful snare of allowing the 
abomination to be put into the sanctuary of God.” 


225 


CHAPTER XXV. 


The second parable is the parable of the ten virgins. It 
is one which is interpreted by students of the prophetic 
Nord in different ways; we are therefore obliged to give 
it our closest attention. 

“Then shall the kingdom of the heavens be likened to 
ten virgins that, having taken their lamps, went forth to 
meet the bridegroom. And five of them were prudent and 
five foolish. ‘They that were foolish took their lamps and 
did not take oil with them; but the prudent took oil in their 
vessels with their lamps. Now the bridegroom tarrying, 
they all grew heavy and ‘slept. But in the middle of the 
night there was a cry, Behold, the bridegroom; go forth 
to meet him. Then all those virgins arose and trimmed 
their lamps. And the foolish said to the prudent, Give us 
of your oil, for our lamps are going out. But the prudent 
answered, saying: We cannot, lest it might not suffice for 
us and for you. Go rather to those that ‘sell and buy for 
yourselves. But as they went away to buy the bridegroom 
came, and the ones that were ready went in with him to the 
wedding feast, and the door was shut. Afterwards came 
also the rest of the virgins, saying Lord, Lord, open to us; 
but he answering, said, Verily I say unto you, I do not 
know you. Watch therefore, for ye know not the day nor 
the hour.” (Verses I-13.) 

We have already shown that these parables have nothing 
more to do with the Jewish age and the remnant of His 
earthly people, which ‘stands out so prominently in the first 
part of this discourse. However, as there is an increasing 


226 


tendency among teachers of Prophecy to apply this par- 
able of the virgins in a Jewish way, putting its fulfillment 
in the time of the great tribulation, we will be obliged to look 
at this view first and show that it is incorrect. After we 
have done this we shall be able to better grasp the mean- 
ing of this great parable and its teaching. The theory ad- 
vanced is the following: : 

The Lord begins His parable with the word “then”. 
This word proves that the parable refers to the time of the 
end of the Jewish age for that is described in the preceding 
chapter. Then—when?—when there is a time of trouble 
and the Lord is about to come. The parable is therefore 
applied by some teachers as referring to the condition of 
things on the earth at the close of the great tribulation. 
“Then” at that time when He returns after the great trib- 
ulation, ‘shall the kingdom of the heavens be like ten vir- 
gins. It is furthermore claimed that the ten virgins do not 
represent the church, as the Bride of Christ. That the 
Bride is already with the Bridegroom and as the virgins are 
not the Bride, but go forth to meet th Bridegroom who 
comes with the Bride to the wedding feast, the parable could 
not be applied to present conditions; the Bride, the church, 
must be first with the Bridegroom, before the virgins can 
go out to meet Him. 

Another fact is used to strengthen this exposition. Some 
of the oldest versions have additional three words in the 
first verse, so that it reads: “Then ‘shall the kingdom of 
the heavens be made like ten virgins that having their 
torches, went forth to meet the bridegroom and the bride.” 
The words are found in the Syriac version and also in the 
Vulgate. This is generally taken to be the conclusive evi- 
dence that the parable falls in its fulfillment in the close 
of the great tribulation and that the five prudent virgins are 
the Jewish remnant. 


227 


And now we challenge this exposition as being incorrect 
and contrary to Scripture. Let us look at the arguments 
against it. 

The use of the word “then” proves the very opposite 
from what it is made to prove. “Then,” this little word, 
has always a great significance in Prophecy. Now if the 
parable of the ten virgins would come in at the close of 
the forty-fourth verse in chapter xxiv, the parable could 
mean absolutely nothing else but an event which is con- 
nected with the end of the geat tribulation. We learned 
that the forty-fourth verse in the preceding chapter marked 
the close of the part of the discourse in which the Lord 
speaks of the signs of His coming and the end of the age. 
If we were to read in the forty-fifth verse, ‘““Then shall the 
kingdom of the heavens be likened to ten virgins, etc.,” 
there would be no other way but to connect the parable with 
the mighty events which the Lord had just described. It 
would have the same application as the “then” in verse 
forty. “Then two ‘shall be in the field, one is taken and 
one is left.” But will the reader notice as we have shown 
before, that with the forty-fifth verse the Lord introduces 
an entirely different theme; it is no longer the Jewish end 
of the age, the Jewish remnant, their suffering and deliver- 
ance, no longer His visible manifestation out of the heavens, 
but it is teaching in parables concerning this present Chris- 
tian age, the Christian profession. One parable He had 
spoken, the parable of the faithful and the evil servant. 
How perfectly it applies to Christian conditions in this age, 
the true and the false, we have seen in our exposition. The 
“then” with which the second parable begins is to be 
brought in connection with the first parable; it refers to the 
same period of time when in the professing sphere of Chris- 
tendom there is a faithful servant and an evil servant, and 
not to the end of the Jewish age. 


228 


A brief word on the question of the virgins representing 
the Jewish remnant and the apostate part of the nation (in 
the foolish virgins) is in order. We read in the parable 
of the ten virgins going to sleep because the bridegroom 
tarried. It is generally conceded that the going to sleep 
happened on account of the long delay of the bridegroom ~ 
and that the virgins watched no longer for his coming. 
It is impossible to apply this to the condition of things 
during the great tribulation. It is all out of the question 
to think of the remnant, if that remnant is represented by 
the wise virgins, as going to sleep, when that remnant, 
as we learned from Chapter xxiv will preach the Gospel 
of the Kingdom and herald the coming of the King. This 
one argument is ‘sufficient to completely answer this mode 
of interpretation. Furthermore the remnant is not called 
out to go forth to meet the bridegroom. The virgins are 
such who are called out to go forth. The remnant is the 
opposite. The prudent virgins have the oil, which is a type 
of the Holy Spirit; they have the supply of the Holy Spirit, 
which could hardly be applied to the Jews before the visible 
return of the Lord. : 

And what about the reading of some of the old versions? 
There is not sufficient evidence that it is genuine. The 
evidences against it are two-fold. The teaching that the 
church is the bride of Christ is a subsequent revelation. 
We cannot look for it here, and in the second place it is 
opposed to the meaning of the parable itself. This parable 
relates to the coming of the Bridegroom and that is why 
there is no need of mentioning the Bride. With this we 
dismiss this theory that the parable is one which refers to 
the Jews during the tribulation. 

Before we turn to the exposition of the parable itself we 
want to mention another wrong interpretation which like- 
wise is gaining ground in these days. It is taught that the 


229 


five prudent virgins with the oil are such who have received 
the fullness of the Holy Spirit, who have attained to a 
high standard of holiness, who are fully surrendered and 
are virgins indeed, separated from the world in the highest 
sense. The foolish virgins are Christians too, but lack 
the “higher life,’ a phrase as unscriptural as “the second 
blessing.” Such teaching is not alone confusing but it 
aims finally at the Grace of God and the blessed work of 
our Lord.* We do well to beware of anything which mag- 
nifies the attainments of man and thereby obscures Grace. 
No, the wise virgins do not represent the select company 
called by some “the First Fruits,’ who are filled with the 
Spirit and are taken to be with the Lord while the foolish 
are “only justified believers’? who have to go through the 
tribulation. The foolish virgins could not represent real 
Christians for the Lord tells them “J know you not.” 

And now before we look at the parable, which is simple 
indeed, we wish to remind the reader again, that it is not 
necessary that everything in a parable be applied in some 
way. A parable is an allegorical representation illustrating 
some great principle. This parable shows under the pic- 
ture of the ten virgins the Christian profession, the true 
and the false again and yet in profession alike in having 
gone out to meet the Bridegroom. 

It must be looked upon as referring first of all to the 
beginning of this, Christian age. The Christian church 
started out so to speak with this two-fold attitude, separa- 
tion from the world and in expectation of the Coming of 
the Bridegroom. 

The teaching of Christianity is that such who accept the 
name of Christian are to go out and separate from tne old 


*Quite often Pslam xlv is used in teaching the difference of the 
Bride and the virgins. However, that Psalm refers to Israel and the 
nations. ‘ 


230 

and go forth with the purpose to meet the Bridegroom. It 
was so in the beginning. The Jews had to go forth from 
the camp and the Gentiles had to turn to God from their 
idols; all waited for His Son from heaven that blessed 
Hope, which was so lively in the very start of Christianity. 
The name “virgin” conveys the same thought of separa- 
tion. The lamps which they had tell us of another Chris- 
tian characteristic; he is called to give light. The first 
verse of the parable gives us in a few words that which 
is characteristic of the Christian calling and which was so 
marked in the beginning, Going forth, that is separation 
from the world, going forth with lamps, to give light and 
shine and going forth to meet the Bridegroom, who prom- 
ised to come again. Separation, manifestation and ex- 
pectation is that in which Christianity consists. 

In the next place we read that half of the virgins re- 
presenting the Christian profession were foolish. Their 
foolishness consisted in taking their lamps, but they took 
no oil. However, their condition is fully discovered and 
demonstrated after the midnight cry. The other five were 
wise and they took oil in their vessels with their lamps. 
What these lamps and vessels were is best explained by 
Edersheim. He says: “The lamps consisted of round re- 
ceptacles for pitch or oil for the wick. This was placed ~ 
in a hollow cup or deep saucer, which was fastened by a 
pointed end into a long wooden pole, in which it was 
borne aloft.” 

That we have in the division of the ten virgins, into 
five foolish and five wise, the false and the true is obvious 
enough. ‘The five foolish virgins are representing such 
who are only professing Christians, while the five wise are 
possessing Christians, true believers. But it may be said, 
did not the foolish virgins go forth to meet the Bridegroom? 
In theirprofession they certainly did, but that does not make 


231 


~ them really saved persons. Everything later shows that 
they were unsaved and all their profession was simply em- 
pty. They are the representatives of such who have the 
form of godliness (the lamps) but who deny the power 
thereof, who lack the power to give out light (the oil). 
And here again is an objection. Did they not later say 
“give us of your oil for our lamps are going out?” Then 
they must have had some oil else how could they say that 
the lamps were going out? There is no proof at all in 
this that they possessed oil. In the first place, it says in 
the beginning, “they took no oil”; this in itself should 
settle this question. In their alarm, however, when the 
cry of the coming of the Bridegroom was heard they 
made an effort to have shining lamps. Who does not know 
that a wick may be set burning without oil to give forth a 
puff of smoke and then.to go out? This was the case 
with the foolish virgins. They never had oil as the great 
masses of professing Christians in these days have lamps, 
the form outwardly, but they have never accepted Christ 
in the heart, and therefore the oil, the Holy Spirit and 
His’ power, is lacking. A fearful condition it is! Alas! 
the innumerable thousands and hundreds of thousands who 
are in this condition to-day! The wise virgins represent 
the true believers, who not alone have lamps, but oil in their 
lamps with their vessels. The Holy Spirit is present with 
every true child of God, though he be the weakest and 
the least taught. 

And now we read of the tarrying of the bridegroom 
and that both, the foolish and the wise, grew heavy and 
slept. This has been interpreted in different ways, but 
only one interpretation can be made. The bridegroom 
tarrying long they did no longer expect him and were 
overcome by sleep. In the beginning of the Christian 
church they all expected the coming of the Lord, but as 


232 


years went on they gave up the blessed Hope and ceased 
looking for the Lord. The sleeping of the virgins stands 
for this fact that the expectancy of the coming of the Lord 
was given up. Occasionally during the centuries when 
the professing church had gone into corruption, there was 
an alarm of the coming judgment day. It was so in the 
beginning of the seventh century and about the year 1000. 
But it was not a going forth again to meet the bride- 
groom with joy, but rather the opposite, an expectation 
of judgment and the end of the world. The. priests then 
made use of the opportunity and the poor frightened peo- 
ple expecting the end of the world handed over their 
treasures to the “church.” Aside from these alarms of the 
end of the world the sleep continued, and instead of wait- 
ing for the Bridegroom, going forth to meet Him, the 
professing church, the foolish and the wise, became oc- 
cupied with earthly things, earthly power and government 
and the conversion of the world. Here in this verse we 
note a ‘second period in the history of Christendom, the per- 
iod in which the return of the Lord is not expected; they 
all slept. 

But now comes a third period... “‘But in the middle of the 
night there was a cry, Behold the Bridegroom, go ye forth 
to meet Him.” The question is, has this period been 
reached or are we to wait for a startling cry of this na- 
ture, awaking the foolish and the wise, the professors and 
the possessors? Some teach that this midnight cry refers 
to the shout of the Lord when He comes into the air (1 
Thess. iv:13-18). Dear readers, we are living in the 
very time of the fulfillment of this verse and are facing 
the soon coming of the Bridegroom. The midnight cry 
has been heard toward the middle of the last century, when 
the Holy Spirit through mighty instruments, though hum- 
ble, gave a revival of the blessed Hope and all that which 


233 


~ i8 connected with it. And this cry is-still heard, “Behold the 
Bridegroom! ge ye forth to meet Him.” ‘The enemy would 
silence this blessed word, but he cannot do it. But notice 
it is not alone the announcement of the fact of the coming 
of the Bridegroom, but it is more than that. The right 
reading is to leave out the word “cometh” in the author- 
ized version and read simply, “Behold the Bridegroom!” 
The blessed Hope of His coming does not so much put 
the coming before our hearts as it does Himself. And 
as we behold the Bridegroom and know He is soon coming, 
how can we help ourselves but to go forth to meet Him. 
That means then a return to the true Christian calling, 
which is separation from the world, separation from all 
which is false and unscriptural, which dishonors Him. 
His person, His Work or His Word. And this has been 
exactly the case. The midnight cry has awakened the true 
believers to a return to the true position and led on to a 
separation from that which is evil. It is so still. There 
is of course a preaching and teaching of Prophecy which 
does not touch the conscience, which is only for the head. 
Men teach correctly all about the 70 year weeks in Daniel, 
the restoration of the Jews and the millennium, and they 
go on in their evil ways. This is an evil thing. May the 
Lord keep us from it. The midnight cry is given that 
we may go forth to meet Him and be truly ‘separated unto 
Him, who is soon coming. And if we have heard that 
cry by the power of the Spirit of God and are gone forth 
to meet the Bridegroom, we have a responsibility to take 
it up and sound it forth. And now what happens next? 
“Then all those virgins arose and trimmed their lamps. 
And the foolish said to the prudent, Give us of your oil for 
our lamps are gone out. But the prudent answered say- 
ing, We cannot lest it might not suffice for us and for you. 
Go rather to those that sell and buy for yourselves, But as 


234 


they went away the Bridegroom came, and the ones that 
were ready went in with Him to the wedding feast and the 
door was shut.” 

The midnight cry discovers the true condition of the fool- 
ish and the wise. The foolish without oil running hither 
and thither, the prudent calm, arising, trimming their lamps, 
ready for the Bridegroom. It is a most significant fact that 
the blessed Hope of the coming of the Bridegroom, the mid- 
night cry, is causing a separation between the true and the 
false. Those who are the Lord’s and have the oil seem to 
be attracted to Himself and love His appearing, while the 
others, the mere professors, are behaving as foolishly as the 
foolish virgins in the parable. We can do no better than 
quote from the writings of one of the earnest and devoted 
men, who were used under God, to have a part in giving 
the midnight cry. ‘“Awestricken come the foolish virgins to 
the wise saying, ‘Give us of your oil,’ but this is beyond the 
Christian, and the wise bid them, ‘Go buy oil for yourselves.’ 
There is one who sells, but freely, without money and with- 
out price, to buy even from an apostle is fatal. The cry 
was given to revive the hope, as it had the effect also of 
recalling the original and only right attitude of the saints © 
toward Christ. It was enough to sever the wise as alone 
ready to act accordingly. It was too late for the foolish; 
who but one could give what they wanted. What is the 
meaning of all the recent agitation? People zealous for 
religious forms, who know not really of Christianity. The 
foolish virgins are in quest of the oil, leaving no stone un- 
turned to get what they have not, the one thing needful— 
taking every way except the right. The decking of eccles- 
iastical buildings, the fantastical costumes of clergymen, 
the modern taste for church music, simply show that the 
foolish virgins are at work. They are not in fit state to meet 
the Lord and fear it themselves. They are troubled with 


235 


the rumor of they know not what. The consequence then 
of this midnight cry is that a double activity is going on. 
For the Lord is awakening those who know Himself, and 
are wise by His Grace to go forth to meet the Bridegroom. 
The others, if indirectly are none the less powerfully, but 
in their own way affected by the cry and its effects, which 
rise not above nature and the earth.” Utterly ignorant of 
the Grace of God, they are trying to make up by what is — 
called “earnestness.” ‘They know not that they are far from 
God, yea, dead in trespasses and sins. So they think or 
hope, that being “earnest they may somehow or other get 
right at last. What delusion can be more hopeless?” 
And what else might be added to this? Religious activi- 
ties, societies, endeavors and other things are constantly 
multiplying and one can'see readily in much of this the run- 
ning about of the foolish virgins. None could take from 
the parable however that when the midnight cry is heard 
that an individual who discovers that he has no oil, that he 
is not the Lord’s, could not come to Him, who is ready to 
sell without money and without price. Blessed be His 
Name, He stands ready to the very last moment to give the 
oil, fulfilling to the last moment while He tarrieth His own 
gracious word, “He that cometh unto me I will in no wise 
cast out.” The trouble however with the foolish virgins is 
they do not want to come to HIM to buy of Him, but rather 
go on in their own natural, foolish way. 
And now comes the last stage of this parable. The Bride- 
groom comes. The prudent enter in, the foolish are shut 
out. The door was shut. Oh, solemn, solemn word! The 
door was shut! How soon all this may be a reality. The 
midnight brought the cry; now we are facing the dawn of 
the morning. We are in the fourth watch. Soon He will 
come and al] who are saved by Grace, though they may be 
ignorant of His premillennial coming, or sadly lacking in 


236 


other respects, will go in to the wedding feast. All others, 
who are not ‘saved, will be shut out. It is a final judgment. 
They can never enter in. “I know you not,” is all they hear. 
“Watch therefore, for you know not the day nor the hour.” 
Reader! Are you ready? 

And now we come to the third parable. This parable con- 
cludes the second part of the Olivet discourse. ‘‘For it is as 
if a man going away out of a country called his bondsmen 
and delivered to them his substance. And to one he gave 
five talents, to another two, and to another one, to each ac- 
cording to his particular ability, and immediately went away 
out of the country. And he that had received the five talents 
went and trafficked with them, and made five other talents. 
In like manner also he that had received the two, he also 
gained two others. But he that had received the one went 
and dug in the earth and hid the money of his lord. After 
a long time the lord of those bondmen comes and reckons 
with them. And he that had received the five talents came 
to him and brought five other talents, saying, My lord, thou 
deliveredst me five talents; behold I have gained five other 
talents besides them. His lord said to him, Well, good and 
faithful bondman; thou wast faithful over a few things, I 
will set thee over many things; enter into the joy of thy 
lord. And he also that had received the two talents came 
to him and said, My lord, thou deliveredst me two talents ; 
behold I have gained two other talents besides them. His 
lord said to him, Well, good and faithful bondman, thou 
wast faithful over a few things, I will set thee over many 
things; enter thou into the joy of thy lord. And he also 
that had received the one talent coming to him said, My 
lord, I know thee that thou are at hard man, reaping where 
thou hast not sowed, and gathering from where thou hadst 
not scattered, and being afraid I went away and hid thy 
talent in the earth; behold thou hast that which is thine. 


237 

And his lord answering said to him, Wicked and sloth- 
ful bondman, thou knewest that I reap where I had not 
sowed, and gathered from where I had not scattered; thou 
oughtest then to have put my money to the money changers, 
and when I came I should have got what is mine with in- 
terest. Take therefore the talent from him, and give it to 
him that has the ten talents; for to every one that has shall 
be given, and he shall be in abundance; but from him that 
has not, that even which he has shall be taken from him. 
And cast out the useless bondman into the outer darkness; 
there shall be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth” (ver- 
ses I4-30). 

This parable is not identical with the one which is re- 
corded in the Gospel of Luke (chapter xix:12-27). The 
one in. Luke, the parable of the tem pounds, was uttered 
before the last visit to Jerusalem; the one here in Matthew 
when His visit was almost ended. The parable in Luke has 
more to do with the rewards in the Kingdom and has its 
special application into which we do not enter here. The 
parable here, following that of the ten virgins, shows us the 
same period of time, when the Lord is not present. We see 
in it again the responsibility which man has, in possession of 
the gifts which the absent Lord has bestowed and how the 
gifts may either be used or not used and that when He comes 
again the good and faithful servant will have an abundant 
entrance into the joy of His Lord, while the unprofitable 
servant is cast out. 

The difficulty in this parable seems to have always been 
the servant who received the one talent. The teaching which 
is often, or rather generally given from his case, is one 
which is positively unscriptural. It is taught that he, as a 
believer and servant of Christ, did not make use of his 
talent and that all Christian believers who act in the same 
way, must share his fate. Upon this conception, believers 


238 


are exhorted to faithfulness, to be diligent and use that 
which the Lord has given to them, in case they do not, they 
will surely be cast out into the outer darkness where there 
is weeping and gnashing of teeth. According to this teach- 
ing final salvation depends not upon the work of the Lord 
‘Jesus Christ upon the cross, but upon the faithfulness of the 
believer and upon the use of what he has received. How 
this thought can be enlarged is easily seen. Some say, in- 
deed, that every human being has some talent, even if it is 
a very small one, some light, something good, and if it is 
used, improved, that little good developed, it will result in 
salvation. ‘That all such teaching is wicked and strikes at 
the very fundamentals of the blessed Gospel, is seen at the 
first glance. How can we reconcile the teaching of the 
Gospel of Grace with the case of the unprofitable servant in 
this parable? There is no need of attempting to reconcile 
it, for the one who had received the one talent and who hid 
it does not represent a true believer at all. To verify this 
we only need to hear what he has to say, what excuse he 
gives for having put away the talent. His words discover 
his true condition. He was far from being a true servant 
with a heart full of confidence and love. He is the very 
opposite. He did not trust the Lord at all, and with his 
words he accuses the Lord of being a hard master. Surely 
a true believer could never say such words about his graci- 
ous Lord. That he did not use the talent at all and then 
upon his idleness accuses the Lord unjustly is proof enough 
that the man represents a mere professing servant. What 
the Lord had put at his disposal he had refused by not using — 
tt 

The whole parable, aside from the case of the unprofitable 
servant, is not difficult to understand. We must, however, 
be careful to avoid the thought that the talents, the five 
talents and the two talents, are things like earthly posses- 


a 239 


sions, mental faculties, such as a good memory, a keen, 
logical mind, or a robust body. That all these are blessings 
and gifts of God none would doubt. The talents are His 
goods and delivered into the hands of the servants when He 
went away. However natural endowments are considered 
in the distribution of the gifts. To each is given “accord- 
ing to his particular ability.”” His own divine wisdom mani- 
fests itself in the bestowal of these talents. There is no true 
servant of Christ who is left without a gift. The absent 
Lord has given to each according to their ability. 

Another great principle which this parable teaches is that 
the gift can be enlarged and increased. The two trafficked 
with the talents and doubled them. Exercise of any gift, 
no matter how small it is, will increase that gift and there 
will be gain, which of nccessity is gain first of all for the 
Lord Himself. It will be for Him, as these servants laid 
before Him what they had received and what they had 
gained. 

However, the distinction between the parable of the pru- 
dent servant and the evil servant at the close of chapter 
xxiv must also be maintained. The sphere of the prudent 
servant was narrower. He had to give meat in season to 
the household. The talents here are to be used in a wider 
sphere. Just as the merchant who trafficks and wishes to 
gain goes outside, the servant of Christ is to use that the 
Lord has given to him according to his natural ability and 
as he uses it, whether it is the preaching of the Gospel or 
labor among God’s people, it will increase. 

And then the Coming of the Lord and how He dealt with 
the good and faithful servants brings out another principle. 
Each receives a reward. To each the Lord saith, “Well, 
good and faithful bondman, thou wast faithful over few 
things, I will set thee over many things; enter thou into the 
joy of thy Lord.” He does not speak a higher and better 


240 


word of approval to the one who had the five talents and 
brought him five other talents. Both hear the same word 
of approval. It is therefore not the question of how much 
we have received of the Lord, but how we use that which 
He has given to us. Faithful service, even in the smallest 
matter, though there be but one talent, will bring approval. 

To fully understand “the setting over many things,” and 
what it is “to enter into the joy of the Lord” we shall have 
to wait until we stand in His own glorious presence and see 
Him face to face. 

May this parable, like the preceding ones, urge us on as 
true believers to be faithful to the Lord. Soon He will 
come. Soon we shall appear before His judgment seat to 
give an account. May we all use what He has given and 
use it with confidence in Him and with Love for Him. 

In the closing verses of this chapter (v. 31-46), we find 
the third part of the great prophetic discourse of our Lord. 
It relates to the Gentiles. Quite often this part is spoken 
of by expositors as a parable, just as some call the descrip- 
tion of the future state of Dives and Lazarus in’ Luke xvi, 
a parable. But neither is a parable. Both are solemn de- 
scriptions of events and conditions which are real. 

The King here gives us the picture of a great judgment, 
which He Himself conducts while He occupies the throne 
of His glory. 

“But when the Son of man comes, and all the angels with 
Him, then shall He sit upon His throne of glory, and all the 
nations shall be gathered before Him; and He shall sepa- 
rate them one from another, as the shepherd separates the 
sheep from the goats; and He will set the sheep on His 
tight hand, and the goats on His left” (v. 31-33). 

It is evident that these words must be connected with 
chapter xxiv :30, 31. The scene takes place after His visible 
and glorious appearing as Son of Man and after His elect 


241 


(the remnant of His earthly people; that is, the “all Israel’) 
have been gathered. Leaving out the central portion of the 
discourse, the three parables, relating to the Christian pro- 
fession, we have in chapter xxiv:3-41 and chapter xxv :31- 
46 chronological events relating to the end of the Jewish 
age and the judgment which follows immediately after the 
Lord has come. 

And will He occupy a literal throne? Some take it as 
being only a picture. But such a conception is totally wrong 
and dangerous. The angels will also appear with Him and 
will be seen by the inhabiters of the earth; what reason could 
be given that the throne, which He occupies, is a spiritual 
throne? ‘No, the throne will be a literal throne, and it will 
be “His throne of Glory.” To this same throne He referred 
when He answered Peter in chapter xix:28, “And Jesus 
said to them, Verily I say unto you, That ye who have fol- 
lowed me, in the regeneration when the Son of Man shall 
sit down upon His throne of Glory, ye also shall sit on 
twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.’ The 
“Regeneration,” the “Paligenesia,’ of the coming age, be- 
gins with His second visible coming, and the first great 
event which takes place after He has sat down upon His 
own throne will be the judgment, as described by Himself 
in this part of the discourse. 

The church is not seen here in Matthew. He will bring 
His own with Him and the church will take part in the 
scene pictured here as well as in the government of the earth 
and the universe. “Do ye not know that the Saints shall 
judge the world?” (1 Cor. vi:2). The angels will have their 
definite work in this: judgment scene (Matt. xiii:41-42). 
The question which arises now is who the persons are, who 
will be judged.’ What judgment is it, which the Lord here 
describes? There should be little difficulty in ascertaining 
this and the person who closely adheres to the text, without 


242 


consulting the traditional views of the professing church 
will see at a glance who will be judged. The Lord says 
“all nations” will be gathered before Him. ‘The persons 
judged must therefore be the nations, which are living in 
the day when the Lord appears in His Glory. 

This excludes at once the true church. The church is 
with Him. No such judgment can be for the true church. 
The judgment seat of Christ (not of the Son of man) be- 
fore which all true believers have to appear, either for 
approval or disapproval, is when this judgment of the na- 
tions takes place, a thing of the past. The judgment seat 
of Christ, before which believers have to appear, is not upon 
the earth, but in the air, in the place to which the church 
had been caught up. 

Generally the great scene our Lord unfolds here of this 
judgment of the living nations is applied to a universal 
judgment. Such a judgment in which Jews, Christians, 
saved and unsaved, every member of the human race, all 
the heathen will participate is often preached from this 
passage, and another judgment scene, which is recorded in 
Rev. xx:1I-15 is strangely identified with this one. We say 
at once there is not a line of Scripture which teaches such a 
universal judgment and no line of Scripture which teaches 
a universal resurrection, which is also taught by those who 
teach a general judgment. We repeat, a general judgment 
and a general resurrection is nowhere taught in the Word 
of God. However, we do not want our readers to think that 
we deny judgment and resurrection. We fully believe that 
every person who ever lived will be judged at some time, 
and every person who lived on this earth and died will be 
raised from the dead; but there are different judgments 
and two distinct resurrections. 

If we turn to Rev. xx:1I-15, the passage which is so 
cften quoted with Matt. xxv :31-46, we find it totally dif- 


243 


ferent from the judgment scene which our Lord describes 
here in His Olivet discourse. In Rev. xx we do not behold 
a throne of Glory upon which the Son of Man sitteth, but 
it is a great white throne. Nor does that great white 
throne stand upon the earth as in Matt. xxv, but the eart’ 
and heaven fled away and there was no place found for 
them. The subjects of the great white throne judgment 
are not living nations, but “the dead.” As the context 
shows the nations, which were rebellious at the end of the 
thousand years were devoured by the fire from God out of 
heaven (verse 9). The great white throne judgment is 
that of the wicked dead and their eternal abiding place will 
be the lake of fire. This is the second resurrection or the. 
resurrection of the unjust as our Lord calls it in John v. 
There is a first resurrection in which all the saved have 
a share, which begins when the Lord comes for His Saints, 
and the dead in Christ rise first and we which are alive are 
caught up together with them to meet the Lord in the air 
(1 Thess. iv:15-17). To this first resurrection belong like- 
wise the martyrs during the great tribulation. All this is 
made clear by a few verses in the 2oth chapter of Revela- 
tion. “And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and 
judgment was given unto them; and I saw the souls of them 
that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the 
Word of God, and which had not worshipped the beast, 
neither his image, neither had received his mark upon their 
foreheads, or in their hands; and they lived and reigned 
with Christ a thousand years. But the rest of the dead lived 
not again until the thousand years were finished. This is 
the first resurrection’ (Rev. xx:4, 5). This proves clearly 
that there are two resurrections, one of the just and the 
other of the unjust, and they occur not at the same time, 
but there is a space of a thousand years between them. 
Again let us remember that it is said of all such who 


244 


have believed in the Lord Jesus Christ that they have ever- 
lasting lift and shall not come into judgment. For the true 
believer there is no judgment, because the Lord Jesus pas- — 
sed on the cross through the judgment as his substitute. 
The judgment seat of Christ of which we read in I Cor. v 
and before which all have to appear who are Christ’s, con- 
cerns works, service, rewards, etc., and not an eternal des- 
tiny. 

In our passage here an entirely different judgment is 
described. Nota word or a hint is given about resurrection ; 
in fact, there is no resurrection at all in connection with the 
event pictured by the Lord. When He comes in His Glory, 
His church with Him, attended by the holy angels, He finds 
upon the earth His own earthly people Israel. The Israel 
which is left and passed through the fire and great tribula- 
tion has received Him as Redeemer and King and He 
turned ungodliness from Jacob. But He also finds living 
nations on the earth and these nations will be ‘separated by 
the Son of Man sitting upon the throne of His glory. They 
will be parted by Him and the sheep put at His right hand 
and the goats at His left. 

The place of the judgment of these living nations will no 
doubt be the land of Israel. 

Zech. xiv :1-5 and Joel iii throws light upon this judgment 
scene. Let us then bear this clearly in mind. Matt. xxv:- 
31-46 describes a judgment, which takes place immediately 
after the Lord’s second coming in power and in glory. The 
persons concerned in it are not Jews, nor the church, nor 
the dead, but the nations which are living in that day. And 
now after the separation has taken place the King speaks: 
“Then shall the King say to those at His right hand, Come 
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you 
from the world’s foundation; for I hungered and you gave 
me to eat; I thirsted and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger 


245 


and ye took me in; naked and ye clothed me; I was ill and 
ye visited me; I was in prison and ye came to me. Then 
shall the righteous answer Him saying, Lord, when saw we 
Thee hungering, and nourished Thee; or thirsting and gave 
Thee to drink? and when saw we Thee a stranger and took 
Thee in; or naked and clothed Thee? and when saw we 
Thee ill or in prison and came to Thee? And the King an- 
swering shall say to them, Verily, I ‘say to you, inasmuch 
as ye have done it to one of the least of these my brethren, 
ye have done it to me. Then shall He also say to those on 
the left, Go from me cursed into eternal fire, prepared for 
the devil and his angels; for I hungered, and ye gave me 
not to eat; thirsted and ye gave me not to drink; I was a 
stranger and ye took me not in; naked and ye did not clothe 
me; ill and in prison and ye did not visit me. Then shall 
they also answer saying, Lord, when saw we Thee hunger: 
ing, or thirsting, or a stranger or naked, or ill, or in prison, 
and have not ministered to Thee? ‘Then shall He answer 
them saying, Verily, I say unto you, inasmuch as ye have 
not done it to one of these least, neither have ye done it to 
me. And these shall go away into eternal punishment, and 
the righteous into eternal life.” 

And now in the first place, Who are the nations who are 
righteous and who figure here as sheep? That they do not 
represent the church and are not church saints, members 
of the one body, we have already demonstrated. It can 
easily be proven from the text itself. The righteous nations 
are called “the blessed of the Father,” believers who con- 
stitute the church are more than blessed of the Father, they 
are. in fellowship with the Father and the Son. These na- 
tions inherit a kingdom which is prepared from the founda- 
tion of the world. The inheritance of the church is higher 
than that. Our inheritance is with Himself. We are the 
joint heirs with the Lord Jesus Christ. Furthermore of the 


246 


church it is said that God has chosen us in Him “before the 
foundation of the world.” Other proofs that these nations 
do not represent the church we pass by. 

These nations are saved nations and their acts of right- 
eousness are given here. They were merciful to the least of 
the King’s brethren; they fed them, gave them to drink, 
clothed them and visited them. What they did to the 
Brethren of the King, they did unto Him. 

How great the confusion is among Christians on the 
meaning of these words! Often the interpretation given 
strikes at the very fundamentals of the Gospel. Generally 
charitable acts, such as hospitals and prison work, feeding 
the hungry and clothing the naked in connection with church 
work or philanthropic institutions, are thought to be meant 
by our Lord. 

If any one does these things and is faithful in them the 
King will approve of them in the judgment and many a soul 
builds upon this foundation of sand. All this is absolutely 
wrong. The works have an entirely different meaning. 

Who are the Brethren of the King whom these righteous 
nations treated with such kindness and mercy? They are 
the brethren of the Lord according to the flesh, in other 
words they are Jews. If this is grasped, the whole judg- 
ment, the righteousness of the nations at the King’s right 
hand and the unrighteousness of the others, the goats, will 
be clear. 

Let the reader turn back to the first part of this discourse. 
There we read, “And this Gospel of the Kingdom shall be 
preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations, and 
then shall the end come.” What the Gospel of the Kingdom 
is, when this Gospel is to be preached (during the great 
tribulation), who is going to preach this last great witness 
we have shown at length in our exposition of the preceding 
chapter. The preaching of the Gospel of the kingdom 


247 


among all nations takes place during the end of the age. 
Up to this time this Gospel is not yet preached. The 
preachers of this Gospel during the ending years of the 
Jewish age will be the Jewish remnant. These are “Breth- 
ren” of our Lord according to the flesh. They will move 
among the nations of the world and give their startling 
witness in the proclamation of that Gospel, which will herald 
the nearness of the coming of the King and the Kingdom. 
How will they be received among the nations? Will their 
testimony be universally believed or will it be rejected? 
_ The words of our Lord here at the close of the discourse 
give us the answer. 

Some of the nations will receive their testimony. They 
believe the Gospel of the Kingdom, this last great witness. 
They manifest the genuineness of their faith by works. 
The preachers who are going about are prosecuted and 
hated by others, suffering, hungry, and some cast into pri- 
son. These nations who believe their testimony show their 
faith by giving them to eat, clothing them, visiting them in 
prison, and by showing love to them. The. case of Rahab 
may be looked upon as a typical foreshadowing. She be- 
lieved. It was at a time when the judgment was gathering 
over Jericho (the type of the world). “By faith the harlot 
Rahab perished not with them that believed not, when she 
had received the spies with peace.” And again it is written 
of her, “Likewise also was Rahab the harlot justified by 
works, when she had received the messengers, and had sent 
them out another way?” She had faith and manifested it 
by works. And ‘so these nations believe the messengers and 
treat them in kindness. Grace thus covers them because 
they believed. 

They enter into the Kingdom and inherit the same; as 
righteous they go into eternal life. In other words, they 
remain throughout the kingdom age on the earth and pass 


{ 


, 248 


on into the eternal state. That they will occupy with saved 
Israel a special position in the Kingdom we fully believe; 
nor can they share the revolt which takes place after the 
thousand years, when Satan is loosed for a little while. 

The question may arise who these nations are, who will 
receive the Gospel of the Kingdom. This can hardly be 
answered now. One thing seems certain that the nations 
which heard the Gospel of Grace preached, who had a 
chance to believe will not have another chance* to accept 
the Gospel of the Kingdom. 

And now the other side. There are nations in the pres- 
ence of that throne of Glory who will be put at the left side 
of the King. The messengers came to them and they re- 
fused to believe their message and because they did not 
believe they did not treat the messengers in kindness and 
mercy. These nations continued in wickedness and unbe- 
lief; they rejected the last offer, and now their eternal des- 
tiny is to be forever settled. The King says unto them, 
“Go from Me, cursed, into eternal fire, prepared for the 
devil and his angels.” At the close the Lord says, “And 
these shall go away into eternal punishment.” How solemn 
are these words! Awful words! Go from Me! And where 
to? Into eternal fire. He does not say “Cursed of my 
Father,” but simply “Cursed.” The Father does not 
“Curse ;’ He does not want any one to be in the place of 
eternal distance and darkness. Nor is the place, the eternal 
fire, prepared for these nations, but it is prepared for the 
devil and his angels. By rejecting God’s love and mercy, 
by continuing in unbelief they sided with the devil and his 
angels and now there is no other remedy for them but to 
share for all eternity the place prepared for the devil and 


*We are sorry to find this unscriptural theory of a second chance 
spreading in our day among many good people. Beware of it! 


249 


his angels. At the close of the thousand years the devil is 
put into the lake of fire (Rev. xx:10). Previously the beast 
and the false prophet were cast into that place before the 
millennium (Rev. xix:20). The order of punishment then 
is the following: 1. The beast and the false prophet. 2. 
The unrighteous nations. These go there before the mil- 
lennial kingdom. 3. The devil with his angels. 4. The 
wicked dead from the great white throne judgment. This 
takes place after the thousand years. Oh! the folly which 
tries to explain away the eternity of punishment of the 
wicked. Yet this is done in our present day as never be- 
fore. God is too good, too merciful to do that; and others 
claim that while there is punishment, it is not eternal, but 
only age abiding. All these fanciful, philosophical theories, 
so popular in our day, are completely answered by the sol- 
emn words of our Lord, “And these shall go away into 
ETERNAL punishment, and the righteous into ETER- 
WAL Mite.” 

Thus ends the last great discourse of the King in this 
Gospel and ere long all that which He predicted, sitting 
upon the Mount of Olives, will be reality. Reader! Let 
us live in the light of these solemn truths. 


250 


CHAPTER XXVI. 


The great last discourse of the King being ended there 
remains now nothing else to record than the story of His 
passion, His suffering, death and resurrection. This is the 
record of the remaining three chapters of the first Gospel. 
Two of these are the longest in the whole book. He had 
foretold in His great prophecy in the Olivet discourse the 
future of the Jews, the Christian profession and the future 
of the nations. Now He is to go and fulfill all the pre- 
dictions concerning His sufferings and death, as written in 
Moses, the Prophets and the Psalms. The twenty-sixth 
chapter, which we shall follow briefly, is one of contrasts. 
Here we behold Him in all His wonderful perfection again. 
With what calmness and dignity He enters upon that great 
work, which the Father gave Him to do. On the other hand 
we see wickedness and Satanic powers revealed which now 
cast themselves in all their fury upon the holy One. What 
a wonderful story it is which we have followed in this first 
Gospel. How marvelous the events and how perfect and 
divine the entire arrangement! Man could never have writ- 
ten such an account. ; 

‘This chapter tells us of seven events, which we hope 
to follow in their order. These are the following: 1.— 
The last prediction of His suffering and death (verses 1-5). 
2.—His anointing in the house of Simon, the leper, in 
Bethany (verses 6-13). 3.—Judas betrays Him for thirty 
pieces of silver (verses 14-16). 4.—The account of the pass- 
over meal and the institution of the Lord’s Supper (verses 


251-°' 


17-35). 5.—The agony in the garden of Gethsemane 
‘(verses 36-46). 6,—His capture and the accusations and 
sufferings before Caiaphas, the high priest (verses 47-68). 
7.—The denial of Peter (69-75). 

“And it came to pass when Jesus had finished all these 
sayings, He said to His disciples, Ye know that after two 
days the Passover takes place and the Son of Man is deliv- 
ered up to be crucified. Then the chief priests and the elders 
of the people were gathered together to the palace of the 
high priest, who was called Caiaphas, and took counsel 
together, in order that they might seize Jesus by subtlety 
and kill Him; but they said, Not in the feast, that there be 
not a tumult among the people” (verses I-5). : 

We notice first of all the last prediction of His death. 
This is the fourth time He predicts His death in this Gospel. 
He not only predicts the manner of His death, but now also 
the time; He is to be crucified at the time of the Passover. 
All this manifests His Deity. He knew all beforehand. Let 
none think that all that which was before Him dawned 
upon Him gradually; He knew every one of the sufferings 
and all that which was now to come upon His holy head. 
But what calmness breathes in these words, in which He 
predicted His coming crucifixion! There is no anxiety, 
no concern about anything, but to do the will of Him that 
sent Him and to give Himself as the true passover Lamb. 

No sooner is this announcement made and heard from 
His lips then the enemy becomes also busy. He would 
hinder this divine purpose that the great sacrifice should 
be brought at the predicted time. If he could not keep 
Him from going to the cross, he would attempt, at least, 
to mar the fullest meaning of that death. The chief priests 
and the elders are now together in counsel. The men who 
have appeared so often upon the scene of this Gospel ap- 


252 


pear once more, and through them the enemy utters his 
advice “not in the feast.” But this much is decided, the 
King, the Prince of Life, is to be killed. They must get rid 
of Him, and so wicked -hands are getting ready to crucify 
and to slay Him, as later the Holy Spirit declared “Him 
ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and 
slain.’ All the wickedness, hatred of man and the sinfulness 
of sin, as well as Satanic power, is now to be revealed in the 
sufferings of Christ. And here He is the perfect One in 
perfect love and obedience, to do the Father’s will, who so 
loved the world that He gave His only begotten Son. -~ 

And now the second scene. It takes place in the house 
of Simon, the leper, most likely called by that name because 
he had been afflicted with leprosy. The beautiful incident, 
full of precious lessons, is followed by the murmuring of the 
disciples, especially from the side of Judas, as we learn 
from the Gospel of John. 

“But Jesus being in Bethany, in Simon, the leper’s house, 
a woman having an alabaster flask of very precious ointment, 
came to Him and poured it out upon His head as he lay at 
table. But the disciples seeing it became indignant, saying, 
To what end was this waste? for this might have been sold 
for much and been given to the poor. But Jesus knowing it 
said to them, Why do ye trouble the woman? for she has 
wrought a good work toward me. For ye have the poor 
always with you, but me ye have not always. For in pour- 
ing out this ointment on my body, she has done it for my 
burial. Verily I say to you, Wheresoever these glad tidings 
may be preached in the whole world, that also which this 
woman has done shall be spoken of for a memorial of her” 
(verses 6-13). 

The woman who did this blessed work for the Lord is not 
named here. From the Gospel of John we learn that it was 
none other than Mary, the sister of Martha. To fully under- 


253 


stand the scene here the account in the Gospel of John must 
be taken in consideration (Chapter xii). There we read 
the details of the feast which was made for Him in the 
house and that Lazarus was also present. How devoted 
Mary was to her Lord. We first see her at His feet listen- 
ing to His words. “One thing is needful, and Mary hath 
chosen that good part,’ He had said then. She had ac- 
knowledged Him in His office as Prophet. In John xi we 
see her again at His feet. There she is weeping on account 
of the death of Lazarus; a little while later He weeps with 
her. She knew Him as the sympathizing One, as He is now 
our Priest. And here she anoints Him, and does it for His 
burying. In faith she realizes the near approach of that 
death, of which He had spoken. She believed He, the Lamb 
of God, would soon die; she understood more of that death 
than all the other disciples. Perhaps when she sat at His 
feet He had spoken to her about His coming death and 
burial and resurrection. But some readers of the Bible 
have a difficulty. Here in our Gospel she anoints His head, 
but in the Gospel of John she is at His feet and anoints 
them, wiping His feet with her hair. Critics and infidels 
who deny the inspiration of the Bible have pointed this out 
as one of the glaring contradictions, while others have 
thought of two different occasions when the anointing took 
place. There is, however, no difficulty here at all. She 
anointed both His feet and His head. The Holy Spirit 
reports the anointing of the head of the Lord in Matthew, 
because this is in harmony with the object of the Gospel. 
He is the King, and while He is the rejected King, her faith 
no doubt looked beyond death and burial. In John the Holy 
Spirit gives the anointing of the feet and leaves out the — 
anointing of the head, because the King is the Son of God; 
as stich he is described in the Gospel of John, and that at- 


254 


titude of Mary before His feet anointing them is in fullest 
harmony with the fourth Gospel. 


It was an alabaster flask she brought full of ointment of 
spikenard, very costly. These flasks contained about a 
pound of this costly ointment; the probable value was 300 
denarii, or about $50. It was a very large sum of money 
in that time, when we remember that a day laborer received 
only one dinar wages a day. Three hundred denarii was at 
that time as much as three hundred dollars to-day. How 
did she obtain so costly an alabaster flask with spikenard? 
Most likely it had been stored away from bye-gone days. 
It must have been the most costly she possessed. A heart 
filled with love and devotion prompted her to bring this 
costly ointment and pour it over the body of her Lord. To 
honor Him was her sole object, and that at a time when He 
was about to be rejected and forsaken by all. And let us 
not forget that she had learned this devotion and love to 
Him, manifested in the outpouring of the precious ointment, 
at His feet. Her heart occupation with the Lord, her an- 
ticipation in faith of what was before Him, led her on to 
do what she did. She had no eyes for what was around her, 
nor had she ears for the criticism of those who watched her 
deed. Heand He alone was her object. 

It should be so with us, and it will be so if we truly 
abide in Him. We, too, will bring our best to. Him. 
May all we do, yea, the smallest act, be the result of the 
deepest appreciation of Himself, our wonderful Saviour and 
Lord. 

And much more might be said by way of application of 
this most blessed incident. For instance from the Gospel 
of John we learn that the odor of the ointment filled the 
house. “Thy name is as ointment poured forth,” we read 
in Solomon’s song; well may we think of that precious oint- 


ash, 
ment poured forth with its fragrant smell as a type of His 
death. In the same song we read “while the King sitteth 
at his table my spikenard sendeth forth the smell thereof.” 
How it must have delighted and refreshed His heart when 
that ointment enveloped Him with its fragrance. 

And now the murmuring. No doubt Judas was the leader 
of it, as we see in the Gospel of John. Some of the others 
were influenced by him. ‘Why was not this ointment sold 
for three hundred denarii and given to the poor. This he 
said, not that he cared for the poor, but because he was a 
thief, and had the bag and bare what was put therein” (John 
xii:5-6). Why this waste, What.a state of heart these few 
words reveal! How different from her, who ever must 
remain the highest type of Christian discipleship—Mary. 
She gave him the very best she had. The others thought 
of it as waste, as if anything devoted to the Christ of God, 
the One altogether lovely, could be waste. These two classes 
among disciples are still present ; but how few the Mary-type 
in heart devotion. 

The words He spoke in appreciation of her service and 
her gift have come blessedly true. Her act will never be 
forgotten. Beautifully has a saint written on this occur- 
rence: we quote a part of it: 

“Reader, whoever you are, or however you are engaged, 
ponder this. See that you keep your eye directly upon the 
Lord in all you do. Make Jesus the immediate object of 
every little act of service, no matter what. Seek so to do 
your every work as that He may be able to say, ‘It is a 
good work upon me.’ Do not be occupied with the thoughts 
of men as to your path or as to your work. Do not mind 
their indignation or their misunderstanding, but pour your 
alabaster box of ointment upon the person of your Lord. 
See that your every act of service is the fruit of your heart’s 


256 


appreciation of Him; and be assured He will appreciate your 
work and vindicate you before assembled myriads. Thus it 
was with the woman of whom we have been reading. She 
took her alabaster box, and made ‘her way to the house of 
Simon the leper, with one object in her heart, namely, Jesus 
and what was before Him. She was absorbed in Him. She 
thought of none beside, but poured her precious ointment 
on His head. And note the blessed issue. Her act has 
come down to us, in the gospel record, coupled with His 
blessed Name. No one can fead the gospel without reading 
also the memorial of her personal devotedness. Empires 
have risen, flourished, and passed away into the region of 
silence and oblivion. Monuments have been erected to com- 
memorate human. genius, greatness and philanthropy—and 
these monuments have crumbled into dust; but the act of 
this woman still lives, and shall live for ever. The hand of 
the Master has erected a monument to her, which shall 
never, no never, perish. May we have grace to imitate her; 
and, in this day, when there is so much of human effort. 
in the way of philanthropy, may our works, whatever they 
are, be the fruit of our heart’s appreciation of an absent, 
rejected, crucified Lord!” 

Mary’s devotion was the cause of the failure of the plans 
of the enemies that the death of the Lord should not take 
place in the feast. It stirred up the traitor to action. This 
no doubt is the reason why the Holy Spirit gives the record 
of the anointing out of its chronological order. Judas’ dark 
deed we behold next. “Then one of the twelve, he was called 
Judas Iscariot, went to the chief priests and said, What are 
ye willing to give me, and I will deliver Him up to you? 
And they appointed to him thirty pieces of silver. And from 
that time he sought a good opportunity that he might deliver 
Him up’”’ (verses 14-16). . 


257 


Who was Judas? His surname is given here. Iscariot 
is composed of two words “Ish” and “Kerioth;’. translated 
“the man of Kerith.’” He was the only Judean disciple 
among the twelve, the rest were all from Galilee. This is 
significant and shows the apostasy of Judah, this man of 
Kerioth being the heading up of it as ere long there will be 
another heading up, in the man of sin and tlie son of per- 
dition, the personal Anti-Christ, who will be a Jew.* In 
Luke we have the information that Satan entered into him. 
That mighty enemy, who tempted our Lord and found noth- 
ing in Him, who took hold of Peter and used him as mouth- 
piece when he said, “Be it far from thee, Lord,” now takes 
actual possession of the one, who was indeed his own, for 
Judas had never believed in Christ. Peter may deny Him 
and the rest of the disciples forsake their Lord, yet Satan 
could never enter into them, for they were saved, had life 
and the power of God kept them. The Lord knew that 
wicked one among His disciples. “But there are some gf 
you who believe not. For Jesus knew from the beginning 
who they were who did not believe, and who would deliver 
Him up” (John vi:64). “He knew him that delivered Him 
up; on account of this He said, Ye are not all clean” (John 
xiii:11. Furthermore, all this had been predicted in the Old 
Testament. See Zechariah xi:12; Psalms xli:9; Ixix:25; 
clx.:8. And the* price for which Judas betrayed the King 
was the price of a servant, a slave, according to Exodus 
sexs 32. 

And now the great event, the complete fulfillment of 


*We desire to caution our readers against a fanciful teaching, 
which lacks scriptural support, that Judas will be raised up during 
the great tribulation and will be that man of sin, the Antichrist 
foretold in 2 Thess, ii. Such teaching coming from otherwise 
reputable teachers of the Bible does much harm. - 


258 


His own predictions concerning His sufferings and ‘His 
death, draws nearer. He was not taken by surprise in any- 
thing. In the calmest dignity He moves on, knowing His 
Father’s will He had come to do and that the mighty work 
could never fail, but would be accomplished. He is ready 
to pay the purchase price, to give all, to die for the nation, 
to obtain the treasure and the field and the one pearl of great 
price likewise. And now we follow Him and the disciples 
to the feast. 

“Now on the first day of the feast of unleavened bread, 
the disciples came to Jesus, saying, Where wilt thou that 
we prepare for Thee to eat the Passover? And He said, 
Go into the city unto such a one, and say to him, The 
Teacher says, My time is near, I will keep the passover with 
my disciples in thy house. And the disciples did as Jesus 
had directed them, and they prepared the passover. And 
when the evening was come He lay down at table with the 
twelve. And as they were eating He said, Verily I say 
to you, that one of you shall deliver Me up. And being 
exceedingly grieved they began to say to Him, each of them, 
Is it I, Lord? But He answering said, He that dips his 
hand with Me in the dish, he it is that shall deliver Me up. 
The Son of Man goes indeed according as it is written con- 
cerning Him, but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man 
is delivered up; it were good for that man if he had not been 
born. And Judas, who delivered Him up, answering said, 
Is it I, Rabbi? He says to him, Thou hast said” (verses 
17-25). 

Is it not the purpose of our exposition to compare the 
different Gospel records, and so we shall not refer to the 
different accounts, which certainly are not conflicting. The 
first day of the feast of the unleavened bread was the day 
on which the passover was to be killed (Luke xxii:7). It 


259 


~ is, therefore, clear that He and His disciples commemorated 
then the Jewish Paschal Supper. He Himself does the 
ordering and manifests Himself as Lord throughout. Once 
more He announces the nearness of His passion—“My time 
is near.’ What a moment that was! They had attempted 
before to take His life. That was impossible. The time 
is now near, His time, when the King was to lay down His 
life. Directly we see Him at the table with the twelve, and 
while they were eating He announces the fact of one of them 
being the traitor. What follows in that conversation may 
well be taken for a last warning to Judas. The Lord had 
seen him turning to the chief priests and knew of his bar- 
gaining with them. He read the whole dark story in that 
heart, which was before Him, the omniscient One, as an 
opened book. “Verily I say to you, that one of you shall 
deliver me up.’ This must have been aimed at the con- 
science of Judas Iscariot. Did he also show surprise? Did 
his face turn red or into paleness as he saw the innermost 
thoughts of his heart revealed? Each of them, with the 
exception of Judas, asks the question, Is it I, Lord? Judas 
is silent. Under the power of that awful being, Satan, who 
held him in his grasp, he hardens his heart. But more than 
that the Lord speaks. “He that dips his hand with me in 
the dish, he it is who shall deliver me up.”” The more de- 
tailed account .of all this we find in the Gospel of John. 
While here we have only the fact stated of the betrayer 
dipping his hand into the dish, in John we read that the 
‘Lord gave him a sop. And Judas could take that morsel, 
a token of the love of the Lord whom he had rejected and 
was about to betray. It was a silent offer from the side of 
the Lord to give even to him, but he would not. He rejects 
that offer. Again we have the record for the second time 
that Satan entered into him (John xiii:27). It was right 


260 


after he had taken the morsel. The last offer was rejected, 
and now Satan gains a still firmer hold upon him and pos- 
sesses him fully. At last these closed lips open. What 
awful, satanic hypocrisy he utters! ’’Is it I, Rabbi?’ Such 
hypocrisy in the presence of Him who is the Truth can only 
be explained by the presence of that being in Judas, who is 
the father of lies. It is also a significant fact that Judas 
did not say “Lord,” but he used the word “Rabbi” instead. 
This is evidence that he never had received Him as Lord 
and believed on Him as the Lord. He had power conferred 
on him to drive out the demons and to heal the sick—mes- 
sianic power, coming from the King, but he was nevertheless 
an unbeliever. “Rabbi” he said, because Satan had entered 
into him, and Satan refuses to call Him Lord. Yet the time 
will come when all knees, including Judas, must bow at (not 
in) the names of Jesus and every tongue confess that Jesus 
Christ is Lord. For thus it is written: “Wherefore also 
God highly exalted Him, and granted Him a 
name, which is above every name, that at the 
name of Jesus every knee should bow, of heavenly and - 
earthly and infernal beings and every tongue confess 
that Jesus Christ is Lord to God the Father’s glory” (Phil. 
xi:9-I1). From the lips of the Lord he hears the “Woe,” 
and, according to the Gospel of John, “he went out imme- 
diately and it was night.” He went out into a night without 
a morning, into eternal night, the blackness of darkness 
forever (Jude 13). And all who reject that Lord, who wil- 
fully close their hearts against Him and refuse His au- 
thority, go into that night. | 
; In connection with this solemn scene we find the descrip- 
tion of another scene. We have now the record of the in- 


stitution of that great and blessed memorial, generally called 
the Lord’s supper. 


261 


“And as they were eating, Jesus, having taken the bread 
and blessed, broke it and gave it to the disciples, and said, 
Take, eat, this is my body. And having taken the cup and 
given thanks, He gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it. 
For this is my blood, that of the new covenant, that is shed 
for many for remission of sins. But I say to you that I 
will not at all drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, 
until that day when I drink it new with you in the kingdom 
of my Father. And having sung a hymn, they went out to 
the mount of Olives’ (verses 26-30). What the passover 
feast of the Jews commemorated is so well known that it 
does not need further mention here. And now the true 
passover Lamb is about to be slain and He institutes another 
feast, a great and blessed memorial of His mighty work, of 
His sacrificial death upon the cross. “On that night the 
Jewish dispensation came to an end. The Passover, its great 
institution, had fulfilled its purpose; the Paschal Lamb it 
prepared for and prefigured was the next day to be slain. 
The same night saw the inauguration of a new feast which 
embodies the fundamental truth of Christianity, as the Pass- 
over embodied the fundamental truth of Judaism.”* How 
_ «fearfully the words of our blessed Lord have been misused, 
what blasphemous doctrines have been built upon the simple 
language of the Lord and how this blessed memorial has 
become the occasion for strife, violence and even bloodshed, 
we do not care to follow in our exposition. It would take 
hundreds of pages to record all that. The Roman dogma 
of the transubstantiation is a downright blasphemy. Hun- 
dreds of saints have been tortured and killed for stating thus 
the lie of transubstantiation, and, if Rome could, she would 
do the same in the present day. This transubstantiation 
claims that the bread and wine are changed into the real 


*Weston in the Genesis of the New Testament. | 


262 


body and blood of the Lord Jesus Christ. And then there 
is the consubstantiation, the doctrine that the body and blood 
of Christ coexists in and with the bread and wine, although 
they retain their nature as bread and wine. This is more 
or less the teaching of the Lutheran church. But we refrain 
from following the different teachings concerning the Lord’s 
supper. What can be more evident than that the new feast 
He instituted is a memorial? The Passover feast was a 
feast of remembrance, and what He does here on that sol- 
emn night was a simple meal to commemorate the giving of 
His body and the shedding of His blood. The account given 
here of the institution of the Lord’s supper is in harmony 
with the character of this first Gospel. The Holy Spirit 
gives the record to show the blood of the new covenant, 
which the lamb of God shed for many, in contrast to the 
Jewish Passover, the old covenant which was exclusively 
only for the Jewish people. If we turn to the Gospel of 
Luke, which is wider in its scope than the Gospel of Mat- 
thew, we read the words, which give to the Lord’s supper 
decidedly the character of a memorial. “Do this in remem- 
“brance of Me.” It is then simply this to remember Him, 
not to receive anything, but to remember Him and His love. - 
This is still more enforced by another record which we have 
of this great memorial. We find a record outside of the 
Gospels altogether. This record was given by revelation to 
the Apostle Paul: “For I received from the Lord, that which 
I also delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus in the night 
in which He was delivered up, took bread, and having given 
thanks broke it, and said, This is my body, which is for you; _ 
this do in remembrance of Me. In like manner also the cup. 
after having supped, saying, This cup is the new covenant 
in my blood, this do, as often as ye shall drink it in remem- 
brance of Me. For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and 


263 


drink the cup ye announce the death of the Lord until He 
come” (1, Cor. xi:23-26). And what better way could there 
be than the way He has shown in this request to remember 
Him, in this simple ceremony of breaking the bread and par- 
taking of it and drinking from the cup? No doubt this re-— 
quest was fulfilled by the Saints of earliest date on every 
Lord’s day; Acts xx:7 certainly gives one that impression ; 
yet there is no law about it. The soul that is occupied with 
Him will ever long to fulfill that request He left in that 
night ere He was delivered up. “Till He comes” up to the 
time when we shall see Him face to face in the Father’s 
house. It ever keeps Him, His death for us and His coming 
again as a bright and blessed reality before the heart. 


“See the feast of Love is spread, 
Drink the wine and break the bread; 
Sweet memorials—till the Lord 

Call us around His heavenly board ; 
Some from earth, from Glory some, 
Severed only till He come.” 


But we return to the words of the Lord in this Gospel. 
Significant is the statement “But I say unto you, that I will 
not at all drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until 
that day when I drink it new with you in the kingdom of 
my Father’’ These words are characteristic to this Gospel. 
In Luke and Mark we read that He speaks of Himself 
as not drinking of the fruit of the vine until the kingdom of 
God has come. But here He speaks of that day when not 
only He will drink it anew but when He will drink it anew 
with His disciples in the kingdom of His Father. The words 
are beautifully in order in this Gospel, which, as we have 
learned, tells us so much of the kingdom. There is a day 
coming when that Kingdom will come in power and in 


264 


Glory. It is the day of His return. Then His own will be — 
associated with Him in heavenly Glory. For a deeper knowl- 
edge of that drinking anew with Him, the wine, the fullest 
joy in that mighty coming Manifestation, we have to wait 
till that day of Glory breaks. Dispensationally we see the 
King separated from His own people till the hour strikes 
when His Kingdom comes. 

And now they leave the room after they had sung a 
hymn. This has been and is still the custom of the Jews in 
connection with the passover feast. Indeed it would be in- 
teresting and helpful to mention here the passover customs 
of the Jews; they are full of significant ceremonies. How- 
ever this would lead us too far. Suffice it to say that the 
hymn they sang consisted of Psalms Cxv, Cxvi, Cxvii and 
Cxviii. In the Jewish ritual they are called the great Hal- 
lel. With what emotion of soul He must have sung with 
His disciples! What encouragement it must have been for 
Him! These Psalms contain such blessed and full messianic 
predictions. “The stone, which the builders refused, is be- 
come the head of the corner. This is the Lord’s doing, it 
is marvelous in our eyes. This is the day which the Lord 
hath made; we will rejoice and be glad in it. Save now, I 
beseech thee, send now prosperity. Blessed be He that com- 
eth in the name of the Lord.” These words come in at the 
close of that hymn they sung, and while the dis¢iples sang 
them as they had done so often before as pious Jews, for 
Him it meant so much. A little while longer, just a few 
hours, and the builders would reject Him. A few days 
more and by resurrection from the dead He would be the 
head of the corner, the chief stone, and in that shout, 
“Blessed be He that cometh in the name of the Lord,” He 
saw in the distant future a welcome from the remnant of 
His people, at the time of His Second Coming. And so the 


265 


blessed One even then saw the travail of His soul and was 
satisfied. 


The last notes have died away and He speaks again. 
“Then said Jesus to them, All ye shall be offended in me 
during this night. For it is written, I will smite the shep- 
herd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered abroad; 
but after that I shall be risen, I will go before you to Gali- 
lee. And Peter answering said to Him, If all shall be of- 
fended in Thee, I will never be offended. Jesus said to him, 
. Verily I say to thee, that during this night, before the cock 
shall crow, thou shalt deny me thrice. Peter saith to Him, 
If I should need die with Thee, I will in nowise deny Thee. 
Likewise said all the disciples also” (verses 31-35). He 
revealed thus what was before them. The Scripture to 
which He refers is found in Zechariah. They were His 
sheep and He the shepherd, as He speaks of Himself in the 
Gospel of John, the good shepherd, who gives His life for 
the sheep. But the smiting of the shepherd, the smiting of 
Him who is called in that prophecy of Zechariah the fellow 
of God (Zech. xili:7), what was that to be? The cry of 
the forsaken One on the cross gives us the answer. He 
knew all that was before Him.* And again we notice. His 
calmness, His dignity through all this, which to a mere man 
would have been an almost unbearable ordeal. Then He 
announces His resurrection and that He would go before 
them to Galilee. Later we shall find the risen One there 
with His disciples, announcing the fact that He has all 
power in heaven and on earth. There is no mention made 
of His ascension. Peter now looms up. Once more poor 


*The teaching of the so-called critics, so strong to-day throughout 
the professing church, a school which claims that the Lord had no 
full knowledge of what the Scriptures contained, this teaching must 
be branded as wickedness, 


266 skeet 
Peter acts in self-confidence in his own strength. The 
Lord had told Him before, “Where I go thou canst not fol- 
low me now, but thou shalt follow me after” (John xiii:36). 
What significant words these were. They remind one of 
the third chapter of Joshua, of the record of the passing 
over Jordan. There was to be a space of two thousand 
cubits between the ark of the covenant and the people. The 
ark of the covenant of the Lord, typifying Christ, was alone — 
by itself and had to make way for the people, and they 
followed after. So Peter would follow Him and die with 
Him, but he could not. Afterwards at the Lake of Tiberias 
the risen Christ tells him that he should indeed follow, re- 
vealing the time and the manner of his death, a death which 
the grace of God, the strength of the Lord made alone pos- 
sible. Here he acts in the flesh, and in spite of the Lord’s 
warning, he maintains that attitude, the attitude of self- 
confidence. The Lord announces his soon coming denial, 
the record of which we find at the close of our chapter. 


“Then Jesus comes with them to a place called Geth- 
semane, and says to the disciples, sit here until I go away 
and pray yonder. And taking with Him Peter and the 
two sons of Zebedee, He began to be sorrowful and deeply 
depressed. Then He says to them, My soul is very sorrow- 
ful even unto death; remain here and watch with Me. And 
going forward a little He fell upon His face, praying and 
saying, My Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from 
Me; but not as I will, but as Thou wilt. And He comes to 
the disciples and finds them sleeping, and says to Peter, 
Thus ye have not been able to watch one hour with Me? 
Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation; the spirit 
indeed is willing, but the flesh weak. Again a going away 
a second time He prayed, saying, My Father, if this cannot 
pass from Me unless I drink it, Thy will be done. And 


267 

coming He found them again sleeping, for their eyes were 
heavy. And leaving them He went away again and prayed 
the third time, saying the same thing. Then He comes to 
the disciples and says to them, Sleep on now and take your 
rest ; behold the hour has drawn nigh, and the Son of man is 
delivered up into the hands of sinners. Arise, let us go; 
behold he that delivers me up has drawn nigh.” (Verses 
36-46.) 

What a holy scene it is that is now before us! We are. 
face to face with the most solemn event in the life of the Son 
of God, save that hour when He hung on the cross, forsaken 
by God. It is a Scripture which we approach with the 
greatest caution; the words are ringing in our ears, the 
words which Moses heard when he stood in divine presence 
“put off thy shoes from off thy feet for the place whereon 
thou standest is holy ground.” It is a scene which draws 
out the heart in worship and adoration for it was for us He 
passed through this deep agony, for us that He, the mighty 
Creator fell on His face, into the dust of earth, He had 
created. 


Hark! what sounds of bitter weeping, 
From yon lonesome garden sweep? 
’Tis the Lord His vigil keeping, 
Whilst His followers sink in sleep. 
Ah, my soul, He loved thee, 
Yes, He gave Himself for me. 
He is speaking to His Father, 
Tasting deep that bitter cup, 
Yet He takes it, willing rather 
For our sakes to drink it up. 
Oh what love! He loved me! 
Gave Himself, my soul, for thee. 


Even so, He loved me and gave Himself for me. Oh 


268 


Thou blessed Lord, what agony Thou didst go through for 
the sake of having us poor, vile, miserable, lost sinners with 
Thee and share Thy presence and Glory throughout eter- 
nity. And how little we appreciate, honor and adore Thee! 
Much rather would we write in the strain of devotion and 
worship than to attempt by’ feeble human words a closer 
study of Gethsemane. Of an exposition of the events of 
that night we dare not speak, The suffering of our Lord 
in the garden is beyond the ken of any saint; no saint of 
God will ever be able to fathom the deep mystery of the 
sufferings of the holy One. If we could fully grasp His 
marvelous personality, how holy, how absolutely holy He was 
and absolutely perfect in Himself, we might be able to enter 
deeper into the agony of our Lord. Only the right estimate 
of His Person can give us, at least in part, a little of the 
meaning of His deep sorrow unto death. 

But alas! just into this holy scene man with his reason 
and wrong conception has intruded and by attempting to 
solve the mystery of the suffering of the Lord has put dis- 
honor upon His person. Different interpretations are 
‘ about, which belittle and dishonor Him. We would rather 
pass these by, but it is expedient that we do not. 

But recently, in a leading christian magazine, the follow- 
ing appeared from the pen of a well known preacher: 

The second interpretation is, that He prayed literally to be de- 
livered from death, then and there; that the severity of His agony 
was such that His physical nature was unable to bear it, and, unless 
sustained miraculously, life would have become extinct in the Garden 
of Gethsemane; that the conflict with Satan was so intense and 
prolonged that His human nature would have given way but for the 
Father’s help. In this aspect, this was the gravest crisis of His 
dependence and need, and the Father did support and sustain, so 
that, instead of dying in Gethsemane, He was enabled and strength- 
ened to go on to the greater agony and crisis of Cavalry. We con- 
fess that our own minds turn absolutely and instinctively to the 


269 


latter of these interpretations as the more rational, scriptural, and 
satisfactory. 


We do not deny, that this interpretation is rational, but 
it is far from being scriptural. Indeed it has the elements 
of wicked doctrine in it. If it is true “that the conflict with 
Satan was so intense and prolonged that His human nature 
would have given way but for the Father’s help” then Satan 
must have had the power to slay the Prince of Life. The 
reader will see at once to what such a conception must 
lead us. This interpretation likewise speaks of the agony 
His physical nature was unable to bear unless sustained 
miraculously and the possibility of His life becoming extinct 
in the garden. He, instead of dying on the cross, dying in 
Gethsemane. All this dishonors our Lord. We cannot tol- 
erate such a thought for a moment. His life could never 
become extinct in Gethsemane; there was no such danger of 
His death. At no time was our blessed Lord in danger of 
death. His body was not mortal.but immortal. Death is the 
result of sin; where there is no sin death has no claim. 
Our Lord could never die under the attacks of the enemy. 
On the cross where He, who knew no sin was made sin for 
us, He gave His life; then as our substitute He died. His 
death could never take place till that solemn moment had 
come, when He was made sin for us on the cross. Further- 
more He said: ‘Therefore doth my Father love Me, be- 
cause I lay down my life that I might take it again. No 
man taketh it from Me, but I lay it down myself, I have 
power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again” 
(John x:17-18). Another view has recently been advanced. 
A brother wrote us about this as follows: “Have you seen 
anywhere that in Gethsemane, our Lord was delivered from 
death which he feared, according to Hebrews v; and was 
strengthened to go on to the death on the cross, at which 


270 


He aimed, and for which He came? His willingness to stop 
short of His finished work, and let all that He had accom- 
plished thus far go if the Father so willed it, is the greatest 
instance of submission on record.” The first statement is not 
true, as He was not delivered from death and the second 
statement is inconceivable. How could He be willing to 
stop short of His finished work, when He entered into the 
world for that very purpose and all depended on that work? 
How could He be willing to stop short of it after His own 
Spirit in the prophets had spoken of His sufferings and the 
accomplishment of this work of atonement? Such a concep- 
tion is highly fanciful and full of mysticism. We refrain 
from pointing out other difficulties connected with this 
theory of His sufferings in the garden. But did He perhaps 
shrink from the physical sufferings of the cross, as others 
have maintained? Assuredly not, for He had announced 
so often, as we have seen in this Gospel, His rejection, suf- 
fering and death. And if it was not all that which is suggest- 
ed in these different interpretations of His agony, what. was 
it then? What was that cup which He dreaded? What was 
that sorrow unto death? It was this very fact we stated 
before, that He the Holy, the Spotless One, the One who is 
the image of God, was soon to be made sin and to stand 
in the presence of God, no longer as the Beloved One, 
but in the sinner’s stead. God’s face upon which He 
had ever gazed which had ever smiled upon Him was 
soon to be hid. That eternal love He enjoyed was to be no 
longer upon Him, but in its place judgment and wrath of 
God. And what was it when at last He was made sin for us? 
That awful cry from the cross gives us the answer, “My 
God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?” But oh! 
what did that cry mean for that Holy One? Shall we ever 
know its depths and the awful suffering the Holy One, 


271 

made sin for us, had to pass through, when thus He cried? 
From this His holy soul shrank. His holiness and perfection 
even made this shrinking necessary. He could do nothing 
else but shrink from it, and yet He bows in perfect sub- 
mission and obedience to the Father’s will. Not my will but 
‘Thy will be done. This was before Him in the garden in 
that dark night of agony and sorrow. And here we would 
rest. But all praise and adoration to Thee our blessed 
Saviour and Lord for all Thine agony and sorrow and for 
Thine obedience unto the death of the cross! 

Two Scriptures, one from the Old Testament, the 
other from the New, may be mentioned as giving 
further light on Gethsemane. The one hundred and 
second Psalm may be rightly termed “The Gethse- 
mane Psalm.” Its superscription is, “ A prayer of 
the afflicted, when he is overwhelmed, and poureth out 
his complaint before God.” It begins with the deepest dis- 
tress and ends with the eternal Glory of the One who was 
in such sorrow. In the first part of this Psalm we find the 
great sorrow. Well may one think here of that pathetic out- 
burst found elsewhere in the Word, “Behold and see if there 
be any sorrow like unto my sorrow” (Lam. i:12). First 
we hear His cry, “Hide not Thy face from Me in the day 
when I am in trouble.” Then He speaks of His days being 
consumed ; His bones burned, His heart smitten.and withered 
like grass; He is alone in His weeping and crying. Then 
again we hear the voice of the sufferer. “He weakened my 
strength in the way; He shortened my days. I said oh my 
God, take me not away in the midst of my days * * *.” 
The words which follow are not addressed by the agonizing 
sufferer to God, but God addresses them to the sufferer, 
who is prostrated before Him. No one could have ever had 
_ this conception if the Holy Spirit had not given us the key. 


272 


In the first chapter of Hebrews the closing words of the 
Psalm are quoted and there they are given as addressed by 
God Himself to the Son. As in the twenty-second Psalm, 
the deepest humiliation and then, the exaltation of the, One 
who suffered so we find it in the Gethsemane Psalm. The 
last verses of the one hundred and second Psalm are God’s 
answer to the One who is bowed down in deepest sorrow. 


The other passage we have in mind is the familiar one in 
the Epistle to the Hebrews. ‘Who in the days of His flesh, 
having offered up both supplications and entreaties to Him 
who was able to save Him out of death, with strong crying 
and tears (and having been heard because of His piety) ; 
though He were Son, He learned obedience from the things 
which He suffered” (Heb. v:7, 8). There is no doubt but 
these words refer us back to the Gethsemane scene. The 
supplications and entreaties. with strong crying and tears 
took place in Gethsemane; yea, even more than that, the 
sweat as if it were great drops of blood. But it does not say 
that He was saved “from” death. It is often assumed that 
He cried to be saved from death and upon this some of these 
Christ dishonoring conceptions are formed. He cried to Him 
who was able to save Him out of death. And He was heard. 
The answer came in His resurrection from the dead. 
But to return to the scene in the garden. Where do we 
find His disciples? Three He had taken with Him and told 
them to remain there and watch with Him. Soon they were 
asleep. They were on the holy mountain with Him, eye- 
witnesses of His Glory. And did they sleep then? Luke 
ix :32 gives us the answer. “But Peter and they that were 
with Him were heavy with sleep ; and when they were awake, 
they saw His Glory, and the two men that stood with Him.” 
This manifests what the flesh is, which is fully exhibited 
in the disciples. Their Lord in tender love, appearing almost 


273 


as if He looked for their sympathy, had requested them to 
watch with Him. Instead they sleep. How could they have 
looked into His loving face, with the solemn feeling upon 
them of great events soon to come and then going to sleep! 
Did that show love for Him? And He had spoken to them 
about not falling into temptation. They did not realize their 
need and their danger, And what tenderness and grace He 
manifests toward His disciples, who had failed! Oh the 
Glory of Himself even in that dark hour ; how it shines forth! 
After He had prayed the third time He said to them, “Sleep 
on now and take your rest; behold, the hour is nigh, and 
the Son of Man is delivered into the hands of sinners.” 
Marvelous words of grace, calmness and dignity. The 
Shepherd is ready to give His life for the sheep, that they 
might have life and rest. The sword is soon to be unsheathed 
and fall upon the Shepherd, the man called by God “my 
fellow” (Zech. xiii:7). The Lamb of God is ready to take 
away the sin of the world, ready to go to the slaughter as 
a lamb and as a sheep dumb before her shearers, Yea, the 
Holy One, the adorable, blessed One is ready to be stricken 
and smitten of God. What a path was His! Humbling 
Himself, He became obedient even unto death, and that the 
death of the cross. The last part of that path is now before 
Him, What a theme it is! What food for our souls and 
what exercise of soul it brings to contemplate Him who for 
the joy set before Him endured the cross and despised the 
shame. 

What other applications of this touching scene in Gethse- 
mane might be made. How it teaches us submission and 
obedience and the highest prayer, the sweetest prayer as well 
to our Loving Father “Not my will but thy will be done.” 
We leave these meditations to our readers with the prayer 
that He Himself may speak to each heart. Oh Lord, our 


274 


Lord, we cannot fathom Thy Being, we cannot fully under- 
stand what Thou wast, but we know Thy love for us! We 
praise and adore Thee. Make Thyself a greater reality to 
our hearts. Amen. 

And what a story it is which we have before us, the story 
of thé passion of the King. And who could be able to fol- 
low the Lamb of God and fathom the depths of His sorrow! 
What it must have been for Him, the Holy, spotless One, 
to be thus delivered into the hands of sinners! Again we 
say that it is quite impossible to write an exposition of all 
these solemn events connected with the suffering and death 
of our Lord. Much of what might be written by way of 
application we must leave unsaid; it would take volumes 
to do that. 

It was while He was still speaking to His disciples that 
the enemies came to take hold of Him, to take the Beloved 
of the Father captive. “And while He was yet speaking, 
Behold Judas, one of the twelve came, and with him a great 
crowd with swords and sticks” (verse 47). It seems that 
Judas made good use of his time since he left the room 
where the feast was kept. The Lord had said to him, know- 
ing the thoughts of his dark heart, “What thou doest, do 
quickly.” Possessed by Satan, he had rushed forth into the 
dark night, and, in feverish haste, led on by the evil one, he 
had succeeded in all his plans.. The officers and a detach- 
ment of Roman soldiers, most likely several hundred, were 
put at his disposal. These carried swords and other weapons, 
besides lanterns and torches. These were Gentiles; perhaps 
of different countries, such which Rome had conquered. 
But there were others, and they carried sticks. The temple 
guard had turned out in full force; these were the hirelings 
of the chief priests and elders. The rabble of the street no 
doubt was also represented, for it was a great crowd. What 


ae p= 275 

_ascene! Gentiles and Jews come to lay their hands on the 
Prince of Life, the Lord of Glory, ready to commit the 
greatest sin. All the sinfulness of sin is now to be mani- 
fested. But why such a great multitude and such precaution 
to capture one man, who was “meek and lowly”? What a 
testimony after all to His power, which they feared and yet 
what blindness. 

Judas appears first on the scene. Behold Judas! What 
a surprise it must have been for the disciples, aroused from 
sleep, to find him present who had withdrawn from them 
under such mysterious circumstances. From the Gospel of 
Luke we learn that he was not only the leader of the great 
crowd but he walked ahead of them. What a subtle plan 
he had laid, and in it the cunning of that same Serpent 

_ which was in that. garden, in which the first /.dam had been 
placed. How cunning and yet how blunt. All had been 

_ arranged so as to make His escape impossible. The traitor 
was to kiss Him so that the Lord might be known and like- 
wise become detached from the disciples; then they were to 
press at once upon Him and capture Him. All was carefully 
premeditated. Judas by his action and his plan shows that 
he did not believe in the Lord as the Son of God; he knew 
His power. When he walked before them he may have 
cunningly aimed at the hiding of his satanic deed. 

And now he reaches the side of Him whom he still calls 
“Rabbi.” The first word he utters was a word of joy. “Oh, 
the joy ! Rabbi’—thus it reads in literal translation. Then 
he kissed Him eagerly. The symbol of love, devotion and 
faithfulness so much used in the Orient is used by the traitor. 
What must the Holy One have suffered, when the one who 
had been in His loving company came up and had uttered 
that word, “Oh, the Joy’? What suffering must have passed 
through that loving heart when He felt the vile lips of that 
one upon His cheeks! 


276 


And to think that He who rebuked the sea and it obeyed 
His voice, whose omnipotent word had healed the sick and 
raised the dead, should thus be delivered up. Oh, what a 
story it is! 

“But Jesus said to him, Friend, for what purpose art thou 
come?” What calm and gentle answer to the satan-pos- 
sessed Judas Iscariot. Should not this tender question have 
touched the conscience of the traitor? He was beyond hope. 
It is significant that the Lord addresses him with the word, 
Friend. Yet it is a different word which the Lord used in 
calling His disciples as recorded in John xv. The word He 
uses here signifies “companion.” Judas had been a compan- . 
ion of the Lord, He had beheld His mighty works, and had 
by Him messianic power to heal the sick conferred upon him- 
self. This is the last word that wicked man ever heard ad- 
dressed to himself by the Lord. The next time we behold 
him is when he is filled with remorse, casting the pieces of 
silver in the temple ; then he went and hanged himself. 

And now they laid hands upon the Lord and seized Him. 
The rough hands of the inhuman Roman soldiers, the cruel 
hands of the hating Jewish mob took hold of that sinless 
body of the Lamb of God. All were energized by Satan 
who stands behind all this and that which follows; it is the 
hour of darkness and the manifestation of the power of 
darkness upon Him, the willing sacrifice. 

But far different is the description of His betrayal in the 
Gospel of John. Not a word is said in that Gospel of His 
agony in the garden. As Son of God, described in the 
fourth Gospel, no such record would be in order. And 
when they come to take Him, He meets them with a calm, 
“Whom seek ye?” His majestic answer “I am,” makes the 
whole multitude of Roman soldiers, temple guards and the 
mob fall down. “They went backward and fell to the 


: 277 

ground.” All He needed to do was to walk away and dis- 
' appear between the trees of the garden. There is, of course, 
no discrepancy here. The Gospel of John simply shows 
the divine side of that scene. He allowed Himself bound, 
and that ‘with the condition “let these go away.” He sur- 
renders Himself; His own are free. Blessed hint of that 
precious Gospel of the Son of God. 

An incident is connected with this great event which is 
full of instruction. The hasty action of Peter, as we learn 
from the Gospel of John, almost marred the gracious scene, 
and only the Lord’s hand could overrule the serious con- 
sequences of that action and bring good out of it. The 
confusion of the disciples must have been great when their 
beloved Master was taken captive. To see how the meek 
One, whom they had followed, at whose feet they had sat, 
in whom they believed as the Christ of God, was taken by 
these rough men, was too much for them. They had be- 
tween themselves two swords. The words of the Lord about 
“Selling his garment and buying a sword” had been taken 
literally by them. Simon Peter possessed one of these 
swords, and had he not said he would be willing to lay down 
his life for the Lord? Now the opportunity had come to 
show his willingness to redeem his promise and his loyalty 
to his Master. In fearful rashness he draws the sword and 
strikes the one next to him. He strikes with the intent to 
kill. The one hit is the servant of the High Priest by name 
of Malchus. The mercy of the Lord prevented the worst 
and Peter only takes off the ear of the servant. Surely it 
was courage in Peter to do this. To attack such a large 
body of people was fearlessness; loyalty to Christ was the 
cause of the action. And yet how it belittled the Lord! Did 
He who had said just the word “I am” and his enemies had 
fallen into the dust, need such a defense? Did He who 


278 


willingly stretched out His hands, the willing captive, need 
Peter’s interference to make Him free? Upon the holy 
mount Peter had quite lost sight of the dignity of Him 
whom he called Lord and classed Him with Moses and Elias, 
and here he errs in the same manner. The Lord has to re- 
mind him of his mistake. “Return thy sword to its place; 
for all who take the sword shall perish by the sword. Or 
thinkest thou that I cannot now call upon my Father, and 
He will furnish me more than twelve legions of angels? 
How then should the Scriptures be fulfilled that thus it must 
be?” (verses 52-54). If it were a case of self-help how 
easy it would have been for Him to summon the angels. 
Peter stood in all probability in the attitude of defiance, 
ready to strike again if he should be attacked in return. He 
is told to put up the sword. Though loyal to the Lord, he 
had dishonored Him and not manifested the graciousness 
and mind of Him, whom He tried to defend. Alas! how 
many of us have followed impulsive Peter in this action. 
The Scriptures had to be fulfilled, and from now on we 
see indeed the fulfillment of Scripture. Elsewhere we read 
that the Lord touched the ear of the wounded servant and 
healed him. It was the last miracle of healing the Lord per- 
formed before He went to the cross, and that was done to an ~ 
enemy. In the tumult and confusion of the hour the act of 
Peter passed unnoticed. : 


“In that hour said Jesus to the crowds, Are ye come out 
against a robber with swords and sticks to take me? I sat 
daily with you teaching in the temple and ye did not seize 
me? But all this is come to pass that the Scriptures of 
the prophets may be fulfilled. Then all the disciples left 
Him and fled” (verses 55-56). The word He had spoken 
was now fulfilled, “All ye shall be offended because of Me 
this night; for it is written, I will smite the Shepherd, and 


279 


the sheep shall be scattered.” The Shepherd is left alone. 
We pass over the account found only in the Gospel of Mark 
about the young man who followed clad in a linen garment. 

Alone and forsaken the blessed Lord is taken away cap- 
tive. What a scene it must have been! The fleeing dis- 
ciples disappearing in the darkness of the night, the mob 
leading Him hence; no doubt they buffeted Him with blas- 
phemous curses dragging Him along and so soon Gethsem- 
ane, the place of that solemn drama, is enshrouded in the 
stillness of the night. But oh, what it was that took place 
there. The mighty Creator, the Son of God, the. Holy One 
in His agony and sinful man laying hold of the Lord of 
Glory! 

We will be obliged as we pass on in meditating on the 
passion of our Saviour to confine ourselves strictly to the 
Gospel, which we study. We do not write an exposition 
of the entire story of His suffering and what was done 
to the-Man of Sorrows, but only as the Holy Spirit has re- 
corded these events in the first Gospel. And in doing this, 
we shall point out only the leading features. 

First we see Him before Caiaphas, the high priest, 
where the scribes and the elders were assembled. They 
expected Him to be brought in. What triumph must there 
have been upon their faces, when at last in that memor- 
able night, the One whom they hated and despised was 
brought securely bound into their presence, under arrest 
in the hands of the Gentiles. 

He must appear before the ecclesiastical council first; He 
must be tried there. But what can they say against Him? 
What evil had He done? They had watched Him closely. 
Deputations, one after another, had tried to ensnare Him. 
_ Pharisees and Sadducees, as we have seen in our study 
of this Gospel, had come to tempt Him. They found noth- 


280 

ing in Him. He had asked the question in one of His great 
discourses, which they had heard. Which of you convinces 
Me of sin? There was no answer. He was the sinless 
One, the perfect and holy One. | But it is their hour and 
the power of darkness. Thus we read: “And the chief 
priests and the elders and the whole Sanhedrim sought 
false witness against Jesus, so that they might put Him to 
death.” But did they succeed? “And they found none, 
though many false witnesses came forward”, They could 
find nothing. Therefore, He ought to be freed. “But at 
the last two false witnesses came forward and said, He said 
I am able to destroy the temple of God, and in three days 
build it.” But this was a wrong quotation of His words 
and a wrong application. Besides this, as we learn from the 
Gospel of Mark, the witnesses did not agree amongst them- 
selves. It was impossible to convict Him on such a charge. 
He had not a word to say. They look upon Him with 
their awful hatred. The high priest attempts to get Him 
to answer. “Answereth Thou nothing?” “But Jesus was 
silent”. It is obvious they could not convict Him. The 
charge against Him was blasphemy. They had miser- 
ably failed in proving anything whatever against the Lord. 
But condemned to death, He must be. He must die. 

There remained just one thing to be done, and that was 
to put a question to Him directly, a question, which He 
could not refuse to answer. Why did they not do this at 
once? He had first to be shown as the Holy One, the Lamb 
of God, without spot or blemish. The moment has come. 
Most likely the Highpriest in his excitement had arisen 
from his seat.“ The silent victim stands immediately before 
Him. They are face to face. The furious, heated face of 
Caiaphas looks into the loving tender eyes of the Lord. 
Did this high priest and his associates know that this lowly 


281 


One, standing bound in their presence, is the Son of God, 
the promised Messiah? They knew that He had given 
the witness to that effect throughout His public ministry. 
He had not only given the self-witness, that He and the 
Father are one, that He is the Son of God, but His works 
had fully established His Deity. The last question the Lord 
put to the Pharisees concerning the Christ, whose son He 
is, (Chap. xxii) had been answered by Him in a way they 
all understood. There was no doubt, they knew Him, even 
as the Lord had said in the parable, “He is the Heir; come 
Jet us kill Him’. The highpriest knew he would succeed 
if he put that question concerning His Sonship to Him. 
But little he knew what he was doing; the blessed One 
could not be condemned by false witnesses. His own con- 
fession of who He was, the confession of the truth alone 
could bring about His condemnation. “And the highpriest 
answering said to Him, I adjure Thee by the living God 
that Thou tell us if Thou art the Christ, the Son of God. 
Jesus says to Him, Thou hast said. Moreover, I say to you, 
From henceforth ye shall see the Son of Man sitting at the 
right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven” 
(Verses 63-64.) 

Under that oath He could not be silent. For this moment 
He was waiting to witness that good confession. He 
confesses Himself the Christ, the Son of God and wit- 
nesses to His future Glory at the right hand of power, and 
His visible manifestation at the time of His Coming again 
in the clouds of heaven. What a confirmation of the 
fact that He is the willing sacrifice of the Holy One, who 
will drink that bitter cup and fulfill the Scriptures. “They 
all heard it—and, as the Law directed when blasphemy was 
spoken, the highpriest rent both his outer and inner gar- 
ment, with a rent that might never be repaired. But his 


282 


object was attained. Christ would neither explain, modify, 
nor retract His claims. They all had heard it. What use 
was there of witnesses.” Behold now ye have heard the 
blasphemy. “Then turning to those assembled, he put to 
them the usual question which preceded the formal sen- 
tence of death. As given in the rabbinic original it is: 
“What think ye gentlemen? And they answered, if for 
life, “For Life.’ ‘If for death: “For death.” But the 
formal sentence of death, which if it had been a regular 
meeting of the Sanhedrin, must now have been spoken 
by the President, was not pronounced.”* 

“What think ye?” And they answering said, He is liable 
to the penalty of death?’ (Verse 66.) What a justice! 
Satanic, fiendish injustice rather. But there He stands, 
the silent Lamb of God. What a picture! Oh that we 
might behold Him once moréas” le stood before this com- 
pany of His enemies. What ¢ Imness. “ Majestic in His 
silence, majestic in His speech; unmoved by threats to 
speak, unmoved by threats when He had spoken.” 

And now affecting the scene, which follows. His con- 
fession set the powers of darkness loose and the unde- 
fending Christ, the Son of God is tasting a little of the 
cup He had to drink. Oh to think of it! They spit in His 
face! That face, which in loving tenderness had gazed 
with compassion upon the multitudes, yea, that face, the 
image of the invisible God, was covered with vile spittle of 
men. How He must have suffered! They buffeted Him, 
struck Him with the palms of their hands, mocked Him. 
And not a word, not a murmur came from His blessed 
lips. “When reviled, He reviled not again, when: suffering, 
He threatened not.” And reader! it was all for such vile 
sinners as we are! He loved us and gave Himself for us. 
What a Saviour! How little we think of Him; how little 


*Edersheim. 


283 


that which He did for us is before our hearts and has a 
governing power over our lives. Oh Lord! Thou art 
worthy of all. And then to think that such a Saviour is 
» rejected of those for whom He suffered thus, dishonored, 
His mighty work denied among those who profess His 
name. 

The last paragraph of this solemn chapter concerns Peter. 
Peter had followed Him at a distance, even to the palace 
of the highpriest and entering in, sat with the officers to 
see the end. Perhaps when they all had fled, he remem- 
bered his promise to the Lord and so at a distance he fol- 
lowed. Far better it would have been for Peter if he had 
not followed at all. “Now Peter sat without in the court, 
and a maiden came unto him and said, Thou also wast with 
Jesus, the Galilean. But he denied before them all, saying, 
I know not what thou sayest. And when he had gone out 
into the entrance, another saw him, and said unto those 
that were there, this man also was with Jesus, the Nazar- 
éan. And again he denied with an oath, I do not know the 
man. But after a little while, they that stood by came and 
said unto Peter: Of a truth thou art also of them, for even 
thy speech discovereth thee. Then began he to curse and to 
swear, I know not the man. And immediately the cock 
crew. And Peter remembered the word of Jesus that He 
had spoken, Before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me 
thrice. And going out, he wept bitterly” (verses 69-75). 

Poor Peter has to learn the depths of his own self. In 
self assertion and self confidence, he had boasted to lay his 
life down for the Lord. His Lord knew him; he was a true 
believer, but did not know the weakness of himself. That 
weakness had to be uncovered, he had to be sifted as the 
Lord had told him. Far different was the case of Judas. 
He was not a believer at all, only a professing one, and the 
wickedness of the flesh is manifested in his case. 


284 


Peter, as a true believer, did not know what the flesh was, 
as alas so many believers are ignorant of the true nature 
of the flesh. There was no willingness in Peter to sin; he 
wanted to do that which he had told the Lord, but he was 
ignorant of his own weakness. Step by step he had ap- 
proached this sad and sorrowful moment. He did not 
plunge suddenly into the out and out denial of the Lord; 
he never meant to say what he did say. Had any one 
told him, “Peter, you are going to curse and swear, declar- 
ing, I know not the man’, he would have. shuddered in 
horror and vowed, he could never do such a thing. Grad- 
ually he had been drawn towards this awful denial. 
“Watch and pray” the Lord had said “that ye enter not into 
temptation”. Peter had slept; he had neglectea prayer. 
He could not watch an hour with His Lord. Here the first 
step was made. Because he was ignorant of the real char- 
acter of the flesh, that old nature, he did not pray. If he 
had known what the flesh is he would have cast himself 
upon the Lord and watched and prayed. And this is the 
cause of every denial of our blessed Lord; and how numer- 
ous these are! 

What sad repetitions of Peter’s fall in the lives of God’s 
people. The absolute worthlessness of the flesh is learned 
and learned over and over again by many a sad experience. 
The consciousness of our utter weakness in ourselves must 
ever lead us into a closer fellowship in prayer with Himself, 
But over this sad scene of failure and denial was the 
gracious, loving praying Lord. Peter was His own; he 
could not go the way Judas went. He had foreseen all. Ere 
it happened He told Peter what he would do and how Sa- 
tan’s power linked with the flesh would result in his denial. 
But more than that the Lord had prayed for him. “TI have 
prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not.” Where would 


285 


have Peter been, if it had not been for that prayer of the 
Lord. -And so His loving eye watched him, and when the 
sin was committed and the right moment came, there was 
not a word spoken to Peter, but the Lord looked upon Peter. 
Their eyes met. That was enough. What was in that look? 
An angry reminder what Peter had done? A frown which 
showed displeasure? Far from that. It must have been 
a tender, loving, sad look. It went home to Peter’s heart. 
He remembers now. The horror of his denial breaks upon 
him. Had he not been the Lord’s own, had he not known 
the Lord, Satan who had led him gradually on, would 
have rushed him into despair. But we see him rushing 
out and behold him in the night, the dawning morning in | 
the East, convulsed with bitter weeping. What a weeping 
it was, the tears of repentance, selfjudgment flowed freely. 
Broken in heart and broken in spirit with that tender look 
burning in his soul, he weeps and weeps. Reader do you 
know anything of such tears? ‘You do if you walk with 
the Lord. Another one rushes out too when that morning 
had come. He went out and—hanged himself. Satan 
claims his own. Oh what a loving Saviour and Lord we 
have. How He dealt with Peter. How He has dealt with 
us and still cares for His own, prays for them and keeps 
them and restores them to service as He did with His de- 
nying Peter, . 


LE 


286 , = 


CHAPTER. XXVII. 


In this great chapter we follow the Lamb of God to the 
cross; What a journey it was! He, who had lived that 
wonderful iife, had healed the sick, commanded the demons, 
raised the dead, He, who is announced in the beginning of 
this Gospel to be Immanuel, God manifested in flesh, the ~ 
Beloved of the Father is in the hands of men, led away 
to the cross. What sufferings were His? Who is able 
to follow the depths of that shame, which He despised, the 
cross which He endured? But feebly we can meditate on 
these things, which He suffered in our stead. 

The previous chapter closed with that sad record of 
Peter’s denial and his bitter weeping. The Lord had given 
His great confession before the highpriest, the confession 
of truth, which resulted in His being condemned to death. 
The morning had come after this eventful night.* There 
was no sleep for many in that night. The Son of God © 
who had watched and prayed in the garden saw no sleep; 
dragged along He was and reviled by sinners. Peter saw 
no sleep; he went out and wept. The forsaking disciples 
did not sleep; they had fled terror stricken. The chief 
priests waked and plotted on how to proceed against the 
Holy One in putting Him into the hands of the Roman 
governor. Securely bound they led Him away through 
the streets of Jerusalem, to hand Him over to Pontius 
Pilate. (Verses 1-2.) What humiliation for Him to be 


*We cannot enter here into the chronology of that week to correct 
some of the errors of the traditional view. 


287 


thus led away! What a contrast with that which happened 
a few days before, when He was welcomed by the mul- 
titudes as the King of Israel! 


But before we see Him standing in the presence of the 
roman governor, the Holy Spirit gives us the record of 
what became of Judas. “Then Judas, who delivered Him 
up, seeing that He had been condemned, filled with remorse, 
returned the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and 
the elders,. saying, I have sinned in having delivered up 
guiltless blood” (verses 3-4). No doubt he stood there 
and witnessed all what was done to the Lord. He too spent 
a sleepless night. He saw the meek and lowly One, buffeted 
and spit upon. It left him all unmoved; there was no love 
for the Lord in that heart. Did he expect the Lord to 
manifest that power of which he, the traitor had been 
so often an ey2 witness? Perhaps this very thought it was, 
which Satan, who had entered into him suggested. His 
love for money, Satan used as bait. He may have whis- 
pered “You get the money and he will take care of Himself. 
He will not die but get free.” Thus Judas was deceived 
to sell the Lord. What a sin covetousness, the love of mon- 
ey is! It is the root of all evil; it is idolatry. And this 
sin is one of the great sins of the present day. Its worst 
feature is that betrayal of the Lord and His truth, for “filthy 
lucre’s sake” which goes on in Christendom. Professed 
teachers, who are described in the Epistle of Jude and in 
the Second Epistle of Peter, who are nothing but natural 
men, not haying the Spirit, who use great swelling words, 
which the world calls “oratory” are betraying the Lord 
as Judas did. They. are rushing too in a darkness, just as 
dense as that into which Judas rushed that night. The 
Word declares “to whom is reserved the blackness of 
darkness forever.” 


288 


He goes to the priests, who were just as much under that 
satanic power as he was. He gives them his confession. 
He has betrayed guiltless blood. That much at least he 
acknowledges. Then he hanged himself. This is the way 
Satan uses his victims. He deceives; he is a master in 
reasoning in a subtle way. He leads on and on, deeper and 
deeper and when the sin is committed he leads into despair 
and drags his victim down with himself into the place, 
which is prepared for him and his angels. Oh, what grace 
and blessing, to be delivered from the power of darkness, 
from that awful master. Judas after committing suicide 
went to his place (Acts i:25). The view given out by 
some teachers that Judas will come out of his place, -to 
which he departed, and that he will be’ the final Anti-christ, 
the man of sin, is highly fanciful; one does well to beware 
of such views. 

The silver pieces he cast into the temple and the priests, 
as covetous as Judas, stoop down to pick them up. 
That which follows is only reported in this Gospel, in the 
other Gospel records no mention is made of the fate of 
Judas. It is put only in the Gospel of Matthew on account 
of its dispensational bearing. The priests judge very re- 
ligiously that it is not lawful to put the money into the 
Corban; the treasury of the temple. They decide to buy 
with the pieces of silver, the field of the potter for a bury- 
ing ground for strangers. This was in partial fulfillment 
of what was spoken by Jeremias. The full prophecy is 
found in Zechariah, but the Spirit calls here attention to 
what is also spoken by Jeremias. We read in that book 
(Chapers xvii and xix) of a potter’s field, which was sit- 
uated on the side of the valley of Hinnom. That valley 
is also called “Tophet”, a fearful type with its awful mem- 
ories of Gehenna. Perhaps there, Judas had ended his 


289 


earthly existence, and after hanging himself had fallen 
down, and burst asunder. This potter’s field was bought 
with the blood money. 

“By a fiction of law the money was still considered to be 
Judas’, and to have been applied by him in the purchase 
of that potter’s field, for the charitable purpose of burying 
in it strangers. But from henceforth the name of potter’s 
field, became popularly changed into that of “field of blood.” 
And yet it was the act of Israel through its leaders. It was 
all theirs, though they would have fain made it all Judas’: 
the valuing, the selling and the purchasing. And “the pot- 
ter’s field”, the very spot on which Jeremiah had been di- 
vinely directed to prophecy against Jerusalem and against 
Israel, how was it now all fulfilled in the light of the com- 
pleted sin and apostasy of the people, as prophetically de- 
scribed by Zechariah! This Tophet of Jeremiah, now that 
they had valued and sold at thirty shekels Israel’s Messiah- 
Shepherd—truly a Tophet, and become a field of blood! 
Surely not an accidental coincidence this, that it should 
be the place of Jeremiah’s announcement of judgment, not 
accidental, but veritably a fulfillment of this prophecy.* 

Prophetically all is a foreshadowing of what was to happen 
to Israel and Israel’s land on account of the bloodguiltiness, 
which they took upon themselves. Israel’s land becoming 
_“a burying place for strangers” and Israel scattered among 
the nations, finding their graves in Hagal Dama, a field of 
blood. 

We see Him now before Pilate, the Gentile governor, whérc 
He was to be condemned to die; the Jews had no power and 
right. to execute any one. First He was condemned by the 
Jews and delivered into the hands of the Gentiles, who also 
condemned Him. The crowning sin of the world was there- 


*Edersheim Life and Times of the Messiah. 


290 


fore committed by both, the Jews and the Gentiles. Israel’s 
long promised Messiah and King was delivered by His own 
people into the hands of the Roman governor, the Gentile 
power, which was oppressing them. The charge which the 
leaders of the nation had brought against the Lord before 
Pilate was the charge of being a rebel; one who made him- 
self king in opposition to the Roman authority. An im- 
mense multitude of people must have followed Him to the 
Praetorium. The governor questions Him without delay, 
“Art thou the King of the Jews?” The answer comes at 
once from his lips “Thou sayest.” How brief and full of 
dignity! Then the accusation of the chief priests and elders 
began. One after the other spoke. They accused Him 
urgently, we read in the Gospel of Mark. Perhaps one tried 
to outdo the other in slandering Him and speaking malic- 
ious lies about Him. The Holy Spirit has not given us the 
detailed accusations they brought against Him; they all 
were undoubtedly of a political nature. But there He stood, 
the lamb of God and opened not His mouth. How calm He 
was in that Babel of voices. There was no need for Him to 
defend Himself against these unjust accusations. And the 
Gentile governor, the sharp, worldly, Roman politician 
wonders at that strange behaviour. Many a time accused 
criminals had been brought before him and he had witnessed 
their eagerness in defending themselves. Here stands one in 
his presence, who does not open His mouth. Nor does He 
say another word to Pilate after he had questioned him, so 
that Pilate wondered exceedingly. Such a prisoner had 
never been before him. He knew he was guiltless. 

They had a custom, for how long we do not know, that on 
the feast the Roman governor would liberate a great criminal, 
under condemnation. As we read in the Gospel of Mark, the 
multitude began crying out and to beg, that he would do to 


2gr 


them as he had always done. One notable criminal was at 
_ that time in custody; his name was Barabbas. Significant 

~ name! Translated it means “the son of the father.” The 
old Syriac version adds another name, the very name which 
our Lord bore on the earth, the name of Jesus. “Jesus 
Barabbas’”’—a miserable, satanic counterfeit of the true “Son 
of the Father.” Who was he? He was an insurgent and 
had committed murder. May he not have been a false Mes- 
siah, one of these satanic instruments, who attempted to 
become leaders? It is not unreasonable to believe this; in all 
probability he was just such a character. 

“Pilate said to them, whom will ye that I release to you, 
Barabbas, or Jesus who is called Christ? For he knew that 
they had delivered Him up through envy.” What a scene! 
Barabbas still in prison, the guilty one; and here before a 
great multitude of people, among them the elders and the 
priests, moving around and whispering their satanic council 
in the ears of the people, there stands securely bound the 
Holy One, the blessed Lord, in His solemn silence. But 
ere the question is answered something else happens. We 
see a messenger coming in haste towards the seat which 
the governor occupies. He carries an important message, 
which Pilate has to see at once. The message was from his 
wife. 

“But, as he was sitting on the judgment seat, his wife sent 
to him, saying, Have thou nothing to do with this righteous 
man; for I have suffered to-day many things in a dream, 

’ because of Him” (verse 19). It was a solemn warning aimed 
at the conscience of the superstitious Roman. He knew 
the victim was without guilt. God in His mercy gave the 
Gentile a warning. He heeded it not. 

The pause, which had come in was well used by the chief 
priests and the elders for they went among the multitudes and 


292 


persuaded them that they should beg for Barabbas and to 
destroy Jesus. Fearful deed it was! 


And now he puts the important question: ‘Which of the 
two will ye that I release unto you?’ It does not take long to 
bring forth the answer. Barabbas is the people’s choice. 
Barabbas! Barabbas! Not a voice was heard for the Lord. 
Where were now the multitudes who had followed Him? 
Where they who had cried “Hosanna”? If one of them 
was present they kept silent for fear of the wicked leaders. 
But Pilate convinced of the awful choice, which had been 
made, against the authority which he had, makes another 
attempt: “What then shall I do with Jesus, who is called 
Christ?” What a solemn question it was; and it is so still. 
The question was answered there and it must also be an- 
swered by every person to whom the Lord Jesus Christ is 
offered. He must either be accepted as Saviour and Lord 
or rejected. The choice decides the eternal destiny; those 
who accept Him and own Him as their Saviour are saved 
and all who reject Him as Son of God and Saviour are 
lost. Pilate’s second question is answered by a great cry, 
that fearful cry: “Let Him be crucified.” Again Pilate 
asks: “What evil then has He done?” But his voice is 
drowned in a greater demand: “Let Him be crucified.” Pilate 
was fully convinced of the innocence of the silent victim 
before him, but miserable coward he was, he would not act. 
When he saw he availed nothing and a great tumult was 
rising, he took water, washed his hands before the crowd 
and said: “I am guiltless of the blood of this righteous 
one, see ye to it.” A Roman ceremony this was not, but we 
think rather that he borrowed it from the Jews themselves. 
Deut. xxi:6; 2 Sam. ii1:28; Psal. xxvi:6 at least refer to 
what he did here. Pilate with his “See ye to it” casts the 
bloodguiltiness upon the Jews. The chief priests and elders 


293 


had used almost the same phrase in speaking to Judas: 
“See thou to it,” they had said. And what did they answer 
to the governor’s action and “see ye to it’’ his word to them? 
And all the people answering said, “His blood be on us and 
our children. Then he released unto them Barabbas; but 
Jesus, having scourged Him, he delivered up that He might 
be crucified.” 

Terrible answer it was. Barabbas is the nation’s choice 
and the blood of the Holy One is wished by them upon their 
heads and the heads of their children. Has that awful 
wish been granted? Let the history of the Jews answer 
down to the present day. How His blood came upon them 
and their children; the end is not yet. Barabbas has been 
their choice and there is still that false Christ to come, 
who comes in his own name and whom they will receive. 

Delivered up to be crucified. The Holy One is now in 
the hands of cruel, wicked men and all the suffering, shame 
and crueity sinful man energized by Satan is capable of 
inflicting was heaped upon the king, the Lord of Glory. 
Who could describe that scene, which is before us? Paint- 
ers have attempted to picture the terrible ordeal on can- 
vas. Recently Tissot has produced pictures, which the 
world calls “realistic” of great artistic value. Miserable, 
blasphemous works they are indeed, the imaginations of 
the human mind. What was done to Him and what He 
suffered in our stead no brush, no pen, no tongue can tell. 
The hands tied, the back bent, the cruel scourge of cruel 
Rome fell upon the Son of God. Satanic hatred against 
the Holy One supplied the strength to inflict that awful 
punishment, which Roman writers called “the intermediated 
death” preceding death by crucifixion. At last that Holy 
body was a mass of torn and bleeding flesh. 

Then the wicked Gentile soldiers began their mockery. 


294 


“Then the soldiers of the governor, having taken Jesus 
with them to the praetorium, gathered against Him the 
whole band, and having taken off His garment, put on Him 
a scarlet cloak, and having woven a crown of thorns they 
put it on His head; and a reed in His right hand; and bow- 
ing the knee before Him, they mocked Him, saying, Hail, 
King of the Jews! And having spit upon Him, they took 
the reed and beat Him upon His head. And when they had 
mocked Him, they took the cloak off Him, and put His own 
clothes on Him, and led Him away to be crucified” (verses 
27-31). 

A whole cohort of rough, barbaric soldiers are now tak- 
ing hold of the willing victim. After that terrible scourg- 
ing, the:most awful indignities were heaped upon Him. First 
they tore His clothes from His outraged body, most likely 
in eager haste to have their sport with Him. Then they 
east a scarlet cloak on Him. That garment was worn by 
kings, and the scarlet color was produced by the coccus cac- 
ti, the crushed insect. Then they wove a crown of thorns 
and put it on His blessed Head. The crown must-have 
been put upon Him by these instruments of Satan, to in- 
flict pain and to ridicule Him. The crown of thorns also 
points us back to the garden in which the first man fell. 
Thorns became the witnesses of the curse, as they are still 
in nature. The second Man, the Holy One, takes the curse 
upon Hisown head. They put a reed, a weak, perishable 
reed in His hand, the hand which upholds all things, the 
hand which had been outstretched in blessing over the weak, 
the erring, the sick. the blind and which had touched the 
leper; that mighty hand holds the reed, a scepter of mock- 
ery. And then the satanic drama of mockery and ridicule 
is complete. One after the other, these wicked men come 
and bow the knee before Him, they mock Him. “Oh Joy! 


295 


or, Rejoice! King of the Jews.” This was their greeting. 
But they get up from their position and spit upon Him and 
take the reed and beat Him on His head. 

What a scene for us to contemplate! Who can measure 
its depths! The Son of God, He who came from the bosom 
of the Father, the Only Begotten, whose Glory Isaiah had 
seen, insulted, outraged, spit upon trampled upon by His 
vile creatures. And oh! reader, it was our sin which did it. 
How affecting to our hearts it should be and indeed it is. 
How He did love us.to give Himself to such shame and 
suffering. 


In that hour it was fulfilled what His Spirit had predicted 
of His suffering. “I gave my back to the smiters, and my 
cheeks to them that plucked off my hair; I hid not my face 
from shame and spitting” (Isaiah 1:6). And through it all 
- He opened not His mouth. “He was oppressed, and He was 
afflicted, yet He opened not His mouth; He is brought as a 
lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers 
is dumb, so He openeth not His mouth” (Isaiah lili :7). 


And as we gaze upon this scene once more we behold His 
Glory as well. The scene of His shame and rejection, of 
mockery and suffering is prophetic of His exaltation and 
Glory. 

He is the King in Glory; the King of kings and Lord of 
lords. The royal garment is His. The crown of thorns 
gives way to the many crowns which His brow will wear. 
The scepter is His. Every knee must bow before Him and 
every tongue confess Him Lord, to the praise of God the 
Father. The highest Glory He reached through suffering, 
the crown through the cross, because He loved such as we 
are; because God wants us to be with Him in all eternity. 
Oh! glorious, blessed Gospel, how sweet to our hearts! 


206 


Thy holy head, once bound with thorns, 
The crown of glory now adorns; 

Thy seat, the Father’s throne; 
© Lord, e’en now we sing: Thy praise, 
Ours the eternal song to raise— 

Worthy the Lord alone! 


As Head for us Thou sittest there, 
Until Thy members too shall share 
In all Thou dost receive: 
Thy glory and Thy royal throne 
Thy boundless love has made our own 
Who in Thy name believe. 


We triumph in Thy triumphs, Lord; 
Thy joys our deepest joys afford, 
The fruit of love divine. 
While sorrow’ng, suff’ring, toiling here 
How does the thought our spirits cheer 
The throne of glory’s Thine.” 


And now they led Him away that He should be crucified. 
“Once more was He unrobed and robed. The purple robe 
was torn from His bleeding body, the crown of thorns 
from His bleeding brow. Arrayed again in His own, now 
blood stained, garments, He was led forth to execution. 
Only about two hours and a half had passed since the time 
that He had first stood before Pilate (about half-past six), 
when the melancholy procession reached Golgotha (at nine 
AN) 

“And as they went forth they found a man of Cyrene, 
Simon by name; him they compelled to go with them that 
he might bear His cross. And having come to a place called 
Golgotha, which means place of a skull, they gave Him to 


*Edersheim. 


of 


drink vinegar mingled with gall; and having tasted it He 
would not drink” (verses 32-35). 

Physical weakness made it necessary that one should 
carry His cross. Was there ever such a procession seen 
before! The Lamb of God led forth to suffer outside of the 
camp! Oh, the man of sorrows, how He must have looked 
when they dragged Him to the place of death! But though 
He did not carry the cross and was weakened, yet He could 
not succumb at this point. The soldiers had led forth, no 
doubt, many a one to a similar death. Perhaps some died 
before the nails could be driven through the hands and 
feet. Did they fear that this might be the case with Him, 
whom they had maltreated, dishonored and mocked? Or 
was it mercy, which offered Him vinegar mingled with 
gall? Mercy, we believe it was not. It was a stimulant 
which they offered Him. They knew not that the Life 
which was in their hands could not succumb; no one could 
take that life from Him. He would not drink what was 
given to Him; He did not seek relief, He did not need it. 
His loving will was to endure all the suffering in perfect 
consciousness. But there is a prophecy that He should 
drink vinegar and gall in His suffering (Psalm Ixix). 
When the right moment had come for the fulfillment of 
that prophecy, He said, that the Scripture might be ful- 
filled, ‘I thirst.” Then He drank. Before the crucifixion 
He refused the vinegar and the gall. Golgotha, the place 
where they took Him, must have been to the north of 
Jerusalem. It was outside of the gate near gardens, in 
which were tombs. 

Here they crucified Him. No description of the act itself 
is given in any of the Gospels. Crucifixion was the most 
horrible torturing mode of putting criminals to death; it 
originated in Phoenicia and was adopted by the Romar 


298 


government. The Jews themselves knew nothing of putting 
transgressors to death by the cross. Inasmuch as the Holy 
Spirit does not describe the awful act, the nailing of the 
Lord to the cross, we shall not attempt it. Lifted up, His 
hands and feet pierced by nails, every muscle stretched 
and life’s blood pouring out, He hung on the cross, suffer- 
ing the unspeakable tortures of such a death. 


Prophecy is now being fulfilled. All the predictions of 
His sufferings come true. That what was foreshadowed 
in the different offerings and sacrifices, is now beheld in its 
deep and awful reality. The heavenly Isaac is upon the 
altar and the hand of God about to smite Him; there is no 
deliverance from the cup, He drinks it to the last drop. 

The xxii Psalm, that great prophecy concerning the sin- 
bearer, comes first of all into view. “They parted His 
clothes amongst themselves, casting lots.” This was fore- 
told by David (Psalm xxii:18). It is said that the division 
of the garments of the victims was a Roman custom. But 
there is a deeper significance than a mere fulfillment of a 
prophecy. His enemies, those who nailed Him to the cross, 
received His clothes. And so for His naked creature He 
has provided the robe of righteousness by His death on the 
cross. 

In the next place the superscription is mentioned. “And 
they set over His head His accusation written: “This is 
Jesus the King of the Jews.” A board on which the crime 
of the condemned was written was generally carried before 
the criminal, who was led forth to the place of execution 
through the crowded streets. This custom was most: likely 
followed with our Lord. Pilate himself had the superscrip- 
tion drawn up and it was written in three languages: Latin, 
Greek and the Aramaean dialect of Hebrew. We can not 
follow here the report of the different Gospel records about 


299 


_ the writing above the cross. The one here in Matthew 
was undoubtedly the Latin inscription, while the fullest, as 
reported by John “Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews” 
was written in Aramean and the one in Mark “The King of - 
the Jews” is the Greek inscription. Pilate could not help 
himself, he had to write as he did, though he may have had 
the thought in mind to.avenge himself and to mock the 
Jews. In spite of the hating Jews He received His true 
title and that from the Gentile. There it stood written and 
could not be changed; so it is still. Jesus of Nazareth, 
the despised, the rejected One, is the King of the Jews, one 
of His titles; the throne of His Father David is His and 
in the wider sense He will be the King of kings. 


“Then are crucified with Him two robbers, one on the 
right hand and one on the left.” Another fulfillment of 
Scripture. “He was numbered with the transgressors” 
(Isaiah liii:12). 

“But the passers-by reviled Him, shiaidne their heads and 
saying, Thou that destroyest the temple and buildest it in 
three days, save thyself. .If thou art the Son of God, de- 
scend from the cross. And in like manner the chief priests 
also, mocking with the scribes and the elders, said, He 
saved others, Himself He cannot save. He is the King of 
Israel; let Him descend from the cross, and we will believe 
on Him. He trusted upon God, let Him save Him now if 
He will have Him. For He said, Iam Son ofGod. And 
the robbers also who had been crucified with Him cast the 
same reproaches on Him” (verses 43-44). 

We behold still deeper sufferings of the Holy One. We 
listen again to the voice of prophecy. “Reproach hath 
broken my heart; and I am full of heaviness; and I looked 
for some to take pity, but there was none; and for comfort- 
_ ers, but I found none” (Psalm Ixix:20). There is none to 


300 


pity in the scene before us. He is alone cruelly mocked and 
He must have felt the reproach as only one who is ab- 
solutely holy could have felt it. He was reviled but He 
reviled not again. Our Gospel does not report a single 
word coming from His lips. From the Gospel of Luke we 
learn that the first word He had spoken after He had been 
lifted up, was that wonderful prayer “Father forgive them 
for they know not what they do.” He is silent to the cruel 
and vile mockeries, born in the pit, the very breath of 
Satan. The old accusation is once more held up against 
Him. Little they knew that they were fulfilling that very 
Word about destroying the temple and that the third day, 
when He would arise as the mighty victor was not far 
hence. 

But it was not only the rabble of the street, the low down 
element, the uncultured mob which mocked: Him, but 
the chief priests, the elders had gone out to help in re- 
proaching Him. They had come to deride Him in His 
agony. What awful depravity this reveals. It is astonish- 
ing to see that these cultured religionists in their fearful 
blindness quoted Scripture, when they gazed upon Him. 
They had said, “He is King of Israel; let Him descend now 
from the cross, and we will believe on Him.”” The great 
King of Israel, David, had written by the Spirit that great 
prophetic. psalm of the suffering One, the Twenty-second. 
They knew that Psalm well. The ancient synagogue even 
had given this Psalm a Messianic interpretation. The suf- 
ferer ‘there in that Psalm cries out, “But I am a worm and 
ne man, a reproach of men, and despised of the people.” 
They gazed upon this great suffering One. “All they that 
see me laugh me to scorn, they shoot out the lip, they shake 
the head.” They saw the laughing throng, the cruelly 
mocking crowds, and they themselves joined in. But there 


301 


is more than that. The wicked enemies of the great suf- 
ferer speak in that Psalm..The very words they were to utter 
in the presence of the forsaken sufferer, the words with which 
they were to revile Him are given. “He trusted on the 
Lord that He would deliver Him; let Him deliver Him, 
seeing He delighted in Him.” (Verse 8.) These very 
words the sneering chief priests, elders and scribes uttered 
before the cross. What awful blindness had come upon 
them! But more solemn still and full of meaning are the 
words they also said. “He saved others, Himself He can- 
not save.” How true, He saved others. And what a con- 
fession from their lips that He did save others. They 
owned His divine power and yet they rejected Him. He 
could not save Himself, for He would not. He had come 
to save others, and that could only be accomplished by 
‘taking the place of those He came to save. He had to die 
on the cross; Himself He could not save. 

The robbers, too, cast the same reproaches on Him. The 
one, indeed, becomes ere he dies the mighty trophy of His 
Grace and hears from the blessed Lord that marvelous 
word, “To-day thou shalt be with Me in Paradise.” As 
this incident does not belong into this Gospel we pass it by. 

The deepest agony has not yet been reached. Awful as 
the physical and mental sufferings of the Son of God 
must have been, there was still greater suffering before Him, 
a suffering before which all the other sufferings pale. Up 
to this point He had suffered from wicked men, energized 
by the devil. But now He is approaching the moment when 
He who knew no sin is to be made sin, when, instead of 
suffering from men, He is to suffer from God Himself. 
The cup from which His holy Being shrank He takes now 
to drink to the last drop. 

“Now from the sixth hour there was darkness over the 


302 


whole land until the ninth hour; but about the ninth hour 
Jesus cried out with a loud voice, saying, Eli, Eli, lama 
sabachthani? that is, My God, my God, why hast Thou for- 
saken Me?” (verses 45-47). 


A solemn darkness settled over the whole land. Was it 
a darkness which covered the entire earth? Hardly, for in 
a part of the world it was night and darkness was not possi- 
ble. No doubt the darkness covered the entire land and 
perhaps the entire Roman world. It enshrouded the cross 
with the great sufferer so that He was no longer visible to 
those who kept guard and those who looked on. ‘That it was 
not_an eclipse of the sun is learned from the fact that it 
was full moon at that time. It was a supernatural dark- 
ness. At the termination of the darkness about the ninth 
hour we hear His voice out of the darkness. About the 
ninth hour He cried, not in feebleness, but with a loud 
voice, “Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani?” But what is the mean- 
ing of this darkness? It was the outer sign of what passed 
over Him, who was then the sinner’s substitute before a 
holy and righteous God. God had hidden His face from 
Him; He was forsaken by God Himself. His cry explains 
the meaning of the darkness, and the darkness gives us the 
meaning of His bitter cry. God had turned from Him, left 
Him, who had taken the sinner’s place. He then. bore our 
sins, was made sin for us and was the offering for sin. But 
who can fathom it? Who can understand the deep mys- 
tery, the deep suffering when the holy and righteous God 
dealt with sin in Him, who had no sin, but who was made 
sin? 

“He was alone with God, made sin; nothing to turn aside 
the cup of justice; nothing to deaden it. The power which 
was in Him did not shelter Him; it rendered Him capable 
of bearing that which weighed on His soul, the feeling of 


3093 


_ the horror of the curse in the measure in which the love of 
_ the Father was familiar to Him, the feeling of that which 
it was to be made sin in the measure of the divine holiness 
which was in Him. Neither the one nor the other could be 
measured. He drank then the cup of judgment of God 
against sin. All forces Him to utter the cry, a cry which we 
are allowed to hear that we might know what passed there, 
the reality of atonement: ‘My God, my God, why hast 
Thou forsaken Me?’ It is a forsaking which none can 
fathom, save He who felt it.’’* 

Oh the blessed mystery of what transpired then 
in those three hours of darkness! It is true we cannot 
fathom it. We cannot know what it cost to make reconcilia- 
tion, but we know the great work was done. The just died 
for the unjust that He might bring us to God. All done for 
us that God might be just and the justifier of him, who be- 
~ lieves in Jesus. “And some of those who stood there, when 

they heard it said, This man calls for Elias. And imme- 
diately one of them running and getting a sponge, having 
filled it with vinegar and fixed it on a reed, gave Him to 
drink. But the rest said, Let be; let us see if Elias comes 
to save Him” (v. 47-50). Who were those who said, This 
man calls for Elias? It is generally assumed that they were 
some of the soldiers. They knew perhaps little of Hebrew, 
it is said, and mistook the word “Eli” My God, for Elias. 
But against this it must be said that they equally knew little 
or nothing of Elias. We think rather the persons were — 
mocking Jews, who understood the words and made them 
the occasion of new mockery. At this time it happened what 
is more fully recorded in the Gospel of John. “After this, 
Jesus, knowing that all things were now finished, that the 
_ Scripture might be fulfilled, says, I thirst.” Then they gave 


*John N. Darby. 


304 


Him to drink after which He gave up the spirit. The work 
was done in the three hours of darkness. After that little 
unfulfilied Scripture is fulfilled at the right time He said, 
“Tt is finished.” 

But here in our Gospel we read “And Jesus having cried 
again with a loud voice dismissed His spirit.” It is signifi- 
cant that twice we read of His loud voice. - There was no 
sign and evidence of exhaustion. His life was not taken 
from Him but He gave His life; He laid it down Himself. 
The King Himself, when the moment had come, dismissed 
His spirit. And now we behold a three-fold result of His 
death. The veil in the temple was rent. The earth was 
shaken, and the tombs were opened and the centurion made 
his confession as well as those who were with him. 

“And lo, the veil of the temple was rent in two from top 
to the-bottom, and the earth was shaken, and the rocks were 
rent, and the tombs were opened; and many bodies of the 
saints fallen asleep arose, and, going out of the tombs after 
His resurrection, entered into the holy city and appeared 
unto many. But the centurion, and they that were with him 
on guard over Jesus, seeing the earthquake and the things 
that took place, feared greatly, saying, Truly this man was 
Son of God” (verses 51-54). 

The rent veil is the first event following the death of the 
Lord. The veil was the inner one of the temple, dividing 
the holy of holies from the holy part. It was not an earth- 
quake, which rent this heavy veil, but the power of God. 
It was done from above and not from below, “from top to 
bottom.” It must have happened just about the time when the 
priests entered the holy part at the evening sacrifice. What 
terror must have seized these officiating priests when they 
beheld that unseen hand throwing open the most holy place. 
It has been suggested that this miracle was responsible that 


3095 

so many priests became converted in Jerusalem. For we 
read in the Book of Acts “and a great company of the priests 
were obedient to the faith” (Acts vi:7). The veil itself was 
the sign that man was barred from coming to God; that 
heavy, solid veil, ever gave that testimony that it is impossi- 
ble for man to approach God. The rent veil shows that it 
has been made possible.” The rent veil declares that the great 
sacrifice on the cross of the spotless Lamb of God has been 
accepted. It is the first great answer of God to the majestic 
word of the dying Saviour, “It is finished.” It likewise 
shows that the Jewish ceremonial law is fulfilled and ended. 
Most beautiful and uplifting is that inspired reference to this 
great event in the Epistle to the Hebrews: “Having there- 
fore, brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood 
of Jesus, by a new and living way, which He has consecrated 
for us, through the veil, that is to say His flesh, and having 
a high priest over the house of God. Let us draw near with 
a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts 
sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed 
with pure water. Let us hold fast the profession of Hope 
without wavering; for He is the faithful that promised” 
(Heb; x :19-23 ). 

In the next place the earth was shaken, the rocks were 
rent, and the tombs opened. This statement is peculiar to 
Matthew ; we do not find it in the other Gospel records. The 
death of the King shook the earth and rent the rocks. The 
opened tombs declared the glorious news, that His death 
hath broken the bands of death forever; through death He 
destroyed him, that had the power of death, the devil (Heb. 
ii:14). The interpretation that the rocks were rent and the 
graves opened, because the Lord in spirit descended into 
hades, we reject as unscriptural and fanciful, leading to- 
wards more serious errors. The Lord did not descend into 
hades; He went to paradise. 


306 


But besides this great sign, showing the captivity led cap- 
tive, the power of death destroyed by His death, we read 
something else. “Many bodies of the saints fallen asleep 
arose, and going out of the tombs after His resurrection, 
entered into the holy city and appeared to many.” The 
reader notices that the resurrection of the bodies of these 
saints did not take place immediately after the Lord had 
dismissed His spirit. They came forth after His resurrec- 
tion. They could not precede Him. He is the first fruits, 
and these saints could not rise till He was risen on the third 
day. But why is it mentioned here and not in the next 
chapter in connection with His own resurrection? It belongs 
there historically. It is put here by the Holy Spirit to show 
the effect of the great work accomplished on the cross, the 
efficacy of the death of our Saviour. Death is now to be 
swallowed up in victory. ‘Where O death is thy sting? 
Where O death thy victory? Now the sting of death is sin, 
and the power of sin the law. But thanks to God, who gives 
us the victory by our Lord Jesus Christ” (1 Corinth xv:55- 
57). By His death the great work of deliverance has been 
accomplished, and this makes resurrection possible. The 
rising of the bodies of these saints is a solemn and glorious 
anticipation of the first resurrection, soon to come. These 
risen Saints, who came forth after He had left the grave, 
entered actually in the holy city and appeared to many. It 
_ was another mighty, supernatural witness of what had been 
wrought. But one might ask many questions in connection 
with this event. Who were they? What became of them? 
Where are they now? To whom did they appear and for what 
purpose? These questions and similar ones are unanswer- 
able. It is useless to speculate about it. It is well in these 
days to abide very close to the written Word. 


307 


And the third event, the confession of the Saviour as Son 
of God by the centurion and the company of soldiers under 
him. In Luke and Mark we find the centurion mentioned 
alone, but here it is the entire company. They were Gen- 
tiles, heathen. The earthquake, the darkness, the loud voice 

which had spoken from the cross, all had filled these poor 

pagans with fear and from their lips, gazing up to the cross 
where He had bowed His adorable head, came the confes- 
sion “Son of God.” No such word came from Jewish lips. 
What a prophetic foreshadowing again. The Gentiles were 
to believe on Him. That for which they had condemned 
them and delivered Him into the hands of the Gentiles is 
confessed by those who had put Him to death. 

The work was finished, and God made it impossible that any 
other indignities could be put upon Him, whose body could 
“not see corruption. It was customary to leave the bodies 
of the crucified hanging on the cross, the prey of wild birds. 
What happened about the breaking of the bones and the 
spear thrust is not recorded in our Gospel, but is fully made 
knowr in the Gospel of John. We mention it, therefore, 
briefly without attempting an exposition. “The Jews, there- 
fore, that the bodies might not remain on the cross on the 
Sabbath, for it was the preparation, for the day of that Sab- 
bath was a great day, demanded of Pilate that their legs 
might be broken and they taken away.” Had they suc- 
ceeded, instruments of Satan as they were, the Scriptures 
_ would have been broken. But what happened? “The sol- 
diers, therefore, came and broke the legs of the first and of 
the other that had been crucified with Him; but coming to 
Jesus, when they saw that He was already dead they did 
not break His legs, but one of the soldiers pierced His side 
with a spear and immediately there came out blood and 
water, And he who saw it bears witness, and his witness is 


208 


true, that ye also may believe. For these things took place 
that the Scripture might be fulfilled. Not a bone of Him 
shall be broken. And again another Scripture says, They 
shall look on Him whom they pierced” (John xix :32-37). 

Then there were many women who witnessed the suffer- 
ings of the second man how He bore the curse. They gazed 
upon Him from afar (verses 55-50). 

“Now when even was come a rich man of Arimathea, his 
name Joseph, who also himself was a disciple of Jesus. He 
going to Pilate begged the body of Jesus. Then Pilate com- 
manded the body to be given up. And Joseph having got | 
the body, wrapped it in a clean linen cloth, and laid it in 
his new tomb which he had hewn in the rock; and having 
rolled a great stone to the door of the tomb, went away. 
But Mary of Magdala was there, and the other Mary, sit- 
ting opposite the sepulchre” (verses 57-61). 

Who was this Joseph of Arimathea? A wealthy man of 
the Jews and a secret disciple of the Lord Jesus. He was 
an honorable councillor, belonging to the Sanhedrim, who 
also himself was awaiting the kingdom of God (Mark xv: 
43). He was a good man and just. When the Sanhedrim 
had come together to condemn the Holy One Joseph of 
Arimathea had not assented to their counsel and deed (Luke 
xxili:51). IFear of the Jews had kept his discipleship in the 
background, but now when the Lord had expired on the 
cross, and after the mighty events, which had taken place, 
he comes boldly to the front. His fear became a holy bold- 
ness. During the earthly life of the Lord, though he knew 
Him and believed on Him, fear kept him back from avowing 
openly his discipleship; but now as His Lord had died He 
makes His great confession of Him before the Jews, the 
Sanhedrim and the Gentiles as well. He went right to 
Pilate. This person had the authority to dispose of the 


399 
bodies of the crucified. Generally they were, after all dis- 
honor had been done to them, thrown in the malefactors’ 
graves. He then begged for the body of Jesus, and Pilate 
consented readily and gave his permission. The death of 
Christ had made a deep impression upon the Roman gov- 
ernor. That Jesus should have died so soon was a great 
amazement to Pilate. He called for the centurion to get the 
details from him and perhaps that official gave him his con- 
viction that the crucified One was Son of God (Mark xv: 
44). And now to the astonishment of Pilate the well known, 
prominent and wealthy Joseph comes and begs for the body 
to do Him honor. How it must have disturbed the coward 
and troubled his conscience. But another one was there, 
too. That One helped in the hasty preparation for the 
burial. “And Nicodemus also, who at first came to Jesus by 
night, came, bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about a 
hundred pounds weight. They took, therefore, the body of 
Jesus and bound it up in linen with the spices, as it is the 
custom with the Jews to prepare for burial” (John xix :39- 
40). Nicodemus was a very timid man by nature. How he 
came to the Lord by night for fear of the Jews is well 
known. From His own lips he heard the blessed truth, the 
words of life. The precious seed had been sown in his 
heart. Did it spring up? He also belonged to the council. 
When the officers returned, having been sent to capture the 
Lord and they gave their report, Nicodemus, the great ac- 
knowledged teacher in Israel ventured a weak defense of 
the Lord (John vii:50-53). It showed the seed working. 
But the death of Christ brought him and Joseph of Ari- 
mathea deliverance from the fear of men; light and liberty. 
flashed in their souls as the result of the death of Christ. 
The Lord had said to Nicodemus: “As Moses lifted up a 
serpent in the wilderness so must the Son of Man be lifted 


310 


up, that whosoever believes on Him should not perish but 
have everlasting life.” He had been lifted up and Nicodemus 
believing, confessed Him. 


What honor then was done to the Lord. Wrapped in a ~ 
clean linen sheet, after He had been lifted from the cross 
and then the resting place for Him, who had finished the 
work the Father gave Him to do, a new tomb hewn in the 
rock. It was a fulfillment of Isaiah liii:o.. It is unfortunate 
that the authorized version gives us such a poor translation 
of this verse. Literally translated itis “And men appointed 
His grave with the wicked, but He was with the rich in His 
death, because He had done no violence, neither was there 
guile in His mouth.” The authorized version ‘““He made His 
grave with the wicked” is wrong. The enemy would cast 
His body to the place where the bodies of the wicked were 
cast, but the power of God made that impossible. 

The great stone is rolled to the door of the tomb. Joseph 
and Nicodemus depart. Only Mary of Magdala and the 
other Mary keep their love watch opposite the sepulchre. 
Thus closed the greatest day in the history of the world, the 
day on which the Prince of life, the Lord of Glory died on 
the cross of Golgotha, when the great work of reconciliation — 
had been accomplished and peace was made in the blood of 
His cross. 

That which follows in the chapter is peculiar to Matthew. 
None of the other Gospels have it. It is indeed the proper 
place for it. 

‘Now on the morrow, which is after the preparation, the 
chief priests and the Pharisees came together to Pilate, 
saying, Sir, we have called to mind that that deceiver said 
when He was still alive, after three days I arise. Command 
therefore that the sepulchre be secured until the third day, 
lest His disciples should come and steal Him away, and say 


311 


to the people He is risen from the dead; and the last error 
shall be worst than the first. And Pilate said to them, Ye 
have a watch; go, secure it as well as ye know how. And 
they went and secured the sepulchre, having sealed the stone 
with the watch besides’’ (verses 62-66). 

- But little comment on this striking incident is necessary. 
The enemy is at work to make all secure, but instead of it 
he only makes his own defeat complete, and the wrath of 
the enemy is made to praise Him. They remembered sud- 
denly the words of the Lord, showing how they had watched 
His utterances. The disciples to whom He had said so often 
that He would rise on the third day, had forgotten all about 
it. It did not enter into their minds. This is proven by the 
way they took the news of His resurrection. It was a for- 
getfulness, no doubt, produced by the Spirit of God; in this 
very fact lies a strong argument for the resurrection of the 
Lord. Their imaginations could not produce, as infidelity 
“has claimed, a supposed appearing of the One who had died. 
But the enemy remembered. Yet could they really fear that 
His disciples would steal His body? The disciples had been 
scattered like sheep. Poor Peter, where was he? They had 
fled. Would the feeble women roll the stone away and steal 
-His body? Could they think that fraud and deception might 
be practiced? It was the bad conscience which made them 
fear. Pilate made no objections; he let them have their de- 
sire. The stone is sealed, the guard is placed there to make 
fraud and illusion an impossibility. Little did they know 
that they were working to make the fact of the glorious 
resurrection of the Son of God secure beyond controversy. 
They furnished one of the strongest proofs for that event, 
thus becoming involuntary witnesses of His resurrection. 


312 


CHAPTER. XXVITE 


We have reached the last portion of our Gospel. The end 
is brief and very abrupt. The account of the resurrection 
of the Lord as given by Matthew is the briefest of all the 
Gospels. Only a few of the facts are mentioned. Then the 
characteristic feature of this last chapter is that no mention 
is made of the ascension of the Lord. However, the fact 
of His ascension is implied in numerous places in the Gos- 
pel. In the Gospel of Mark we find the statement that 
He was taken up into heaven and sat at the right 
hand of God. In Luke we read that He was “carried 
into heaven,’ but in Matthew no such statement is made. 
The Gospel ends as if He were still’on the earth, all power 
in heaven and on earth in His hands and with His own to 
the completion of the age. All this is in perfect harmony 
with the scope of the Gospel. 

In giving a brief exposition of this last chapter we shall 
not consider the different accounts of the resurrection, 
nor shall we attempt to harmonize the different manifesta- 
tions of the risen Christ or to give the order of these. All 
this is beyond the work we have undertaken. We confine 
ourselves to the account as given here. 

The chapter contains three parts. First, we find a brief 
account of the resurrection and the manifestation of Christ 
to the women. In the second place we find an account, 
which, like the last paragraph of the previous chapter, is 
peculiar to Matthew, the lying report invented by the Jews. 
Lastly, we see the disciples gathered in Galilee and He gives 
them His great commission, declares His power in heaven 


313 anita 


and on earth and assures them of His presence with them, 
even unto the end of the age. This is the last vision of the 
King in the Gospel of Matthew. 

“Now late on Sabbath, as it began to dawn on the first 
day of the week, came Mary of Magdala and the other Mary 
to look at the sepulchre.”’ This is the brief introduction to 
the scene which follows. With the many women the two 
Marys had looked on the awful crucifixion scene. How 
they must have suffered in these hours of the agony of Him 
whom they loved. Then we beheld them sitting opposite 
the sepulchre. And now after others had gone and were 
taking a physical rest they could not stay away; they over- 
came all fear and went out to the sepulchre once more. The 
wording of the first verse is peculiar. Another translation 
reads, “And late in the week, when it was on the point of 
dawning into the first of the week came Mary the Magda- 
lene and the other Mary to view the sepulchre.’* Some 
have thought of two visits these women made, one on the 
evening and the other in the early morning. This is not 
probable. The dawning of the first day of the week is the 
time marked out. The first day of the week began after 
sundown on the Sabbath. It is quite correct. to translate 
“after the Sabbath.” To this agree the other records. 

“And behold there was a great earthquake; for an angel 
of the Lord, descending out of heaven, came and rolled away 
the stone and sat upon it. And his look was as lightning, 
and his clothing white as snow. And for fear of him the 
guards trembled and became as dead men” (verses 2-4). 
The’ great earthquake was occasioned by the descending 
angel and the stone, so securely sealed, was rolled away and 
the heavenly messenger took his seat upon it. However, the 
resurrection of the Lord did not take place when the earth- 


*Rotherham. 


Sag eee 
quake happened and when the stone was rolled away. Paint- 
ings often help along this unscriptural conception. No angel 
was needed to open the way for Him from the tomb. God 
raised Him from the dead afd He Himself arose. The 
stone was rolled away to show that the tomb was empty. 
The resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead was God’s 
mighty and glorious seal upon the atoning. work accom- 
plished on the cross. It was God’s answer to His strong 
crying and tears (Heb. v:7). The women no doubt felt the 
earthquake and may have seen that flash of light from above. 

We have the effect of what happened upon the soldiers 
first, in the next place upon the women, and, lastly, upon the 
Jews. Three classes are seen in connection with the resur- 
rection of the Lord in Matthew. The soldiers represent un- 
believing Gentiles, the women, believers and then the Jews. 
The solders are terror-stricken, They were lying around on 
the ground as if they were dead. It is the effect upon the 
natural man of God’s power made known. On what greater 
scale this will be repeated when He comes again in resur-_ 
rection Glory, as King of kings and Lord of lords. 

The trembling soldiers are left for the present. We shall 
hear of them later. The women are now addressed by the 
angel. They, too, must have made an outcry for the angel ~ 
“answered them.” 

“And the angel answering said to the women, Fear not ye, 
I know that ye seek Jesus, the crucified One. He is not 
here, for He is risen as He said. Come and see the place 
where the Lord lay. And go quickly and say to the disciples 
that He is risen from the dead; and Behold He goes before 
you into Gelilee, there shall ye see Him. Behold I have told 


9 


you. 


What a glorious message it was. ‘The crucified One risen 
from the dead! Mary of Magdala is in the foreground. 


315 


Out of her the Lord had driven seven demons. She and the 
other Mary take the place of a Miriam and Dehorah in the 
Old Testament. They are to herald and celebrate the mighty 
victory over sin, death and the devil which had been won. — 
They hear the good news first and are the publishers of the 
same. As in the beginning of the Gospel, in the genealogy 
of the King, women are prominently mentioned, so in the 
closing scenes, in the triumph of the King, they have the 
lead. 

“Fear not ye” is the message of the angel to the women. 
This, indeed, is the good news from the empty tomb. There 
is no cause to fear, absolutely none, for those who have be- 
lieved on the Lord and are His own. All darkness, all un- 
certainty, all doubt and fear are at an end. The whole sin 
question has been righteously dealt with. The empty tomb, 
the glorious victory over death, and the grave are the ever- 
lasting witnesses. Gazing on this empty tomb, hearing that 
angelic message “He is risen” faith breaks forth in that song 
of triumph, penned by the Holy Spirit in Romans viii. 
“What shall we then say to these things? If God be for us, 
who. can be against us? He who spared not His own Son, 
but delivered Him up for us all, how shall He not also with 
Him give us all things? Who shall bring an accusation- 
against God’s elect? It is God who justifies ; who is he that 
condemns? It is Christ who has died, but rather has been 
also raised up; who is also at the right hand of God; who 
also intercedes for us.” God is for us; He gave His Son; _ 
Christ died for us and God raised Him from the dead. 
Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures ; He was 
buried, He was raised on the third day according to the 
_ Scriptures (1 Corinth. xv:3-4). Thanks be unto God for 

His blessed Gospel. 


But we must refrain from following the blessed doctrine 


316 


of resurrection. If we were teaching this great doctrine we 
would have to follow the revelations as given in the Epistles. 
This is not our purpose. We are following only a partial 
historical account of the event itself. 

The angel directs the women to bear the good news to the 
disciples and assures them the risen One Himself would go 
before them to Galilee, and there the disciples would see 
Him. This appointment was according to His own word. 
We find it in chapter xxvi:32. It is peculiar to Matthew and 
as we shall see later of no little importance. 

“And going out quickly from the tomb with fear and great 
joy, they ran to bring His disciples word. And as they went 
to bring His disciples word behold, also, Jesus met them, 
saying, Hail! And they coming up took Him by the feet 
and worshipped Him. Then Jesus says to them, Fear not; 
go, bring word to my brethren that they go into Galilee, and 
there they shall see Me” (verses 8-10). 

This tells us that they had entered into the empty tomb 
and had looked upon the place His blessed Body had rested. 
They must have trembled in great excitement; but greater 
still was their joy. The angel’s message had at last brought 
back the remembrance of the words of the Lord about His 
resurrection on the third day. They ran, therefore, to bring 
the news to the disciples. And as they hastened on, eager 
to carry out the command, behold Jesus met them and 
greeted them with the word Chairete “Oh! the Joy” or “Re- 
joice!’’ He was full of joy and graciously He revealed 
Himself to these devoted women. But oh, the joy! when at 
last His own are all with Him. Worshippingly they fall at 
His feet, while He Himself assures them “Fear not!” and 
repeats the message of the angel, “Bring word to my breth- 
ten that they go into Galilee, and there they shall see Me.” 

All this is very tersely told. In the Gospel of John we find 


317 


the fuller account of the Lord’s manifestation to Mary (John 
xx:11-18). It is often said by those who do not believe in 
the inspiration of the Scriptures that there is a discrepancy 
between Matthew and John. In Matthew they fall at His 
feet and worship Him, but in John’s Gospel the Lord says 
to Mary “Touch me not.” There is no difficulty here at all. 
She fell at His feet and touched them, and laying hold of 
them the Lord uttered the words which are found in the 
Gospel of John. The taking hold by the feet is reported in 
the Gospel of Matthew, and the words He spake in the 
Gospel of John. This is one of the beautiful evidences of 
the divine authorship of the Gospel records. In our Gospel 
Christ is seen in relation to Israel. He is the risen Messiah 
in connection with His believing remnant. Well can she 
claim Him and take hold of His feet. As the women fell at 
His feet and worshipped Him, so His earthly people will at 
some day worship the Lord and own Him as the Messiah. 
But in John it is the heavenly side. He is to ascend, to go 
away, leaving the earth and going on high; His bodily pres- 
ence on the earth in relation to Israel is not the revelation 
found in the fourth Gospel. Then the Lord calls His own 
“Brethren.” In the Gospel of John we find the same com- 
mand. Never before did the Lord call His disciples “breth- 
ren,” but on that glorious resurrection morning He uses this 
expression. It is now fully manifested that “ He that sancti- 
fieth and they are sanctified are all of one; therefore He is 
not ashamed to call them brethren” (Heb. ii:11-12). The 
word itself is mentioned in xxii Psalm. “I will declare thy 
name unto my brethren” (verse 22). That Psalm, contain- 
ing the great prophecy of the suffering and exaltation of 
Christ, is prominent in the closing scenes of Matthew. We 
saw the fulfillment of the sufferings on the cross and here 
the prediction which relates to His resurrection. The main 


318 


thing, however, insisted upon in the resurrection account in 
Matthew is Galilee. The disciples are told to go there ; there 
the Lord will meet them and send them forth on their great 
mission among the nations. Before we behold them gathered 
in the mountain, which the Lord had appointed, another 
scene is introduced. 

“And as they went, behold some of the watch went into- 
the city, and brought word to the chief priests of all that 
had taken place. And having assembled with the elders, 
and having taken counsel, they gave a large sum of money. 
to the soldiers saying, Say that His disciples coming by 
night stole Him while we were sleeping. And if this should 
come to the hearing of the governor we will persuade him 
and save you from all anxiety. And they took the money, 
and did as they had been taught. And this report is current 
among the Jews until this day” (verses 11-15). 

As previously stated this is peculiar to Matthew and the 
continuation of the story contained in the last paragraph of 
chapter xxvii. We learn that the effect of the resurrection _ 
of the Lord was a hardening one for the Jews. These 
wicked men had given thirty pieces of silver to have him 
delivered into their hands and now they are giving an im- 
mense sum to circulate a lie about His resurrection. The 
watch had sufficiently recovered from their awful fright, 
and some of them hasten back to the city. Surely something 
must have happened or why should they leave their impor- 
tant post and return to the city to make a report? Then it 
is strange that they went to the chief priests first and not to 
the Roman governor. This was indeed a very irregular pro- 
ceeding. From this fact we must conclude that in the esti- 
mation of these soldiers, that which they had to report, was 
of greater importance for the chief priests to know than it 
was for Pilate. Who knows but these priests had instructed 


319 


the guard, that if something should happen at the sepulchre 
and He should come forth, that they were to come to them 
first of all? This is probable. They bring their report and 
this was nothing less but a witness of the resurrection and 
that the tomb is empty. The enemies were the first wit- 
nesses Of His triumph. The whole Sanhedrim was then 
hastily summoned to receive the report in an official way. 
The straightforward statement, as men of a military training 
are apt to report, made doubt about veracity impossible. 
The agitation of the guard, their frightened looks, the evi- 
dences that they had passed through a terrible experience, 
substantiated the truth of what they had reported. The 
Sanhedrim had nothing else left but to accept the report. 
To impeach these witnesses, to accuse them of falsehoods, 
would have been insane. There was no doubt in their minds 
that all had really happened as they reported. An-earth- 
quake had taken place, an angel had come down from 
heaven, the stone was rolled away, the tomb was found 
empty. What motives could make these soldiers to rush 
back to the city? Did they not do it at the risk of their own 
lives? The Sanhedrim was, therefore, in an awful predica* 
ment. What would happen, this must have flashed 
through the minds of these blinded men, if this truth should 
get out among the people? Perhaps they thought too of 
Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus, two of their number 
who had confessed Him by their devoted actions. Then they 
had thought of the possibility of something to happen with 
the sepulchre and had the guard placed there. And now the 
attempt to defeat the resurrection of the Lord had miserably 
failed. He has risen from the dead. His own words came 
true. The temple which was destroyed was built again; 
as Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of the 
fish, so He was in the heart of the earth. He is risen. The 


320 


very guards. they had placed before the sepulchre to make 
any deception impossible bear the witness. Their fine minds, 
some of them legally trained, saw the hopelessness of their 
case. One thought was written upon every one of their dark 
hearts; the truth about the resurrection must be denied. 
This again could only be accomplished by inventing a lie. 
The only possible lie was to say that His disciples stole the 
body. The whole story they invented is, of course, incredi- 
ble. It is far easier to believe He arose from the dead than 
to believe what the Jews invented about His resurrection. 
If His disciples could have stolen the body, if it had been 
possible, they surely would not have done it. But if they 
had a desire to steal the body, they could not have done so, 
for with the guard placed at the tomb, it was an impossibility. 
The disciples had forgotten all about the resurrection prom- 
ise; they were a scattered, poor and timid lot of people. 
But even if they had been anxious to steal the body, how 
could they have done it? Here was the company of armed 
men. They were experienced guards and careful watchers, 
trained in that profession. Then there was the sealed, heavy 
stone. How could they have rolled away the stone and car- 
ried away the body without being detected? Impossible. 
But the utterly ridiculous side of the whole lie came out 
with the report which these soldiers were to circtilate, being 
well paid for it by the Sanhedrim. The disciples came and 
stole the body, while they were sleeping! In the first place, ~ 
it is incredible that all these men had fallen asleep at the 
same time. All were fast asleep, so fast asleep that the com- 
motion of rolling away the stone and the carrying away ofa 
dead one did not disturb them. Furthermore, sleeping at a 
post meant death for the Roman soldier. One might have 
nodded and thus risked his life, but that all slept is an im- 
possibility. But the report is foolish; they were asleep, and 


321 


while they were asleep they witnessed how the disciples 
stole the body of Jesus. How ridiculous, The whole pro- 
ceedings were out and out fraud and falsehood. And this 
wase indeed the only statement they could possibly bring 
against the resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ. It was 
a miserable lie. And this lie is continued to the present day. 
A ‘small volume is still circulated among the Jews, the “Tole- 
doth Jesu” in which the most blasphemous things are said 
about our blessed Lord, and the lie about His resurrection 
invented by the Sanhedrim is likewise printed. This lie will 
be upheld by the unbelieving Jews till the day comes when 
He appears the second time, and the believing remnant of 
His earthly people will cry out, “Thou art the Son of God; 
Thou art the King of Israel.” We might mention here the 
testimony of Josephus. He says in his antiquities: “He 
appeared to them alive on the third day, as the divine 
prophets had foretold these and ten thousand other wonder- 
ful things concerning Him.” 


Indeed the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, His 
physical resurrection is unassailable. How wicked then to 
deny it or any part of it! Yet this is of common occurrence 
in these last days.* 

And now but a few brief sentences remain with which 
the Gospel of Matthew closes. 


“But the eleven disciples went into Galilee to the moun- 
tain which Jesus had appointed them. And when they saw 
Him they worshipped Him, but some doubted. And Jesus 
coming up spoke to them, saying, “All power has been given 


*That evil system known by the name of “Millennial Dawnism,” 
or “Russellism,” belongs to those movements which introduce dam- 
’ nable heresies in the last days (2 Peter ii). “Millennial Dawnism,” 
among other things, denies the literal, physical resurrection of our 
Lord 


322 


me in heaven and upon earth. Go, therefore, and make dis- 
ciples of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit; teaching 
them to observe all things whatsoever I have enjoined you. 
And behold I am with you all the days, until the completion 
of the age” (verses 16-20). 

What mountain it was He had appointed as the meeting 
place we do not know. Some one has said “Matthew is the 
Gosepl of the Mountain.’’t : 

From a mountain He gave as King His great proclama- 
tion, the so-called sermon on the mount, in which He pro- 
claimed the principles of His Kingdom. On a mountain we 
saw Him transfigured, the blessed type of His second coming 
in majesty and glory for the establishment of that Kingdom. 
On the mount of Olives He took the place as Son of David 
to ride down into Jerusalem. From the same mountain He 
delivered His great prophetic discourse concerning the future 
of the Jews, the Christian profession and the nations. And 
now we see Him and His own on the Galilean mountain. 
But why is Galilee made so prominent in the last chapter of 
Matthew? 

It is, indeed, a strong and important point in this Gospel. 
Galilee was the place of His rejection. This is evident in the 
whole Gospel of Matthew, which gives us exclusively His 
Galilean ministry. Jerusalem would not have Him. It re- 
jected-Him and sought to kill Him through Herod in His 
infancy. This is only found in Matthew. Therefore, when 
the King began His ministry He began it in “the Galilee of 
the nations” (chapter iv). The most ignorant Jews resided 
in Galilee and they had become mixed with the Gentiles. The 
scribes despised Galilee and as we know said “Search and 
look, for out of Galilee ariseth no prophet” (John vii 52): 


+H. G Weston. 


gas 


7 


Ba : ise 323 


His first appearing there was prophetic. It was a sign that 
Israel would reject Him and that the people sitting in dark- 
ness would behold the great light and that to them which sit 
in the region and shadow of death, light would spring up 
(chapter iv:16). Jerusalem did reject Him and, therefore, 
in this Gospel of the Kingdom, the Kingdom preached and 


_ rejected, we see the risen One passing by Jerusalem, He 


returns to the place of His rejection and His disciples have 
to go there and meet Him in Galilee. Here on this signifi- 
cant ground He gives them the great commission to proclaim 
the kingdom world-wide, to disciple all nations and to bap- 
tize them. 

This is the Kingdom commission. In Luke xxiv we have 


the proper Christian mission. A time is coming when this 


great commission here will be carried out by a remnant of 
Jewish disciples, who are represented by the eleven. It is 
the same remnant as in Matthew xxiv. 

We desire to give this fact in the words of another, which, 
will be helpful.* 

“Tt is well to notice what has been alluded to:—the min- 
istry in the Acts is not the accomplishment of this commis- 
sion in Matthew, but of the mission in Luke, the book itself 


being, as is known, the continuation of his Gospel; nor was 


the ministry of Paul, who took up by a separate divine mis- 
sion the evangelization of the nations, the carrying out of 
this (the commission here in Matthew). His was fully more 
even yet a mission from the ascended and glorified Saviour, 
to which was added the ministry of the church. It connects 
itself even much more in its first elements with Luke. The 
ministry here established stands alone. The disciples are 


_ not sent to Jews, as in Luke. But Jerusalem is rejected and 


- the remnant is attached to Christ (His brethren and owned 


*Collected writings of J. N. D., page 327. 


\ 
& 


324 


in this character) sent out to Gentiles. This as far as Scrip- 


ture teaches us has never been fulfilled. The course of 


events under the hand of God, the disciples remain in Jeru- 
salem. A new mission is sent forth in the person of Paul 
and that connected with the establishment of the church on 
earth. The accomplishment of the commission here in 
Matthew has been interrupted, but there is the promise to be 
with those who went forth in it to the end of the age. Nor 
do I doubt it will be so. This testimony will go forth to the 
nations before the Lord comes. ‘The Brethren’ will carry 
it to warn the nations. The commission was given, but we 
find no accomplishment of it. It connects the testimony 
with the Jewish remnant owned by a risen Lord of all, with — 
the earth and His earthly directions, and for the present it 
has in fact given place to a heavenly commission, and the 
church of God.” 
How wonderful and harmonious is the Word of God. If 
anything else had been put at the close of Matthew it would 
‘have disturbed and marred the scope of the whole book. 
Man’s wisdom could never have produced such a work. 

The eleven then saw Him there. Some doubted. How 
this indeed carried conviction with it of the truthfulness of 
the report. Most likely they were taken by surprise, beheld 
Him from a distance ; soon all doubts vanished, for He came 
up and spoke to them. 
SAT power is His; all power in heaven and on earth. Soon 
the day will come when indeed He will have all things put 
under His feet. And the last word, “And behold, I am with 
you all the days until the completion of the age.” Precious 
promise to faith! He will never leave nor forsake, and He 
who is with us is the “I am,” the mighty Jehovah, the Im- 
manuel, having all power in heaven and on earth. 


The Gospel of Matthew begins with Immanuel, “God with 


325 


us,” it ends with Immanuel. With Him, our Saviour and 
Lord, we shall be in all eternity. Forever with the Lord. 
~ With all our hearts we praise God for such a Saviour, for 
such a Lord, for such a Gospel and for such a future with 
HIMSELF, the King of kings and Lord of lords. 

Our study is ended. We lay this work at His feet, and if 
it pleases Him to use it for the edification of His people, for 
the defence of the faith, above all for the PRAISE AND 
GLORY OF HIS ADORABLE NAME, we shall praise 
Him for it in all eternity, Amen and Amen. 


INDEX TO VOLUME I. 


GENESIS— 


NUMBERS— 


“ 
“ce 


(73 


DEUTERONOMY— 


CHAPTER, PAGE. 
ADS aoe ve Be tanee chests, seeiougrahe & 8a 
PU eee eee cee Autti S Pee 82, 84 
EEF me MIS. gee Se ood ews 17 
DV hg eh ces eam Cee ECS 286 
Ve ie Ss 8 ae tere ees 286 
REE NRE IE Tee rae ie dls aoe 28, 173, 5201 
Ge NONI Mies rena rany cites nine ore 230 
Se il 62 Re gah re pet een 24 
DCE i OE xe BA rat ange Sanne Sacra ot 99 
Pe US 2D eee s Sig ob de Ravin ah acts 99 
PV 82 ee ei Me energies eee eS 53 
NEPAD Sa ceria wee days 0s 159 
© 0S AAD LT, Pee MERON ree eRe 299 
Pe RINE IN Or sie ten settee ie OE se 30 
Ee Nee ga Laws Aaya aa es 33 
BS GN bk ie Re SS Po Og eR 170 
inl ae EWS, aos odes s Seas 42 
PW el SOV ane nd Saae vais ca id pha eye 241 
Ah fe ae ar ar Oe re 85 
WW ECL OM cities ete We Peek ois ee 84 
G1 2 eS ears ae, Maer ene 84 
AL RCL el ep Teds gate way RR Or a go, 84. 
SME L oe ct ene Wa wierd Go wo ofesete 80 
2 AB SD EMO  as SUe ees O ORL eae 26 


J, SAMUEL— 


6é 


ce 


IT, Kines— 


(3 


(Ts 


I. CHRONICLES— 


PROVERBS— 


il 


CHAPTER, PAGE. 
LES aaa tard ebtcc ive a aReioeeorens 27 
DAT 15 i Sas phere aals cheep Sense Sores 241 
DEX IB=4S SV eron! s cgtgals atrateselaies 22% 
TGs Ea caky 0. eich Reais aeons ee ae 58 
A SEATS ook Pare poeta cae aca retens Cee 170 
OR NGS real Oaraia vara ve ttge ene 23 
LiL or a oh ate ade cee 23 
TB Ira revere Re aie ayaee i Nee teeta 23 
TEE 1 oe ee isis ois enc. noche eae 2 

WELT sev oe aig taae eat, praee ole aterm 22 
er a EY BIA Rr, Be Sy. fe 8 84 
WV TE SSR aie a ot Sights ease Seen 114 
GPG rt Nara Gee c+ 123 
OX Te ancl te tenner 12 
XT Ve ne ine 0 cate dain eee It4 
XXX VETHO-T Rss cies ch eee 118 
Lg==02. Git Oe ee eee 20 
TE XX 7-Si iat ees one a cera eee 25 
TEREX 20 ho are ne et ee 114 
1B), @.@, QV AN prin Aree rigs ie = 114 
XK oes eats Sonne ee eee 86 
CP arto suk elcante ner ee 24 
CEX 222 1.94 Gost aor ee) sence ere TI4 
GXV [28s 6 aa eee 178 
CXLX BO te eels oe ee 322 
CX Pie a etnies an areraee hae gl, 84 
CXR Be ES oe eee ee 122 
CXEX XV eae peice oe eee 209 
OP, @ GB 4 BAN re eis, 184 


IsaAIAH— 


it 


JEREMIAH— 


66 
ce 
~ 66 


66 


iii 


CHAPTER. -PAGE. 
NESE ae, Srl SA het oP eee Re T7t 
[SE oat On eC A ap eS 125 
NOEs by Bs Fine ae eg ead 268 
NEG HOR aos Nok Oot tno cis 271 
NAIM AR eeratl is Pa bh co easshs oes 35 
1 RESTS Fy cpsgray otc WO a 99 
11D Ey pap Wilner eee oe Or eRe REE A ai 
D Ug ea Vibes ete A ae Aimer oe on OE 127 
RES PO a Ree Wel el 175, 188 
ON Ba ret nw glee cele LOZ 
De POV ET archee a ists tote nar take Mente 167 
PGES SY Rare aA eee a 222 
RM OOF stat Neate say PNais eed Gel AES bi 127 
UIE AE MESON. ents wc de Sek yee oe ae 58 
Pe alee b oteemtnten citer NS, Paes 114 
vO Ls Er he aR 244 
DO OE Fe pep ck See ae a at De ee 187 
Nie seats iy Seve ee ee are QI 
NEU Ratigae We Pave Sia Roce wee oes SemagEe 167 
isk 1 See oe SNS pay Coan Py I2 
Met Bale, Caer a Pee eessns ase ais 174 
A BOR 8 ae ree a a 297 
MD Nae Dears gaia beaten ees a2 116 
MOK ect ernie ch Goss How ee cates 98 
MRO Sa esiaa's tio toe th bates he 50, 51 
Bae lars aa ek ob ollojene BG oe 30 
DOV ORR is 29 apeci nies s.ai tie. 2 252 
Re SON Gs aie tule wak Wield oltr'aye! ¢ 23 
SOOO ADAGE DRY abi ais bie duns Fe shots 53 
370d SSA gre OC SR ae 54 


a 


EZEKIEL— 


66 


ZEPHANIAH— 


66 


HIAGGAI— 


“ce 
MaALacHiI— 

ce 

6é 


ty 


MATTHEW— 


“cc 
6é 
ti 


ce 


iv 


CHAPTER. PAGE. 


SOX IOV tai orsie ee stored ns pees 201 
SRA L250 eee ae oye eeaewene eames 124 
[WEY tamaby Neen Soper ot nay Niet ye 60 
TisA8 Vein ae asee eee oe ae 4I 
FV22674 303.) oe eo eee 60 
WINES haa 6 aus oe eee 60 
EX 25> Pahoa ciel, Marsa yates eee 12 
4 UE Seetre Serie eee 53 
VAT Sees ete a a See eee 210 
VTS TEA os eedidar Uhre cal ea era 117 
VIEIIS Aaa. Qantas a eae 187 
VAERIOG So sum a ron eee 198 
TEES 2 Nog or hee oc eee 116. 
Tey ah eee eee eee 42 
LED SE ee are koe eee ee 58 
DWV 223. ocak Saas eg ae 59 
TV525-0 7. sien cow Sate nao Be 58 
TO 2a oer eee 24 
ESS 45 jie ae ang ee oe 22 
DSEDS cneee Mure ae cae a a 
DAU as ee ee 27 
1 Eh rae rny Seer Ne ate 21 
TS ape Sa aaa ee 28 


. MatrrHew— 


66 


Vv A 
CHAPTER, PAGE 
LAT 525" fabh eg re he ee Pa Opera 39 
ES nae cen ope aan Wa ee 67 
Die Ve venircat ti hdc eau 52 
RE ere eae Ae Oe Se oe ORS 55 
HE eAgare, Marih tect wa ke oe tu 57 
5 USS op Be Ne ia i ek eae a 70 
SAR dy fe oe Oe ee en ane eno 74 
sy TUS Car Brae repent uae Wipe Keene Sea (8 795 
1S, (ESS Sault (sae Pe 78, 79 
ae tng ye PE hae ns sec aa 219 
2A a ott pak oc we eae 98 
EN Soe ee en ie Mee 100 
ENO aa eae ER Oe eal ca IOI 
LEO Stir ae OMe re es 102 
SIA owen ts Uke ee iS Pawnee TII 
RY AM stir atty tunes es oe ll etter ea 133 
BOGS Urata gp aioe cass a SRL ee 119 
RN amt eet ak Mock de oun III 
VEZ, te eM pete ewer ee tice Wie Ree 131 
2 TA Ae ste ads eRe ee 127 
2 LE oD SE eG an eters, Wea Beye ara NONE as 129 
el Te A ee catego, Ye Ng als ew oehtes 130 
WR LEAt cd atest, | Aas oon aan 131 
APs Sain PVE a leh ae ed 135 
SEATS, scanty a ol aia a tonal eee III 
WEED R ss 2 Me eto ain bi Cole sacetee 131 
TB. oaiciane earls 4 e442 ashes 131 
BUA STIS Anew Gel ects AC uN Sid Shae III 
Wee ain cede sek afta Beg 148 
hn od are raters tues. bio ese e 149 
AL eT d= tats ae a Alt “otemes ges.6 acess III 


MATTHEW— 


vi 


CHAPTER. PAGE. 
NOLDFETT epee teu o re a oi one ren eerecicetad 154 
NL Giese Ca hapten ae ae ee 155 
MIT 6 ci ea ie sora: seceteneeee 157 
VIELiS 26ers  Fegbaenee oe enor TIt 
WMEHO-20- 22 oF aie certian 160 
WAT 207 Ro tae a0 aon aye Mae merelte III 
WITT 24527 tr . sco hiseene Vac coarse 104 
WOT stag hk eee ocean dee nee 166 
WILT S117: ain +t) osle aes een cen emer 169 
VA TT e551 3 Ss aes cegerith cs pee eee 166 
WEES BAsTS: See tc al eee eee 166 
bg Oh eran Werrinerie, Sewers whe sae Sc. 290 
AGUA KOs Cr peeminiren rae eae sine 05 166 
VT 1 O22 chs oe ane re at we een 175 
ME D8 B52 Oo .- dnd aes ne mere 166 
MUL 3238 eo cote Bat ey a 178 
WIBM28=34 058 Docs Dccicaaton tee 166 
VETE26NS soe een ea ee 175 
DX RES reo a Big: oka ee ce atoms De eee 166 
TXB 85s. toe oe Se ee eee 185 
TX SS. ete Sect Y eechags oe pene 188 
TOs Pi ae een as ee en 189 
TXA20522 fen eae ere ee sk eee 167 
EXE:20-2 5.550 pena fe ee 195 
LXe2Q220 Sir kan. nice ees 167 
TX220-31 S00 7 UA at ore eee 167 
EX832-23 5 poetics «ne eee 167 
EX 8A ie SES eileen nites Se 246 
NE Sarre ex eer vests = tat tne. 207, 167 
KS acy sult aes opie Renate 61, 210 
9 RA gh aa fhe ne te Gos oe 208 


MattrHEw— 


ee 


Vii 


CHAPTER. PAGE. 
OEMS etait Lae Fes Seyi sow 210 
DSA REG ee ey Bs 117 
JO ZT Sa] OR ED SEA et aeRO Ne OE Yo 210 
AOA BO Sys pcrut a's ar Pn. good Satur she 215 
PRAM Gaon. oa spas antl tite eae 57 
POU US C0 Wey Sale ee eae TS 227 
DEMS DO SD Ne st sive one tas) sie sh ope ame 184 
TKS vor ranean is ttre oats 235 
MIP ANO> Bidet Soci. ae phcsthe t saps comaaee 167 
SU BRI seg chaste daca cnn auth eo a 244 
OTA 7p chante ontine s-aeee vines 244 
OU 25-20 ep se sae i me SI 248 
RNG 2G ceria 2S ae cr sage cela 244 
ela ey tet te eoptetn eee Jaf en dio pey 248 
DGGE 9c REE epee ee ee are MO 252 
8 Tyee ee to eS irae eek Ae See, 254 
Be | 7 Ip ea A he 255 
WAN Bis BGT? CSE Te ga Rr ap Somer 257 
OURS andes Roth ee See 5, 269 
SMe Deck oc aap tae, eRe A a Te 218 
MA SSO GE aa ie oO To ate Bos eosrannsione 270 
REL OTE Tate hg sates tn Spat 92 hah pe Be Sr onehere ts 260 
A PPTL) von eel 6 ately bie oaione bale 272 
DEPT oes tech, pee os Was ae Mare) «ns 273 
CN U2 ge Rie Pe ayatis Yaa! 6 teat ee a oe 274 
2 Soca geste eleven, eorenitac abe apa 275 
2S) OE 25 Se Va PS ener 275 
BB WS 22 a Sar ens 283 
ELL Lie Sate MSs Gliese ge bogus Rva? 287 
el LPIA aaa a. Se viiielycetreksih.etere 2 4.8 260 
DRUID o 7% Eee, Se ra cera oe 279 


INGER. oo VE ek ee 280 


MaTTHEW— 


(73 


Vili 


CHAPTER. PAGE. 
XII 44-40 Rakavie wes gone oe ee 204 
MI47-50°? Sater. ee ees 302 
SOLE i= 5280 fees acees UE taeee ee 304 
SHE 54-58 wees. hoe dee 304 
DOW SEO 2a hs 1s ole hoa eee ee on eee 252 
DEV 52575 he echcet eater a cnet eae 198 
O18 Ea er ie a are tet 263 
PGA iby o7 oah Meweten waned ge SA 290 
DOW Liste C 5. oo oe temereeenee 59 
AN Tila gt tn re, 279 
SEV LI 15-18 Se See ee ae I51 
ZEN-TEL bons CNA tits Sees 135 
S28 Bon sens tools ee 204 
XXL. ee ae ee IQI 
RIV et a cians 15; 3575-303 
XT VE tARAS) gb ceed tute Reece eee 15 
XOX 35-320 cea oc tec ee ee 210 
9. .@ Dlg fo ay Se ee gone 117 
DOD .29'S VES Sat, oeenee Nema 15 
DONE Ve Acard oa aaa pany tes oO 15 
RAV 338 ieee ros lian tee ae 281 
Eas fe ech aia as ae eee 79 
Dh Feo era ee ae ee ee 80 
TEST Act 7 lode wcrc ee eee 19c 
EET 220; crue sooo eet eee 258 
NESEY noes a ene as ke eer 180 
PTESF IY. os Vachs ato, eee 58 
Bi28- 350 0.1 VS oe cee ee SE 
Bge eho k ie eee ee 44 
TY 3Q is waka eicle x 3 ec eae 47 


1x 

CHAPTER. PAGE. 
te 7 IC eG ei aa NOR Cen Wt ee 48 
LEO Eas hte kk os cake 62 
Tae Serie We ce Se hs ew eee 20 
Dine Ager hes adie Sa cs Sate MS 20 
bigs PRO Te cae ARE ile ae eI 171 
INE AERA eevee see is a Rina 185 
SEES On ates Ste ogy aa 67 
1s aL Ue ge Roly anaeee nae nay oat wh S ae 180 
Pe Fs eGR of Ses os SS he 155, 165 
DEVAL CE Origtncrtoeie hs rsh euee ear a's 225 
DOTS Ba ap evoke wits eit woketes 133 
NA tut ok Sar Co go ede Oe 208 
Peel Aye t ihe tei be. oo 9s Oca tee 132 
Taam Mahe iske ctak cae mete Sia 37 
dco ena a pen ee ee ge ae Ce 58 
BQO BA at en a 0 gto woe Mga ie 63 
1 ile oe, ae aaa a Re eg EN ae 
(gM FG aA GSD ga eis ue Rk 76 
Tare AG scat ore. t,o dee ge oe 64 

Ee eck Asta ass Tee ope lle 193 
1 ip 220 Micon Ort os er 0 a a 49 
eee ei AS Ne Bo ips ier Mae a 186 
RRS Ameo CON B08 Saxicg "va, 9 3 OE EO 199 
Nae Micah ttpid ths acaichs wuale 4,30 Sas 32 
SL 27 Poe RN  Hhaa F ietaeis 4007 Mo eieas 32 
NTE PAA rao Mecpe AS eee 85 
DR Ca teh RI OE BE 156 
A IE concarites Be aie Siam alse ome 299 
DOU AABN cots cos tac tewew ste adi Pose 272 
OL Vides Haoee Rae Sree ke Oe 156 
PIV TO, av oie) oe San oneeroiclee a. at oe esesbiace 190 


RoMANS— 


ce 


a 


CHAPTER. PAGE. 
DV TES 8 silane aie otter see ween ore 212 
DOV TW 242 Fr by ovens cuales ei temee eran 140 
X ViELSA@ eo a eee eee Sart 284 
OLX seat ee ot cave eee 89 
1 Pe ee MRI BRANCH TSN Cpt, ssf 
Ts Aikisopie ooh qcapete. biases ea aera 135 
Ta etn Pee een aoe ee 135 
TEL 1: sea Sent area eee 66 
BX 532-35 40 ata ceo ara nanan Meee 187 
Xo tit. 28 ctuars Set bk ener 135 
PO sie ee ea eee 77. 
DT NEI 3 ree phe hes ate Oe Sica 248 
DON SOULS ON Seebeck oe 158 
DL LSTAl Segond teks ae on oe eee 136 
XX TD 25228 inane aosae aera 197 
Ti 3> ody acta ete oe: renee 77 
LOR EA ere. Sena ar wc 124 
LER 22 aks pas ee ere 74 
ODI 325 <a Aaron entra. «Cane 68 
VLE SAU Ss GT eae Areas ae 121 
Al We ee teins Be Ee Aes Pe 5 124 
AVG Wil ip Peper nee nce Agee bo. 227 
WEIN 26 Pathe Pie ea nee ee 142 
Se: Sn es eo seek 255 
DEB“ 12), i Gaetan alee et eee 215 
DLS walle os tgle eee 287 
JT 5 Ry lca cate eee 300 
DPA iis dean ne ee ee 135 
DLT 8 sOceR Gta tree. nba one 156 
Dol Vi gai aati’ ces tupeer ages 


J. CorRINTHIANS— 


II. CorInTHIANS— 


66 


GALATIANS— 


6c 


EPHESIANS— 


(ts 


PHILLIPIANS— 


6c 
66 


66 


xi 


CHAPTER, Pace. 
TO aeern yes Sta, Sse cis ha OG IOI 
EN ele sents eA TISNS © Sbisve alc 6 ae a 153;.213 
Eppes Cras ieee ei elke. anaats 290 
ek (AG ie Ia Aap Ree tae I51 
UG NEES be Pala ve a en OP 72 
PO eta tees. enh tae hate wee 154 
RIVA Sik Nal optesa oS ioc Bese lam s 21 
De RE Rah Sie Nope Oars ee esis hip el alk, 205 
CRN ES Steet Se a ere caine SE tas Pans Salis 205 
CELT 7s GOS See Pai eae ah A 159 
Nee do tas otkahe ee iatacer Rl oe 146 
AVS. i rap ean 2 SO Say AR 120 
Mesh PIER TIS eee cies: at's A ay auntek'v at aceee' 159 
PORE AS Mices stains stansloe suse es ateire 138 
Dole? Prot kre avs cr aratate dia tie sais a heats 205 
PU ZAR2S ie. i soma retain ee 121 
CELA eas hg ty aS Pe > cope geen 21 
LEG As ney eric Oey AIM SD OES 78 
Vase) satiee ie ieee otrseer dione hie Gee at 290 
VL Gielen Some obs oie she saisie 6 ape ga aid 238 
AUS Way annie en te ene i aceeent 147 
Lee Peas eoae.> Labs fers otink 183 
EN TEO< 2h, pe paige et vhs 8741 5 ease) teas 8 ae 200 
LW S2o Ate eae abe ad we apboleaniaitect Fe 144 
WS oe eh temUMii at sie oe Histe iak o.) ee eb 130 
We DOnEg >< eee MR eee Gasca Sores 182 
7 seen ert etna oeeto al oop tains Pants She oR 30 
TL HO Gregan Jo eetmete) sere opeuerd 2) o7-C ee 49 
LACE rae tis case Caregen 245 
TVicG camens ies teria sienee eo aiés.n's,s 148, 136 


CoLossIANS— 


oe 


6“ 


ce 


Il. THESSALONIANS— 


6c 


ce 


Il. TimotTHy— 


(73 


II. TimotHy— 


“cc 


Tirus— 


6c 


HEBREWS— 


“e 


xii 

CHAPTER. Pace. 

TD SB i eacteg rtespe eave saeteeeter eoereaers . 158 

TL 2b3a i ctith 2 Se,8 ie = ree 146 

LV acd eens ne ee 136 

Ts Sunny ieee ate fc ea a earners IOI 

Tae Ped ae ed how eee 41 

DVWib Fo cates av etst ond taancle aie eee 159 

Aa By itera ta! reg RRA ee crt ce 180 

V.ELQ- DES, ch sie eare saver otal erat 146 

MERI9-18" (e555 3 2h We ee 146 

ML 2OR ate aie os wie! cue a ence 158 

Ls 2a sek rer tesa ele cee 245 

DikOr bDsaty ssistose bog cee wae 159 

1s eat ee ae a te A Se 2I 

TT ti a aie hoe a oe ee 55. 
PLT 4 8. cack We ane ee 95 

TE 2 es ois ce eiten nee ae 120 

WAZ Aaa wince chai ae eek ae 114 

DEAT aly bag O okencaliaes cee tee 230 

BESS Fi a cal Meo asi yn a weed 5 eee 88 

ST BT! mats ain, ours + oideeas aes ee 26 
AEA 3G Ua Neha gic, wie Sane vik a ae 25 

ATED hg Polis pack wate Cee 146 
TS Or A i Poacsce se Shekels neces See 93 

DS5 Yiy sie ale cee tte Sagan ee ee 154 
Tinie “33 Usicen aoe 181 

V4": PTT TAHT ORT ORE Ree Oo ee 148 


J, PETER — 


oe 
6c 


[73 


IL. PETER— 


_ Xili 


CHAPTER. PAGE. 
TA Needy el has gO es Oe go 
Dash ea eters bad wae ee 132 
(21 I RG ar te MG a go, 118 
LO eth ie as tat nyo ha ok oO 14 
| AN NAS ec ORT PEN Fe Re ak Mat 159 
LS 2 EGE Sa aN a ora os raga 154 
UT Slat ea oe pace PSs boo 132 
PEO Pave aay ooehisie tsetse See 127, 
UPI egy tains scen oe ati eae Wee 156 
POC Ee a cet. Ou. cased E Oa vias 126 
PETE Bit res tare prt wa nie oa. bares so ES 159 
TV BO ire nu Basis ea dioica ON os eee 156 
SOE Tobias aie cep al cc sehen 251 
DA FAIS wa Rastes peek taste ea 285 
|i es Sse ae eI Sermo Mer ares 194 
NE ees eS rn n ea eae ack ameter aes 216 
ee Pa it diam ees oe 282 
5B Ieee Pen eine a rb eae 53, 82 
I. «Fan. cs, 7 ee 59 
WEA Org Vy sislepes 0 vel Maes Bae 303 
DY ARO ie: oY low oT bia oe ow ee eae 280 
POSEN 2 maeso%e a bi bie'oe, 40s pa cas one 286 
DREAM Martial ates aaa ais. si we olbte am eter 119 


» 8.9 I2-14 Coe 204 


INDEX TO VOLUME II. 


INDEX SCRIPTURE TEXTS. 


GENESIS— 


é 


“ce 


Exopus— 


“cc 


NuUMBERS— 


cc 


DEUTERONOMY— 


“ 


JosHua— 


“cc 


II. SAMUEL— 


6c 


II. CurRonicLEs— 


“ce 


PsaLMS— 


CHAPTER. PAGE. 
DOV PII G25 205s, cae eseletstovexeraiaeletet see 112 
XO PD er eralcreo © sis alvie sae sete 143 
NITE 0-16: horas Sale oe ee ee 156 
Di Le e2 Y cies. sheds hatote) eecaast ofertas 257 
DON SITIO 22, oe oer 75 
OX CIN 27S ctaee cinereus whoa ahateentae 26 
Viagee te Me oravecaotetahclarerenete elle mice 98 
MDSARB ial owate ahhastaiers otereeeeeeneae 156 
DM VALI Oy ok anrescontiege Stee 164 
p00, Ik om SA aed Nerd hort GK: 292 
DX LVI Ny Tove os ore tous aaa hee eee 99 
B®: ©. WEN pr AA en hee ian ts 164 
TY oo a itaceie a oie Gene teeta 266 
ADT 28 Sostolaee wie stasis + ects eee 292 
AV T1822 (oe or a eee 185 
DODXCIS 7 iii Sa retelnacert ota eee 64 
SOX ETS = ee ea Pr gral 272) 3200 
ROLISB hata Od eee eee See 300 


PsALMS— 


IsaAlAH— 


66 


LAMENTATIONS— 


66 


EZEKIEL— 
6a 


XV 


CHAPTER, PAGE. 
OLS A SE rat Sh AAO pet Qr7. 
DEM aa hcioe ays Arai aire 292 
POLIO recor, ateus din 80.8! uae lore A 257 
TCL ale wae oo AS Ee IE 124 
PEED E ZO aie tak ans Sareaa scare 299 
IE De) SS anaes RO 257 
NO ore Mots daa cos pcs soe 136 
MaDe oe ob Nisia Sisk hea Seba aE 272 
CROs seine Ysa G seen his aheip- ee als 207 
CXVs, OXV I CXVIL. CX Ville 264 
CATA eg stad dis che che aie cient 127 
Wee ra GMs Mele FR aks ois orAeoontayste ts 136 
PE LAE aiaie stesso eens leh 213 
UU TO mre tke oa, a eee ore Uleaiere es II 
BOE E CS Se i ard ree eae eR PS 2i2 
POR caren gi gual oe CS ees 295 
OE ei acta stage ate steelers’ 215 
EO sate ceteaite base deh wo Ree ete ge 310 
Bee LDN ores arte aR hrs Rib akon reese aes 299 
bP il ig PAN aE ae Ree To 130 
FeLi iate cides alscrbclete aiere, ae 81 
RED Te ears ete tek Oa cbaaiel oi ahe es Maye Ger, re 136 
VIL SARTO Us May concn o Wtreincoetenane 213 
Pe AMET OFS ey arin iia’ ioas ook Able. einem 31 
DEN ECP 150 so, esi oxereis weavers 288 
GHAR) oa ccohaiots ore n(e(s. 9s dusis'e sume 180 
Beast a nists a sip paves «tins sere 271 
eee Cac SNR vaaet hae 26 Ace dtid 180 
DO oc tin arate 3.0: oiahoce e's II 


xvi 


CHAPTER. PAGE. 
DANIEL— i 
5 Nig EY Wearing ron an een I 126 
e VE 4 eo eo eee 210 
oe Mi 2g > uc ct. suai ee eee 197 
ef EX BAA Bese oa hts ol clean 170, 198 
TX 205 a ee: Poe oe 201 
i AXA 7 Telia ae te eae 197, 202 
Sy DA hay Son's SONI paisa of tase fhe aaa 198 
o DS a eee pee Se arth yy, ee pee 197 
‘ DO tae Mace eine np et a 180 
bi BQN los bapa ae alr ste oak ate we Ie oe os 7 197 
HosEA— 
sf AVE OPA TAs Ae o th: Sain a ease eee ae 180 
a VRS iter aren We wt oe e's 16 
JoEL— 
rs ED shel Ziert onl eaper gate tre sores 180 
re TID Se. ASA tke ge Soe ee pone 244 
se iN Res Oe mene cas Mee oS 208 
- TEE 7 oo Peele oer cat ae ee 33 
Amos— 
‘f VOT) 5 Fale antes veo Soto oe er ee 180 
MicaH— 
3 Ale bea ty Aue aM beeen ese Sh. 180 
HABAKKUK— 
< TEE STOy 25 ag 5 cee omer eee 180 
- ZECHARIAH— 
€ 15 Bes rare RN ger Gry ere es 81 
ie TXS0-10" 0 ose) fo oils eee ee 125 
GY AS? "yin sb iren ae ote eee 257 
. AT 10 =. 2 fake eg eh 210 
« RUE 37: Soe ee aa pores 265, 273 
a! RLV to) ace ae ee 115,171: 
Gas XV e202, goo ee NIC 


~ MaLacuHi— 
“cc 
» MatTHEwW— 


ee 


xvii 
CHAPTER. PAGE. 
PER MO attren hE SG nla oT Pees A 69 
Rie Tins gue eae aes se aeGE ON Ne 130 
CS ee OP ata a am See ae etre 322 
DVM oenig Meta ee ahd oh eA e%) 
PINES SEAS NS GRR RON DRS ae 6 
DOU GRE we os tel Fok EDS cade ek, a AR 
POUT OD Crete tals ocx ately TE 
oi WE 3 6 Cr Geer ae BORE ne: 13 
DRL GUERIN eed. Deans OC mors 5 ete 14 
AN WEE Pde Ga heh 5 eels Sat he 15 
AN REA. Ort oe LAs) i ye 19 
PONS na Meas PR EE Nase egteys 20 
oN Ree oe Achat so) IM Shoe oe 25 
Bae 5 Seas tes Sin is ire Pe eRe, 28 
DRE Pei ene Agnes a ous ear as 30 
PON SAO ERY mincnts irera eA cis ar orantiede 31 
DOV BES Eft VN BRM, weet eh tae Pan Me’ bes 38 
oY UR EAE oe AEE phasPa bind Obeet ada he 8 4I 
0 GG IES 0 29 og aE reg ae TRE 43 
CA efi 7 sates to nerig ded eae ea Poe 44 
DOW VERT AU TL esd re yt names ule e 47 
EW EMD ae cheats fae Ac alas thee vce, cones Oe 50 
BG NANO CAAT UME eae ly Oey ey eset Bee Boo 53 
MOM LAZO oie y cas waste nssaoats 54 
TRON Ms esata a we De cE Ba 55 
Nhe rel le Dn ie. oe apes WEN é 4 56 
pA Eo OE TGR eee AE eae Pa ae a 57 
2A HE OS ara OE At 58 
DON 7 BB ry oie shells aja Paes § 59 
EN MEO Ged eit a ia udib ogee lo 5 63 
Pa Ue ees ahichiera LRT ec aces inp kee 4 68 


MatTTrHEw— 


XVill 


CHAPTER. PAGE. 
DEV DERTO=<1 35s 3 cts ocery, mrancestopeeseceeee 69 
VIE STACAT Laake hee eee 71 
DV 2322.35 ise cakes eee 73 
XV [224-27 ss Poe se nee 74. 
X VALET H5 Re ete ate ease 79 
XV UTS 520 te. nea ea eee 81 
X VEE TOs oo ce tae aoe east Gael on 82 
AV DTT U2 A ya ot 2 ee ee 84 
X VTE 2G 62) oc costes ee ee eee 86 
SV LTE 16507. scot. settee 87 
XX. VELE 87220: © sscre sale a; Store saree go 
XVITet=22) i. ele cane ae QI 
XV Lis? 4-96 t 2 corn teen ee 93 
XUEX S39 is wale ae oie eee 96 
DCR sie bee oe ee 08 
XEX 8-120). Sah oy. eee 99 
DG Ges i irae aire a EN cd IOI 
DLA S14 Shs Someone ae nae 102 
XOECLE 8 23 Ass Niscekanc ese Oa ROR 104 
ST 24269 Nai hese ree uate 106 
AEX 28-30 7PWy oy parce ee 107 
SACT-TO" ake ee es als eee 110 
SEE RLTO So dee cacew 5 oe sects ae 113 
DX 720-2 Tle « saldaciy sie wpe eae 114 
DX (225248 cee, Ue oer eene II5 
XX25-28 cs lie sick 118 
DX 20-3 acs Se ee, ke 11g 
Ba Babi Sian bietinc eee 124 
»@.4 by 5G De Treg Ty © 129 
XK UT4-16 Sse 6 ee ee eee 131 
RX ISI7-22:50.0< poke ee ee 132 
AUNT 23 ison bev erates ae cee ree 133 


MATTRHEW— 


xix 


CHAPTER, PAGE. 
DONS ZAR2O hao oak antares ane Hark 134 
ROSA viata e scree hana a es 137 
SO VEGI at SO ra ORR ep 138 
Ue ney aaa Gee cvetate sk Voces as 281 
DOT TD) 1 1, ade pe CI ig I4I 
Ne MI tl teats ore on, SS atin, nats 145 
ROTO 227 Os. so Sh oR Oa be 146 
ROU gO em Rio sceeew ect ae 148 
ORAL BO ssa Sed). Scarvi aes ave cee ins 150 
Oe eae Ole a ores 3 8 ola A 151 
2S eS ak ae Ie ere EE 154 
D3): 8) ESS Rael Ne agra gman ae ee 159 
OR DUET Go itioe Sie old a polos Resets 160 
2G, 6 GB RS ee Saar erg ana yard ier 161 
DG W/E Sam aa ae SO eg ts 323 
PROMO) Te A NARS 1 Mango's Se ghdn ouadibon ie 172 
9 Ee NR ae aE SOE eRe 175 
ENN EAE Aa Shia crac dee Molerantoletabs 178 
De a at ee sren ter, mavy clout ats ticle, rise 187 
DU SPO a pecd varie ocsiena ens Gigs 196 
9, Or, BAR tog ans ae ee ene oe 205 
ERS ARUBA I (veil Doe x cts mane eciae 206 
De. PLZ ICRC Oe ay a Dere ER P 207 
ROI a Ze AQ Kiko ataretisliey antgeas Moan 213 
EOE, $a eaS Ge Sy haae a tha tnrete as 214 
DV aT eta teen cia'siiese diare keto hel a 215 
BO Ae 2) ay ee Pg Peary 216 
DON VATAAEAL Sie rae paigsiovare sere 08755 an 217 
DR SEEN AERO N SRe eAons wie teed 220 
ON TELA 15 ereeis a aie ates aida age ok 225 
ROME Eo LASOe it ees wees eA 237 


MATTHEW— 


“a 


xX 


CHAPTER. PAGE. 
KAW EAS ovine ote owns o ¥sie exsisus 251 
>. OR ees VIS one re es ane eres 252 
0 @,O5 6 is i Ce ei Laer 256 
Re NLT =25 aids copia eset td 258 
KOR VI 2O-8O 72 talanaeels aaa ere 261 
MX beth itinc-n 4 wile ie mesa 265 
Daan Vil S32 olinre ey stevduessie te see areeake 316 
XIV O-aOy Eee ae olen creer 267 
DX ND seh Sass ira ork esther 274 
XV [spec eerie selec pees 278 
DEX VES =5On as acre lie seems “278 
BV T 63-O4l a cote epieie ast 281 
DOV DGG Ee IS octet oak oeeeeeneamse 282 
XX VCORE: eels oe oat ott arene , 283 
9, ©6086 ne cay ein 2A 
CVE S125 cise sisiebaaioie oe ciOe . 286 
SOR V 13-4 a hae eee ee ele) 
SRV 27-8 tee cae ae . 204 
Rue VALI 322573 BION Se saat res enn ame 297 
DOV LT 49-day cn oes oe eee 299 
DN NALA SAAT Oe cea ie re 302 
RAM LE 7B anats lait ols) ont ae 303 
DOXV PES 1-54 Saas ose an eteeas 304 
XACV ETH 5 sO pees Sse reece nes 308 
DOCV ATES C7261 arta eh ere ae 308 
DEX V E6226 i aie. cee en ee 311 
DAV a es eee wee eee 312 
AAV UT os4) 20 aie eae 313 
RCV ELT BO Nt ia ost aac eerie 316 
RAM LESTISES sas Sine saneeaeee 318 
XXVIII :16:20 


a 


xxi 
CHAPTER. PAGE. 
a CRED plies ctr tele Apieo  e g Oe 114 
| 25 the ae, ae 4 ea a aera ICI 68 
PA eGR cok pies seal dee PA SSG eave 124 
Da 3 eS Ae OR ae Aor aT I5c 
Ee Means ralt Sale tage Oe are 102 
PrN as WM cM oa es «hah as east 308 
Pe Bas ree N ete We fea when sa eee 309 
PONE 2y stats teeta sco tts. ae ake 55 ete 63 
TAGs eta oot lee hance 79 
OA ae SIR orale date bic ere shaeyte 132 
DSc erat oo ewioe ee wT eee 215 
DEMIS SE SAIS onal ike ate a ee 4I 
POW PEE Ss oS iera Yee ae psa RE 102 
DN 2OS2 Bee abs isa las Rabe dees hone 168 
LUE fiom tay agg ieiaso te wcll iene 258 
ONSUT URS T. pasate balconies Varelvce setae eaaee 308 
POL Wiss t i 8g Bonen gsc po eae oI 323 
be Co ee one er Cy ar eee ae apt 129 
WLS 20: Sched wee ants 6 ocap atovelanes 13 
ME Bieta sae are Kaye hee ae ID 15 
WDA ee eth se sraee tare a Bae 16 
AEE INP he Saale one ee pS ane 257 
SE GG aay a eect ae ue ate atm Fake 309 
De Letra rae ats ins. Pateasana nies 322 
Peni eR Ok Ot wes WAC ee pa ee trece 269 
PRM egal oh fais a0n «a lecnde UES Se 253 
ARO ire tir vino oe aS ind a geet weaie § 255 
MOL) ey ask oia'els'e aie ew o's! Se bie 128 
PEE ARAN a wee.s etek side eke ek eee 57 
Deeb BT Op CER d c'diie 8 ad's asics o-ehe 257 


oe 


II. CorInTHIANS— 


se 


GALATIANS— 
oe 


Xxii 


CHAPTER. PAGE. 
RIL 27 “raertenye Siete ejcoteiw ee eure eee ye 
XGLELS3O Me ebaes omnis cote mere eens 266 
Di LX 2-37 Goats os eraalers afeoelemaae 308 
DX 30740: soc ceeqnists doiaiels < alerasene 309 
DASTESISIS Ea ole oeret site oletene 317 
Ti0-7 nies ciate ot ete se eke ga etie severe 181 
(ee nin Ae Hn NO CbS, SEED cc. 288 
TID oe ee eee Sean 189 
LIT S105 20% sic. Gatien s oloies 142, 164, 189 
TV SE etree a 3 ieee steer 7 
Ae iy aR eee EC MARAIIR RRR es Sone 305 
VG 7A Xi ccskcirs v5 cance atenetetee 164 
Kee owing Ccate aialellotsiedia eaeneians 52 
RDO anaes ene oa deme 6 
X Vibes T es ncaa ake eeeere ene 102 
DD. Ely An PER Sie Fic 263 
EsAnse so kcans ss tare ieee eee ene 46 
OT Sait ooh ais Om asa oe tee 192 
DLT c2 ays dieistsaie « ate Wee es Cae 63 
Wilson eet testentenrets wacetevelete aleve 241 
WITS28-32.0 os ocak ee eee 100 
ADE 3226) aia. Sere site renee rat ates 263 
DoW. S354. Fie lee auton ne ee reaene 315 
DOV 3272267) Conroe pus Sresvcaneeeace 112 
RV285-57° sb ceeeretee nis oi eeaeae 52300: 
TTS ieee eee wiaictenene . »63 
IV: 


XXili 


CHAPTER. PAGE 
EPHESIANS— 
aS TAO tw. yahe ahs dete'e aes Pa nacesterenn ruts face 138 
~ NE BB aie Ayn. nk HES SR ene g2 
\ WB eta oor. Gicuateten were tare 98, 103 
3 AVALSE (a7 papa Ne Conn Tee che Paes 103 
PHILIPPIANS— 
- NSE IE negate csettme oN 5 doe eee wa aad 260 
ay DT Gar. 3, oscar hctarce oder. daecaveceantete 116 
“5 FV AIS cba en ayn cei aay oes ths 57 
CoLossIANS— 
S; DOE Sete Vetere ois bo Pees Oh ckaee 77 
me UE 2A, ae MAN Aa ea ait'c.o, 85 RE ee 116 
z gl OTR) cs, relat RRR MOR apr eR 92 
J. THESSALONIANS— 
27 ASP REPS Maton sgrrsGetines ee cas 65, 175 
. MAG raha seme ciace as che cee oe ee 243 
s UA GES Ot 7 Raith Nea Panera 184, I91 
II. THESSALONIANS— 
if PGS a Pts ara Poe tens teat ea eeiuaee 211 
= Pein Bat BO aD cche te tae 186, 257 
i Re Oa Monk a dah Sener eRe 130, 204 
ei PROSE oer wedi son epee 195 
HEBREWS— . Oca CH PA ae Te 272 
a HN A OMe NAR CRG ta head Pia isan bata 77 
| Aopen Ue ener IRA 83 
bh MEL On 10 COS Adie cm eaten es 211 
a3 15) 8h it te re ee Ne ag 217, 
ie DTA aierstN ies tl ord ite ah. g- 0 “a @oiirs eierotele ve id 305 
ff COU MICEE SIME AA. a Oa eras Sane 164 
“ IN gatas Wise copa eaccriia: weve, s ae" 272) 304 
s ER Td wiatit ate entities Hd thie a vee ee 54 
e DSi I DAR? CGR ee 305 
cy OTT AGETGy voataes ale y 00! ors naa inne's bie 81 


xxiv 


CHAPTER. PAGE. 
JAMES— 
cM DV224 oi diate sl saat aed sb wnegane a lierenn ied 9 
I. PETER— 
“ Teta see ae we eee ae 114 
ss Te3l er tees Ook LL eee 58 
: TE aeO i ek Sao ec ae lore eae 50 
¥ id By Mn RD eee ior sens 138 
£ TU 20 Sore oo or ete aoe 116 
II. PETER— 
i Tit 6-209) os een Pe ee ieee 61 
SET os Poi Ba de ae ee 
% ea ORS dares ors rie eee oe 185 
JUuDE— 
13 sighs coo ants oh alee aoe eee 260 
REVELATION— 
- t BSS ics Pe Ma eI ec sr er mM he 2it 
ie: 1226228 oie ssa Se ere ah che eee 108 
fe Lea ott spore eee 5, 181 
oe Mi Th erat ald tae aad aol Genes ee ae 181 
€ MLicsOe Sc riee ae nee ee ee 184 
= V Ese l inact Sees See ee 184 
s Witt 2507 ula iota nave s PP 185 
if VT, arrears aes 177, 182 
se Ve ores: ake On ee eee 171, 194 
“ OS LE it ore Sette eee 203, 204 
a ELT 12528 Seti «cance 204 
es REVEL 24 een ile Se ene 9. 
« >. © Crane h aie lo Se eomage mn” i 126 
Hi MIRC ItIG Re ee eee ee art 
ed KATA Shy Sines oh sellers hoa 243 
is + © Gs (COPEL Be te SR Pete csp 249 
POOODE Tio 3 oie et ae 242 


