





~ 
= 
°o 
& 
w 
ss 
— 
Oo 
” 
J 
> 


IM MIMM 


iY 


| 


| 


School I Theolog 





WEST FOOTHILL 














BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION. 
~ re 5 | ; : * an 





* 
oe 
2 * 
a 
Pe 








SH 


PROOF 


FIR 


x 
v7 


XTON READING THI 


C 


3 
= 
= 
=) 
> 
| 
rs) 
ra) 
< 
= 
iS 
ae 
Rn 
A 
= 
= 
& 
Q 
= 
W 
a 
q 
fe) 
= 
A 
< 
x 
i) 
a 
Lal 





THE BIBLE OF THE 
REFORMATION 


ITS TRANSLATORS AND THEIR WORK 
Bs 
N55 
HY 26 


BY THE 


Rev. W. J. HEATON, B.D. 


dj) 
FELLOW OF THE ROYAL HISTORICAL SOCIETY 
AUTHOR OF ‘‘OUR OWN ENGLISH BIBLE” 


WITH ILLUSTRATIONS AND FACSIMILES 


London; 
FRANCIS GRIFFITHS 


Ig10 


Theology Li ree 


SCHOCI OFT AEOLae 
AT CLAREMONT 
California 


Methodist World Service Fung 


ws 


SS) 


DEDICATED 
TO 


THE RIGHT HONOURABLE 
LORD PECKOVER 


LL:D., ¥.S:A.5 F-L.S., F.R.G-S.. FsR.N-5- 
OF WISBECH 


A LIFELONG LOVER OF THE LIVING WORD 


AND ESPECIALLY OF ITS ENGLISH FORM 





CHAP. 


IE 
1G 
ga 


IV. 


Wale 
Wane 
VIII. 
Xe 

‘ X. 
x 
XA. 
XIII. 
XIV. 
XY. 
VL. 


XVII. 
XVIII. 


CONTENTS 


Was IT NEEDED ?—ERASMUS 
Wuart aspout ENGLAND ?—CoLeEt 


TYNDALE AT THE UNIVERSITIES, AND IN GLOU- 
CESTERSHIRE . 


TYNDALE GOES TO LONDON, AND THEN LEAVES 
ENGLAND FOR EVER 


TYNDALE AT Worms, Four YEARS AFTER THE 
Micuty Drier : : : : ; ; : 


TYNDALE HARD AT WORK, AND FIERCELY OPPOSED 
Tae TRUE CHARACTER OF TYNDALE’S WoRK . 

Sir THomas More—“O tHe Piry oF 17” 
Fryta— NotHING IS HERE FOR TEARS” : ; 
ANNE BOLEYN . : ‘ ; F : ; 
THE BETRAYAL AND MartyrpoM or TYNDALE 
TYNDALE’S OTHER WORKS 4 . ; : : 
Tuer First CompLeTE ENGLISH BrBLE—COVERDALE 
FresH LigHt oN THE COVERDALE BIBLE 
CovERDALE’S LATER History AND OTHHR WORKS . 


Tue First EnquisH Binte FULLY AUTHORISED— 
MattHew’s BIBLE. 


BisHop Becken’s BIBLE 


Honest HueH LATIMER 


ix 


VAGE 


10 


19 


28 


45 
63 
76 
88 
104 
116 
126 
138 
151 
164 
174 


183 
191 
195 


OTE 


XXIV. 


XXV. 


XXVI. 


CONTENTS 


. Toe GREAT BIBLE 

. THomas CROMWELL AND BONNER 

_ Tur CoMPLETION OF THE GREAT BIBLE . 
XXII. 


ORANMER AND HIS Bist—E Work—CROMWELL’S 
FALL 


TAVERNER, THE Lay TRANSLATOR 

Tue REACTION AND ITS CAUSES 

Foxn’s “MERRY AND PLEASANT NARRATIVE” 
Tur BIBLE-SHUTTERS’ CRUELTY 


EPILOGUE 


PAGE 


204 
210 
220 


226 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


— 
PAGE 
Caxton READING THE First PRooF SHEET . : Frontispiece 
MEMORIAL TO THE FIRST PRINTERS, FRANKFORT . : ; 2 
ERASMUS . j : : 4 F : ; F ; : 5 
Wotsry IN CHANCERY LANE. : : : $ : A ee 
Wousry at LEICESTER ABBEY ; ; : : ‘ oils) 
Wibiiam TYNDALE. ; : : ; : ; = he 
Lirrte Soppury Manor House 1n 1889. : : Semel 
Less Distant VIEW : ‘ : ‘ é 3 : sal 
Lapy WALSH AND TYNDALE . : z : : : Fe 8} 
CHAPEL AT LitTLE SODBURY. . . : : é ; 7 82a) 
Oxp Sr. DuNSTAN’s, WHERE TYNDALE PREACHED. ; 2 829 
Srate CHURCH, WITTENBERG, IN THE CONFESSIONAL OF 
WHICH LUTHER WAS TOLD ABOUT TETZEL aT qeero2 
Spats CHURCH, WITTENBERG, WHERE MANY OF LUTHER’S 
SERMONS WERE PREACHED ; : : : ; 7 82 
WITTENBERG UNIVERSITY : : : 2 : : See 
CasttE CuurcH, WITTENBERG : : : : ; e200 
Tur VERITABLE Door OF THE THESES . ‘ 5 : = 86 


CastTLE CHURCH, WITTENBERG, WHERE THE THESES WERE 
NAILED UP, AND LUTHER AND MELANCHTHON ARE 


BuRIED . : ‘ : : : ; : ; pe ial 
TyNDALES WATER-WAY, COBLENTZ. f : : ; 5 eS) 
TYNDALE’'S WATER-WAY, EHRENBREITZTEIN . : ; wo 84) 
Epitrion oF New TESTAMENT BEGUN AT CoLOGNE ‘ , ais 


Worms New TESTAMENT : ; : : ; : 5 a 
xi 


xil LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


PAGE 
TYNDALE’S PENTATEUCH, WITH WoopcuTs . - d 1 49 


FacsIMILE oF First Pace or First Engrish New Trsta- 
MENT EVER PRINTED, witH WoopcuTt oF St. MattHEew 50 


St. MarrHew . f : - ; ; : , : ioe KO 
FacstmitE or First OCnaprer or First EnauisH NEw 

TESTAMENT EVER PRINTED : : ; ‘ é or. 82 
FacsImMILtE oF New TESTAMENT COMMENCED AND FINISHED 

AT Worms, 1525. ; , : : , ; SO 
TyYNDALE’s “ ADDRESS TO THE REDER” : : ; ae RD 
TYNDALE’S NEW TESTAMENT, 1525 : ; : ; soe 2k 
CARDINAL XIMENES : : : ; : : 5 Gin 
THE BurRNING oF TYNDALE’S TESTAMENTS . : ‘ = 269 


Oxtp Sr. Pav’s anD PauL’s Cross, WHERE TESTAMENTS 
WERE BURNED . : : ; ; ‘ F 73 


TYNDALE AT HIS WoRK . P : é ; : ‘ Seid) 
FACSIMILE FROM THE “ REPRODUCTION BY F. Fry, 1862, oF 
THE First New TESTAMENT IN ENGLISH BY WILLIAM 
TYNDALE (1525 or ’26)”. ‘ . 84 


Str T. More . : : 3 : 5 : 5 ‘ : 91 


Sir T. More anp His DAUGHTER. ; ‘ ; ae aeore 
Op Fier Prison. i : : : j ; ; a LOU 
PortTION oF TYNDALE’s PROLOGUE TO Exopus : 6 LOS, 
A New Liverature : : ; ; ; : ; all 
Anne Boneyn . ‘ : ‘ j : ; ‘ mee likg 
(THE Present) Buickting Hat, WHERE ANNE BoLEyn 

was BorN, AND LIVED HER EARLIER LIFE. GARDENS 

AND LAKE ‘ ; 5 ; : ; PAI 
BuickLine Hany : : : : ‘ 3 _elou 
Tue Liprary, Buickuing HaLu : ‘ : : ¥ G29 
MaARGUERITE DE VALOIS, THE QUEEN oF NAVARRE, AND 

HER PROTESTANT FRIENDS F ; ; fe US 
TYNDALE'S PRESENT TO ANNE BOLEYN . : : F 2 l2A 
THE Encuish Housz, ANTWERP : é 3 a ey 
TYNDALE’S BETRAYAL . : ; : 5 ; ; . 128 
THE CasTLE OF VILVORDE, NEAR BRUSSELS . : ; seellel 


Marryrpom or TYNDALE ‘ é ‘ ‘ 2 . Iss 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


TYNDALE’s MONUMENT, AT HIS BIRTHPLACE, EITHER NortTH 

NIBLEY, OR NEAR IT : ‘ : : 
Mites CoverDALE, BisHor oF EXETER, : : : 4 
TITLE TO THE First ENTIRE EncGiisH BrisLE— Cover- 

DALE’s, 1535 
Horikwam Hatt, Seat or THE Ear or LEICESTER, WHERE 

THE Unique CoVERDALE BIBLE IS PRESERVED 
CHRISTOPHER FROSCHOVER : : : ; ; 
JoHN Rogers, First Martyr IN QuEEN Mary’s REIGN 
Hues Latimer, Bishop or WORCESTER : 
Puacre oF MARTYRDOM, SMITHFIELD. : 
TirLe-PAGE OF THE GREAT BIBLE, 1539 
THoMAS CROMWELL, EarL or Essex 
Hosein, BY HIMSELF 


. . 


CRANMER, ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY : 
CANTERBURY CATHEDRAL, THE MARTYRDOM TRANSEPT 
Tirte To Great BiBieE, 1540 : ; : 

THE Burning oF ANNE ASKEW AND OTHERS 

HieH STREET, OXFORD . : ‘ 

Sr. Mary’s, OxForpD : ; ‘ : : ‘ : 
Porter READING THE BIBLE IN THE CRYPT OF Sr, PAUL’s. 


. 


Xili 
PAGE 


141 
153 


159 


165 
167 
185 
196 
199 
205 
211 
216 
227 
231 
235 
239 
263 
267 
275 





THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


BEING THE SECOND VOLUME 
OF “OUR OWN ENGLISH BIBLE” 


“©The Schoolmen, having subtle and strong capacities, abundance of 
leisure, and but small variety of reading, their minds being shut up in a 
few authors as their bodies were in the cells of their monasteries ; they, with 
infinite agitation of wit, spun out of a small quantity of matter, those 
laborious webs of learning which are extant in their books. For the 
human mind, if it acts upon matter, and contemplates the nature of things 
and the works of God, operates according to the stuff, and is limited 
thereby ; but if it works upon itself as the spider does, then it has no end, 
but produces cobwebs of learning, admirable indeed for the fineness of the 
thread, but of no substance or profit.” 

Bacon, Advancement of Learning. 


“The Reformation is not to be regarded as a great and sudden event 
which took the nation by surprise. It was merely the crisis, to which 
things had been tending for some centuries. And if the fire did at last 
run over the country with wonderful rapidity, it was because the trees 
were all dry.” —J. J. Buunv. 


THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


——_———— 


CHAPTER 1 
WAS IT NEEDED ?—ERASMUS 


In our first volume, on the Manuscript English Bible, 
we have broken up fresh ground. No other work has 
ever dealt separately with this early period, so full of 
fascination. But the printed Bible has been discussed 
again and again; and, in venturing once more on such 
familiar ground, we are reminded of Pliny’s remark, that 
it is no easy task to give novelty to what is old. But 
“the world moves,” and so much has come to light quite 
recently. The State Papers are full of interest on such a 
subject. And the publication of the National Dictionary 
of Biography has thrown a flood of light on many of those 
whose labours will now be recorded. In particular, a 
somewhat full account of all who took part in the Bishops’ 
Bible will be given. And are not the translators of the 
Authorised Version worthy of everlasting remembrance ? 
Their work has been published millions of times ; and it 
has intluenced our literature, and our national life, for 
good, as perhaps nothing else ever did. Yet how few 
know anything about the men to whom we are so vastly 
indebted? For, even in works on the subject, they 
receive only scant notice. 

Pursuing, then, the history of our “rightful though 
interrupted inheritance,” we now approach the Reforma- 
tion period. Archdeacon Hare has said that Luther's 
intense love of truth, which could not be lulled by any 


I 


3 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


make-believe, is the legacy he has bequeathed to the 
Protestant Churches. But it was not he alone that was 
yearning after realities. The feeling was widespread, and 
only needed a powerful and consistent spokesman. 

To glance briefly at the period preceding that of Luther 
and Tyndale, the most remarkable event was, of course, 
the invention of printing. About half-way down the 
fifteenth century, the secret, which now seems so simple, 
was discovered for Europe by a German. For, whilst 





8 


MEMORIAL TO THE FIRST PRINTERS, FRANKFORT. 


many of the great inventions which have altered the face 
of society belong to our own country, this one, by far the 
most influential, was discovered in the country where the 
Reformation itself originated, and just in time for it. 
About 1450 John Gutenberg began to print at Maintz, 
the first attempts having been at Strasburg a little 
earlier. He expended nearly all his substance on. the 
invention, and was about to abandon it in despair, when, 
through the advice and assistance of John Faust, he was 
enabled to proceed. Peter Schoeffer, at first a servant, and 


WAS IT NEEDED ?—ERASMUS 3 


afterwards a son-in-law, of Faust, discovered the readier 
method of casting the types; and they kept their secret 
for some time, till, at last, it was divulged by their work- 
men. The first book that appeared with a printer’s name 
and date was the best-loved portion of the Word of God 
—the Psalms—as was fitting. It was printed at Maintz, 
in 1457. Beautiful from the first, the initial B was 
imitated in Dibdin’s Bibliotheca Spenceriana. But, in 
twenty years, the colour faded; though the original, four 
hundred years old, is well preserved. 

Just at the right time for the new art, the sack of 
Constantinople, in 1453, sent large quantities of the most 
_ valuable manuscripts broadcast over Europe; and thus 
both “knowledge and vital piety ” were stimulated. 

They met in Erasmus, whose Bible work parallels that 
of Luther. His Prazse of Folly is a powerful satire on the 
absurdities of the period. Listen to his description of 
one of the sermons of the time. “I heard a grave divine 
taking upon him to treat of the mysterious name of Jesus, 
who did very subtilely pretend that in the very letters 
was contained whatever could be said of it. For, first, 
its being declined with three cases did expressly point 
out the Trinity of persons. Then, that the nominative 
ease ended with s, the accusative with m, and the ablative 
with u, did imply some unspeakable mystery; namely, 
that, in words of those initial letters, Christ was the 
summus, or beginning; the medius, or middle; and the 
ultimus, or end, of all things.” Erasmus says that the 
monks were wonderfully fond of the Fire of Purgatory, 
because it was so useful to their kitchens; but that, in 
many countries, the people scarcely heard a profitable 
- sermon once in six months. “J am firmly resolved,” he 
exclaims, “to die in the study of the Scriptures. In them 
I find my joy and peace.” And again, with regard to the 
new learning of the time, he says: “The highest object 
of the revival of philosophical studies will be to learn 
to become acquainted with the simple and pure Chris- 
tianity of the Bible.” 

Froude says that, when Erasmus’s New Testament and 


4 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


Paraphrase came out, the laity were able to see, side by 
side, the Christianity which converted the world, and the 
Christianity of the Church, with a Borgia Pope, Cardinal 
Princes, Ecclesiastical Courts, and a mythology of lies. 
Between 1526 and 1536, 30,000 copies of this New 
Testament were put into circulation; and the Manual of 
a Christian Soldier, which Tyndale translated at Little 
Sodbury, was also a work of pronounced anti-papal 
tendencies. It said that Christianity was not a matter of 
the acceptance of dogma or the performance of outward 
ceremonies and rites, so much ag a pure, righteous, and 
self-sacrificing life. 

Simple and pure Christianity was, indeed, almost 
unknown in all Europe. Divines of eighty years of age 
were ignorant of quotations from St. Paul; and preachers 
of long standing had never seen the New Testament. We 
are told that the Archbishop of Maintz said of the Bible: 
“In truth, I do not know what this book is, but I perceive 
that everything in it is against us.” “Cardinal Hosius’s 
persuasion was that it had been best for the Church if no 
Gospel had been written. The maxims that were current 
at the time are decisive enough on the point.* 

Even a little later, when Hooper was Bishop of 
Gloucester, out of 311 of his clergy, he found 168 unable 
to say the Ten Commandments ; 31 of these did not know 
where they were; 40 could not tell where the Lord’s 
Prayer was given, and 31 did not know the author. 

Erasmus found the spurious gospel of Nicodemus 
chained to a pillar in the nave of Canterbury Cathedral, 
but no Bible. Meantime, there were far more Moham- 
medans than Christians, and the number was rapidly 
increasing. 

The age was run mad on ceremony. Tyndale says, in 
his answer to More: “That trust which the ceremonies 
preached to be given unto God’s word and Christ’s blood, 
that same they turned unto the ceremony itself; as 
though a man were so mad, to forget that the bush at the 


* “ Quanto eris melior grammaticus, tanto pejor theologus. Grace posse 
scriptum fuerit. Hebraice proprie hereticum.” 





ERASMUS., 
FROM THE ORIGINAL PICTURE BY G. PENN, IN HIS MAJESTY’S 
COLLECTION AT WINDSOR. 





WAS IT NEEDED ?—ERASMUS 7 


tavern door did signify wine to be sold therein, but would 
believe that the bush itself would quench his thirst.” 
And the expense of all these ceremonies was enormous. 
Tyndale’s language on such a subject is righteously strong. 
“ How cometh it that a poor layman, having a wife and 
twenty children, and not able to provide for them, though 
all his neighbours know his necessity, shall not get, with 
begging for Christ’s sake, in a long summer’s day, enough 
to provide for them two days honestly: when, if a dis- 
guised monster come, he shall, with an hour’s lying in 
the pulpit, get enough to provide for thirty or forty sturdy 
lubbers a month long, of which the weakest shall be as 
strong in the belly, when he cometh unto the manger, as 
the mightiest porter in the Weigh-House, or the best 
courser that is in the king’s stable?” 

The partial reforms that had taken place needed to be 
earried much farther; and the pictures which stand out 
most vividly in the fifteenth century have only one 
interpretation. Innocent vil. chasing and murdering the 
Waldensian believers; John Huss, and Jerome of Prague, 
martyred as if by barbarians; the monasteries filled with 
the timid, the lazy, and the disappointed, though never 
without a seasoning of the salt of the earth; the pulpit 
largely given up to what was fanatical, or ridiculous, or 
political; and, in many parts, scarcely employed at all; 
while the whole system of Popery was used, mainly, either 
for money-making or the gaining of secular power. Even 
when men were dead, still money was demanded, that 
masses might be said for their souls, which never went 
either to heaven or hell, but always to Purgatory. In his 
Obedience of a Christian Man, Tyndale says: “If a poor 
man die, and leave his wife and half a dozen young 
children, with but one cow to feed them, that will they 
have for a mortuary, mercilessly; let come of wife and 
children what will. Yea! let anything be done against 
their pleasure, and they will interdict the whole realm, 
sparing no person.” 

The Schoolmen, both Dominicans and Franciscans, also 
contributed very largely, by their support of the existing 


8 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


order of things, to its downfall. We have described their 
ancestors, In the days of Wycliff. Roger Bacon says: 
“The miserable herd of students fatigue themselves, and 
play the fool, about the miserable translations of Aristotle ; 
and lose their time, their labour, and their expense. 
Appearances alone engage them, and they have no care 
to acquire real knowledge; but only to seem knowing in 
the eyes of the senseless multitude.” 

Hear Mr. Brewer on these Schoolmen :— 

“They had pierced and drilled, by their vermiculate 
questions, the solid body of the general belief; until, 
under the guise of its defenders, they had become its 
most dangerous enemies. Every form of difficulty or 
error, which had ever entered the brains of others or 
themselves, had been so carefully stated, and SO laboriously 
confuted, that doubts, which might have died of them- 
selves, or obtained, at best, a narrow and _ precarious 
existence, gained a fatal activity by their writings. For, 
error is too subtle to yield to dialectics. And, such is 
the perverseness of the human mind, that the poison 
remains, when the antidote is forgotten.” * 

Adrian v1, indeed (Pope, 1522-23), ingenuously con- 
fessed that great distress had justly come upon the Holy 
See, as a punishment of the abominations that had been 
committed in it; and he promised to carry out a reforma- 
tion himself, despising Luther and all his party. He died, 
however, before he had sat two years in the Papal chair; 
not without good suspicions of foul play.t The Council 
of Trent was, in fact, the acknowledgment of crying 
grievances and corruptions; though its slow assembling, 
and long protraction, did not evidence any great desire to 
deal with them. It was said, indeed, that there could be 
no reason to imagine that the grace of the Holy Spirit 
was present with such a council, except that the managers 
were brought to it with as much difficulty as if they had 
been sure to meet the Holy Ghost there. : 


* State Papers, vol. iii., Rev. J. S. Brewer, M.A. 
t Somers’ Collection of Tracts, vol. ix., ‘State of the Church of Rome 
when the Reformation began.” 


WAS IT NEEDED ?—ERASMUS 9 


We must close this general sketch by quoting the words 
of Mr. Froude, who says: “ Protestantism was a falling 
back upon the rules of truth and piety which lay upon 
the surface of the Bible: and a determination rather to 
die than to mock with unreality any longer the Almighty 
Maker of the world. Intellect, as it ever does, followed 
in the wake of the higher virtues of manly honesty and 
truthfulness.” 


CHAPTER. LT 


WHAT ABOUT ENGLAND ? 


“Our grand business in life is not to see what lies dimly at a distance, 
but to do what lies clearly at hand.”—CariyLp. 


Bur we turn to our own country, without attempting a 
more detailed description of the need of a sweeping 
reformation. That need was seen clearly enough within 
our own shores; but, perhaps, the full time had not come 
before the instruments were ready. Lord Macaulay, at 
least, is responsible for the saying that, corrupt as the 
Church of Rome had become, if it had been overthrown 
in the twelfth, or even in the fourteenth century, the 
vacant space would have been occupied by some system 
more corrupt still. Wycliffs work had never, indeed, - 
died out; and Tunstall, Bishop of London, wrote to 
Erasmus, in 1523: “It is no question of some pernicious 
novelty. It is that new arms are being added to the 
great band of Wycliffite heretics.” Erasmus, in the same 
year, said that the Wycliffite party was “not extinguished, 
but only overcome.” They were still reading Bible 
fragments in barns and behind hedges, and keeping 
alive what has come to be the dominant force in Pro- 
testantism.* 

Now, however, that the time had come, it seemed as if 
the Papal hierarchy was to illustrate its greatest pomp 
and pride immediately before its fall. Never had England 
had a representative of the Vatican who approached 
Cardinal Wolsey, both in outward grandeur and in real 


*J. H. Gardiner, The Bible as English Literature. Chaucer, in his 
Ploughman’s Tale, shows himself a thorough Wycliffite. 
Io 


WHAT ABOUT ENGLAND? II 


power. Im 1513 he was made Bishop of Tournay, in 
France ; in 1514, Archbishop of York; in 1515, the King’s 
High Almoner, Cardinal, and Lord High Chancellor of 
the kingdom; and, in 1518, the Pope’s Legate. His 
revenues, from all sources, were immense; and his style 
of living equalled that of the mightiest sovereigns. On 
special expeditions he was attended by four thousand 
horsemen, including nobles, prelates, and knights; and 


j es Jo iN. A 





WOLSEY IN CHANCERY LANE, 


the bosses of his mule’s bridles might buy Christ and His 
Apostles, as the satire said.* 

When at home, Wolsey’s ordinary establishment, at 
Hampton Court, numbered a thousand persons. At the 
head of his yeomen and ushers, there were nine or ten 
lords to wait on him, each with several servants; the 
Earl of Derby having five. Attending his table, there 
were twelve doctors and chaplains, a physician, four 
councillors learned in the law, two secretaries, a herald- 
at-arms, a sergeant-at-arms, an armourer, and a Clerk 

* «Rede me and be nott wrothe.”—W. Royr. 


12 ‘THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


of the Green Cloth, ete. As Shakespeare says, he bound 
all England, by suggestion; and, though he probably 
never said “Ego et meus rex,” he often said ‘“‘ My king 
and I.” He was far more powerful than the Pope him- 
self, says the Venetian Giustinian; though he was foiled 
in his attempts to reach the Vatican, through political 
complications. Who could have thought that he and 
his Church were so quickly to fall together! Amongst 
his last words were—‘Commend me .to His Royal 
Majesty, and request him, in God’s name, that he be 
on the watch to depress this new sect of Lutherans; 
from whose mischief, God in His mercy defend us!” 
Six years later, Tyndale died, praying—“Lord, open 
the King of England’s eyes.” 

Who, then, was Tyndale, whose prayer we know to 
have been answered? We may well call him one of the 
torch-bearers going first in this ever-memorable period. 
He it was who first gave the printed Bible to English 
people. Foxe calls him “the true servant and martyr 
of God, the Apostle of England in this our latter age.” 
It is an indication of the state of religion, that no one 
should have attempted the work before. For the 
Mazarin Bible, a Latin copy, had been printed and sold 
seventy years before Tyndale commenced his labour. 

The printing establishments of Gutenberg and Schoeffer 
were broken up by the sack of Maintz, in 1462; and 
their workmen, becoming dispersed, carried the new 
invention into almost every country of Europe. More- 
over, translators were not wanting; so that, before the 
end of the fifteenth century, Bibles were printed in 
Spanish (1478), in Italian (1471), in French (1487), in 
Dutch (1475), in German (1467), and in Bohemian (1488); 
being all taken from the Vulgate. The Mazarin Bible 
was Gutenberg’s work; and it was a splendid trophy of 
the new art. Hallam says: “It is a very striking circum- 
stance, that the high-minded inventors of this great’ art 
tried, at the very outset, so bold a flight as the printing 
of an entire Bible; and executed it with astonishing 
success. It was Minerva, leaping on the earth in her 





ABBEY. 


LEICESTER 





< 


\ 


0) 


WOLSI 





WHAT ABOUT ENGLAND? 15 


divine strength and radiant armour, ready, at the moment 
of her nativity, to subdue and destroy her enemies. We 
see, in imagination, this splendid volume leading up the 
crowded myriads of its followers, and imploring a blessing 
on the new art, by dedicating its first-fruits to the service 
of heaven.”* The first portion of the New Testament 
printed was the Hymn of Zacharias, and that of Mary; 
which were printed as an Appendix to a Greek Psalter, 
in 1486. 

Apart from the ecclesiastical influences which hindered 
the printing of the Bible in England, it is to be borne in 
mind that never, within our shores, has the Sovereign 
undertaken any expense in connection with it. In 
Germany, two generations before the time of Tyndale, 
a translation was commenced at the Imperial expense. 
The Danish translation has been four. times revised by 
order of as many kings; and one King of Denmark 
appointed a travelling commission for the collection of 
manuscripts, at his own expense. The Swedish, Norse, 
and other versions have also had public assistance. But 
the English versions have been the result of independent 
enterprise, though occasionally sanctioned by the reigning 
monarch, 

Connecting, then, the name of Coverdale with that of 
Tyndale, by later references, let us glance at his personal 
history, as it amply lies before us. William Tyndale was 
born about 1484; being connected, in all probability, 
with a baronial family. Demaus, in his second edition 
(Lovett’s edition), thinks that all the evidence is in favour 
of Tyndale’s being born at Melksham Court, Stinchcombe, 
this being the home of Tyndale’s family. It was another 
family, of the same name, that resided at North Nibley ; 
though the memorial column has been erected there.t 
Family legends are generally worthy of consideration, 
and, according to them, the Tyndales came from the 


* Literary History, edition 1864, p. 156. 

+ W. Tyndale, G. Barnett Smith. Full particulars of Tyndale’s family 
will be found in a little publication by B. W. Greenfield, Barrister-at- 
Law, entitled Wotes relating to the Family of Tyndale, London, 1878. 


16 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


north, during the Wars of the Roses; and, to elude 
observation, changed their names to Hutchins, or 
Hychyns. Thus Tyndale entered Oxford as William 
Hychyns. But, afterwards, the family reverted to their 
former and rightful name of Tyndale. 





[ Winniam TYNDALE, 


Tyndale was educated, ike Wycliff, at Oxford, “ where 
he increased, as well in the knowledge of tongues and 
other arts, as especially in the knowledge of Scriptures, 
whereunto his mind was singularly addicted.” In his 


WHAT ABOUT ENGLAND? 17 


days, great changes were constantly taking place in the 
thoughts and feelings of those who were influenced by 
the revival of letters. And in Oxford, naturally, such 
changes would find their surest register. Tyndale Says, 
in his Practice of Prelates, that when he first went to 
Oxford most of the teaching pertained as much to the 
healing of a man’s heel as to the saving of his soul; 
and that no one looked at the Scriptures until he had 
been trained in heathen learning for years. 

Several Oxford students had been to Italy, however, 
and had learned to love and understand the Greek 
tongue, and to read the Bible instead of the Schoolmen. 
One especially, John Colet, had imbibed the spirit of 
the great Florentine reformer, Savonarola; and returned 
to begin at Oxford a movement which was to have an 
altogether immeasurable influence. Colet began to 
lecture on St. Paul’s Epistles, studying them as any 
other letters might be studied, and quoting Plato, when 
he did quote, more than either Aquinas or Scotus. Sir 
Thomas More and Erasmus were powerfully influenced 
by him, being at Oxford at the same time. Thus, before 
many years were gone, the books of the Schoolmen, 
which had been so highly prized, became little more 
than waste paper. 

Colet was the son of a Lord Mayor of London, and 
in course of time was appointed to the Deanery of St. 
Paul’s Cathedral. More, Grocyn, Linacre, and other 
Oxford students were also found in London, when 
Erasmus visited it, in 1505. These men formed a 
powerful little group, who could not go on in the old 
ways; though they came, afterwards, to differ widely 
from one another. Colet was made Court Preacher on 
the accession of Henry vill, and excited plenty of 
malice amongst the old school by his bold reforming 
spirit. Tyndale says, in his answer to Sir T. More’s 
Dialogue, that Fitz-James, Bishop of London, would 
have made Colet a heretic, for translating the Pater 
Noster into English,* and denouncing the worship of 

* Arber’s Reprint. 
2 


18 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


images, but the Archbishop of Canterbury dismissed the 
charge as frivolous. 

Colet preached, in fact, before the Convocation, and 
seized the opportunity of urging, in the plainest manner, 
the need for an improvement in the morals of the clergy. 
The wicked worldly life of some of the bishops, he 
averred, was far worse heresy than that of poor Lollards; 
two of whom had just been burnt at Smithfield. 

Colet used his father’s fortune to found the public 
school by the side of St. Paul’s, in which “gentleness 
and prayer” were made much of, in place of the 
barbarous usages of the period; and in which the pure 
Latin and Greek imported from Italy were taught, as 
well as the “new learning” generally.* It became a 
model school, copied in fifty towns. 

There was a widespread indifference, as a rule, however, 
at this period, and for some time afterwards, to any 
special dogmatic truths. And, except a man chose to 
obtrude his “heresies” in the very face of his bishop, he 
was safe enough. Mr. Brewer, the able editor of the 
State Papers, says: “In general, the indifference or 
contempt with which the bishops regarded departures 
from established doctrines, especially when the dissent 
was not attended with scholarship, was more galling, 
in many cases, than when they launched against it 
their ecclesiastical fulminations.” 


* The Oxford Reformers, Seebohm. 


CHAPTERS IIT 


TYNDALE AT THE UNIVERSITIES, AND IN GLOUCESTERSHIRE 


““He that has light within his own clear breast 
May sit i’ the centre, and enjoy bright day.” 
MILTON. 


TYNDALE probably entered Oxford about 1504, and 
became a student at Magdalen Hall, where Wolsey had 
distinguished himself when little more than a boy. His 
portrait hangs in the Refectory, with an inscription, 
freely recognising his services as a translator, and his 
virtues as a man and a martyr, and calling him the Pride 
of the Hall and the Apostle of England.* In these early 
days, he read privately to certain students and fellows of 
Magdalen College, “some parcel of Divinity, instructing 
them in the knowledge and truth of the Scriptures.” 
We are not surprised to learn, therefore, that he was 
soon suspected of Lutheranism; and, after a time, he 
found it desirable to move on to Cambridge.t There the 
same influences would be found as at Oxford, and his 
views would be confirmed by intercourse with some of 
the leading spirits among the Reformers. 

Though Erasmus had left Cambridge, it may have been 
some teaching of his which first suggested to Tyndale the 
noble design of giving his countrymen the Word of God. 
We must dwell, at some length, on Erasmus’s own New 
Testament; so will only quote here his words in the 

* Now Hertford College. 

} “It isa mistake to suppose that Tyndale left Oxford for Cambridge 
to sit at the feet of Erasmus; for he took his M.A. at Oxford in 1515, 


and Erasmus had left Cambridge in 1514, See the preface to Lovett’s 


edition of Demaus’s Tyndale. 
19 


20 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


Paraclesis: “I totally dissent from those who are un- 
willing that the sacred Scriptures, translated into the 
vulgar tongue, should be read by private individuals ; 
as if Christ had taught such subtle doctrines that they 
can with difficulty be understood by a very few theo- 
logians; or as if the strength of the Christian religion 
lay in men’s ignorance of it. The mysteries of kings it 
were perhaps better to conceal, but Christ wishes His 
mysteries to be published as widely as possible. I would 
wish even all women to read the Gospel and the Epistles 
of St. Paul. And I wish they were translated into all 
languages, of all people, that they might be read and 
known, not merely by the Scotch and the Irish, but even 
by the Turks and the Saracens. I wish that the husband- 
man may sing parts of them at his plough; that the 
weaver may warble them at his shuttle, that the traveller 
may, with their narratives, beguile the weariness of the 
way. 

Luther’s influence was great all over Europe, but he 
never came here, and the recent Cambridge History of 
Literature says very properly: “The English Reforma- 
tion began at Cambridge, and the Cambridge movement 
began with Erasmus, although he was not its sole author.” * 
It was a great disappointment for him at first, his coming 
to England in 1509. His pupil, Lord Mountjoy, wrote 
telling him of the accession of Henry viil., and assured him 
that being a humanist Prince, he would encourage learned 
men, without whom the rest of mankind would hardly 
exist. All things would be full of honey and nectar for 
him. Erasmus was poor, and came, to find that Henry 
took no notice of him. However, plenty of others did, 
and he became a notable teacher and writer, finding 
friends who delighted and surprised him here. He said 
of Colet that when he heard him, he seemed to be listen- 
ing to Plato, and he assured the prior of the convent to 
which he was still nominally attached that there were as 
accurate scholars in Latin and Greek here as there were 


* Renascence and Reformation, vol. iil., A. W. Ward, Litt.D., and 
A. R. Waller, M.A. 


TYNDALE A 





THE UNIVERSITIES 21 








LESS DISTANT VIEW. 


22 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


in Italy. His works had an immense sale and influence. 
Amongst the MSS. preserved at Corpus Christi, Oxford, 
there is the day-book of an Oxford bookseller, showing 
what he sold in 1520. His name was John Dorne, and 
he had sold 2383 books during that year, one-ninth of 
the whole being written or edited by Erasmus. Seventy- 
five editions of the Hnchiridion were published in Henry’s 
reign alone. 

Bilney and Cranmer were both at Cambridge in 
Tyndale’s time. Latimer was there also, though he was 
then a determined opponent both of Greek and the study 
of the Scriptures. Tyndale’s somewhat long residence, 
in first one University and then the other, laid the 
foundation of that good scholarship which he afterwards 
evidenced in his translation; Sir Thomas More, his 
great antagonist, allowing that, before he left England, 
he was “well known for a man of right good living, 
studious, and well learned in Scripture.” There never 
was, in fact, a word to say either against his character or 
scholarship. 

From Cambridge, Tyndale proceeded to act as tutor 
in the family of Sir John Walsh, a Gloucestershire 
knight, whose manor house, amongst the Cotswolds, 
was picturesquely situated.* Here he could still devote 
a large portion of his time to study, his pupils being 
very young. In fact, he must have been more of a 
chaplain than a tutor, and would have plenty of time for 
thought. 

It was while he was living at Little Sodbury that 
Tyndale’s strong repugnance to much that was ecclesias- 
tical, without being religious, manifested itself. In the 
dining hall (which can be seen to-day) there were 
accustomed to assemble many neighbouring priests ; and, 
in their company, he began to express himself with creat 

* Being on the western side of the Cotswolds, the Forest of Dean is 
near at hand. It furnished oak for the navy ; and the Spanish Armada 
was instructed to destroy it (Z'yndale, C. Tylor, 1898). 

The manor house at Little Sodbury is still to be seen, being now a 


substantial farmhouse, as I found one lovely summer afternoon, after 
taking the train to Yate, 
























































































































































ay aN | \y : 
RSS \ \ ais’ N | 

ai Za S NV | 

SA" aN] : . 























LADY WALSH AND TYNDALE. 


23 





TYNDALE AT THE UNIVERSITIES 25 


freedom, Foxe says, that “as he was learned, and well 
practised in God’s matters, so he spared not to show unto 
them, simply and plainly, his judgment. And when 
they at any time did vary from his opinions, he would 
show them in the book, and lay before them the manifest 
places of Scripture, to confute their errors and to con- 
firm his sayings.” At length his patrons undertook to 
expostulate with him on the subject, and the argument 
used by Lady Walsh shows that money power is no 





CHAPEL AT LITTLE SODBURY. 


modern metewand. “Why!” she said, “here is such a 
doctor as may dispend a hundred pounds; and another, 
two hundred; and another, three hundred pounds; and 
were it reason, think you, that we should believe you 
before them?” So that Hudibras was not far wrong : 


“What makes all doctrines plain and clear? 
About two hundred pounds a year. 
And, that which was proved true before, 
Proved false again? Two hundred more.” 


26 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 
Or Shakespeare : 


‘““O what a world of vile ill-favoured faults 
Look handsome in three hundred pounds a year!” 


It was here, however, that Tyndale avowed the resolu- 
tion that, before many years, he would cause the boy 
that drove the plough to know more of the Scriptures 
than the priests themselves. “A thousand books,” he 
exclaims, “had they rather to be put forth against their 
abominable doings and doctrines, than that the Scripture 
should come to light. For, as long as they may keep 
that down, they will so darken the right way with the 
mists of their sophistry, and so tangle them that either 
rebuke or despise their abominations with arguments of 
philosophy, and with worldly similitudes, and apparent 
reasons of natural wisdom, and with wresting the 
Scripture to their own purpose (clean contrary unto 
the process, order, and meaning of the text); and so 
delude them with descanting upon it with allegories; 
and amaze them, expounding it in many senses before 
the unlearned lay people, when it hath but one simple 
natural sense, whose light the owls cannot abide; that 
though thou feelest in thine heart, and art sure, that 
all is false which they say, yet thou couldest not solve 
their subtle riddles.” (Preface to the Pentateuch.) 

During his residence at Little Sodbury, Tyndale 
preached at College Green, Bristol, and in the villages 
around. It is remarkable, as a sign of the times, that 
there was no resident bishop to interfere with him. For 
the bishop was a thousand miles off, in Italy. It is 
worthy of notice that this very non-resident bishop 
afterwards became the Pope who kept Wolsey from 
attaining to that much coveted position. His name, 
when Bishop of Worcester, was Julio di Medici, and 
afterwards Clement vu. He lived at Rome, and never 
saw England! Henry vii. wanted the Popedom for 
Wolsey, but Charles vy. eventually secured it for his 
nominee. In fact, from 1512, when Sylvester di Giglio 


TYNDALE AT THE UNIVERSITIES 27 


returned to Rome, to 1535, when Hugh Latimer was 
consecrated, there was no resident. Bishop of Worcester. 
A foreigner once held seven hundred preferments at a 
time, and another time orders came from Rome that 
three hundred Italians were to be appointed to the 
first benefices that fell vacant. So Dr. Parker, the 
Chancellor, did the bishop’s work for him, being a 
violent bigot. 


CHAPTER IV 


TYNDALE GOES TO LONDON, AND THEN LEAVES ENGLAND 
FOR EVER 


‘‘Nunquam periclum sine periclo vincitur.” 


Tuus, at length, not finding the quiet and liberty which 
he had looked for in a Gloucestershire manor house, in 
1524 Tyndale went up to London, and tried to get into 
the service of the Bishop of London, but in vain. “Room 
enough,” he says, “there was in my Lord’s house for 
belly-cheer, but none to translate the New Testament.” 
The Bishop was Tunstall, a courtly scholar, but no 
Reformer,* though friendly with Erasmus and More. 


“To place and power, all public spirit tends, 
In place and power all public spirit ends.” 


Tyndale said afterwards that Erasmus had a tongue 
which made of little gnats great elephants, if any one 
favoured him. His stay in London was not in vain, 
however, in view of the life-work God was calling him 
to. He marked the course of the world; heard the 
preachers, whom he calls praters; and beheld the pomp 
of the prelates; and how they endeavoured to set unity 
and peace in the world, “themselves walking in darkness 
all the time.” He wanted nothing more than a yearly 
income of ten pounds for his subsistence, and some post 
in which he might preach the Word of God and teach 
children. Soon after his arrival, a wealthy and bene- 

* Afterwards Tyndale had reason‘to call him “ that still Saturn, the 


imaginer of all mischief.” 
28 


“dqaHoOV 


w 


Ud DWIVONAL WutHM 


‘g NY 








ul 


LS 


NO 


“LS 








a 


r 


10 





20 





TYNDALE GOES TO LONDON 25 


volent eitizen, Humphrey Monmouth by name, who was 
a Reformer in his principles, and had bestowed ex- 
hibitions in the Universities, received Tyndale under 
his roof, and engaged to supply him with all that was 
necessary. He heard him preach several times at St. 
Dunstan’s. Humphrey Monmouth was sent to the 
Tower in May 1528, for reading “heretical books.” 
But better times came, and he was made Alderman and 
Under-Sheriff of London. He was a draper, be it said, 
to the honour of the fraternity. Fryth also became 
Tyndale’s friend while he was in London, He was not 
unmolested, however; and after six months of hard labour 
in God’s word, he left our shores for a safer retreat some- 
where abroad. 

From his boyhood, Tyndale tells us, he had felt himself 
called to the work which he had now begun. So, finding 
that there was no room, not only in the bishop’s palace, 
but in all England to translate the New Testament, he 
was determined to go where there was. ‘There can be very 
little doubt that the first English New Testament was 
produced at far-famed Wittenberg. Tyndale landed at 
Hamburg, but there was not a solitary printer there then, 
and the fame of Luther would be sure to attract such a 
man, All the contemporaneous evidence agrees, and it 
is almost certain that he spent his first continental year 
where Luther was now a married man and could easily 
receive his friends. On the way he would find evidences 
of the Reformation right and left, convents abandoned, 
the mass giving place to the Lord’s Supper, and the 
people freely permitted to read the Scriptures in their 
own tongue. He soon learnt German, and would be 
amongst the crowd in the University Church listening 
to the intrepid Reformer. I was there some years ago, 
and it was encouraging to be told by the verger that the 
congregations were as large to-day as when Luther 
preached. It is not unlikely also that such a man as 
Tyndale would get into private intercourse with Luther, 
and be inspired by some of his table talk. He had just 
translated the Bible himself into the German vernacular, 


32 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


and thrown his inkstand at the devil for interfering 
with him! 
His helper, during this memorable year, was Friar 
Roye, as he could get none better, and it was necessary 
to have some secretary or amanuensis. What they went 





STATE CHURCH, WITTENBERG, IN THE 
CONFESSIONAL OF WHICH LUTHER WHERE MANY OF LUTHER’S 
WAS TOLD ABOUT TETZEL, SERMONS WERE PREACHED, 


STATE CHURCH, WITTENBERG, 


to work with was the third edition of Erasmus’s New 
Testament in Greek, with its Latin Version, This was 
the foundation, and they had algo the Vulgate, Luther’s 
German translation, and such grammars and lexicons as 
the age furnished. 


toye had been at Cambridge, and then a friar at 


‘HOOTH LSUIL HHL NO ‘UMMOL THL JO LHYIY FHL OL TUATM SWOOU § UHHLOT 


“ALISUMAINA SUMANALLIM 





33 


©9 





TYNDALE GOES TO LONDON 35 


Greenwich, when his eyes were opened to the true 
character of Popery. He was not, however, one of the 
brightest champions of the new faith; and though Tyndale 
used him, no friendship was formed between them. 
Tyndale’s account of him is that, as long as he had no 
money, he could rule him; but, as soon as he got money, 








CASTLE CHURCH, WITTENBERG. 


“he became like himself again.” He says they compared 
texts together, which he could not do alone, and then he 
bade him farewell “for our two lives, and, as men say, a 
day longer.” 

It certainly seems suitable that the first English New 
Testament should have been produced at Wittenberg, 
“the cradle of the Reformation.” We shall see directly 


36 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


that it was printed at Worms, where the mighty Diet 
had been only four years before, so its connection with 
two of the chief scenes of the Reformation is sufficiently 
strong. The Castle Church at Wittenberg was restored 
in 1892, and contains the tombs of Luther, Melanch- 
thon, Frederick the Wise, and John the Steadfast. On 





THE VERITABLE DOOR OF THE THESES. 


its old doors, now replaced, Luther nailed his ninety- 
five theses, and there is a tree outside the Elster Gate 
where he burned the Papal Bull. There is a fine bronze 
statue to “the solitary monk that shook the world,” by 
Schadow, in the market-place, but neither at Wittenberg 
nor Worms is there any trace of Tyndale, whose quiet 
work, however, was just as enduring. 


TYNDALE GOES TO LONDON 37 


However, though translated, the first New Testament 
was not printed at Wittenberg. It was too strongly 
identified with books that would be called heretical, and 
Tyndale moved on to Cologne, a large commercial shipping 
centre. The Romanist policy everywhere was like that 
of the Philistines, who would allow no smith in Israel, 
lest the Hebrews should make them swords or spears.* 
But in such a Romanist city, a printer of “heresies” 
would scarcely be suspected. Nevertheless, it was whilst 
at Cologne, where Tyndale arrived in June 1525, that 





CASTLE CHURCH, WITTENBERG, WHERE THE THESES WERE NAILED 
UP, AND LUTHER AND MELANCHTHON ARE BURIED. 


Cochleeus, best known for his ferocious attacks on Luther, 
interrupted the printing of the sheets, getting an order 
from the Senate, which nearly spoilt the labours of many 
patient months. Later on, this man (whose real name 
was John Dobneck) entered on this very translation con- 
troversy, printing a letter to James v. of Scotland, as to 
whether it was expedient for laymen to read the 
Scriptures. It is to this letter chiefly that we owe the 
minute account of the whole of the transactions at this: 


* Scripture the Illustrator, Bowes. 


38 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


time, of which Cochleus was not a little proud.* The 
printing was being executed by Peter Quentel; and 
Cochleus made some of his workmen drunk, that he 
might get the secret out of them. It was through the 
interest taken in the matter by Rinck,.a patrician of 
Cologne, to whom Cochleus disclosed what he had dis- 
covered, that the order of the Senate was given which 
put an end to the printing for the present. 

There were many well-known printers in such a city 
as Cologne, Ulric Zell, having been the first, in 1466. 
It is probable, however, that Quentel was amongst the 
foremost of his day, and Cologne is likely to have been 
chosen by Tyndale as a good place to remain undis- 
covered in, being a city of great importance, the birth- 
place of Rembrandt, the capital of the Duchy, and a 
centre of commerce. It 1s worthy of note that the first 
instances of books printed with imprimaturs, or Romish 
official permissions, are two printed in this same city of 
Cologne in 1479, one of them being a Latin Bible. 

It is perhaps rather strange, however, that Tyndale 
should have chosen a place like Cologne to commence his 
printing operations in, considering how fierce was the 
odium theologicum of that time, unless it was that he 
thought he would be hid. One Doctor at this time hung 
up the portrait of Hrasmus in his study, that he might be 
able at any moment to spit in his face ! 

With Roye as his companion, Tyndale now took the 
quarto sheets already printed, as far as the printer’s 
signature “xk,” and fled, by a ship going up the Rhine, to 
that famous Worms, where Luther had taken his stand at 
the Diet only four years previously. It is almost a 
wonder he did not go to Antwerp, not far away, and then 
the headquarters of Bible printing. Here no fewer 
than thirteen editions of the Bible and twenty-four of 
the New Testament, in Dutch or Flemish, were printed 

* Roye said of Cochleus : i 

*“A little, praty, foolish poade ; 
But, although his stature be small, 


Yet men say he lacketh no gall ; 
More venomous than any toad.” 








OBLENTZ, 


© 


ER-WAY, 


r 


TYNDALE’S WA 


39 





TYNDALE GOES TO LONDON 4l 


during the first part of the sixteenth century; besides 
many others in various languages. 

Worms was chosen, however, most likely, for more 
than one reason. Its strong Lutheran feeling; its being 
straight up the Rhine; and, perhaps, the fact of Schoeffer 
being there, may have influenced Tyndale. The modern 
traveller will remember that he had thus to sail up the 
loveliest part of the Rhine. But there were no gay steamers 
crowded with tourists then ; and we can only guess at 
the effect produced on his mind by the seven mountains, 


the castle-crowned heights, and the innumerable fables 





TYNDALE’S WATER-WAY, EHRENBREITZTEIN. 


and traditions which haunt the famous river. With his 
work interrupted in the middle, and so far a failure, it is 
not likely that Tyndale would be in the mood to make 
many inquiries. But we may imagine him, many a time, 
led out in prayer, in the lovely solitudes through which 
he would pass; and pacing, it may be, a heavy barge, 
similar to those which the traveller now frequently sees 
slowly working their way against the strong deep current. 

The associations of the towns through which Tyndale 
passed, however, would not be lost upon him. At 
Cologne, which he now quitted, there had been, only a few 


42 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


years back, a disturbance which had thrown into bold 
relief the two parties which now divided the Church. 
Reuchlin, by whom the study of classical literature and 
Hebrew was greatly promoted, had been involved in a 
quarrel with a Jew of Cologne, called Pfefferkorn, who, 
at the age of fifty, had made a profession of Christianity. 
Pfefferkorn published some works for the purpose of 
converting his Jewish brethren, but without much 
success. He then petitioned the Emperor Maximilian 
that all Jewish books, except the Bible, might be destroyed. 
It was suggested to the Emperor that Reuchlin should 
be consulted; and, accordingly, he gave his judgment in 
an argumentative treatise. In this he distinguished the 
books of the Jews into seven classes, and affirmed that 
amongst the lighter sort only was there anything in 
mockery of the Christian religion, and that the rest 
might profitably be studied. Pfefferkorn at once assailed 
Reuchlin, in a book called the Hand-glass; to which 
Reuchlin rejoined in one entitled the Fye-glass, in which he 
convicted his adversary of twenty-four untruths. Then 
came the Dominican Monks upon the scene, who made 
Reuchlin apologise for some of his language, though he 
would retract nothing. The end of it was that Sickingen, 
a noble who had strongly espoused Reuchlin’s cause, and 
that of the Reformation generally, threatened that, unless 
the payment of damages was made within a month, he 
would lay waste the territory of Cologne. In consequence 
of this, the Inquisitor made his payment; and Reuchlin 
was undisturbed till the day of his death. All this, full 
of the lights and shadows of the Reformation period, 
had occurred immediately before Tyndale’s residence in 
Cologne. 

He would not forget either that, at the University of 
Cologne, John Wessel, styled by his admirers “ the light 
of the world,” and by his opponents “the master of 
contradictions,’ was educated. Of his works, Luther 
says: “If I had read them earlier, my enemies might 
have thought that I derived everything from him, so 
much does the spirit of the two agree.” Being asked by 


TYNDALE GOES TO LONDON 43 


the Pope, who had known him in early life, to choose 
some gift, Wessel selected a Bible in the original tongues, 
from the Vatican Library. When the Pope expressed 
his wonder that he had not selected a bishopric, or some 
valuable benefice, Wessel replied that he did not need 
any such things. 

Passing Oberwessel, the birthplace of John Richrath, 
Tyndale would again be reminded that there was nothing 
very modern about his views. For Richrath, like Luther, 
had been disgusted by the preaching of Indulgences; so 
that he wrote, not only against the grosser abuses of the 
system, but the whole principle of it. 

Perhaps the reader would like to have a sample or two 
of these far-famed Indulgences. The following is in the 
Hours after the Use of Sarum, printed at Paris, in 1526: 
“To all that be in a state of grace, that devoutly say 
this prayer (fol. 38) before the Blessed Lady of Pity; 
she will show them her Blessed Visage, and warn them 
the day and hour of their death.” Again, “John the 
Third, Pope of Rome, at the request of the people of 
England, hath granted to all them that devoutly say this 
prayer, before the image of our Lord crucified, as many 
days of pardon as there are wounds in the body of our 
Lord, in the time of His bitter passion, the which were 
5465."* 

Richrath attained great popularity as a preacher, at 
Worms. But he did not avoid the extravagances into 
which men of his class so easily fall. He once said that, 
if Peter instituted fasting, it was with a view to getting a 
better market for his fish! His writings were burned, and 
he was sent to the Convent of Augustinian Friars at 
Maintz (Mayence), where he soon afterwards died. 

Yes! Maintz, the home of printing in Germany, would 
be Tyndale’s last stopping-place. And, no doubt, his 
purpose would be strengthened, as he reflected how the 
printing presses here had groaned under German Bibles 
long enough; whilst his own country was destitute of one 
single printed English Bible. Fourteen complete editions 


*The prayers are in Latin (Antiquarian Repository, London, 1807). 


44 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


in High German, and four in Low, had been issued; 
though not without opposition. Berthold, Archbishop of 
Maintz, in 1486, denounced the publishing of any books 
not allowed by four Doctors, especially the Bible. A 
Bull of Alexander vi, in 1501, recited that many 
pernicious books had been published in various parts, 
especially in the Provinces of Cologne, Maintz, 
Treves, and Magdeburg; and forbidding all printers to 
publish any books, without the licence of the archbishops 
and their officials. “Scarabaeus aquitam querit” — the 
beetle destroyed the eggs of the eagle, in revenge for an 
injury; so said Erasmus, in his adages. For a time, 
however, the nobility gave some influence to the new 
reforming ideas. Both in Germany and in France they 
were the first to embrace them, and the first to desert them. 

Of course in England the Scriptures had been prac- 
tically forbidden to the people. Not theoretically, as 
Mr. Demaus points out. Men were not forbidden to 
translate the Scriptures, but only “ of their own authority.” 
So said the Constitution passed at Oxford in 1408, but that 
was more than a century before, and the bishops had never 
provided the reliable text. Instead of that, they had 
been unrelenting in their severity towards all who dared 
to read Wycliff's version, which was the only one. They 
took no steps whatever to supersede that, which they 
found fault with, by a better. 


CHAPTER V 


TYNDALE AT WORMS, FOUR YEARS AFTER THE 
MIGHTY DIET 


“Often shall we find 
The sharded beetle in a safer hold, 
Than is the full-winged eagle.” 
CYMBELINE. 


THERE can be no reasonable doubt that it was to Worms 
that Tyndale went; a piece of gossip, harmlessly exagger- 
ated, identifying him there in 1526. Spalatin, who was 
with the Elector of Saxony at Spires, twenty miles off, 
notes in his diary: “On the Saturday, the morrow of 
St. Lawrence (August 10th, 1526), our Prince, the Elector 
of Saxony, then at the Diet of Spires, having heard a 
sermon at the residence of the Landgrave of Hesse, 
returned to his house. Buschius told us at supper that, 
at Worms, six thousand copies of the New Testament were 
printed in English. This work was translated by an 
Englishman, who was staying there, with two of his 
countrymen ; and who was so learned in seven languages 
(Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Italian, Spanish, English, and 
French) that, whichever he spoke, you would think it his 
native tongue. The English, indeed, have such a desire 
for the Gospel, although the king dislikes and opposes it, 
that they say they would buy a New Testament, even if 
each copy cost 100,000 pieces of money.” 

With regard to the number said to be printed, namely, 
6000, it is probable that it is to be divided between the 
quarto edition begun at Cologne, and the octavo edition 
printed entirely at Worms. Perhaps Tyndale found a 
difficulty in matching the Cologne printer's type, and so 

45 


46 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


proceeded with a fresh octavo edition. The quarto sheets, 
up to the printer’s signature “xk,” may have been sent to 
England, to be completed there. But it is doubtful 
whether this edition was ever finished. The solitary 
fragment in the British Museum was only found in 1834; 
though libraries are being ransacked more than ever. 

At any rate, the octavo edition was produced first ; and 
it was quickly issued, without notes, from Peter Schoeffer’s 
press. Thus the first printed English New Testament 
saw the light in the ancient and historic city of Worms ; to 
which, only four years before, Luther had been summoned, 
and where he went, though, as he said, he should find as 
many devils as there were tiles on the housetops. I have 
tried to find the exact spot in Worms where Tyndale 
had his Testament printed, the first of an illustrious line. 
I failed; but it is probably still there, most of the houses 
being ancient, and very much as Luther and Tyndale saw 
them. If the hypothetical number of devils had been 
reached, it would have been enormous, the houses having 
usually long sloping roofs, such as delighted Mr. Ruskin. | 

Schoeffer, the printer, on becoming a Lutheran, had 
found it desirable to leave Maintz and settle at Worms, 
which he did in 1512. He was the son of the famous 
associate of Faust and Gutenberg, the original printers, 
whose statues adorn the Frankfort market-place. Works 
issuing from his press, about the same time, have similar 
type, capital letters, length and number of lines in a page, 
water-mark, and wood-cuts; as Mr. Fry has shown, after 
thorough investigation. 

Tyndale translated chiefly from the Greek original, and 
not from the Vulgate, as was the case with preceding 
versions ; and the one thing he aimed at, above all, was 
accuracy of text. He says, in a letter to his friend Fryth: 
“TI call God to record, against the day we shall appear 
before the Lord Jesus, to give a reckoning of our doings, 
that I never altered one syllable of God’s word, against 
my conscience; nor would do, this day, if all that is in 
the earth, whether it be honour, pleasure, or riches, might 
be given me.” So far was he from seeking personal fame 


TYNDALE AT WORMS 47 


or gain, that he promised Henry vii. that, if he would 
have the bare text of Scripture given to the people, by 
whomsoever translated, he would never write more. God 
had marked him out for the work, however; and no one 
now grudges him the highest praise as a translator. He 
consulted the Vulgate, the Latin translation of Erasmus, 
and Luther’s German Bible. He was not, however, other- 
wise aided by Luther, as has been thought. The two men 
were, indeed, prosecuting the same labour, at the same era, 
and in the same thoroughgoing way. Luther’s care to pro- 
duce an exact translation was so great that, finding some 
difficulty in expressing the different parts of animals 
which are treated of in the sacrificial laws, he got butchers 
to dress sheep before him, that he might see the parts 
referred to, and be sure of the proper German names for 
them.* 

Whether Tyndale thoroughly knew German at this 
time is doubtful; and the idea of there being a number 
of Germanisms in our present version in consequence is 
probably erroneous. There are many such expressions as 
—So ordain I in all the churches” ; “ to the weak became 
1”; “of the Jews five times received I”; but this form of 
expression is equally common in the early Anglo-Saxon 
and English.t 

Tyndale was a very good Greek scholar, however, and 
his instincts, as a Reformer, would lead him to rely 
principally on this. He took a translation of one of the 
orations of Isocrates, when he went to see the Bishop of 
London, as a sample of his powers; and no doubt the 
language, practically rediscovered, would have a great 


* Mathesius. 
+ e.g. Chaucer’s Knight’s Tale. 
‘Her eyen cast she full lowe adowne.” 
‘And lyke a lyon loked he aboute.” 
‘‘Full hye upon a chare of golde stode he.” 
In Chaucer’s prose also the same order is frequently observed. ‘‘ She 
may have mercy, this note I will” (Parson's Tale). 

The Anglo-Saxon Scriptures also have: ‘‘Tha genan he an ribb of his 
siden.” The fact is, Tyndale frequently comes nearer to the original 
than either Luther, the Vulgate, or the LXX. (H. Walker, B.D., 
Letter to Bishop of Peterborough, 1828). 


t : 


48 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


charm for him. He answers the old objection, that the 
Scripture makes men heretics, in a characteristic way, in 
a note on 1 John—* Because their darkness cannot 
comprehend the light of the Scripture, they turn it into 
blind riddles, and read it without understanding, as lay- 
men do our Lady’s Matins, or, as it were, Merlin’s 
prophecies. Their minds are ever upon their heresies, 
and when they come to a place that soundeth like, there 
they rest, and ring out wonderful expositions to establish 
their heresies withal. Like the tale of the boy who 





EDITION OF NEW TESTAMENT BEGUN AT COLOGNE, 


would fain have eaten of the pasty of lampreys, but durst 
not, until the bells seemed to sing unto him— Sit down, 
Jack boy, and eat of the lampreys !’ to establish his 
wavering conscience.” 

There is only a fragment of the first quarto edition 
known to exist; and it has been discovered during the 
present century, as we have said, bound up with another 
volume. Of the first octavo edition there remain but 
two copies. A further revision of the New Testament, 
however, was published in 1534, much Superior to those 


TYNDALE AT WORMS 49 


which had preceded it; and from this Tyndale’s labours 





WORMS NEW TESTAMENT, 
PRINTED BY SCHOEFFER, 1525, WITHOUT GLOSSES OR PROLOGUE. 





TYNDALE’S PENTATEUCH, WITH WOODCUTS, 


may best be judged. There is very little fault, however, 
to be fairly found with his first edition. Dr. Geddes has 


4 


Themologae. 
ane here tranflaced 


Chrethern and fufters mooft dere and 
tenderly befoued inCbauft > the ne= 
- we Teftament for youre fpiriruall ¢7 
opfpinge/confolacton/and folas: 
Crhortynge unftancly and befecdhpnge 
thofethat are better fene in thetong ? 
then p/ and that have byer gyft? of. 
gracetointerpret the fence of the (cra 
ipture /and meangnge of the fppzz 
ES te/then p /tocon(ydze and pondre mp 
aboure / and that with the fpyrte™ 
of mteFenes. And pf they perceyve in eny placeathaty have 
not attapned the very fence of the tonge / o2 meanynge of 
che (eripture / 02 haue not geven che right engly([he wo2de / 
thacthey puttothere hands to amende it/remembaynge that fo 
isthereduetie to doo. Forme have noc ceceyvedthe gplt7 of god 
for oure fefues only/o2 forto byde them: bucfo2to beftome them 
pittothe honouringe of god andchaift/and edy fringe of theconz 
Gregacion /xechich is the bode ofdyaft. 


The caufes thar moved merotranflace /y thought better 

thatotber( bulde ypmagion/thenthaty (bulde rebearce them. 
Wore over y fuppofed pt fuperfluous /forzwbo ps fo bfpnde to 
are wbylygbt (hulde be (bewed to them that walte in dercks 
nes /wobere they cannot but (tomble/andwbereto (tombe ys 
the daynger of eternafPoarmmacion / other fo defpygbrfulP 
that he woldeenvye enyman Cy (peake nott bis brother) fo 
heceffaty a thinge/ or fo bedlern madde to affpame that gad 
is the natural caufeof pneff /anddertnes co procede oute of 
Babe / and that lpinge (hulde be grounded in trougth and 
verptie /and mott rather cfene contrary / that lyght:deftro z 
yeth dercEnes/and veritte reproveth amanner Sse 
g 


FACSIMILE OF FIRST PAGE OF FIRST ENGLISH NEW TESTAMENT EVER 
PRINTED, WITH WOODCUT OF ST. MATTHEW. QUARTO EDITION 
PUBLISHED AT COLOGNE BY QUENTEL, 1525. 

5° 





SS ate 


WN 


AY SSS 
AN 


AW 


SS 
\S 


Wb rise 


2: 





ST. MATTHEW. 


51 


The Bolpell of.S. Mathew. Fo .j. 


The Firft Chapter. 


sistbe boz 


Waa [Pe off the generacton off 

Shefus chaft the fonncof Das 

pid, the (dnealfoof Ubzaban. 
4Absabambedat Gfaac: -Il. 
Sfaachegat Jacob: ALI ferero 
\ : pacchbeget Judas and bys 

Tg Szethzen: hd 

cat “judas begat phazsesand zara 





Es , 
Me NSE 


offthamaer: 
Phares begat Efroms 

Lfrom begat Arams 

Aram begat Aminadabs 

Aminadab begat Liaaffon: 

LTaaffon begat Salmon: 

Salmon begat Hoos ofRahab: 

‘Boos begat DObedofRuth: 

D bed begat Feffe: 

3cle begat David the Frnge: 

Davidtbe ynge begat Solomsofherthat 
was thewyfe of Dry: 
Solomon begat Roboam: 
Roboam begat Abie: 
Abiabegat Ala: 

Afa begat Fofaphat: 

Sofaphat begaroram: 

Soram begat Ofias: 

Ofias begarYoathamy 

“soatham begat Achass 

aichas begat E3ednass 

a A 

FACSIMILE OF FIRST CHAPTER OF FIRST ENGLISH NEW TESTAMENT EVER 
PRINTED, P. QUENTEL’S QUARTO, COLOGNE, 1525. THE FRAGMENT 
PRESERVED ONLY GOES AS FAR AS THE APPROPRIATE VERSE, 
“FRIEND, HOW CAMEST THOU IN HITHERWARD !”—Matt. xxii. 1p 


52 


gq ¥egient re. 


t Sfore-=- 


(i 
t HCE Pwrnice 


The Gofpel. 


Esechias begat {Nanaffcs: 

Aanaffes begat Amon: 

Anon begat Fofias: 

Sofias begat Yechontas and bys bethzenabs 

oute the tyme ofthe captivete of Babilon. 
2(fter they wer ledd captive to Babilonz es 

chonras begat Salathiel: 

Salathiel begat Forobabel: 

Sorobabel begat Ahiuod: 

Abind begat \Flrachim: 

Elfachim begat Azo2: 

A302 begat Gadoc: 

Sadoc begat Achins 

Achin begat Eliud: 

Ehud begat Eleafar: 

Eleafarbeaat Macthan: 

21atthan begat Gacob: : 

Sacob begat Sofeph thehufbaoe off ttlaty of 

ree dead bownthat Shefuswhd (6 called 
pzift. 

All the generactons from AbzahatoDanid 
Ar fowwtencgeneracads. Andfroin David wns 
tothecaptivete of Babilon are fowrtene genes 
Tactons. And fromthe captivete vf Babild yng 
to Chzft-are alfo fowrtene generacions. 

Che byrbe off Chate wason thys wyps 
fe’ When bys mother mary was maryed onto 
Fofeph- before they camtodwelltoagcsdee-fhe 
mwas founde with chylde by theholy gooft. Thé 
ber bufbande Jofeph beingea parfect man/zd 
loth to defame ber was mynded to put her aws 
aycfeeretly. Whill he thus thou ght /beholdthe 
Rgell of thelozapered pntobiinilepelaige:zo 


53 


54 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


said that, “although it is far from a perfect translation, 
yet few first translations will be found preferable to it. 
It is astonishing how little obsolete the language of it is, 
even at this day. And, in point of perspicuity and noble 
simplicity, propriety of idiom, and purity of style, no 
English version has yet surpassed it.” 

For Tyndale’s notes, indeed, he was largely indebted to 
Luther, as might be expected. But in these also he is 
original, and differs from Luther on a variety of points, 
notably in relation to St. James’s Epistle, and that to the 
Hebrews. He was never weary of altering, where he 
thought he could mend. And a host of minute changes 
are found, when one edition is compared with another. 
But, throughout, he went upon general principles which 
have been accepted ever since. The Bible was to be a 
book for the people, and not for the scholar merely. It 
was thus often highly vernacular; as, for instance, 
“When ye pray, babble not much.” On “shake off the 
dust of your feet,’ he writes: “That is, see that ye take 
nothing of them; insomuch that ye shake off the very 
dust from your shoes, that they may know how ye 
sought, not your own profit, but their health.” On 
“ Hosanna,” he says: “Hosanna! is as much as to say 
Och, helppe! or, Och! give good luck, and health!” 
Tyndale’s last Testament, in 1535, was published without 
notes; ending thus as he began. 

EKrasmus’s work was, doubtless, of the greatest assistance. 
It has already been referred to, but we must spend a little 
longer time upon it. His translation and paraphrase of 
the New Testament was a production suitable to his genius 
and scholarship ; though it was, unfortunately, too hurried. 
It was published in 1516, by Froben, of Basle, a well- 
known printer of the time, to whose instigation the work 
was largely due. It contained, in two columns, side by 
side, the original Greek, and a new Latin translation of 
his own; thus laying the foundation for Tyndale’s work, 
or that of any translator into the vernacular. In the 
Preface, he asks why it seems indecent for any one to 
read or pronounce the gospel in that tongue wherein he 


The golpell of H.<Bathery. 


The fyrft Chapeer. 











s fi TAbzabam begact Fac: 
we Faacbegast Jacob: 
¥) 
ay Sudasbegat Phares: 
RT: ey and Saram of thamar; 
Me NEU) Phares begat E (rom: 
WEES from begatt Aram: 
: Aram beg att Aminadab : 
Aminadab begart naa(fan: 
Ylaa(fon begat Salmon: 
Salmon begatt boos of rabab: 
Boos begate obedof ruth: 
Obed begatt Feffe: 
Ge(febegatt david the Fynge: 
Tavid thekpnge begatt Solornon/of ber that was the 
Salomon begatroboam: Cwoyfe of ory: 
Roboam begatt Abia: i 
Abia hegatt afa: 
A(abegatt iofaphat: 
Jofapbatbegart “Foram: 
Foram begattOfas: 
Ofias begatt Foatbam: 
oatham begatt Achas: 
Achas begatt Ezednas: 
SE sechias begatt ATanaffcs: 
Manaffes begatt Amon; 
Amon begatt Fofias: 











Ibys psthe boke of 
the generacsd of Fefus Cbrift the (oz 
Jiie of Savid/T be fone alfo of 2bza 
ba. BF 


* Abzabam and 
David are fyzitre 
earflo, becaufe 
thar chalte was 
chefly promyleo 


Jacob begat Judas and bys bze= yntochem. 
(tbren: 


Saynet mathew 
lever otit cerres 
pne generacions/ 
2 deferibeth LA 
nites linage from 
solomosafter the 
lawe of Mofes, 
but Lucas defers 
beth i¢ accordyng 
to nature, fro nay 
than folomds br 
other. forthe las 
we calleth them 
a mannes childré 
wbich his broder 

gatt of his wy? 


be 
Foflas begatt Jecyonras and bis brethren about thetpme of fe lefte behynde 


the captivite of babilon 


ni afters de9 


by 
€ Afrer they wereled captive to babilon / Sechonras begatt th e.deurRvec 


FACSIMILE OF NEW TESTAMENT COMMENCED AND FINISHED 


AT worms, 1525. 


BAPTIST LIBRARY, AT BRISTOL. 


55 


56 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


was born? “To me,” he says, “it appears more indecent, 
or rather ridiculous, that ignorant men and young women, 
like parrots, mutter their Psalms and the Lord’s Prayer 
in Latin, when they do not understand what they say, or 
the meaning of the noise they make.” 

Froben was one of the most learned men of the Basle 
University, and was the first of the German printers to 
bring the art to any perfection; the early printing being 
full of mistakes. He put up his proofs for public 
inspection, and gave a reward to any one discovering an 
error. 

But although Erasmus’s famous work was printed at 
Basle, its continental character almost ends there. At 
least, it was largely the work of his residence in England. 
He had the assistance of Englishmen in the examination 
of the manuscripts required; and English patrons lent 
that encouragement to the work which was needed, both 
in funds and influence. Specially was he indebted to 
Archbishop Warham and Lord Mountjoy. Many of the 
bishops also patronised the work, and spoke of it in high 
terms. It was, indeed, a bold step to take, to overthrow 
the authority of the Vulgate; and to show that some of 
the popular belief was founded on nothing but a mis- 
apprehension of the sacred text. Erasmus explained the 
text just as he would have explained any classic author, 
according to the best scholarship and science of the age ; 
separating the spurious from the genuine; scattering to 
the winds all rules resting merely on authority, and re- 
placing them by such as philology and history furnished. 
The interest taken in the work was widespread, owing 
largely to the fame of its author. And it was highly 
praised; one of the bishops declaring that it was worth 
more to him than ten commentaries. 

Still, all was too hastily done, and the ill effects of the 
haste are to be recognised in our Authorised Version of 
to-day. The splendid edition of Cardinal Ximenes was 
soon to make its appearance; and Froben wished to 
publish the translation of Erasmus first, as he did. Tt 
was really a race, to anticipate the Complutensian 


Cothe Reder. 


Ferrets nent ncaa Terbortethe) that 
ou come witha pure mynde/andast 
feripturefapth witha frngicer “onto ieee 
de of bealth-Ad of eternall lyfeby the whidar 
werepentdd beleve them) weareboméanene’ 
Createda fref[he ad entoye the fruresoffthe blo: 
ud of Chait. Whidse bloud erpeth notfoz Z 
aticesas the b loud of ibd but th purchafe- 
daa ed co oe lewet pnge/and whats 
oever 1s pzomp(ed in the(criptures to ther ths 
at beleve andobeye God: andftondathbitwene 
vs and wrathe wengeaunces cure’ and whats 
focver thefcripture thzcatencthaga theons 
belevers antd difobedient- which refiftvandcon, 
fentnotintheic bertes to thelawe of goo-tharit 
1s t- wholytufte and ougbt (oo tobe. 
avtcthe playnedad manvfeft places of the 
feriptuces, andindoutfull places /fethou adde 
ho interpaetactd contrary totben:but(as paul 
fayth Dlet all be confoemableas agreynge tothe 
Llotethe differercecfthelawedo ¢ ° 
of the gofpell. Che oncaretb andrequyvetty / 
wothtr pedonethandfozgeveth. Cheonettes 
atencth the wother jromyfett all good / 
totbemthat (err thee truftin Cheiftouly. The 
g one eth gladde ee are BaP 
utt omy{es 00d toyn & 
noe gofpell earetuneheg {bobs $oi 
(fthelawe werea waye thou coulde(t not®now 
what the gofpdl meante. Fyen as thoucouldeft 
tot fe perdon /favour/and gracevercepte thelas 
werebufedthesand declared onto thy the finne- 
[dede’ andtreafpafe. 
"Repent ano beleve the gofpellas fayth Chute 


TYNDALE’S ‘‘ ADDRESS TO THE REDER.” 


To the Reder. 

inthefyr(t of Atarte. Applyc all wayethe lawe 
to pd ia hed nth fon indelufte tate bot< 
tomof thpne berte to thelawe warde:and foofhz 
Se eee eat tate Baie 
tayneforowe-paynie and grefe totbyne beete: 
becaufetboucanft nottwtth full lufteootheses 
ves offthelame. UApplyetbegospell - thatis to 
fe pomyfes/ onto the defervpnge off Ch 
tift-and to themercye of god anid tstrouty/Ad 
(oo fyalt thounott defpeare:butt [halt feale goo 
as afyndead amercifullfather2ind bis {p2ete 
Tea tenes tonger the: dd 
t Ce i acitanetie ae er b 
not v Left thou [pu orgett thy jylfey 
and be negl fg pel A be 
even thefoz Chai ftis blouddis fafe-towhd 
conut tby filfe all togedder/ with out refpect/ ot? 

her of thy good dedes 02 of thy badde. 
tare learned Chriftenly/ J befeches 
forasmodcas 3 ant (ute ad my con{cience bez 
ateth me recorde / that ofa pureentent/fin illy 
andfaythfullp J have interpzeted itt as farre 
fozthaggod gavemethe gyftc of Pnowledge ad 
vnderftondynde: thatthe rudnes off the wozte 
noweat the tyme offende themnot: but th: 
atthey howe that J had no man tocoz 
ie withen Mibecteay 
that ae ame/oz foche lyEerbige 
ithe(cripture befozetpmie.£1foreover/ eve very 
neceflitieAdcombzaunce( Bod ts recozde abo 
ve (tren which 3 will not vebearce - left we 
fhulde ferne to boft oure(el ves caufedthat maz 
ny thyriges ave lacynge wmbichenece|] ney! vate 

y 





Tothe Reder. 


: pects d.Count tt asatbyngenot bavyngebis 
full {hape/butasitwere boene afore bystyme- 
even asathig begunne ratherthen fynnd|bed. 
Sntymetocome( yf god have apoynte us th: 
ercvnto wewitll geveit hie full (bape: and putt 
outyfought be added (iuperfiuufly: and adocto 
yffought be overfene thozowe negligence: and 
wwillenfoarce cobzyngeto compendeoufnes thy 
atwhidis nowetranflated at thelengthes Adto 
Gevelyght wbereit is requyred “and tofekcice: 
ttayneplaces moze proper englyffbe / and witty 
atabletoerpoiide the wozdes whichare nott coz 
menly vfeo/and fhewe bowetbe (cripture vfeth 
many wo2des/ whid) are wother wyle onderft- 
onde of the cOmen people: Adto helpe with ade, 
claracton where oneconge tafeth nott another. 
And will endever oure (el vea/as it weretofethe 
ithetter-andtomate ttmozeapte fe theweate 
(tomaPes:de(pryngetbem thatarclearnedand 
able-to remember their duetic and tobelpeth: 
ere vntosandto be (ftowe unto the cdpfyige 
of Chaiftis body-( whid (s the cogres 
Gacton of them that beleve )tho- 
fe whyd) they have 
receaved of god for the 
famepurpofe. Thegr 
acethatcometh 
Ch2ift bewith the 
atlove 


prayefo2 vs. 


60 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


Polyglott of Ximenes, as far as the popular New Testament 
was concerned. In consequence, the manuscripts used 
were of no special value; even the best that were acces- 
sible not being made much use of. Bishop Ellicott has 
said that, whilst to speculate on such a mysterious order- 
ing of Providence may be unwise, it does seem hard to 
resist the conviction that the great devotion and industry 
shown, generation after generation, in the critical study 
of the New Testament, would never have been called 
forth but for these cireumstances. The knowledge that 
a purer text was attainable than that dignified by the 
title of the Universally Received Text, has quickened 
scholars in their lifelong labours. The Codex Basiliensis 
was amongst the manuscripts at the service of Erasmus ; 
one of the most ancient and valuable; but he made 
scarcely any use of it, because its readings were so 
different from the others! With a little trouble, a 
collation with the Vatican MS. might also have been 
made.* 

One edition of this Testament succeeded another, each 
being an improvement, until the fourth, which may be 
looked upon as the mother edition of our own Authorised 
Version, and of the Textus Receptus. The first two 
editions amounted to 3300; and the whole were in 
circulation by 1522, the year when the Complutensian 
Polyglott was published. Subsequent editions showed 
traces of the influence of this latter work upon 
Erasmus. 

It is amusing to think of the alarm and opposition which 
even such a great scholar’s work excited. “Henry, 
Bishop of Saynt Asse,” was Bishop of St. Asaph, and one 
of the brutal commissaries who had to do with the 
martyrdom of Bilney. On the appearance of Erasmus’s 
first Testament, he is said to have fallen on his knees to 
the king and queen, and implored them to put him down. 
His title was often contracted, as here, into St. Asse, and 
the contraction was not unsuitable in his case, for Standish 

* Revision of English Version, C. J. Ellicott, D.D, 
+ Tregelles. Account of printed text. 


( 


Wa Xx 


G ‘ 
ae 


“UOVd WIOHM AO AZIS 


¢ 


- CHONCTAND 


“C@GL ‘INGWVISAL MON SATIVONAL 


‘ 


) 





61 


62 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


—that was his proper name—was very ignorant and 
bigotted. Erasmus called him “Episcopus a Sancto 
Asino.” According to Roye’s satire, it was he who first 
informed Wolsey of the arrival of Tyndale’s English 
Testament, and implored him to suppress it. 


CHAPTER VI 


TYNDALE HARD AT WORK, AND FIERCELY OPPOSED 


“*God, of His goodness, grudged not to die, 
Man to deliver from deadly damnation, 
Whose will is that we should know perfectly 
What He here hath done for our salvation. 
O cruel Caiaphas, full of crafty conspiration, 
How durst thou give then false judgment 
To burn God’s Word, the Holy Testament ! 


The lewdness of living is loath to bear 
Christ’s Gospel to come into clear light ; 
Howbeit surely it is so spread far and near 
That, for to let it, thou hast little might. 
God hath opened our dark dimmed sight 
Truly to perceive thy tyrannous intent 
To burn God’s Word, the Holy Testament.” 
Roye. 


PERHAPS we should dwell a little on the parallel work of 
Ximenes, before returning to Tyndale. Cardinal Francis 
Ximenes, Archbishop of Toledo, commenced a Polyglott 
in the year 1502; the work being partly intended to 
celebrate the birth of the heir to the throne of Castile, 
afterwards Charles v. Theologians did not generally 
desire anything of the kind, being satisfied with the 
Vulgate, which was sometimes compared to Christ cruci- 
fied between two thieves; the original. Hebrew being 
on one side, and the Septuagint on the other. The 
Vulgate had, of course, been corrected from time to time ; 
two succeeding Popes earning doubtful honours in the 
matter. Nicholas de Lyra, a converted Jew, of Normandy, 
who flourished about 1320, had also corrected many pas- 
sages, according to the true sense of the Hebrew text, 


though he never attempted an entire revision. 
é 63 


64 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


Ximenes set to work, and accomplished this, with a 
number of helpers. The Old Testament was completed 
some time before the New, which appeared in vol. iv. of 
the entire work, in Greek and Latin, with the date January 
10th, 1514. The Polyglott was finished in the same year 
as Martin Luther fixed his theses to the Electoral Chapel 
at Wittenberg; all the manuscripts used, however, being 
modern. Complutum is the Latin name for Alcala, in 
Spain, where the cardinal had founded a University, and 
where his work was printed. The Polyglott never came 
into any general use, though it was a fine production for 
the age, and its originator must have been a superior man. 
Erasmus’s New Testament found its way round into Spain 
while Cardinal Ximenes was yet living, and he repressed 
the remarks by which Stunica, his chief New Testament 
editor, sought to depreciate it. “I would that all might 
thus prophesy,” he said; “produce what is better, if thou 
canst ; do not condemn the industry of another.” He did 
not live, however, to see the completion of his great en- 
terprise; the publication of the whole not taking place 
till 1522. The editors say that they consulted old manu- 
scripts from the Vatican Library. But Bishop Marsh says 
that the New Testament agrees almost always with modern 
manuscripts. Though never widely used, the work has been 
published again by Plantin at Antwerp, and at Geneva. 

Tyndale was clearly supported in his enterprise by 
wealthy men, though, who they were, has never been 
quite cleared up. We have no knowledge of his coming 
to possess any property of his own. And we know that 
he was first a tutor, and then under obligations to a 
London merchant for board and lodging. Yet, notwith- 
standing the fact that, when he landed on the Continent, 
in May 1524, he was a poor and utterly unknown man, 
within two years he had printed two large editions of the 
New Testament, involving a considerable expense. He 
had to defray his own expenses also, and those’ of his 
assistant; and travelling about was not done by modern 
cheap coupons, “with a reduction for ministers.” Per- 
haps he was supported, and his editions made possible, 





CARDINAL XIMENES. 


ON 5 Et I re ae ale amy ree OR, rg hee EE ey edn ple ae emo 


ee eee 





TYNDALE HARD AT WORK 67 


by the Antwerp merchants, amongst others, to whom he 
afterwards became a sort of chaplain. It is certain that 
there was both a strong anti-Romish and an anti-W olsey 
feeling; and many Englishmen on the Continent were 
prepared to pay something for the Reformation of their 
own land. 

However, the English New Testament, in its printed 
form, saw the light at last. And now the question was 
how to get it into England? The King and the Church 

were both against it; though Wolsey was at first in 
‘favour of tolerating it.* Moreover, in those days, there 
were no shops in which it could be sold. Nevertheless, 
to England it went, through Holland, by way of Antwerp ; 
and it was soon found in London, Oxford, N orwich, and 
many other cities. The country was crying out for both 
kinds of bread, and with the wheat, which was largely 
imported at this time, went hundreds of copies of the 
Word of God. The first Testaments, indeed, were in 
England before the famine broke out in 1527. Their 
importation would be facilitated, therefore, just when it 
was needed, after opposition was aroused. 

About this time there was formed in London a society 
calling itself the Association of Christian Brothers, and 
composed chiefly of poor men, with a very few of the 
clergy. Its agents perambulated the country, selling 
Testaments and tracts in the Universities and towns, 
and enrolling such persons as dared to belong to such a 
Society. The price of a Testament was half a crown, though 
the Dutch booksellers soon issued them for thirteen pence. 
The half-crown may be appreciated by a reference to the 
prices of other things in Henry vut’s reign. Hay was 
five shillings a load; beef and pork were a halfpenny a 
pound; and veal or mutton, three farthings. French 
wines were eightpence or a shilling a gallon. A mason 
was paid fourpence a day and his food, or sixpence 
without it. Women servants’ wages were ten shillings a 
year, and four shillings for clothing. Perhaps the 


* Afterwards he was soured by Roye’s satire, ‘‘Rede me and be 
nott wrothe,” which he wrongly attributed to Tyndale. 


68 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


average multiple for the coins would’ be about seventeen 
in order to reach their present value. 

The first notice of possession by any one dates from 
Colchester, and it is worth transcribing. John Pykas, 
a baker, confessed on March 7th, 1528, that “about two 
years ago, his mother, then dwelling in Bury St. Edmunds, 
sent for him, and moved him that he should not believe 
in the Sacraments of the Church; for that was not the 
right way. And then she delivered to this respondent a 
book of Paul’s Epistles, in English, and bade him live 
after the way and manner of the said Epistles and Gospels, 
and not after the way the Church doth teach. Afterwards, 
when he heard that the said New Testament was forbidden, 
that no man should keep them, he delivered it, and the 
book of Paul’s Epistles, to his mother again.” 

One of the most impertant of those who interested 
themselves in the sale of the Testaments was Richard 
Harman, a merchant of the English factory at Antwerp, 
who, with his wife, was imprisoned in 1528, but discharged 
the following year, and of whom we shall hear again. 
Another was Simon Fysche, author of A Supplication for 
the Beggars: which was answered at once by Sir Thomas 
More, who calls him a “dyspyteful person.” When the 
persecution of 1528 arose he went abroad, but soon came 
back to London, and died there in 1530. Robert Necton 
also, whose brother was Sheriff of Norwich, in 1530, and 
who himself was in a good position, devoted himself to 
the work of colportage, merely from love of gospel 
principles. There can be no doubt that, through the 
labours of such men, the Testaments, though costing 
about £2 of our money, were sold with some rapidity. 

One edition soon followed another, the quarto edition, 
which Cochleus had delayed, being probably sold out, and 
also the first octavo one. An Antwerp printer, Christopher 
of Endoven, issued a third edition; and this was succeeded 
by a fourth. The Dutch printers printed 5000, in their 
two editions, which were smaller than Tyndale’s. They 
engaged George Joye, an English refugee, to correct the 
sheets, which he did for fourteen shillings, but very faultily. 











THE BURNING OF TYNDALE’S TESTAMENTS. 





TYNDALE HARD AT WORK 7% 


Of course, the reigning authorities took alarm at all 
this. As Southey says: “The Romanists knew perfectly 
well how little some of their practices were supported 
by Scripture; and that if the ark of the covenant was 
admitted, Dagon must fall.” * Or, as Latimer said, in his 
plain way: “Where the devil is resident, and has his 
plough going, then away with books, and up with candles ; 
away with Bibles, and up with beads; away with the light 
of the gospel, and up with the light of candles; yea, at 
noonday.” Plutarch tells us of a painter, who, having 
painted a cock unskilfully, chased away the cocks out of 
the town, that the imperfection of his art might not 
appear ; and it is well substantiated, that Warham, Arch- 
bishop of Canterbury, bought up either the first or a 
very early edition, and then levied a charge on each of 
the bishops; the sum expended being £66, 9s. 4d. His 
mandate is dated November 3rd, 1526, and directs that 
all copies of Tyndale’s Testament shall be burned. A 
letter from the Bishop of Norwich, dated June 1527, 
approving of the course adopted, and offering his share, 
is still extant.t Tunstall also, Bishop of London, two 
years later, bought up another edition, probably when 
coming through Antwerp, on his way back from the 
Treaty of Cambray. He sent out a prohibition, dated 
October 23rd, 1526, in which he calls the new books 
“nestiferous and most pernicious poison”; accuses the 
authors of seducing the simple people by their wicked 
and perverse interpretations; and threatens excommuni- 
cation unless all such books are brought in. A merchant, 
called Packington, was employed in the business; and, on 
the authority of Hall’s Chronicle, Tyndale rather facili- 
tated the sale. For he was convinced of some faults in 
the edition, and was then engaged in purging it, but had 
no money to print a new one. Besides, he felt sure that 
the burning of God’s word, which was what the bishop 
designed and carried out, would rouse indignation, and 
lead to wholesome inquiry. So the money was paid, and 


* Book of the Church, Southey. 
+ Original Letters, Ellis, vol. ii. series ili. 


72 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


the books were publicly burned at St. Paul’s Cross. Next 
year, when a further edition was finished, many more 
copies came to England. A man named Constantine, on 
being taken and brought before the Lord Chancellor, was 
promised. that no hurt should be done to him, if he would 
say who encouraged and supported the printers at 
Antwerp. When he at once replied that the greatest 
encouragement they had was from the Bishop of London, 
who had bought up half the previous impression.* So, 
“thinking he had God by the toe, he had the devil by 
the fist.” 

It was resolved, indeed, at headquarters to stamp out 
Tyndale’s translations. And, with regard to the first 
editions, the work was so thoroughly done, that, of the 
quarto Cologne edition, only a small fragment is known 
to exist; and, of the Worms octavo, only two copies 
remain; one being in the Baptist College Library, Bristol, 
and the other in that of St. Paul’s. But they might 
as well have tried to keep back the Atlantic with a 
broom, like Mrs. Partington, the multiplication of editions 
and copies being very rapid. Six editions of the New 
Testament were printed between 1525 and 1530, three 
of which were surreptitious, showing how great was the 
demand. The public burning of Testaments in May 
1531 appears to have caused a temporary bar to their 
publication. But in 1534 there were no less than five 
editions of the New Testament printed at Antwerp. In 
1535 there were four editions of the New Testament, 
and one of the whole Bible, which we shall describe 
later on. In 1536 no less than ten editions of the New 
Testament, and one of the Bible, were printed ; while in 
1537 there were two editions of the Bible. In 1538 
there were seven editions of the New Testament; in 1539 
four of the New Testament, and four of the Bible; and in 
1540 four of the Bible, with three of the New Testament. 
Though not all cheap, they were eagerly bought. And we 
have the remarkable fact that, within seventeen years of 


* Doré (Old Bibles) should not blame Tyndale for selling his Testa- 
ments, in order to produce better ones. 


















































OLD ST. PAUL’S AND PAUL’S CROSS, WHERE TESTAMENTS 
WERE BURNED, : 


73 





TYNDALE HARD AT WORK 75 


Tyndale’s {first New Testament, there were thirty-nine 
editions of the New Testament, and fourteen of the whole 
Bible. So mightily grew the Word of God, and prevailed. 
Henry vu. tried, indeed, to stop the exportation from 
Antwerp, but the merchants there found that Christopher 
Endhoven, a much respected citizen, was then printing 
these books, and they declined to regard them as 
heretical. 

If all the prohibitions and burnings failed, it was not 
for the want of strong language. The 1530 prohibition 
was to be published by the preachers, who were to say to 
their congregations :— 

“Wherefore you that have the books called ... the 
New Testament in English of the translation that is now 
printed, dajest them, abhor them, keep them not in your 
hands; and if by reading of them heretofore anything 
remains in your breast of that teaching, either forget it, 
or by information of the truth expel it. Forasmuch as 
the King’s Highness, by the advice and deliberation of his 
council, and the argument of the great learned men, 
thinketh in his conscience that the divulging of this Scrip- 
ture at this time, in the English tongue, should rather 
be to their further confusion and destruction than the 
edification of their souls; it was thought there, to all and 
singular in that congregation,* that the King’s Highness 
and the prelates, in so doing, and not suffering the Serip- 
ture to be divulged to the people, do well.” Well done, 
King, Prelates, and Council, all and very singular. Qui 
habitat in coelis, irredebit cos. 


* That is, the Council. 


CHAPTER VII 


THE TRUE CHARACTER OF TYNDALE’S WORK 


«Then for the style, majestic and divine, 
It speaks no less than God in every line.” 
DRryDEN. 


We have seen something of the character of the man 
engaged in this work, at the risk of his lifg; and we 
should expect that anything bearing his name would 
have the marks of honesty and patient diligence. But 
Tyndale’s translation has more excellences than these. It 
is not, indeed, going too far when we repeat what has 
often been said before, and by authorities of eminence, 
that his work has given a character to all future transla- 
tions; and, amongst them, to that which is generally 
acknowledged to be the best in any vernacular, our 
Authorised Version. Tyndale’s knowledge of Greek was 
sufficient to enable him to produce a work not offensive 
to scholars of unprejudiced minds. And he caught the 
popular ear in his terms and phrases, without descending 
to vulgarity. 

Plumptre, for instance, says: “ All the exquisite grace 
and simplicity, which have endeared the Authorised Ver- 
sion to men of most opposite tempers and contrasted 
opinions, are due mainly to his clear-sighted truthfulness.” 
And Bishop Ellicott, out of a host of others, has said : 
“Tyndale not only furnished the type of all sueceeding 
versions, but bequeathed principles which will exercise 
a preservative influence over the Version of the English 
Bible, through every change or revision that may await 
it, until Scriptural revision shall be no more needed.” 


The only dissonant note is from Mr. Blunt, who is not 
76 


TRUE CHARACTER OF TYNDALE’S WORK 77 


specially appreciative; and who adduces an argument 
against any further revision, from the fact that the 
English people have a vested right in the Authorised 
Version, as so much property.* Ha wno disce omnes. 

The prologue is an altogether remarkable piece of writing, 
and shows what the mind of the man was full of, in days 
when the mint and anise and cummin were put in place 
of the weightier matters of the law. It is,in fact, va 
general description of true religion, based upon redemp- 
tion through Jesus Christ. He distinguishes between a 
self-righteous man, who justifies himself with his outward 
deeds, a voluptuous man (called a sense-well man), and a 
true Christian. After speaking of the nature of faith, 
and its effects, he closes with such a description of the 
Christian as it is not easy to excel. “Faith,” he says, 
“yeceiveth of God, and love bestoweth the same on his 
neighbour. A true Christian man believeth that heaven 
is his already, by Christ’s purchasing; and, therefore, he 
loveth and worketh to honour God only, and to draw all 
things to God. A Christian man feeleth the working of 
the Holy Ghost in his soul; and, in all tribulation and 
adversities, feeleth God a merciful and loving Father.” 

It may surprise our readers to see how small indeed is 
the change made from Tyndale’s translation, except in 
the spelling. Selecting a passage at random and modern- 
ising it, Tyndale reads, in Matt. xvi. 13-19, “When Jesus 
came into the coast of the city which is called Caesarea 
Philippi, He asked His disciples, saying, ‘Whom do men 
say that I, the Son of Man, am?’ They said, ‘Some say 
that Thou art John Baptist; some, Elias ; some, Jeremiah, 
or one of the prophets.” He said unto them, ‘But whom 
say ye that I am?’ Simon Peter answered and said, 
“Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God’ And Jesus 
answered and said unto him, ‘ Happy art thou, Simon, the 
Son of Jonas; for flesh and blood have not opened unto 
thee that, but my Father which is in heaven. And I say 
‘also unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock 
will I build my congregation, and the gates of hell shall 

* Plain Account of the English Bible, J. H. Blunt, FS. A. 


48 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


not prevail against it. And I will give unto thee the keys 
of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou bindest 
upon earth, it shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever 
thou loosest on earth, it shall be loosed in heaven. ” * 

As a sample of the marginal notes also, we give the 
one on this passage. “Peter, in the Greek, signifieth a 
stone, in the English. This confession is the rock. How 
is Simon Barjona, or Simon, Jonas’s son, called Peter 2 
Because of his confession. Whosoever, then, this wise 
confesseth Christ, the same is called Peter. Now is 
this confession come to all that are true Christians. Then 
is every Christian man and woman Peter. Read Bede, 
Augustine, and Jerome, of the manner of loosing and 
binding ; and note how Jerome checketh the presumption 
of the Pharisees in his time, which yet had not such 
monstrous interpretations as our new gods have feigned. 
Read the annotations of Erasmus. It was not for naught 
Christ bade us beware of the leaven of the Pharisees. 
Nothing is so sweet, but they make it sour, with their 
traditions. The Gospel, that joyful tidings, is now 
bitterer than the old Law. Christ’s birch is heavier than 
the yoke of Moses. Our condition and estate is ten times 
more grievous than was ever the Jews. The Pharisees 
have so leavened Christ's sweet bread.” As another 
example of Tyndale’s notes, take that on Matt. v. 22: 
“ Raca is the hoarse sound in the throat, and betokeneth 
all signs of wrath.” 

Yes, the contentions of those days were not about 
trifle. And it is well for us to remember that, three 
times, at Gothic St. Paul’s, which went before the present 
structure, the Word of God was publicly burned. The 
first of these burnings was accompanied by a sermon from > 
Tunstall, at St. Paul’s Cross opposite, in which he said that 
Tyndale’s Testament had 3000 errors. Cardinal Wolsey 
made one of his last appearances at the burning of Tyndale’s 
Testaments in 1530, when the people were solemnly 
warned against the sin of reading what God had written, 
and the Saviour had ealled men to search. There is no 


* Th 


From the Cologne quarto, interrupted by Cochleus, 





TYNDALE AT HIS WORK. 


79 





TRUE CHARACTER OF TYNDALE’S WORK 81 


instance, however, of Wolsey’s sending any one to the 
stake; and, to his immense ability, must be added his 
charity and extreme unwillingness to adopt harsh 
measures. His endeavour was, constantly, to win over 
the “heretic,” and make his submission easy. It was not 
till the reins fell into the hands of Sir Thomas More that 
there was a change in this respect, which we shall dwell 
upon at some length. We will only say now that Sir 
Thomas More may be said to have lived to illustrate the 
necessary tendencies of Romanism, in an honest mind 
convinced of its truth; to show that the test of sincerity, 
in a man who professes to regard “orthodoxy” as an 
essential of salvation, is not the readiness to endure per- 
secution, but the courage that will venture to inflict it. 
So says Froude. 

Tyndale’s brother John interested himself in the sale 
of the Testaments, with Thomas Patmore; and they were 
made to ride with their faces to the tails of their horses, 
having the heretical books hung about their cloaks, to the 
Standard at Cheapside, where they threw the books into 
the fire; being also heavily fined. Humphrey Monmouth, 
Tyndale’s early friend, found a place in the Tower, and 
was almost ruined. Tewkesbury also, a similar man to 
Humphrey Monmouth, witnessed a good confession, and 
was tortured accordingly. When arraigned before the 
Bishop of London, and charged with reading the Wicked 
Mammon, a work of Tyndale’s: “I find no fault in the 
book,” he said, “but it is not my gospel. I have studied 
the Holy Scriptures these seventeen years; and, as a man 
sees the spots of his face in a glass, so by reading them I 
have learned the faults of my soul.” 

In the Parable of the Wicked Mammon, Tyndale says 
that Antichrist was not outward, but spiritual. He had 
been present in the times of the Old Testament, as in the 
New, and would be to the end. The book was condemned, 
of course; and then he published the Obedience of a Chris- 
tian Man. In this he denounces the shutting up of the 
Bible thus: “That this threatening and forbidding the 
lay-people to read the Scripture is not for the love of 


6 


82 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


your souls (which they care for as the fox doth for the 
geese) is evident; inasmuch as they suffer you to read 
Robin Hood, Bevis of Hampton, Hercules, Hector and Trowlus, 
with a thousand histories and fables of love and wanton- 
ness, and of ribaldry as filthy as heart can think.” 

He brings up a host of Romanist writings differing 
ereatly from one another. They could not be piled up in 
any warehouse in London, and how should men know: 
what to believe? His answer is, only by the Scriptures, 
and yet people are not permitted to have them. sik 
. They say the Scripture is so hard that it could:‘never 
be understood but by the Doctors. .This is to measure 
the meteyard by the cloth. Some of Origen’s works are 
allowed, and some condemned for heresy, and how are 
they distinguished except by the Scriptures? Augustine 
knew more of Plato than the Scriptures at first, and 
when he came to know them .he revoked part of what he 
had formerly written. 

And. as for its being necessary to know philosophy 
before we can understand God’s Word, what philosophy 
is that? Ifit is Aristotle, his doctrine is that the world 
was without beginning, and shall be without end; that 
the first man never was, and the last never shall be; 
that God doth all of necessity, neither careth what we do, 
nor will ask any account of it. “Isit not a madness, then, 
to say that we cannot understand the Scripture without 
Aristotle!” Luther said once that if Aristotle had not 
been a man, he should have thought he was the devil. 

As for Tyndale’s writings causing insurrection, nothing 
could be further from the truth. It was of this last work 
that Henry vu. said, “This book is for me and all 
kings to read.” Luther had severely condemned the ex- 
cesses of the Peasants’ War in Germany, and Tyndale 
inculcated upon Englishmen their duty to their lawful 
Sovereign; though he justified a spiritual warfare against 
the usurped authority of the Pope. Evil rulers -were a 
scourge of God. “Now, if the sick resist the razor, the 
scorching iron, and so forth, doth he not resist his own 
health?” His language was certainly strong in his 


TRUE CHARACTER OF TYNDALE’S WORK 83 


Practice of Prelates, published at Marburg; and _ he 
thinly disguises his references to Wolsey, under ‘“ Wolfsee.” 
He erroneously laid on him and Longland, the Bishop of 
Lincoln, the blame of suggesting the divorce from 
Catherine of Aragon, and he had better have left the 
subject alone, as he did not understand it. After his 
Obedience of a Christian Man, Henry had tried to get 
him to return to England, but he quite dropped the idea 
when he read what he said about the divorce. It showed 
Tyndale’s courage, however, and he only voiced the 
general feeling. Gairdner adds that Tyndale was a strong 
Imperialist, and disliked the divorce all the more because 
it was an injury to the emperor’s aunt.* 
* History of the English Church. 


cclppeity 
The pittie of paul 


vnto Citus. 


Che fyr(t Chapter. 


Al ul the fervaunt ofgod 
Blandan Apostle of JefuChrift 
Bal co pzeache the fayth of Goddis ez 
lecte/ andthe Fnrowledaeoffthe 
trueth wobich teueth te in fervyz 
ngegodinbope ofeternall lyfe 
which lyfe goothatcanotlye hath pzomyl(eobe 
foretbe worlde began : but hath atthetymeap 
opntcdopéned bis wmo2debppacachynges which 
zeachpngels committed unto me by the comz 
atidement ofgodoure faveoure. — 
f To Titus bis naturall fonnein the commen 
ayth. ; 
Gracemercie andpeacefrom Gor the fathz 
erand from the lozde Sefu Chait ourefaveous 


re. 
$o2thiscaulelefts thein Creta/thatthou{h, 
uldeft performe that which was lachyngead {hz 
wlde(tozdepne feniours in everypeitic as J apoz 
ited te, tf befocheasnomancan comp 
ayneory the ufpade of one wyfes bavynge faz 
ptbfull cpildzen-whicb are not (cland2<d off ro’ 
potesnether are difobediét.§o2a biffhoppe mu 
(tbe focheasnoman can complayne onasitbe 
commett the minifter off Bod. not ftubborne 
NOLAN nO Rate eN notgeve 
v 


——— 


Facsimile from the “Reproduction by 
Lilry 1802, of the First New Testament 
wnkinglish by W™ tyndale (15250726) 






84 


Thepiflleof Paul 
tofiltbylucre: buttberberous, onethatloveth 
goodnes/ of honeft bebaveour tighteousbolp 
temperat/Ad fucheas cleveth onto thetrue woz 
maa aan fea thatthe mayebe ableto erhozte 
votth wholformlearnynge/andtoimpzovetbem 
thatfapeagayn(ttt. . 

Sozthereare manyotfobedient and talkers 
offvanitie /anddifceavers off nyndes / namly 
Soe offthecircumet(ton whofe mouthes mut 
be(topped ~whichpervert wholehoufestead; 
pngetbyndf whids they ougbrnott fapeoatagie 
filtbplucce. Won bepngeofthen (elves whi 
WAS apopet of their owne fayoe: The Cretapns 
are alwayeslyars/evyll beaftes/andflowebe 
lies. his witnes (a rrue/wherforerebufe them 
{barply- that they mayebefoundein thefayth’ 
and nottaFyngebeoeto tewes fables anocoms 
maundmentf of men/vobich turnefrom thetrus 
eth. Ontotbepure/arcall thyngf puresbut vn2 
rotbemthbatare defiled ad vnbelevynge 1s no 
thynde pucesbut even the very niyndes and con 
{clences offthem aredefiled. They confefle that 
‘thepPnowe gods but with dedes they de npehym 
and are abbominable andorfobedtent/ Adwns 
to all good worPesorfcommendable. 

The. ij. Chapter. 
ri peakethoutbat which becémeth whol 
fomelearnynge:T bat tbeedlermen be fobs 
or/bonet diferete fouideinthe fayth inlovead 
(npactence. Andthe elder wemen lye wyfetbat 
they be tnfoche rayment-as be cSmeth holynes- 
not falceacculars/not devé to mode dzikynge, 


85 


Onto Titus. Fo. cloyptiiy 
but teachers of boneft thyngf7 that they nurtey 
the yonge wemenfoztolove ther bufbades “to 
Love their childzen-to be of bone (tbehbaveoure- 
chaft. bufwyfly good and obedtent vntotheir 
aunebufbandes- that the wo2de of god be notes 
vyll poken of. NongemenlyPwyleerhorte that 
Hed be of bone(t manners. 

boveall thyng? (hewethyfilfeand infaple 
Of good worPes In the doctryne[hew vncoztup 
cionboneftie/ andthe wholfome wo2de which 
canot berebuted that be which withftooeth ma 
pebe afhamed/ bavyngenothigein pouthat be 
maye difpzayfe.T he fervaunt? erbozte to beobs 
edient unite thelr owne me flere /and to pleafein 
all thig? not anfwerynge agayne, nether be pis 
cere, butthattbep fheweall good faythfulnes” 
thatthev mayedoworlbippetothe doctryneofF 
god oure faveoureinall thynges. Fo2the grace 
of god-thatbepnaetb bealth ontoall men bath 
apercdad teacheth vsthat we fhulde denye vnz 
Qodlynes/Ad wordly luftes Adthar wefbulbelt 
ve hone(tly/righteoufly- and goalyi this pzefét 
tworldeloFige fo2z that bleed bope/Ad glozious 
aperége ofthe myghty g0d/ ad of ourefavioure 
Sefu Chait: which gave byin(ilfe foz ve-to rede 
mevsf2dall ontightewe|nes ad td pourdge 0d 
apecultarpeoplevntobtfilfe fezvetly gevd unto 
Good wo2Ff, Thele thin? (peaFe, Ad exbhorte/ 4d 
rebube/withall comatdpnge. Se tbatnoman 


defpifethe. Che.tij. Chapter. 


\\ / Acnethern that they fubmitthem felves 
torucleand power/toobeyp the officers. 
thatthepbe prdpt vntoall goodwortttharthey - 


TheptFicof Paul 
fpeakeevylloffnoman /thatthey be no Fygbte- 
rebut fofte. (he wpnge all mefnes vntoallmen 
§o2 voc ourdfelvesalfowerertntpmies pafty uns 
wy(e/difobedtent’ deceaved / indaundgertoluz 
{tee/and to divers mannnersoff voluptu{nes’ 
lrppngeinmalicioufnes sandenviepull of bate 
batynge one another. 

But after tbat thePyndnes audloveofoure 
faveoureto manvwarde apered/notofthe ocoes 
off zightewefnes which we wrougbt but off bis 
mercie/befaved vs bythe fountapne of tenes 
webirth/and witbtherenuynge offthe holy go’ 
olt which be (hedon vs aboundantly /thozow 
ee Cort (tourefaveoure / that weonce tufts © 

ed by his grace (huldebe beyres offetern allly 
fetho2omebope. This igatruefapinge. 

Off thefetbyng? J wolde thou (huloeftcerti 
fie that they whdy beleve God mygbt be (too7 
(ous to goforwardein doodc wort, Thefe thy’ 
nat are goodeanoproffetable vntomen. Solt(Z 
(be queftions/and genealogies” andbzaulinaft 
and {tryfe aboute thelame avoyoe/ for they are 
pnproffetable/ and fi alse - Amanthatis 
theauctor off fectes “after the fyrft anodthe{ecos 
nde amonicion avoyoe/ remembzynge that be 
that 18 foche / is perverted ” and fynneth - even 
Damned by his amnetudgement. 

Lohen-76 fo all feride 2Airtemas unto the or Tiz 
dhicusbediligéttocometome yiito Sichopolis 
$02 Fhave determined thereto wynter. Bryn 
ge Benasthelawearand Apollos on theirtoz + 
nepoiligently , thatnothpnge belactynge wnto 
them. Andlet oures alfolearne toegcell in goode 
worfes for neceffarie ufes that Bex Be not 
unfruptefuff. 


87 


CHAPTER: Vaart 
SIR THOMAS MORE—“O THE PITY OF IT” 
‘Corruptio optimi pessima.” 


ARGUMENT, however, was resorted to as well as force; and 
Sir Thomas More entered the lists against Tyndale, pub- 
lishing a dialogue, which was soon answered. More said 
that he did not object to a vernacular translation, but it 
should be undertaken by men of Catholic minds, in times 
less rife with religious dissension, and should have the 
approval of the ecclesiastical authorities. Let us look in 
upon them at the fray, selecting what belongs to our 
subject. 

More.—Christ said not the Holy Ghost shall write, but 
shall teach. Whatsoever the Church says, it is the Word 
of God, though it be not in Scripture. 

Tyndale.—What! Christ and the Apostles not speak- 
ing of Scripture! These are written, says St. John, that 
ye might believe, and through belief have life. 

More.—The Apostles have taught by mouth many 
things they did not write; because they should not come 
into the hands of the heathen, for mockery. 

Tyndale—I pray you, what thing more to be mocked 
by the heathen could they teach than the Resurrection 2 
And that Christ was God and man, and died between two 
thieves? Yet all these things the Apostles wrote. 
Again, Purgatory, penance, satisfaction for sin, and pray- 
ing to saints, are marvellous agreeable unto the super- 
stition of the heathen people; so that they need not to 
abstain from writing of them, for fear lest the heathen 


should have mocked them. 
88 


SIR THOMAS MORE—“O THE PITY OF IT” 89 


In another place, Tyndale puts the Popish legends by 
the side of the Talmud. “As the Jews have set upa 
book of traditions, called Talmud, to destroy the sense of 
Seripture; unto which they give faith, and unto the 
Seripture none at all, be it never so plain; but say it 
cannot be understood, save by the Talmud; even so have 
ours set up their Duns, their Thomas, and a thousand 
like draff, to stablish their lies, through falsifying the 
Scripture; and say that it cannot be understood without 
them, be it never so plain. And if a man allege a holy 
Doctor against them, they glose him out, as they do the 
Scripture; or will not hear; or say the Church hath 
otherwise determined. They have also corrupted the 
Legends and Lives of nearly all the Saints. They have 
feigned false books, and put them forth; some in the 
name of St. Jerome, some in the name of St. Augustine, 
in the name of St. Cyprian, St. Dionyse, and other holy 
men; which are proved none of theirs, partly by the style 
and Latin, and partly by authentic stories.” 

More—We must not examine the teaching of the 
Church by Scripture, but understand Scripture by means 
of what the Church says. 

Tyndale.—What! does the air give light to the sun, or 
the sun to the air? God begat, with His own will, with 
the Word of Truth, says St. James. If he who begetteth 
is before him who is begotten, the Word is before the 
Church. 

More.—The Romish Church, from which the Lutheran 
came out, was before them, and therefore is the right one. 

Tyndale.—In like manner you may say that the Church 
of the Pharisees, when Christ and His Apostles came out, 
was before them, and therefore was the right Church. 

More.—I marvel that you deny Purgatory, Sir William, 
unless it be a plain point with you, to go straight to 
hell. 

Tyndale—I know no other purging, but faith in the 
Cross of Christ. While you, for a groat, or a sixpence, 
buy some secret pills (indulgences), which you take to 
purge yourself of your sins. 


go THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


More.—Faith, then, is your Purgatory. You say there 
is no need, therefore, of works ; a most immoral doctrine. 

Tyndale.—It is faith alone that saves us; but not a 
bare faith. When a horse beareth the saddle, and a man 
thereon, we may well say that the horse only, and alone, 
beareth the saddle; but we do not mean the saddle empty 
and no man thereon. 

Three special words of Tyndale’s More singled out for 
his vituperation ; congregation instead of church; elder, 
for priest; and love, for charity. Tyndale answers him 
at length. With regard to church, he says that congre- 
gation is better, since the idea of church has come, under 
Popish influences, to be limited to its ministers. Thomas 
iu Becket, for instance, died for the liberties and _ privi- 
leges of the Church, ze. liberty to do all mischief un- 
punished by the secular arm. But what he always 
understands by the Church is “The Pope, Cardinals, 
Legates, Patriarchs, ... Friars, black, white, pied, grey, ete.” 
And as for Ecclesia always being translated Church ; it is 
used three times in one chapter, the 19th of Acts, of a 
congregation of heathen people, with their Demetrius. 

Think of Sir Thomas More, the most accomplished man 
of his time, becoming, under the influence of Popery, a 
Judge Jefferies! He thirsted for the blood of those who 
differed from him in matters of faith, if he did not turn 
the screw with his own hands to torture them, and jest 
at his victim’s sufferings. As Lord Chancellor he under- 
stood the rights of person and property. To the human 
mind only he would allow no liberty whatever. Why 
did he attack Tyndale’s New Testament as ignorant, 
dishonest, and heretical? Partly because, for ecclesias- 
tical terms, Tyndale used others, as we have seen; church 
was congregation, priest was elder; charity was love; 
grace was favour; penance was repentance ; and confes- 
sion was knowledge (acknowledge). Sir Thomas More 
cast Bainham, a Reformer, into prison within his own 
house, and was commonly said to have whipped him at a 
tree in his garden, called the tree of truth. After which 
he sent him to be tortured on the rack at the Tower. 























or 





SIR THOMAS MORE—“O THE PITY OF IT” 93 


More was the first man who persuaded Henry vil, pub- 
licly and personally, to imbrue his hands in the blood of ’ 
his subjects on English ground, as Catherine Sinclair says. 
Oh yes, Wolsey was much milder, and it was a charge 
brought against him that “he was the impeacher and 
disturber of due and direct correction of heresies.” He 
stood by Latimer against his own persecuting bishop. 

It was a sign of the times that even Sir Thomas, con- 
sidered then to be the greatest wit in England, had to ask, 
or did ask, permission to read Tyndale’s works, with a 
view to replying to them. The permission was granted 
by Bishop Tunstall, who gave it him “forasmuch as he 
could play the Demosthenes.” He played it. But Arber's 
criticism on his performance is a just one, when he says 
that the whole of More’s well-meant efforts in the con- 
troversy are a distortion of the natural bent of his genius, 
leading him to a reckless vituperation of his opponents.* 

It is painful to have to speak disparagingly of such a 
man as More, in connection with Bible history, greatly 
advanced beyond his day as he unquestionably was, and 
a most upright and diligent Lord Chancellor. Who could 
have expected the author of Utopia to take such a 
course? Utopia, with its admirable discussions on 
criminal law, its forcible objection to capital punishment 
for offences against property, its remarks on the tendency 
of the practice of inflicting needless suffering on animals, 
and its extraordinary latitude of toleration as to the mind! 
So Sir James Mackintosh summarises it. Who, then, 
could have imagined that the author would have become 
a persecutor, and an opponent of the publication of the 
Scriptures so that they could be understood? But 
Utopia was written when More was a young man com- 
paratively, being thirty-eight, and far from the Lord 
Chancellorship of England: when the description of his 
household, which Erasmus gives us, is one of the loveliest 
pictures in literature. Here it is :-— 

“You would say there were in that place Plato's 


* See the Facsimile Text of the first printed English New Testament, 
by E. Arber, 1871. 


94 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


academy ; but I do the house injury by comparing it to 
that, where there were only disputations of numbers, and 
geometrical figures, and moral virtues. I should rather 
call his house a School or University of Christian Religion, 
for there is none therein but readeth or studieth the 
liberal sciences; their special care is piety and virtue; 
there is no quarrelling or intemperate words heard; none 
seen idle; which household discipline that worthy gentle- 
man doth: not govern by proud and haughty words, but 
with all kind and courteous favour. Everybody per- 
formeth his duty, yet there is always alacrity; neither is 
sober mirth anything wanting.” 

. But what Shakespeare says of another, may be applied 
both to More and his royal master : 


“ For sweetest things turn sourest, by their deeds ; 
Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds.” 


No doubt he became alarmed and indignant at some of 
the excesses of the Reformation party, which, however, 
were almost to be expected. He never thought that his 
Utopia would furnish texts for excited agitators on 
village greens or in the public houses of German towns, 
and was horrified at the Peasants’ War.* 

One cannot but mourn deeply over such a man, how- 
ever, and see in him the natural effect of medizval 
Popery. Christopher Anderson says: “ Utopia was the 
blossom of his youth, but there had been little congenial 
moisture within him, and so it dropped off. His tedious 
controversial writings were the fruit of his mature age, 
and they remain, to any who ever look at them, the gad- 
dest. memorial of his falling into the yellow leaf.” 

- Foxe says that he was called to the works ofa layman, and 
“if he had kept himself within his own shop, and applied 
the faculty whereunto he was called, and had not over- 
reached himself to prove masteries in such matters wherein 
he had little skill, less experience, and which pertained not 
to his profession, he had deserved not only much more com- 
mendation, but also a longer life.” He goes much further 

* Cambridge History of Literature. 


SIR THOMAS. MORE—“O THE PITY OF IT” 95 


than this later on, and says that he was so blinded in the 
zeal of Popery, so deadly set against the one side, andso 
partially affectionate unto the other, that in them whom 
he favoureth he can see nothing but all fair roses and 
sweet virtue; in the other which he hateth, there is never 
a thing can please his fantasy, but all is “as black as 
pitch, vice, abomination, heresy, and folly, whatsoever they 
do, or intend to do.” * 

- These are strong things to say,and we will justify them 
by giving briefly the history of Bainham, just referred to, 
as a sample of many more that might be given. He was 
a gentleman, being the son of a Gloucestershire knight, 
virtuously brought up, and having knowledge of Latin 
and Greek. He gave himself to the study of law, and 
became well known as a “great maintainer of the godly, 
a visitor of the prisoners, liberal to scholars, very merciful 
to his clients, using equity to the poor, very diligent in 
giving counsel to all the needy, widows, fatherless, and 
afflicted, without money or reward; briefly, a singular 
example to all lawyers.” 

Well, here was just the man that one would have 
expected the Lord Chancellor of England to make a friend 
of,and advance. The law was his profession, and the Lord 
Chancellor was at the head of it. But there was one 
thing more: “ he was an earnest reader of the Scriptures,” 
and much addicted to prayer. This was the head and 
front of his offending, and when he found that, in spite of 
his birth, learning, and goodness, it was likely to cost him 
his very life, for a brief season his courage gave way. 
But he recovered himself quickly, and stood up with the 
New Testament of Tyndale in his hand, exclaiming with 
tears, “If I should not return again to this truth, this 
Word of God would damn me both body and soul, at the 
day of judgment.” He prayed to every godly man to do 
as he did, for he would not feel such a hell again for all 
the world’s good. What followed? Remember this was 
a gentleman of spotless character, but he said, ‘‘ Christ’s 
body is not chewed with teeth.” He was the son of a 

* All quotations from Foxe are from Rev. J. Pratt’s edition, 8 vols. 


96 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


knight, but. he said that neither Sir Thomas More nor 
any one else could prove by Scripture that there was any 
Purgatory. He had a most bountiful soul, but he said 
that whoever preached and lived according to the Word 
of God had the key that bound and loosed, and the Pope 
had no other. 

This was how he suffered. First, he lay in the Bishop of 
London’s coalhouse in the stocks, with irons on his legs, 
for about a fortnight. Then he was taken to Sir Thomas 
More’s, and there chained to a post two nights; then to 
Fulham, where he was cruelly handled for a week ; then to 
the Tower, for a fortnight, where he was scourged to make 
him revoke his opinions; at last to Newgate, where he 
was visited by Latimer. When he came to the stake, he 
embraced it, and said— 

“Tam come hither, good people, accused and condemned 
for an heretic; Sir Thomas More being my accuser and 
my judge ; and these be the articles that I die for, which 
be very truth and no heresy. I say it is lawful for every 
man and woman to have God’s book in their mother- 
tongue. That the Bishop of Rome is Antichrist, and 
that he knoweth none other keys of heaven-gates, but 
only the preaching of the law and the Gospel. And that 
there is none other purgatory than the purgatory of 
Christ’s blood.” 

Then answered one of the officers called Pave, who 
soon afterwards hanged himself. 

“Thou liest, thou heretic! thou deniest the blessed 
sacrament of the altar.” 

“T do not deny,” said Bainham, “the sacrament of 
Christ’s body and blood as it was instituted of Christ, and 
-used of the Apostles; but I deny your transubstantia- 
tion.” 

“Thou heretic!” said Pave ; “set fire to him, and burn 
him.” 

When the fire had half consumed his arms and legs, 
he said— 

“O ye papists! behold, ye look for miracles, and here 
now ye may see a miracle, for in this fire I feel no more 


“AUUATIVO NONUWAA WIL NI GUALOIA AHL WOUs 
“HALHOOVG SIH GNY ZUOW ‘L UIs 





’ 


“svi d Dali atintm ah sina schema bd 


7 
he 
Cs 





SIR THOMAS MORE—“O THE PITY OF IT” 99 


pain than if I were ina bed of down; but it is to me as 
sweet as a bed of roses.” * 

As Maitland and others have complained of the strong 
language often used by the Protestants, it is only fair to 
say that nothing could be more utterly vulgar than some 
of Sir Thomas More’s. We will close this unpleasant 
subject by giving two examples, and leaving them with 
our readers. To those who objected to the burning of the 
New Testaments he answered— 

“Whoso called these books which were burned the 
New Testament gave them a wrong name, since they were 
rather Tyndale’s or Luther’s Testaments, it being so 
corrupted and changed from the good and wholesome 
doctrine of Christ to their own devilish heresies as to be 
quite another thing.” 

And again of Tyndale’s translation of Jonah, he says— 

“ A book that whoso delight therein shall stand in peril 
that Jonas was never so swallowed up of a whale as by 
the delight of that book a man’s soul may be so swallowed 
up by the devil that he shall never have the grace to get 
out again.” 

Demaus says Tyndale never defiled his pen with such 
Billingsgate as the remaining illustration. Tyndale had 
spoken disparagingly of Aquinas — too much so—and 
More’s answer is: “This devilish drunken soul abomin- 
ably blasphemes this glorious Saint of God, and calls him 
a falsifier of Scripture. But this drowsy drudge hath 
drunken so deep in the devil’s dregs, that but if he wake 
and repent himself the sooner, he may hap to fall into the 
mashing fat, and turn himself into draff which the hogs of 
hell shall feed upon.” 

Tyndale was certainly severe and sometimes indelicate 
in handling More, as he thought that he had sold his pen 
in order to further his political advancement. But it 
may have been, partly, that Tyndale was such a thorough 
Reformer, and that More’s mind became more conservative 
of old ways and thoughts as life advanced; by no means 
an uncommon experience. How many are hampered in 

* Foxe, vol. vi. 


TOO THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


their judgment by ancient precedent, of whom Milton 
exclaims, “Antiquity! Why do we stand worshipping 
and admiring this lifeless Colossus, that, like a carved 
giant, terribly menacing to children and weaklings, lifts 
up his club, but strikes not, and is subject to the mutiny 
of every sparrow ?” 

Certainly we will believe Sir Thomas More when he 
denies that he cruelly used some of the Reformers with 
his own hands. But, as to the binding to a tree in his 
garden and beating, he admits that he had caused such 
things to be done by the officers of the Marshalsea, And 
he declares that none of the so-called heretics “had 
wrong, but that it were for they were burned no sooner.” 
Mr. Demaus naturally looks upon it, therefore, as very 
significant that on the chancel wall of old Chelsea Church, 
adorned with a handsome marble monument which More 
had in his lifetime erected for himself, there should be a 
memorial tablet of one of the Tyndale family. There it 
was placed, long afterwards, probably by some one quite 
ignorant of all this memorable history, and it is over it, as 
if in triumphant superiority. 

Gairdner thinks that because similar cruelties to those 
suffered by Bainham were also said to be practised 
towards another martyr, perhaps there were neither the 
one nor the other. We should feel inclined to believe 
there were both, in view of the horrible treatment of so- 
called heretics again and again in this reign. But that 
would not hinder us from giving a place amongst the 
noble army of martyrs to Sir Thomas More himself, 
Nothing could ever be more abominable and hateful than 
the judicial murder of such a man, and of Fisher, the aged 
Bishop of Rochester. Well might Europe be stunned, and 
think that Henry vu. was a fiend. 

But, whatever the spirit of the age, More should not 
have called his opponents swine, “hell hounds that the 
devil hath in his kennel,” and « apes that dance for the 
pleasure of Lucifer.” 

He is said to have been the first to make his mark 
as an orator, and in his youth he conceived the idea of 


“NOSIUd LOATA GIO SIHL NI NGGd SVH I 


NIVS V 


ANVIV 





tot 


f 
‘ 


Ber ee carer es 





: 


SIR THOMAS MORE—“O THE PITY OF IT” 103 


nine pageants or emblems, representing the life of man. 
Death boasts that he has conquered all, but fame steps in, 
and says: 


“O cruel death, thy power I confound ; 
When thou a noble man hast brought to ground, 
Maugre thy teeth, to live cause him shall I 
Of people in perpetual memory.” 


And Sir Thomas More’s own fame will never fade, but 
whilst we think of his merry and brilliant sayings, his 
deep affections, his spotless honour, and his beautiful 
home, it is sad to think that he was also a relentless 
persecutor. 


CHAPTER IX 


FRYTH 


‘Nothing is here for tears.” 


ATTEMPTS were made by Henry vil. to capture Tyndale ; 
overtures to induce him to return to England being 
unsuccessful. And when these also failed, a general 
consultation with the bishops and the leaders of the 
Universities followed. The result of which was that a 
Royal Proclamation was published, in May 1530, ordering 
all copies of the New or Old Testaments to be 
delivered up; and promising that, if it should appear 
that erroneous opinions were forsaken, the king would 
provide a new translation, by the joint labours of great, 
learned, and Catholic persons. Of this promise, Cranmer 
often took occasion to remind the king. 

Stephen Vaughan was one of Henry vii1’s agents abroad, 
and he writes to the king on May 20, 1531, “that he had 
shown Tyndale a clause in Cromwell’s letter, saying, ‘ If 
it were possible, by good and wholesome exhortations, to 
convert the said Tyndale from the train and affection 
which he now is in, and to extirpate and take away the 
opinions rooted in him, I doubt not but the King’s 
Highness would be much joyous of his conversion and 
amendment. And if he then would return into his 
realm, undoubtedly the King’s Royal Majesty is so 
inclined to merey, pity, and compassion, that he refugeth 
none which he seeth to submit themselves to the obedi- 
ence and good order of the world.’ In these words, I 
thought to be such sweetness and virtues as were able 
to pierce the hardest heart of the world, And, ag if 


104 
4 


FRYTH 105 


thought, so it came to pass. For, after sight thereof, I 
perceived the man to be exceeding altered, and to take 
the same very near unto his heart, in such wise that 
water stood in his eyes, and he answered, ‘What 
gracious words are these! I assure you, if it would 
stand with the King’s most gracious pleasure, to grant 
only a bare text of the Scriptures to be put forth among 
his people, like as is put forth among the subjects of the 
Emperor in these parts, and of other Christian Princes, 
be it of the translation of what person soever shall please 
His Majesty, I shall immediately make faithful promise 
never to write more, nor abide two days in these parts 
after the same, but immediately repair into his realm, ” 

But the searching of the Scriptures went on, in spite of 
all opposition. The burning did harm to the Papal cause, 
as Tyndale had expected; and people were forced to 
believe that there must be some contrariety between the 
Book and the doctrines of those who handled it. 


‘When they brennyd the Newe Testament, 
They pretendyd a zele very fervient, 

To maynteyne onely Goddes honour ; 
Which they sayde, with protestacyon, 
Was obscured by translacyon ; 

In Englysshe causynge moche errour. 


But, trueth playnly to be sayde, 
Thys was the cause why they were afrayde, 
Least layemen shuld knowe theyr iniquiti ; 
Which, through Goddes Worde is so uttered, 
As it were not possyble to be suffred, 
Yf to rede Scripture men had lyberti.” 
A proper dyuloge. 


Almost as soon as Tyndale’s first edition was published, 
there came to his help a man of a very different stamp 
from his earlier assistant, in the person of John Fryth. 

In the valuable Cambridge History of English Litera- 
twre recently published,* he is said to be a writer and a 
martyr far above most of the day in dignity and breadth, 
and as his history is peculiarly interesting and illustra- 

* A. W. Ward, Litt.D., and A. R. Waller, M.A., Cambridge, 1909. 


106 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


tive of the times, we must linger in his company a little. 
Like George Whitfield, he was the son of an innkeeper, 
and was born at Sevenoaks about 1503. He studied at 
Cambridge first, and then was one of those selected by 
Wolsey, on account of their talents, to be members of 
his new College at Oxford. Meantime he had become 
acquainted with Tyndale, and adopted many of the 
teachings of the Reformation. In consequence he, with 
several others, was imprisoned in a deep cellar belonging 
to Wolsey’s College, where the salt fish was kept. The 
stench killed several of them, but Fryth was released, and 
joined Tyndale abroad, helping him in his translation. 
After a time he returned, and having some expectations 
from the Abbot of Reading, he went there. Whatever 
they were, however, he was disappointed, and was taken 
up and set in the stocks as a vagrant. Here he began 
speaking in Latin, and asked to see the schoolmaster of 
the place, who was astonished to find a scholar there, 
and soon got him released. He then went to London, but 
became a marked man for his writings, and was hunted 
down by Sir Thomas More, and thrown into the Tower. 
Here he became acquainted with Mr. Petit, a wealthy 
merchant, and member of Parliament for the City several 
years. He too was imprisoned by Sir Thomas More for 
assisting ‘the Reformers in the printing of their books, 
and laid in a dungeon on a pad of straw, where he 
contracted a disease of which he soon afterwards died. 
We simply state indisputable facts. Fryth was ordered 
to be examined at Croydon, and here again comes a 
remarkable piece of history probably known to few in 
the pleasant and populous suburb of Brixton Hill. The 
two who were taking him on foot were so impressed with 
his character, knowing that the upshot of his trial was 
sure to be death, that they agreed together to allow him 
to escape. On each side of Brixton Hill were thick 
woods, and he was to fly through those on the east into 
Kent, and escape abroad. Then after a little time they 
would say he had escaped on the other side, and have a 
search made there. Fryth, however, absolutely refused to 


FRYTH 107 


fall into the plot, and said he would walk to Croydon 
- himself if they did not take him. He believed very 
much as Zwingli did in the matter of the Sacrament, 
and that and some other things were enough for the bishops. 
He was martyred at Smithfield, after being for some time 
in Newgate. Here he was put into the dungeon under 
the gate, and laden with bolts and irons, his neck being 
made fast to a post with a collar of iron so that he could 
neither stand upright nor lie down. Yet in this position 
he continued writing, by the light of a candle, almost 
until his death. He was burned on the 4th of July 1533, 
and a priest, Dr. Coke, admonished the people that they 
should no more pray for him than a dog. Fryth smiled, 
and asked God to forgive him. 

Fryth must have been of considerable assistance to 
Tyndale in his Bible work, but what the nature and 
value of that assistance was we cannot tell. 

Tyndale always spoke of ‘him with affection and erati- 
tude, however, and in one of his letters he says: 

“Brother Jacob, beloved in my heart, there lives not in 
whom I have so good hope and trust, and in whom my 
heart rejoices, as in you. Not the thousandth part so 
much for your learning, and what other gifts else you 
have, as that you will creep low by the ground, and walk 
in those things which the conscience may feel, and not in 
the imaginations of the brain ; in fear, and not in boldness ; 
in open necessary things, and not to pronounce or define 
of hid secrets, or things that neither help nor hinder, 
whether they be so or no; in unity, and not in seditious 
opinions; insomuch that, if you be sure you know, yet, 
in things that may abide leisure, you will defer, or say, 
till others agree with you; methinks the text requires 
this sense or understanding.” In thus praising Fryth, 
Tyndale shows himself. 

His writings have been published by the Religious 
Tract Society, and amongst them is a Mirror, or Glass, 
to know Thyself. Here he says that the prophet cried, 
Woe to those who coupled and knit houses together, and 
that woe would be verified upon many of the bishops. 


108 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


“ Nevertheless, this I dare say, that if a bishop who may 
expend four thousand marks would distribute every year 
but the one-half unto the poor of his diocese, giving unto 
one man forty shillings, and lending to another twenty 
nobles, to set up his occupation withal, and so give and 
lend as he seeth need, he should within five or six years 
have a flourishing diocese, And I think, verily, that his 
face should more be allowed before God than if he had 
built a thousand abbeys ; for God’s commandment ought 
first to be done, and is much more acceptable to Him than 
all the works that proceed of our imaginations and foolish 
fantasies. He shall ask you, at the day of Judgment 
whether you have fed the hungry, and given drink to the 
thirsty, and not whether you have builded abbeys and 
chauntries. He shall ask you whether you have 
harboured the harbourless, and clothed the naked, and 
not whether you have gilded images, or given copes to 
churches. He shall ask you whether you have visited 
the sick, and gone to the prisoners, and’ not whether you 
have gone a pilgrimage to Walsingham or Canterbury. 
Therefore take good heed, and say not but that ye are 
warned.” 

Grafton calls Fryth a young man of an excellent wit 
and learning ; and when we read the writings of such men, 
we see how the Reformation had a literary and spiritual 
impetus quite apart from anything that Henry virr. ever 
said or did. 

He said to Sir Thomas More, “Grant that the Word 
of God, I mean the text of Scripture, may go abroad in 
our English tongue; and my brother, William Tyndale, 
and I have done, and will promise you to write no more.” 

This was the spirit of both men. ‘It was not for glosses 
or comments they contended, and such men never 
attempted to form a party, and died without forming one. 
There were Lutherans and Calvinists, but the term “ Tyn- 
dalian ” occurs only once in the letter of an enemy, and it 
never was adopted. 

Tyndale next directed his labours to the Old Testament, 
learning Hebrew under the Jewish Rabbis of Germany, 


fo T | 

inthe herte, fo that aman bringeth forth good 
workes of his atone acord without compullia 
of the lawe, without feare of threateninges or 
curfinges:yee and with out all manet ref pecte 
or loue pnto any temporal pleafure, But of the 
Dery power of the {prete rcceaved thorow fais 
th, A's thoureadeft.oan.i. He gaue them pos 
toer to be the fonnes of God in that they beles 
uedon his name.And ofthat power they wor 
Ke:fo that he which hath the fprete of chrift is 
now nomoare a childe: he nether learneth or 
tvorketh now anylonger fer payne of therod> 
de or for feare of bcogges or pleafureof aps 
ples, But doth althinges of his atone courage 
As chrift fayeth. loan. vif. He that beleueth on 
me fhall haue riuers of lyuinge water lowinge 
out of his belye. That is, All good workes ad 
all giftes of grace fpringe out of him naturals 
lye and by their atone accorde. Thouneadeft 
not to tercft good trorkes outofhim as am3 
told wringe veriuce out of crabbes: Nay thei 
flow naturally out of him as {pringes out off 
hilles or rockes. 

‘T henewe teftament twas ever, eue from the 
beginning of the world.For there were alsoae 
ye promyles of Chrift to come by faith in wini 
ehe promyfes the electe were then iuftifyed 

inwardly 


PORTION OF TYNDALE’S PROLOGUE TO EXODUS. 


(Including the curious passage, “ For payne of the rodde 
or for fear of boogges.”’) 


IIo THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


and published his translation of the Pentateuch, January 
17th, 1530. He gained a fair knowledge of Hebrew 
before attempting this work; as is evidenced by references 
to the subject in his works.* For instance, in his Parable 
of the Wicked Mammon, he expounds the word thus: 
“Mammon is a Hebrew word, and signifieth riches, or 
temporal goods; namely, all superfluity, and all that is 
above necessity, wherewith a man may help another, 
without undoing or hurting himself. For Hamon, in the 
Hebrew speech, signifieth a multitude, or plenteousness, 
of goods or riches.” Again, speaking of St. Matthew's 
Hebraisms, he says: “If ought seem changed, or not 
altogether agreeing with the Greek, let the finder of 
the fault consider the Hebrew phrase, or manner of 
speech, left in the Greek words; whose preterperfect 
tense, and present tense, is oft both one; and the future 
tense is the optative mood also; and oft the imperative 
mood, in the active voice; and in the passive ever.” + 

Tyndale was delighted to find that this old language, 
new to him and to everybody, “ agreed a thousand times 
more with the English than with the Latin”; and soon 
followed his translation of the Pentateuch with one of 
Jonah; which usually stood at the head of the Prophets 
in his time. There is some strong language in the 
Prologue. “As the envious Philistines,” he says, “ stopped 
the wells of Abraham, and filled them up with earth, to 
put the memorial out of mind, to the intent that they 
might challenge the ground; even the fleshly minded 
hypocrites stop up the Scripture with their traditions, 
false similitudes, and lying allegories, out of like zeal to 
make the Scripture their own possession and merchandise ; 
and so, shut up the Kingdom of Heaven, which is God’s 
word, neither entering in themselves, nor suffering them 
that would.” 

The Pentateuch was printed in piebald fashion; Genesis 


* Worms had a colony of Jews, and an ancient synagogue, established, 
according to tradition, shortly after the destruction of the Temple by 
Nebuchadnezzar. 

+ Lewis. 








0 OF 


A NEW LITERATUE 


2a Be 





FRYTH 113 


and Numbers being in Gothic letter; Exodus, Leviticus, 
and Deuteronomy in Roman type. There is no collective 
title-page, and the different books were probably intended 
for separate issue. 

Tyndale had already been hunted, and Antwerp was a 
dangerous place for him; but it had its advantages. 
Here also he translated and printed Jonah. So com- 
pletely had this book disappeared, that its existence was 
doubted, till Lord Arthur Harvey found a copy bound up 
in an old volume in his library at Ickworth. 

In his revision of the Pentateuch, which Tyndale also 
published at Antwerp, there were no changes made except 
in Genesis. The translation is highly idiomatic. For 
instance, Gen. xxxix. 2,“ And the Lord was with J oseph, 
and he was a lucky fellow.” The notes are often curious. 
“Enoch walked with God, and was no more seen ; that is, 
he lived godly, and died; God took him away ; that is, 
hid his body, as he did Moses and Aaron’s, lest haply they 
should have made an idol of him, for he was a great 
preacher and a holy man.” On the constantly questio 
vexata of faith and works, he says: “If any man ask me, 
seeing that faith justifieth me, why I work; I answer, 
Love compelleth me. For, as long as my soul feeleth 
what love God hath showed me in Christ, I cannot but 
love God again, and His will and commandments, and of 
love work them; nor can they seem hard unto me. I 
think not myself better for my working; nor seek heaven, 
nor a higher place in heaven, because of it.” The Pro- 
logue closes: “Read God’s word diligently, and with a 
good heart, and it shall teach thee all things.” 

About the same period, Luther published his German 
translation; Zwingli, in Switzerland, and Le Fevre, in 
France, also gave the Scriptures to their countrymen. 
And a Swedish New Testament appeared in 1521. It 
was indeed an age of translations. But it is not going 
too far to repeat that Tyndale’s early translation gave 
the Bible which is now in common use a stamp which 
no subsequent editions could efface. That he did not 
found his work on the Vulgate, and was not greatly 

8 


II4 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


influenced by the versions of Wycliff and Purvey, we 
cannot be too thankful; as also that he was not betrayed 
into a pedantic style, but produced a book popular and 
homely, whilst grave and beautiful. “A peculiar genius,” 
says Froude, “breathes through it; in the mingled 
tenderness and majesty, the Saxon simplicity, the preter- 
natural grandeur; unequalled and unapproached in the 
attempted improvements of modern scholars—all are 
here, and the impress of one man, William Tyndale.” 

Some portions of the Apocrypha followed. But, in 
1534, an edition of his New Testament was published 
in Holland, edited for Christopher of Endhoven’s widow 
by George Joye, who made considerable alterations in 
the text, and introduced errors based on the Old Latin 
version, particularly with regard to the state of the dead 
before the Judgment. Tyndale was naturally annoyed 
at this liberty. And other surreptitious reprints being 
made at the same time, his attention was drawn back to 
the New Testament. In November of the same year, 
therefore, he issued a new and revised edition of his 
ewn, with short marginal notes, and prologues to the 
several books, chiefly compiled from Luther. This 
was the first edition containing the name of the 
translator. 

I am indebted to Lord Peckover for the following 
quaint illustrations of this edition, which is the one given 
in the English Hexapla :— 

Matt. 14. 20.—And they gadered up of the gobbets 
that remayned xii baskets full. 

John 1. 15.—He that cometh after me was before me, 
because he was yer than I. 

Gal. 6. 17.—Let no man put me to busynes. 

Matt. 26. 30.—When they had said grace. 

Edgar gives a large number of illustrations of Tyndale’s 
idiomatic and often forceful renderings :— 

Phil. 1. 8—I long after you all, from the very herte 
rote in Jesus Christ. 

Mark 6. 31.—There were many comers and goers, that 
they had no leisure so moche as to eat. i 


FRYTH 115 


Mark 2. 4.—They let him down thorowe the tylinge, 
beed and all. 

2 Cor. 2. 17.—We are not as many which chopped an 
chaunge with the Worde of God. 

Luke 22. 25.—They that bear rule over them are called 
gracious Lords. 

1 Tim. 6. 4—He is pufte up and knoweth nothinge, 
but wasteth his braynes aboute questions and stryfe of 
words.* 

Quite a number of Tyndale’s renderings that were 
changed in the Authorised Version have been practically 
restored in the Revised. 


* Bibles of England. 


CHAPTER X 
ANNE BOLEYN 


“$89 kind an office hath been done.” 


THERE is no positive proof that Tyndale ever came into 
contact with Luther, and Mr. Anderson contends that the 
contrary was sent abroad by the enemies of Tyndale to 
damage the reputation of his work, “ Lutheran” then 
answering to the “Lollard” of an earlier time. Mr. 
Offer has recently brought to light a few manuscript 
translations of portions of the New Testament, bearing the 
signature of W. 'I., and the date of 1502, twenty years 
before the publication of any portion of Luther’s Bible. 
But both Westcott and Demaus think that these are 
literary forgeries, of which there have been many examples. 
He lived for a time at Marburg, where he found a safer 
residence. The Landgrave, Philip the Magnanimous, had 
early and enthusiastically embraced the Reformation. 
On the heights above the city stood his ancient castle, 
and, in 1527, he had founded the University—where 
to-day there are a thousand students. Here the press 
of Hans Luft was of great service to Tyndale. He never 
returned to the land of his birth, for the best of reasons. 
For some time he was on good terms with the English 
merchants at Antwerp; and several plots were laid to 
bring him back to England, but they failed. A beautiful 
description of his manner of life here is given by Foxe. 
He had two days in the week which he called his days 
of pastime, being the only ones that he did not devote 
to hard study. On Monday he visited such as were fled 
out of England on account of the persecutions, liberally 


116 








ANNE BOLEYN, 


FROM THE ORIGINAL PAINTING BY HOLBEIN. 


By 





ANNE BOLEYN 119g 


relieving them. On Saturday he walked round about the 
town, seeking out the poor, the aged, the weak, and those 
overburdened with children. These he relieved out. of 
a liberal sum given him by the merchants at Antwerp. 
He was a man, says Foxe, “without any spot or blemish 
of rancour or malice, full of merey and compassion, so that 
no man living was able to reprove him of any kind of sin.” 

Two attempts on Tyndale failed. We have referred to 
Stephen Vaughan, who was instructed to promise him 
safe conduct if he would return, but he had the discretion 
to remain where he was. Vaughan was an English 
envoy in the Low Countries; and then Henry issued 
orders for his apprehension, and sent over Sir Thomas 
Elyot, a friend of Sir T. More’s. But Tyndale was 
not only in exile, but in hiding; and although Sir Thomas 
offered many rewards for his discovery, he had to report 
that, “like as he is in wit movable, so is his person 
uncertain to come by.” 

Vaughan, indeed, disapproved entirely of Sir Thomas 
More’s crusade against the English Reformers, and 
admired Tyndale, though he repudiated the imputation 
of being a “Tyndalian” himself. Very touching was 
the great translator’s answer to him once, when he 
was speaking of the king’s clemency, and urging him 
to return to England, as we have seen, 

If the Bible was translated and published at all, he 
would return, “and there most humbly submit myself at 
the feet of His Royal Majesty, offering my body to suffer 
what pain and torture, yea, what death his grace will, so 
that this be obtained.... But if the things I have 
written be true and stand with God’s word, why should 
His Majesty, having so excellent gift of knowledge in 
the Scriptures, move me to do anything against my 
conscience ? ” 

Fryth said practically the same when in the Tower, 
adding—* Till sufficient instruction is given to the poor 
commoners, the Word of God boileth in my body like a 
fervent fire, and will needs have issue, and breaketh out 
when occasion is given.” 


120 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


And let it never be misunderstood that, whilst such 
men died for giving the people of England the Scriptures, 
it was the Scriptures themselves that the Romanists raged 
against in vain. It was not the notes and comments, 
as some have ignorantly said. Every year, on the average, 
since the first New Testament was printed, there had been 
a new edition, and these were reprints of the octavo of 
Worms, without note or comment, except references in the 
margin to parallel passages. What was prohibited, con- 
demned, and burnt was the simple text of Holy Scripture, 
without any note, comment, or prologue of any kind 
whatever. 

Cochleus never got the reward he expected for his 
interference at Cologne, but at least he may be credited 
with bidding very hard for it when he says: 

“The New Testament translated into the vulgar tongue 
is the food of death, the fuel of sin, the vail of malice, .the 
pretext of false liberty, the protection of disobedience, the 
corruption of discipline, the depravity of morals, the 
termination of concord, the death of honesty, the well- 
spring of vices, the disease of virtues, the instigation of 
rebellion, the milk of pride, the nourishment of contempt, 
the death of peace, the destruction of charity, the enemy 
of unity, the murderer of truth.’ Mr. Demaus, who 
quotes this from Cochleeus’s An licet Laicis, very properly 
says that Romanists holding such views proscribed and 
burnt the Bible as naturally as people who dread con- 
tagion burn all infected garments. 

Tyndale was living in the “English House,” set apart, 
since 1474, by the municipality for the use of English 
merchants, when he was at length arrested. It was in a 
block of buildings between the present Rue de la Vieille 
Bourse and Rue Kirck. Tyndale had taken up his abode 
here in 1533, thinking himself safe from further attack. 
Towards the close of the year, John Rogers came as 
English chaplain. At first a Roman Catholic, he joined 
the Reformers, probably through Tyndale’s influence. 

Previously to this, Tyndale had turned from translation 
to exposition. He published an exposition of St. John’s 


ANNE BOLEYN / 721 


First Epistle, and of the Sermon on the Mount. Anne 
Boleyn, about this time, interfered on behalf of Harman, 





(THE PRESENT) BLICKLING HALL, WHERE ANNE BOLEYN WAS 
BORN, AND LIVED HER EARLIER LIFE. GARDENS AND LAKE. 





BLICKLING HAUL. 


an Antwerp merchant, who had suffered losses and im- 
prisonment for helping to circulate New Testaments. 
Tyndale sent to her, in gratitude, a copy of his New 


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA SCHOOL 
OF THEOLOGY LIBRARY 


122 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


Testament printed on vellum, and marked with her name 
and title on the edges,* whilst his own was suppressed. 
The British Museum possesses this copy. 

Anne Boleyn had a double reason for being a Protestant. 
In the first place, her father, Sir Thomas Boleyn, was a 
man of learning, and a friend of Erasmus, who said that 
he was almost the only learned man amongst the nobility. 
Henry vii. sent him on important embassies to F oreign 
Courts, and he thus came in contact with men of liberal 
views in Germany and other countries. He certainly 
embraced many of the new opinions, and three of the 





THE. LIBRARY,” BLICKLING HALL. 


Treatises of Erasmus were written at his request, including 
his exposition of the Apostles’ Creed. Erasmus congratu- 
lated him on thinking more of learning than his honour- 
able ancestry, and in one of his letters Says: 

“I do the more congratulate you when I observe that 
the sacred Scriptures are so precious to a man such as 
you, so powerful a layman and a courtier, and that you 
are actuated by a desire to possess that pearl of price.” 

Of course this was notorious, and Anne would be greatly 


* Anna, Anglie, Regina. When examining it in the British Museum, 
I found the tradition there was, that the queen took this lovely volume to 
the scaffold. 


ANNE BOLEYN re 


influenced by him in her earliest years, as well as later, 
when she had returned from France, so that it was per- 
fectly natural for Shakespeare to make Wolsey say— 
“What though I know her virtuous, and well-deserving ? 
yet I know her for a spleeny Lutheran; and not whole- 
some to our cause. This candle burns not clear; ’tis I 
must snuff it.” 
Then again, when Anne Boleyn was a girl, and accom- 
panied the king’s sister to France, she became closely 
connected with Margaret of Valois, from whom she very 





MARGUERITE DE VALOIS, THE QUEEN OF NAVARRE, 
AND HER ‘PROTESTANT. FRIENDS. 


likely imbibed her Protestant views. If so, they were 
largely those of Erasmus, as Mr. Saintsbury tells us in his 
edition of the Heptameron. Margaret was a highly culti- 
vated and energetic queen, and would naturally have the 
strongest objection to the idleness, ignorance, and often 
coarseness and vices of the cloister. She had aspirations 
after a more spiritual form of religion than the Popery 
of the day provided, and she sheltered many persecuted 
Reformers, and more than once begged for the release of 
some supposed heretic. There was dissension between 
her husband and herself in consequence, though he was at 


124 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


one time of her mind—never knowing his own. The side 
of the Reformation which appealed to her was its spiritual 
pietism, and its connection with learning and letters, of 
which she was an ardent devotee. 

Anne Boleyn was with her for some time at the most 
impressionable age, and often showed her Protestant 
feelings. She tried to get preferment for Garrett, whose 
story is one of the most touching of the Reformers. She 





TYNDALE’S PRESENT TO ANNE BOLEYN 


gave a copy of Fish’s Supplication of Beggars to the king, 
after she and her brother had read it. This short book is 
the most awful indictment of Popery in all the literature 
of the period, and if a quarter of it is true, the wonder is 
not that it fell in this reign, but that it lasted so long. It 
could not fail to stir deep feelings in any one that read it, 
king or peasant, and Henry said, after a long pause, “If 
a man should pull down an old stone wall, and begin at 
the lower part, the upper part might chance to fall upon 


ANNE BOLEYN 125 


his head.” After describing the horrible lives of many of 
the Friars, it exclaims: 

“This is the great reason why they will not let the 
New Testament go abroad in your mother tongue, lest 
men should spy out that they do translate your kingdom 
into their hands; that they are cruel, unclean, unmerciful 
hypocrites.” 

Anne Boleyn was a great supporter of Protestant 
scholars at Cambridge, and in fact her generosity was 
remarkable. If any one chooses to believe the flimsily 
supported charges brought against her by the great 
bloated, cowardly wife-murderer, he may. But the aver- 
age mind will find them hard to harmonise with the - 
testimony of her silk-woman (Miss Wilkinson), who said 
that she kept all those about her so occupied in making 
shirts and smocks for the poor, that there was no idleness 
nor doubtful pastimes such as are commonly seen in 
princes’ Courts. And of the Duchess of Richmond, who 
said that she thought no day well spent wherein some had 
not fared the better by some benefit at her hands. But 
as Wolsey once said, if the king had ordered a jury to 
bring in a verdict that Abel killed Cain, they would have 
done it. Of course she was obnoxious to the supporters 
of the Pope both at home and abroad, and Wyatt in his 
Memoirs of her ascribes her downfall to their plottings, “the 
most and chiefest of them having come from. Rome,” that 


‘Nest of treasons, in which is hatched and bred 
What ill this day the world doth overspread,” 


as Petrarch long before termed it. 

Certainly Chapuys, the Imperial Ambassador, whose 
letters are so fully given in the State Papers, cannot be 
relied on for a moment, when he dared to speak of a 
Queen of England as he did. But few of her friends had 
any moral courage. 


‘‘When smiling fortune spreads her golden ray, 
All crowd around to flatter and obey ; 
But when she thunders from an angry sky, 
Our friends, our flatterers, and lovers fly.” 


CHAPTER xt 
THE BETRAYAL AND MARTYRDOM OF TYNDALE 


“His blood was shed, 
In confirmation of the noblest claim, 
Our claim to feed upon immortal truth, 
To walk with God, to be divinely free, 
To soar, and to anticipate the skies, 


O pitiless skies ! why did your clouds retain, 
For peasants’ fields their floods of hoarded rain ! 
O pitiless earth! why opened no abyss, 

To bury in its chasm a crime like this !” 


In 1535 Tyndale made the acquaintance of the miscreant, 
Phillips, who betrayed him. He was said to have been a 
Roman Catholic student at Louvain, but had fled to 
Flanders, after robbing his father. He insinuated himself 
into Tyndale’s confidence, by professing great zeal for 
religious reform. Then he borrowed some money from 
him, decoyed him from the « English House,” and betrayed 
him to the Imperial officers on 23rd May 1535. Mr. 
Carlyle says that it cannot be proved that this wretch 
was either the agent of Henry vit, or a tool of English 
Catholics. But he must have been somebody’s tool; and, 
no doubt, he was well paid for his J udas-work.* 
Cromwell dispatched a Cambridge scholar to Louvain 
to find out how Phillips was supplied with funds, and 
doubtless to stop the supplies, if possible; a very practical 
measure. It was thus discovered that Phillips had two 
benefices and a prebend when he went over the sea, and 
his employers would be sure to transmit the traitorous 
pluralist his revenues. “It was therefore the funds of 


* E. Irving Carlyle, in Biographical Dictionar Ye 
126 


BETRAYAL AND MARTYRDOM OF TYNDALE 127 


the Church of England,” says Demaus, Tyndale’s bio- 
grapher, “those funds which the piety of previous 
generations had consecrated for the perpetual religious 
benefit of the community, which were employed in doing 
to death the man who has bestowed upon the people of 
England the greatest religious blessing which they enjoy.” 

In fact, Mr. Carlyle has not made himself quite familia? 
enough with his edition of Foxe. There he would have 
read (vol. v. p. 121) :— 

“In the Registers of London it appeareth manifest how 





THE ENGLISH HOUSE, ANTWERP. 


that the Bishops and Sir Thomas More having any poor 
man under coram, to be examined before them, namely, 
such as had been at Antwerp, most studiously would 
search and examine all things belonging to Tyndale, 
where and with whom he hosted, whereabouts stood 
the house, what was his stature, in what apparel he 
went, what resort he had, ete.; all which things when 
they had diligently learned (as may appear by the 
exainination of Simon Smith and others), then began 
they to work their feats.” 

And let not Foxe’s statements be doubted. His Acts 


128 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


and Monuments are worth far more than all the histories 
put together, and no man was more careful of his 
facts, though in eight great volumes a few inaccuracies 
may be found. One such, with regard to John Marbeck 
of Windsor, he publicly corrected, showing how he had 
been misled by the records and registers, the bishop's 
certificate and the writ of execution, into thinking that 
he suffered with some others. He just eseaped, however. 





TYNDALE’S BETRAYAL, 


Persons, Harpsfield, and other contemporary Romanists, 
who had every means, as well as disposition, to impeach 
Foxe's statements, could only find two supposed errors in 
all the mass of his writings on the Marian persecutions, 
One of these was only an error of a name. and the other, 
after personal inquiry on the spot, was found to be no 
error at all.* 

* Church History of England, J. A. Baxter, M.A. 


BETRAYAL AND MARTYRDOM OF TYNDALE 129 


So that Rev. Canon Townsend may well say that there 
is no historian of his own times so faithful, and that but 
for his mighty work the heart of England would never 
have been so permanently animated with that utter 
abhorrence of persecution which has been the foundation 
both of our liberty and our national influence amongst 
mankind. “In this sense John Foxe deserves to be placed, 
where our fathers ranked him, amongst the best friends 
and benefactors of the civilised world.” 

As it has been the fashion with some to disparage Foxe, 
we will add one more testimony, that of Wordsworth in 
his Ecclesiastical Biography : 

“Tt never will be proved that John Foxe is not one of 
the most faithful and authentic of all historians. We 
know too much of the strength of Foxe’s book, and the 
weakness of those of his adversaries. The many researches 
and discoveries of later times, in regard to historical 
documents, have only contributed to place the general 
fidelity and truth of Foxe’s melancholy narrative on a rock 
which cannot be shaken.” And this in spite of the fact 
that Foxe’s great work is twice as long as Gibbon’s 
Decline and Fall, and is perhaps without a parallel in 
literature. My edition contains 6700 pages, largest octavo, 
being Rev. J. Pratt’s. “Homely, dramatic, and vital,” 
says the Cambridge History of Literature. 

Tyndale was thrown into prison at Vilvorde, near 
Brussels; where he remained about a year and a half. 
Before this, however, he prepared a further edition of the 
New Testament, without any marginal notes, which has 
been supposed to have a rustic orthography, and to redeem 
his promise of giving God’s word to the Gloucestershire 
ploughboys. But this idea is without foundation; the 
probability being that some Flemish compositor, who 
issued the work after Tyndale’s arrest, and without his 
supervision, introduced Flemish equivalents for the 
English vowel sounds. 

Another still more absurd idea is that Tyndale was in 
this volume attempting phonological reform, bringing 
spelling and pronunciation into correspondence. 


g 


130 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION — 


Two editions, in fact, appeared in 1535; the first, from 
the press of Hans van Ruremonde, at Antwerp, being an 
octavo. This is the one thought to be for Gloucestershire 
ploughboys.* Probably it was a private enterprise of 
Dutch printers, who wished to anticipate the final revision 
which Tyndale was understood to be preparing. This 
last revision has the signature G.H.; and Mr. Bradshaw 
has now shown that this stands for Godfried van der 
Haghen, the Antwerp publisher, who possibly employed 
Martin Emperour as his printer. It was a dangerous 
thing to avow sympathy with a man like Tyndale, so 
there is no printer's name; and the publisher simply 
inserted his initials. 

Here is a sample of the 1535 Testament, with the 
peculiar spelling. “Though I spaeke with the tonges of 
men and aengels, and yet had no love, I were even as 
soundynge brasse, or as a tinklinge cimball. And though 
I could prophesy, and ondestoede all secretes, and all 
knowledge ; ye, yf I had all faeyth, so that I coulde move 
mountayns oute of thear places, and yet had no love, I 
were nothinge.” It was simply the Flemish printers who 
put in their own spelling. 

Foxe says that, during his imprisonment, Tyndale con- 
verted his keeper, the keeper’s daughter, and others of 
his household. The rest that knew him said. that, if he 
were not a good Christian man, they could not tell who to 
trust. Probably Tyndale left behind him a translation 
of Joshua, Judges, Ruth, Samuel, Kings, and Chronicles, 
completed while in “ durance vile.” 

It was a real prison, however. And from a letter still 
extant, written to the Governor, we gain a sorrowful insight 
into his prison life Tyndale pathetically appeals for “a 
warmer cap, for I suffer extremely from cold in the head, 
being afflicted with a perpetual catarrh, which is con- 
siderably increased in the cell; also a piece of cloth, to 
patch my leggings. My overcoat has been worn out. My 

*The Cambridge University Library hasa copy. Father is spelled 


“‘faether” ; master, ‘‘maester”; stone, ‘“‘stoene”; once, ‘‘oones” ; 
worse, ‘‘ whorsse.”’ 


BETRAYAL AND MARTYRDOM OF TYNDALE 131 


shirts are also worn out. J wish algo his permission to 
have a candle in the evening; for it is wearisome to sit 
alone in the dark.” 

This is the only letter of Tyndale’s extant. It reminds 
us of the pathetic close of St. Paul’s Second Epistle to 
Timothy. Not a single letter, or document of any sort, 
in his own hand, had been discovered, till this was found 





— 











THE CASTLE OF VILYORDE, NEAR BRUSSELS. 
FROM THE “LIFE OF TYNDALE,” BY R. DEMAUS, M.A. 


by a foreigner. M. Galesloot came across it in the archives 
of the Council of Brabant. Mr. F. Fry had it photographed; 
and the facsimile is amongst the treasures in the large 
room of the British Museum Library. The letter hag 
neither date nor superscription. But there is not the 
least doubt that it was written at Vilvorde, in the winter 
of 1535, and addressed to the Governor of the Castle, the 


132 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


Marquis Bergen op Zoom, with whom Cromwell had lately 
interceded in Tyndale’s favour. He had been appointed 
Governor in 1530. A huge whitewashed Penitentiary 
occupies the site of the old castle now, having been built 
in 1870. The larger castle in which Tyndale was im- 
prisoned was built by Duke Wenceslaus in 1375, and the 
archives of Brabant were kept there, in addition to State 
prisoners. 

A. discussion, conducted in a better spirit than most 
such, took place between Tyndale and some Louvain 
theologians; but it could only end in one way. After the 
mouse is played with, it is devoured. 

Some earnest efforts, however, were made to save 
Tyndale’s life, especially by his faithful Antwerp friend, 
Poyntz. And the Vaughan before alluded to wrote to 
Cromwell: “If now you send me your letter to the Privy 
Council, I could deliver Tyndale from the fire; so it come 
by time.” Henry vii. was on bad terms with the Emperor 
Charles v., however, and it was the Emperor that ordered 
the execution. So that, for this foul murder, at all events, 
England is not responsible. Indeed, in England, the 
great subject of all this time was the king's divorce; and ~ 
the appearance of the Bible in an English dress was quite 
a secondary matter. Cranmer did nothing to save Tyndale, 
though he knew all; but probably there was nothing he 
could do. Thus, on the 6th October 1536, Tyndale was 
led forth to the stake; and, after being strangled, his 
body was consumed to ashes. 

He died praying, “Lord, open the King of England's 
eyes,” with a fervent zeal and a loud voice, and his 
prayer was answered at once. Before the waning year 
had come to its close, the first volume of Scripture ever 
printed on English ground came forth from the press 
of the king’s own printer; and that volume was a folio 
Testament, Tyndale’s own version, with his prologues 
too, and with the long proscribed name of William 
Tyndale openly set forth on its title-page* The next 


* Probably printed by Thomas Berthelet, though his name is not 
mentioned, and at the very time when Tyndale was being martyred. 


‘ 
$ 
: 
x 
: 


MARTYRDOM OF 


133 





TYNDALE. 





BETRAYAL AND MARTYRDOM OF TYNDALE. 135 


year, the whole Bible, including a large portion translated 
by Tyndale, was sanctioned by the king, for was there 
not found in it, “The king’s heart is in the hands 
of the Lord; as the rivers of water He turneth it 
whithersoever He will.” * 

We are indebted to the valuable Life of Tyndale, by 
the Rev. R. Demaus, M.A., for a view of the Castle of 
Vilvorde, where the martyr was imprisoned, strangled, 
and burned to death. The traveller who is approaching 
Brussels looks in vain for any sign of its existence, for 
not one stone has been left upon another. But Vilvorde 
has two church towers, and is now a pleasant enough 
place, as I saw it a few summers ago, when the peasants 
were hay-making. 

Memorials have been raised to Tyndale’s memory, 
both in Gloucestershire and in London, where he began 
his work. A monument, in the form of a fine column, 
122 feet in height, and 26 feet square at the base, has 
recently been erected by subscription, on a site at North 
Nibley Knoll, Gloucestershire, given by Earl Fitzhar- 
dinge. This was then supposed to be his birthplace. 
The monument was unveiled by the Earl of Ducie, 
6th November 1866. The project for this memorial 
was originally made by Mr. C. Anderson, whose admirable 
work on the English Bible is so largely a life of Tyndale. 
It was revived in 1861 by a few gentlemen living 
near Nibley. 

Another memorial graces the Thames Embankment, 
being a bronze statue by Mr. J. E. Boehm, costing about 
£2400. Mr. Tyssen Amherst, afterwards Lord Amherst 
of Didlington Hall, Norfolk, obtained a fine site from 
the Metropolitan Board of Works; and Dean Stanley, 
in presiding at the first public meeting to promote it, 
said that the work of revision, then in progress, “was 
but the latest edition of Tyndale’s Bible.” The statue 


Christopher Anderson thinks that Anne Boleyn must have patronised 
it, or it could scarcely have been issued from the king’s printers. This 
would harmonise with her defence of Harman. 

* Life, in Parker Society’s Doctrinal Treatises. 


136 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


was unveiled by the Earl of Shaftesbury, 7th May 1884. 
It is ten feet in height, and one-half the money was 
guaranteed by twelve gentlemen. 

So Tyndale has not been neglected, by our generation 
at least, though the lines are often true: 


“Patriots have toiled ; and, in their country’s cause, 
Bled nobly. And their deeds, as they deserve, 
Receive proud recompense. We give in charge 
Their names to the sweet lyre. The historic muse, 
Vain of the treasure,-marches with it down 
To latest times. And Scripture, in her turn, 
Gives bond in stone, and ever-during brass, 

To guard them, and to immortalise her trust. 
But fairer wreaths are due, though never paid 
To those who, posted at the shrine of truth, 
Have fallen in her defence.” 


It was openly acknowledged in the Convocation of 
1536, by Fox, Bishop of Hereford, before Tyndale 
expired, that “the lay people do now know the Scriptures 
better than many of us.” And, though Henry vui’s 
sanction of the Bible was only “the whim of a moment,” 
the people, lay and clerical, of England have been doing 
perpetual honour to Tyndale’s memory by using what 
is so largely his work. But Tyndale never sought 
human praise, for, as he said in one of his prologues, 
“He that hath the Spirit of Christ, neither learneth, 
nor worketh, for payne of the rodde, or for feare of boogies, 
or pleasure of apples.” 

Erasmus died during the same year. And Tyndale’s 
convert and coadjutor, John Rogers, was the first martyr 
in the bloody days of Queen Mary. Truly, in these, 
as in many times before, the blood of the martyrs was 
the seed of the Church; and we see how that seed has 
brought forth in us a hundredfold, in a long harvest 
of peaceful days. To lead the way is always harder 
than to follow. Thus to Tyndale belongs the double 
praise, of having stamped the English Bible with his 
own high character, and braved the dangers incident 
to such a work. 


BETRAYAL AND MARTYRDOM OF TYNDALE, 137 


Of the five or six editions of Tyndale’s first New 
Testament, it is now difficult to find even a fragment. 
They were intercepted, captiously examined, and 
studiously misrepresented. “There is not so much as one 
i therein, if it lacke a tytle over his hed, but they have 
noted it, and number it unto the ignorant people for 
an heresy.’ So Tyndale wrote in his Preface to the 
Pentateuch, published in 1530. 


CHA BLE TR oll 


TYNDALE’S OTHER WORKS 


‘‘Tts wearing fatigues, its small enmities, its false friendships, and its 
meagre and capricious rewards.” f 
- Lytron on Literature. 


“THE most interesting book in the language,” as it has 
been called, is at the Baptist College, Bristol. This is the 
octavo printed at Worms, by Schoeffer, the first English 
New Testament ever printed. It was originally in the 
Harleian Collection, and was obtained for the Earl of 
Oxford, by one of the many agents whom he employed in 
hunting up such treasures. The Earl was so pleased, 
when he found himself the possessor of this volume, that 
he settled an annuity of twenty pounds upon the finder. 
It is stated, that Osborn, the bookseller, purchased the 
Harleian Library for less than the Earl had spent on the 
bindings ; and that, to ensure a speedy sale, he catalogued 
the books at a very low figure. Not recognising the value 
of this one, he priced it at fifteen shillings. It passed into 
the hands of the antiquary, J. Ames; and at his death, 
into those of a Mr. White, who gave fourteen guineas for 
it. Mr. White sold it to his friend, Dr. Gifford, a Baptist 
minister, of much repute in his day, for twenty guineas. 
And Dr. Gifford placed it in the College Library. It has 
been admirably reproduced in facsimile by Mr. F. Fry. 
“The noble army of martyrs praise Thee.” Tyndale 
was one of the noblest of them; and, for a long time, he 
expected no other fate. Once he said, “There is none 
other way into the kingdom of life, than through persecu- 
tion, and suffering, and pain, and of very death, after 
the example of Christ.” On another occasion he said, “If 


138 


TYNDALE’S OTHER WORKS 139 


they shall burn me, they shall do none other thing than 
IT looked for.” 

But let it not be thought that he died as a disloyal and 
law-breaking fanatic. He said, indeed, in his Parable of 
the Wicked Mammon (1528), that there is no right of 
absolute ownership, apart from social obligations. And 
' this led Sir Thomas More to call it. “a very treasury and 
well-spring of wickedness.” But Tyndale was quite 
correct; and, in the Obedience of a Christian Man” (1528), 
he defends the Reformers against the charge of dis- 
obedience to the civil power. In this, for the first time, 
are clearly stated the two great principles of the 
Reformation ; namely, the supreme authority of Scripture 
in the Church, and of the king in the State. The treatise 
was shown to Henry vul., who approved. But Tyndale’s 
Practice of Prelates attacked both Henry’s divorce pro- 
ceedings, and Wolsey’s action. This quite destroyed, in 
Henry’s mind, the favourable impression made by the 
Obedience, as we have seen. In later editions, the part 
about the divorce was expunged. 

In this Obedience of a Christian Man, Tyndale attacks, 
of course, the false obedience preached up in his time. 
“Tf thou pollest thy head in the worship of thy father, 
and breakest his commandments, shouldest thou so 
escape? Or, if thou painted thy master’s image on a 
wall, and stickest up a candle before it, shouldest thou 
therewith make satisfaction for the breaking of his 
commandments? Or, if thou wearest a blue coat in the 
worship of the king, and breakest his laws, shouldest thou 
so go quiet ?” 

In fact, Tyndale was quite as much one of the leading 
writers of his age as a translator, and to those of his day 
the probability is that he loomed largest as a theological 
pamphleteer. . 

In the Preface he amplifies his charge of the ignorance 
of the clergy. After his conversations with them in 
Gloucestershire, he had said he would make the plough- 
boys understand the Scriptures better than they did, and 
here he says: 


140 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


“ Alas, the curates themselves, for the most part, wot 
no more what the New or Old Testament meaneth than 
do the Turks; neither care they, but even to mumble up 
so much every day, as the pie and popinjay speak. If 
they will not let the layman have the Word of God in 
his mother tongue, yet let the priests have it; which for 
a great part of them do understand no Latin at all, but 
sing, and say, and patter all day, with the lips only, that 
which the heart understandeth not. Christ commanded 
to search the Scriptures. Though miracles bare record 
unto His doctrine, yet desired He no faith to be given to 
it or to His miracles without record of the Scripture.” 

Under the influence of Barnes, Tyndale cast off tran- 
substantiation, and went back to the ancient way of 
understanding the Sacrament; and as a final sample of the 
venom of Sir Thomas More, this is the way he speaks of 
Tyndale’s giving up the gross error of his education: “ But 
within a while after, as he that is falling is soon put over, 
the Friar (Barnes) made the fool mad outright, and brought 
him down blindfold into the deepest dungeon of that 
devilish heresy wherein he sitteth now, fast bounden in 
the chair of pestilence with the chain of pertinacity.” 
“Our Saviour will say to Tyndale, ‘Thou art accursed, 
Tyndale, the son of the devil, for neither flesh nor blood 
hath taught thee these heresies, but thine own father, the 
devil. Ah! blasphemous beast, to whose roaring and 
lowing no good Christian can without heaviness of heart 
give ear,” 

This from a literary man! And Maitland thinks the 
language of the Protestants was too strong ! 

It certainly seems as if Tyndale should have escaped 
martyrdom. Sir T. More had fallen, although only the year 
before, and Bishop Fisher, with his new cardinal’s hat. 
Cranmer and Cromwell were strongly in sympathy with 
the Reformers. Also Miles Coverdale, his former associate, 
was then engaged upon the translation of the whole 
Scripture. Moreover, there is no doubt that Cromwell 
tried to save him; his imprisonment lasting sixteen 
months. . 


TYNDALE’S OTHER WORKS ieee 


A fine heroic figure Tyndale presents, however, and we 
have had great pleasure in dwelling at some length on 
the notable work he did for England and for Englishmen. 
Sir Philip Sydney has said that the historian is “laden 


re 











TYNDALE’S MONUMENT. AT HIS BIRTHPLACE, 
EITHER NORTH NIBLEY, OR NEAR IT. 





with old mouse-eaten records, authorising himself, for the 
most part, upon other histories, whose greatest authorities 
are built upon the notable foundation Hearsay; having 
much ado to accord differing writers, and to pick truth 


142 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


out of partiality.” It is not a very flattering description. 
But we will set over against it Colton’s dictum that, to 
cite the examples of history, in order to animate men to 
virtue, or to arm them to fortitude,—this is to call up 
the illustrious dead to inspire and improve the living. 
And of Tyndale, it may certainly be said— 

“He neither feared the darkest hour, 

Nor trembled at the tempter’s power.” 


T. Russell, M.A., published a portion of Tyndale’s Works, 
and Fryth’s, in 1827.* He intended to complete his work ; 
but the abridged series published by the Religious Tract 
Society made it impossible. The publisher complains that 
there is not room for them both, and that this is not the 
first time that the R.T'S.,a great Society, with practically 
unlimited means, has competed with the private publisher. 
One cannot but have a little sympathy with the com- 
plainant, but these three large volumes are a valuable 
contribution to the Tyndale literature. The Prefaces are 
all given; and, in that to the Pentateuch; the language 
is certainly strong. “In this they be all agreed: to drive 
you from the knowledge of the Scripture, and that you 
shall not have the text thereof in the mother tongue; 
and to keep the world still in darkness, to the intent they 
might sit in the consciences of the people, through vain 
superstition, and false doctrine; to satisfy their filthy 
lusts, their proud ambition, and their unsatiable covetous- 
ness... . A thousand books had they leaver to be put 
forth, against their abominable doings and doctrine, than 
that the Scripture should come to light.” 

Tyndale shows his knowledge of Hebrew in this Pre- 
face; and says that, when he had translated the New 
Testament, he desired, in an epistle at the end, any that 
were learned to amend anything that wasamiss. “But our 
malicious and wily hypocrites, which are so stubborn and 
hard-hearted in their wicked abominations, that it is not 
possible for them to amend anything at all, say, some of 
them, that it is impossible to translate the Scriptures 

* K. Palmer, London. 


TYNDALE’S OTHER WORKS 143 


into English ; some, that it is not lawful for the lay-people 
to have it in their mother tongue; some, that it would 
make them all heretics. As it would, no doubt, from 
many things which they of long time have falsely taught. 
And that is the whole cause wherefore they forbid it; 
though they other cloaks present.” 

In another Prologue, to the Books of Moses, speaking 
of a man having a precious jewel, and yet being none the 
richer, because he is ignorant of its worth, Tyndale says: 
“It is not enough, therefore, to read and talk of it only, 
but we must also desire God, day and night, instantly 
to open our eyes, and to make us understand and feel 
wherefore the Scripture was given, that we may apply 
the medicine of the Scripture, every man to his own 
sores. Unless we intend to be idle disputers, and 
brawlers about vain words, ever gnawing upon the bittere 
bark without, and never attaining unto the sweet pith 
within ; and persecuting one another in defending of lewd 
imaginations and phantasies of our own invention.” 

Tyndale wants to make all plain to the unlettered 
reader. And there are Tables expounding words of 
importance. Take a few extracts from the Table on 
Genesis :— 

“ Bless—God’s blessings are His gifts: as in the first 
chapter, He blessed them, saying, ‘Grow, and multiply, 
and have dominion.’ And in the ninth chapter, ‘He 
blessed Noah and his sons, and gave them dominion over 
all beasts, and authority to eat them.” 

“ Curse.—God’s curse is the taking away of His benefits ; 
as God cursed the earth, and made it barren. So now, 
hunger, dearth, war, pestilence, and such like are yet 
right curses, and signs of the wrath of God unto the un- 
believers; but, unto them that know Christ, they are 
very blessings, and that wholesome cross, and true pur- 
gatory of our flesh, through which all must go that will 
live godly and be saved. As thou readest in Matthew 
y., ‘Blessed are they that suffer persecution for righteous- 
ness sake.’” 

“ Haith is the believing of God’s promises, and a sure 


144 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


trust in the goodness and truth of God. Good works are 
things of God’s commandment, wrought in faith. And 
to sew a shoe at the commandment of God, to do thy 
neighbour service withal, with faith to be saved by Christ, 
is much better than to build an abbey of thine own 
imagination, trusting to be saved by the feigned works of 
hypocrites.” 

The Prologues are all able productions. In that to 
Exodus, he says :— 

“Beware of subtle allegories. And note everything 
earnestly, as things pertaining to thine own heart and 
soul... . Note, how God is found true at the last; and 
how, when all is past remedy, and brought into desperation, 
He then fulfilleth His promises; and that by an abject 
and a castaway, a despised and a refused person; yea, 

eand by a way impossible to believe.” 

“Make not Moses a figure of Christ, with Rochester ; 
but an example unto all princes, and to all that are in 
authority, how to rule unto God’s good pleasure, and unto 
their neighbours’ profit. For there is not a perfecter 
life in this world, both to the honour of God and profit 
of his neighbour, nor yet a greater cross, than to rule 
Christianly.” 

“Note also, how God sendeth His promise to the 
people, and Moses confirmeth it with miracles, and the 
people believe. But, when temptation cometh, they fall 
into unbelief, and few bide standing, where thou seest that 
all be not Christian that will be so called, and that the 
cross trieth the true and the feigned; for, if the cross 
were not, Christ should have disciples enough. Whereof 
also thou seest, what an excellent eift true faith is, and 
impossible to be had without the Spirit of God. For it is 
above all natural power that a man, in time of tempta- 
tion, when God scourgeth him, should believe then stead- 
fastly how God loveth him, and careth for him, and hath 
prepared all good things for him.” 

Beautifully Tyndale dwells on the humanity and kind- 
liness of the law, and the reasonableness of every precept. 
And, as to the multitude of sacrifices and ceremonies, 


TYNDALE’S OTHER WORKS 145 


they were to occupy the minds of the people, and that 
they should have no desire to follow the heathen, But 
“he that goeth about to purchase grace with ceremonies 
doth but suck the ale-pole to quench his thirst.” 

Tyndale’s Introduction to Leviticus shows more fully 
the scope of the sacrifices. He says that, though all the 
sacrifices and ceremonies have a starlight of Christ, yet 
some have the light of the broad day, and express Him as 
plainly as if we should play His passion on a scaffold, or 
in a stage play: as the scapegoat, the brazen serpent, the 
ox burned without the host, the passover lamb, ete. “ Inso- 
much that I am fully persuaded that God showed Moses 
the secrets of Christ, and the very manner of His death.” 

Concerning Numbers, Tyndale says we have here the 
practice of the Law given by God. But then, just as in 
modern times, good deeds of men’s own imagination were 
put in the place of it. The Papists “have set up wilful 
poverty, of another manner than any that is commanded 
of God. And, the chastity of matrimony utterly defied, 
they have set up another wilful chastity, not required of 
God; which they swear, vow, and profess to give to God, 
whether He will give it them or no; and compel all their 
disciples thereunto, saying that it is in the power of every 
man’s free-will to observe it, contrary to Christ and His 
apostle Paul. And into what corrupting of other men’s 
wives, and open whoredom, and into other abominations 
too filthy to be spoken of, hath their voluntary chastity 
brought them.” 

Of Deuteronomy, Tyndale says that it is worthy to be 
read day and night, and never to be out of our hands. The 
notes and glosses are nearly all his own, and not Luther’s. 

There follow, in these three handsome and beautifully 
printed volumes, Zhe Prologue to Jonah, The Wicked 
Mammon, The Obedience of a Christian Man, The Practice of 
Prelates, The Answer to More, The Prologues to the Sermon 
on the Mount and 1st Epistle of John, and The Pathway 
into the Holy Scripture. 

Tn all that he thus wrote, Tyndale was actuated by the 
highest motives. “I take God to record,” he eries, “if I 

Io 


146 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


wrote of all . . . save only of pity on the blindness of my 
brethren; to make every one of them, if it were possible, 
as perfect as an angel of heaven.” But whatever bore 
his name was soon forbidden. And when the sacred 
text could no longer be prohibited, all Prologues and 
Annotations, by whomsoever written, were ordered to be 
utterly removed from it. This is the reason why, among 
the earlier editions which have come down to us, the 
greater part are mutilated and defaced. dition followed 
edition, however, and the light could not be hid. 

Those who want full particulars of the great number 
printed must refer to the valuable work of Dr. Cotton. 
He published a second edition of his list, thirty-one years 
after the first, in which he mourns that, after being 
within easy reach of the great libraries in London, 
Oxford, and Cambridge, he had now for a long time been 
in a country place in the South of Ireland. He was then 
Archdeacon of Cashel; but he continued his investiga- 
tions to the last. The catalogue of Mr. Lea Wilson’s 
library is also very valuable. 

In the British Museum there are eleven German 
editions of the Bible, from 1466-1518, three Bohemian, 
one Dutch, 1477; five French, 1510-1531; and seven 
Italian, 1471-1532. In Germany there were, in this 
early age, seventy-two partial translations, and fifty 
complete. Luther, in making his, had one of these 
translations before him. In France these translations 
were livres de luxe. 

Certainly we were far behind in England ; Caxton not 
daring to print the Bible as such, on account of Arundel’s 
decree. But the place was partly supplied by his 
Golden Legend, which came out before -the close of the 
fifteenth century. This contained nearly all the Pentateuch, 
and the Gospel narrative, in English. 

It was a folio volume, and contained the word “ breches,” 
in Gen. ili, 21, long before the Genevan Bible. There 
were numerous editions of this book ; and it was possibly 
read in the Churches. The text is mixed with much 
priestly gloss and dross; but the Pentateuch and the 


TYNDALE’S OTHER WORKS Ay 


Gospels would give anything value, and it must have been 
extensively read, long before the Reformation. 

Mr. Francis Fry published the Tyndale in the Baptist 
College, Bristol, 1862. Mr. Arber reprinted the quarto 
fragment of the first edition. Those who wish to see the 
sequence of the different editions of Tyndale’s Testament 
will find it in Mr. Fry’s Bibliographical Description, 
printed in 1878, and full of interest. 

Fuller draws a parallel between St. Paul and Tyndale. 
After saying that Bale called Tyndale the Apostle of the 
English, he says that St. Paul defeated the power of 
Elymas, the sorcerer, and Tyndale put a magician out of 
countenance. St. Paul, in Philippi, converted his jailer 
and his household ; Tyndale, during his imprisonment at 
Vilvorde converted his keeper, his daughter, and others of 
his family. St. Paul was in perils by “waters, by robbers, 
and amongst false brethren ; and so was Tyndale. 

But no man could speak out against the gross cone 
of the time, and expect to escape persecution. The 
beautiful religion of Christ had become identified with a 
senseless mummery which neither appealed to the heart 
nor the intellect, and greed and extortion’were the 
commonest things. “The parson sheareth, the vicar 
shaveth, the parish priest polleth, the friar scrapeth, and 
the pardoner pareth; we lack but a butcher to pull off 
the skin.”* So Tyndale said, and this witness was 
true. 


SPECIMENS 
OF 
TYNDALE’S VERSIONS 
OF DIFFERENT PARTS OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURES 


I. A specimen of his earliest production as a translator of 
Hebrew ; copied from the second edition of his version of 
Genesis, as printed at Marburg in Hesse, by Hans Luft, 
and carried through the press in 1534. 





* Bibles of England, Edgar. 


148 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


GENESIS iy. 3 


AND it fortuned in processe of tyme, that Cain brought 
of the frute of the erth, an offeringe vnto the lorde. And 
Abel, he brought also of the firstlynges of his shepe ad of 
the fat of them. And the lorde loked vnto Abel and to 
his oiferinge: but vnto Cain and vnto his offeringe, loked 
he not. And Cain was wroth exceadingly, and loured. 
And the lorde sayde vnto Cain: why arte thou angry, and 
why loureste thou? wotest thou not yf thou do well thou 
shalt receave it? But and yf thou do euell, by and by 
thy sinne lyeth open in the dore: notwithstondinge let it 
be subdued unto the, and se thou rule it. And Cain 
talked with Abel his brother. 

And assoone as they were in the feldes Cain fell vpon 
Abel his brother and slewe him. And the Lorde sayd 
vnto Cain: where is Abel thy brother? And he sayd: I 
can not tell, am I my brothers keper? And he sayde: 
What haste thou done? the voyce of thy brothers bloud 
cryeth vnto me out of the erth. And now cursed be thou 
as pertayninge to the erth, whiche openned her mouth to 
receaue thy brothers bloud of thine hande. For when 
thou tyllest the grounde she shall henceforth not geue 
hyr power vnto the. A vagabunde and a rennagate shall 
thou be vpon the erth. 

And Cain sayd vnto the lorde: my sinne is greater, 
then that it maye be forgeuen. Beholde thou castest me 
out this daye fro of the face of the erth, and frome thy 
syght must I hyde my selfe, and I must be wandringe 
and a vagabunde vpon the erth. Morouer whosoeuer 
findeth me, will kill me. And the lorde sayd vnto him. 
Not so, but whosoever slayeth Cain, shalbe punysshed vii. 
folde. And the Lorde put a marke vpon Cain that no 
man that founde hym, shulde kyll him. And Cain went 
out from the face of the Lorde and dwelt in the lande 
Nod, on the east syde of Eden. 


II. A specimen of Tyndale’s latest labours as a translator of 
Hebrew ; copied from his version of the historical books of 


TYNDALE’S OTHER WORKS 149 


the Old Testament, as incorporated by Rogers into the Bible 
called Matthew’s, and first published by Grafton the printer 
in 1537, about ten months after the translator’s martyrdom, 


2 SAMUEL i. 17 


And Dauid sang thys song of mournyng ouer Saul and 
ouer Jonathas hys sonne, & bad to teache the children of 
Israel y* staues therof. And Beholde it is wrytté in the 
boke of ryghtwes. The glorye of Israell is slayne upo y° 
hie hilles: Oh how were y* mightye ouerthrowe? Tell it 
not in Geth: nor publyshe it in the streates of Askalon : 
lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoise, & that y° 
daughters of y° uncirciicised triiphe therof. Ye moun- 
taynes of Gelboe, upon you be nether dew nor raygne, ner 
feldes whence heaue offeringes come. For there the 
shildes of y° myghtie were cast from them: the shilde of 
Saul, as though he had not bene anoynted wyth oyle. 
The boowe of Jonathas and the swerde of Saul turned 
neuer backe agayne emptie, from the bloud of the wounded 
and from the fatte of the mightie warryowres. 

Saul and Jonathas louely and pleasaiit in their lyues, 
were in their deethes not deuided, men swiftter then 
Kgles and stronger then Lyons. Ye daughters of Israel, 
wepe ouer Saul, whych clothed you in purple & garmentes 
of pleasure, and bordered youre rayment with ornamentes 
of goulde. How were y° mightye slayne in battell ? 
Jonathas on the hie hilles was wounded to deeth. Woo 
is me for the my brother Jonathas: delectable to me wast 
thou excedyng. Thy loue to me was wonderfull, passing 
y° loue of wemé. How were thy myghtie ouerthrowen, 
& how were the wepons of warre forloren. 


III. A specimen of Tyndale’s labours as a translator of Greek ; 
from the earliest edition of his version of the new Testa- 
ment printed at Worms, in 1525, and now in the library of 
the Baptist College, Bristol. 


1 CORINTHIANS Xili, 


Though I speake with the tong* of men 4d angels, and 
yet had no love, I were evé as soundynge brasse: and as 


150 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


a tynklynge Cynball. and though I coulde prophesy, and 
vnderstode all secretes, and all knowledge: yee, if I had 
all fayth so that I coulde move mountayns oute of there 
plac’, and yet had no love, I were nothynge. And though 
I bestowed all my gooddes to fede the povre, and though 
I gave my body even that I burned, ad yet have no love, 
it profeteth me nothynge. 

Love suffreth loge, and is corteous. love envieth nott. 
Love doth nott frawardly, swelleth not, dealeth not dis- 
honestly, seketh nott her awne, is not provoked to anger, 
thynketh not evyll, reioyseth not in iniquite : but reioyseth 
in the trueth, suffreth all thynge, beleveth all thyng* 
hopeth all thyng*, endureth i all thyng*’. Though that 
prophesyinge fayle, other tonges shall cease, or knowledge 
vanysshe awaye: yet love falleth never awaye. 

For oure knowledge is vnparfet, and oure prophesyige 
is vnperfet: but whé thatt which is parfet is come: the 
that which is vnparfet shall bedone awaye. When I was 
a chylde, I spake as a chylde, I vnderstode as a childe, I 
ymmagened as a chylde: but as sone as I was a man I 
put awaye all childesshnes. Nowe we se in a glasse even 
in a darke speakynge: but then shall we se face to face. 
Nowe I knowe vnparfectly: but then shall I knowe even 
as I am knowen. Nowe abideth fayth, hope, and love, 
even these thre: but the chefe of these is love. 


CHAPTER XIII 


THE FIRST COMPLETE ENGLISH BIBLE—COVERDALE 


“There is a fragrance which can never waste, 
Though left for ages to the charter’d wind.” 


Bur “the immortals never come alone,” and we must look 
in another direction to find the first entire Bible printed 
in the English tongue. To Miles Coverdale, a Cambridge 
scholar, this work has been universally ascribed ; and he 
probably hailed from the same part of Yorkshire as 
Wycliff had done before him. He had acquaintances 
amongst the highest in the land, being a visitor at the 
house of Sir T. More. His early patron was Cromwell, 
the favourite of Henry vim. through a long period; and 
his connection with him frequently saved him from 
trouble. 

Coverdale early imbibed the principles of the Reforma- 
tion; and, whilst at the University, became a diligent 
student of the Scriptures. He was, for a considerable 
time, in the Monastery of the Augustine’s at Cambridge, 
of which the well-known Dr. Barnes was Prior; and they 
appear to have thrown off the errors of Popery together. 
The meetings of those who inclined to Protestantism 
were held frequently at a house called the “White 
Horse,’ which came, from this association, to be nick- 
named “Germany,” the Reformed doctrines being im- 
ported thence. They could easily meet here from the 
principal Colleges. 

This was in 1526, just after the publication of Tyndale’s 
first New Testament; and partly, no doubt, in consequence 
of it. When Barnes was arrested, and conveyed to 
London, Coverdale attended him, and helped him to 


151 


152 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


prepare his defence, laying aside his conventual habit. 
Later on, we find him preaching at Binstead, in Essex, 
against transubstantiation and the worship of images, 
and conversing privately with a priest against confession, 
so that his safety became endangered. Hollinshed thus 
portrays his character: “He was very sober in diet, 
godhe in life, friendlie to the godlie, liberal to the poor, 
and courteous to all men, void of pride, full of humilitie, 
abhorring covetousness, and an enemy to all wickedness 
and wicked men. ” 

It is not known how long Coverdale was engaged in 
his Bible work. But we lose sight of him from 1528 to 
1535; and probably he left England. It is likely that 
Zurich was the scene of his labours; and that he visited 
and spent some time with Tyndale, at Hamburg. 
Probably both Cromwell and Sir T. More had to do with 
Coverdale’s undertaking the translation of the Scriptures. 
In a letter addressed to the former, he speaks of 
beginning to taste of Holy Scripture, and of being “set 
to. the most sweet smell of holy letters.” Certainly it 
was sweet work to him, and there is much tender beauty 
about many of his renderings. 

Yes, Zurich, the city of Zwingli, who, fourteen years 
before, had opposed Samson in his impious traffic of 
Indulgences, just as Luther had opposed Tetzel. At least, 
in the main, Coverdale’s version is based on the Swiss- 
German Version produced by Zwingli; and Leo Juda, 
which was published at Zurich; also on the Latin of 
Pagninus.* 

About ten years after the New Testament, on 4th 
October 1535, the entire Scriptures were finished, and 
ready for printing. Coverdale was “helped” by the 
Latin and Dutch Bibles, as well as the portions which 
Tyndale had translated. But he calls his book “a special 
translation, not as a checker, reprover, or despiser, of 
other men’s translations; but lowly and faithfully 
following his interpreters, and that under conviction.” 
He had, in point of fact, as he says in his dedication to 

* Westcott and Dr. Ginsburg. 





MILES COVERDALE, BISHOP OF EXETER, 





THE FIRST COMPLETE ENGLISH BIBLE 155 


the king, five sundry interpreters; probably the German 
of Luther; the Swiss-German published at Zurich 
1525-29; the Latin of Pagninus; the Vulgate: with 
the English Pentateuch, Book of Jonah, and New 
Testament of Tyndale. Having been abroad go long, his 
volume came, as Dr. Eadie says, “unheralded and un- 
anticipated.” 

Mr. J. W. Whittaker, M.A., has shown that Coverdale 
translated from the Hebrew. And he says: “If the state- 
ment, translated out of Dutch and Latin, is in the original 
title-page, it contains a very great misrepresentation.” 
Anderson concludes that these words were withdrawn by 
Coverdale himself, in 1536. 

Coverdale’s version shows a stronger sympathy with 
ecclesiastical words than Tyndale’s; and is more 
rhythmical at the sacrifice of literality. For the 
prophetical writings he had no English guide, and he was 
swayed almost entirely, in this portion, by Leo Juda’s 
Swiss-German Bible, a fact which partly accounts for the 
occasional obscurity of the Minor Prophets in our 
Authorised Version.* 

Coverdale speaks of the adversity of those who were 
not only of ripe knowledge, but would also, with all their 
hearts, have performed that they begun, if they had not 
had impediment. It is of Tyndale, no doubt, that he 
chiefly speaks, who was now in prison, having gone as far 
with the Old Testament as 2 Chronicles. 

The title is as follows :—“ Biblia—the Bible, that is, the 
Holy Scripture of the Olde and New Testament, faithfully 
and truly translated out of the Douche and Latyn, into 
Englishe, Mpxxxv. St. Paul, 2 Tessa. iti, ‘Praie for us, 
that the Worde of God maie have fre passage and be 
glorified’; and St. Paul, Col. i, ‘Let the Worde of 
Christ dwell in you plenteously, in all wysdome’; and 
Joshua i. ‘Let not the boke of this Lawe departe out of 
thy mouth, but exercyse thyselfe therein daye and nighte.’” 

At the commencement of the dedication to Henry VII, 
Coverdale alludes to the king’s “dearest just wyfe and 

* See Quarterly Review, vol. cxxviii. p. 318, 


156 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


most vertuous pryncesse Queen Anne”; which he after- 
wards changed to “Queen Jane.” And, of the existing 
copies of the first edition, several are found made up with 
the later dedication. 

Mr. Fry has examined into this with his usual care. 
The British Museum copy has “ Anne,” altered with the 
pen into “Jane.” The Bodleian has “Anne”; Sion 
College has “Jane.” And, in some copies the name of 
the queen is expunged altogéther. Lambeth Library has 
an example of each. Those with the name “Jane,” how- 
ever, Mr. Fry found were from Nycholson’s edition of 
1537, a leaf of which had been inserted. Bibles are often 
made up of two or three editions; frequent use, of course, 
injuring them. Thus portions of the three editions of 
Tyndale’s New Testament, in quarto, 1536, are found in 
the same volume. Mr. Fry sums up, after long com- 
parison, that the leaf of the dedication to Queen Jane 
is that of the edition of Nycholson, 1537. There is not 
the least ground for supposing, with Lewis and Anderson, 
that the publication of this first complete English Bible 
was retarded, in order that the dedication to the king 
might be reprinted with the name of Queen Jane. 

The dedication has been described as fulsome. But 
we must remember the circumstances under which it was 
penned, and the real facts with which it deals. At the 
commencement Coverdale compares the Pope to Caiaphas, 
and then goes into Scriptural arguments against the 
presumptions of the Papacy. He continues by asking 
what is the cause of all these intolerable, and no more to 
be suffered, abominations? Truly, even the ignorance 
of the Scriptures of God. For how had it else been 
possible that such blindness should have come into the 
world, had not the light of God’s word been extinct ? 
“ How could men, I say, have been so far from the true 
service of God, or from the due obedience of their Prince, 
had not the law of God been clean shut up, depressed, 
cast aside, and put out of remembrance? As it was before 
the time of that noble king, Josias, and as it hath been also 
among us, until your Grace’s time, by whose righteous 


THE FIRST COMPLETE ENGLISH BIBLE Leg, 


administration (through the merciful goodness of God) 
it is now found again.” And, later on, he says, in words 
which rise even to eloquence—‘ As false doctrine is the 
original cause of all evil plagues and destruction, so is 
the true executing of the law of God, and the preaching 
of the same, the mother of all godly prosperity. The 
only Word of God, I say, 1s the cause of all felicity; it 
bringeth all goodness with it; it bringeth learning; it 
gendereth understanding; it causeth good works; it 
maketh children of obedience; briefly, it teacheth all 
estates their office and duty. Seeing, then, that the 
Scriptures of God teacheth us everything sufficiently, 
both what we ought to do, and what we ought to leave 
undone; whom we are bound to obey, and whom we 
should not obey ; therefore, I say, it causeth all prosperity, 
and setteth everything in frame, and, where it is taught 
and known, it lighteneth all darknesses, comforteth all 
sore hearts, leaveth no*poor man unhelped, suffereth 
nothing amiss unamended, letteth no prince be disobeyed, 
permitteth no heresy to be preached, but reformeth all 
things; and why, because it is given by inspiration of 
God, therefore is it ever bringing profit and fruit, by 
teaching, by improving, by amending and reforming all 
them that will receive it, to make them perfect and meet 
unto all good works.” In the close of this dedication 
certainly some strong language is used in reference to 
the part Henry had taken in opening the long-shut 
Word of God, but there is nothing which merits the 
charge of fulsomeness. Coverdale greatly rejoices that 
the Bible is no longer “clene shut up, depressed, cast 
aside, and put out of remembrance.” 

There is plenty of strong language also about the 
Pope. He is called the blind bishop of Rome, and blind 
Balaam. It is said that his hypocrites have taught 
people, instead of obeying prince and father and mother, 
to “step over father and mother’s belly to enter into 
his painted religion.” Strong language, and somewhat 
coarse! But we must remember that these were times 
when a king could be reminded of his “proper place,” 


158 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


by being told by a priest, “your God is in my hand, and 
your wife at my feet.” Coverdale is fond of alliteration, 
and speaks of “the Pope’s pestilent picking of Peter's 
pence out of the kingdom,” and his “deceiving with his 
devilish doctrines.” He says that he uses “penance” 
and “repentance” indifferently, to show that the 
Reformers do not abhor the word “penance.” Only 
it must be interpreted properly, being naught but “a 
very repentance, amendment, or conversion to God, and 
an unfeigned new creature in Christ, and to live according 
to God’s law.” In fact, Coverdale prefers to use different 
renderings; and says that more understanding of the 
Scriptures comes through various translations than any 
other way. The reader is by no means to be deceived 
by diverse expressions. And often there is no more 
diversity than between fourpence and a groat. Instead 
of cavilling, let the new boon of Scripture be thankfully 
received. He submits his translation to the king, but 
protests that he has neither wrested nor altered one 
word, for the maintenance of any manner of sect. 

With reference to the “fulsomeness,’ Hume says, 
that no prince in Europe, not even the Pope himself in 
his own dominions, where he then united the civil and 
ecclesiastical powers, was possessed of such absolute 
authority as this headstrong Henry vin. All parties 
vied with each other in paying him the most deferential 
submission, knowing that, though frank and generous, as 
Wolsey told Sir William Kingston, “rather than miss or 
want any part of his will, he would endanger the one- 
half of his kingdom.” By this time, Henry had become 
irritable under the least opposition; and then, out came 
his ungovernable temper. 

This being the first complete Bible printed in the 
English tongue, a somewhat particular account of it 
may be interesting to the reader. It was a handsome 
folio, as were all the Bibles at this early date. After 
the first leaf of the text, there follows a large woodcut, 
representing the six days’ work of the creation; the 
chapter beginning with a large flourished letter, fourteen 


Olde and Clow Teftament , faith- 
fallyand truly tranflated out 
of Doucheand Latyn 
in to Englifhe. 


MD KXRVS 


re thelavres that 
thou Mal before them i 
si —— S.poul Nl. Ceffa.in. 
a: epee na.thar the woide of Bos mate 
paue fre we and be glorified.zcf. 
auf Col Il. 
Letrbe cat of Chay orwell in you pen 
'g teouflyin all mypbome tcf. : 
Fofue 1. 
4 See mot he boke of thia lame depatte 
@ out ae thy mouth, bat eee thofelfe 


18,¢h¢ holy Geripene of chs 





TITLE TO THE FIRST ENTIRE ENGLISH BIBLE—COVERDALE’S, 1585. 
159 


ae 
nia 





THE FIRST COMPLETE ENGLISH BIBLE. 161 


lines of letterpress in depth. At the end of Deuteronomy 
is a folded map, headed “the description of the lande of 
Promes, called Palestine, Canaan, or the Holy Lande.” 
The third part ends with Solomon’s song, called 
“Solomon’s Ballettes”; and is followed by a title-page 
saying, “All the prophetes in Englishe. Esay to 
Malachy.” Then comes the “Apocripha, the bokes 
and treatises, which, amonge the fathers of olde are 
not reckoned to be of like authoritie with the other 
bokes of the Byble. Nather are they founde in the 
Canon of the Hebrue.” In a wooden border, the cuts 
of the four corners being the four Evangelists, is “the 
New Testament, the Gospell of St. Matthew, etce., to 
Revalacion of St. Jhon.” The lower half of this page 
contains “a faute escaped in prynting the New Testa- 
ment.” And the imprint is as follows:—“prynted in 
the yeare of our Lord MpDxxxy., and fynished the 
4th day of October.” On folio forty-one is a large cut 
of the Tabernacle and its contents, which is repeated. 
Each of the Gospels has a figure of the Evangelist pre- 
fixed; that of St. Luke being repeated in the Acts of 
the Apostles; and that of St. John in his first Epistle, 
and in the Revelation. To most of the Epistles of St. 
Paul there is a cut showing the Apostle seated at a 
desk writing, with a sword across his left arm, and a 
weavers’ loom to the left hand. A synopsis precedes 
every book. There are also numerous quaint cuts, some 
of them being frequently repeated. 

The prologue to the whole is of considerable length. 
Coverdale praises the Fathers for their love of God’s 
word, and their constant quotation of it in their works, 
But, as soon as the Bible was cast aside, he says, and 
every one began to write what came into his own head, 
then grew the darkness of men’s traditions. And this 
is the reason we have so many writers who seldom make 
any mention of the Scriptures; or, if they do, the 
reference is “so farre out of season, and so wide from 
ye purpose, that a man may well perceave how that 
they never sawe the oryginall.” He expresses his opinion 


Il 


162 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


that, instead of several translations being harmful, there 
is more good to be got by comparing them together than 
from the glosses of sophistical doctors. This opinion 
has been acted upon in modern times; the English 
Hexapla being its product, where Coverdale’s saying is 
printed on the title-page. A collation of the most 
important English Bibles was also made in 1847, by 
Mr. C. Roger of Dundee, and published by Messrs. Bagster 
& Sons. 

Coverdale sometimes hits the meaning better than 
our present Authorised Version; as, for instance, in 
Proy. xxiii. 16, 17, our Version says, “ Let not thine heart 
envy sinners; but be thou in the fear of the Lord all the 
day long. For surely there is an end; and thine ex- 
pectation shall not be cut off” Coverdale renders the 
latter verse thus—‘“For the end is not yet come, and 
thy patient abiding shall not be in vain.” He is, how- 
ever, very paraphrastic, as, for instance, he translates 
the well-known verse, Prov. iv. 7, thus—“ The chief point 
of wisdom is that thou be willing to obtain wisdom, and 
before all thy good to get thee understanding.” Some- 
times the semi-paraphrase is very simple and powerful, 
as witness the following :—“The same preacher was not 
wise alone, but taught the people knowledge also. He 
gave good hede, sought out the grounde, and set forth 
many parables. His diligence was to fynde out accept- 
able wordes, right Scripture, and the wordes of trueth. 
For the wordes of the wyse are like prickes and nales 
that go thorough, wherewith men are kept together, for 
they are given of one Shepherd onely. Therefore, beware 
(my sonne) that above these thou make thee not many 
and innumerable bookes, nor take dyverse doctrynes in 
hande, to weery thy body withal. Let us heare the 
conclucion of all thynges; feare God and kepe His com- 
mandements, for that toucheth all men; for God shall 
judge all workes and secrete thynges, whether they be 
good or evill” (Kccles. xii. 9-14). 

Mr. Edgar thinks the term “ Roundheads,” so familiar 
a century later, may have been suggested by Coverdale’s 


THE FIRST COMPLETE ENGLISH BIBLE 163 


Version. The passage is in 2 Sam. xiv. 25, which he 
renders :— 

In all Israel there was not so fayre and so marvuelous 
goodly aman as Absalom. From the sole of his fote unto 
the toppe of his heade there was not one blemysh in him, 
and when his head was rounded (that was commonly every 
yeare, for it was too heavy for him, so that it must needs 
have been rounded) the heer of his heade weyed two hun- 
dred sicles after the Kynges weight. 

Some other quaint renderings are :— 

Psalm 51. '7.—Reconcile me with Isope, and I shal be 
clene. 

Amos 7. 9—The hye Hilchapels off Isaac must be 
layd waiste. 

Acts 11. 29.—The disciples concluded to sende an hand 
reachinge unto the brethren that were in J ewry. 

Rom. 9. 4—Unto whom pertayneth the childshippe.* 

All Tyndale’s Prologues and Notes are omitted by 
Coverdale, as these had given the chief offence to the 
Catholics. The controverted passage in 1 John v., “There 
are three that bear record in heaven,” is placed within 
a parenthesis, as are generally the additions to the 
original. 





* Bibles of England. 


CHAPTER XIV 


FRESH LIGHT ON THE COVERDALE BIBLE 


“Honours best thrive 
When rather from our acts we them derive, 
Than our foregoers.” 
SHAKESPEARE. 


Tue only perfect copy, including the title-page, now 
known of this first printed English Bible, belongs to the 
Earl of Leicester, and was discovered in 1846, concealed 
under the false bottom of an old oak chest, in Holkham 
Hall, near Walsingham. The book was formerly thought 
to have been printed by C. Froschover, and the woodeuts 
executed by Hans 8. Beham ; to Froschover being assigned 
the first place amongst the eminent printers of the day. 
He carried on a successful trade, indeed, in this new art 
of printing, for half a century. Mr. Fry, however, to 
whom so much is owing in Biblical investigations, threw 
doubt upon this, in his Bible by Coverdale; and 
equally doubted the title of Christian Egenolph, of 
Frankfort, to be considered the printer. Mr. Batfield 
inclines to him, indeed, and says that the book was 
printed in the usual square Secretary Gothic type of 
theological books executed abroad at this period, the 
letters being angular Swiss or German. He says that 
the dedication and address to the Christian reader were 
afterwards added, by a London printer; and that there 
are 568 leaves, and 112 woodcuts.* 

The truth has now probably been discovered, by Mr. 
Henry Stevens, F.S.A., and is given at length in his 
Bibles in the Caaton Exhibition, published in 1878. 

* First English Bible, B. Batfield, M.A., F.R.S. 
164 


FRESH LIGHT ON THE COVERDALE BIBLE 16s 


Mr. Stevens had spent twenty-five years, in “mousing 
and groping among old books of all sorts,” as he tells 
us, when he came upon the truth, apparently by accident. 
His researches and comparisons of type, cuts, paper, 
water-marks, ink, and other printers’ et-cetera, had all 
been vain and unprofitable. So that, he says, there was 
a thrill of delight when “the secret dropped into our 
open mouth of its own mere ripeness.” To Jacob van 
Meteren, of Antwerp, must now be ascribed the honour 
of having printed the first entire English Bible that ever 





HOLKHAM HALL, SEAT OF THE EARL OF LEICESTER, WHERE 
THE UNIQUE COVERDALE BIBLE IS PRESERVED. 


saw the light. He may have assisted also in its trans- 
lation, being a young man of position, and a good linguist. 
In his youth he had been taught the art of printing. 
And in his manhood he manifested great zeal in pro- 
ducing, at Antwerp, a translation of the Bible into 
English, “for the advancement of the kingdom of Christ 
in England,” says his biographer; “and, for this purpose, 
he employed a certain learned scholar, named Miles 
Coverdale.” 

Jacob van Meteren was connected with the family of 
Abraham Ortelius, the geographer. After the printing, 


166 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


Meteren found a very unexpected impediment to his 
publishing the complete bound work in Antwerp. The 
London bookbinders and stationers, finding the market 
filled with foreign books, usually at a cheap price, 
complained in 1533, and petitioned for relief. In con- 
sequence, an Act was passed, compelling foreigners to 
sell their editions entire, in sheets, to some London 
stationer; so that, at all events, the binders should not 
suffer. This new law came into operation at the begin- 
ning of the very year which saw the publication of this 
first printed English Bible. Consequently, Jacob van 
Meteren came to London to sell the edition; and he sold 
it probably to James Nycholson, of Southwark, who 
bought not only the entire edition, but the woodcuts, 
and probably the punches and type; so that all the 
copies of this Coverdale Bible have appeared in English 
binding. 

Let, then, the name of Jacob van Meteren, of Antwerp, 
henceforth be held in honour in the records of “this art 
preservative of all arts.” Towards the end of the reign 
of Edward v1. finding Antwerp no longer safe, on account 
of their religion, Meteren and his wife Ottilia resolved to 
remove to London, where they were invited by the king 
to settle. But, on their passage, the ship that bore them 
was attacked by a French eruiser, burned, and sunk. 

Still further light has been thrown on the matter 
recently, however, by Mr. W. J. C. Moens, who has 
reprinted a document from an original copy in the old 
box of the Dutch Reformed Church, in Austin Friars. 
This was an affidavit, signed by Emanuel van Meteren, 
dated 28th May 1609, to the effect that he was brought 
to England in 1550 by his father, a furtherer of the 
Reformed Religion, and he that caused the first Bible 
“at his costes, to be Englisshed by Mr. Myles Coverdale, 
in Andwarp,-the which his father, with Mr. Edward 
Whytchurch, printed both in Paris and in London.” * 
This agrees with the statement of Simeon Ruytinck, on 
which Mr. Stevens relies; except the place of printing, 

* Registers of the Dutch Reformed Church, Austin Friars, 1884, p. 14. 








ROSCHOVERI 


fog ke Pep Pg ete ERP LAL LL EE PELL (F 





f ‘ # 
eet SPS E ULE. 


POEL A IAI 








FRESH LIGHT ON THE COVERDALE BIBLE 169 


and the addition of the name Whitchurch, which may 
be a mistaken reference to the folio Bible of 1537. Mr. 
Stevens thought that Coverdale was simply, “the best 
proof-reader and corrector of his age.” But it is probable 
that the translation was executed by him, at Antwerp, 
and that Van Meteren got the volume printed by some 
other printer, who may have been Froschover, of Zurich. 
Nycholson seems to have bought the copies for sale in 
England.* 

The woodcuts and type were certainly not those used by 
Egenolph, of Frankfort. Dr. Ginsburg says, that he has 
in fact complete typographical proof that the Bible was 
printed by Froschover; and that Stevens’s theory, 
about Jacob van Meteren being the real translator, and 
Coverdale only the corrector of the press, will not do at 
all. It is likely, however, that Meteren found the money 
for some of these early Bibles.f 

Certain it is, that Henry vu. received the Bible, and 
put it into the hands of the bishops, to peruse. After 
some delays, they redelivered the book; and, being asked 
by the king what they thought of it, they replied that it 
contained many faults. ‘“ Well!” said the king, “but are 
there any heresies maintained thereby ?” They answered 
that there were no heresies that they could find. “If 
there be no heresies,” said the king, “then, in God’s 
name, let it go abroad among our people.” For, in spite 
of the early action Henry had taken against the new 
doctrines, a change had been passing in his mind, as well 
as in the current of feeling around him. The tract, 
called the Supplication of Beggars, already referred to, 
had something to do with this, no doubt. It was 
scattered about the streets of London at night; and, the 
king’s curiosity being excited, by the stories of its being 
“a marvel to hear of,’ he asked a merchant, named 
Elliot, to get one, and read it to him. It contained an 
attack on all the fraternity of Monks, Friars, and 
Pardoners; whose grasping spirit threatened to swallow 


* Leslie Stephen. 
+ Westcott, 3rd edition. 


170 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


up the whole country. “This is why,” it said, “ they will 
not let the New Testament go abroad in your mother 
tongue; lest men should espy that they, by their cloaked 
hypocrisy, do translate thus fast your kingdom into their 
hands.” The king listened patiently to every word ; and, 
when all was finished, said, as we have already seen, “Ifa 
man would pull down an old stone wall, and begin at the 
lower part, the upper part thereof might chance to fall 
on his head.” Then, locking up the tract in his desk, 
he commanded all present not to disclose to any one that 
he had seen it. 

The Apocryphal Books, with the exception of Baruch, 
were separated from the rest, with the following title :— 
“ Apocripha; the Bokes and Treatises which, amonge the 
fathers of olde, are not reckened to be of like authoritie 
with the other bokes of the Byble, nather are they founde 
in the Canon of the Hebrue.’ Coverdale hesitated 
somewhat as to making the separation; and the prologue 
speaks doubtfully of their authority. But it required 
some courage, at that time, to make the distinction at all. 
And he was the first to do so, amongst the English 
Reformers. The distinction was made more decisively in 
Matthews’ Bible, where they appear preceded by a 
valuable prologue, which formed part of Olivetan’s Bible. 
And all the subsequent Protestant Bibles, down to the 
Authorised Version, continued to make them distinct from 
the inspired portion. 

There was, however, either some neglect, or unavoidable 
delay, with regard to the sanction of this first printed 
English Bible, so that it was never properly sanctioned 
by either king or Parliament. The true history of the 
matter is given, at length, in the Memorials of Myles 
Coverdale, published by Bagster, in 1838. We may say, 
in a few words, that Cranmer and Cromwell, being 
strongly in favour of the vernacular Scriptures. being 
given to the people, their general principles were also 
heartily promoted by Queen Anne Boleyn. When she 
was beheaded, on the 19th May 1536, everything came 
into contempt, for the time, which her name recalled, 


FRESH LIGHT ON THE COVERDALE BIBLE 171 


The sanction already agreed upon, of Coverdale’s Bible, 
was withdrawn; and nothing more was done in the 
matter. Henry, wavering very much on the subject, had 
only given his consent on the intercession of Queen 
Anne; and Foxe’s copy of the injunctions in its favour 
was taken from one which was actually drawn up 
though never issued and acted upon. When the Queen’s 
head fell, the injunctions were suppressed, and new ones 
published in their place. 

A number of editions followed, however, without any 
formal sanction. And one of them, three years later, does 
not speak much for the honesty of the printer, Nycholson, 
of Southwark. There were so many blunders in it, that 
Coverdale remonstrated with him, and wished the copies 
bearing his name to be called in. Whereupon, Nycholson 
at once put to press another edition, of the same form 
and type, only substituting for Coverdale’s the name of 
Johan Hollybushe. Undoubtedly, this first Bible was 
patronised, not only by Cranmer and Cromwell, but by 
Henry himself, though there was a good deal of vacil- 
lation on his part. We find Grafton, the printer, 
complaining, later on, that a post had come, ordering 
them to print, not “cum privilegio,’ but “ad imprimen- 
dum solum”; simply a license to sell what is set forth, 
without any evidence that it is the king’s mind to set it 
forth. This letter concludes by hoping that the bishops 
will be as ready to read, as other men are to put the 
sacred writings forth. “ For it is now seven years since 
the Bishops promised to translate and set forth the Bible, 
and as yet they have no leisure.” * 

Cranmer had much the same view of the small help to 
be obtained from the Bishops. Writing to Cromwell 
from Forde, a seaside retreat, a little way off Canterbury, 
and now a ruin for the occasional tourist from Herne Bay 
to explore, he asks him to obtain from the king, if he can, 
that the Bible which he sends may be sold and read of 
every person, without danger of any Act heretofore to 
the contrary, until such time as the Bishops shall set 

* State Papers, vol. i. 1538. 


172 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


forth a better, which will not be, in his judgment, till a 
day after doomsday. He encourages him, therefore, to 
suffer some snubs, slanders, lies, and reproaches for the 
same; which will be one day requited altogether. 

Cranmer had been made Archbishop in 1533; and, as 
early as December, 1534, at a meeting of Convocation, 
it was agreed to request the king that a translation of 
the Scriptures should be made. In 1536 Cromwell's 
injunction was issued, for the whole Bible, in Latin and 
English, to be laid in the Choir. Coverdale’s Bible was 
the only one then extant; and consequently it may, in 
a sense, be regarded as the first Authorised Version. 
Matthew’s Bible, however, to which we must next turn, 
was taken up by Cranmer, and he procured its full 
authorisation. It is probable, therefore, that Coverdale’s 
never came into use in the Churches ; though his New 
Testament was printed from time to time.* Nycholson, 
of Southwark, printed it during the same year that 
Tyndale’s New Testament, at last, got published in 
London.t 

Coverdale’s Bible has been called the Treacle Bible ; 
Jeremiah viii. 22 being rendered, “Is there no treacle at 
Gilead?” also xlvi. 11,“Goe up unto Gilead, and bring 
treacle”; though many Bibles, in Henry vu. and Eliza- 
beth’s reigns, repeated the word. Dr. Geddes preferred 
this version of Coverdale’s to the Authorised. And there 
are certainly some very idiomatic renderings; of which 
we give a few :— 

Psalm xe. 10.—The days of our age are three score 
years and ten. 

Isaiah xlviii. 19.—Thy seed shall be like as the sand 
of the sea, and the fruit of thy body like the gravel-stones 
thereof. 

Job xix. 18—yYea, the very desert fools despise 
me. 

Proverbs xvi. 28.—He that is a blabbe of his tongue 
maketh division. 


* See 4A Plea for Revision, T. K. Abbott, M.A. 
+ By Berthelet. See Quarterly Review, vol. cxxviii. 


FRESH LIGHT ON THE COVERDALE BIBLE 173 


Jeremiah xxii. 1.—Graven upon the edge of your altars, 
with a pen of iron, and with an adamant claw. 

Exodus xx. 14.—Thou shalt not breake wedlocke. 

Also, the dove returns with an olive leaf “in her nebb. 
David's “slaverings” run down his beard; their widows 
are neglected in ‘the daily “hand- reachinge” ; the earth 
shall “give a great crack”; and, he “w asteth his brayne” 


in foolish questions, 


CHAPTER XV 
COVERDALE’S LATER HISTORY AND OTHER WORKS 


‘“©What have we to do with time but fill it up with labour.” 
O, W. Homes. 


CovERDALE had a very chequered career. We shall 
meet with him again; but we may here complete the 
chief biographical details about him. After Cromwell’s 
execution (July 28, 1540), and Barnes’s, he went to 
Germany, and became the pastor of a church at Bergzabern, 
near Strasburg; where he married the sister-in-law of Dr. 
M‘Alpine, who helped to translate the first Danish Bible. 
He returned to England when Edward VI. came to the 
throne, and became one of his chaplains, and Almoner to 
the Queen Dowager, Catherine Parr, writing to Fagius 
from Windsor Castle, 21st October 1548. He preached at 
her funeral, in 1548, when he warned the people that the 
offerings then made were for the benefit of the poor, and 
the honour of the clergy, “not anything to profit the 
dead.” 

In 1551 Coverdale became Bishop of Exeter, succeed- 
ing Voysey, who resigned at last. But, on the acces- 
sion of Queen Mary, he was deposed, imprisoned, and 
banished. A man of such prominence so long, he would 
not have escaped death, but for the intercession of the 
King of Denmark, Christian 1., whose chaplain was 
Coverdale’s brother-in-law. An evasive answer was 
returned to the king’s first letter ; but he wrote again, and 
saved Coverdale’s life. It took a year to get him released 
from prison, on condition of his leaving the kingdom. 
Queen Mary alleged that he was in prison for a debt 


due to her in connection with his bishopric. The king 
174 


COVERDALE’S LATER HISTORY 175 


availed himself of this to urge his release, as the more 
reasonable, inasmuch as he had cleared his accounts. It 
is interesting to see one translator helping another; his 
brother-in-law, the King of Denmark’s chaplain, having 
been one of the translators of the recent Danish Version 
of the Seriptures. 

Coverdale then lived for a while at Wesel, in Friesland, 
as pastor of an English congregation. After that he 
went again to Bergzabern; and finally to Geneva, where 
he was quite content to share in the production of the 
Genevan Bible; thus having a hand in four memorable 
versions. When Mary died, he returned to England 
again; but was not reinstated in his bishopric, as he 
had strong objections to the vestments still worn. From 
1564 to 1566 he was Rector of St. Magnus the Martyr, 
London Bridge, but he was poor at the time of his 
appointment, after all his continental exile and wander- 
ings, and wrote to Sir William Cecil that he might be 
excused the first-fruits. He says that he is not likely to 
live over a year; and, “if now, poor old Myles may be 
provided for, I shall think it as good as a feast.” He 
preached after he had resigned his living, and Strype 
says that many ran after him. He died eighty-one years 
of age, even in those troubled times, in February 1569, 
and was attended to his grave in St. Bartholomew’s 
Church, behind the Exchange, by vast crowds of those 
who admired and loved him.  ~ 

Coverdale turned some of the Psalms into verse, and 
they were published with musical notes. We may give 
a single specimen (Psalm cxxxvii. 1, 2). 


“At the ryvers of Babilon, 
there sat we down ryght hevely ; 
Even when we thought upon Sion, 
we wept together sorofully ; 
for we were in soch hevynes, 
yt we forgat al our merynes, 
and left of all our sport and playe. 
On the wilye trees yt were therby, 
We hanged up our harpes truly, 
And morned sore both night and day.” 


176 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


This is amongst the earliest, if not the very earliest, 
attempts at a metrical version of the Psalms in our 
language. According to modern standards, it would only 
be called an attempt, but they soon became common 
after this. Queen Elizabeth versed the 25th Psalm ; and 
Bacon’s were published under the name of Theodore 
Basille. 

A memorial tablet is erected to Coverdale, in the 
Church of St. Magnus, of which he was Rector. He was 
a faithful and painstaking man in all he put his hand to ; 
and, during the short time of his bishopric at Exeter, 
Vowell says that he “most worthily did perform the 
office committed to him; he preached continually on 
every Holy Day; he was hospitable, liberal, sober, 
and modest; and his wife a most sober, chaste, and 
godly matron.” * Coverdale knew German and Latin 
well, some Greek and Hebrew, and a little French. He 
was fairly read in theology; and, though not inclined to 
be a martyr, was a pious, conscientious, generous, and 
thoroughly honest and good man. As life went on, he 
became a stronger Puritan; and the Act of Uniformity 
brought down his reverend hairs with sorrow to the 
grave, A catalogue of twenty-eight works, with which he 
had more or less to do, is given by Leslie Stephen. And 
many of these were edited for the Parker Society, by the 
Rey. George Pearson, B.D., in two volumes, The 
authenticity of the portrait given is doubtful. 

Many of Coverdale’s works are translations; and 
amongst them is Luther’s exposition of Psalm 23. Very 
touching it is, in parts, and Coverdale would have a 
strong fellow-feeling with the great Reformer, when he 
exclaims, in his comment on verse 5, “Thou preparest a 
table before me against mine enemies.” “After this 
manner have I also, through the grace of God, behaved 
myself these eighteen years, I have ever suffered mine 
enemies to be wroth, to threaten, to blaspheme and 
condemn me, to cast their heads still against me, to 
imagine many evil ways, and to use divers unthirsty 


* Catalog of Bishops of Exceter, 1584. 


COVERDALE’S LATER HISTORY ONG, 


points. I have suffered them to take wondrous great 
thought, how they might destroy me and mine, yea, God’s 
doctrine. Moreover, I have been glad and merry, and 
not greatly regarded their raging and madness, but have 
holden me by the staff of comfort, and had recourse to the 
Lord’s table; that is, I have committed the cause unto 
God, wherein He hath so led me that I have obtained all 
my will and mind. And, in the meantime, have I done 
little or nothing, but spoken unto Him a Paternoster, or 
some little Psalm. This is all my harness, wherewith I 
have defended me hitherto; not only against mine 
enemies, but also (through the grace of God) brought so 
much to pass that, when I look behind me, and call to 
remembrance how it hath stood in the Papistry, I do 
even wonder that the matter is come so far. I would 
never have thought that the tenth part should have come 
to pass as it is now before our eyes. He that hath begun 
it shall bring it well to an end; yea, though nine Hells 
or Worlds were set on an heap together against it. Let 
every Christian man, therefore, learn this science ; namely, 
that he hold him by this staff and sheephook, and resort 
unto this table, when heaviness or any other misfortune 
is at hand. And go shall he doubtless receive strength 
and comfort against everything that oppresseth him,” 

Another of Coverdale’s works is the Confutation of 
Standish, in defence of Dr. Barnes’s Protestation, They 
had been great friends at Cambridge, in the days when 
they met at the “White Horse,” as we have seen. This 
work occupies more than a hundred pages in the large 
octavo edition of his works published by the Parker 
Society. Here he indignantly repels the charge of anti- 
nomianism, and exclaims, “The more I look upon your 
words, the more I wonder at your shameless slandering 
of the truth.” Later on, he says, “Faith, then, neither 
destroyeth penance nor good works; but is the womb that 
beareth them both.” Penance is constantly used where 
now we should say Repentance. 

Coverdale exults in the conviction that, if Barnes were 
martyred, his words would prevail; and quotes his own 


12 


178 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


exclamation: “ When I am dead, the sun and the moon, 
the stars and the elements, water and fire, yea, and also 
the stones, shall defend this cause, sooner than the verity 
should perish.” 

As to the outcry, that without the Church is no salva- 
tion; Coverdale says there are two Churches. * There is 
a congregation, church, and multitude, of froward and 
wicked doers, which not only gather themselves together, 
like roaring lions, fat bulls, wanton calves, and cur dogs, 
against Christ, as the 22nd Psalm complaineth; but also 
make laws, constitutions, statutes, ordinances, and tra- 
ditions, against God’s word; whereby it cometh to pass 
that, though they boast never so much of God’s service, 
yet all is to them in vain, as the prophet, and Christ 
Himself, doth testify. Another Church is there, which 
is the holy spouse, congregation, and company, of them 
that are of the fellowship of Christ, and walk not in 
darkness, but in the truth, having all their sins cleansed 
by His blood. This Church continueth in the Apostles’ 
doctrine, runneth not out from the heavenly fellowship of 
Christ and His members, distributeth the Sacraments 
duly and truly, ceaseth not from praying and well-doing, 
are of one mind and soul, and are glad to help one 
another. The men of this Church pray in all places, 
lifting up pure hands. In this Church is free pardon, 
and remission of sins for all true penitents.” 

As for the charge of heresy perpetually brought against 
the Reformers; the real heretics are those who have 
departed from the Word of God. The heretics whom St. 
Paul prophesieth of (1 Tim. iv.) are such as, through their 
devilish doctrines, forbid men to live in holy wedlock, 
and command them to abstain from the meats which 
God hath created to be received of Christian men with 
thanksgiving. The heretics of whom he speaketh in 
2 Tim. iii. are such as, among all other vices, are covetous, 
boasters, proud, cursed speakers, false accusers, riotous, 
fierce, despisers of them that are good, traitors, having 
a shine of godly living, but denying the power thereof, 
resist the truth, being men of corrupt minds, and lewd 


COVERDALE’S LATER HISTORY 179 


in things pertaining to the faith. The heretics that he 
speaketh of in Acts xx. are such grievous wolves as spare 
not Christ’s flock, and speak perverse doctrine to draw 
disciples after them. The heretics whom St. Peter 
speaketh of are such mockers as regard not God’s 
promise; and are not only unlearned, but algo unstable, 
and pervert Paul’s Epistles, as they do the other Serip- 
tures also to their own damnation. The heretics whom 
St. Jude speaketh of are such as, among other errors, are 
craftily crept into the Church, and turn the grace of God 
into wantonness, and deny God, the only Lord, and our 
Lord Jesus Christ; even such dreamers as defile the 
flesh, despise rulers, speak evil of the things that they 
know not; and, in such things as they know to be 
natural, do corrupt themselves as beasts, following the 
way of Cain, the error of Balaam for lucre’s sake, and 
the treason of Core, feeding themselves, making feasts of 
other men’s kindness, and having men in great rever- 
ence because of advantage. Have you not now well 
described the Papistry, and the unholy pillars of your 
unholy mother, the Church of the wicked? We thank 
you for pointing us to those Scriptures. We know you 
now, better than we did afore. 

Much was made of Augustine’s words, that he had not 
believed the gospel, but for the Church which gave it him. 
Franciscus Maronis, in the fourteenth century, with many 
others, had given this a meaning which Augustine never 
thought of, as if the Church could make new articles, by 
her own authority ; and that people were bound to believe 
them, though not grounded in Scripture. Coverdale deals 
plainly with this, as his manner is; and, after showing 
how full of error Manicheus was, against whom Augustine 
was then writing; and that, in confuting him, he brought 
no other doctrine but the Scripture; he sums up: “By 
the circumstance, now, of Augustine’s words, it is 
evident,—first, that he would believe no such doctrine 
as men brought up of their own heads; secondly, that 
he would believe no uncertain doctrine, nor that he knew 
not to be true; thirdly, that the occasion which moved 


180 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


him to believe the gospel, was the whole consent and 
authority of the universal Church. Now, like as he 
reporteth not of them, that they preached any other 
doctrine unto him, save the gospel; so saith he not that 
he believed any other learning, save only rie 

Coverdale also translated The Defence of a certain Poor 
Christian Man, written in Germany, by “a right ex- 
cellent and noble Prince.” This also is well worth per- 
usal, by those who would know how earnestly men 
contended for the faith once delivered to the saints in 
these days. Terms were constantly abused, and needed 
restoring to their true meaning. With regard to good 
works, after defending the true spiritual ones, the writer 
says: “Thou sayest we lack good works; but not such as 
come of love, or that Christ shall require of us at the 
Day of Judgment; but, to go a pilgrimage, to set up 
candles before images, to number up what we pray, to 
tell over a prayer of beads, to put difference in clothing, 
in meats, in prayers, in titles or names, where one had 
rather be called a Charter House monk, or a barefoot 
friar, than a Christian man. These, and such like slender 
and childish works, requirest thou of us. Which, though 
one had done them altogether, it were even as much as 
though he had ridden upon a stick, with boys in the 
street.” 

Mr. Fry has printed the 1535 edition of Coverdale’s 
Bibles with a facsimile title from the Marquis of 
Northampton’s copy ; together with another leaf, in fac- 
simile, from the Earl of Leicester’s copy. In 1854 an 
original copy, nearly perfect, sold for £364. 

Grindal was grieved that Coverdale was not made a 
bishop, when he returned to England, on Elizabeth’s 
accession; for, he said, he was in Christ before them 
all. 

As Dr. Cotton says, Coverdale has scarcely had: justice 
done to him in Christopher Anderson’s valuable work. 
Mr. Anderson was a Baptist minister in Edinburgh, and 
followed the Rev. J. Lewis, Vicar of Margate, who was 
the first to draw attention to the great interest attaching 


COVERDALE’S LATER HISTORY 181 


to our own English Bible, except Rev. A. Johnson, M.A., 
Rector of Swarkston, who published a pamphlet on the 
subject in 1730. 

In the Caxton Exhibition, 1877, a number of the 
Coverdale Bibles were shown. And Mr. H. Stevens may 
well say, with regard to the Earl of Leicester’s copy, and 
six others, all placed together—* Let no Englishman or 
American view these without first lifting his hat.” Mr. 
Stevens says that Nycholson, the London printer, to whom 
all was sold, seems to have had as much trouble in 
working off his book as Simmons had in selling Milton’s 
Paradise Lost; if we may judge by the number of new 
titles, and preliminary leaves, found in different copies. 
It is almost demonstrated that there was, originally, no 
dedication to the King. But towards the end of 1535, 
finding the Convocation, Cranmer, Cromwell, and the 
King more propitious towards free Scriptures than they 
had been, Nycholson probably got Coverdale to prepare 
the long and rather obsequious dedication to Henry vutt., 
to pave the way to a Royal Licence. The omission of the 
line—‘“and truly out of Douche and Latyn”—was simply 
a matter of the printer’s taste and convenience; Coverdale 
having more fully explained his authorities in his Epistles 
to the king and to the reader. Neither of the later 
editions, appearing directly afterwards, had the king’s 
licence. Most likely, when Grafton obtained it for the 
Matthew Bible of 1537, a similar favour was granted to 
Nycholson, though it was too late. “Set forth with the 
Kinge’s most gracious license” appears, however, in 
Nycholson’s later quarto. 

Coverdale appears to have had no monument as yet, 
but he is one of the eight immortals in the great window 
of the exquisite library at the London Guildhall. 

I am indebted to Lord Peckover for the following 
quaint renderings from this memorable version :— 

Isaiah 24, 9.—The beer shall be bitter. 

Psalm 9. 20.—O Lord, set a scholemaster over them. 

Proy. 27. 22.—Though thou shouldest bray a foole 
with a pestill in a mortar like otemeel. 


182 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


Psalm 14, 1.—The foolish bodyes saye in their hertes, 
Tush! there is no God. 

Prov. 23. 21.—He that is given to moch slepe shall go 
with a ragged cote. 

Gen. 39. 2.—And the Lorde was with Joseph in so 
moch that he became a luckye man. 


CHAPTER XVI 


THE FIRST ENGLISH BIBLE FULLY AUTHORISED— 
MATTHEW'S BIBLE 


“* Tf life preserved for wife and children’s sake,— 
_If bliss which none but husbands, fathers, feel,— 
If worldly woe escaped, and worldly weal 
Enjoyed, lands, houses, goods, with all to take 
Captive the waverer,—had had power to shake 
Thy firm resolve, and quench thy fervent zeal,— 
Rogers, the Church had lost her earliest seal, 
Stamped in thy heart’s blood on the burning stake. 
But nobler thought was thine, and loftier scope, 
The tempter’s vile allurements to withstand 
Victorious ; thine, the Christian’s deathless hope ; 
The Christian’s faith: and thus thy native land 
Salutes in thee her harvest’s firstling crop— 
In thee the Stephen of her martyred band.” 
Dr. MANT, Bishop of Down and Connor. 


WE have seen that Tyndale’s work was imperfect, and 
that Coverdale’s was not fully authorised, but very 
shortly after Tyndale died, praying, “Lord, open the 
King of England’s eyes!” an English Bible was 
sanctioned both by archbishop and king, It was 
executed by John Rogers, one of Tyndale’s converts, 
who had been chaplain to the English congregation at 
Antwerp, and had renounced the errors of the Church 
of Rome. He took up the work where Tyndale left it 
off, in 2 Chronicles, and revised Coverdale’s version for 
the rest of the Old Testament and the Apocrypha. His 
only original translation appears to have been the prayer 
of Manasses in the Apocrypha. For the New Testament 
he took Tyndale’s 1535 edition, revised the whole, 
and added so many notes that his work is almost a 


Commentary. 
183 


184 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


He only knew Tyndale a short time, but rapidly 
developed an ardent Protestantism. Tyndale was 
arrested in the spring of 1535, and Rogers had only 
arrived as chaplain to the merchant adventurers at the 
end of 1534. He proved the thoroughness of his con- 
version, however, like Luther, by taking a wife in the 
face of day! She was an Antwerp lady, without money, 
but “richly endowed with virtue and sobriety of life.” 
Soon afterwards Rogers went to Wittenberg, to be the 
minister of a Protestant congregation there. Tyndale 
naturally handed over to him his incomplete translations. 
To conceal himself from the dangers which surrounded 
any one engaged in such labours, he adopted the fictitious 
name of Thomas Matthew, and the book has ever since 
been called Matthew’s Bible. Possibly, however, Collier 
is right when he says that, as Tyndale lay under the 
imputation of unsound opinions, a further reason may 
have been to thus gain more general acceptance for it. 
He could not avoid a similar reputation, however, and 
in Queen Mary’s Council Register, printed in Haynes’s 
State Papers, there is an entry ordering John Rogers 
alias Matthew, to keep his house at Paul’s, as a seditious 
preacher.* Certainly he could speak out, if that was 
what they meant, and he denounced the foul abuse of 
some of the money taken from the monasteries, making 
an outspoken protest before the Privy Council. 

The title was printed in red and black, within an 
elaborate wood engraving: “The Byble which is all the 
Holy Scripture, in whych are contayned the Olde and 
Newe Testament, truly and purely translated by Thomas 
Matthew. LEssaye j ‘Hearchin to ye Heavens and thou 
Earth geave eare: for the Lorde speaketh’ mpxxxvu..” 
At the foot of the page in a large bold letter is found— 
“Set forth with the Kinge’s most graycious lycence.” 

The difference between the Pope and the new Head of 
the Church was thus seen in the most striking manner, 
the one shutting and the other opening. Rogers followed 


* J. H. Blunt, English Bible. 
| John Rogers of Deritend, R. K. Dent. 





JOHN ROGERS, FIRST MARTYR IN QUEEN MARY’S REIGN. 


FROM THE ORIGINAL IN THE HEROOLOGIA. 


185 





THE FIRST ENGLISH BIBLE AUTHORISED 187 


Tyndale very faithfully, but went over every sentence 
himself, having recourse to Hebrew, Greek, Latin, German, 
and English copies. ‘The Prefaces and Notes were largely 
from Martin Luther. There isa table of principal matters, 
a gathering of certain hard words, and explanatory notes 
in the margin which would fill a good-sized volume. 
The whole production, indeed, indicated industry and 
thoroughness, and the table of principal matters extended 
over twenty-six folio pages, and combined the characters 
of a dictionary, a concordance, and a commentary. It 
was of great importance at such a time, as leading to an 
easy comparison of passages against such doctrines as 
the Sacrifice of the Mass; and, as appears by Bonner’s 
Register, when the official prohibition of dangerous books 
was issued, in 1542, it was separated, with the notes, 
from the rest of the volume. It contained also an 
Epistle on the authority of the Apocrypha, extracted 
from the French Bible published in 1535 under the name 
of Olivetan, but really by Calvin.* 

The Apocrypha were retained, indeed, probably in 
accordance with the publisher’s wishes; but though notes 
appear numerously everywhere else, there are none here, 
Rogers took Coverdale’s translation, just as he had left 
it, adding only a slight formal synopsis to each chapter, 
and making his preparatory protest against. the inspiration 
of what he chose to call the “ Hagiographa.” 

Westcott does not accept the identity of John Rogers 
and Thomas Matthew, but thinks that the latter was an 
unknown fellow-labourer. 

The dedication was to the most noble and gracious King 
Henry the Eighth, King of England and of France, Lord 
of Ireland, Defender of the Faith, and under God the chief 
and supreme Head of the Church of England, and in it 
the translator says he was emboldened in his work by 
the way in which the king had suppressed superstition 
and maintained true holiness. He compares the neglect 
of the Old Testament in ancient Jewish times to that of 


* This was also included, almost unaltered, in Cranmer’s Bible of 1540. 
See The Bible in the Church, Westcott. 


188 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


the entire Scriptures of late, and trusts that, as Hezekiah 
and Josiah did honour to them, the King of England 
to-day will equal or surpass them. 

Two short examples, embracing familiar passages, will 
show the variations from the present version, and the 
peculiar orthography of this translation. 


GENESIS. { The fyrst Chapter. 


In the beginnyng God created heauen and erth. The 
erth was voyde and emptye, and darcknesse was vpon the 
depe, & the spirite of God moued vpon the water. 

Than God sayde: let there be lyght: & there was lyght. 
And God sawe the lyght that it was good: & deuyded y° 
lyght from the darcknesse, & called the light the daye, & 
the darcknesse the nyght: and so of the euenyng & 
mornyng was made the fyrst daye. 


JOHN. { The fyrst Chapter. 


In the beginnynge was the worde, & the worde was 
with God: and the worde was God. The same was in the 
beginnynge wyth God. All thinges were made by it, and 
wythout it, was made nothynge that was made. In it was 
lyfe, & the lyfe was the lyght of men, & the lyght shyneth 
in y° darcknes, but the darcknes comprehended it not. 

I am indebted to Lord Peckover for the following 
renderings :— 

» Deut. xxxiv. 7—And yet hys eyes were not dym nor 
his chekes abated. 

Judges v. 12.—Up, up, Debora. Up, up, and synge a 
songe | up Barak and take thy praye. 

1 Sam. iii. 13.—For the wickednesse whych he knoweth 
how his sonnes are ungraciouse | and he was not wroth 
therewith. 

1 Sam. xviii. 6—Women came out of all cyties of Israel 
syngyng and daunsing agaynst Saul | with tymbrelles | 
with joye | and with fydelles. 

2 Kings ix. 30.—Jezebel starched her eyes. 


THE FIRST ENGLISH BIBLE AUTHORISED 189 


Here is a sample of the notes. 2 Kings. ii. 283—the 
mockers of Elisha :— 

“The contempt of godly men, chiefly preachers, is an 
offence most grievous, whose authority ought to be most 
holy and reverent to all the people, whom he that 
receiveth or againsaieth receiveth or rejecteth God. 
Fathers while they correct not the wantonness of their 
children, while they hold them not under nurture, while 
they suffer them to jest and scoff with every man, and let 
them attempt everything unpunished, the Lord punisheth 
them with the children in many ways.” 

Here is another example of the notes :— 

Psalm i—To standin judgment is to win the process, 
and to have sentence pronounced on their sides; as to rob 
judgment is to let the process, and to have sentence 
pronounced against right or truth. So then this text 
meaneth no more but that the wicked shall have such a 
terrible sentence given upon them that they shall not be 
able to abide when the Lord shall come to the general 
judgment; it meaneth not that the wicked shall not 
appear in the judgment.” 

The book was published by Grafton and Whitchurch in 
1537, and forwarded at once to Cranmer. It was really 
a private speculation of Grafton, the printer, and well it 
might be, as book after book was issuing from the press, 
and still the book of God was only “made in Germany.” 

Grafton was a citizen and grocer in London, and a man 
of good family. His publications appear to have ceased 
in 1553, but he wrote some works after that, and 
Grafton’s Chronicle was published in 1569. His 
device was a pun, as was not uncommon in those days, 
though to us the wit seems small. It was a tun, with a 
fruit-tree issuing from the bung-hole, indicating graft tun. 
He was twice master of the Grocers’ Company, was in 
Parliament more than once, and became master of Bride- 
well. In later life, however, he was reduced to poverty, 
and we find him, after 1570, proposing to become a public 
informer. 

Whitchurch appears to have been originally a 


190 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


merchant, and his connection with Grafton was dissolved 
in 1541, his latest extant publication being dated 1560. 
He lived first at the Well and Two Buckets in St. 
Martin’s-le-Grand, and last at the Sun in Fleet Street. He 
married the widow of Cranmer, who survived him. 

Cranmer was very pleased when the book was sent to 
him, and it was through his and Cromwell’s influence 
that it received royal sanction. 

He writes to Cromwell, from his quiet country-house 
at Forde, not far from Herne in Kent, where Ridley was 
vicar, and had the Te Deum in English for the first 
time :— 

“My very singular good Lord—In my most hearty 
wise 1 commend me unto your Lordship. And whereas 
I understand that your Lordship, at my request, hath 
not only exhibited the Bible which I sent unto you, to 
the King’s Majesty, but also hath obtained of His Grace, 
that the same shall be allowed by his authority, to be 
bought and read within this realm; my Lord, for this 
your pains, I give you my most hearty thanks, assuring 
your Lordship you have showed me more pleasure here 
than if you had given me a thousand pounds; and I 
doubt not but that hereby such fruit of good knowledge 
shall ensue, that it shall well appear hereafter what high 
and excellent service you have done unto God and the 
king, which shall so much redound to your honour that, 
besides God’s reward, you shall obtain a_ perpetual 
memory for the same within this Realm. 

At Ford, the 13th day of August 1537, 
Your own boundman ever, 
T. CANTUARIEN.” 

In another letter, at the end of the same month, he 
said that this deed he should hear of at the great Day, 
when all things should be opened and made manifest. 

Grafton wrote to Cromwell the same month, asking to 
have it licensed under the Privy Seal, and later on that 
he should have the sole printing of it. This was because 
the Dutch were so ready to print for mere gain, and did 
it incorrectly. 


CHAPTER XVII 


BISHOP BECKE’S BIBLE 


“Bibles laid open, millions of surprises.” 
HERBERT. 


In 1551 a Bible was published under the name of 
Bishop Becke, which was almost a reprint of Matthew’s. 
It was said of him: 


“A prince of the publicans, a taker of tolls, 
Is become a preacher, a feeder of souls.” 


He published it in a handsome though a cheaper form, 
and dedicated it to the young king, Edward vr, whom he 
lectures on his duties. If people would spare an hour a 
day for reading it, he says, they would soon abandon 
blasphemy, swearing, carding, and dicing; they would 
put away all pride, prodigality, riot, licentious, and dis- 
solute living. 

Tn this Bible, Psalm xci. 5 is translated “ any bugges by 
night.” It has been thought that the translator may 
have meant “bogies,” which perhaps is a little nearer the 
suggestion of terror, though there might be a difference 
of opinion on that. Coverdale’s and Taverner’s also have 
“bugs.” 

My of Becke’s notes are objectionable. They are 
also often very long, and are printed in the same type as 
the text. Those to Matthew vi. occupy nearly one and a 
half columns, and are practically a sermon on the Lord’s 
Prayer. The notes to" Matthew xix. are indecent, and 
there is much abuse of the Church, her doctrine, and her 
clergy. Here is a sample of Annotations which were 
disapproved at the time and never reprinted :— 


IgI 


192 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


1 Pet. iii—“He dwelleth wyth his wyfe according to 
knowledge, that taketh her as a necessarye healper, and 
not as a bonde servaunte or a bonde slave. And yf she 
be not obedient and healpfull unto hym endeavoureth to 
beate the feare of God into her heade, therby she maye 
be compelled to learne her dutie, and to do it.” 

There are a number of woodcuts resembling those in 
Flemish and other Bibles printed about that time, and 
they are explained by such doggerel as the following :— 


“ By the Stars in hys hand we may wel se 
What manner of men our preachers should be.” 


“The open enemye is most oughly in syghte, 
But the wolfe in the Lambe’s skyne doeth all the spight.” 


“ The elect of God onely can singe the songe 
That soundeth on the herte, and not on the tonge.”* 


To return to the original Matthew’s Bible. 

Tyndale had just been martyred and his translation 
condemned and denounced, and yet here it was under the 
highest sanction. For it was practically very much the 
same thing, and it was brought out by his convert and 
friend. Well may Mr. Edgar say: 

“The licensing of Matthew’s Bible was enough to have 
waked the ashes of Tyndale into laughter. Matthew’s 
Bible was just a revised edition of Tyndale’s translations, 
which had been so fiercely denounced, with a new part, 
from Ezra to Malachi, added. How little do some people 
know what they condemn and what they commend.” t 

Before Henry died, however, thirty-one impressions of 
the original Matthew’s Bible had been issued, but no 
reign presents greater contrasts than this. At one time 
it was a criminal offence to teach children the Lord’s 
Prayer in English; at another the entire Bible was 
ordered to be placed in every parish church. It has been 
generally supposed that Henry’s private sentiments were 
in favour of the free circulation of the Scriptures, but his 

* Old Bibles, Dove. | Bibles of England. 


BISHOP BECKE’S BIBLE 193 


chief concern was always to secure and strengthen his 
own absolute authority. He was fickle and capricious, 
continually wavering to and fro, so that the Reformers 
could never reckon on his protection for a single day. 
No man could foretell in the evening what would be the 
royal will and the National Creed the next morning. There 
was a royal proclamation against the writings of Coverdale, 
Tyndale, Luther, and Melanchthon in the last year of his 
reign, which repeated much the same prohibition as had 
been issued in 1539. When the solemn and precise 
Charles v. abdicated, it suited his humour to turn clock- 
maker, and, discovering that scarcely any two clocks went 
exactly alike, he wondered that he had expected all his sub- 
jects to agree. It was Henry vul.’s fixed determination, 
however, to make every one in England agree with him 
both on social and ecclesiastical questions. At the same 
time, as Froude says, no trimmer ever did any great work 
in the world, and offensive in the last degree as many of 
his characteristics were, it was such a man that could 
strike the roots of the Reformation deep into English soil.* 
In estimating him also, let not the bright figure of his 
early days be forgotten. Bright it is as we see him 
in everything the people’s friend ; kneeling with them at 
St. Paul’s and Westminster ; fighting openly at the Tilt ; 
maying at Greenwich with pasteboard Gogs and Magogs ; 
a scholar able to discuss with bishops and priests the 
New Testament of Erasmus; everywhere seen and yet 
never to be trifled with. He was, indeed, such a people’s 
head as England had never had, and has not since 
possessed. And if his later life makes us cry out “O 
mores!” we must also with a special emphasis cry “O 
tempora !” 

However, Bibles became multiplied in spite of the 
fickleness of both monarch and people, and able men 
were raised up to advocate their reading. There is a 
famous story of how honest Hugh Latimer handled a 


* The world owes some of its greatest debts to men from whose very 


memory it recoils, and the worst cause has often been illustrated with the 
most heroic virtue.—STuBBs. 


ES 


194 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


friar at Cambridge in 1529, soon after his conversion. 
The friar, a prior of the Black Friars, called Buckingham, 
preached a sermon in which he attempted to show that 
the Bible was so full of obscurities that it was not safe 
to give it to the people. He said that, when the plough- 
man hears in the New Testament, “No man having put 
his hand to the plough and looking back is fit for the 
kingdom of God,’ he might in panic cease from the 
plough; that the baker might give us no leavened bread 
on hearing that “a little leaven leaveneth the whole 
lump”; and also that the simple man, when he hears 
“if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from 
thee,” might blind himself, and soon the world would be 
filled with beggars. On the same afternoon Latimer 
replied to the friar, who sat right opposite with a 
malicious scowl, anticipating a triumph. But with his 
ready knowledge of the Word of God, the Reformer 
showed the clearness with which its great truths were 
usually revealed, so that he that ran could -read, and 
then, as for the figurative language, he said, it was easily 
understood by the common sense of mankind. “For 
example,” said he, looking full at the friar, “when 
painters picture to us a fox preaching out of a friar’s 
cowl,.none is so mad as to take this to be a fox that 
preacheth, but knows well enough that the painting 
represents what hypocrisy, craft, and subtle dissimula- 
tion leth many times hid in these friars’ cowls, willing 
us to beware of them.” 


CHAPTER. XVII 


HONEST HUGH LATIMER 


“Amid my list of blessings infinite 
Stands this the foremost, that my heart hath bled.” 
Youne. 


Yes, there was some hard hitting in these days, and 
another extract from Latimer is pertinent to our subject. 
It is from the famous Plough Sermon preached in the 
Shrouds of St. Paul’s, and he says, as we have partly seen : 

“Where the devil is resident, and has his plough going, 
then away with books and up with candles; away with 
Bibles and up with beads; away with the light of the 
gospel, and up with the light of candles—yea, at noon- 
day. Where the devil is resident, that he may prevail, 
up with all superstition and idolatry, censing, painting of 
images, candles—a new service of men’s inventing—as 
though man could find a better way to honour God with 
than God Himself hath appointed.” 

It is strong language, but did not the state of the 
country, after so long a night, justify it! Imagine, for 
instance, the following conversation between a vicar and 
his bishop. The vicar is Thomas Forret, Vicar of Dollar, 
whose eyes had been opened after a visit to Cologne, and 
who used to commit three chapters of the Bible to 
memory every day, and repeat them to his servant at 
night. It was in 1538 that his bishop—Crighton (or 
Creighton) of Dunkeld—accused him of “heresy” for 
preaching every Sunday on the Epistle and Gospel for 
the day amongst other things, and when he appeared the 
bishop said, “My joy, Dean Thomas, I am informed 
that you preach the Epistle and Gospel every Sunday 


195 


196 THE BIBLE OF THE: REFORMATION 


to your parishioners. It is too much to preach every 
Sunday, for in so doing you make the people think that 
we should preach likewise. It is enough for you, when 
you find any good Epistle or good Gospel that setteth 
forth the liberties of Holy Church, to preach that, and 





HUGH LATIMER, BISHOP OF WORCESTER. 


let the rest alone.” The vicar answered, “I think, my 
Lord, that none of my parishioners will complain. Your 
Lordship saith it is too much to preach every Sunday. 
I think it is too little, and I wish your Lordship did the 
like.” Crichton: “Nay, nay, Dean Thomas, we were 


HONEST HUGH LATIMER 197 


not ordained to preach.” Forret: “Your Lordship 
directs me when I meet with a good Epistle, or a good 
Gospel, to preach upon it. I have read both the Old 
and New Testament, but have never met with a bad 
Epistle or a bad Gospel. But if your Lordship will show 
me which are the bad and which are the good, I will 
preach on the good, and let the bad-alone.” Crichton: 
“I thank my God I know nothing of either the Old or 
New Testament; therefore, Dean Thomas, I will know 
nothing but my portass (breviary) and my pontifical. 
Go away and lay aside these phantasies, or you will 
repent it when too late.”* He was burned on the Castle 
Hill at Edinburgh. 

Latimer was a Cambridge man, a Bachelor of Divinity, 
and a Fellow of Clare. He bore the cross in processions 
for the University, and attacked Melanchthon when he 
took his B.D. But he had an honest mind, and when 
Bilney chose him as confessor, after his attack on the 
German Reformer, he gained Latimer over to his own views, 
and he never went back from them, though he was in prison 
for years in Henry’s reign, and lit the famous candle in 
Queen Mary’s. He joined the group who met at the 
“White Horse,” which was called “ Little Germany.” 

In 1530 he sat with some fellow-commissioners who 
deprecated the publication of the English New Testament, 
but he soon saw what a mistake he had made, and wrote 
a letter to the king urging it. He said afterwards he 
would be guided solely by God’s book, and rather than 
dissent one jot from it, would be torn by wild horses. 
Seldom has there been such plain speaking as Latimer’s, 
and when he addressed the Convocation (Ad Clerum, 1536) 
he imagined Christ saying to them : 

“You preach very seldom, and when you do preach, 
do nothing but cumber those that preach truly. I would 
that Christian people should hear my doctrine, and at 
their convenient leisure read it also. Your care is not 
that all men may hear it, but all your care is that no 

layman do read it.” 
* Acts and Monuments, Persecution in Scotland. 


198 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


There is a valuable Life of Rogers, by Mr. J. Lemuel 
Chester, published by Longmans. He was the proto- 
martyr in Queen Mary’s reign, and the deadly persecutions 
of that time of blood could not have commenced with an 
example more likely to tend to the permanent downfall of 
Popery in the land. For Rogers was a saint, a scholar, a 
gentleman, and a public benefactor. The only crimes 
ever urged against him were that he believed in the 
doctrine of the early English Church, and translated the 
Word of God to show that this was scriptural, and for 
the general edification of the people, who had been in 
darkness so long. His portrait shows what manner of 
man he was, and his gon, Daniel Rogers, had the character 
of being one of the most accomplished gentlemen of the 
time in Queen Elizabeth’s reign. We shall meet with 
him again, and will only emphasise now that he was the 
first to give to the English people both a Commentary 
and a Concordance. Where this first “Authorised 
Version” was printed is not known, but it was at the 
expense of Grafton and Whitchurch, who may be called 
the publishers. It came out in August 1537, and is 
evidently of foreign workmanship. Antwerp, Hamburg, 
and Lubee have been named, and Dr. Cotton gives the 
preference to the last, on the ground that the two large 
fine wood engravings, the title, and Adam and Eve, are 
struck from the blocks which had been used in a Dutch 
Bible. Only the publishers were English. 

No doubt Matthew’s Bible had a mighty influence in 
the nation at large, and as one illustration of it we may 
refer briefly to Marbeck, one of the Windsor Protestants. 
He made a Concordance for himself, at great labour, and 
when under examination was asked what help he had 
from others. “I will tell your Lordship,” he answered 
the Bishop of Salisbury, “what instructor I had to begin 
it. When Thomas Matthewe’s Bible came first out in 
print, I was much desirous to have one of them; and 
being a poor man, not able to buy one of them, I deter- 
mined to borrow one amongst my friends, and to write it 
forth. And when I had written out the five books of 


t 


‘CIGIGHLINS ‘NOGUALUVN AO TOVTd 





199 





HONEST HUGH LATIMER 201 


Moses in fair great paper, and was entered into the Book 
of Joshua, my friend Master Turner (Magdalen College, 
Oxford) chanced to steal upon me unawares, and seeing 
me write out the Bible, asked me what I meant thereby. 
And when I had told him the cause, ‘Tush, quoth he, 
‘thou goest about a vain and tedious labour. But this 
were a profitable work for thee, to set out a Concordance 
in English”” Well might the Bishop of Hereford, one 
of his examiners, say, after looking over a quire or two of 
his work, “This man hath been better occupied than a 
great sort of our priests.” 

When Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester, examined this 
man in his own house, he examined him in his own way, 
which was as follows :— 

“What a devil made thee to meddle with the 
Scriptures? Thy vocation was another way, wherein 
thou hast a goodly gift if thou didst esteem it?” Foxe’s 
note on this is that Christ says “Search the Scriptures,” 
and Winchester says that the devil makes men to meddle 
with the Scriptures. However, Marbeck answered, “I 
do esteem it; and have done my part therein according 
to that little knowledge that God hath given me.” “And 
why the devil,’ quoth the bishop, ‘“didst thou not 
hold thee there?” 

Another of these notable Windsor Protestants was 
Henry Filmer, who was churchwarden. One of the 
suppressed friars was made vicar, but still had his friar’s 
heart, and brought his friar’s tales into the pulpit. 
Once he said that “Our Lady held out her breasts to St. 
Bernard, and spouted her milk into his eyes,’ whereupon 
Filmer went to him and protested against his rubbish. 
In the end, right under the towers of Windsor Castle, 
three such men were burnt to death together, Marbeck 
just escaping. It was rather natural that one of them, 
Anthony Pearson, should say that many of the bishops of 
the day were bite-sheeps instead of bishops. When 
Pearson came to the place of execution, he embraced the 
stake with a cheerful countenance, and, kissing it, said, 
“ Now welcome, mine own sweet wife! for this day shalt 


202 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


thou and I be married together in the love and peace of 
God.” 

Such abominable persecution took effect even over the 
water, and soon afterwards Ralph Hare was brought up 
before Gardiner at Calais. He was charged with “many 
heinous and detestable errors, namely, that he was a great 
reader of the New Testament in English; that he was 
such an one that indeed neither used to take holy bread, 
holy water, holy ashes, nor holy palm.” But they could 
not deny that he lived a holy life. In fact, at Calais 
there was a great deal of persecution, but they found it 
difficult to answer the supposed heretics. One of them, 
William Button, asked a friar who pretended to deliver 
souls out of Purgatory, whether the Pope could do it. 
“There is no doubt of that,” said the friar. “Why, then, 
doth not he out of charity deliver all the souls thereout ?” 
And he turned to Dr. Darly, the commissary, and said, 
“Tf your holy father the Pope may deliver souls out of 
Purgatory, and will not of charity deliver them, then I 
would to God the king would make me Pope, and I 
would surely deliver all out without money.” 

Such persecutions were miserably frequent, and we give 
these as examples, and pass on. Foxe exclaims once, 
“Why stand I here numbering the sand!” But he is 
able to add, “Yet, nevertheless, so mighty the power of 
God’s Gospel did work in the hearts of good men that the 
number of them did nothing lessen for all this violence 
and policy of the adversaries.” 

It was the strong Protestant character of some of the 
notes that led to Matthew’s Bible being so soon superseded 
by the Great. But was there not a cause? Think of 
Tyndale’s bishop in Gloucestershire being an Italian who 
had never set foot in his diocese! All he wanted was 
the money, and well may Matthew exclaim, in his note on 
1 Tim. ii. 1— 

“If a man covet the office of a Bysshoppe he desyreth a 
good work. This Bysshoppe is a sear to, a taker heade to, 
or an oversear ; which when he desyreth to feade Christes 
flock with the fode of healeth, that is, with his holy 


HONEST HUGH LATIMER 203 


worde, as the Bysshopes did in Paul’s tyme, desyreth a 
good worcke, and the very office of a Bisshope. But he 
that desyreth honoure; gapeth for lucre; thirsteth great 
rentes; seketh preeminence, pompe, dominion; coveteth 
abundance of all thinges without want, rest and hertes 
ease, castells, parks, lordshyppes, yerldomes, etc., desyre 
not a worcke, moch lesse a good worcke.” 


CHAPTER X1X 
THE GREAT BIBLE 


YES, as we have often seen, what we now call Pro- 
testantism is the ancient religion of the British Isles. 
Those who first brought the Gospel to England, St. 
Patrick in Ireland, and St. Columba in Scotland, walked 
in the truth. If the Protestant is asked, “Where was 
your religion before the Reformation ?” the countryman’s 
retort stands good, “ Where was your face this morning 
before it was washed?” The Pearl of great price was 
hidden with trash and filth, and our Reformers removed 
only what obscured it. The Church was known to be 
the Spouse of Christ by her first features and complexion, 
though she cast off the new Italian dress. Christianity 
was obscured like the sun under the cloud, but still the 
sun was the same, and at length conquered the mists. 
“Tis a fine question to ask where the sun was before 
noonday?” So says the Charge of Novelty,* ending with, 
“he that will prefer an old disease before a new cure, let 
him be ever sick. Where did your Church lurk, in what 
cave of the earth slept she after so many hundreds of 
years together, before the birth of Martin Luther? The 
reply is that she lurked beneath the folds of that garment 
of many colours which the hand of superstition had woven 
and embellished for her, and wherewith she was fantasti- 
cally encumbered and disguised. She slept in that cavern 
of enchantment where costly odours and intoxicating 
fumes were floating around to overpower her sense, and 
to suspend her faculties; till at last a voice was heard to 
cry, Sleep no more. And then she started up, like a 
* London, 1683. 


204 


“= ER Lon RED Se 
iC The Hyble nie 
el Enalethe, that is to lape the con |) 
| tent ofall the holy f acts : 
4) o€¥ oldeand newe teftament 
; oo reinahe Sata of {be 
4 a e 
a Ae ulpe ot spuntc ote the ) 


nied bp Rpchand Graft 
siighg Soa Be Sarkis ae 


dunrfolum. 
1539- 


i Cum priuilegio ad impzimen- 


= orm 
ar ete 
opcecreiantet Fe 
sare att 
pe Se 











TITLE-PAGE OF THE GREAT BIBLE, 1539. 


205 





THE GREAT BIBLE 207 


strong man refreshed, and shook herself from the dust 
of ages. Then did she cast aside the gorgeous things 
which had oppressed her, and stood before the world a 
sacred form of brightness and purity.” * 

It was a very difficult matter to get released, however, 
and the credit of it must never be put down too much to 
Henry vit. The determined elements of his character 
were a strong point in the whole business indeed, but the 
work was very largely in the hands of other and different 
men. ‘The way in which Luther handled him, exposing 
his royal ignorance and vanity, though it stung him at 
the time, did not materially alter his course. “What 
most surprises me is,” wrote Luther, “not the ignorance 
of this Hal of England; not that he understands less 
about faith and works than a log of wood; but that the 
devil should trouble himself to make use of this man 
against me, when he knows that I don’t care a straw for 
either one or the other. King Henry justifies the 
proverb, ‘Kings and princes are fools.’ Who sees not 
the hand of God in the blindness and imbecility of this 
man! I shall say very little more about him at present ; 
for I have the Bible to translate and other important 
matters to attend to.” In fact the king’s book, though 
so heartily welcomed by the Pope, and gaining for him 
the title of Defender of the Faith, contained little of 
either thought or research, and was possibly written for 
him in part. Luther laughs at him and plays with 
him finely, being fresh from victory. He went too far 
indeed, and afterwards apologised for such strong language. 
In the Preface to this same Great Bible it is said: 
“The Bishop of Rome conferred on King Henry vutt. the 
title of Defender of the Faith, because His Highness 
suffered the Bishops to burn God’s Word, the root of 
Faith, and to persecute the lovers and ministers of the 
same. 

Yes, and the people suffered all this, for at this period 
they voluntarily rushed into slavery, as Tacitus tells us 
the Romans did in the reign of Tiberius. 

* See Le Bas, Life of Wycliffe. 


208 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


Bishop Warburton looks more deeply into these things 
than most when he says: 

“Generally some oblique passion gratifies itself in 
decrying the grosser corruptions supported by and 
supporting those it hates. The machine thus set a-going, 
truth has fair play; she is now at liberty to procure 
friends, and to attach them to her service. This was 
the course of things in the Revolution in Henry VII.’s 
reign, and is the natural rise and progress of religious 
reformations in general. For if in the state of such 
established error, Providence was to wait till a love of 
truth had set men upon shaking off their bondage, its 
dispensations could never provide that timely aid which 
we now find they always do to distressed humanity. 
And it is knowing as little of the religious as of the 
moral course of God’s Providence to upbraid those who 
have profited of this blessing with the baseness of the 
instruments that procured it. ® 

We come, then, now to the Great Bible, and the work 
of Cromwell and Cranmer in connection with it. There 
had been an attempt made by Cranmer four years pre- 
viously (1534) to get a translation executed by the 
bishops, but their entire co-operation could not be 
secured. The matter was brought up in Convocation, 
and the king asked that a right translation might be 
prepared. The work was divided out, but Bishop 
Stokesley returned his “paper book,” and refused to 
have anything to do with it, as likely to infect the people 
with heresy. Whereupon the chaplain to the Duke of 
Norfolk said, “I can tell your Grace why my Lord of 
London will not bestow any labour or pains this way. 
Your Grace knoweth well that his portion is a piece 
of the New Testament. But he, being persuaded that 
Christ has bequeathed him nothing in his Testament, 
thought it madness to bestow any labour or pains where 
no gain was to be gotten, and, besides this, it is the Acts 
of the Apostles, who were simple poor fellows, and 
therefore my Lord of London disdained to have to do 
with any of them.” 


i) 


THE GREAT BIBLE 209 


This Stokesley was the “natural brute beast,” who, 
when he was lying at the point of death, rejoiced that 
in his lifetime he had burned fifty heretics. What is 
the “conscience” capable of, when seared as with a hot 
iron, and in fact an old man of our own time said he had 
lived long enough to hear men attempt to justify nearly 
every crime, except murder. Hall says he was a man 
of great wit and learning, but of little discretion and 
humanity. 

The bishops protested in 1531 against the reflections 
upon them in the Prefaces to the new translations. 
But they did not set to work to prepare a “sound trans- 
lation,” as the King then urged them to do. For, as 
Froude says, the work of the Reformation was not much 
furthered by the official clergy. It was largely done by 
volunteers from the ranks, and forced upon the Church 
by the secular arm. “The stream flowed on, caring little 
for human opposition. To swim with, or to swim against 
it, affected little the velocity with which the English 
world was swept into the new era.” 

In fact, to change the figure, we are often reminded of 
Lord Bacon’s remark, that in human affairs great weights 
often hang on small wires. 


14 


CHAPTER XX 


CROMWELL AND BONNER 


‘In this Act was laid the foundation stone on which the whole later 
history of England, civil as well as ecclesiastical, has been reared, and 
the most minute incidents become interesting, connected with an event of 
so mighty moment.” 

FRovupDE, on the publication of the Great Bible. 


So the Great Bible was no bishop’s work, but a further 
revision of Matthew’s Version by Miles Coverdale, 
Cromwell instigating and supporting the whole under- 
taking. Cromwell was practically Wolsey’s successor, 
having formerly been his secretary. His love of the 
Scriptures had been shown early, and it is said he had 
committed most of Erasmus’s Latin Testament to memory. 
He often used to tell his friends, however, what a ruffian 
he had been in his youth, and it did not seem likely that 
he would become the great exposer of Papist juggleries, 
bringing the Rood of Grace to St. Paul’s Cross to be torn 
to pieces by the people, proving the blood at Hales to be 
duck’s blood, and the “ holy maid of Kent” to be a worth- 
less character. In fact, he was rather a zealous Papist in 
his early irreligious days—a combination of opposites 
always possible. If we may believe the story, it seems 
that the people of Boston, Lincolnshire, resolved to send to 
Rome for a renewal of their two pardons, and accordingly 
dispatched two men with the proper writing, and requisite 
money. Coming to Antwerp, where Cromwell-then was, 
and the courage of one of them failing, they prevailed on 
Cromwell to accompany them, which he did, being fond of 
travel and adventure. Arriving in Rome, and finding 
the Pope was fond of delicacies, he prepared some fine 











LA fol crore Snipe 





























er 
a 
= 
= 
m 
VY 
aL 
= 
o 
ae 
a 
’ ye 














Dn 
uit ji as 








2I1 





CROMWELL AND BONNER 213 


dishes of jellies, never before seen there, and choosing his 
time when the Pope had come in from hunting, and gone 
into his pavilion, he brought his presents, with “three men’s 
song,” as it was then called. The Pope, surprised and 
pleased with the song, and understanding that they were 
Englishmen, and did not come empty-handed, called them 
in; whereupon Cromwell, doing his obeisance, offered him 
his jelly junkets. Upon a cardinal’s tasting and recom- 
mending them, the Pope tried them, and was so much 
pleased with them that he granted them their request, 
and commanded them to teach his cook the art of making 
the dishes. Cromwell made several confections in later 
life that were not so palatable. 

He certainly became one of the chief promoters of the 
open English Bible, and amongst the last things. he did 
was to father the one ordered to be placed in every 
church, and commonly called the Great Bible. The idea of 
Coverdale’s earlier Bible was not satisfactory, and 
Matthew’s notes were highly controversial, and sure to 
provoke great opposition. Cromwell went to Coverdale 
about the matter, in the early part of 1538, and got him 
to undertake a new edition on the basis of Matthew’s, but 
to be issued without his notes, and with a more complete 
collation of the Hebrew and Latin Texts. Coverdale 
undertook it at once, and spent about a year on the work. 
He “set in a private table the diversity of readings of all 
Texts, Hebrew, Chaldee, Greek, Latin, with such Annot- 
ations in another table as shall doubtless elucidate and 
clear the same, as well without any singularity of opinions 
as all checkings and reproofs.” He was quite willing to 
take another man’s work as the basis of his own, but the 
alterations he made were numerous. He was not a press- 
corrector, but an editor, and one valuable work, just 
published, had a very important influence on the version 
he now produced. This was a new Latin version of the 
Old Testament with the Hebrew Text, and a Commentary 
chiefly from Hebrew sources, published by S. Munster in 
1534-35. It was avaluable addition to his critical stories, 
and, according to Westcott, the Old Testament may indeed 


214 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


be said to be chiefly a revision of Matthew's by the aid of 
Munster. And what Munster was to the Old Testament, 
Erasmus was to the New. His Latin version frequently 
led to the giving up of Tyndale’s renderings, in the 1534 
text. 

There are some idiomatic renderings in the Great Bible, 
as, for instance, when Christ is said to be in the midst of 
the Doctors in the Temple, “hearinge them and posinge 
them.’ In the Temptation also Satan is said to show 
Christ all the kingdoms of the world “in the twynklelynge 
of an eye.” In Psalm cxxxii. 4 we have “neither the 
temples of my head to take any rest.” There is quite a 
love of variety in the translation, “ the chief musician” in 
the Psalms being sometimes “the Cae and sometimes 
“he that excelleth.” 

I am indebted to Lord Peckover for the following 
illustrations :— 

Gen, 43. 34.—And they drinking were dronke with 
him. 

Ley. 19. 27.—Ye shall not rounde the lockes of your 
heades, neyther shalte thou marre the tufles of thy 
bearde. 

Deut. 32. 10.—He found hym in a deserte land, in a 
voyde grounde, and in a roarynge wildernesse. 

Hosea 10. 11.—Ephraim was unto me as a cow that is 
used to go to plowe, therefore I loved him, and fell upon 
his neck. I drove Ephraim. Juda plowed, and Jacob 
played the husbondeman. 

Edgar says that, whatever may be said of its accuracy 
as a translation, its intrinsic reasonableness strongly 
commends the following :— 

Prov. 26. 4-5.—Give not the foole an answer after his 
foolishnesse, lest thou become like unto him; but make 
the foole an answer ¢o his foolishnesse, lest he be wise in 
his own conceate. 

Strikingly rendered also is Job 19. 20.—My bone 
hangeth to my skin, and the flesh is away; only there is 
left me the skynne about my teeth.* 


* Bibles of England. 


CROMWELL AND BONNER 215 


The frontispiece is an emphatic recognition of the 
share borne by the king in this work. It is divided 
into four compartments. In the first the Almighty is 
seen in the clouds with outstretched arms. Two scrolls 
proceed out of His mouth, to the right and to the left. 
On the former is the verse: “The word which goeth 
forth from me shall not return to me empty, but shall 
accomplish whatsoever I will have done.” The other is 
addressed to Henry, who is kneeling ata distance, bare- 
headed, with his crown lying at his feet. The scroll 
says: “I have found me a man after my own heart, who 
shall fulfil all my will’ Henry answers, “Thy word is a 
lantern unto my feet.” Immediately below, the king is 
seated on his throne, holding in each hand a book, on 
which is written “The Word of God.” One of these he 
is giving to Cranmer and another bishop,—who, with a 
group of priests, are on the right of the picture,—saying, 
“Take this and teach it.” The other, on the opposite 
side, he holds out to Cromwell and the lay peers, and the 
words are, “I make a decree that, in all my kingdom, men 
shall tremble and fear before the living God.” A third 
scroll, falling downward over his feet, says alike to peer 
and prelate, “Judge righteous judgement; turn not 
away your ear from the prayer of a poor man.” The 
king’s face is directed sternly towards the bishops, with 
a somewhat threatening expression, as if to let the world 
know who is to be Head of the Church now. In the 
third compartment Cranmer and Cromwell are distribut- 
ing the Bible to kneeling priests and laymen, and at the 
bottom a preacher with a benevolent face is addressing a 
crowd from a pulpit in the open air. He is commencing 
a sermon from the text, “I exhort, therefore, that, first of 
all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of 
thanks be made for all men—for kings.” At the word 
kings the people are shouting “God save the King.” 
And at the extreme left, at a jail window, a prisoner is 
joining in the cry of delight, as if he were being delivered 
from bondage, like the Bible, long bound in an unknown 
tongue. However, the work never cost Henry a penny. 


216 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


Christopher Anderson tells us that he is said to have diced 
away the bells of suppressed houses, and lost thousands of 
the spoil at play, but he certainly never spent his money 
in printing Bibles. 

This large title-page has been said to be the work of 
Hans Holbein the younger, though Wornum, in his Zife 
of Holbein, pronounces against it. Mr. W. H. Carpenter, 
keeper of the engravings in the British Museum Library, 
however, gives his name, and it is certain that Henry was 





HOLBEIN, BY HIMSELF, 
IN SPENCER COLLECTION AT ALTHORP. 


Holbein’s patron at this time. The famous painter of “ The 
Dance of Death,” and many other well-known works, came 
to England the second time in 1532, and goon after- 
wards produced his masterpiece, “The Ambassadors,” 
about which so much has been written by Ruskin. It 
was about this time he painted for the king the great 
family picture of Henry vit, with Elizabeth of York, and 
also that of Henry vir, with Jane Seymour and children, 
and it seems likely that such a piece of work as this frontis- 
piece would be put into the hands of a well-known artist. 


CROMWELL AND BONNER 217 


The art of wood-cutting had certainly been rescued from its 
early monopoly by the playing-card makers, and in the 
hands of Albert Durer and others was soon to become a 
thing of beauty and a joy forever. Our readers will agree, 
however, as they look at this great childish production 
that its hour had not yet come. Nothing is more comic 
than the early wood-cutting, especially that in the Dutch 
Bibles.* 

The Great Bible has one special distinction. Its 
rendering of the Psalter is the one permanently used in 
the Church of England Prayer Book. When the “ Bishops’ 
Bible” succeeded this one, no attempt was made to sub- 
stitute the new Psalter for this older one. And when the 
last Revision of the Prayer Book came, in 1662, the 
people had grown familiar with it, and though some 
pleaded for the Authorised Version, it retained its place. 
It was felt to be “smoother and more easy to sing,” and 
Westcott analyses and defends this popular judgment, 
though the Authorised Versionis almost always morecorrect. 
Certainly we cannot wonder that a great musician should 
prefer,“ Why do the nations so furiously rage together !” 
So, whilst the Gospels and Epistles were directed to be 
taken from the Authorised Version more than two. 
centuries ago, the Psalter was left unchanged. The 
present Prayer Book version of the Psalms, however, does 
not exactly correspond with any great Bible, and Psalm 
xxxvili. 10 has “sight” for “light.” 

The printing of the Great Bible was commenced in 
Paris, where the best materials were to be found, and the 
work was undertaken by Grafton and Whitchurch. 
Richard Grafton not only devoted himself to such work, 
but was an historian, his Chronicle at large having 
afterwards a considerable reputation. Both he and 
Whitchurch were excluded from the pardon in Queen 
Mary’s proclamation at her Coronation in 1554. 

They were afraid of being interrupted in their work, as 
Tyndale had been before them, and not without reason. 
In the middle of the winter of 1538, the Inquisition, caring 

* Origin of Wood Engraving, Lewis, 1811. 


218 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


neither for the countenance of the English ambassador, 
nor the express license of Francis, the King of France, 
both of which had been secured, issued an order against 
the printer, and summoned all parties engaged to appear. 
Francis Regnault was the printer employed, Grafton 
attending to business matters, but fortunately they had 
received notice of what was intended against them, and 
had sent a large portion of the sheets to England, whither 
they now followed them, leaving the remainder to their fate. 
A few were burned, but the rest were sold to a haberdasher 
“to lap his caps in,” the officer in charge thinking he 
might as well make something for himself. 

The ambassador at this time was the infamous Bonner, 
then Bishop of Hereford. The secret history of the whole 
affair is not yet written, but it would appear that he showed 
great interest in the undertaking, and forwarded it. He 
became very friendly with Grafton and Whitchurch, and 
still more with Coverdale. He insisted on their being 
frequently at his table, either at dinner or supper, and 
would often be found at the house of the printer. 
Certainly, when he afterwards became Bishop of London, 
he sent for Grafton, and made great promises of how he 

ewould promote the Word of God in his diocese. So this 
“ Keclesiastical Nero, the disgrace of the Church of England 
in the sixteenth century,” as Dean Hook calls him, promised 
very different things at this time. He had a New 
Testament printed in English and Latin, and took a great 
many of them to give his friends. But his vile temper 
showed itself in these early “ Protestant ” days, and he so 
behaved himself in the presence of the Pope that the aston- 
ished and enraged Pontiff talked of throwing him into a 
cauldron of melted lead. He offended the French king, 
Francis 1., also so hugely at this very time of his residence 
in Paris that his Majesty desired him to write three things 
to the king his master: that his ambassador was a great 
fool; that he (Francis) caused better justice to be done in 
his realm in a month than they did in England in a whole 
year; and that if it were not for the love he bore his 
master he should have an hundred strokes with a halbert. 


CROMWELL AND BONNER 219 


By and by he took his revenge, when he whipped his 
Protestant prisoners with his own hands till he was tired 
with the violence of the exercise, and once toreout the beard 
of a weaver, and that he might give him a specimen of 
burning, held his hand toa candle till the sinews and veins 
shrunk and burst. Well may Dean Hook close his long 
account of him by saying, ‘Edmund Bonner, with his 
contemporary, Stephen Gardiner, have made Romanism so 
odious in the eyes of Englishmen that Romanisers have 
never since been able to maintain a permanent footing in 
our Church.” 

And yet he actually said to Grafton at this time : 

“To tell you, Master Grafton, before God (for that was 
commonly his oath) the greatest fault that I ever found 
in Stokesley was for vexing and troubling of poor men, 
as Lobley, the bookbinder, and others for having the 
Scripture in English; and, God willing, he did not so 
much hinder it, but I will as much further it; and I will 
have of your Bibles set up in the Church of Paul’s at the 
least in sundry places six of them; and I will pay you 
honestly for them, and give you hearty thanks.” Which 
words, says Foxe, who is constantly giving his authorities, 
he spoke in the hearing of divers credible persons, as 
Edmund Stile, Grocer, and others. But this was when he 
was willing to do anything to please Cromwell, against 
whom he said the strongest things when he had fallen. 


CHAPTER XX] 
THE COMPLETION OF THE GREAT BIBLE 
** AVS well that ends well.” 


AFTER a time, however, the printers stole back again, 
and found that the Inquisition had not done its work 
so well as usual. They recovered the presses, type, and 
workmen, and eventually even the haberdasher’s cap 
paper. Then, setting up again, the work was at length 
completed in April 1539, two parchment copies being 
printed for the king and Cromwell, and the remainder on 
paper. Cromwell's fine parchment copy is to be found in 
the library of St. John’s College, Cambridge, but where 
the printing was finished is still doubtful. Some say in 
London, and that the wrath of man thus -praised God, for 
the interference of the Inquisition thus introduced into 
England the materials and men best suited to carry out 
the translation. Some say in Flanders, and if so prob- 
ably at Antwerp, and in any case there were seven 
distinct editions within three years, closely resembling one 
another, So, for the time, the “heretics, new-fangled 
fellows, English Biblers,-Cobblers of Divinity, Fellows of 
the new Faith,” as they complained that they were called, 
had completely triumphed. 

The Bible was mostly allowed to speak for itself, 
some of the previous notes having given the chief 
offence. A few marginal notes were incorporated in 
the first impression, which, however, were afterwards 
omitted. The note on Matt. xvi. 18, for instance, is as 
follows : 


* That is,” saith St. Austin, “ upon the confession whieh 
220 





THE COMPLETION OF THE GREAT BIBLE 221 


thou hast made, acknowledging me to be Christ, the Son 
of the living God, I build my Congregation or Church.” 

Now at length there was free course for the Word of the 
Lord, at least for a season. Every parish was to set a 
Bible up in its church, under a penalty of forty shillings 
a month, half the expense being borne by the minister 
and half by the people. A Royal Declaration was issued 
stating his Majesty’s pleasure that his subjects should im- 
prove themselves in the knowledge of their duty to God 
and himself, and that the most likely way of attaining 
this end was to allow them the free use of the Bible in 
their mother tongue. 

Hollinshead says that it was in September 1538 that 
Cromwell first sent out injunctions to all bishops and 
curates to have a Bible of the largest volume, and it was at 
the same time that all notable images to which pilgrimages 
were made, as those at Walsingham, Ipswich, and Wor- 
cester, were removed, as also shrines of “Counterfeit 
saints,” like that of Thomas a Becket at Canterbury. 
Many of the images were brought up to London, and 
burnt at Chelsea by the Lord Privy Seal. No more could 
the parings of St. Edward’s toe-nails be seen, nor the 
coals that roasted St. Lawrence. The girdle of the Virgin 
had been exhibited in eleven different places at the same 
time, but now it was to be found in none. At Hales, in 
Gloucester, the blood of Christ, brought from Jerusalem, 
had been shown for generations, but it only revealed 
itself to the absolved penitent. The phial had a thick 
and opaque side, and a transparent one. Into this the 
fresh blood of a duck was introduced every week, and the 
dark side only shown to rich pilgrims till they had freely 
expended their money, when the transparent side, show- 
ing the blood, was turned towards them, to their wonder. 

Perhaps the most ingenious money-making contrivance 
was at Boxley in Kent, a miraculous crucifix called the 
Rocd of Grace. The lips, eyes, and head of the image 
moved on the approach of its votaries, the eyes goggling, 
the lips hanging, the jaws shaking, according to the coin 
given. This was brought by Hilsey, the Bishop of 


222 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


Rochester, to St. Paul’s Cross, and there broken up in the 
presence of a great crowd, the wheels and springs by 
which it was moved being exposed. 

Complaints have been made of the strong language 
used by Tyndale and others, but how could honest men 
speak with bated breath of these money-making imposi- 
tions on the credulity of the people. They abounded, 
and were connected with the grossest cruelties against 
those who exposed them. The North British Review gives 
a list of those at Glasgow alone, from which we extract 
the following — | 

“The priests of Glasgow appear to have been par- 
ticularly favoured with choice articles of holiness. An 
inventory of them has been preserved. First, we have a 
bit of wood of the Cross; item, a golden vial, with part of 
the hair of the Blessed Virgin; item, a golden vial, con- 
taining part of the coat of St. Kentigern and Thomas 
Becket; item, in another golden casket, the mouth of St. 
Ninian; item, part of the zone of the Blessed Virgin ; 
item, in a small vial of crystal, part of the milk of the B.V.; 
item, a bit of the manger in which Christ lay ; item, in a 
small saffron-coloured vial, the oil which emanated from 
the tube of St. Kentigern ; item, another casket with the 
bones of St. Blasius and Eugenius; item, part of the comb 
of St. Catharine ; item, a small bag with part of the sweat 
of St. Martin ; item, a precious bag, with the breasts of St. 
Kentigern and Thomas Becket ; item, four other sacks with 
the bones of saints; item, a wooden chest with many 
small relics; and at last, when the person making the in- 
ventory was getting tired of his duty, he sums up the 
whole with—Item, two linen sacks full of the bones of 
Kentigern, Tenaw, and different other saints. Can there 
be a more wretched exhibition of human folly, or the 
picture of a more debasing superstition !” 

It was all this rubbish that had so fired the soul of 
Tyndale in-Gloucestershire. “As sure as God is in 
Gloucester” meant that absurd forms and_ ridiculous 
ceremonies were a little more abundant there than else- 
where. The kissing of the thumb nails previous to 


THE COMPLETION OF THE GREAT BIBLE 223 


engaging in prayer, the flinging of holy water at the devil, 
and the offering of a big cheese every year to St. White, 
went on before his eyes. Being an agricultural country, 
it was thought desirable to invoke the assistance of a 
special saint to protect the cream and cheese against the 
accidents of the weather, and the depredations of the 
fairies and the Welshmen. Though who St. White was is a 
mystery even to those versed in such lore. Perhaps she 
was a canonised dairymaid, or it may have been St. 
Witta, a German bishop of the eighth century, and a friend 
of Boniface.* 

Burnet says that at Reading they had an angel’s wing 
which brought over the spear’s point that pierced our 
Saviour’s side, and let no one imagine that this mass of 
absurdities simply attracted a few brainless people. At 
the Canterbury Jubilee it was thought 100,000 people 
were present. And when Henry vu. put an end to all 
this imposture, instead of the authorities in Rome dis- 
owning it, he was compared to the worst princes that 
ever ruled, to Pharaoh, Belshazzar, Nero, Diocletian, and 
Julian—the latter more especially, as they called him an 
Apostate. The Pope put the kingdom under an interdict, 
and required all Christians to make war upon the king, 
and make slaves of his subjects. 

It was the same abroad. At Wittenberg Luther might 
see a fragment of Noah’s ark, some soot from the furnace 
of the Three Children, a piece of wood from the cradle at 
Bethlehem, some hair from the beard of St. Christopher, 
and thousands of other relics. 

And remember that all this rubbish was supported by 
the highest authorities in the Popery of the time. For 
instance, the inducements to keep up the fame of “the 
holy blood of Hayles” are given at length by Hearne in 
the notes to Leland’s Collectanea. Miracles were said to 
be wrought every day. Pope John xxi. granted to the 
abbot for evermore power to have eleven confessors to 
forgive the pilgrims their sins. Pope Eugene Iv. con- 
firmed this and granted “seven yere and three lents” to 

* Demaus, Life of Tyndale. 


224 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


those who came down with their money. Pope Calix ut. 
and fifteen cardinals also made great promises to those who 
“put to their helping hands to the welfare of that foresaid 
monastery at Hayles.” * 

The helping hands were put to such places so generously 
that the wealth of the most famous of them became 
fabulous, Becket’s shrine at Canterbury had a prodigious 
number of precious stones, and a thousand pounds was 
presented there in a single year, whilst the offerings at 
Christ’s altar were insignificant. And this when the 
common people were miserably poor, and perished by 
thousands for the want of proper food, sanitation, and 
medicine. 

So down fell the monasteries in this reforming age, first 
the small ones, and then the great. Ina play published 
soon afterwards, Cromwell is made to answer Gardiner, 
who is defending them: 


“T am no enemy to religion, 
But what is done it is for England’s good. 
What did they serve for but to feed a sort 
Of lazy abbots and of full-fed Friars! 
They neither plough nor sow, and yet they reap 
The fat of all the land, and suck the poor.” + 


The suppression of the monasteries, however, was 
begun by Wolsey, a cardinal of the Church, partly to 
raise funds for his New College at Oxford. Doubtless 
they had become in many cases very corrupt, and the 
destruction of the “black book” containing the Visitors’ 
charges, in Queen Mary’s reign, is significant. What 
were they doing with all their money too, which Milton 
calls the poison of the Church, the quinsy of truth? It is 
difficult to see why a few clergy should need such large 
sums to practise poverty. At Abingdon there were only 
25 in residence, and the revenues were £2000 a year ; at 
Battle 17, and they had £1000; at St. Albans 37, with 
£2000; at Bury 45, with £2000; all which figures 


* Acts and Monuments. Addenda to vol. y. 
+ Lord Cromwell. A play by W. Shp Mas 


THE COMPLETION OF THE GREAT BIBLE 225 


must be multiplied by about 15 or 17 to represent present 
value.* 

Of course both images and monasteries had their de- 
fenders, and at Shrewsbury, where an image had been 
removed, the following rhyme was circulated :— 


“The parson’s the man ! 
Let him do what he can. 

He'd for gain leave his God in the lurch. 
Could Iscariot do more, 
Had it lain in his power, 

Than turn the Lord out of the Church?” 


The vicar replied, however : 


“The God I adore 
Is mighty in power, 
The one only living and true. 
But that God of yours, 
That I turned out of doors, 
Had about as much power as you. 


But since you bemoan 
This God of your own. 
Cheer up, my disconsolate brother. 
Though it seem very odd, 
Yet if that be your God, 
Any duffer can make you another.” 


Bridgett attempts to show that the rood at Boxley 
was not used superstitiously, but he quotes Archbishop 
Warham saying that people came there from every part 
of the country. 


* 7. Cromwell, A. Galton. 


15 


CHAT PER XX UE 


CRANMER AND HIS BIBLE WORK—CROMWELL’S FALL 


““ Step after step 
Through many voices crying right and left, 
Have I climbed back into the primal Church, 
And stand within the porch, and Christ with me.” 
TENNYSON’s ‘‘Queen Mary.” 


‘QO momentary grace of mortal men 
Which we more hunt for than the grace of God! 
Who builds his hopes in air of your fair looks 
Lives like a drunken sailor on a mast, 
Ready, with every nod, to tumble down 
Into the fatal bowels of the deep.” 
SHAKESPEARE, 


IN his exposition of the Sermon on the Mount, Tyndale 
spoke out about the absurdity of the monastic life, and 
the way it impoverished the country. He says on Matt. 
v. 20. 

“God's law is pure and single, ‘Love thy neighbour, 
whether he be good or bad; and by love God meaneth to 
help at need. Now when God biddeth thee to get thy 
living, and somewhat over to help him that cannot; if 
thou, with thirty or forty others, get you to wilderness, 
and not only help not your neighbours, but also rob a 
great number of two or three thousand pounds yearly, 
how love ye your neighbours? Such men help the world 
with prayer, thou wilt say to me. Thou wert better to 
say ‘they rob the world with their hypocrisy.’ For if I 
stick up to the middle in the mire, like to perish without 
present help, and thou stand by and wilt not succour me, 
but kneelest down and prayest, will God hear the prayers 
of such an hypocrite? God biddeth thee so to love me 


226 





CRANMER, ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY, 


227 





CRANMER AND HIS BIBLE WORK 229 


that thou put thyself in jeopardy to help me; and that 
thine heart, while thy body laboureth, do pray and trust 
in God that he will assist thee, and through thee to save 
me. An hypocrite that will put neither body nor goods 
in peril for to help me at my need loveth me not, neither 
hath compassion on me; and therefore his heart cannot 
pray, though he wag his lips ever so much.” 

Of course the Pope was highly indignant at the 
suppression of the monasteries, but their gross profligacy 
had been the subject of Papal admonitions only in 1490. 

So it was Scripture against all that had been put in its 
place, and Cromwell’s injunctions were not only for the 
Bibles being placed in the churches, but for encouragement 
being given to the people to read them :—“ Item, that you 
shall discourage no man privily or apertly from the 
readyne or heryne of the sayde Bible, but shall expressely 
promote, stire, and exhorte every person to reade the same 
as that whiche is the very lively Worde of God; that every 
Christen person is bounde to embrace, believe, and folowe, 
yf they loke to be saved; admonysshyng them neverthe- 
lesse to avoyd all contention and altercation therein, but 
to use an honest Sobrietie in the inquisition of the 
trewe sense of the same, and to referre the explication 
of obscure places to men of higher judgement in 
Scripture.” 

In making such provision Cromwell was simply going 
back to the custom of the early Christian Churches, in 
which it was common to have a large Bible in some 
convenient place. Paulinus wrote on the wall of the 
Secretarium at Nola: 

“Si quem sancta tenet meditandi in lege voluntas ; 
Hic poterit residens sacris intendere libris.” * 

Certainly a little more instruction was needed if 
Michael Ward can be trusted, who said about this 
time :— 

* «Tf any one is piously disposed to meditate in God’s law, here he 


may sit and employ himself in reading the holy books” (Bingham, 
Antiquities). 


230 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


“Who is there can say even the Lord’s Prayer in 
English! who can tell one article of his faith! who had 
once heard of any of the 10 Commandments! If we 
were sick of the pestilence, we ran to St. Rock; if of the 
ague, to St. Parnil or Master John Shorne. If men were 
in prison, they prayed to St. Leonard. If the Welshman 
would have a purse, he prayed to David Gathorne.” * 
But now the Churches had plenty of inquirers as well as 
listeners, and the doctrines, at last clearly read out, began 
to be in many places the common subject of conversation. 

Cranmer appears to have had no direct connection with 
the Great Bible in its first edition ; but his followed in the 
spring of 1540, and then one edition succeeded another. 
What a name for raising a debate! It is certain, however, 
that in days when good preaching was the rarest thing, 
Cranmer was a simple, earnest preacher of the main 
truths of the Bible. That, along with this, he was one 
of the greatest promoters of learning, and received in his 
palace at Lambeth such men as Bucer, who had made 
Strasburg a centre of Protestant light and learning, and 
eventually became Regius Professor of Divinity at Cam- 
bridge until his death. That he was also a liberal and 
generous-hearted man, and under special pressure, after 
the closing of the monasteries, fitted up one of his own 
manor houses as a hospital for soldiers who had returned 
from the wars on the Continent wounded, and were too 
often little cared for. 

Mr. Fry says that in the whole of Cranmer’s corre- 
spondence with Cromwell in 1538 there is not one allu- 
sion to the Bible. The Great Bible was emphatically 
Cromwell’s work, and without his importation of types 
and men, Cranmer would not afterwards have been able 
to proceed as he did. When Cranmer followed him, 
however, in the same work, he brought out six editions, 
one after another, and there were probably 21,000 
printed, though copies are now very rare and valuable. 
After most careful examination, Mr. Fry comes to the 
conclusion that many of the “made up” volumes were 

* Dialogue or Familiar Talk, 1754. 


*“TTUTSWIH UALUVW V Ad OL SIRL WOUA AASSVd YAWNVAO 
*‘LAUSNVUL WOGUALUVN DHL “IVUCUHLVO AUACUALINVO 





aa) 
a 





CRANMER AND HIS BIBLE WORK 233 


first issued in that form.* The marginal notes were 
corrected, and there was a careful exclusion of everything 
relating to Tyndale, now burnt as a heretic. 

What was especially new in these Cranmer Bibles was 
the Preface written by the archbishop himself, and doing 
him much honour. This was inserted in many of the 
editions, and he says to those who would shut up the 
the Bible: 

“JT marvel much that any man should be so mad as to 
refuse in darkness, light; in hunger, food; in cold, fire. 
For the Word of God is light—Thy word is a lantern to 
my feet. It is food—man shall not live by bread only, 
but by every word of God. It is fire—I am come to send 
fire on the earth, and what is my desire but that it be — 
kindled. I would marvel at this, save that I consider 
how much custom and usage may do.” 

But he speaks with equal plainness to those who abused 
the Scripture, and all whose holiness consisted in talking. 
Quoting Gregory Nazianzen, he says: “ The learning of a 
Christian man ought to begin of the fear of God, and end 
in matters of high speculation, and not contrarily to begin 
with high speculation and to end in fear.” In fact, he 
says, there are two sorts of people, some being too 
slow and needing the spur; and others too quick, and 
needing the bridle. In the former sort are all those 
that refuse to read the Scripture in the vulgar tongue; in 
the latter, those who by their inordinate reading, indis- 
creet speaking, contentious disputing, or licentious living, 
slander and hinder the Word of God. The whole 
Preface may be found in the Appendix to Strype’s Life of 
Cranmer. 

Anthony Marler, a citizen of London, of the Haber- 
dashers’ Company, bore all the expense of the folio 
editions printed in 1539-40, presenting a fine copy in 
vellum to Henry vult., which is now in the British Museum. 
Anderson quotes the minutes of the Privy Council at 
Greenwich, 25th April, 33 of Henry vi1—that is 1541: 

“Tt was agreed that Anthony Marler, of London, 

* Great Bible, ¥. Fry, ¥.S.A. 


ia 
234 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


Merchant, might sell the Bibles of the Great Bible un- 
bound for x shillings sterling, and bound, being trimmed 
_ with bullyons for xu shillings sterling.” 

‘There was a good deal of backwardness in providing 
such large and expensive Bibles, however, and we find 
Marler representing himself to the Privy Council as a 
ruined man, unless some further steps were taken to pro- 
mote the sale of the Bibles he had printed, an order being 
consequent upon this that the last day for the purchase 
of the book was fixed for Hallow Masse.”* On 12th 
March 1542 a patent was granted him “to print the 
Bible in English,” a former prohibition having denied 
that right to any except with Cromwell’s license.t 

It was at this very time of Bible opening and reading 
that the “ Bloody Bill” was passed, showing the need of 
them in the clearest light. Its date was 7th June 1540, 
and the Chancellor opened Parliament by saying that it was 
his Majesty’s earnest desire to extirpate from his kingdom 
all diversities of opinion with regard to religion. Six 
Articles were accordingly drawn up which asserted the 
real presence in the Eucharist, the Communion in one 
kind, the perpetual obligation of Vows of Chastity, the 
utility of private Masses, Celibacy, and the utility of 
Auricular Confession. All who did not subscribe to this 
statute were to be burnt alive, beheaded, or stripped of their | 
property. It is to Cranmer’s honour, who knew perfectly 
well what it might mean to him in these difficult days, 
that he opposed might and main the passing of this 
measure. Henry ordered him at length to leave the 
House. He refused to do so, saying that it was not man’s 
business but God’s. The act was passed, however, like 
everything else upon which Henry had set his mind, and 
in a few months five hundred were thrown into prison. 
“Those who are against the Pope,” said a foreigner, “are 
burned ; those who are for him are hanged.” Latimer and 
Shaxton, Bishops of Worcester and Salisbury, resigned their 


* Nicolas, Proceedings Privy Council, vol. vii. 
+ This was dated November 14, 1539. See Rymer, Acta Regia. 
Rapin 111. 


ee 


ot PS 
Cee. 


3 aaa 
D: My, os 





oe. 


heByble & 


inéngiplhe, thatistofaye, BY LZA 
thecontent of atl the Holpe Fa ev 


(trppture , bothe of the olde Ba : Vo 


and newe Leftament truly 
tranflatedD after the berpte 
of the Hebsue and Greke 
tertes by che Diligent Bu 
bye of Opuers excellent 
lerned men experts 


A Lad inthe forelapde tongues. ¢ 
% i 


pas 


Ne pnted at Zlonvoubp Thomas] 
AX 


BS) @ 192 
EA A pi ,ond Robertemrpman, fo2 
eas / Chomas Becthelet : Pepnter 


pnto the Bprges grace. 
ref Cum Priuilegio ad impri- 
mendum felum. 


Rai ang 
Ahk 





en, 


eG 0m 0 Pew. 
Periaw angen,” 


Rr 
Lor) 


Ping 


ae : r 
Ny § A 
x, a itr 
on OFF 83.98 2 yar) 1h RY Ss 
: ™ beprieen. A \, ss a 
y = * y \ 
“ CRs Kegs i? he 
es: ~. we 4 * 





TITLE TO GREAT BIBLE, 1540. 
235 





CRANMER AND HIS BIBLE WORK 2a 


sees, but as for Shaxton, on being pressed again to sign 
the Articles in 1534, and at last being condemned to be 
burnt to death, he made an abjuration to save his life, 

Of course, Gardiner hada leading hand in this atrocious 
Act of the Six Articles, but Foxe says they might seem 
to have been written not with the ink of Stephen 
Gardiner, but with the blood of a dragon, or rather the 
claws of the devil. Scarcely might a man speak any word 
of Christ and His religion, but he was in peril of these 
Six Articles, so curious and subtle was their wording. 
Maitland thinks they were chiefly to frighten people,* 
and their severity was certainly so horrible that relaxation 
came before long, but not until some noble blood had been 
shed. There have been some fiendish things done in 
England, and we have given one or two examples of them 
where we might have given hundreds pertinent to our 
history. But perhaps the foulest of all was the judicial 
murder of Anne Askew, not long before this miserable 
reign closed. Though a little anticipating, we will give 
an account of this, as illustrating what took place under 
such Acts as these. 

Anne Askew was the second daughter of Sir William 
Askew, of Kelsey, in Lincolnshire, and this lovely and 
noble victim was only about twenty-five years of age when 
she suffered the most horrible death on record. Her elder 
sister died, and she was compelled to marry against her 
will, and when very young, a wealthy neighbour, called 
Kyme, who was to have married her sister. For her love 
of the Bible and its truths, her husband drove her out of 
the house. She went to London, and soon became friendly 
with some of the principal ladies of the Court. 

She was very brave and plain spoken, and was soon 
marked out for destruction by such Hell-hounds as 
Gardiner and Bonner. The account of her examinations 
occupies many pages in Foxe’s Acts and Monuments, 
and was drawn up by herself, at the earnest request 
of her friends. Briefly, her confession of faith closes 
thus : 


* Essays on the Reformation. 


238 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


“Finally, I believe all those Scriptures to be true which 
Christ hath confirmed with His most precious blood. 
Yea, and St. Paul saith, those Scriptures are sufficient for 
our learning and salvation, that Christ hath left here 
with us; so that I believe we need no unwritien verities 
to rule His Church with. But as concerning your 
Mass, as it is now used, I do say and believe it ig 
the most abominable idol that is in the world; for my 
God will not be eaten with teeth, neither yet dieth He 
again.” 

"When she was condemned, she was let down into a 
dungeon at the Tower, where Sir Anthony Knevet, the 
Lieutenant, commanded his jailer to put her on the rack. 
The fiends wanted her to condemn some of the Court 
ladies, suspected of sharing Protestant views, such as 
Lady Herbert, the Queen’s sister, and the Duchess of 
Suffolk. But nothing could be extracted from her, and 
she said she had lately lived by gifts from apprentices 
in the streets, which her maid went out and got for her, 
When Knevet thought things had gone far enough, and 
was about to take her off the rack, Wriothesley, the 
Chancellor,* commanded the Lieutenant to strain her on 
the rack again. He refused, and then Wriothesley and a 
creature called Rich, throwing off their gowns, racked her 
with their own hands. The consequence was that when 
the day of her execution came she was unable to walk, 
and was brought into Smithfield in a chair. When 
letters were brought to her, offering her pardon if she 
would recant, she would not look at them. The cowardly 
wretches who were in charge, Wriothesley, the old Duke 
of Norfolk, the Earl of Bedford, and the Lord Mayor, 
were afraid lest they should be injured by the gunpowder 
that was used, and it took a good deal of explanation to 
quiet their fears. But this lovely and constant lady had 
no fears, and died with three others, Shaxton the recanter 
being ordered to preach to them. Yes, the Apostate might 
preach, but such a piece of history will preach as long as 


* This fiend was a renegade, being an ‘‘ earnest doer against the Pope in 
my Lord Cromwell’s time.” —Batn, 


“SUdH 


LO GNV MUS 


VY Q@NNV 40 ONINYOA FHL 








CRANMER AND HIS BIBLE WORK 241 


there are any men to see the difference between light 
and darkness, good and evil, sweet and bitter.* 

The Commissioners who carried out the Six Articles 
matched them. In the Metropolis they were ignorant, 
headstrong, and bloodthirsty, “such as had read no part 
of Scripture in English, or in any wise favoured such as 
had, or loved the preachers of it.” They sat in Mercer’s 
Chapel, close by the Old Jewry, Cheapside, and over- 
stepping their commission they inquired who read the 
Bible in Church. The prisons could not contain all whom 
they brought to trial. 

Of course there were martyrs of a Catholic type as 
well as Protestants, both in this reign and long before it. 
John Bale gives a list of them, and glories in the early 
ones of the Primitive Church here before such names as 
Catholic and Protestant were known, and when it acknow- 
ledged no authority of the Romish Pope. Such~ were 
Emerita, Amphibalus, Alban, Aaron, Julius, and Dinothus, 
who were as sheep among wolves. But “the Popish 
martyrdoms, compared to the martyrdoms of Anne Askew 
and her faithful company, are as a rusty iron to pure 
silver.” England has had her true martyrs, however, for 
ages, he says, who have been “cruelly burnt if they did 
but read the Testament of God in their mother tongue; 
and their spiritual tyrants of Rome do not as yet repent 
them of that mischief, but continue therein.” 

We are not always able to agree with Gairdner in his 
recent volume, from which we have often quoted, but 
every one will agree with the way he closes his account of 
Anne Askew: 

“ How little is it understood, in any age, that the world 
is governed by spiritual influences and not by mere brute 
force! The burning of books was futile, for the burning of 
martyrs read a deeper lesson.” 

The Great Bible was the culminating point of a great 
struggle. The Right Honourable W. E. Gladstone said, in 


* Bale draws out an elaborate parallel between Blandina, the famous 
second century martyr, and Anne Askew. It extends over two large pages. 
Select Works of John Bale, D.D., Parker Society. 


16 


242 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


opening the Caxton Exhibition in 1877, that it was the 
climax and consummation of the art of printing up to 
that time. And Mr. Henry Stevens, F.S.A., adds that, 
considering the times and the state of the market; that 
as it was a wholly private, individual, and mercantile 
enterprise, carried on at great peril and risk by Marler, 
Grafton, Whitchurch, and other City merchants, in spite of 
ecclesiastical bigots not yet all dead,—it may be considered 
the greatest effort of the press even to the present day.* 
With seven distinct editions, 1539-41, of these great and 
magnificent volumes scattered throughout the land, 
11,000 in the parish churches, and 20,000 in the families 
of the nobility and gentry, it was impossible for the nation 
not to advance. 

Cromwell just lived to see his great project executed, 
and then fell, deserted by his king, whom he had often 
terrorised, but for whom he had done so much. Tudor 
absolutism was chiefly his creation, bearing fruit a 
century later in the execution of Charles 1. His master 
should not have deserted him, but he had struck down 
More and Fisher, Courtenay and Pole, and his own turn 
came. Lam aris quam aratris. But just as Copernicus 
received his immortal book, on which his mind had been 
so long occupied, on his death-bed, so Cromwell lived to 
see his Bibles in every part of the land. Cranmer was 
the only man faithful to his friend. He wrote the king 
an eloquent letter in his defence, a very dangerous thing 
to do. But the king said, on reading it, “ The traitor 
Lord never extended pity nor mercy to one of his victims, 
and he shall receive none from me.” All were against 
him. The nobility envied him, being of low birth. 
Gardiner and the Catholics hated him for his suppression 
of the monasteries. He used to call the clergy the king’s 
half-subjects, on account of their oaths to the Pope. The 
Reformers found he could not protect them, even from 
burning. And the people suffered from his avarice, and 
had long mistrusted him. Besides a subsidy of 4s. in 
the pound from the clergy, he hadjust forced on in the 

* Bibles in the Caxton Exhibition. 


CRANMER AND HIS BIBLE WORK 243 


Parliament another of one-tenth and four-fifteenths from the 
laity. Catherine Parr had recently given the king minute 
particulars of his tyranny, her own relative, George 
Throckmorton, being in the Tower; and Cromwell 
himself said that the vengeance of Heaven had overtaken 
him at last.* 

But he was a loving and kind master to his servants, 
and provided for them nearly all beforehand. He 
remembered favours done him, and rewarded them gener- 
ously. And if he had really been a traitor to the king, he 
would not have lamented his death so soon, and wished 
he had him back again. But there was never any 
dependence on Henry vit. for two months together, 
except in the case of Cranmer, to whom he was always 
faithful, and whose life he saved more than once. 

Foxe says it was the general rule for those who suffered 
as martyrs to have grace and fortitude which made them 
quite different from others. Often also they went to their 
doom with alacrity and cheerfulness, and it was so at last 
with Cromwell, though at first the prospect of death filled 
him withfear. But on the dread morning (July 28, 1540) 
he found Lord Hungerford, likewise going to his execution, ~ 
very heavy and doleful, and exclaimed, “Be of good 
comfort, for if you repent and be heartily sorry for what 
you have done, there is mercy enough with the Lord. 
And though the breakfast we are going to be sharp, yet 
trusting to the Lord, we shall have a joyful dinner.” 
So we must leave him in the great beyond, of which Faber 
Says: 

“There is no place where earth’s failings, 
Have such kindly judgment given.” 


Better to die than live in such times! The House of 
Lords condemned to death without trial, examination, or 
evidence, the most powerful minister of the age, a man 
whom they had declared to be worthy of being the Vicar- 
General of the Universe only just before. The Commons 
objected a little, but the king put on his brow-beating air, 

* Men and Women of the Reformation, S. H. Burke. 


244 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


and they yielded. Never was there a more memorable 
case of being hoist with his own petard, for the Act under 
which he died was his own framing. 

In the Great Bibles issued subsequent to July 1540, 
the date of Cromwell’s death, the circle in the large 
frontispiece occupied by his coat of arms is left a blank. 
The fixed price of these numerous Bibles was 12s. bound, 
and 10s. unbound, being about £9 and £7, 10s. of our 
money. They were frequently sold for less, however, and 
Church records show this, as for instance at Ashburton 
there is the following entry:—“a.p. 1540. I Paid vs. 
iid. for a new booke called a Bybyll. Paid viiid. for a 
chaine for fastenynge the said booke.” * 

* Rey. R. Lovett, MvA. 


CHAPTER XXIII 


TAVERNER, THE LAY-TRANSLATOR 


‘©The Truth of God is as a rock assailed by waves ; each in succession 
may seem to overwhelm it, but the force of each is in measure spent 
upon that which has preceded it, and modified by that which follows. 
Each wave may make wild havoc amongst the detached pebbles at its 
base, whilst the rock itself is unmoved and uninjured.” 

S. P. TrraEties, LL.D. 


In November 1540 there came out another edition of 
the Great Bible, with the name and sanction of that very 
Bishop Tunstall who had tried to stop the sale of Tyndale’s 
version. It is never to be forgotten, indeed, in considering 
the history of these days, what a long night of Papist 
abuses had preceded them. So long had the Bible been 
shut against the people that conscientious men might 
think they were doing God service by opposing its free 
circulation. To a certain order of mind change is pro- 
fanity. We are told that even as early as Augustine's 
day, a bishop having publicly read the new translation 
of Jonah by Jerome, the people hearing the word rendered 
Hedera, which they had been accustomed to hear Cucurbita, 
accused the bishop of falsifying the Scriptures. There 
was quite a tumult about it! But it is at least worth 
noting that conversions took place very rapidly when the 
king authorised the reading of the Scriptures. Many 
who had had serious scruples found answers to them, and 
here we find one of the great enemies of Tyndale, only a 
few years after his death, carrying on the work for which 
he had been martyred. He was now Bishop of Durham, 
and with him Heath, Bishop of Rochester, was associated. 
Tunstall seems to have been a fairly good man, for the 
times. Fuller says the Bishopric of Durham had halcyon 


245 


246 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


days under God and good Cuthbert Tunstall, a learned 
man of sweet disposition, rather devout to follow his own 
than cruel to persecute the consciences of others. Wood 
calls him a very good Grecian and Hebrician, but it was 
his name chiefly that was wanted, and his work was 
probably of the slightest. Cromwell having fallen soon 
after the publication of the Great Bible, the sanction of 
two eminent bishops was desirable for after editions. 
All the better if they belonged to the party which had 
opposed Cromwell, so as to show that this was not a 
matter of parties. So on the title-page of the edition 
which came out the very year that Cromwell was executed, 
Tunstall and Heath are said to have “overseen and 
perused” the translation, “at the commandment of the 
King’s Highness.” Cranmer’s Prologue is inserted, but 
the Preface to the Apocrypha is left out. Afterwards, 
when the tide turned, the two bishops disclaimed all 
responsibility, so that probably they did scarcely anything, 
and were unwilling to do that. 

Tunstall had gone to Italy in his early days, and 
absorbed some of the spirit of the Renascence in its home. 
He studied at Padua, and was engaged in the diplomatic 
service of Henry VIII, receiving ecclesiastical preferment 
for his services,—quite a common thing. He was Wolsey’s 
agent at the famous Diet of Worms, and wrote to his 
master that he believed there were a hundred thousand 
Germans ready to lay down their lives in Luther’s defence.* 

It is a somewhat striking indication of the revival of 
letters to find a layman bringing out a translation of his 
own about the same time. This was Richard Taverner, 
to whose work Westcott says that justice has scarcely 
been done. He certainly presents a picturesque figure in 
more ways than one. He was born at North Elmham in 
Norfolk, educated at Benet College, Cambridge, and Christ 
Church, Oxford, and at the latter became known asa reader 
of Tyndale’s New Testament when first they arrived at 
Oxford. He was one of those imprisoned for a time 
in the College cellar, in consequence, amongst the salt fish. 

* Cambridge History of Literature. 


TAVERNER, THE LAY-TRANSLATOR 247 


A public Act of penance followed, such books being thrown 
into a fire at Carfax, in the centre of the city. Later on 
he was at the Inner Temple, and came under the patron- 
age of Cromwell, being made a Clerk of the Signet in 
ordinary. In Edward v1.’s reign, preachers being very 
searce, he received a licence as an Evangelist, and preached 
in different churches throughout the kingdom. He wore 
a velvet bonnet and a damask gown, with a gold chain 
about his neck, and exercised his gifts as a lay preacher 
both at Court and before his University. During Queen 
Mary’s reign he retired to his house at Norbiton Hill, and 
remained there unmolested until the accession of Elizabeth. 
He then presented her with a congratulatory epistle, and 
was offered the honour of knighthood, which, however, he 
refused. But he accepted later on the office of High Sheriff 
of Oxfordshire, which he held for six years. He continued 
to preach. He preached before the University in 1569, 
wearing a sword at his side, and commencing :— 

“ Arriving at the Mount of St. Mary’s, in the stony 
stage (a pulpit of stone), where I now stand, I have 
brought you some fine biscuits baked in the oven of 
charity, and carefully conserved for the chickens of the 
Church, the sparrows of the Spirit, and the sweet swallows 
of salvation.” Perhaps the man’s pleasant humour 
lengthened his life, in spite of his having been once 
thrown into the Tower, as well as amongst the salt fish 
in the cellar of his College, for he lived to be a very old 
man. Henry vil. made him a number of presents, and in 
1545 he was returned to Parliament for Liverpool. His 
preaching was of course unusual, but he had a special 
licence for it. Other laymen have done the same, being 
University men, such as Holcot. Sir T. More read lectures 
on Augustine’s City of God, in the Church of St. Lawrence, 
Old Jewry, for some time after he was called to the Bar 
at Lincoln’s Inn. The University of Oxford possesses the 
power of licensing, under sufficient safeguard.* 

Taverner’s Bible is something between a revision of 
Matthew’s and a new version. It was printed by John 


* Notes and Queries. 


248 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


Byddell in 1539, and was published under Royal authority. 
Some skill in Greek is shown, but in the dedication to the 
king, Taverner says that it is a work of such great 
difficulty that he found it could scarce be done by one or 
two persons, but rather required “both a deeper con- 
ferring of many learned wits together, and also a juster 
time and longer leisure.” There is a table of principal 
matters, as in Matthew's Bible, and the Apocrypha is 
included. On the title-page is the somewhat singular ex- 
pression——“ Recognised by Richard Taverner.” He affirms 
in the dedication that the king never did anything more 
acceptable to God and profitable to the advancement of 
true Christianity than when he sent forth the Bible in 
English, “though it would want another Cicero or 
Demosthenes to set forth what he had done for the 
Christian religion.” This was the kind of thing that 
made Henry like a spoilt child. 

Taverner was a lawyer, but there is no prolixity about 
his version, which aims at compression and vividness, 
The word “mercystock” is coined for Tyndale’s round- 
about “He it is that obtaineth grace for our sins.” His 
regard for the Greek article led him to better renderings, 
such as “that was the true light,” “I am a voice of one 
crying.” It had been his humour sometimes to quote the 
law in Greek, and possibly this incited the printer to 
suggest such a work to him, which may be the origin of 
the version. 

There are several pieces of independent translation in the 
Old Testament, and this Bible has an additional book at 
the end of the Apocrypha, viz. the Third Book of M accabees, 
consisting of seven chapters. Westcott says that he has 
observed no help that he had for the Old Testament, except 
the Vulgate, but scarcely a page fails to show changes 
which are made for the sake of clearness and force. Thus 
“the child of death” becomes “ worthy of death” (2 Sam, 
xii. 5); “of mine own mind” is altered to “of mine own 
head” ; “a curtesye bawlme ” is changed into “a quantity 
of bawlme.” 

A large proportion of Rogers’s notes are absent, and 


TAVERNER, THE LAY-TRANSLATOR 249 


some are softened. Thus,in the Table of principal matters, 
where Matthew begins “An altar was never commanded 
to be made but only to God,’ Taverner reads, “An 
altar was commanded to be made to God.” The section 
speaking of those that believe in Purgatory thus despising 
the passion of Christ, he omits altogether. 

There were two editions, folio and quarto, and both the 
entire Bible and the New Testament were printed the 
same year. The quarto edition was published in part, so 
that all might be able to secure a portion. It was probably 
the first work to be ever so brought out. The appearance 
of the Great Bible checked the sale, but both Bible and 
New Testament were reprinted, and the Old Testament 
was adopted in a Bible of 1551. 

Cromwell no doubt favoured this Bible of Taverner’s, 
but its influence on subsequent versions was not great. 
Some more translations came from the same pen, showing 
the layman’s learning, amongst them being “ The Confession 
of Faith of the Germans, with the Apology of Melanch- 
thon.” 

He published also some “ Postils,” or Expositions of the 
Gospels and Epistles. They did not receive any such 
sanction as to be entitled to rank with the Homilies, 
Foxe’s Acts and Monuments, the Paraphrase of Erasmus, 
or the Apology of Bishop Jewel, all of which came to have 
some authority in the Church of England. But two of 
them were adopted by Archbishop Parker, and published 
by authority of Queen Elizabeth, in her second Book of 
Homilies. ‘Twenty-two years had elapsed since they were 
issued, and “times of shaking” both in doctrine and 
discipline had been experienced such as are rarely known, 
and yet they were adopted without any alterations of 
importance, though they were on two of the most important 
services of the Church. 

Taverner’s Bible is seldom found complete. The copy 
in Earl Spencer’s Library, lent to the Caxton Exhibition, 
wants folios 55 to 60 in the New Testament, and H. 
Stevens says this hiatus was probably intended to be filled 
with a prologue to the Epistle to the Romans. | 


250 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


Here are two renderings from Judges, for which I am 
indebted to Lord Peckover. 

5, 15.—Even so was Isakar sent to the valeye a fote, 
and put his life in a venture. 

5. 27.—Betwene her feet he sprawled and laye deed 
lyke a wretche. 

Taverner was employed by the printers, but says that 
it was only notable faults that he was desired to amend, 
and that it is absurd to suppose that a faultless translation 
could be made in a year’s time by any single man. As 
further specimens of his work, we give: 

Matt. 26. 30.—When they had given praises. 

Luke 12. 29.—Be not carried in the clouds. 

Edgar says that Taverner’s adherence to the English 
text of Tyndale is much more noticeable and sometimes 
stranger than his occasional departures from it. Both 
render 1 Tim vi. 17, “Charge them that are ryche in this 
world that they be not exceedyng wyse.” 


CHAPTER XXIV 


THE REACTION AND ITS CAUSES 


“Systems, schemes, and hypotheses, all bred in the warm region of = 
controversy, will, like meteors in a troubled sky, all have their turn to 
blaze and pass away. But the Bible is eternal, like the sun, the never 
failing source of life and light.” 

Warsurton, Divine Legation. 


So the new art of printing became a mighty force on 
the side of truth. Foxe exults in it, exclaiming— 

“Hereby tongues are known, knowledge groweth, 
judgment increaseth, books are dispersed, the Scrip- 
ture is seen, the Doctors be read, stories be opened, 
times compared, truth promoted, falsehood detected, 
and with finger pointed, and all through the benefit of 
printing.” 

But some time before Henry’s death a reaction set in. 
The times were gathering a greater degree of hazard 
and perplexity. By declining to enter into a common 
Confession of Faith, Henry had estranged from him the 
Protestant princes of Germany. The Roman Catholic 
Powers had begun to form alliances against him. The 
Pope had held a Bull of Excommunication suspended 
over him, and some of the Reformers had assumed a 
license inconsistent with the king’s views of supreme 
authority, and with the tranquillity of the realm. The 
arrest and almost immediate execution of such a man 
as Cromwell also was a terrible blow to the Reformers, 
and one of Henry’s foulest crimes. 

In 1542 it was proposed in Convocation that the 
New Testament should be still further revised, and that 


251 


252 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


certain “majestic words” in ‘the Latin copy should be 
transferred into this new version. The motion was 
made by Gardiner, and the words he wished to retain 
were exactly a hundred, and occupy seventeen lines in 
Colhier’s History. It was during the sixth session of a 
select Joint-Committee of both Houses of Convocation 
appointed to examine and amend the Great Bible that 
the proposition was made. ‘Two sittings followed this, 
and then Henry sent to say that the two Universities 
had better be consulted. All dissented from this, except 
Cranmer and two others, the argument being that the 
* Universities were “much sunk from their former con- 
siderableness,” and that the learning of the nation lay 
mostly in Convocation. Cranmer, however, said he would 
stick by his master’s will and pleasure, and the whole 
matter was allowed to drop. 

The next year, only four years after the royal sanction, 
a Bill was passed prohibiting the use of Tyndale’s trans- 
lation altogether, and denying the Bible to all except the 
highest in the land. Neither in public nor private was 
any one belonging to the class of artificers, journeymen, 
servants, husbandmen, and labourers allowed to read 
any portion of God’s Word. Thus did the tide turn 
directly after it had risen to its height, Burnet saying 
that what Henry did after this was by starts backwards 
or forwards as the humour took him. 

There were two Acts, and by this one in 1543, Lords, 
Gentlemen, and Merchants might possess an English 
Bible, and some other religious books for the instruction 
of their families. But Cranmer himself seems to have 
been a favourer of this Bill, which denied it to all others, 
the preamble speaking of “many seditious and ignorant 
people,” who abused the privilege granted to them. The 
stronger prohibition was in 1546, and not only were 
Tyndale’s and Coverdale’s Bibles forbidden, but any 
books set forth in the names of Tyndale, Frith, Joy, 
Bale, Barnes, Coverdale, Turner, Tracy, and all Protestant 
books in general. This latter Act was at Gardiner’s 
suggestion and Wriothesley’s, and Henry of course 


THE REACTION AND ITS CAUSES 253 


quite turned his back on his former opinions in sanction- 
ing it.* 

Once Cranmer and Gardiner had a dispute in his presence 
on the giving of the Word of God to the people, Henry 
listening for some time attentively. Perceiving, however, 
the superiority of Cranmer’s arguments in favour of it, 
the debate was suddenly broken up by Henry’s exclaim- 
ing to Gardiner that such a novice as he was not fit to 
contend with an old experienced general.t 

What results, then, had followed the opening of God’s 
Word go disastrous that it was necessary to close it 
again? The preamble already referred to says that great 
diversity of opinion, animosities, tumults, and schisms had 
been occasioned by perverting the sense of the Scriptures. 
But what good thing has ever been without its abuses ? 
and surely some might have been reckoned upon at first. 
If food in good quantity is set before a number of famished 
men, there will be the possibility of some injury, but 
that is better than starving. It is exactly what happened 
at the first publication of the Gospel, and is deplored by 

-the Apostle: “Some things hard to be understood, which 
they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do 
also other Scriptures unto their own destruction.” But 
what conclusion does he draw? Not that the Scriptures 
are therefore to be put aside, but only that we are to 
beware lest we be led away with the error of the wicked, and 
fall from our own steadfastness. And as for the learning 
supposed to be necessary before the Word of God comes 
into the hands of the people, let Du Moulin speak: 
“ Must one be skilledin Greek or Hebrew? But the Popes 
themselves, who give these rules, are often unskilful.{ And 
a knowledge of Hebrew cannot be attained but by the 
reading of the Old Testament. Must one have the learning 
which comes of studying the old Poets, with their lust 

* The kingdom was also to be purged of all religious plays, inter- 
ludes, rhymes, ballads, and songs, which were said to be equally pes- 
tiferous and noisome to the peace of the Church. 

+ Rapin. 

+ Innocent 111. derives the word “‘ pascha ” from the Passion. Another 
said that Cephas signifies a ‘‘head.” 


254 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


and war? Must one be abreast of philosophy? But the 
Apostles were not by any means; and some philosophers 
have been bitter enemies to the Christian religion. Is not 
Scripture rather to be read to get learning ? ” 

The Bill became an Act, however, and soon Gardiner is 
found figuring in the renewed history of persecution. 
We have mentioned the Windsor martyrs, who were tried 
before a packed jury of College tenants, the Papists there 
not being numerous enough. The description of their 
steadfastness unto death, right under Windsor Castle, so 
affected Henry that, for a while, the hands of the perse- 
cutors were stayed. This was the way he got reported 
‘abroad, however; Richard Hilles, writing to Henry 
Bullinger at this time, says: 

“The king has within these two months, as I wrote to 
John Burcher, burnt three godly men in one day. For 
he has married the widow of a certain nobleman 
(Catherine Parr), and he is always wont to celebrate his 
nuptials by some wickedness of this kind.” * 

To the same period belongs the remarkable incident 
connected with the name of Patrick Hamilton. He was 
nephew to the Regent in Scotland, and was arraigned 
under the ordinary charges urged against Protestants. He 
had been betrayed by a Dominican friar, called Campbell, 
whom he had taken some pains to convince, and who 
insulted him at the stake. He called him to answer at 
the judgment seat of Christ, and appealed to him whether 
he were not persuaded of the very truths for which he 
was persecuting him. The friar went mad, fell into a 
fever, and died. 

Certainly it must be admitted that some of the effects 
of the circulation of God’s Word were bad. Foolish 
people talked all the more foolishly, and hot reasoners 
got very warm on some Biblical subjects. Many had not 
learnt what Augustine says, that Scripture is a large and 
high place, but the door is very low, so that the high and 
arrogant Man cannot run in; or, to use the figure of 
Cheney, Bishop of Gloucester : 

* Original Letters, Parker Society. 


THE REACTION AND ITS CAUSES 255 


“In reading the Scriptures be you like the snail, for 
when he feels a hard thing against his horns, he pulls 
them in again. So when you come to hard matters of 
controversy, pull in your horns.” 

Sects professing the strangest doctrines sprang up, and 
became even dangerous to the State. There were 
Anabaptists, who held that every man was guided by the 
direct inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and that there was no 
need of any judge, magistrate, minister, or even of civil law ; 
Antinomians, who persuaded themselves that they thought 
that all things were free to the saints, and amongst whom 
were to be found some of the vilest characters; members 
of the “Family of Love,’ and Davidians, called after 
David George, their leader, who announced himself to be 
the Messiah, denied the existence of either heaven or 
hell, and laughed at all kinds of self-denial. He promised 
that after death he would rise again at the end of three 
years; which he did, for the magistrate of the city where 
he was buried, when the time arrived, had him dug up and 
burnt, together with his writings, by the common hang- 
man. Then there were Arians, Libertines, and Unitarians, 
and arguments on the most sacred subjects were conducted 
with such venom, that Hudibras cries out: 


“As if religion were intended 
For nothing else but to be mended, 
A sect whose chief devotion lies 
In odd, perverse antipathies ; 
In falling out with that or this, 
And finding somewhat still amiss ; 
More peevish, cross, and splenetic 
Than dog distract, or monkey sick.” 


But this was to be almost reckoned on for a time, and 
was not to be measured at all by the side of the incal- 
culable benefits conferred on the nation by giving it the 
holiest body of truth which the world contains. Know- 
ledge and religion had been separated, and if those that 


made the chasm would not build the bridge, let them not 
criticise the ruder workmanship of those who sought to 


256 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


“unite the pair so long disjoined, knowledge and vital 
piety.” Coleridge has said: 

“Those who examine a system by identifying it with 
its abuses and imperfections degrade their understandings, 
and are sure to prescribe remedies more dangerous than 
the disease.” * 

It is also to be remembered that a large proportion of 
the scandals which abounded at this period are to be 
attributed not to the circulation of the Scriptures, but to 
the suppression of the monasteries. Many who had been 
thrown out of them found it hard to support a livelihood, 
and the means which they adopted were often not such 
as established their character. One priest, in Derbyshire, 
had a church and an alehouse under the same roof, and 
kept them both going himself, there being a hole in the 
wall so that beer could be passed from the one to the 
other. 

The suppression of the monasteries could not but make 
a vast difference in every way. The number was 
enormous. There were suppressed at different times in 
this one reign 645 monasteries, 90 colleges, 2574 chantries 
and free chapels, and 110 hospitals, the revenue of the 
whole amounting to £161,000, whilst the movables were 
worth half a million. Henry did not begin the work, and 
in 1513 had written to Leo x., eulogising the Religious 
Orders in England, Franciscans and Grey Friars being 
specially commended. He described them then as being 
“remarkable for Christian poverty, sincerity, charity, and 
devotion,” however much he changed his mind after- 
wards.t 

Wolsey really led the way in 1524, seizing on no fewer 
than forty small monasteries, in order to found his two 
colleges, and turning their inhabitants out of house and 
home. ‘This was when he was a cardinal of the Romish 
Church, and. Pope Clement vi. sanctioned what he did. 
Henry v. also suppressed a hundred monasteries in 1414, 
wanting money to carry on his war with France, and 


* Lay sermon to the higher and middle classes. 
} Ellis’s Original Letters. 


THE REACTION AND ITS CAUSES 257 


Henry yi. endowed Eton and King’s College (Cambridge) 
with revenues which came from the suppression of alien 
priories. 

To hig honour be it said that Gardiner did not receive 
the smallest portion of the plunder, though he could often 
enough be a pliant tool of Henry’s. The waste was fear- 
ful. Bale tells us that some monastic libraries were used 
to clean candlesticks ; some to rub boots; some were sold 
to grocers and soap boilers; and large quantities were sent 
over the seas—whole shipfuls, to the great wonder of 
foreign nations. “I know a man,” he says, “ who bought 
the contents of two noble libraries for forty shillings, a 
shame be it spoken. He used the said books for ten 
years instead of grey (brown) paper, and yet he had suffi- 
cient for many years to come.” The monasteries had 
employed about 200,020 men, women, and children, and 
often their new masters were not half so good to them. 
Churches were turned into shelters for sheep. The 
number of idle and sick poor became terrible, as well as 
worse offenders, and to meet the case there was an amended 
code of whipping, ear cutting, and pinching; and an 

‘improved specimen of the pillory, invented by Cromwell’s 
brother. Stripping naked and_whipping till the blood 
came was an everyday thing. Highwaymen were hanged 
on the nearest tree, and hanging, drawing, and quartering 
were dismally frequent. 

Certainly a good deal was credited to the opening of 
the Bible, which had very little more connection with it 
than Tenterden Church steeple had with Goodwin Sands. 
Calvin has to defend Luther in the same way, and after 
speaking of Anabaptists and others who were no disciples 
of his, he says: 

“The Reformers are no more bound to bear the odium 
of their impiety than Paul was to bear that of Hermo- 
genes and Philetus. We must not be frightened out of 
good things because of a few abuses which the common 
sense of men will presently rectify.” 

Most likely a good many lies were told about the evil 
doings in the monasteries, but it is significant that the 


17 


258 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


“black book” containing the record is said to have been 
destroyed in Queen Mary’s reign. And no one need 
pore over the “Comperta ” preserved in the Record Office, 
for the Bishops’ Registers are above suspicion, and sub- 
stantiate some of the worst accusations. The facts about 
St. Rhadegund’s Nunnery at Cambridge, suppressed as 
early as 1497 by the Bishop of Ely, and about St. Albans, 
are indisputable, if not illustrative, for those who wish 
to examine more fully an unpleasant subject. Creighton 
says, in his Historical Essays: 

“The monks, as a body, were above the ordinary 
standard of morality, but they were not so far above it as 
to be a moral force in the community. They were lazy, 
ignorant, self-indulgent, and a hindrance to economic 
progress and ecclesiastical reform.” 

And probably their charities have been exaggerated. 
The houses were mostly apart from the centres of popula- 
tion, and their annals show but few traces of any thought- 
ful gifts.* Often this was not their fault, but it took 
twenty-six carts to convey away the treasures from Becket’s 
shrine. 

No doubt the spoil should have been put to better use. 
Most of the enormous sums made by the Dissolution 
went into the hands of the nobility and gentry. By 
purchase at very easy rates, or direct gifts from the Crown, 
they were made the fast friends of the new order of 
things. It was wrong, but most would agree with 
Hallam’s summing up: 

“ However illaudable in its motive, this has proved, on 
the whole, more beneficial to England than any other 
disposition would have turned out.” 

Certainly the country was not really impoverished by 
what happened. It was poor enough before, in the days 
when monasteries abounded. At the very time when 
Tyndale published his first New Testament, some rebels 
in Norfolk said to the Duke, « My Lord, since you ask 
who is our captain, forsooth his name is Poverty, for he 
and his cousin Necessity hath brought us to this doing.” 

* Reformation in England, G. G. Perry, M.A. 


CHECNIEMUID IE, DO WY 
FOXE’S “MERRY AND PLEASANT NARRATIVE” 


‘A little nonsense now and then 
Is relished by the best of men.” 
SHAKESPEARE, 


Ou the horrors of this reign! Alas for the rarity of 
Christian charity! We might fill whole chapters with 
the persecutions of innocent people. Here, to open 
Foxe at random, is some of the bloody work of Longland, 
Bishop of Lincoln, who was one of the worst of the 
persecuting brood, in 1541. 

« About the same time John Longland, Bishop of Lin- 
coln, burned two upon one day, the one named Thomas 
Bernard, and the other James Morton; the one for teaching 
the Lord’s Prayer in English, and the other for keeping the 
Epistle of St. James translated into English.” 

It would be only too easy to multiply such quotations. 
Some recanted, and a great stir was made the same year 
about the recantation of “Master Barber,’ an Oxford 
Master of Arts. Another who recanted was “ Master 
Malary,” a Cambridge Master of Arts, Scholar of Christ’s 
College, who was sent to Oxford, to teach the Bible lovers 
there a lesson. He was to openly recant and bear his 
faggot, and listen to a sermon for the good of his soul, 
exhorting him to stop reading the Scriptures which 
Christ had commanded to be searched. But the whole 
narration is sq illustrative of the temper and spirit of the 
two parties that were dividing the Church, so apropos to 
the subject, and so highly amusing, that, though it is a 
little long, we feel tempted to extricate it from Foxe’s 
great volumes, and give it in his own words.* 


* Acts and Monwments, vol. v. 
259 


260 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


A Merry and Pleasant Narration. 


The time and place were appointed, that Master Malary . 
should be brought solemnly into St. Mary’s Church (the 
University Church), Oxford, upon a Sunday; where a 
great number of the head doctors and divines, and others 
of the University were together assembled, besides a 
great multitude of citizens and town dwellers, who came 
to behold the sight. Furthermore, because that solemnity 
should not pass without some effectual sermon for the — 
holding up of the Mother Church of Rome, Dr. Smith, 
reader then of the Divinity Lecture, was appointed to make 
the sermon at this recantation. Briefly, at the preaching 
of this sermon there was assembled a mighty audience of 
all sorts and degrees, as well of students as others. Few 
almost were absent who loved to see or hear any news; 
insomuch that there was no place almost in the whole 
church which was not fully replenished with concourse 
and throng of people. 

All things being thus prepared, cometh forth poor 
Malary, with his faggot upon his shoulder. Not long 
after, also, proceedeth the Doctor into the pulpit, to make 
his sermon, the argument whereof was wholly on the 
Sacrament ; the which Doctor, for the more confirmation 
of his words, had provided the Holy Catholic Cake, there 
to hang by a string before him in the pulpit. Thus the 
Doetor, with his God Almighty, entering his sermon, 
had scarce proceeded into the midst thereof, the people 
giving great silence with all reverence unto his doctrine, 
but suddenly was heard into the church, the voice of one 
crying in the street, “Fire, Fire!” The party who thus 
cried in the street was called Henster, and the occasion of 
this exclamation came by a chimney that was on fire in 
the town. 

This sound of fire being heard in the church, first of 
them that stood outermost next to the church door, so 
increased and went from one to another, that at length 
it came to the ears of the Doctors, and at last to the 
preacher himself, who, as soon, as they heard the matter, 


FOXE’S MERRY AND PLEASANT NARRATIVE 261 


being amazed with sudden fear, and marvelling what the 
matter should mean, began to look up into the top of the 
church, and to behold the walls. The residue, seeing 
them look up, looked up also. Then began they, in the 
midst of the audience to ery out with a loud voice, “ Fire, 
Fire!” “Where?” saith one; “Where?” saith another. 
“Tn the church,” saith one. The mention of the church 
was scarcely pronounced, when, as in one moment, there 
was a common cry amongst them, “The church is set on 
fire by heretics.” And albeit no man did see any fire at 
all, yet, forasmuch as all men cried out so, every man 
thought it true that they heard. Then was there such 
fear, concourse, and tumult of people, through the whole 
church that it cannot be declared in words as it was 
in deed. 

And as in a great fire, where fire is indeed, we see 
many times how one little spark giveth matter of a 
mighty flame, setting whole stacks and piles a-burning, so 
here, upon a small occasion of one man’s word, kindled 
first a general cry, then a strong opinion, running in 
every man’s head within the church, thinking the 
church to be on fire where no fire was at all. Thus 
it pleased Almighty God to delude these deluders ; that 
is, that these great Doctors and wise men of the Schools, 
who think themselves so wise in God’s matters as though 
they could not err, should see, by their own senses and 
judgments, how blinded and infatuated they were in 
these so small matters and sensible trifles. 

Thus the strong imagination of fire being fixed in their 
heads, as nothing could remove them to think contrary 
but that the church was on fire, so everything that they 
saw or heard increased this suspicion in them, to make 
it seem most true, which was indeed most false. The 
frst occasion that augmented this suspicion was the 
heretic there bearing his faggot, which gave them to 
imagine that all other heretics had conspired with him 
to set the church on fire. 

After this, through the rage of the people, and running 
to and fro, the dust was so raised, that it showed as it 


262 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


had been the smoke of fire; which thing, together with 
the outcry of the people, made all men so afraid, 
that, leaving the sermon, they began all together to run 
away. But such was the press of the multitude, running 
in heaps together, that the more they laboured, the less 
they could get out. For while they ran all headlong to 
the doors, every man striving to get out first, they thrust 
one another in such sort, and stuck so fast, that neither 
they that were without could get into the church again, 
neither they that were within could get out by any 
means. So then, one door being stopped, they ran to 
another little wicket on the north side, toward the 
College called Brasennose, thinking so to pass out. But 
there again was the like or greater throng. So the 
people, clustering, and thronging together, it put 
many in danger, and brought many to their end, by 
bruising of their bones or sides. Some yet are alive whose 
mother’s arms were there broken. There was yet another 
door towards the west, which, albeit it was shut and 
seldom opened, yet now ran they to it with such sway 
that the great bar of iron, which is incredible to be 
spoken, being pulled out and broken by force of men’s 
hands, the door, notwithstanding, could not be opened 
for the press or multitude of people. 

At last, when they were there also past all hope to get 
out, then they were all exceedingly amazed, and ran up 
and down, crying out upon the heretics who had conspired 
their death. The more they ran about and cried out, the 
more smoke and dust rose in the church, even as though 
all things had now been on a flaming fire. I think there 
was never such a tumultuous hurly-burly rising so of 
nothing at all, nor so great a fear where there was no 
cause for fear, nor peril at all; so that if Democritus, the 
merry philosopher, sitting in the top of the church, and 
seeing all things in such safety as they were, had looked 
down upon the multitude, and beholden'so great a number, 
some howling and weeping, running up and down, and 
playing the madmen, now hither, now thither, as being 
tossed to and fro with waves or tempests, trembling and 


‘aquoaxo ‘LOTULS 


HOI 








FOXE’S MERRY AND PLEASANT NARRATIVE 265 


quaking, raging and faring, without any manifest cause ; 
especially if he had seen those great rabbins, the doctors, 
laden with so many badges or cognisances of wisdom, so 
foolishly and ridiculously seeking holes and corners to 
hide themselves in; gasping and sweating, and for very 
horror being almost beside themselves; I think he would 
have satisfied himself with this one laughter for all his 
lifetime ; whilst one said that he plainly heard the noise 
of the fire, another affirmed that he saw it, and another 
swore that he felt the molten lead dropping down upon his 
head and shoulders. Such is the force of imagination when 
itis once grafted in men’s hearts through fear. In all the 
whole company there was none that behaved himself 
more modestly than the heretic that was there to do 
penance ; who, casting his faggot off from his shoulders 
upon a monk’s head that stood by, kept himself quiet. 

All the others, being careful for themselves, never made 
an end of running up and down and crying out. None 
cried out more earnestly than the Doctor that preached, 
Doctor Smith, who, in manner first of all, cried out in the 
pulpit, saying, “ These are the trains and subtleties of the 
heretics against me. Lord, have mercy upon me; Lord, 
have mercy upon me.” But might not God, as it had 
been, to speak with Job, out of a whirlwind, have answered 
again unto this preacher thus, “Thou dost now implore 
My merey, but thou thyself showest no mercy, unto thy 
fellows and brethren. How doth thy flesh tremble now 
at the mention of fire! But you think it a sport to burn 
other simple innocents, neither do ye anything at all 
regard it. If burning and to suffer a torment of fire seem 
so grievous a matter unto you, then you should also have 
the like consideration in other men’s perils and dangers, 
when you do burn your fellows and brethren! Or, if you 
think it but a light and trifling matter in them, go to now, 
do you also, with like courage contemn, and with like 
patience suffer now, the same torments yourselves. And 
if so be I should now suffer you, with the whole church, 
to be burned to ashes, what other thing should I do unto 
you, than you do daily unto your fellows and brethren. 


266 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


Wherefore, since you so little esteem the death of others, 
be now content that other men should also little regard 
the death of you.” With this, I say, or with some other 
like answer, if that either God, or human charity, or the 
common sense of nature would expostulate with them ; 
yea, if there had been a fire indeed, who would have 
doubted but that it had happened unto them according to 
their deserts? But now, worthy it is the noting, how the 
vain fear and folly of those Catholics either were deluded, 
or how their cruelty was reproved, whereby they, being 
better taught by their own example, might hereafter learn 
what it is to put other poor men to the fire, which they 
themselves here so much abhorred. 

But to return again to the history of this pageant, 
wherein there was no danger at all, yet were they all in 
such fear as if present death had been over their heads. 
For almost all the churches in England are covered with 
lead, as in Germany they are for the most part tiled. In 
all this great maze and garboil, there was nothing more 
feared than the melting of the lead, which many affirmed 
that they felt dropping upon their bodies. Now in this 
sudden terror and fear, which took from them all reason 
and counsel, to behold what practices and sundry shifts 
every man made for himself, it would make not only 
Democritus and Heraclitus also to laugh, but rather a 
horse well near to break his halter. And none used them- 
selves more ridiculously than such as seemed the greatest 
wise men, saving that in one or two peradventure some- 
what more quietness of mind appeared. The younger 
and stronger of these ran up and down through the 
press, marvelling at the incivility of men, and waxed 
angry with the unmannerly multitude that would give no 
room to the doctors, bachelors, masters, and other 
graduates and regent-masters. But, as the terror and 
fear was common unto all men, so was there no difference 
made of persons or degrees, every man scrambling for 
himself. The violet cap, or purple gown, did there nothing 
avail the doctor; neither the master’s hood, nor the 
monk’s cowl, was there respected. 





, 


tD. 


FO! 


Ox 


? 


ARYS 


M 


ST. 


207 





FOXE’S MERRY AND PLEASANT NARRATIVE 269 


Yea, if the King or Queen had been there at that 
present, and in that perplexity, they had been no better 
than common people. After they had long striven and 
assayed all manner of ways, and saw no remedy, neither 
by force nor authority to prevail, they fell to entreaty and 
offering of rewards; one offereth twenty pound of good 
money, another his scarlet gown, so that any man would 
pull him out, though it were by the ears! 

Some stood close under the pillars, thinking themselves 
safe, under the vautes of stone from the dropping of the 
lead ; other some, being without money, and unprovided 
of all shift, knew not which way to turn them. One, 
being a president of a certain College, whose name I need 
not here utter, pulling a board out from the pews, 
covered his head and shoulders therewith against the 
scalding lead, which they feared much more than the 
fall of the church. How great a laughter would this 
also have ministered to Democritus to behold a certain 
grand paunch, who, seeing the doors stopped and every way 
closed up, thought by another compendious means to get 
out through a glass window, if it might be by any shift! 
But here the iron grates letted him; notwithstanding 
his greedy mind would needs attempt. When he had 
broken the glass, and was come to the space between the 
grates where he should creep out, first he thrust in his head 
with one shoulder, and it went through well enough. 
Then he laboured to get the other shoulder after; but 
there was great labour about that, and long he stuck by 
the shoulders, but at the last he got it through with 
much ado; for what doth not importune labour overcome ! 
Thus far forth he was now gotten; but by what part of 
his body he did stick fast, I am not certain, neither may 
I feign, forasmuch as there be yet witnesses which did see 
these things, which would correct me, if I should do so. 
Notwithstanding, this is most certain, that he did stick 
fast between the grates, and could neither get out nor in. 
Thus this good man, being indeed a monk, and having 
but short hose, by the which way he supposed soonest to 
escape, by the same he fell into further inconvenience, 


270 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


making of one danger two. For, if the fire or lead had 
fallen on the outside, those parts which did hang out of 
the window had been in danger ; and contrariwise, if the 
flame had raged within the church, all his other parts 
had lien open to the fire. And as this man did stick 
fast in the window, so did the rest stick as fast in the 
doors that sooner they might have been burned than they 
could once stir or move one foot; through the which 
press, at last, there was a way found, that some, going 
over their heads, got out. 

Here also happened another pageant in a certain monk 
of Gloucester College, whereat Calphurnius might well 
laugh with open mouth. So it happened that there was 
a young lad in this tumult, who, seeing the doors fast 
stopped with the press or multitude, and that he had not 
way to get out, climbed up upon the door, and there 
staying upon the top of the door, was forced to tarry 
still; for to come down into the church again he durst 
not for fear of the fire, and to leap down toward the street 
he could not without danger of falling. When he had 
tarried there awhile, he advised himself what to do; 
neither did occasion want to serve his purpose; for by 
chance amongst them that got out over men’s heads, he 
saw a monk coming towards him, who had a great wide 
cowl hanging at his back. This the boy thought to be a 
good occasion for him to escape by. When the monk 
came near unto him, the boy which was in the top of the 
door came down, and prettily conveyed himself into the 
monk’s cowl, thinking, as it came to pass indeed, that if 
the monk did escape, he should also get out with him. 
To be brief, at the last the monk got out over men’s heads 
with the boy in his cowl, and for a great while felt no. 
weight or burden, through the press. 

At last, when he was somewhat more come to himself 
and did shake his shoulders, feeling his cowl heavier than 
it was accustomed to be, and also hearing the voice of one 
speaking behind in his cowl, he was more afraid than he 
was before when he was in the throng, thinking, in very 
deed, that the evil spirit which had set the church on fire 


FOXE’S MERRY AND PLEASANT NARRATIVE O75 


had flien into his cowl. By and by he began to play 
the exorcist: “In the name of God,” said he, “and all 
saints, I command thee to declare what thou art, that art 
behind at my back.” To whom the boy answered, “I am 
Bertram’s boy,” for that was his name. “But I,” said the - 
monk, “adjure thee, in the name of the unseparable 
Trinity, that thou, wicked spirit! do tell me who thou art, 
from whence thou comest, and that thou get thee hence ?” 
“T am Bertram’s boy,” said he ; “ good master, let me go,” 
and with that his cowl began to crack upon his shoulders, 
with the weight. The monk, when he perceived the 
matter, took the boy out, who took to his legs, and ran 
away as fast as he could. 

Among others, one ran with the church door-key, 
beating upon the stone walls, thinking therewith to break 
a hole through to escape. 

In the meantime those that were in the streets looking 
diligently about them, and perceiving all things to be 
safe, marvelled at this sudden outrage, and made signs 
and tokens to them that were in the church to keep 
themselves quiet, crying to them that there was no 
danger. 

But, forasmuch as no word could be heard by reason of 
the noise that was within the church, those signs made 
them much more afraid than they were before, inter- 
preting the matter as though all had been on fire without 
the church; and for the dropping of the lead and falling 
of other things, they should rather tarry still within the 
church, and not to venture out. This trouble continued 
in this manner by the space of certain hours. 

The next day, and also all the following week, there 
was an incredible number of bills set up on the church 
doors to inquire for things that were lost. “If any man 
have found a pair of shoes yesterday in St. Mary’s Church, 
or knoweth any man that hath found them,” ete. Another 
bill was set up for a gown that was lost. Another 
entreated to have his cap restored. One lost his purse 
and girdle, with certain money ; another his sword, with 
his glove of mail. One inquireth for a ring, and, to be 


272 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


short, there were few in this garboil but that either 
through negligence lost, or through oblivion left some- 
thing behind them. 

How few that walk down what has been called the 
- noblest street in Europe, High Street, Oxford; and pass 
the University Church, lately acquiring fresh notoriety — 
through Newman’s Sermons, preached there in the days 
of Tract 90,—ever imagine that such a highly ridiculous 
“pageant” was enacted there. But it was, and its date 
was 1541, and the mighty offence was actually daring to 
read the Word of God, and understand it in a reasonable 
way. 


CHAPTER XXVI 


THE BIBLE-SHUTTERS CRUELTY 


“*Man’s inhumanity to man 
Makes countless thousands mourn.” 
BurNs. 


“* His learning turned to casuistry, his accomplishment became cunning, 
his bravery fell away into an implacable cruelty. He who had been 
open with all men grew into a monster of suspicion. While his eyes 
sunk deeper into his head and overlooked nothing, his tongue refused to 
speak what hiseyes saw. ‘If I thought that my cap knew my counsel, 
I would throw it in the fire,’ he said to Cavendish.” 

Charles Whibley, speaking of Henry virt. in his recent edition of 
Hall’s Chronicle. Two beautiful volumes, 1904. 


THE story connected with this famous picture from The 
Look and its Story, by L. N R., is one of the saddest in 
literature, and we had better give it here, as a foil to 
Foxe’s “ merry narrative.” 

The Bibles being set up in St. Paul’s by commandment 
of the king, and appointment of Bonner, the bishop, 
many came to hear them read, not imagining any danger. 
Amongst them was John Porter, “a fresh young man and 
of a big stature,” whose voice could be well heard, so that 
he often read aloud, at the wish of the people. All went 
well till Cromwell’s fall, but soon after that Porter was 
sent for, and rebuked sharply. 

He answered that he trusted he had done nothing 
contrary to the law, but Bonner then said that he had 
made expositions upon the text, and there had been 
tumults. «Porter replied that he trusted that should 
not be proved against him. However, Bonner sent him 
to Newgate, where he was fettered in irons, both legs 
and arms, with a collar of iron about his neck, fastened 


18 


274 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


to the wall in the dungeon. <A relative who came to see 
him entreated Jewet, then Keeper of Newgate, to release 
him, and let him go up among the other prisoners, using 
the money-talisman. But when he came amongst the 
prisoners, there for felony and murder, he exhorted them 
to leave their wickedness and blasphemy, and for this 
was taken down again into the lowest dungeon of all. 
Here he was oppressed with bolts and irons, and in about 
a week was found dead. 

The night before he died, those that were near that part 
of the prison, heard him “piteously groaning,” and it is 
supposed that he was again put into “the devil on the 
neck,” which strains and wrenches the neck with the legs 
together, so that “the more he stirreth in it, the straiter 
it presseth him.” 

Well might Bonner have to be hid from the people’s 
fury in Queen Elizabeth’s reign, and linger year after © 
year in the Marshalsea Prison, though it is one of the ~ 
most consoling thoughts that when she came to the 
throne, there was no retaliation for all the miseries which 
these first Protestants had endured. 

But though, on the one hand, Henry forbade the cireu- 
lation of the Word of God, after solemnly sanctioning it, 
and on the other went to the absurdity of writing two 
books himself to set forth the doctrine which all his 
subjects were to believe, in which he grossly contradicted 
himself over and over again, nevertheless he could not undo 
what had been done, and what he had helped to do. The 
waves that had broken on the shore were only the pre- 
cursors of a multitude. He had helped to awaken a 
mightier sentiment than his own, and in obedience to it 
the Liturgy was permitted in English two years before 
his death, and this, says Fuller, was the “farthest pace 
the Reformation stepped in his reign.” * 

As for his two books, one was the Institution of a 
Christian Man, which was accepted by Convocation as 


* No doubt this was in accordance with Henry’s earlier feelings, for, 
when going to war with France, he had ordered some prayers to be 
written in English, so that all might understand them. 


FROM ‘‘THE BOOK AND ITS STORY.”’—L.-N. R. 


Nn 
ic} 
° 
a 
len! 
ial 
i=] 
[S) 
‘al 
isa) 
a 
A 
BH 
| 
4 
— 
ot 
tal 
A 
q 
‘al 
i) 
i) 
gH 
A 
, 
A 
pS 
asl 
cat 
& 
on] 
fo} 
Ay 








THE BIBILESHUTTERS’ CRUELTY 274 


the standard of orthodoxy, and which, with a general 
leaning towards the Reformers, allowed Seven Sacraments 
and other Romish doctrines. This was printed in 1537, 
and some years afterwards he produced The Hrudition of 
a Christian Man, which he published on his own author- 
ity without troubling Convocation, aud which says that the 
bread and wine are changed and turned to the very 
substance of the body and blood. Whilst the books 
differ on many points, there is a perfect agreement on 
one—the passive obedience due to the king in all things, 
speculative and practical. Yes, this was his chief 
religion, and a fine harvest there was by and by for his 
successor a century later. His last speech in Parliament 
was affecting and even eloquent. It was in December 
1545, and after he had spoken of the business of the 
Session, he paused, hesitated, and finally burst into tears. 
One thing, he then said, there was specially, in which he 
could not work alone, and he must call upon them all 
to help him, in the name and for the honour of Almighty 
God. “J hear that the special foundation of our religion, 
being charity between man and man, is refrigerate, as 
there was never more dissension and lack of love, the 
occasions whereof are opinions only and names devised 
for the continuance of the same. Some are called 
Papists, some Lutherans, and some Anabaptists, names de- 
vised of the devil, and yet not fully without ground for the 
severing of one man’s heart by conceit of opinion from 
another. For the remedy whereof I desire, first, every 
man of himself to travail for his own amendment. 
Finally, I exhort nobles and laity not to receive the 
grace of God in vain, and albeit the Scriptures have been 
permitted to them in the English tongue, yet not to 
take upon them the judgment and expositing of the 
same, but reverently and humbly to receive and use the 
knowledge which it hath pleased God to show unto them, 
and in any doubt to resort unto the learned or at best 
the higher powers. I am very sorry to know and hear 
how undeservedly that precious jewel, the Word of God, 
is disputed, rhymed, sung, and jangled in every alehouse, 


278 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


house, and tavern. Therefore, as I said before, be in 
charity one with another, like brother and brother. Then 
may I justly rejoice that thus long I have lived to see 
this day; and you, by verity, conscience, and charity 
between yourselves may in this point, as you have been 
in divers others, accounted among the rest of the world 
as blessed men.” 

There were two parts in this discourse, but as Foxe 
says, there was one wanting. Ifhe had gone on to suggest 
the removal of the Act of the Six Articles, then he 
would have spoken “like a worthy Prince.” It was this 
“Bloody Act” that was the great stumbling-block to 
Christian charity, and he was largely the author of it. It 
had set brother against brother, neighbour against neigh- 
bour, the superior against the subject, and the wolves to 
devour the flock of Christ. “And wherein consisteth all 
this variance, but only because God’s Word hath not its 
free course, but that those who set it forth are condemned 
and burned ?” 

In fact, this speech of the king, in which he exhorted 
them to set forth God’s Word, “ both by true preaching 
and good example giving,” should never be read without 
Foxe’s notes on it, and the remembrance that soon 
afterwards the lovely Anne Askew suffered as few ladies 
have ever been called to suffer. Foxe sees in such an 
incident a suitable occasion for summing up the whole 
controversy of these weary years, and says : 

“ Princes who exhort to charity and concord do well: 
but Princes who seek out the causes of discord, and reform 
the same, do much better. The root and ground of all 
this grievance riseth hence; from the prelates and clergy 
of Rome seeking, as it seemeth, altogether after riches, 
pomp, and honour of this world; who, to maintain the 
same under pretence of religion, do in very deed subvert 
religion. Under that title of the Church, they bring into 
the Church manifest errors and absurdities intolerable, 
who, pretending to be. fathers of the Church, if they 
transgressed but in manners and lightness of life, or 
negligence of government, they might be borne withal, for 


THE BIBLE-SHUTTERS’ CRUELTY 279 


peace and concord’s sake; and here modesty, civility, 
quietness, unity, and charity might have place amongst 
modest natures. But now, they obscure the glory of the 
Son of God, which in no case ought to be suffered; they 
extinguish the light and grace of the Gospel; they clog 
men’s conscience; they set up idolatry, and maintain 
idols; they bring in false invocation, and restrain lawful 
matrimony, whereby groweth filthy pollution, adultery, 
and whoredom in the Church unspeakable; they corrupt 
the Sacraments; they wrest the Scripture to worldly 
purposes; they kill and persecute God’s people; briefly, 
their doctrine is damnable, their laws be impious, their 
doings are detestable. And yet, after all this, they creep 
eraftily into the hearts of Princes, under the title of the 
Church, and colour of concord ; making Kings and Princes 
believe that all be heretics and schismatics who will not 
be subject to their ordinary power. Now Almighty God, 
who is a jealous God, and not suffering the glory of His 
Son to be defaced, nor His truth to be trodden underfoot, 
stirreth up again the hearts of His people to understand 
His truth, and to defend His cause. Whereupon of these 
two parts, as two mighty flints thus smiting together, 
cometh out the sparkle of this division, which can in no 
wise be quenched, but that one part must needs yield and 
give over. There is no neutrality, nor mediation of 
peace, nor exhortation to agreement, that will serve 
between these two contrary doctrines, but either the 
Pope’s errors must give place to God’s Word, or else the 
verity of God must give place unto them.” 

At the close of Henry’s reign there was published a 
Supplication of the Poor Commons, somewhat answering 
to the Supplication of the Beggars of twenty years 
earlier, and to which we have referred. It showed plainly 
enough what a dreadful state the persecution and bigotry 
of the time had reduced the realm to, together with the 
incessant demands for money. It prays the king to study 
to leave the young prince who would reign after him a 
Commonwealth to govern, and not an island of brute beasts, 
among whom the stronger devour the weaker. “They 


280 THE BIBLE OF THE REFORMATION 


have procured a law that none shall be so hardy as to 
have the Scripture in his house unless he may spend ten 
pounds a year. Hath God put immortal souls in none 
other? Did not Christ send word to John the Baptist 
that the poor received the Gospel? Why do these men 
disable them from reading the Scriptures that are not 
endued with the possessions of the world? Undoubtedly, 
most gracious Sovereign, because they are the very same 
that shut the Kingdom of Heaven before men. They 
enter not in themselves, nor suffer they them to enter 
that would.” Both supplications were published in one 
book. This reign was not finished, however, before even 
“Lords a many, and Dukes a few,” and all sorts and 
conditions of men were prohibited from having, taking, or 
keeping any books “set forth in the names of Fryth, 
Tyndale, Wickliffe, Joye, Roye, Becon, Bale, Barnes, 
Coverdale, Turner, or Tracy.” 

Henry and Luther passed away almost together, 
Luther one year and Henry the next, the real Defender 
of the Faith, and the one who was called so by the Pope. 
Then came five or six years of haleyon quiet under the 
young and godly Prince Edward, during which the 
Protestant religion took such firm hold of the mind of 
the country that Mary and Philip, with all their bloody 
persecutions, could not greatly disturb it. 

It is certainly a relief to part with his Serene Majesty, 
Henry vit, and perhaps Fuller is right in saying that all 
the virtues and vices of all his predecessors from the Con- 
quest were fully represented in him—learning, wisdom, 
valour, and magnificence; cruelty, avarice, fury, and 
lust. 

And Dantiscus, the Bishop of Vermein, was not far 
wrong when he wrote to Cranmer that England was pass- 
ing through such times, in this reign, as had never before 
happened in any country of the Christian world, 

Perhaps there has seldom been such a severe judgment 
as Lodge’s passed upon any ruler, and we cannot subscribe 
to it: 

“We seek in vain for a single act in Henry’s life which 





THE BIBLE-SHUTTERS’ CRUELTY 281 


might authorise us even to suspect that he had a 
conscience.” 

When he was made Defender of the Faith by the Pope, 
he said he would not lose it for all London, and twenty 
miles round about it. “ Neither isit marvel,’ exclaimed 
Tyndale, “for it had cost more than London and forty 
miles round it is able to make at this hour, beside the 
effusion of innocent blood.” 

Yes, the effusion was dreadful in this long reign, and 
no wonder that Henry was once so haunted by the ghost 
of one he had unjustly put to death that he left the Army 
and went home. What home he finally reached we will 
not venture to say, but it is well for us all to recall at the 
end of this memorable history what Wolsey once said to 
him, showing that he was no sycophant. When he was 
compelled to give up York Place, to the injury of his see, 
he answered Judge Shelley, who made the demand : 

“T charge your conscience, and discharge mine. How- 
beit, I pray you, show his Majesty from me, that I most 
humbly desire his Highness to call to his most gracious 
rememberance that there is both Heaven and Hell.” 


EPILOGUE 


THE cordial reception given to Our own English Bible 
has encouraged the author thus to proceed, and he 
hopes to publish a concluding volume on The Puritan 
ible. Great assistance has been rendered by the 
Right Honourable Lord Peckover, who not only placed 
his invaluable collection of Bibles at the author’s service, 
but assisted him with carefully made extracts which are 
duly acknowledged in the body of the work. 

Much valuable help has also been given by the Rey. 
J. H. Broadbent, B.A. (Lond.), and Mr. W. H. Smalley, 
which is here thankfully acknowledged. 

To the Earl of Leicester the author also presents his 
thanks for his kind permission to use the unique Cover- 
dale Bible at Holkham Hall. 

As to authorities, it would be interminable to quote 
them, after thirty-five years of reading in the British 
Museum and other Libraries, but the author has been 
glad to include some valuable notes from the Cambridge 
Listory of Interature, just published in time. 


Printed by Morrison & Gres Limiren, Edinburgh 


THEOLOGY LIBRARY 
CLAREMONT, CALIF. 


TS 


OUR OWN ENGLISH BIBLE 


ITS TRANSLATORS AND THEIR WORK. 


Rev. W. J. HEATON, B.D., F.R.Hist.S. 


With 56 Facsimiles and Illustrations hitherto only found 
in expensive works. 


Crown 8vo, Cloth, Gilt Top. Price 5S. net. 


The History of the first 1,500 years, . 
and the only illustrated work on the subject. 





Lonpon: F. GRIFFITHS, 34, MAIDEN LANE, STRAND, W.C. 


OO er OOEOr~E~rrmre—™SoO 


“This is a noble work, and one hitherto greatly needed. We cordially recommend 
it to all Bible Lovers who wish to know how we got our Bible. It is well illustrated 
with good photographs and drawings.”—British Weekly. 


‘Mr. Heaton’s volume is a gold mine of information and ought to be widely read. 
What he says is true, that no Vernacular Bible possesses such a remarkable early history. 
The illustrations scattered through the text are well chosen.” —Saint Andrew. 


“This story is one which must be dear to every devout heart. No pains have been 
spared in the gathering of materials from many quarters, and by lucid description, ample 
quotation, and excellent pictorial illustrations, the.e is brought home to the reader a 
most vivid picture of the long and painful, yet marvellous process by which, on the 
human side, there has come into our hands that wonderful English Bible which the 
author fitly describes as the greatest concrete force on the side of truth and righteousness 
which the world contains.”—Chvistian. 


“There is a ready market for books about the English Bible. But the Rev. W. J. 
Heaton has almost no competition, whilst he has all the popular interest, when he 
publishes a book on the age before printing. He tells the difficult story easily, and it is 
made memorable by many excellent engravings.” Expository Times. 


“© We have been charmed with it from beginning to end. Where we looked for dry 
lists, we have found a story more pleasant to read, and more full of interest than many 
a novel. It is written for the people, it is true, but its every page bears signs of 
erudition, research, and skill in handling the facts of history. Here is at last the 
romance of the English Bible, for which we have long been waiting.”—Z7ith Times. 


‘The deeply interesting story of a little known period is well told. Every lover of 
the English Bible will thank Mr. Heaton as well for the painstaking research which 
has resulted in the collection of facts of the highest interest as for the skill with which 
he has marshalled them. It deserves a wide circulation, and the attractiveness of the 
volume is greatly increased by a large number of excellent engravings.”—Methodist 
Recorder. 


‘An immense amount of good and careful work has been done in the preparation of 
this history. A great mass of valuable information has been collected, illustrative of 
the life and labours of the early translators and transcribers of the Scriptures in our 
Country.”—Zxaminer. ” 

“He gives us what has to be told in an attractive way. Czedmon, Aldhelm, Bada, 
are described. Further on, we hear of King Alfred, of the Lindisfarne Gospels and the 
Rushworth Gloss. Finally we come to Wycliffe, of whose character and work there is 
an interesting account, written in a judiciously sympathetic spirit.” —Spectator. 


“This is a distinctly good book. It contains a vast mass of information in a small 
compass. Mr. Heaton is an eminently safe guide.” —Methodist Times. 


“We have often wondered why no expert had treated this period with the fulness it 
deserved. We must therefore congratulate Mr. Heaton upon his much needed venture, 
and are persuaded that, having read the present volume on the manuscript period, 
readers will be eager to see its successor.” —Glou-ester Journal. 


“Rev. W. J. Heaton has written a volume of unusual interest and value. We have 
many noble books on the printed Bible, but this is the fullest treatment of the manuscript 
period that has appeared. He is never dull or severely technical, and every lover of the 
Bible will rejoice to have such a book."—Wesleyan Methodist Magazine. 


“We cordially recognise the admirable manner in which the author has dealt with the 
history of the Sacred Writings prior to the age of printing. The volume bears evidence 
of laborious research, and the facts collected are presented in a way which fixes the 
interest of the reader from the first page to the last. Mr. Heaton is to be thanked for 
this noble contribution to the literature relating to a book whése influence grows with 
the ages.” —Isle of Wight County Press. 


‘He writes not only with full and accurate knowledge, but with a lucid and pleasant 
style which carries the reader on from page to page with unflagging interest. Late 
periods of this entrancing history will be dealt with in one or two subsequent volumes.” 
—Baptist Times and Freeman. 


“Tt is a fascinating story which Mr. Heaton tells. His book is clearly the result of 
much original research, and it is inspired by enthusiasm. It is written in a popular 
style, and the general reader, as well as the student, will find it interesting and in- 
structive. Mr. Heaton says the total Bible production of our time is about 3,000 a day, 
or five for every minute of working time.”—Scotsman. 


“This work is a very valuable and instructive, besides an entirely fascinating book. 
He tells the tale of the pioneers of the English Bible in a fashion which commends his 
book to young and old alike, and certainly all teachers in pulpit and Sunday School 
should make themselves acquainted with Mr. Heaton’s delightful work.”—Christian 
Commonwealth. 

“This history of the English Bible has met with a very cordial reception on the part 
of many critics.”"—Westminster Review. 

“His interesting work is the fullest treatment of the subject that has appeared, and 
reveals accurate knowledge and painstaking research.” —Midland Counties Herald. 

“A piece of work which needed doing, and is here nobly done. Mr. Heaton has 
performed his task so skilfully that his book should become indispensable.” —Christian 
Globe. 

““Mr. Heaton has dealt skilfully with a difficult subject, and produced a book which 
should be valued by all lovers of the Bible.” —Record. 

“The work bears traces of profound research, but the subject is treated in popular 
language.” —Blackburn Telegraph. 

“The story is told in attractive language.” —Sheffiield Telegraph. 

“This work, by a well-known authority on the Bible, is a valuable addition to the 


literature relating to the Scriptures, and shows evidence of much original research,”— 
Southport Guardian. 


““The subject is treated in such a manner that to us there is not a dull or dreary page 
in the book. We have read it halfa dozen times, and yet it is just as fascinating as 
ever.’—Local Preachers’ Magazine. 


““ A book of entrancing interest.”—Wesleyan Methodist Sunday School Magazine. 


““A fascinating, instructive, and altogether valuable volume.”—Christian Work 
(Wew York). 


“Clear, compendious, and informing.”—Dorset County Chronicle. 
“* Of the utmost literary and historical interest.”’—Christian Advocate (New York). 





Her Majesty Queen Alexandra and the Queen Dowager of Sweden have ordered 
copies of this work. 

The Right Hon. Lord Peckover, of Wisbech, the possessor of some priceless MSS, 
and of one of the most valuable collections of Bibles in Europe, has presented a number 
to leading Libraries, and says:—‘‘ Your work gives the best account of the early 
English Bible that I have met with. I hope if spared to go through it again before 
long.” 

Lady William Cecil, who assisted her father, the late Earl Amherst, in his magnificent 
collection of Bibles and Biblical Literature, in ordering some copies, says :—‘‘ My 
husband and I have read it with the greatest pleasure. It is so full of research and 
information and written with such a full knowledge of the subject.” 

Professor Skeat, Cambridge:—‘‘I have read it nearly all through with much 
interest, and am glad to find you have taken so much trouble in describing the history 
of Biblical translation.” 

Rev. George Parker, Greenock :—‘“‘ Your absorbingly interesting book.” 


Rev. R. F. M‘Causland, M.A., Hawsker Vicarage :—‘‘ Your very interesting book is 
well got up and prettily illustrated.” 

Rev. Ganon Adams, Kill Rectory :—‘‘I shall be glad to bring your work under the 
notice of my friends.” 


H. J. Farmer-Atkinson, Esq., D.L., F.S.A.:—‘‘I think the book very interesting, 
and enjoy reading it.” 


Rev. J. S. Hicks :—‘‘ As to its permanent value there is no question.” 
Sir R. W. Perks, M.P. :—‘‘I know your excellent book, and have a copy of it,” 


Alderman CG, J. Lowe :—‘‘ You have expended great pains and research in its 
production.” 

Rev. H. B. Workman, D.Lit. :—‘“‘I need not say that your work displays considerable 
reading and research.” 

Rev. Henry Smith :—“‘ The more I read your book the more impressed am I with its 
very great worth.” 

Rev. James Cooke :—‘‘ Your book seems quite to supply a want.” 

Lady Wantage :—“ Full of interesting matter.” 

Rev. S. Parkes Cadman, D.D., New York:—‘“I am very much interested in your 
book.” 

The Rev. Dr. Briggs, in sending an order from the Book Room in Canada, says :— 
‘¢We have some books on this subject, but of course none of them at all of the 
importance or interest or instruction of yours.” 

The Rev. R. Culley :—‘‘ Your book deserves success. It is able and useful.” 

Walter Morrison, Esq., J.P. :—‘‘ I am sending a number of your books to India.” 

Rev. J. Woode, M.A., Fersfield Rectory :—‘‘If you want to thoroughly understand 
this early period, you must read Mr. Heaton’s book.” 


Rev. H. Chellew, B.D. :—‘‘ Your book appeared most opportunely, and is a valuable 
contribution to the theme so much neglected among us all.” 


W. P. Workman, M.A., B.Sc., Head Master of Kingswood School :— An ideal book 
for prizes.” 


J. H. Waterson, Esq., Principal of Lytham College :—“A literary and artistic 
achievement of a very high order. Further acquaintance confirms my opinion of its 
intrinsic value.” 


Rev. W. Glasson, Maclear, South Africa :—‘‘I read the book with more than usual 
interest and profit.” 


¥. G. Osborn, M.A., Colwyn Bay :—‘‘It is a book I should like all our boys to read, 
and I shall not fail to recommend it to them.” 


Mr. R. Harvey, Yarmouth :—‘“‘ A very fine piece of work.” 


Rev. W. F. Moulton, D.D. (the late), Cambridge :—“ I am much interested, and your 


readers will be as much so as myself. Do not cut it down.” ® 
. 


Rev. A. F. Sheffield, Harleston :—“ A first-class book.” 


Rev. J. G. Whiting :—‘“‘ It is surprising what a vast field of information is here opened 
” 


up. 


The Principal, Jersey Ladies’ .College :—‘‘I have read your volume with very ereat 
interest. It deserves a wide circulation.” 


Lady Battersea :—“ Your most interesting book.” 


Rev. T. Cook, Cliff College :—‘‘ We are placing your work on special shelves for 
standard works.” 


The Principal, Ladies’ College, Harrogate :—‘I have read the volume with very 
great interest and enjoyment, and recommended it to several Heads of Schools.” 


Rev. J. E. Page, Sleights :—‘‘It is splendidly got up and illustrated—worthy of its 
quality.” 


Rev. R. W. Pitt, M.A., Saxlingham Rectory :—‘‘ Most useful in connection with Bible 
Classes.” 


Rev. Dr. Barber, The Leys, Cambridge :—‘‘ I have looked through your book with 
pleasure and interest.” 


Rev. W. Middleton :—“‘ Your book I highly prize.” 


Rev. David Young, F.R.Hist.S. :—‘‘The most reliable and deserving in its own 
sphere.” 


Rev. E. L. Anderson, Cody Wyoming, U.S.A. :-— 


“T shall take pleasure in recom- 
mending your books to Ministers of my Presbytery.” 








ALSO BY THE SAME AUTHOR 
“SHOULD NOT THE REVISED VERSION OF THE 
SCRIPTURES BE FURTHER REVISED 2” 


A Popular Tract. 6d. 


‘Able, thorough, and convincing.” —Publishers’ Circular. 


IS A WORLD RELIGION POSSIBLE? By Davin Batsittur, 
M.A. Crown 8vo, 4s. net. 


This is a recondite work of great value. Mr. Balsillie has the necessary learning, 
the logical ability, and the fair-mindedness for his task. In eight chapters he deals 
with such subjects as the Reconstruction of Belief, Pluralism and Religion, Neo- 
Hegelian Religion, the Personality of Jesus of Nazareth, the Sayings of Jesus, the 
True Revelation, and Some Doubtful Sayings of Jesus. He cites Mr. Mallock’s and 
Mr. Campbell's views, and the views of Professor William James and others, and the 
conclusion he comes to is that a world religion is possible, and that Christianity 
must be its basis. He states emphatically that he would not derive his materials for 
a new religion from any doctrines of Science or from any philosophical system, as 
the latter at any rate better tells what not to believe than what to believe. He 
would obtain his materials from some concrete realisation of the religious ideal, and 
no better concrete realisation in his judgment can be found than that embodied in 
the personality and teaching of the Founder of Christianity. 


An English rendering, by the Rev. W. H. Lowe, of a Biblical Trilogy, 
the work of the popular Russian Author, Leonid Andreyev. 


“JUDAS ISCARIOT,” together with “ Eleazar” 
(Lazarus) and ‘‘Ben Tobit.” Crown 8vo, 5s. net. 


A daring, yet reverent, attempt to tell, from a new point.of view, the story of the great 
betrayal. For the first time, perhaps, in the history of literature—outside the Bible— 
the companions of Christ are presented to us, as living men, revealing themselves, in 
their frailties, virtues, and characteristics, as men of like passions with ourselves. The 
character of Judas is a masterly study, and will excite much interest and comment. The 
remaining stories, ‘‘ Eleazar” and ‘‘ Ben Tobit” are equally brilliant of their kind—the 
one revealing to the full the imaginative power, as well as the decadence, of Andreyev ; 
while the other is a typical example of the beautiful simplicity of his style, of his skill 
in handling minute detail, and of his ability to remind us that events of profound 
consequence to the destinies of mankind may pass almost unobserved before our eyes, 
their significance wholly obscured by want of perception or by the trivial personal 
incidents of daily life. [Ready in March. 


A New Work on the Cathedrals of England. 


OUR ENGLISH CATHEDRALS. By the Rey. James Sriprez. 
Fully Illustrated by Photographs and Block Plans. In Two Volumes. 
Crown 8vyo, 5s. net each. 


‘‘The author has, therefore, thought that there was still room for a book on these 
wonderful creatiuns of our ancestors’ skill and genius, on somewhat different lines from 
those taken by previous works on the subject.” To those who have neither time nor in- 
clination for a minutely detailed examination, the author trusts that this book may be of 
service ; and, “‘he is not without hope that it may also prove to be of interest to those 
who, in our own country, or in our Colonies, or in the United States, may wish to have, 
in a brief and compact form, a sketch of English Cathedrals on the whole.” 

The book, however, is neither scrappy nor meagre. The buildings are adequately 
described, building dates and historical notes are given. There is a chapter upon the 
significance and growth of Gothic Architecture, upon references to the Cathedrals in 
English Literature (including many quotations), and also upon the relation of our 
Cathedrals to the life of to-day. The work is complete and thoroughly readable. 


[Ready April 1910. 


THINGS NEW AND OLD. Being Sunday Addresses delivered at 
Thornton Castle and elsewhere. By Professor Knicur. Large 
crown 8yo, 5s. net. 


These addresses are the pleasant ingathering of an acute and spiritual mind whose 
Christian sympathies have always been on the side of breadth and comprehension. 
“¢Those selected have been chosen,” he tells us, “‘ because they refer less to transient 
aspects of religious truth than to its lasting phases, and deal not so much with temporary 
interests as with the duties, aspirations, and ideals that do not alter with the changing 
years.” 





Lonpon :: FRANCIS GRIFFITHS, 34, MarpEen LANE, STRAND, W.C. 


NEWMAN, PASCAL, LOISY, AND THE CATHOLIC 
CHURCH. By W. J. Witiams. Large crown 8vo, cloth, 
6s. net. ‘ : 


Spectator.—‘ Those who desire to get a better understanding of the Liberal Roman 
Catholic position should read this book. Mr. Williams not only presses the claims of the 
Roman Church upon all who profess and call themselves Christians, but on all who 
acknowledge the existence of a religious element in man’s nature.” 

Catholic Weekly.—‘‘ The time is ripe for a revival of Catholic philosophy which shall 
reflect the intellectual rigour that has been such a marked feature of the scientific work of 
the last fifty years, a rigour which owes its development to that vast order of ideas known 
under the name of Evolution. To those Catholics who are looking for signs of sucha 
revival, Mr. W. J. Williams’ book . . . will be welcomed with enthusiasm. To many it 
will open out a lew realm of philosophic thought, a new country whose breezes stimulate 
the mind and invigorate our very being. It is a book that must be read with an intensity 
that will not be satisfied with one reading.” 

Morning Post.—Mr. Wilfrid Ward says in a two column review: “ The juxtaposition 
of the names of Newman and Pascal in the title of Mr. Williams’ bock suggests at once 
why its theme is interesting and important. And when I add that the theme is treated 
by the writer with thoroughness and speculative ability of a very high order, I have said 
enough to justify me, if I am right, in speaking of the work at some length.” 


ENGLISH CHURCH ARCHITECTURE. From the Earliest 
Times to the Reformation. By G. A. T. MIDDLETON, A.R.I.B.A. 
Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d. net. 


This book is profusely illustrated by many well-executed Sketches and Measured 
Drawings, which heighten its appeal to the Architect. It is especially useful to young 
students at the commencement of their career, but also contains many suggestions which 
are of interest to older men also, as well as to the general public. 

Architect.— This little book is useful as a first aid to the study of our English 
medizeval architecture by the amateur, or even the youthful professional student. . . . 
While he does not attempt to teach everything about English Gothic, what he does 
teach is put clearly and simply, so that his reader will know something, and that 
something worth knowing.” 

Scotsman.—“ An excellent little handbook.” 


Catholic Herald.—“ A delightful essay upon the growth of ecclesiastical architecture 
in England.” 


A striking and suggestive book, by the Rev. J. Forbes Phillips. 
WHAT WAS THE RESURRECTION ? Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d. net. 


An attempt to re-state, in the light of the modern spirit and of modern discoveries, this 
fundamental article of Christian belief. 

Extract front the Author's Preface.—“ Recent years have witnessed a great change 
in the spirit and methods of treating the fundamental doctrine of the Faith, and more 
especially the belief in the Resurrection. There is a growing impression that many 
accepted definitions of certain articles of belief have seriously obscured the Great Truths 
themselves, and that views have a way of supplanting the main idea. The Resurrection 
is a notable example. Preachers in their sermons, and theologians in their lectures, 
insist upon the acceptance of the theory that the dead body of the Saviour was re- 
animated on Easter Day, and that this was the stupendous miracle; whereas the 
fundamental truth is that the Christ, having suffered death, showed that it had no more 
dominion over Him, that He had preserved this identity, and from out of the Unseen 
was able to project Himself into the Seen, and satisfy His followers that He, the Very 
Christ, was living and still holding communication and communion with them. That 
was the miracle, but the proof of it lies in the fact that He is still doing this.” 


THE SECRET OF GENESIS. An Astro-Religious Record. The 
Legends and their Interpretation from the Fall of the Angels to the 
Building of the Babel Tower. By GrorGE St. CLarr. Demy 8yo, 
6s. net. 


MAN: FIRST AND LAST. From Cave Dweller to Christian. 
By GEORGE ST. CLAIR. Demy 8vo, gs. net. 


Lonpon: FRANCIS GRIFFITHS, 34, MAIDEN Lang, STRAND, W.C. 





3 y 
7. | 
= 
» = 
9 + 
- 
> 
4 
’ 
- 
Us 
‘ 
- 
. 
ly 












BS455 .H426 
Heaton, William James, b. 1845. 
The Bible of the reformation ; its tran 












RSs 


H426 


2728 ) 





+to% 


Heaton, William James, ».1845. 


The Bible of the reformation; its translators and 
work; by the Rev. W. J. Heaton ... with illustration: 
facsimiles. London, F. Griffiths, 1910. 

xiii, 1), 281, (1) p. incl. front., illus., plates, facsims. 194 cm 


“‘Yhe Bible of the reformation; being the second volume o: 
own English Bible.’ ” 


Includes bibliographical references. 


1, Bibles English--Historye 2. Bible. Engli sh--Vers 
T * Ti tle . 


ccst/ef A 11— 


Enoch Pratt Free Libr. 
for Library of Congress pad4r29¢1) 





