BS2418 


S.l^.OG 


^c^^* 


x^ 


^^  X\\t  ^iltalagirsi  ^ 


^'n, 


'*, 


^  PRINCETON,  N.  J.  ^ 


Division .,Xmi.^  LmTx   \  C? 


Section . 


!*     MAY  19  1906 


Cbe  Seven  Parables 


MATTHEW  Xm. 

AN  EXPOSITION 

y'    • 

A.  C  GAEBELEIN 

Editor  of  '*Our  Hope" 
With  the  Compliments  of 

THE  BIBLE  HOUSE  OF  LOS  ANGELES 

505  MASON  BUILDING 

LOS  ANGELES       ....       CALIFORNLV 


GREETINGS 


THE  BIBLE  HOUSE  OF  LOS  ANGELES  sends 
greetings  to  their  fellow  labourers  in  the 
Gospel,  and  have  much  pleasure  in  presenting  this 
booklet,  which  is  commended  to  your  prayerful 
reading. 

ADVISORY  COUNCIL 

OP 

THE  BIBLE  HOUSE  OF  LOS  ANGELES 

(rormerly  The  Los  Angeles  Bible  Institute) 

Rev.  F.  W.  Flint         .         .  Christian  Alliance 

Mr.  Lyman  Stewart  .  .  .  Presbyterian 
Rkv.  W.  W.  Logan  .  .  United  Presbyterian 
Prof.  Mbi,vii.i<e;  Dozibr  ....       Baptist 

Mr;  S.  I.  MsRRii.1. Baptist 

Rev.  E.  J.  Inwood  .  .  .  Methodist  Episcopal 
Rkv.  W.  p.  Hardy       .         .        .       Congregational 

OFFICERS 

A.  B.  Prichard  .  .  .  .  .  President 
MEiyVii^LE  DoziER  o         .         .         Vice-President 

R.  D.  Smith      ....  Secretary-Treasurer 

Office:  505  I^ason  Building:,  Los  Angeles,  Cal. 

Correspondence  should  be  addressed  to  the  Secretary. 


THE   SEVEN  PARABLES. 

Matthew  XIII 
'      I. 

The  thirteenth  chapter  in  the  Gospel  of  Mat- 
thew contains  seven  parables,  which  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  uttered,  after  His  people  had  re- 
jected the  message  of  the  kingdom.  This 
chapter  is  one  of  the  greatest  importance.  It 
demands,  therefore,  our  closest  attention,  and 
this  more  so  because  the  revelation  which  our 
Lord  gives  here,  the  unfolding  of  the  mysteries 
of  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens,  has  been  and 
still  is  grossly  misunderstood  and  falsely  inter- 
preted. Precisely  that  which  our  Lord  did  not 
mean  has  been  read  into  this  chapter.  The 
whole  chapter  has  been,  so  to  speak,  turned  up- 
side down  by  most  of  the  learned  commentators 
of  Christendom.  For  any  believer  to  turn  to 
these  for  light  and  instruction  will  only  result 
in  getting  thoroughly  confused.  It  may  be  said 
if  this  chapter  would  be  rightly  understood 
by  the  professing  church,  the  consequences 
would  certainly  be  the  most  far-reaching.  But 
one  almost  despairs  of  seeing  the  true  mean- 
ing of  the  mystery  of  the  kingdom  in  Matthew 
xiii  believed  in  Christendom.  The  professing 
church  continues,  and  will  continue,  to  build 


upon  the  misinterpretation  of  our  Lord's  par- 
ables the  optimistic  dreams  of  the  enlarge- 
ment of  the  church,  the  foreshadowing  of  the 
universal  extension  of  the  kingdom  and  the 
continued  good  work  of  the  leaven  in  the  three 
measures  of  meal,  etc.  It  is  hard  to  get  the 
individual  believer,  brought  up  in  these  wrong 
conceptions,  to  see  the  true  meaning;  and 
often  the  true  testimony  given  is  rejected. 
Let  us  then  carefully  and  prayerfully  look 
into  the  chapter  before  us,  and  may  our 
Lord  give  His"  blessing ;  and  while  the  many 
may  reject  what  is  taught  in  these  parables 
a  few  will  receive  light  through  the  entrance 
of  His  Word,  and  all  believers  in  these  truths 
will  be  strengthened  by  our  meditations. 

Let  us  notice,  first  of  all,  two  verses  in  this 
chapter ;  "Because  to  you  it  is  given  to  know 
the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens, 
but  to  them  it  is  not  given"  (verse  ii)  ;  "All 
these  things  Jesus  spoke  to  the  multitudes  in 
parables,  and  without  a  parable  He  did  not, 
speak  to  them,  so  that  it  might  be  fulfilled 
which  was  spoken  through  the  prophets  saying, 
I  will  open  my  mouth  in  parables ;  I  will  utter 
things  hidden  from  the  world's  foundation" 
(verses  34-35).  These  verses  then  tell  us  what 
our  Lord  makes  known  in  this  chapter,  name- 
ly "the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  the  heav- 
ens"— "Things  tittered,  zvhich  were  hidden 
from  the  world's  foundation." 


In  Genesis  we  read  of  one  who  is  called 
"Zaphnath-paaneah"  which,  according  to  rab- 
binical interpretation,  means  "^^^^^  of  se- 
crets." He  is  Joseph,  the  HebrewiSP^jected 
by  his  brethren,  that  most  perfect  type  of  our 
Lord.  After  his  rejection  by  his  brethren, 
Joseph  becomes  the  revealer  of  the  secrets,  and 
that  through  the  wisdom  of  God. 

Here  in  this  chapter  Christ  appears  as  the 
rejected  one,  and  now  after  the  offer  of  the 
kingdom  is  rejected  by  the  people  of  the  king- 
dom, and  He  as  king,  is  likewise  rejected.  He 
becomes  the  revealer  of  the  secrets,  to  show 
what  will  take  place  after  the  kingdom  has 
been  rejected  by  Israel. 

That  He  is  the  rejected  one  and  the  im- 
portant witness  He  gives  now  is  evident  in 
the  very  opening  verses.  "And  that  same  day 
Jesus  went  out  from  the  house  and  sat  down 
by  the  sea."  Leaving  the  house  means,  He 
severed  His  relations  with  His  people  as  we 
see  at  the  close  of  the  twelfth  chapter.  Taking 
His  place  by  the  sea,  the  sea  typifying  nations, 
shows  that  His  testimony  to  be  given  now,  the 
mysteries  to  be  revealed  have  a  different 
sphere ;  they  are  relative  to  the  nations.  "And 
great  multitudes  were  gathered  together  to* 
Him,  so  that  going  on  board  of  a  ship  Himself, 
He  sat  down,  and  the  whole  crowd  stood  on 
the  shore."  He  separated  himself  from  the  mul- 
titude, while  in  the  first  part  of  this  Gospel  He 


moves  in  the  midst  of  the  multitudes,  here  He 
takes  His  place  alone.  What  a  scene  it  must 
have  been.  There  on  the  seashore  the  multi- 
tudes, and  He  alone  some  ways  from  the  shore 
■ — He  cannot  be  reached  by  touch  now.  All  is 
significant.  Then  when  all  eyes  hang  upon 
His  lips,  He  began  to  speak. 

What  He  says  is  in  parables,  and  without 
parables  He  did  not  speak  to  them.  He  utters 
seven  parables.  In  no  other  Gospel  do  we  find 
them  grouped  together  as  here.  Why  is  this? 
The  reason  is  obvious.  This  is  the  great  dis- 
pensational  Gospel.  Here  God's  plan  of  the 
ages  is  revealed  as  in  no  other  Gospel. 
The  Holy  Spirit  in  giving  us  this  Gos- 
pel, the  Genesis  of  the  New  Testament, 
is  not  tied  down  to  chronological  order, 
but  He  arranges  everything  to  suit  His  sublime 
purpose.  After  the  kingdom  was  offered  and 
rejected,  the  Lord  makes  known  what  is  to  be 
after  His  rejection,  and  during  the  time  of  His 
absence.  Therefore  these  parables,  seven  in 
number,  denoting  completeness,  are  put  right 
in  here. 

Now  the  important  question  is  when  the 
Lord  says  six  times  in  these  parables,  "The 
kingdom  of  the  heavens  is  like"  what  does  He 
mean  by  the  term  "Kingdom  of  the  heavens?" 
That  it  can  no  longer  mean  the  kingdom  as  it 
is  revealed  in  the  Old  Testament,  as  it  is  prom- 
ised to  Israel,  and  as  He  offered  it  to  the  peo- 


pie,  is  evident.  For  in  the  first  place,  the  offer 
was  made  and  rejected.  The  preaching  of 
Him  and  the  messengers  He  sent  out  was, 
"The  kingdom  of  the  heavens  is  at  hand,  re- 
pent." Not  a  word  do  we  hear  of  this  in  the 
thirteenth  chapter,  r-or  after  this  chapter.  And 
in  the  second  place,  if  our  Lord  had  had  the 
Old  Testament  kingdom  promised  to  Israel  in 
view,  when  He  says  here  "The  kingdom  of  the 
heavens  is  like,"  He  could  not  have  said  that 
He  uttered  things  hidden  from  the  world's 
foundation,  for  the  kingdom  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment is  not  a  mystery,  but  clearly  revealed. 

Some  say,  and  indeed  the  popular  and  al- 
most universally  accepted  interpretation  is — it 
is  the  church.  The  Lord  begins  now  to  teach 
about  the  church.  So  that  if  He  says :  "The 
kingdom  of  the  heavens  is  like  leaven,  which  a 
woman  took  and  hid  in  three  measures  of  meal, 
etc.,"  it  is  declared  the  church  is  meant,  and 
the  Gospel.  The  church  is  nowhere  called  the 
kingdom  of  the  heavens.  Oh,  the  sad  and 
widespread  confusion  which  exists  on  this 
topic.  The  Lord  mentions  the  word  church 
for  the  first  time  in  the  Gospel,  in  Matthew 
xvi,  where  He  says  that  He  will  build 
His  church.  The  church  did  not  exist  in 
the  Old  Testament,  it  was  not  known  there 
at  all ;  it  was  not  in  existence  while  the  Lord 
walked  on  the  earth,  and  nowhere  does  He  re- 
fer to  the  church  as  the  kingdom  of  the  heav- 


ens,  neither  does  the  Holy  Spirit  speak  of  the 
church  as  the  kingdom.  lie  speaks  of  the 
church  as  the  habitation  of  God,  a  house,  a 
temple,  the  body  of  Christ  and  the  Bride  of 
Christ,  but  we  repeat  it,  never  as  the  kingdom 
of  the  heavens.  All  this  modern  application  of 
the  kingdom  of  the  heavens  to  the  church  is 
foreign  to  the  Word  of  God.  It  is  the  unscript- 
ural  theory  of  man. 

But  what  does  our  Lord  mean  when  He 
says  "the  kingdom  of  the  heavens?"  The 
answer  is  a  very  simple  one.  The  kingdom  on 
the  one  hand  was  rejected  by  Israel,  but  on 
the  other  hand,  God  gives  His  Word  to  the 
Gentiles,  a  fact  indicated  in  the  Old  Testament 
prophetic  Word. 

The  mercy  and  grace  offered  to  Israel  is  to 
go  forth  to  the  Gentiles,  the  nations,  while  the 
King  Himself  is  absent.  This  very  fact  is 
indicated  in  the  first  parable  where  the  sower 
ivcnt  out,  which  stands  for  the  fact  of  His 
going  forth  into  the  field,  which  is  the  world. 
So  that  which  is  extended  to  the  Gentiles  and 
that  in  which  the  name  of  Christ  is  confessed 
is  now  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens,  and  of 
this  development  of  what  He  the  Lord  from 
heaven  brought  and  left  in  the  earth,  our  Lord 
speaks  in  these  parables.  In  one  word  "the 
kingdom  of  the  heavens"  in  Matthew  is  equiv- 
alent with  "Christendom."  It  includes  the 
whole   sphere   of   Christian    profession   saved 


and  unsaved,  so-called  Romanists  and  Protest- 
ants, all  who.  are  naming  the  name  of  Christ. 
Therefore  the  church  is  not  the  kingdom  of 
the  heavens,  though  the  church  is  in  the  king- 
dom of  the  heavens. 

The  Lord  teaches  in  the  seven  parables  how 
matters  will  go  in  the  earth  while  He  is  not 
here,  and  what  men  will  do  with  that  which  He 
brought  from  heaven  and  left  in  the  hands  of 
men. 

Before  we  take  up  the  parables  separately 
we  must  consider  their  general  character.  The 
seven  parables  are  first  divided  into  four  and 
three.  The  first  four  He  speaks  before  the  mul- 
titudes. Then  after  He  dismissed  the  crowds, 
He  went  into  the  house  and  in  the  presence  of 
the  disciples  He  utters  the  three  last  parables. 
These  three  last  ones,  the  treasure  hid  in  the 
field,  the  pearl  of  great  price  and  the  dragnet, 
have  a  deeper  spiritual  meaning  than  the  first. 
The  first  two  parables  our  Lord  explains  Him- 
self to  His  disciples ;  the  other  five  He  leaves 
unexplained. 

They  may  also  be  divided  in  the  following 
way  by  twos: 

1.  The  sower  who  went  out  to  sow. 

2.  The  enemy  sowing  tares,  the  spurious 
seed. 

These  refer  in  part  to  the  beginning  of  the 
kingdom  of  the  heavens  in  the  hands  of  men, 


8 

however  the  conditions  pictured  here  last  to 
the  end,  the  time  of  the  harvest. 

3.  The  parable  of  the  mustard  seed. 

4.  The  parable  of  the  leaven. 

These  foretell  the  external  and  internal  de- 
velopment of  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens ;  the 
progress  is  described  and  it  is  an  unnatural  and 
evil  progress. 

5.  The  parable  of  the  treasure  hid  in  the 
field. 

6.  The  parable  of  the  one  pearl. 

These  stand  for  the  two  mysteries  in  the 
kingdom,  God's  earthly  people  hid  in  the  field, 
the  church  the  one  pearl  for  which  He  has 
given  all.  First  the  pearl  is  taken,  then  the 
treasure  is  lifted  in  the  field. 

7.  The  parable  of  the  dragnet. 

It  stands  isolated,  and  refers  to  the  end  of 
the  kingdom  of  the  heavens  in  its  mystery 
form. 

Still  another  way  of  looking  at  them  would 
be  to  compare  them  with  the  seven  church  mes- 
sages in  Rev.  ii  and  iii.  Here  the  Lord  speaks 
again,  and  this  speaking  is  from  the  glory.  In 
the  seven  messages  we  learn  the  beginning,  the 
progress  and  the  end  of  this  present  Christian 
age.  It  is  the  history  of  Christendom,  the  king- 
dom of  the  heavens, 

I.  The  parable  of  the  sower — Ephesus.  The 
apostolic  age.  The  beginning  with  its  failure 
— leaving  the  first  love. 


2.  The  parable  of  the  evil  seed — Smyrna, 
meaning  bitterness.    The  enemy  revealed. 

3.  The  parable  of  the  mustard  seed — Per- 
gamos — meaning  high  tower  or  married. 
The  professing  chijrch  becomes  big,  a  state  in- 
stitution under  Constantine  the  Great.  The 
big  tree  and  the  unclean  birds  (nations)  find 
shelter  there. 

4.  The  parable  of  the  leaven — Thyatira. 
This  is  Rome  and  her  abomination.  The 
woman  Jezebel,  the  harlot,  corresponds  to  the 
woman  in  the  parable  of  the  leaven. 

5.  The  parable  of  the  treasure  hid — Sardis 
— the  reformation  age — having  a  name  to  live, 
but  being  dead  and  a  remnant  there.  Israel, 
dead  but  belonging  to  Him  who  has  purchased 
the  field. 

6.  The  parable  of  the  Pearl — Philadelphia. 
The  church,  the  one  pearl.  The  one  body  of 
Christ  and  the  removal  of  the  church  to  be 
with  Him. 

7.  The  parable  of  the  dragnet — Laodicea — 
Judgment.  I  will  spue  thee  out  of  my  mouth. 
We  do  not  claim  to  teach  all  this  in  detail. 
That  would  take  many  pages,  but  we  give  these 
that  each  reader  has  hints  in  what  way  to 
search. 

We  add  but  one  more  fact  to  these  introduc- 
tory remarks  for  the  study  of  the  different  para- 
bles. The  key  for  their  right  interpretation  is 
in  themselves  as  well  as  in  the  scriptures.    The 


lO 

sower  in  the  first  parable  and  in  the  second  is 
the  Son  of  Man.  What  He  sows  is  the  wheat, 
that  which  stands  throughout  the  scriptures  for 
purity,  for  Christ  himself.  The  Word  He  is 
Himself  and  the  corn  of  wheat ;  the  good  seed 
are  the  sons  of  the  kingdom.  The  field  is  the 
world.  The  enemy  is  the  Devil.  The  man  in 
the  sixth  parable  who  buys  the  field  (the 
world)  is  the  same  Son  of  Man  and  the  mer- 
chantman who  sells  all  He  has  to  purchase  the 
one  pearl  He  desires  is  the  same  person  as  the 
Sower.  It  is  nonsense  to  make  out  of  the  mer- 
chantmen and  out  of  the  man  who  buys  the 
field  the  sinner.  That  would  mean  that  the 
sinner  has  something  to  give.  He  has  not. 
And  the  field,  meaning  the  world,  it  would 
mean  the  sinner  is  to  buy  the  world. 

The  three  measures  of  meal  of  course  come 
from  the  wheat,  they  ahvays  stand  for  that 
which  is  good.  Leaven,  however,  never  means 
anything  good,  but  it  always  stands  for  evil. 
The  closer  study  of  these  parables,  which  we 
now  take  up  will  bring  out  all  this  more  fully. 


II. 


After  having  studied  this  important  chapter 
in  a  general  way,  we  shall  now  look  at  the 
seven  parables   separately  and  to  learn   from 


II 

them  the  development  of  the  Kingdom  of  the 
Heavens  in  its  mystery  form.  Throughout  our 
study  the  dispensational  aspect  of  the  parables 
is  to  be  kept  strongly  in  the  foreground,  for  it 
is  dispensational  truth  which  is  taught  here. 

The  first  parable  is  the  well-known  one  of 
the  sower.  "And  he  spoke  to  them  many 
things  in  parables,  saying,  Behold  the  sower 
went  out  to  sow."  Two  things  attract  our  at- 
tention in  this  opening  sentence  of  the  parable. 
We  notice  first  that  our  Lord  speaks  of  the 
sower,  not  of  a  sower,  and  when  He  expounds 
the  parable  later  to  His  disciples  He  does  not 
tell  them  who  this  sower  is,  but  He  only  speaks 
of  what  happens  to  the  seed  He  sowed.  The 
second  thing  we  mention  is  that  the  sower  went 
out. 

The  personality  of  the  sower  is  not  difficult 
to  clear  up,  for  in  explaining  the  second  parable 
our  Lord  says :  "He  that  soweth  the  good 
seed  is  the  Son  of  Man."  Our  Lord  Himself 
is  the  Sower.  He  came  with  the  precious  seed, 
the  fine  wheat,  and  of  course  He  Himself  is  the 
corn  of  wheat.  The  seed  He  sows  can  only 
bring  forth  as  it  falls  upon  good  ground,  and 
in  the  ground  it  dies,  and  out  of  death  comes 
the  fruit.  All  this  is  indicated  here.  We 
would,  however,  take  this  parable  in  the  first 
sense  to  apply  to  the  days  of  our  Lord  in  the 
earth.  In  a  wider  sense  it  must  be  taken  as 
typical  of  the  entire  age,  in  which  He  is  absent 


12 

from  the  earth.  The  sowing  He  began  con- 
tinues still,  and  the  result  of  the  sowing  is  like- 
wise the  same. 

And  what  is  the  significance  that  it  is  written 
that  the  sower  went  out  to  sow  ?  It  shows  the 
beginning  of  something  new;  a  new  work 
which  the  Lord  now  takes  up.  Israel  had  failed 
to  yield  fruit.  Israel  was  the  vineyard  of  Isaiah 
V.  "He  fenced  it  in,  and  gathered  out  the 
stones  thereof,  and  planted  it  with  the  choicest 
vines,  and  built  a  tower  in  the  midst  of  it,  and 
also  made  a  wine  press  therein ;  and  He  looked 
that  it  should  bring  forth  grapes,  and  it  brought 
forth  wild  grapes  .  .  .  and  now  go  to ;  I 
will  tell  you  what  I  will  do  to  my  vineyard :  I 
will  take  away  the  hedge  thereof,  and  it  shall 
be  eaten  up ;  and  break  down  the  wall  thereof, 
and  it  shall  be  trodden  down."  (Is.  Y:2-y.) 
Israel  is  the  fig  tree  of  the  parable ;  the  Lord 
came  and  found  no  fruit.  The  vineyard  is  laid 
waste  and  the  fig  tree  stands  barren.  It  is  true, 
it  will  not  be  always  so.  The  vine  and  the  fig 
tree  will  bring  fruit  at  last,  but  in  the  mean- 
time, while  Israel  is  unfruitful,  the  sower  has 
gone  out  to  sow.  Where  has  he  gone  ?  Where 
does  the  sower  generally  deposit  the  seed?  In 
the  field?  What  is  the  field?  The  divine  in- 
terpreter gives  us  the  answer.  "The  field  is 
the  world."  So  we  have  here  the  fact  estab- 
lished that  after  Israel  failed  the  Word  is  to 
go  forth  into  the  wide  world,  "beginning  in 


'3 

Jerusalem    unto    Samaria   and   the   uttermost 
parts  of  the  earth." 

The  question  comes  at  once,  what  will  be  the 
result  ?  Will  all  the  world  receive  it  and  every 
part  of  the  entire  field  be  cultivated?  Will 
the  whole  field  be  reached  by  the  seed  and 
the  seed  spring  up  and  bear  an  abundant  har- 
vest? Will  not  a  single  grain  be  lost?  The 
parable  has  this  very  thought  as  its  centre. 
What  becomes  of  the  seed  ? 

What  we  learn  from  the  parable  is  far  from 
teaching  us  the  optimistic  dream  of  Christen- 
dom of  world  conversion,  so  often  founded 
upon  a  wrong  application  of  these  parables. 
The  parable  proves  that  it  will  not  be  a  uni- 
versal acceptance  of  the  Word  which  we  can 
look  for  in  this  age;  only  the  fourth  part  of 
the  seed  sown  brings  forth  fruit,  and  there  is 
again  a  marked  difference  in  the  quantity  of 
fruit  in  that  fourth  part.  Our  Lord  then  im- 
presses here  in  this  simple  parable  the  fact, 
which  later  the  Holy  Spirit  repeats,  the  age  in 
which  He  is  absent  and  in  which  His  Word 
is  preached  and  His  grace  is  offered,  that 
Word  will  be  in  greater  part  rejected,  and 
only  a  fourth  part  yields  the  fruit ;  the  rest  is 
failure. 

It  is  very  significant  that  we  meet  this  im- 
portant dispensational  fact  at  the  very  thresh- 
old of  Matthew  xiii.  Alas;  it  has  not  been 
believed  by  the  great  mass  of  professing  Chris- 


14 

tians.  To  speak  of  failure  in  this  age  and  deny 
a  soon  coming  world  conversion  is  frowned 
upon  as  a  miserable,  unbelieving  pessimism. 
One  is  sometimes  even  accused  of  disbelieving 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  convert  the 
whole  world,  as  if  the  Holy  Spirit  had  been 
sent  down  from  heaven  for  world  conversion. 

But  we  shall  now  read  what  came  from  the 
lips  of  our  Lord  in  this  parable. 

"Behold  the  sower  went  out  to  sow ;  and  as 
he  sowed,  some  grains  fell  along  the  way,  and 
the  birds  came  and  devoured  them ;  and  others 
fell  upon  the  rocky  places  where  they  had  not 
much  earth,  and  immediately  they  sprang  up 
out  of  the  ground,  because  of  not  having  any 
depth  of  earth,  but  when  the  sun  rose  they 
were  burned  up,  and  because  of  not  having  any 
root  were  dried  up ;  and  others  fell  upon  the 
thorns,  and  the  thorns  grew  up  and  choked 
them ;  and  others  fell  upon  the  good  ground, 
and  produced  fruit,  one  a  hundred,  one  sixty, 
and  one  thirty.  He  that  has  ears  let  him  hear" 
(verses  5-9).  We  need  not  to  guess  the  mean- 
ing of  this  parable,  for  the  Lord  Himself  tells 
His  disciples  what  He  meant  by  the  birds  and 
the  rocky  place  and  the  thorns.  And  so  we 
shall  take  Llis  own  explanation  with  such  com- 
ments as  may  be  helpful  for  a  fuller  under- 
standing. 

"The  disciples  came  up  to  Him  and  said, 
Why  speakest  thou  to  them  in  parables  ?"  This 


15 

question  came  at  once  after  He  had  finished 
this  first  parable.  They  had  never  heard  a 
parable  from  His  lips.  What  He  had  spoken 
before  to  the  people  and  their  leaders  had  been 
in  simple  words,  easily  to  be  understood  by 
every  one,  and  now  for  the  first  time  He  spoke 
something  which  they  could  not  comprehend. 
It  was  veiled.  The  answer  which  our  Lord 
gives  is  of  great  solemnity,  as  it  announces  the 
judgment  upon  Israel. 

"And  He  answering  said  to  them.  Because 
to  you  it  is  given  to  know  the  mysteries  of  the 
Kingdom  of  the  Heavens,  but  to  them  it  is  not 
given."  The  disciples,  representing  believers, 
were  to  understand  the  mysteries  coming  in 
now  while  the  nation  who  had  refused  the 
light  would  be  in  darkness.  "For  whosoever 
has,  to  him  shall  be  given,  and  he  shall  be 
caused  to  be  in  abundance.  But  he  who  has 
not,  even  what  he  has  shall  be  taken  away  from 
him."  The  disciples  had  received  the  Lord 
and  He  gave  them  more,  while  Israel  had  not, 
they  rejected  Christ  and  so  what  they  had 
still  as  His  earthly  people  was  to  be  taken 
away  from  them.  But  this  two-edged  sword 
cuts  in  another  way.  The  princ  iple  our  Lord 
here  utters  is  still  active.  The  true  believers 
composing  the  church  have,  ?nd  by  and  by 
we  shall  be  caused  to  be  in  abunddiice,  while 
an  apostate  Christendom  which  ha,?  ''lot  shall 
lose  even  what  it  boasts  to  have. 


i6  -^ 

"For  this  cause,"  our  Lord  continues,  "I 
speak  to  them  in  parables,  because  seeing  they 
do  not  see,  and  hearing  they  do  not  hear  nor 
understand ;  and  in  them  is  filled  up  the  proph- 
ecy of  Esaias,  which  says.  Hearing  ye  shall 
hear  and  shall  not  understand,  and  beholding 
ye  shall  behold  and  not  see;  for  the  heart  of 
this  people  has  grown  fat,  and  they  have 
heard  heavily  with  their  ears,  and  they  have 
closed  their  eyes  as  asleep,  lest  they  should  see 
with  the  eyes,  and  hear  with  the  ears,  and  un- 
derstand with  the  heart,  and  should  be  convert- 
ed, and  I  should  heal  them."  This  passage  is 
a  quotation  from  Isaiah  vi:9-io.  Isaiah  saw 
in  a  vision  Jehovah  sitting  upon  a  throne,  and 
He  spoke  these  words  to  the  prophet.  If  we 
turn  to  the  xii.  chapter  in  the  Gospel  of  John 
we  read  the  same  words  quoted  again,  and 
there  is  the  significant  addition,  "These 
things  said  Esaias,  when  He  saw  His 
glory,  and  spoke  of  Him"  (John  xii:40). 
The  Jehovah  Isaiah  saw  upon  His  throne 
was  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Once  more 
do  we  read  the  same  words  brought  to 
remembrance  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  In  the  last 
chapter  of  Acts,  when  Israel's  apostasy  and 
unbelief  is  fully  established,  Paul  speaks  them 
to  the  assembled  Jews  and  adds,  "Be  it  known 
therefore  unto  you  that  the  salvation  of  God 
is  sent  unto  the  Gentiles  and  they  will  hear." 

And   now   after   our   Lord   declares  them 


17 

blessed  on  account  of  what  they  see  and  hear, 
He  explains  the  parable  Himself. 

"Ye,  therefore,  hear  the  parable  of  the  sower. 
From  every  one  who  hears  the  word  of  the 
Kingdom  and  does  not  understand  it,  the 
wicked  one  comes  and  catches  away  what  was 
sown  in  his  heart ;  this  is  he  that  is  sown  at  the 
wayside"  (v.  18-19). 

How  easy  is  it  then  understood.  The  way- 
side is  hard  and  trodden  down  by  feet,  there 
the  seed  fell  and  birds  were  ready  to  snatch  it 
up  and  devour  it. 

A  hearer  or  a  class  of  hearers  is  given  here 
who  do  not  understand  the  Word.  But  is  it 
the  question  of  mental  capacity  of  an  intellec- 
tual understanding?  Certainly  not  The  Lord 
says  the  word  was  "sown  in  the  heart  •'  it  had 
directed  itself  to  the  conscience  and  could 
either  be  accepted  or  rejected.  Bu*-  the  heart 
would  not  have  it  and  turned  agains*  it  •  "and 
does  not  understand  it,"  means  "he  would  not 
understand  or  receive  it."  No  sooner  is  this 
the  case  and  the  seed  has  fallen  upon  such  a 
ground,  a  hard  heart  like  the  wayside,  then 
the  birds  come  and  devour  the  seed.  The  birds 
represent  the  wicked  one.  He  is  present  with 
his  agencies  and  busy  to  take  up  whatever  was 
given.  Once  more  do  we  read  in  this  chapter 
of  birds ;  it  is  in  the  third  parable,  that  of  the 
mustard  seed.    The  birds  there  mean  nothing 


i8 


good  but  that  which  is  evil,  as  in  the  first  para- 
ble. 

"But  he  that  is  sown  on  the  rocky  places — 
this  is  he  that  hears  the  Word  and  immediately 
receives  it  with  joy,  but  has  no  root  in  himself, 
but  is  for  a  time  only;  and  when  tribulation 
happens  on  account  of  the  Word,  he  is  im- 
mediately offended"  (vv.  20-21). 

The  rocky  ground  is  lightly  covered  with 
earth.  There  is  a  sudden  springing  up,  an 
enthusiastic  reception  one  might  say,  which 
pushes  itself  along.  But  the  sun  rises  higher, 
the  heat  is  felt,  and  there  is  no  resistance,  no 
life  to  combat  these  conditions ;  the  delicate 
thing  drops  over  and  is  burned  up.  It  had 
no  roots.  This  little  earth  on  top  of  the  rock 
may  well  represent  the  natural  heart  of  man 
as  the  way  trodden  by  men  represents  it.  Only 
here  is  the  brightest  side  of  the  flesh,  if  one 
can  speak  of  it  in  such  a  way.  But  behind  that 
little  earth  is  the  solid  rock,  which  no  plow 
has  broken  and  in  which  no  life  is  present. 
How  large  is  this  class?  It  is  the  great  class 
of  professing  Christians.  They  are  covering 
over  this  old,  desperately  wicked  heart  with  a 
little  earth.  They  put  on  the  form  of  Godli- 
ness, while  they  know  nothing  of  its  power. 
There  is  also  a  great  deal  of  enthusiasm,  a 
springing  up  of  the  seed ;  it  looks  almost  as  if 
there  is  to  be  a  great  result — but  alas !  there 
is  only  the  name  to  live,  but  death  is  behind  it. 


19 

"When  the  sun  rose  they  were  burned  up." 
May  we  not  apply  this  word  also  dispensation- 
ally?  The  rocky  ground  sowers  will  flourish, 
and  they  flourish  and  increase  now  with  their 
empty  profession  and  their  enthusiastic  show 
of  religiousness  and  world  improvement.  But 
the  sun  will  rise,  tribulation  will  come.  The 
great  tribulation  and  the  judgments,  which 
precede  the  rising  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness 
will  burn  them  up  and  sweep  them  away. 

"And  he  that  is  sown  among  the  thorns, 
this  is  he  who  hears  the  Word,  and  the  anx- 
ious care  of  this  life  and  the  deceit  of  riches 
choke  the  Word  and  he  becomes  unfruitful" 
(verse  22). 

This  is  so  plain  that  it  needs  hardly  any 
comment  at  all.  "The  deceit  of  riches"  hinder 
the  growth  of  the  Word.  It  becomes  choked 
and  there  is  no  fruit.  How  true  this  is  of 
the  present  day  we  all  know.  The  world,  the 
pleasures  of  the  earth,  cares  and  anxiety  in 
getting  as  much  as  possible  of  these  phantom 
things  here  seems  to  control  more  and  more 
the  outwardly  professing  masses.  All  that  is 
of  God  becomes  choked. 

Thus  we  see  in  these  three  classes,  in  which 
the  seed  perishes  and  brings  no  fruit,  the  Devil, 
the  Flesh  and  the  World  represented.  The 
Devil  snatches  up  and  devours,  the  Flesh  at- 
tempts and  fails,  the  World  surrounds  and 
chokes.    And  yet  how  much  else  might  be  said 


20 

in  connection  with  these  three  classes !  No 
human  being  could  have  spoken  such  a  simple 
parable  with  such  a  deep  and  far-reaching 
meaning.  The  Revealer  of  Secrets  speaks, 
who  knows  the  hidden  things. 

"But  he  that  is  sown  upon  the  good  ground, 
this  is  he  who  hears  and  understands  the  Word, 
who  bears  fruit  also  and  produces  one  a  hun- 
dred, one  sixty,  and  one  thirty"  (verse  23). 
Hearing,  understanding,  which  is  in  faith  and 
through  faith,  f ruitbearing  and  producing,  this 
is  the  process  of  the  seed  in  the  good  ground, 
a  receptive  heart  prepared  by  the  Grace  of 
God. 


III. 

We  come  now  to  the  second  parable,  in 
which  we  find  the  Kingdom  of  the  heavens 
mentioned.  It  was  not  mentioned  in  connec- 
tion with  the  first  parable  of  the  sower.  "An- 
other parable  set  He  before  them,  saying. 
The  Kingdom  of  the  heavens  has  become  like 
a  man  sowing  good  seed  in  his  field ;  but  while 
men  slept  his  enemy  came  and  sowed  darnel 
amongst  the  wheat  and  went  away.  But  when 
the  blade  shot  up  and  produced  fruit  then  ap- 
peared the  darnel  also.  And  the  bondmen  of 
the  householder  came  ud  and  said  to  him.  Sir, 
hast  thou  not  sown  good  seed  in  thy  field? 


21 

Whence  then  has  it  darnel?  And  he  said  to 
them,  A  man  that  is  an  enemy  has  done  this. 
And  the  bondmen  said  to  him,  Wilt  thou  then 
that  we  go  and  gather  it  up?  But  he  said, 
No ;  lest  in  gathering  the  darnel  ye  should  root 
up  the  wheat  with  it.  Suffer  both  to  grow 
together  unto  the  harvest,  and  in  time  of  the 
harvest  I  will  say  to  the  harvestmen.  Gather 
first  the  darnel,  and  bind  it  into  bundles  to 
burn  it;  but  the  wheat  bring  together  into  my 
granary"  (verses  24-30).  Again  we  are  not 
left  to  seek  for  an  interpretation.  After  he 
had  spoken  two  other  parables  we  read  that 
our  Lord  in  answer  to  His  disciples'  question 
tells  them  what  He  meant  by  the  parable.  To 
this  perfect  interpretation  by  the  divine  speak- 
er we  have  to  turn  to  find  the  correct  and  far 
reaching  meaning  of  this  second  parable. 
"Then,  having  dismissed  the  crowds.  He  went 
into  the  house;  and  His  disciples  came  to 
Him,  saying.  Expound  to  us  the  parable  of  the 
darnel  of  the  field.  But  He  answering  said, 
He  that  sows  the  good  seed  is  the  Son  of  Man, 
and  the  field  is  the  world  and  the  good  seed 
these  are  the  Sons  of  the  Kingdom,  but  the 
darnel  are  the  sons  of  the  evil  one ;  and  the 
enemy  who  has  sowed  it  is  the  devil,  and  the 
harvest  is  the  completion  of  the  age,  and  the 
harvestmen  are  angels"  (verses  36-39). 

The   connection    with    the   first   parable    is 
clear.    The  sam.e  sower  is  in  the  beginning  of 


22 

the  parable  before  us,  and  the  seed  is  deposited 
in  the  field,  which  is  the  world.  But  our  Lord 
says,  "the  good  seed,  these  are  the  Sons  of 
the  Kingdom."  This  can  mean  only  one  thing, 
namely,  that  the  good  seed  sown  and  fallen 
into  a  good  ground,  as  we  saw  in  the  first 
parable,  brings  forth  fruit,  and  the  Word  of 
the  Kingdom  produces  the  Sons  of  the  King- 
dom. Like  begets  like;  the  fruit  is  according 
to  the  seed.  However,  the  leading  thought  in 
this  parable  is  the  enemy  and  his  evil  work.  It 
is  a  work  of  spite,  as  it  is  yet  quite  often 
practiced  in  oriental  countries.  The  enemy 
watches  till  his  hated  neighbor  has  deposited 
his  seed  into  the  field,  then  he  goes  to  work 
during  the  night,  while  men  sleep,  and  begins 
to  sow  the  bad  seed  of  some  weed.  Not  till 
the  seed  springs  up  and  grows  does  the  un- 
suspecting victim  see  the  work  of  the  enemy. 
The  enemy,  our  Lord  says,  is  the  devil.  As 
from  the  Word  of  the  Kingdom  the  Sons  of 
the  Kingdom  spring  forth,  so  from  the  evil 
seed  sown  by  the  devil  come  the  sons  of  the 
evil  one. 

It  is  important  to  notice  the  time  when  the 
enemy  did  this  and  the  manner  in  which  he 
attempts  to  counteract  the  work  of  the  Sower, 
the  Son  of  Man. 

In  regard  to  the  time,  we  have  two  facts  to 
consider.  The  first  is :  It  was  immediately  af- 
ter the  Sower  had  deposited  the  good  seed; 


23> 

and  the  second  fact :  It  was  "while  men  slept." 
No  sooner  had  our  Lord  brought  the  truth, 
and  the  Holy  Spirit  had  been  given,  than  the 
enemy  began  its  work.  In  the  days  of  the 
Apostle  Paul  the  work  which  the  enemy  had 
done  became  manifest,  and  the  evil  seed,  which 
at  the  end  of  this  age  is  full  grown,  is  easily 
seen  springing  up  in  the  beginning  of  the  age. 
The  mystery  of  iniquity  began  its  work  then, 
and  continues  throughout  the  age  till  the  end 
is  reached,  when  it  is  fully  developed. 

It  was  while  men  slept  that  the  enemy  did  it. 
Not  the  Sower  slept.  He  neither  sleeps  nor 
slumbers,  but  the  men  slept.  Such  an  un- 
watchful  condition  soon  developed  in  the  be- 
ginning of  the  age.  The  first  love  was  soon 
given  up,  and  then  the  enemy  did  his  work. 

The  manner  was  by  putting  a  counterfeit 
seed  in  the  field.  The  darnel  looks  in  its  seed 
like  the  wheat.  When  it  springs  up  it  cannot 
be  distinguished  from  the  wheat,  yet  it  is  a 
poisonous  weed.  The  darnel  represents  the 
He  as  it  is  put  into  the  field  by  the  devil.  It 
is  evil  doctrine,  a  counterfeit  of  the  faith  once 
and  for  all  delivered  unto  the  saints.  The  de- 
nial of  the  Deity  of  our  Lord,  the  denial  of  the 
resurrection  and  the  inspiration  of  the  Bible 
belong  to  this  darnel  seed,  which  made  itself 
felt  in  the  very  beginning  of  this  Christian  age. 

In  a  certain  sense  this  process  still  continues. 
Whenever    the    truth    is    proclaimed    and    the 


24 

Word  taught,  it  does  not  take  long  before  the 
enemy  comes  and  brings  the  counterfeit  when 
"men  sleep."  Another  strong  lesson  we  learn 
from  this  parable  is  the  character  of  this  en- 
tire age.  It  is  evil.  Satan  is  the  god  of  this 
age  till  the  end  of  the  age  comes.  The  mixed 
condition  of  good  seed  and  darnel  seed,  Sons 
of  the  Kingdom  and  sons  of  the  evil  one  pre- 
vails to  the  very  end.  The  servants  of  the 
bondmen  were  willing  to  root  out  the  darnel 
but  were  not  permitted  to  do  so.  It  is  an  idle 
dream,  which  many  hope  to  realize,  to  reform 
the  world,  to  gather  out  obnoxious  evils,  to 
banish  drunkenness  and  immorality,  to  purify 
the  state  and  politics.  Such  efforts  are  no- 
where taught  in  the  Word  of  God.  Men, 
under  Christian  profession,  take  such  work 
upon  themselves,  and  they  little  know  how 
they  sin  and  dishonor  Christ  with  it.  No,  error 
and  its  fruits  will  continue  to  grow  alongside 
the  good  seed  and  its  precious  fruit  till  the 
time  of  the  harvest.  Before  we  follow  the 
thought  of  the  harvest  we  turn  our  attention 
to  still  another  matter  in  connection  with  the 
first  part  of  this  parable. 

A  vital  error  has  been  committed  in  regard 
to  the  place  where  the  wheat  and  the  darnel 
grow  together.  It  has  been  said  to  us  "we 
cannot  have  a  pure  church,  or  assembly,  for 
the  Lord  Himself  has  said  that  the  evil  will 
always  be  with  us  and  that  we  are  not  to  put 


25 

them  out  who  are  the  sons  of  the  evil  one." 
This  was  said  and  is  said  on  the  supposition 
that  our  Lord  speaks  of  the  Church.  How- 
ever, this  is  not  the  case.  The  church,  the 
assembly,  is  not  before  Him  at  all.  As  we 
have  said  before  the  Kingdom  of  the  heavens 
is  not  the  Church.  When  it  comes  to  the  rev- 
elation concerning  the  Church  we  hear  our 
Lord  say  that  evil  is  not  to  be  tolerated  in  the 
assembly.  "If  thy  brother  sin  against  thee  go, 
reprove  him  between  thee  and  him  alone.  If 
he  hear  thee,  thou  hast  gained  thy  brother. 
But  if  he  do  not  hear,  take  with  thee  one  or 
two  besides  that  every  matter  may  stand  upon 
the  word  of  two  witnesses  or  of  three.  But 
if  he  will  not  listen  to  them,  tell  it  to  the  as- 
sembly; and  if  also  he  will  not  listen  to  the 
assembly,  let  him  be  to  thee  as  one  of  the 
nations  and  a  taxgatherer"  (Chap.  xviii:i5- 
17).  This  is  the  way  evil  is  to  be  treated  in 
the  assembly  or,  as  we  generally  say,  Church. 
In  the  epistles  we  find  numerous  exhortations 
that  evil  doctrine  and  an  evil  walk  contrary  to 
the  Gospel  is  not  to  be  tolerated  in  an  assem- 
bly. The  assembly  is  to  judge  evil.  It  is  not 
said  of  the  Church  "let  them  grow  together." 
The  field  is  not  the  Church,  but  the  world, 
and  it  is  in  the  world  that  this  takes  place ;  in 
been  sown,  in  the  entire  sphere  of  professing 
that  part  of  the  field  where  the  good  seed  has 
Christendom. 


26 

The  harvest  is  the  completion  of  the  age. 
Our  authorized  version  has  it  "world."  This 
has  misled  many  readers  of  the  Word.  The 
end  of  this  world  is  a  good  ways  off  yet.  The 
age  in  which  we  live  is  drawing  rapidly 
to  a  close.  What  will  take  place  then? 
Our  Lord  says,  "As  then  the  darnel  is  gath- 
ered and  is  burned  in  the  fire,  thus  it  shall  be 
in  the  completion  of  the  age.  The  Son  of 
Man  shall  send  His  angels  and  they  shall 
gather  out  of  His  Kingdom  all  offences,  and 
those  that  practice  lawlessness,  and  they  shall 
cast  them  into  the  furnace  of  fire;  there  shall 
be  the  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth.  Then 
the  righteous  shall  shine  forth  as  the  sun  in 
the  Kingdom  of  their  father.  He  that  hath 
ears  let  him  hear"  (verses  40-43).  Before  in 
the  parable  our  Lord  said:  "I  will  say  to  the 
harvestmen,  Gather  first  the  darnel,  and  bind 
it  into  bundles  to  burn  it ;  but  the  wheat  bring 
together  into  my  granary." 

The  completion  of  the  age  is  the  same  as  in 
Matthew  xxiv,  when  the  disciples  asked  for 
the  signs  of  His  coming  and  the  completion  of 
the  age.  The  ending  of  the  age  will  be  Jewish  ; 
Jewish  history  resumed  in  the  events  which 
fall  into  the  last  week  of  Daniel,  the  seventieth 
week.  Of  this  ending  the  Lord  speaks.  The 
angels  will  then  be  the  harvestmen.  It  cor- 
responds to  what  we  read  in  Rev.  xiv:  14-20. 
"'And  I  looked  and  behold  a  white  cloud,  and 


27 

upon  the  cloud  one  sat  like  unto  the  Son  of 
Man,  having  upon  His  head  a  golden  crown, 
and  in  His  hand  a  sharp  sickle.  And  another 
angel  came  out  of  the  temple,  crying  with  a 
loud  voice  to  him  |:hat  sat  on  the  cloud  Thrust 
in  thy  sickle  and  reap;  for  the  time  is  come 
for  thee  to  reap,  for  the  harvest  of  the  earth 
is  ripe." 

Some  who  teach  that  unscriptural  theory, 
that  the  church  will  remain  in  the  earth  to  the 
very  end  of  the  age  and  pass  through  the  great 
tribulation,  have  used  this  parable  to  support 
their  views.  We  repeat  the  parable  has  noth- 
ing to  do  with  the  Church.  When  our  Lord 
speaks  of  the  bundling  up  of  the  darnel  and 
the  gathering  of  the  wheat  into  the  granary. 
He  did  not  teach  that  the  wheat  is  the  Church 
or  represents  the  Church,  and  that  the  gather- 
ing in  of  the  Church  is  to  be  His  last  act  in 
this  age.  The  wheat,  of  course,  is  the  good 
seed,  the  good  seed  are  the  Sons  of  the  King- 
dom. That  all  true  believers  are  the  good 
seed  and  as  such  Sons  of  the  Kingdom  none 
would  doubt.  Yet,  after  the  Church  is  re- 
moved from  the  earth,  before  the  completion 
of  the  age,  as  foretold  in  prophecy,  begins, 
there  will  still  be  wheat  in  the  earth.  There 
will  still  be  sowing.  Indeed  it  will  then  be 
"the  Word  of  the  Kingdom"  which  is  preached. 
The  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom  will  be  proclaimed 
during  that  end  and  the  seed  will  spring  up. 


28 

A  great  multitude  will  come  out  o/  that  gjeat 
tribulation  having  washed  their  robes  in  the 
blood  of  the  Lamb.  This  multitude  will  be 
gathered  in  the  time  when  the  darnel  are  being 
bundled  up,  preparatory  to  the  visible 
manifestation  of  the  Lord.  The  wheat, 
these  Sons  of  the  Kingdom,  will  be 
gathered  into  His  granary,  kept  and  preserved 
for  the  Kingdom  to  be  established  in  the  earth. 
"Then  the  righteous  shall  shine  forth  as  the 
sun  in  the  Kingdom  of  their  Father."  This 
reminds  us  very  strongly  of  the  language  of 
Matthew  xxv:34.  "Come  ye  blessed  of  My 
Father,  inherit  the  Kingdom  prepared  for  you 
from  the  foundation  of  the  World."  These 
words  are  addressed  not  to  the  church,  but  to 
that  multitude  come  out  of  all  nations  (Rev. 
vii)  and  the  Kingdom  is  not  the  heavenly  glory 
but  the  earthly  Kingdom.  The  Church,  her 
heavenly  calling  and  destination,  we  repeat 
again,  is  tiof  in  view  at  all  in  this  second  par- 
able. 

Let  us  hold  fast  the  three  great  facts  the 
parable  teaches.  These  are,  as  we  have  seen, 
the  following: 

1.  The  enemy,  the  devil,  began  his  work  in 
the  beginning  of  the  age. 

2.  The  age  is  mixed,  good  and  evil  grows 
together.  This  condition  cannot  be  changed 
throughout  the  age. 

3.  The  mixed  condition  will  cease  with  the 


29 

completion  of  the  age.  The  Sons  of  the  King- 
dom will  inherit  the  Kingdom.  The  darnel 
after  being  bundled  up  are  burned  with  fire. 


IV. 


The  next  two  parables  our  Lord  spake  to 
reveal  still  more  of  the  mysteries  of  the  king- 
dom of  the  heavens  are  the  parables  of  the 
mustard  seed  and  of  the  leaven.  They  belong 
together.  We  shall  learn  in  the  exposition  of 
these  two  parables,  how  the  popular  interpreta- 
tion of  them  through  the  leading  commenta- 
tors of  Christendom  has  turned  everything  up- 
side down.  The  fact  is,  precisely  the  oppo- 
site our  Lord  meant  is  being  taught  by  teach- 
ers in  evangelical  Christendom.  The  fault  of 
this  erroneous  interpretation  springs  from  the 
great  fundamental  error  that  the  Lord  has  the 
church  in  view  when  He  speaks  of  the  king- 
dom of  the  heavens,  and  that  the  church  is  that 
kingdom.  Therefore  it  is  taken  for  granted 
by  this  false  exposition  that  when  the  Lord  now 
speaks  of  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  which  be- 
comes a  great  tree  and  which  gives  shelter  to 
the  birds,  that  this  is  a  prophecy  relating  to 
the  expansion  of  the  church.  The  leaven  is 
therefore  made  to  mean  the  gospel  with  its 
leavening  power.    All  this  is  radically  wrong. 


30 

We  turn  to  the  parable  of  the  grain  of  mustard 
seed  first. 

"Another  parable  set  He  before  them,  say- 
ing, The  kingdom  of  the  heavens  is  like  a 
grain  of  mustard  seed  which  a  man  took  and 
sowed  in  his  field,  which  is  less  indeed  than 
all  seeds,  but  when  it  is  grown  is  greater  than 
herbs,  and  becomes  a  tree,  so  that  the  birds 
©f  heaven  come  and  roost  in  its  branches" 
(verses  31-32). 

Here  we  have  the  outward  development  of 
the  kingdom  of  the  heavens  as  it  grows  and 
expands,  in  an  unnatural  way,  and  becomes 
the  roosting  place  of  the  birds  of  heaven.  As 
indicated  above,  the  almost  universal  com- 
ment on  this  mustard  seed  and  its  miraculous 
growth,  as  it  is  termed,  is  that  it  fully  declares 
the  expansion  of  the  church,  and  the  birds  of 
heaven  are  interpreted  as  meaning  peoples  and 
nations,  who  find  shelter  in  the  church. 
Growing  and  still  growing,  the  mustard  tree 
reaches  over  the  entire  earth,  its  branches 
spread  out  wider  and  wider,  and  soon  (so  they 
tell  us)  the  tree  will  have  covered  the  earth 
as  the  waters  cover  the  deep.  It  is  also  a 
common  occurrence  that  some  denominational 
leader — a  bishop  or  an  elder — claims  the  par- 
able for  his  denomination  and  illustrates  with 
it  the  phenomenal  growth  of  the  sect  to  which 
he  belongs,  or  claims  a  great  future  of  suc- 
cess.    Again,  the  history  of  the  "church"  is 


31 

resorted  to  for  the  sake  of  showing  the  fulfil- 
ment of  this  parable  and  the  statistics  of  Chris- 
tendom, so  many  millions  of  Protestants  (in- 
cluding all  the  infidels,  unsaved  masses  of 
Germany,  Englan4,  and  every  other  "evan- 
gelical" country)  now,  so  manv  more  than 
fifty  years  ago,  etc. 

Now,  if  the  Lord  had  meant  His  church  by 
this  mustard  seed,  which  becomes  a  tree  and 
the  roosting  place  of  birds,  if  it  is  really  the 
church,  which  is  His  body,  then  this  parable 
would  be  in  flagrant  contradiction  with  what 
He  and  the  Holy  Spirit  teach  elsewhere  con- 
cerning the  church  in  the  earth,  the  mission 
and  the  future  of  the  church.  The  greatest 
clash  of  teaching  would  be  the  result. 

For  instance,  in  His  prayer  our  Lord  says 
concerning  His  own,  those  who  are  one  as  the 
Father  and  Son  are  one :  "They  are  not  of  the 
world,  as  I  am  not  of  the  world"  (John  xvii : 
14).  The  church  then,  composed  of  all 
believers,  is  not  of  the  world  as  He  is  not 
of  the  world.  The  church  is  from  above,  as 
every  believer  has  a  life  which  is  from  above; 
but  for  a  little  while  the  church  is  in  the  world, 
and  in  a  little  while  the  church  will  be  above, 
where  He  is  the  glorified  Head  of  His  body. 
The  mustard  seed  springing  up  in  the  field 
(do  not  forget  the  field  is  the  zvorld),  rooting 
deeper  and  deeper  in  the  earth  and  expanding 
in  this  unnatural  way  aflFording  room  for  birds. 


32 

is  the  picture  of  something  entirely  different. 
It  shows  us  a  system  which  is  rooted  in  tlie 
earth  and  which  aims  at  greatness  in  the  world, 
expansion  over  the  earth.  The  Lord  never 
meant  His  church  to  be  rooted  and  grounded 
in  the  field,  the  world.  He  never  called  the 
church  to  assume  such  proportions  and  become 
an  abnormal  growth  in  the  earth.  Whatever 
is  spoken  of  Christ  is  spoken  of  the  church. 
Suffering  and  glory,  lowliness  followed  by 
exaltation,  is  the  way  Christ  went;  it  is 
the  way  ordained  for  the  church.  She  is  to 
be  lowly,  now  suffering  with  Him,  rejected 
and  disowned  by  the  world  as  He  was,  never 
to  reign  and  rule  now,  but  patiently  waiting 
with  Him  for  the  moment  when  He  is  mani- 
fested and  then  to  share  His  Throne  and  His 
Glory.  The  calling  and  destiny  of  the  church 
is  heavenly.  Her  mission  is  to  shine  out  Him- 
self and  testify  of  His  grace,  but  never  to 
control  and  overspread  the  world.  The  epis- 
tles addressed  to  the  church  make  this  suffi- 
ciently clear. 

But  if  the  mustard  seed  and  its  growth 
does  not  mean  the  church,  what  does  it  mean  ? 
[t  means  the  Kingdom  of  the  heavens,  and 
this  is,  as  we  have  seen  before,  professing 
Christendom.  At  once  the  parable  becomes 
illuminated  with  light.  Looked  upon  in  this 
light,  in  full  harmony  with  all  the  Lord  teaches 
in  this  chapter,  all  is  easily  understood.     The 


33 

little  mustard  seed,  which  was  not  destined  to 
be  a  tree  but  only  a  shrub,  easily  taken  out  of 
the  garden  where  it  had  been  planted,  develops 
against  its  nature  into  a  tree.  That  which 
came  from  Him,  the  Son  of  Man,  the  Sower, 
develops,  committed  into  the  hands  of  men, 
into  an  unnatural  thing — one  might  say,  a 
monstrosity — for  such  a  mustard  tree  is.  This 
unnatural  thing,  this  monstrosity,  is  profes- 
sing Christendom  as  a  system  of  the  world, 
professing  Christ,  without  possessing  Him  and 
His  Spirit. 

Here  we  have  to  call  attention  to  the  third 
message  to  the  churches  in  Revelation,  the 
second  chapter.  That  is  the  message  to  Per- 
gamos,  typifying  the  age  of  the  history  of 
Christendom,  beginning  with  Constantine  the 
Great  in  the  fourth  century.  The  professing 
church  was  made  a  state  church.  The  mustard 
seed  suddenly  became  the  tree,  and  ever  since 
the  professing  church  has  delighted  in  looking 
upon  herself  as  a  big  expanding  tree.  But 
notice  the  perfect  agreement — the  third  par- 
able and  the  third  church  message. 

The  birds  which  roost  in  that  tree  would 
have  to  mean,  if  the  parable  applies  to  the 
church,  converted  sinners.  Do  birds  ever  rep- 
resent clean  persons  ?  We  need  not  go  outside 
of  the  chapter  to  answer  this.  The  birds  which 
fell  upon  the  seed  which  had  fallen  by  the 
wavside  were  instruments  of  Satan.    Birds  of 


34 

heaven,  or  fowls,  never  mean  anything  good 
in  Scripture.  Abraham  stood  in  the  midst  of 
the  pieces  of  the  sacrifices  and  drove  away 
the  fowls  which  were  ready  to  fall  upon  the 
pieces  (Gen,  xv).  The  animals  divided  there 
represent  Christ  and  the  fowls  nothing  good. 
Birds  in  this  parable  mean  unsaved,  uncon- 
verted people  and  nations  who  flock  for  selfish 
motives  to  the  tree,  the  outward  form  of  Chris- 
tendom, and  find  shelter  there.  But  they  defile 
the  tree. 

At  last  the  tree  will  be  full  grown.  Of  the 
full  grown  tree  it  is  said,  "Great  Babylon  has 
become  the  habitation  (roosting  place)  of 
demons,  and  a  hold  of  every  unclean  spirit, 
and  a  hold  of  every  unclean  and  hated  bird" 
(Rev.  xviii  :2). 

But  let  us  not  forget  there  is  a  tree  which 
is  to  grow  up  and  spread  its  branches,  taking 
sap  out  of  the  root,  over  the  whole  earth. 
This  tree  is  Israel — the  good  olive  tree  with 
its  indestructible  root.  Some  of  the  branches 
are  now  broken  ofif  and  lie  upon  the  ground. 
Romans  xi,  however,  assures  us  that  God  is 
able  to  graft  them  in  again.  Yet  before  this 
olive  tree  with  its  holy  root,  this  olive  tree  with 
its  long  promised  future,  the  covenant  made 
with  an  oath,  stands  highminded,  boasting 
Christendom,  boasting  itself  against  the 
branches  and  claiming  to  be  the  tree  to  over- 
spread the  earth  and  thus  attending  to  Israel's 


35 

earthly  calling.  Alas!  the  warning  is  cast 
into  the  winds,  "if  God  spared  not  the  natural 
branches  take  heed  lest  He  spare  not  thee." 
What  a  fall  it  will  be  when  at  last  that  tree, 
the  monstrous  tree,'  falls  and  is  destroyed  for- 
ever root  and  all ! 

V. 

But  we  must  now  turn  our  attention  to  the 
next  parable,  the  parable  of  the  leaven.  "He 
spoke  another  parable  to  them :  The  kingdom 
of  the  heavens  is  like  leaven,  which  a  woman 
took  and  hid  in  three  measures  of  meal  until 
it  had  been  all  leavened"  (verse  33).  It  is, 
perhaps,  unnecessary  to  state  the  universal  ex- 
planation of  the  parable  of  the  leaven.  All 
the  leading  commentators  of  the  Bible  have 
accepted  it,  and  it  is  taught  throughout  Chris- 
tendom. However,  we  must  refer  to  it  briefly. 
The  leaven  is  taken  to  mean  the  Gospel  and 
its  power.  The  woman  represents  the  church. 
The  woman  takes  the  leaven  and  puts  it  into 
three  measures  of  meal,  which,  according  to 
this  general  exegesis,  represents  humanity,  the 
entire  human  family.  Here  the  leaven  does, 
in  a  hidden  manner,  its  work  in  an  assimilating 
process  in  penetrating  the  whole  mass  of  hu- 
manity.* 

That  the  parable  could  mean  anything  but 

*Thus  writes  P.  Lange,  often  called  "the  Prince 
among  Commentators."  "The  woman  is  an  apt  figure 


that,  which  we  have  briefly  outlined,  seems  to 
the  great  majority  of  teachers  and  preachers 
of  Christendom  next  to  an  impossible  thing. 
It  is  such  a  generally  accepted  view  that  but 
few  can  tear  themselves  loose  from  it,  and 
see  the  true  teaching  our  Lord  gives  in  this 
fourth  parable.  One  hears  so  continually 
statements  about  the  Gospel  leaven  and  prayer 
that  the  "good"  leaven  may  do  its  work,  etc., 
that  another  explanation  of  this  parable  puts 
one  at  odds  with  the  bulk  of  Christian  believ- 
ers. Indeed,  this  little  parable  contained  in  this 
little  verse  is  apt  to  revolutionize  the  concep- 
tion of  many  truths  revealed  in  the  Word  of 
God.  If  we  then  approach  this  parable  with  a 
candid  mind,  laying  aside  any  prejudice  and 
preconceived  ideas  and  are  willing  to  know 
and  follow  the  truth  at  any  cost,  we  shall  cer- 
tainly find  the  truth  and  with  it  great  joy  and 
peace.  If  it  revolutionizes  our  views  it  will 
only  put  us  right,  for  whosoever  follows  the 
accepted  teachings  of  men  is  generally  not 
right. 


of  the  church.  Leaven,  a  substance  kindred,  yet 
quite  opposed  to  meal,  having  the  power  of  trans- 
forming and  preserving  it,  and  converting  it  into 
bread,  thus  representing  the  divine  in  its  relation  to, 
and  influence  upon,  our  natural  life.  One  of  the 
main  points  of  the  parable  is  the  hiding  or  the  mix- 
ing of  the  leaven  in  the  three  measures  of  meal. 
This  refers  to  the  great  visible  church,  in  which  the 
living  Gospel  seems,  as  it  were,  hidden  and  lost." 


37 

If  then  the  leaven  means  the  Gospel,  and  the 
woman  the  church,  and  the  three  measures  of 
meal  humanity,  the  Lord  would  teach  that 
the  Gospel,  through  the  instrumentality  of  the 
church,  is  to  permeate  humanity,  and  that  the 
world  is  to  be  converted  by  the  assimilating 
power  of  the  Gospel  in  penetrating  the  whole 
mass  of  humanity.  Such,  of  course,  is  the 
belief,  the  unscriptural  belief,  of  Christendom. 
But  if  the  Lord  teaches  any  such  doctrine  in 
this  parable  He  manifestly  contradicts  Him- 
self, a  thing  impossible  with  Him,  who  is  in- 
fallible. We  have  seen  in  the  second  parable 
that  the  wheat  and  the  tares  grow  together 
until  the  time  of  the  harvest.  This  excludes 
the  thought  of  world  conversion  in  this  age. 
This  age,  as  we  have  seen,  is  a  mixed  one,  and 
these  conditions  prevail  to  the  end  of  it.  If 
our  Lord  meant  the  leaven  to  permeate  the 
whole  lump  of  humanity  then  He  teaches 
something  entirely  different  from  what  He 
taught  in  the  second  parable. 

But  let  us  turn  our  attention  to  the  word 
"leaven."  We  should  not  forget  that  our 
Lord  as  the  teacher,  as  Nicodemus  called 
Him,  come  from  God,  was  according  to  the 
flesh  the  Son  of  David  and  the  Son  of  Abra- 
ham. These  to  whom  He  speaks  were  Jews. 
Now  the  hearers  of  the  parable  certainly  un- 
derstood what  was  meant  by  leaven.  No  Jew 
would  ever  dream  that  leaven  used  in  illus- 


38 

trating  some  power  of  process,  could  stand 
for  something  good.  Leaven  with  the  Jews 
means  always  evil.  It  was  excluded  from 
every  offering  of  the  Lord  made  by  fire.  Con- 
scientiously the  orthodox  Jew  searches  his 
dwelling  before  keeping  the  feast  of  the  un- 
leavened bread,  if  perhaps  somewhere  a  mor- 
sel of  bread  with  some  leaven  may  be  hid. 
He  purges  out  the  leaven. 

The  word  leaven,  however,  is  not  used  here 
exclusively.  We  find  it  a  number  of  times  in 
the  New  Testament;  the  question  is  for  what 
does  it  stand  in  the  other  passages? 

Three  times  our  Lord  uses  the  word  leaven 
besides  here  in  the  parable.  He  speaks  of  the 
leaven  of  the  Pharisees,  the  leaven  of  the  Sad- 
ducees  and  the  leaven  of  Herod.  (Matt. 
xvi:i2;  Mark  viii:i5.)  Does  he  mean  some 
good  quality  of  the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees 
when  He  mentions  leaven  in  connection  with 
them?  Certainly  not,  He  cautions  His  disci- 
ples to  beware  of  that  leaven.  He  terms  the 
hypocrisy  of  the  ritualistic  Pharisee,  leaven, 
and  the  rationalism  of  the  Sadducees  and 
worldliness  of  Herod  is  leaven.  The  Holy 
Spirit  furthermore  uses  the  word  leaven  only 
in  an  evil  sense  (i  Cor.  v:6;  Gal.  v:9).  It  is 
then  evident  in  Scripture  language  leaven 
never  means  anything  good,  akvays  stands  for 
evil  and  corruption.  It  is  impossible  that  it 
should  mean  only  once  something  good,  and 


39 

that  the  Lord  without  any  further  comment, 
should  use  it  here  as  a  type  of  the  gospel. 

But  let  us  turn  to  the  question  of  the  three 
measures  of  meal.  What  do  they  represent? 
The  faulty  but  accepted  teaching  is,  that  the 
Lord  means  corrupted  humanity  by  it.  How- 
ever, this  is  as  impossible  as  it  is  for  leaven 
to  be  something  good.  Where  does  the  meal 
come  from?  Surely  any  child  can  answer 
this,  the  meal  comes  from  the  wheat.  Tares, 
the  type  of  evil,  corruption,  never  yield  fine, 
wholesome  meal.  Meal  is  the  product  of  the 
good  seed  only.  Good,  nutritious  and  pure  as 
it  is,  it  can  never  represent  the  unregenerated 
mass  of  humanity.  But  we  have  still  greater 
evidence.  Three  measures  of  meal  (an  ephah) 
stand  in  type  for  Christ,  the  corn  of  wheat 
and  the  bread  of  life.  When  Abraham  com- 
forted the  Lord  (Genesis  xviii)  it  was  by 
three  measures  of  meal  and  a  calf.  Both  are 
typical  of  Christ,  His  Person  and  His  Work. 
He  is  good,  pure,  holy,  undefiled,  as  well  as 
that  which  He  has  given.  His  Word.  It  is 
therefore  all  folly  to  twist  Scripture  language 
around,  and  make  the  three  measures  of  meal 
mean  corruption,  when  it  always  denotes 
purity. 

Again,  if  the  Gospel  is  leaven,  and  this 
leaven  is  to  pervade  the  whole  mass  of  hu- 
manity, we  have  an  additional  contradiction. 
Does  the  Gospel  really  work  like  leaven  ?  How 


40 

does  leaven  work  ?  It  is  put  into  meal  and  then 
it  works  by  itself.  That  is  all.  Simply  put  it 
there,  leave  it  alone,  it  is  bound  to  leaven  the 
whole  lump.  But  this  is  not  the  way  the  Gos- 
pel works  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation. 

Conceding  that  it  is  true,  the  Gospel  is  leaven 
and  is  to  pervade  the  whole  lump,  then  we  can 
readily  say  the  "Gospel  leaven"  is  the  biggest 
failure  which  has  ever  been  put  out.  There  is 
no  nation,  nor  even  a  town  or  hamlet  which 
has  ever  been  successfully  "leavened"  by  the 
Gospel. 

The  process  is  then  a  failure,  the  Gospel 
does  not  accomplish  the  leavening  of  the 
lump.  It  has  not  done  it  in  1900  years.  The 
inference  which  comes  next  is,  that  in  giving 
such  a  prophecy  the  speaker,  our  Lord,  was 
mistaken. 

We  have  now  torn  down  the  false  explana- 
tion of  the  parable,  and  laid  the  foundation 
upon  which  we  can  easily  build  and  grasp  the 
true  meaning  of  the  parable. 

Leaven  is  error,  evil,  corruption  The  good 
pure  meal  stands  for  truth,  for  Christ  and  his 
Word.  The  leaven  corrupts  the  meal,  it 
changes  that  which  is  good,  and  attacks  in  a 
hidden  way  its  purity,  till  it  has  pervaded  the 
whole  mass.  The  Lord  teaches  in  the  parable 
how  evil  doctrine  will  corrupt  the  fine  meal, 
the  doctrine  of  Christ.  It  follows  the  parable 
of   the   mustard   seed.     First  the   professing 


41 

church  was  lifted  up  into  prominence,  and  the 
next  step  was  the  woman  who  put  leaven 
into  the  three  measures  of  meal.  Pergamos, 
the  period  of  church  history,  in  which  the  pro- 
fessing church  is, married  (the  meaning  of 
Pergamos)  to  the  state  and  the  world,  is  fol- 
lowed by  the  fourth  period,  that  of  Thyatira. 
This  fourth  message  corresponds  to  the  para- 
ble of  the  woman  and  the  leaven.  A  woman, 
the  woman  Jezebel,  is  mentioned  in  Revela- 
tion ii.  No  doubt  she  stands  for  Rome.  The 
woman  in  the  parable  represents  the  same,  the 
apostate  church,  the  mother  of  harlots  and 
abominations  of  the  earth.  She  has  with  her 
evil  doctrine,  the  leaven,  corrupted  the  fine 
meal,  the  doctrine  of  Christ.  And  now  this 
leaven  works  in  professing  Christendom.  It 
has  not  yet  fully  pervaded  all,  the  whole  is  not 
yet  leavened.  The  true  believers,  the  church, 
still  on  the  earth,  are  a  hindrance  to  the  full 
leavening  process  of  evil.  But  the  church 
will  be  removed  from  the  earth,  then  the  whole 
lump  will  be  leavened.  The  fire  alone  can 
arrest  the  leaven  in  its  work.  The  fire  will 
make  an  end  of  the  leaven.  This  explanation 
is  the  only  correct  one,  for  it  agrees  perfectly 
not  only  with  the  teaching  of  our  Lord  in  the 
previous  parables,  but  with  Scripture  as  a 
whole.  The  evil  conditions  in  which  the 
kingdom  of  the  heavens  gets  in  the  hands  of 
men,  during  the  absence  of  the  Lord,  is  here 


42 

fully  declared.  Christendom,  Rome,  the 
mother  of  harlots,  and  the  daughters,  is  evi- 
dence enough  and  proof  how  the  Revealer  of 
Secrets  revealed  things  to  come. 

All  these  parables  show  the  growth  of  evil, 
and  are  prophecies  extending  over  the  entire 
age  in  which  we  live.  May  we  bow  before 
the  Word  and  follow  the  Word  and  its  clear 
teachings,  the  oracles  of  God,  rather  than  the 
"voice  of  the  church"  or  "the  doctrines  of 
men." 


VI. 


After  our  Lord  dismissed  the  multitudes.  He 
went  into  the  house  and  here,  in  answer  to 
the  request  of  the  disciples,  He  expounded  the 
second  parable.  It  was  given  to  them,  as  it 
is  given  to  us,  to  know  the  mysteries  of  the 
kingdom.  We  have  looked  at  this  divine  in- 
terpretation before,  and  so  we  can  at  once  pro- 
ceed with  the  three  parables  which  follow  and 
which  our  Lord  speaks  to  His  disciples  in  the 
house.  Two  of  these,  the  parable  of  the  treas- 
ure hid  in  the  field  and  the  parable  of  the  one 
pearl  of  great  price,  belong  together.  After 
these  the  Lord  concludes  His  teaching  on  the 
mysteries  with  the  parable  of  the  dragnet. 

"The  kingdom  of  the  heavens  is  like  a  treas- 
ure hid  in  the  field,  which  a  man  having  found 


43 

has  hid,  and  for  the  joy  of  it  goes  and  sells 
all  whatever  he  has,  and  buys  that  field. 
Again  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens  is  like  a 
merchantman  seeking  beautiful  pearls ;  and 
having  found  one  .pearl  of  great  value,  he  went 
and  sold  all  whatever  he  had  and  bought  it" 
(verses  44-46).  That  these  two  parables  are 
closely  connected  is  seen  by  their  similarity. 
In  both  a  man  is  mentioned,  and  he  sells  in 
either  one  all  he  has  to  obtain  what  he  esteems 
precious.  In  the  first,  he  finds  a  treasure  in 
the  field  and  hides  it  there,  while  he  buys  the 
field  to  possess  the  treasure.  In  the  second,  he 
sells  all  to  obtain  one  pearl  of  great  value. 
There  is,  of  course,  a  difference,  likewise.  The 
treasure  is  in  the  field;  it  is  deposited  there. 
The  field  is  bought,  and  with  it  the  treasure. 
The  one  pearl  comes  out  of  the  sea;  its  value 
is  greater  than  treasure  in  the  field,  of  which 
it  is  not  said  that  it  has  a  great  value.  Again, 
a  treasure  may  be  increased  or  decreased, 
there  may  be  taken  away  from  it  or  added  to 
it;  the  one  pearl,  however,  is  complete,  its 
value  and  beauty  are  fixed. 

As  we  turn  to  the  interpretation  of  these 
parables,  we  are  obliged  to  follow  the  same 
course  which  we  followed  with  the  preceding 
parables.  We  have  to  set  aside  the  commonly 
accepted  view.  We  have  to  show  once  more 
that  the  almost  universal  exposition  and  ap- 
plication of  the  parables  by  evangelical  Chris- 


44 

tendom  is  wrong,  unscriptural  and  conflicting 
with  other  parts  of  God's  Word.  We  shall 
have  to  use  the  sharp  knife  again,  to  lay  bare 
the  errors  of  the  teachings  taken  from  the 
treasure  in  the  field  and  the  one  pearl.  Only 
in  this  way  can  we  get  at  the  root  of  the  mat- 
ter, and  see  the  true  meaning  and  understand 
the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom. 

Perhaps  the  best  way  to  mention  the  erro- 
neous interpretation  is  to  quote  the  father  of 
Protestantism,  Martin  Luther.  His  comment 
on  these  two  parables  is  about  the  best  ex- 
pression of  the  accepted  theories,  what  our 
Lord  meant  with  the  treasure  and  the  pearl. 
Luther  said : 

The  parable  of  the  treasure  means,  that  we  vainly 
seek  the  kingdom  of  God  by  our  works  and  exertion, 
or  the  works  of  the  law.  For  we  are  not  born  of 
.  the  blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the 
will  of  man.  The  Jews  had  the  field,  but  did  not 
see  the  treasure  in  it.  But  the  Gentiles  bought  the 
field  with  the  treasure;  that  is  the  lavj  with  Christ. 

The    hidden    treasure    is    the    Gospel, 

which  gives  us  grace  and  righteousness  without  our 
merit.  Therefore  when  one  finds  it,  it  causes  joy; 
that  is  a  good,  cheerful  conscience,  which  cannot  be 
secured  by  any  good  works. 

The  parable  of  the  pearl  is  almost  of  the  same 
import  as  the  preceding  one,  except  that  the  former 
speaks  of  the  finding  and  this  of  the  seeking.  There- 
fore he  speaks  here  of  a  growing  faith,  and  signifies 
therewith  that  the  pearl  was  not  unknown,  but  that 
it  had  been  heard  of,  as  being  of  great  price.  Here 
the  merchantman  is  intent  only,  that  he  may  possess 


45 

the  one  pearl.  For  this  is  also  the  nature  of  the 
Christian  life,  that  he  who  has  begun  it  imagines  he 
has  nothing,  but  he  reaches  out  for  it,  and  con- 
stantly presses  onward,  that  he  may  obtain  it.* 

This  mode  of  iraterpretation  has  been  strictly 
followed  by  commentators.  H.  A.  W.  Meyer, 
a  leading  expositor  of  the  New  Testament,  de- 
clares "the  kingdom,  the  most  valuable  pos- 
session, must  be  taken  hold  of  by  a  joyful 
sacrifice  of  all  eartly  things."  Another  one 
says :  "The  treasure  and  the  pearl  are  pictures 
of  the  great  value  of  the  kingdom  of  the 
heavens.  To  possess  them  one  has  to  sacri- 
fice all  his  other  goods"  (Prof.  Holtzmann). 
P.  Lange,  so  well  known,  declares:  "True 
Christianity  is  like  an  unexpected  discovery, 
even  in  the  ancient  church.  It  is  the  best 
possession  we  can  find,  a  gift  of  free  grace. 
Every  sinner  must  find  and  discover  Chris- 
tianity for  himself.  In  order  to  secure  pos- 
session, even  of  what  we  found  with  no  merit 
of  our  own,  we  must  be  willing  to  sacrifice 
all ;  for  salvation,  though  entirely  of  free 
grace,  requires  the  fullest  self-surrender." 
But  enough  of  this.  It  is  the  general  way  of 
interpreting  these  two  parables  by  making  the 
man  who  sells  all  to  obtain  the  treasure  and  the 
merchantman,  the  unsaved  sinner.  The  Gos- 
pel, salvation,  the  grace  of  God,  or  as  some 


*Luther's  Explanatory  Notes  on  the  Gospel.     Page 
82. 


46 

term  it  "religion,"  is,  according  to  this,  repre- 
sented in  the  treasure  and  the  one  pearl  of 
great  value.  That  such  a  theory  is  unrecon- 
cilably  clashing  with  the  very  heart  of  the 
gospel  is  but  little  considered. 

Gospel  sermons,  so-called,  are  preached,  in 
which  the  sinner  is  exhorted  to  give  up,  to  sell 
all,  in  order  to  become  a  Christian,  to  surren- 
der the  world  and  himself  and  then  to  find  the 
pearl  of  great  value.  But  is  this  the  Gospel? 
We  answer,  No!  The  sinner  has  no  sacrifice 
to  bring.  All  his  trying  to  surrender  himself 
or  giving  up  the  world  can  never  secure  for 
him  eternal  life  or  the  grace  of  God.  "What 
must  I  do  to  inherit  eternal  life?"  was  spoken 
by  a  self-righteous  Pharisee,  the  young  ruler, 
and  the  Lord  answers  him,  who  came  to  Him 
with  the  law  and  as  under  the  law,  accord- 
'  ingly,  and  tells  him  to  sell  all  he  has  and  give 
it  to  the  poor  and  follow  Him.  But  this  is  not 
the  gospel,  but  the  law,  which  says,  "Do  and 
live."  To  preach  the  Gospel  to  sinners  and 
tell  them  to  do,  to  give  up  and  to  receive,  is 
fundamentally  wrong.  The  Gospel  of  grace 
does  not  ask  of  the  sinner  to  sell  all  he  has  to 
receive  the  grace  of  God  and  eternal  life,  but 
the  Gospel  of  grace  oflFers  to  every  sinner 
eternal  life  as  God's  gift,  a  free  gift,  in  Christ 
Jesus.  The  Word  of  God.  it  is  true,  speaks  of 
buying;  but  what  kind  of  buying  is  it?  "Ho, 
every    one    that    thirsteth,    come    ye    to    the 


47 

waters ;  and  he  that  hath  no  money,  come  ye, 
buy,  and  eat;  yea,  come,  buy  wine  and  milk 
ivitJiont  money  and  zvithout  price"  (Is.  Iv.i, 
2).  It  is  buying  without  money  and  without 
price. 

The  giving  up,  the  surrender,  follows  when 
a  person  is  saved  and  has  received  the  grace 
of  God,  but  never  before.  "We  see  that  to 
teach,  the  man  who  finds  the  treasure  is  the 
sinner,  and  the  sinner  is  to  sell  all  to  obtain 
the  possession  of  Christ,  or  the  merchantman, 
is  the  sinner  who  obtains  a  pearl,  eternal  life, 
by  giving  up  all,  is  wrong  teaching.*  The 
Lord  never  meant  in  these  parables  to  de- 
scribe the  seeking  and  the  finding  of  the 
sinner. 

The  difficulty  which  is  so  apparent  in  the  first 
of  these  two  parables  is  but  little  dealt  with 
by  preachers  who  make  the  Gospel  out  of  it. 
According  to  this  wrong  application  the  sin- 
ner would  have  to  buy  the  Held  to  obtain  the 
treasure,  the  Gospel.  What  is  the  field?  One 
of  the  above  mentioned  commentators  makes 
of  it  "the  external,  worldly  ecclesiasticism." 
This  is  simply  a  human  opinion.  We  know 
what  the  field  is.  We  need  not  to  ask  Dr. 
Luther,  Lange,  or  any  other  man,  what  means 


*Hovv  strange  that  even  the  simple  Gospel  is  so 
little  known,  and  there  is  more  and  more  the  preach- 
ing of  a  Gospel,  which  is  another.  A  nauseating 
mixture  of  law  and  grace. 


48 

the  field.  The  Lord  has  given  us  the  key. 
"The  field  is  the  world."  This  is  the  meaning 
of  the  word  field  in  the  first  two  parables. 
Who  would  say  that  the  word  "field"  means 
anything  different  in  the  fifth  parable?  The 
field  is  the  world.  If  the  sinner  is  meant  by 
the  man  who  buys  the  field,  it  would  mean 
that  the  sinner  has  to  buy  the  world.  There 
is  no  sense  whatever  in  giving  these  two  para- 
bles such  an  application. 

Again,  in  the  two  first  parables  a  person  is 
spoken  of — the  sower,  the  man  who  sowed 
the  good  seed.  This  Man  in  the  first  two 
parables  is  the  Lord  Himself.  In  the  two 
parables  before  us  the  man  and  the  merchant- 
man stand  for  the  same  person,  and  this  per- 
son is  identical  with  the  man  in  the  first  and 
second  parables ;  in  other  words,  the  man  who 
bought  the  field  and  the  treasure  in  it,  and  the 
merchantman,  who  sold  all  to  obtain  one  pearl 
of  great  value,  is  the  Lord  Himself.  It  is  not 
the  unsaved  seeking  and  finding  salvation,  but 
it  is  the  Saviour  seeking  the  sinner,  purchas- 
ing the  field,  buying  the  treasure  in  it,  giving 
up  all  to  possess  one  pearl  of  great  value. 

As  we  look  upon  it  in  this  light  we  have  in- 
deed the  blessed  Gospel.  He,  who  was  rich, 
became  poor  for  our  sakes,  that  by  His  poverty 
we  might  become  rich.  He,  who  subsisted  in 
the  form  of  God,  emptied  Himself.  He  came 
down,  He  gave  up.  He  gave  all  and  was  obedi- 


49 

ent  unto  death,  unto  the  death  of  the  cross. 
Both  parables  teach  the  same  great  truth, 
Christ,  the  Saviour,  who  came  to  seek  that 
which  is  lost  and  who  has  purchased  the  field 
and  found  in  it  a  ^treasure,  which  is  His,  and 
obtained  one  pearl  of  great  value. 

But  the  question  arises,  if  this  is  the  case, 
why  two  parables?  If  the  finding  man  and 
the  seeking  merchantman  is  our  Lord,  why 
should  His  work  in  giving  up  and  selling  all 
be  mentioned  twice?  Why  is  the  treasure 
mentioned  first  and  then  a  pearl?  and  why  is 
the  purchased  treasure  hid,  while  the  one  pearl 
of  great  value  comes  evidently  first  into  the 
possession  of  the  merchantman? 

The  Lord  certainly  speaks  here  of  a  twofold 
mystery  in  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens  and  of 
two  different  objects,  which  He  obtained  by 
His  work  of  redemption.  When  He  mentions 
the  treasure  hid  in  the  field,  which  is  His  by 
purchase,  He  means  His  earthly  people,  Israel. 
The  one  pearl  of  great  value,  taken  out  of  the 
sea ;  the  one  pearl,  beautiful  and  complete, 
means  the  church,  the  one  body.  We  have  in 
these  two  parables  the  mystery  of  Israel  and  the 
mystery  of  the  church ;  of  both  mysteries  the 
Holy  Spirit  witnesses  in  the  epistles  by  the 
Apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  to  whom  these  mys- 
teries were  made  known. 

Israel  is  the  treasure  in  the  field.  "Ye  shall 
be  a  peculiar  treasure  unto  me  above  all  peo- 


50 

pie;  for  ?11  the  earth  is  mine"  (Exod.  xix:5). 
"For  the  Lord  hath  chosen  Jacob  for  Himself 
and  Israel  for  His  peculiar  treasure"  (Psa. 
cxxxv:4).  When  He  came  from  heaven  He 
found  His  people  in  the  world.  He  bought  the 
whole  world  and  with  it,  inclusive,  the  people 
who  are  His  earthly  treasure.  "He  died  for 
that  nation"  is  spoken  of  His  blessed  work 
(John  xi:5i).  However,  we  do  not  read  that 
He  got  possession  of  the  treasure ;  it  is  rather 
the  thought  which  we  get  from  it,  that  the 
treasure  found  is  hid  still  in  the  field  which 
He  bought  by  so  great  a  price,  for  the  sake  of 
owning  that  treasure.  And  in  this  we  have 
the  key,  why  this  is  introduced  in  these  par- 
ables of  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  the 
heavens. 

Israel  is  the  Lord's  peculiar  treasure.  He 
has  purchased  His  earthly  people.  They  shall 
yet  be  His  peculiar  treasure,  displaying  in  the 
earth,  in  the  coming  age,  all  the  excellencies  of 
Himself.  They  will  be  a  justified,  a  separated 
and  Spirit-filled  people.  In  Balaam's  prophe- 
cies the  Spirit  of  God  speaks  of  what  Israel  is 
in  God's  eyes  through  the  redemption  work  of 
Jehovah.  The  Lord  died  for  that  nation,  and 
still  the  results  of  that  death  are  not  yet  mani- 
fested. Israel  is  hid  in  the  field,  in  the  world. 
The  Lord  will  come  again  and  return  to  the 
field,  the  world,  once  more.  He  comes  to 
claim  His  inheritance.     Then  He  will  lift  the 


SI 

treasure,  then  He  will  claim  His  people  Israel 
and  they  will  rejoice  in  His  salvation.  During 
this  age,  the  age  of  an  absent  Lord,  Israel  is 
kept  hid  in  the  field.  This  is  one  of  the  mys- 
teries in  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens.  It  cor- 
responds  to  Rom.  xi:25:  "For  I  do  not  wish 
you  to  be  ignorant,  brethren,  of  this  mystery, 
that  ye  be  not  wise  in  your  own  conceits,  that 
blindness  in  part  is  happened  to  Israel,  until 
the  fullness  of  the  nations  be  come  in;  and  so 
all  Israel  shall  be  saved.  According  as  it  is 
written :  The  Deliverer  shall  come  out  of  Zion ; 
He  shall  turn  away  ungodliness  from  Jacob." 
Alas !  Christendom  is  wise  in  their  own  con- 
ceits and  has  ignored,  yes  completely  ignored 
this  mystery.  It  declares  that  "God  hath  cast 
away  His  people  and  there  is  no  hope  for  Is- 
rael." Christendom  forgets  that  Israel  is  the 
treasure  in  the  field,  purchased  by  the  blood, 
the  precious  blood  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  that 
He,  who  is  like  a  man  who  has  gone  to  a  far 
country,  will  come  again  to  claim  the  earth 
and  lift  His  peculiar  treasure  Israel.  Much 
more  might  be  said  on  all  this,  but  we  turn 
now  to  the  meaning  of  the  one  pearl  of  great 
value. 

This  one  pearl  is  the  Church.  "He  loved 
the  Church  and  gave  Himself  for  it,"  thus  it 
is  written,  and  here  in  the  parable  He  declares 
this  precious  truth  Himself.  The  pearl  is 
taken  out  of  the  sea.    Way  down  on  the  dark 


52 

bottom  of  the  ocean  is  the  shell,  the  house  of 
an  animal,  and  in  this  animal,  by  its  work,  the 
beautiful  pearl  is  produced.  A  small  grain  of 
sand,  we  are  told,  imbeds  itself  between  the 
animal  and  the  shell  and  creates  by  its  pres- 
ence a  wound  in  the  side  of  the  animal.  Upon 
this  miserable  grain  of  sand  the  animal  de- 
posits a  thin  crust  of  a  brilliant  material.  How 
often  this  is  repeated  no  one  can  tell,  one  de- 
posit after  the  other  is  made,  till  at  last  in  the 
side  of  the  animal  there  is  found  a  most  beau- 
tiful pearl,  a  pearl  of  great  price,  a  pearl  in 
which  the  colors  of  the  rainbow  of  the  heavens 
are  wonderfully  blended  together.  It  is  taken 
up  and  becomes  the  well  nigh  priceless  jewel 
in  the  crown  of  some  mighty  monarch. 

We  see  at  once  why  our  Lord  used  the  pearl 
as  the  type  of  the  church  which  He  loved,  and 
gave  Himself  for  it.  Like  Eve  was  taken  out 
of  the  open  side  of  Adam,  so  His  blessed  side 
was  opened  and  out  of  that  side  is  building 
His  church.  Like  the  pearl,  the  church  is  one, 
though  composed  of  many  countless  members 
known  to  Him  alone.  This  one  pearl  is  still 
forming  out  of  His  side.  The  one  pearl  is 
still  in  the  dark  waters  of  the  sea.  How  many 
more  members  will  be  added  to  this  one  pearl 
we  do  not  know.  How  long  it  will  be  yet, 
before  the  Lord  takes  her  unto  Himself  into 
the  air,  to  adorn  Himself  with  that  precious 
pearl,  none  can  tell.     The  church  belongs  to 


53 

Him,  and  will  be  with  Him  in  the  heavenlies. 
Of  what  great  value  must  this  one  pearl  be  to 
Him,  that  He  gave  all  for  it?  What  glories 
will  He  receive  from  the  possession  of  that 
pearl  and  what  a  beautiful  object  will  be  the 
pearl  in  the  possession  of  the  heavenly  and 
eternal  merchantman? 

When  He  comes  to  take  possession  of  Is- 
rael, the  treasure,  and  of  the  world.  His  church 
will  be  with  Him.  And  what  else  might  be 
said  of  this  precious  parable !  May  we  medi- 
tate on  it,  and  rejoice  in  that  love  which  gave 
up  all  to  take  us  out  of  our  ruin  and  loss  un- 
told, and  make  us  the  objects  of  His  marvelous 
grace. 


VII. 

One  more  parable  remains,  the  seventh. 
"Again  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens  is  like  a 
dragnet  cast  into  the  sea,  and  which  gathers 
together  of  every  kind,  which  when  it  has  been 
filled,  having  drawn  up  on  the  shore  and  sat 
down,  they  gathered  the  good  into  vessels  and 
cast  the  worthless  out.  Thus  shall  it  be  in  the 
completion  of  the  age ;  the  angels  shall  go 
forth  and  sever  the  wicked  from  among  the 
just,  and  shall  cast  them  into  the  furnace  of 
fire ;  there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of 
teeth"  (verses  47-50). 


54 

This  is  not  the  Gospel  net,  as  it  is  often 
called.  After  the  one  pearl  is  taken  up  the 
end  of  the  age  begins.  This  parable  falls 
into  the  completion  of  the  age.  The  dragnet 
is  let  into  the  sea,  which,  as  we  have  seen  be- 
fore, represents  the  nations.  The  parable  re- 
fers to  the  preaching  of  the  everlasting  Gospel 
as  it  will  take  place  during  the  great  tribula- 
tion (Rev.  xiv:6,  7).  The  separating  of  the 
good  and  the  bad  is  done  by  angels.  All  this 
cannot  refer  to  the  present  time  nor  to  the 
church,  but  to  the  time  when  the  kingdom  is 
about  to  be  set  up.  Then  angels  will  be  used, 
as  it  is  so  clearly  seen  in  the  book  of  Revela- 
tion. The  wicked  will  be  cast  into  the  furnace 
of  fire  and  the  righteous  will  remain  in  the 
earth  for  the  millennial  kingdom.  To  follow 
all  this  in  detail  would  take  us  into  the  history 
"of  the  seventieth  week  of  Daniel.  It  is  the 
same  "end  of  the  age"  which  is  described  in 
Matthew  xxiv. 

We  have  learned  from  these  seven  parables 
the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens, 
beginning  with  the  apostolic  age  and  showing 
us  the  conditions  which  prevail  up  to  its  end. 
It  is  significant  that  the  last  three  parables — • 
containing,  as  we  have  seen,  the  mystery  of 
Israel,  the  mystery  of  the  church,  and  the 
mystery  of  the  ending  of  the  age — were  spoken 
in  the  house  to  the  disciples.  The  great  multi- 
tude did  not  hear  them,  as  they  contain  pre- 


55 

cious  truths  for  His  own,  to  whom  alone  it  is 
given  through  the  Spirit  of  God  to  know  the 
mysteries  of  the  kingdom.  And  so  we  read: 
"Jesus  says  unto  them,  Have  ye  understood 
all  these  things  ?  They  say  to  Him,  Yea,  Lord. 
And  He  said  to  them.  For  this  reason  every 
scribe  discipled  to  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens 
is  like  a  man  that  is  a  householder  who  brings 
out  of  his  treasure  things  new  and  old"  (verses 
51,  52).  The  things  old  are  the  things  re- 
vealed in  the  Old  Testament  and  the  new 
things  those  of  the  new  dispensation,  which 
are  given  in  these  parables  in  a  nut-shell. 

Upon  this  declaration  there  follows  a  sym- 
bolical action  of  our  Lord.  "And  it  came  to 
pass  when  Jesus  had  finished  these  parables, 
He  withdrew  thence."  The  revealer  of  the 
secrets  has  given  His  revelation  and  now  He 
disappears  from  the  scene.  It  stands  in  type 
for  His  bodily  absence  from  the  earth  during 
this  age. 

The  end  of  the  chapter  is  in  full  accord  with 
the  beginning  and  the  teaching  of  the  entire 
chapter.  "And  having  come  into  His  own 
country,  He  taught  them  in  their  synagogues, 
so  that  they  were  astonished,  and  said,  Whence 
has  this  man  this  wisdom  and  these  works  of 
power?  Is  not  this  the  son  of  a  carpenter?  Is 
not  His  mother  called  Mary,  and  His  brethren 
James  and  Joseph,  and  Simeon  and  Juda? 
And   His  sisters,   are  they  not  all   with  us? 


56 

Whence  then  has  this  man  all  these  things? 
And  they  were  offended  in  Him.  And  Jesus 
said  to  them,  A  prophet  is  not  without  honor, 
unless  in  His  country  and  in  his  house.  And 
He  did  not  there  many  works  of  power,  be- 
cause of  their  unbelief"  (verses  54-58). 

What  else  is  all  this  but  evidence  of  His  full 
rejection?  His  own  knew  Him  not.  They 
speak  of  His  earthly  relations.  For  them  He 
is  "this  man."  His  Father  they  knew  not. 
They  call  Him  "the  son  of  the  carpenter." 
And  thus  He  is  rejected  still  by  His  earthly 
people ;  and  alas !  many  of  those  who  call 
themselves  by  His  name  during  this  age  treat 
Him  no  better. 


The  Magazine  for  Bible  Study 
every  Preacher  needs, 

'OUR  HOPE" 

Edited  by  the  Author  of  this  Pamphlet. 


A  64-paged  Monthly  devoted  to  Bible  Study. 
Prophecy,  the  Jews,  Signs  of  the  Times,  Sunday 
School  Lesson,  Question  Column,  Daily  Scripture 
Calendar,  are  some  of  its  special  features. 

A.  C.  Gabbelkin,  Editor. 

Among  its  contributors  we  mention :  G.  L. 
Ai,RiCH,  Dr.  C.  I.  ScoFiBLD,  formerly  of  E.  North- 
field  ;  Mrs.  G.  C.  Needham,  and  others. 

Sample  copies  free.     Subscription,  $1  per  year. 

SPECIAL  OFFER:  We  will  send  "Our 
Hope"  for  one  year  as  a  Trial  Subscription  to  any 
Preacher  for  only  65  c. 

Address : 

PublisKinj^  Office,  "OUR  HOPE/* 
Station  D.  80  Second  Street. 

New  York  City, 


Send  for  our  Catalogue  of  works  on  Bible  Study, 
the  Jewish  Question,  etc.,  by  A.  C.  Gaebelein  and 
others. 


BIBLE  HOUSE  OF  LOS  ANGELES 

PUBLISHERS  OF  THE 

Underscored  New  Testamewt 

IN   SPANISH 
And  Other  Evangelical  Literature 
Room  505,  Mason  Building 

Cor.  Fourth  and  Broadway       .       .       Los  Angeles,  Cal. 


THE  INEW  TESTAI^ENT  IN  SPANISH. 

Underscored  Edition  (380,000  copies,  including 
Gospels)  is  going  to  every  Spanish- speaking  land  of 
the  world.  Missionaries  of  all  Societies  speak  most 
highly  of  its  usefulness.  The  marking  has  been  done 
with  a  special  view  to  helping  Roman  Catholics, 
among  whom  there  is  absolutely  nothing  better  to 
circulate  than  the  Word  of  God.  We  have  His 
promise:  "It  shAll  not  return  unto  Me  void,"  a 
promise  that  has  been  abundantly  verified. 

$7.50  will  send  100  Testaments,  postage 
($3.60)  extra,  and  $1.00  will  send  100  Gospels.' 
postage  (50c.)  extra,  to  any  part  of  the  world.  This 
is  less  than  cost. 

THREE  VALUABLE  PAMPHLETS 

The  Gospel  of  Grace  in  Romans  HI. 

By  W.  R.  NSWELL,  Chicago. 

Why  We  Believe  the  Bible. 

By  II.  B.  Gage,  Los  Angeles,  Cal. 

Three  Aspects  of  Prayer. 

By  A.  B.  Prichard,  Los  Angeles,  Cal. 
5  cents  each,  or  the  three  for  10  cents,  post-paid. 


Date  Due 

nLL.*f<''J^' 

jAM-l   !»| 

ariiii^  i 

r 

■> 

^"^-n     1 

f) 

OS2418.G127         N,aUhewXIll-a" 

PnncelonTheolo9|calb   ,,u,nnH 


™  1012  oQQg^ 


1267 


